Religion and Loyalty.

The Second Part.

OR THE History of the Concurrence of the Imperial and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in the Government of the Church, from the Beginning of the Reign
of Jovian to the End of the Reign of Justinian.

By SAMUEL PARKER, D.D. Archdeacon of Canterbury.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker at the Three Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXXXV.

TO THE READER.
THE Church of England having acknowledged and declared His Majesty's
Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical, Can. 2.
to be of the same Nature and Extent with that Authority that the Christian
Emperors claimed and exercised in the Primitive Church: I deemed it no unuseful
piece of Service to my King and Country, to inform my self and my
Fellow Subjects out of the Records of those times of our true Duty to the Royal
Supremacy. And to this end I have drawn up as exact a Chart, as my little Skill
could reach, of the Primitive Practice of the Three first Centuries after the
Empire became Christian. Neither have I only Surveyed and coasted the general
History, but have sounded every part of it, and not only described the safe
Passages and right Channels through which the abler Pilots steered their
Courses: but the Shallows, the Gulfs, the Rocks, and the Sands, upon which the
less Skilful or less Fortunate Shipwrackt their Governments. Neither have I
presumed to make any Political Remarks of my own; but have only observed the
Natural and Historical Events of Matters of Fact. And by the Experience of 300
years, in which all Experiments were tried, we are fully instructed in all the
right and all the wrong Measures of Government in the Christian Church. In the
Reigns of the great Constantine, Jovian, Gratian, Theodosius the Great,
Arcadius, Honorius, Theodosius the younger, Marcian, Leo, Justin and Justinian,
are exemplified the Natural good Effects of abetting the Power of the Church by
good Laws, and their effectual Execution. In the Reigns of Julian and
Valentinian we may observe the inevitable Mischiefs of Toleration and Liberty
of Conscience. In the Reigns of Constantius and Valens, but especially of Zeno
and Anastasius, are to be seen the fatal and bloody Consequences of pretended
Moderation, or (as we phrase it) comprehension, that indeed unites all Parties,
but then it is like a Whirlpool, into one common Gulf of Ruin and Confusion.
This is the short account of this Undertaking, and the Historical Events of
things being withal so very Natural, they will of themselves amount to a fair
Demonstration of the Necessity of Discipline in the Church and Penal Laws in
the State. All that I can ensure for the Performance, is its Truth and
Integrity; I have faithfully and impartially perused all the most Material and
Original Records both of Church and State, and out of them, and them alone have
Collected the ensuing History, and if that prove true, (and for that I stand
bound) the Conclusion that I aim at will make it self.

The CONTENTS.
SEct. I. The State of the Church under Jovian. The Hypocrisy both of the
Eusebians to recover their Bishoprics, and of the Acacians to preserve theirs,
in owning the Nicene Faith, page 1.. II. Of Valentinian, his Edict for Liberty
of Conscience. The struglings of the Eusebians against the Acacians. Their
Councils at Lampsacus, and Tyana to that end. They are defeated by the juglings
of the Acacians. The dishonest craft of the two Leaders, Eudoxius in the East
and Auxentius in the West. p. 7.. III. The Persecution of St. Basil by the
Eudoxians, his discourse with the Prefect Modestus. Dear to the Emperor Valens.
Valens himself no Arian, but abused by the Eudoxians, the deplorable State of
the Eastern Church at that time under their Oppressions. St. Basil's misfortune
in receiving Eustathius of Sebasta to communion. The death of St. Athanasius.
The Heresy of Apollinaris, how suppressed, p. 27.. IV. The Election of St.
Ambrose to the Sea of Milan. The death of Valentinian, the mischiefs he brought
upon the Empire by his principle of Liberty of Conscience. Themistius the
Philosopher's Address to Valens in behalf of the Orthodox. The Emperor
Gratian's Rescripts and effectual Proceedings against Heretics. His
restitution of the Discipline of the Church. The bounds of the Imperial and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction briefly stated. The great Schism at Antioch
occasioned by Julian's toleration, p. 35.. V. The singular care of Theodosius
the Great to settle the Church and Orthodox Faith. Vindicated in his
Institution of the Communicatory Bishops. He summons the general Council at
Constantinople, and confirms all their Decrees by several Imperial Rescripts.
Wisely forbids all Disputes about Religion. Assists the young Valentinian
against the Tyrum Maximus, and prevails with him to reverse his severe Rescript
against the Catholics, p. 55.. VI. Valentinian made the first open breach upon
the Power of the Church, in taking to himself the Power of Judicature in
Matters of Faith. St. Ambrose his Sufferings upon that account. His Embassy to
Maximus, his Wisdom and Courage. Maximus his Conquest of Italy, and overthrow
by Theodosius. The Stars raised by the Heretics at Constantinople in the
Emperor's absence. The method of lying People into Tumults. His effectual
enacting and executing Laws against them, settles the Church in Peace. p. 66..
VII. His Laws made without the concurrence of the Church, for reforming the
Abuses of Widows and Deaconesses, the disorders of Monks, and the Abuse of
Church-Sanctuary. p. 81.. VIII. His Laws without the same concurrence against
Manichees, Apostates, Pagans, and in behalf of the Jews, p. 89.. IX. Of the
Council of Aquileia. Of the Schism at Rome between Damasus and Ursicinus. Of
the Schism at Alexandria between Peter and Lucius. Of the Schism at Antioch
between Paulinus and Flavianus, p. 98.. X. The unparalleled Immorality of the
Priscillian Heresy. The Prosecution of them by Ithacius justified against Mr.
B. they were executed as Malefactors and Traitors, not as Heretics. St.
Martin's great indiscretion in interceding for them, p. 124.. XI. The praise of
Theodosius against the Calumnies of Zosimns. The Laws of his Son Arcadius
against the Heretics, p. 152.. XII. His Laws of Privilege to the Catholics.
The several Laws of Tuition. The Law of civil Decision in the Church by
Arbitration. The Laws against Appeals from the Church to the civil Power, p.
167.. XIII. His Laws of Reformation of Discipline. Against the tumults of
Monks, the abuse of Sanctuary; against the Johannites; against Apostates. In
behalf of the Jews. The Laws of Honorius against and for the Jews. The Laws of
both Emperors under the Title de Paganis, p. 180.. XIV. The history and design
of the Theodosian Code. Theodosius his own Novels: Of the Parabolani of
Alexandria. The famous Law concerning the Churches of ^l^yricum explained,
together with his other Laws, and the Laws of Valentinian the third, p. 198..
XV. The History and Acts of the Council of Ephesus, against Nestorius and
Imperial ratification of the Decree^ ^f the Church, by Marcian, p. 225.. XVI.
The Reign of the Emperor Leo, his Method of preserving the Peace of the Church
by way of Encyclical correspondence. Pope Leo's concurrence, p. 260.. XVII. Of
the Emperor Leo, and the Tyrant Basiliscus. The great mischiefs of Zeno's
Henoticon or Act of Comprehension. Of the Acephali, and the Haesitantes, i. e.
the moderate Men. Of the numberless Schisms occasioned in the Church by this
healing Instrument, p. 296.. XIX. The reign of Anastasius, his outrageous zeal
for the Henoticon, his persecution in pursuance of Moderation, till at last the
design ended in Wars, Tumults and Rebellions, p. 335.. XX. Justin's restitution
of the Council of Calcedon. The reunion of the Eastern and Western Churches
thereby. The Tumults of the Scythian and Acaemetan Monks. His Laws against the
Heretics, p. 349.. XXI. A general vindication of the Justinian Code. A short
history of both the Codes, Theodosian and Justinian. Tribonian's Integrity
vindicated in his reciting the Laws of former Emperors against the accusations
of Gothofred, p. 366.. XXII. All Justinian's own Novels vindicated from any
Invasion upon the Power of the Church, and proved to have been nothing else
than Canons enacted into Laws, p. 376.. XXIII. All his Actions vindicated
against Alemannus and the Anecdota. The history of the Contest about the tria
Capitula, with an account of the extravagant behavior of Pope Vigilius, p.
391.. XXIV. The Contest between Paul the 5th, and the state of Venice, the
cause of all the displeasure of the Court of Rome against Justinian. The
Anecdota proved to be spurious, and none of Procopius his writings, p. 426..
XXV. Justinian vindicated from the charge of Cruelty, p. 443.. XXVI. The
unparalled gentleness of his reign, the Empress Theodora, Antonia and the
great Belisarius vindicated from the Calumnies of the Anecdota, p. 455.. XXVII.
An account of Justinian's Persian, Vandalick and Gothic Wars, p. 479.. XXVIII.
The reason of his siding with the Venetae against the Prasmi, i. e. the Tories
against the Whigs, p. 497.. XXIX. His vindication from Folly and Knavery, p.
502.. XXX. Item, From Covetousness and Prodigality, p. 510.. XXXI. Item, From
Oppression in putting the Laws in execution, p. 523.. XXXII. Item, From
inconstancy and falsehood to his Friends. From Vanity, from Forgery, from Lust,
from Unkindness and Over^kindness to his Clergy, p. 547.. XXXIII. An Answer to
the whole Rhapsody of smaller Cavils and Calumnies, p. 573.
ERRATA.
Page 2. l. 3. They kept it themselves. Read They kept it to themselves.

P. 192. l. 2. Welly r. well. P. 200. l. 6. Hair r. hare. P. 224. l. 2. tied r.
lied. P. 267. l. 8. rehearse r. rehear. P. 310. l. 8. Possessions r Possession.
P. 336. l. 12. Syntax r. Sin-tax. P. 354. l. 27. upon r. up. P. 378. l. 29. and
r. an. P. 394. l. 28. on^y r. on the contrary. P. 404. l. penult. Summary r.
Summoning. P. 406. l. 7. Bishops r. Bishop. P. 429. l. 19. Eusebius r.
Eichelius. P. 432. l. ult. Hel^sted r. Helmsted. P. 439. l. 29. Overs^en r.
Over-keen. P. 456. l. 18. Patriarchate r. Patriciate. Ibid. l. 22. Patriarchate
r. Patriciate. P. 466. l. 24. Theodorus r. Theodora 's. P. 479. l. 20. use r.
vie. P. 546. l. friends r. f^nds. P. 550 l. penult. Solomon's r. Solomon.

PART. I.
SECT. I.
UPon the death of Julian, there was another quick and sudden turn of Affairs,
by the Election of Jovian a Christian to the Empire, though the change was
rather made in the Emperor, than the Religion. For Christianity was so
universally entertained, that Julian with all his Arts of Undermining and
Persecution, could make but very little alteration in the Church, and at last
left it in the very same or a much better Condition than that in which he found
it. And for that reason Invec. 1. p. 80. A.
Gregory Nazianzen derides his folly and madness in endeavoring to destroy
Christianity, when it had so universally prevailed, Am. Marcel. l. 21. c. 2.
and himself was so sensible of it, that he was forced for a time to conceal
his own Religion, and as he marched out of France toward Rome, he was forced
to keep Christmas at Vienna, that he might seem to be of the same Religion with
his Army. And so during his reign they kept it themselves, so as to keep it in
reality; Theod. l. 4. c. 1.
for when Jovian was chosen Emperor upon his death, he refused it as being a
Christian, and so unfit to command Julian's Army, whom he could not but suppose
to be of the same Religion with their Master. At which a great shout was made,
O Sir take no care for that, for you shall command Christian Men, and such as
are educated in the Discipline and Piety of the Christian Church, for the
eldest among us were trained up under Constantine, and the younger under
Constantius; and as for the time of Julian, it was too short to make any
alteration as to the Principles of our Religion. Upon which declaration, when
he had made them repeat it several times ( l. 3. c. 22.
as Socrates tells the Story) he accepts the Empire, Sozom. l. 6. c. 3.
and immediately restores all the Revenues, Privileges and Immunities, that had
been given to the Church by Constantine and his Sons, and taken away by Julian.
Greg. Naz. in laud. Athanas.
And withal restores all the banished Bishops, and particularly St. Athanasius
with especial regard to his Person, to whom he writes for Instructions, in
order to the settlement of the true Faith, who upon it immediately calls a
Council, and to prevent the Application of the Heretics, sends him out of hand
the Nicene Confession, Athanas. de fide ad Jovian.
not only as the true old Apostolical Faith, which Arius and his followers had
endeavored to corrupt by their profane Novelties, and others, i. e. the
Eusebians endeavored to supplant, though they durst not disown it: But as the
sense of the Catholic Church ever since the Nicene Council in Spain, in
Britain, in France, in Italy, Dalmatia, Mysia, Macedonia, Greece, Afric,
Sardinia, Cyprus, Creet, Pamphylia, Lysia, Isauria, Egypt, Lybia, Pontus,
Cappadocia, and all the Eastern Churches, a very few only excepted all whose
subscriptions (he says) and many others more remote, we have in our own
Possession, and therefore though there are some few scattered Dissenters, that
ought to be no prejudice to the Faith of the whole World. And this is another
clear Confutation of that uncatholick surmise from the mistaken Sense of St.
Jerome, that all the World were at that time turned Arians. But the most
pleasant Scene of that time, was the Council of Antioch, Soc. l. 3. c. 25.
when all the Arian World (if any such there were) would needs turn Orthodox;
for the Eusebians, that had been supplanted by the Acacians under Constantius,
finding now that they had a Christian Emperor, they petition him in his return
from Persia, that the Acacians who taught the Son to be unlike the Father,
might be displaced out of their Bishoprics, and themselves restored; but they
receiving no kind answer from him, who understood them too well, and the
Acacians, who resolved to keep their hold, finding which way his Pulse beat
tamper with Meletius the Orthodox Bishop of Antioch, and dear to the new
Emperor, who at that time resided there, to call a Council, and though they had
in the time of Constantius deposed him for his Apostasy to the Nicene Faith,
yet now in this Council they unanimously declare for it, and signify their
Decree and the necessity of it to the Emperor, in that they were now convinced
that there was no other stop to be put to the Arian Blasphemy, viz. that the
Son was created out of nothing, and by this false and dishonest shufling, they
outwitted the old Eusebian Knaves, and riveted themselves in their new usurpt
Preferments. But this goes to the very heart of the poor outed Eusebians, to be
thus over-reach't and supplanted, and to turn the whole Game, it drives them
into their old outrage against the vir gregis the great Athanasius. Sozom. l.
6. c. 5.
And so away post Euzoius the then deposed Bishop of Antioch, and Lucius the
pretended Bishop of Alexandria, to Court, and there take their old Method of
engaging some of the Eunuchs into their Party, and particularly Probatius the
Praepositus Cubiculi, that succeeded Eusebius in that Office, who had done so
much mischief in the reign of Constantius, and having secured their Patrons,
they accuse Athanasius to the Emperor upon these three Topics, First, that
there had been continual Complaints against him during the whole time of his
Episcopacy. Secondly, that upon the truth of those Complaints, he had been
often banished by his Predecessors. Thirdly, that he was the sole Author of all
the present Troubles and Disturbances in the Church. This is their old train of
boldness, but the Emperor was a wise Man, and saw through their Designs, and
therefore sends them away with very severe threatenings, and charges his Eunuchs
never to meddle with such Matters, under no less Penalty than the Rod and the
Cudgel, and entertains Athanasius with all the highest expressions of Respect
and Honor, and so for his short time, settled the Church both in Peace and
Truth. This is the true state and story of the revival of the Arian Controversy
under this Emperor, that had slept under Julian: And not lib. 6. c* ^
as Sozomen suggests, the contentiousness of the Bishops, who, he says, under
Julian, when the Christian Religion lay at stake, pieced together for the
security of the common Cause, as it is the custom of all Men, to make peace and
join forces against a common Enemy, but as soon as the danger is blown over, to
return to their old Fewds and Animosities. The observation in general is too
true, but not rightly applied to this particular case: for the ground of the
quarrel here, was not the natural contentiousness of Mankind, whilst in a
condition of peace, as the Historian remarks; in that the Orthodox had never
pieced with any of the other Parties, either Eusebians or Acacians under
Julian, but as we have already seen casheir'd and condemned them both, and
settled the Nicene Faith. So that under Jovian there was no new breach, but even
according to Sozomen's own account, the new contest was raised by the Eusebian
Bishops, that had lost their Bishoprics under Constantius, after the Councils
of Ariminum and Seleucia, when they were over-reach't by the Acacians. And that
is the Argument of their Petition to this Emperor, that things might stand, as
they were left by those Councils, and that all after acts might be nulled, i.
e. that themselves might be restored to their Bishoprics. That was the present
quarrel, and no dispute against the settled Faith, for they had already declared
for the Nicene Confession. And therefore the Acacians upon their complaint
against them for the Aetian Heresy, immediately protest against it, to secure
their Preferments. And that was all along the state of this Controversy, both
before and after this time, the zeal of good Men on one side for the true
Faith, and the Arts of ill Men on the other for Preferment and Court-favor.
This is hitherto evident from the beginning of the quarrel of Eusebius of
Nicomedia with Athanasius, and will appear as clearly in all the same Contests
as long as they lasted, under the succeeding Emperors.

. 2. Jovian dying suddenly, no body knows of what, though several wise
philosophical Conjectures are made about it by the Historians, after him
Valentinian is chosen Emperor with a Nemine contradicente, being a Man, as Lib.
26. c. 1.
Marcellinus himself confesses, of universal reputation. And he deserved it
though it were only for that Prince-like saying after his Election, when those
that chose him, press't him to take an Assistant in the Government, he replied,
when the Empire was vacant, it was in your Power to choose me Emperor, but now
I am in possession of the Crown, it is my business and none of yours, to take
care of the Commonwealth. He understood the true Rights of Sovereign Power in
all Monarchies whether Hereditary or Elective: and unless it be supreme and
unaccountable, it is so far from being any Power at all, that it is the lowest
and most abject kind of Subjection, and of a great General, he would by his
being made Emperor, have only become the public Slave of the Rabble.

But he coming to the Crown after so many sudden turns, and supposing the
Empire very much distracted about Religion, by so many changes of Government,
publishes an Edict for Liberty of Conscience, de Males. et Mathemat. l. 9. v.
Sozimus lib. 4.
ut unicuique quod animo imbibisset, colendi libera facultas tributa sit, that
every Man may have liberty to use what Worship he will, according to those
Opinions that he had sucked in. But then again soon finding himself settled in
the Empire, in the very same year, anno 364, ibid. l.
he forbids the night Sacrifices of the Heathens, but is prevailed upon to
tolerate all those religious Rites that were celebrated by day. And having
gained so much ground, he proceeds to countermine and blow up the Crafts of
Julian, who made all his Laws with a malicious Aspect toward the Christians,
and particularly that famous Law, De Medicis et Professor. l. 5.
that no Man should be allowed to practice Physic or teach any Art or Science,
but by the approbation of the Magistrates of the place with his own impeperial
Consent, and by that means he shut all Christians out of any learned or
ingenuous Employment, and therefore Valentinian as soon as he comes to the
Crown, ibid. l. 6.
cancels that Law, and restores all Professors of Learning to their respective
Thrones. But as for the Church, the Emperor being settled, the poor hungry
Eusebians, that had been so long sequestered out of their Bishoprics, resolve
once more to try their Fortune, and they poor Men had hard luck to quit their
Faith (as they had done under Jovian) and yet not get their Preferments. But
they hope to meet with kinder usage from this Emperor Sozim. l. 6. c. ^*
and therefore send Hypatianus Bishop of Heraclea in an Ambassy to him, to
request a Council, to which he, as he was a very civil Gentleman, and obliged
at that time to much complaisance, being as yet but green in his Government,
replied that being but a Layman, it became not him to meddle in those Matters,
and so left it to themselves to meet as they judged convenient. And that was
the Maxim of his Reign to leave Church Matters to the judgment of Churchmen,
and therefore he fined Chronopius a Bishop a great sum of Money to be
distributed amongst the Poor for appealing from a Synodical sentence to the
secular Court.

L. 20. Qutru. Appellat sint suscip.
Upon this they immediately huddle up a Council at Lampsacus on the Helespont in
the year 365. And here they condemn all the proceedings of Acacius, and his
Party at Constantinople after the Seleucian Council, declare for the Doctrine of
similitude against them, decree that the Bishops that had been deposed by them,
should be restored to their Churches, as having been unjustly deprived. But yet
are so tenderhearted, as to grant the Usurpers the Communion of the Church
upon their Repentance (for which no doubt they were much concerned, after they
had recovered their Purchases.) This being done, they according to custom
signify their proceedings by an Encyclical Epistle to all Christian Churches,
and fearing lest the Enemy should prevent them at Court, as they had hitherto
done, they make all speedy application there. But alas Eudoxius an old crafty
Courtier lay leiger there, and had so possessed the Emperor Valens, to whom his
Brother Valentinian left the Estern Empire, that when they came, the Emperor
commanded them to reconcile themselves to Eudoxius at their peril, and upon
their persisting in their Complaints, in a fury drives them all into
banishment. And now have we the same game turned up and played over again under
these two Brothers, that we have already seen under the Sons of Constantine.
For the Acacians or Eudoxians having seized the Emperor Valens; the poor outed
Eusebians, or rather Macedonians (for by this time they were distinguished by
that name) had no other Remedy left but by application to foreign Churches,
and the power of the Western Emperor. And so among others Soc. l. 4. c. 12.
they in the first place send their Legates to Liberius Bishop of Rome, but he
knew the Men too well by his own sufferings, having been twice driven into
banishment by their means under Constantius for no other crime than his
constant adherence to the Nicene Faith, and therefore peremptorily refuses
Communion with them. But alas they confidently reply that they are not the Men
they were, and that they came to join with the Catholic Church against the
Anomaeans, declare for the Nicene Faith, and for his full satisfaction herein,
produce the Letter of the Lampsacene Council, with all their subscriptions to
the Council of Nice, and defiance to the cheats of Ariminum. The old Man being
transported with the joy of their Conversion, and as he dreamt, the Reunion of
the Eastern and Western Churches, embraces them with both his Arms, little
knowing good Man, that the bottom of their Errand was to recover their
Bishoprics, and that for their sakes they had left their Faith behind them.
And that is the Center of this Controversy, between the Macedonians and the
Eudoxians, not the Faith, but the preferments. They had both been of the same
Party under Constantius against the Nicene Faith: yet under Jovian the Acacians
had subscribed it to keep their Preferments; and now under Valens the
Macedonians finding themselves by that means left in the lurch, make the same
subscription to recover theirs.

Saeculi 40 pars prima 14.
And yet they have so much imposed upon the Historian Natalis Alexander, by the
boldness of their Hypocrisy, that he reckons this Synod among the Orthodox
Councils, and falls out with Baronius and Binius for esteeming them Arians,
whereas in truth they were neither, but a pack of ill Men that knew no other
Religion than Interest.

But their juggling was now too late, for the Adversaries had not only got
possession of their Bishoprics, which they say in all Governments is a great
many Points of Law, but of the Emperor himself, which I am sure in that
Government was all, as will more appear by the sequel of this Story. The
Legates of the Council of Lampsacus having sped at Rome, and being armed with
communicatory Letters from Liberius, they sail to Sicily, and there in a
Council of Bishops make the same Declaration, and obtain the same favor, and
from thence to Illyricum, where they gain synodical Letters to the Eastern
Bishops, to certify or rather congratulate the happy Union of the Eastern and
Western Churches by their conversion. And this they send by Elpidius a
Presbyter of Rome, whom Liberius had joined with the Legates, to give them the
greater reputation in the Western Churches, as Baronius thinks, or rather as
Valesius conjectures with more probability, an Illyrican Bishop, for in their
Epistle they recommend him as their own Legate, and chosen from among
themselves. Theod. l. 4. c. 8.
And the Emperor was so far from being concerned for the Arian cause, that he
grants his Letters to recommend the Decree of the Illyrican Council, and to
settle the Nicene Faith, where he declares against the Equivocations of the
Homoioufians, and proves them no better than Arians. This Letter Valesius will
have to have been written not by Valens, but Valentinian, who though he then
resided in the West, entirely governed the Eastern Empire, Valens being wholly
obedient to his Orders, and rather his Under-officer than his Sharer in the
Empire. This is but a conjecture, and it is not likely that the Council should
send into Fran^e for Imperial Letters, when they had their own Emperor so near;
but if it be true, Valens was concurring in it, and that clears him of Arianism.

By these means the Legates and their Companions get themselves restored to
their Preferments in a Council at Tyana in Cappadocia. But they having gained
their point could not forbear discovering their old pick against the Nicene
Faith, as St. Basil informs the Western Bishops, who gave them their first
reputation, Epist. 74.
It is not the old and open Arian that does the harm, because that Heresy being
condemned by the sentence of the Church, it is wickedness is known to all, but
it is the sheep-skin Men, that under shows of Love and Reconciliation, and upon
pretense of being taken into the bosom of the Church, take advantage to worry
the Flock, and seduce the less understanding. These are the Men of Mischief,
that cannot be so easily prevented. And it is this sort of Deceivers that we
request you to use all diligence to discover and lay open to the World, that
either frankly declaring for the truth, they may own entire Communion with us;
but if they will not, let them keep their Poison to themselves, and not be
suffered to infect others by too careless communicating with them. And
particularly cautions them against Eustathius Bishop of Sebasta in Arm^nia, the
chief Agent in the Ambassy from the Council of Lampsacus to the Western Church,
that he was a rank Arian, and Arius his own Disciple, had been often deposed
for his Debaucheries, and as often changed his Faith to recover his Bishopric,
and therefore concludes that he wonders which way he could impose so far upon
Liberius, as to gain communicatory Letters from him, but by what means so ever
it was, he was no sooner restored by the Council of Tyana, but he fell to
spitting his old poison, and persecuting the very Faith, that he had so lately
professed. But all this was too late for the effectual recovery of his
Bishopric, for the Emperor Valens was now engaged in other Matters, being
invaded by the Goths, but before he would venture into the hazards of War, he
thought it convenient to be baptized into the Christian Faith, Soz. l. 6. c. 12.
which Office was performed by Eudoxius, who always diligently followed his
Trade at Court, and the Historians say (I doubt rashly) that he administered an
Oath to the Emperor at his Baptism to persecute the Catholics: whereas the
Persecution that followed, was not set on foot by the Emperor, but by the
Eudoxian Party, who now presuming of their old Interest in the Court, and their
new one in the Prince, and his distraction in the War, fell to their old Trade
of undermining, and so in a Council assembled in Caria, settle the last
Antiochian or Aetian Creed. Hilarii frag. l. 1. page 40.
And about the same time Bishop Valens and his Mirmidons meet in Mysia much
upon the same Errand, to establish their own particular conceit, similem
dicimus filium patri secundum scripturas, non secundum substantiam, and
endeavor to draw in Germinius, an eminent Man of the old Eusebian Faction, who
had gone all along with them as far as the Tyrian Conference before Constantius,
in which as himself declares, the Faith agreed upon was this, filium similem
patri per omnia, ut sanctae dicunt et docent scripturae, that the Son was like
the Father in all things as the Scriptures affirm, and therefore he cannot but
wonder at the dissimulation of Valens and his Men, that when they themselves
had subscribed this Confession of Faith, not only as the best declaration of
truth, but the best expedient of Peace and Unity, they should now so zealously
trouble themselves and the Christian Church, with new assertions, that the Son
is partly like the Father, partly not. Athanas. ad Episc. Afric.
But Valens and his Party are immediately condemned by a Council at Rome under
Damasus. Athanas. ep. ad Epictelum.
And diverse other Councils there were in several Parts of the World upon the
same occasion, to repress the recovery of the Faction. But Auxentius Bishop of
Milan, who had wrigled himself into that great Bishopric, upon the deposing of
Dionysius by Constantius in his Conventicle at Milan, according to the custom
that I have all along observed of those times, when Men of ill designs procured
the deposition of good Bishops, that themselves by bribery and the Eunuchs
might get into their Places. This Man was by this time become the most eminent
Head of the Party in the Western Church, though he was so ill prepared for his
Office by his Education, that he was not so much as instructed in the Latin
Tongue, but being a crafty and insinuating knave, he had not only poisoned
several Bishops of Illyricum, but had workt himself into the savor of
Valentinian himself, who after his Alemanick War settled his Court at Milan.
Upon this St. Hilary, who had been long acquainted with the craft and
false-hood of the Man, in his extreme old age takes a Journey to Milan, to
inform the Emperor what he was, and charge him with the Arian Heresy The
Emperor refers the examination of the Matter to a mixed Committee of Bishops and
secular Judges. But the Fox seeing himself distressed, and being resolved to save
his skin, denies all, professes mighty Zeal f^r the Nicene Faith, subscribes it
before the Court, and as if that were not enough, presents the Emperor himself
with an orthodox Confession of Faith, and so is too hard for the good old Man;
for upon it, he is acquitted and applauded at Court, and St. Hilary commanded
out of the City as a mover of Sedition, as he tells the Story at large in his
Book against Auxentius. And Auxentius flusht with Victory, grows insolent to
the Orthodox Bishops, especially the great Eusebius of Verselles, and is much
more busy than formerly in Illyricum, in so much that the fame of it reached
Egypt, upon which Athanasius and the Egyptian Bishops write to Damasus to
procure his deposition, who thereupon in the year 369 summons a Council of 90
French and Italian Bishops, in which Auxentius is deposed, but for all that, he
kept his ground, and liked his bargain so well, that he would not easily part
with it, and by the help of his Masters the Eunuchs kept it to his dying day,
which was five years after, and that not only in spite of the Authority of the
Council, but the power of St. Ambrose, who was at that time Governor of that
Province, and two others, with Consular dignity, and then resided at Milan, and
tho he hated the Man, yet he was not able to remove him.

But the Council having discharged their Duty and their Office in his
deposition, they write an adm^nishing Letter to the Bishops of Illyricum, to be
more watchful against the Heresy for the time to come, and write another to the
Eastern Bishops to desire their concurrence with them, which is accordingly
done in a Synod of 146 Bishops, both which Letters were first published by
Holstenius in in the year 1662, and are now inserted into their proper Place of
the year 369 in Labbe's Collection. Sozom. l. 6. c. 12.
And whereas a great Co^ncil was appointed to meet at Tarsus in C^licia in the
Spring following, for perfecting the settlement that was begun at Tyana;
Eud^xius that had got possession of Valens in the East, as Auxentiu^ had of
Valentinian in the West, prevails with the Emperor to send his Letters with
high threatenings, to forbid the meeting* and withal to write to his Governors
of Provinces, that the Bishops that had been outed in the time of Constantius,
and restored by the Apostate should be thrust out again, and this he strictly
requires of his Officers under high Penalties, and so by this Rescript was
Eudoxius revenged not only of the Orthodox Bishops, but the Macedonians too,
who had been cheated out of their Bishoprics by himself and his Associates in
the time of ^onstantius, and now by virtue of the Decree of the Council of
Tyana demand restitution, but by this imperial Rescript are barred their claim
for ever with disgrace* as having been justly displaced by a Christian Emperor,
and restored by the Apostate for ill designs. Here still we see where the
controversy pincht in this Emperor's time. A Party of Knaves had combined in
the time of Constantius to cheat and supplant honest Men out of their
Preferments, which having done, they as all other thieves do, fall out among
themselves, and endeavor to cheat one another, till at last the most crafty
pack sweeps all. After which all the Contest is on one side to recover, and on
the other to keep their Bishoprics, and for that end they stick at nothing,
but all turn Ecebolians, and change their Faith as easily a^ Chameleons do
their Colors, with every turn of Wind and Weather. Under Jovian the
Macedonians, that were the outed Party, turn Orthodox, but he dying so
suddenly, they lose their opportunity, and therefore make their Applications
to Valens the succeeding Emperor in those Parts, but are prevented by Eudoxius
and his Eunuchs, and so are forced to address themselves to foreign Churches,
and by professing themselves great Zealots for the Nicene Faith, are restored
by the Council of Tyana, and that being done, as they believed, again quit
their Faith. So here Auxentius the head of the Acacians in the West, being
called to an account for his Faith, forswears it all, and turns a Tory
Nicenist, and thus both Parties only make use of the Contest to supplant each
other. And that was the craft of Eudoxius here by a plausible Imperial Rescript
to prevent the force of an Ecclesiastical Decree, by which he knew that himself
and his Associates must have lost their Purchases. But which way soever the
Game run, the good Orthodox Bishops had ever the worst of it, and here
particularly the storm fell very heavy upon their heads, and Athanasius is
always the first that is wet in it. He is immediately commanded to be gone, but
the People vehemently interpose to keep him, and in the heat of the Contest
fearing a Sedition, he privately withdraws, is diligently sought for, but
cannot be found, till he is restored by the Emperor's own Letters for fear of
farther mischief. Theod. l. 4. c. 13, 14.
But all the rest that the Rescript reached, were effectually expelled, and in
the first place Meletius of Antioch, Eusebius of Samosata, and Pelagius of
Laodicea, who had been all along great sticklers in the scramble, only Meletius
was become an honest Man Epist. 61.
And here St. Jerome goes about to give a reason why Paulinus of Antioch, and
Epiphanius of Cyprus were not displaced, viz. because of their great worth and
fame in the World: but there is another reason for it plain enough, in that
they had never been turned out of their Bishoprics by Constantius, and
therefore were not concerned in the Rescript, neither were they Bishops till
afterward; Paulinus was not ordein'd till the second year of Julian by Lucifer
Calaritanus, nor Epiphanius till the present Reign. Sozom. l. 4. c. 27.
But Meletius that was Bishop with Paulinus at the same time, having from an
Acacian Bishop turned Orthodox, had therefore been banished by the Eudoxian
Party in the time of Constantius, and Euzoius the old Arian placed in his
stead, was by virtue of this Decree removed. And though probably, as it always
happens in such cases, the Rescript was executed farther than it was intended,
Epist. 10.
as St. Basil describes it, that the Bishoprics were exposed to the basest of
Men, The slaves of Slaves, and particularly that his Brother ibid.
Gregory of Nyssen, was driven from his Church, and a three-penny Slave placed
in his stead, (...).
as he calls him. Yet it is evident that it was in good earnest no persecution
of Faith, but only a trick of Eudoxius to throw all that had been of the
Macedonian Faction out of their Bishoprics. And tho Eusebius and Pelagius were
now zealous for the Orthodox Faith, and much magnified for it by the
Historians, and not only so, but by St. Basil and Gregory Nazianzen, who good
Men having been retired from the World, and unacquainted with the train of
Intrigues, were by their own simplicity imposed upon not to suspect their
dou^lings: yet they had been ejected among the Macedonians by Constantius, for
refusing to go thorough with the Acacians, and therefore must now resign to
some of Eudoxius his Friends of that Party. But they having thus got the Field,
Socrat. l. 4. c. 13.
fall out again among themselves, Eunomius will now have Eudoxius openly
declare himself for Aetius, but he tho he were zealous in the Cause, thought it
not at that t^me seasonable, and so upon that account they again break
Communion. But soon after Eudoxius dies, and this Socrat. l. 4. c. 14. Sozom.
l. 6. c* 13.
say the Historians raises new heats at Constantinople about the Election of
his Successor, his own Party choosing Demophilus, and the Orthodox Evagrius,
who was ordained by Eustathius formerly Bishop of Antioch, who, say they, then
lay concealed in the City to keep up the Homousian Faith, but I doubt they
mistake Eustathius of Antioch for Eustathius of Sebasta, the former was a very
good Man, and was present at the Council of Nice, and therefore cannot easily
be supposed to survive to this time, which was forty five years distance, and
is reported by St. Jerome and Theodorus to have dyed in Exile under Constantius,
and it cannot be supposed that so eminent a Person should have lain unactive
and concealed so long a time, or that Paulinus and M^letius would have invaded
the Sea, if the great Eustathius, had been then living, V. Baron. an. 317. N.
29. et Vales. not. in Socrat.
and therefore I suppose the Historians mean Eustathius of Sebasta, who was a
proper Person to act in the present Scene, for at this time it is evident that
it was not a Contest of the Faith, but the Faction, and tho Eustathius had
^rofessed the Homousian Faith, it was only to recover his Bishopric, to which
tho he were canonically restored by the Council of Tyana, yet he was kept out
of it by Eudoxius, who had cut him off among the rest by an Imperial Rescript,
being in the number of those that had been ejected by Constantius. So that he
lay not leiger at Constantinople, as the Historians dream in behalf of the
Nicene Faith, for before this time he had disclaimed it, but only to watch
Opportunities to recover his Bishopric, and therefore finding Demophilus of
the Eudoxian Party set up for the Court-Bishop, he endeavors to set up Evagrius
of his own Party against him. Socrat. l. 4. c. 15. Sozom. l. 6. c. 13.
But the Eudoxians or their Patrons the Eunuchs had possession of the Emperor,
who therefore upon the first news of the Tumult raised about it at
Constantinople, he being then at Nicomedia in Bithynia, immediately banishes
both Eustathius and Evagrius, and so for the present p^ts an end to that
Controversy. But however the Affairs of the Church go, the Courtiers resolve to
pursue their old Game, to watch all Opportunities of deposing Bishops, and then
they were sure of chapmen, and for that reason they continually blew jealousies
into the Emperor's head about these Matters, as they had dealt with
Constantius, for it does not appear that he had any more zeal in the Cause it
self, then only to preserve the public Peace, or acted farther than as his
credulity or something worse (for he was but a weak Prince, that was never able
to stand upon his own legs, and when he ventured upon one trial, perished in
it) was abused by their tricks and underminings.

. III. But for their purpose in all the Church, there was not an easier Game,
as they fancied, than poor St. Basil, who being a very mortified Man, and
forced from a retired life into the Wealthy Bishopric of Caesarea, was thought
a very easy Prey by Modestus at that time Prefect of the Province, and the head
Patron of the Eudoxian Faction, and therefore the Emperor coming to Caesarea in
his Passage to Antioch, he is incited by his Courtiers against this old Man, as
an open Enemy to his favorite Eudoxius. The description of the Encounter may
be seen in lib. 4. c. 19.
Theodoret, but more at large, and with some difference in Gregory Nazianzens
funeral Oration upon St. Basil, which tho it is too lavish and panegyrical in
many particulars, yet the sum of the account of this business is contained in
the discourse between the old Bishop, and the Prefect Modestus, who was sent to
persuade him to be reconciled to Eudoxius. Where after some conference, the
Prefect falls into rage and threatening, and asks him if he stand not in awe of
his Power. He replys, for what, what can you do to me? What can I do? returns
he, I can proscribe you, banish you, torture you, kill you. Can you so, replys
the Bishop, but if you have nothing else to threaten me with these things
concern not me. What do you mean? says he. I mean, says the Bishop, that he is
not obnoxious to the proscription of Goods that has none, unless you would rob
me of this poor threadbare Garment and a few old Books. Banishment I know none,
for the Earth is the Lords, and that is my Country; as for Tortures I have not
a Body strong enough to feel them, the first stroke will put me out of pain,
and as for death it would be the greatest kindness you could do me, to send me
out of this feeble Carcass to my Lord and Master. At this the Prefect stands
astonished, and professes that in all his life, he never heard any Man speak
with such courage and assurance. Perhaps, says Basil, you never met with a true
Christian Bishop till now, for if you had, he must have discoursed after this
manner, if called into question about these Matters. For you must know, Sir,
that we are mild and gentle in all other things, the most humble and submissive
of all Men, as our Law commands us, insomuch that we dare not behave our selves
with the least pride or stubbornness, I will not say to the Emperor or you that
are great Men, but to the meanest and poo^est of the People. But where the
Cause and the Truth of God is at stake, there we lay all other things aside,
and look at him alone, Fire and Sword, wild Beasts and Flesh-hooks are in his
service, rather pleasure than terror to us, and therefore revile us, threaten
us, do what you pl^ase, and the worst you can with us, and tell the Emperor
what I say, we shall never yield nor comply with his Will, the he threaten much
more dreadful things than all these. This is the true old primitive Spirit,
resolution adorned with Civility, and by it the Bishop not only overcame the
Prefect, but became dear to the Emperor, who resorted to his Church, and
received the holy Eucharist from his hands. From whence it is evident that this
Persecution came not from the zeal of the Emperor, but was merely set on foot
by the Grandees of the Faction for the sale and purchase of Sequestrations. And
for these designs they make use of the Emperors soft nature and vehement desire
of Peace, and that was all that he here required of St. Basil, only to be
reconcil^d to the Eudoxians, not to their Opinions. And though he was so well
satisfied with St. Basil at this first onset, yet they would give him no rest
till he condescended to their importunity for his Banishment, which was signed,
but upon a sudden Sickness of his Son after it, its execution was stopped. And
this is the true Interpretation of all the dismal Stories in the Historians
concerning this Emperor's Ar^an Persecution; but into what a woeful condition
the Eastern Church was brought by this Court-merchandizing, is described in the
Letter of Meletius and his Brethren to the Western Bishops Basil, Epist. 69.
The gravity of the Clergy is lost, the skilful Pastors have left their Flocks,
whilst such as are set over them consume even the Goods of the Poor upon their
own Pleasures. There is no regard had to the Canons of the Church, but an
uncontrolled liberty of Sinning; for they who come to the Government of the
Church by illegal ways, will do any thing to please their Masters. So that
there is in reality no Government, and every-man does what is good in his own
Eyes, wickedness is boundless, and the People stubborn, the Bishops trim and
dare not speak out, for having acquired their Power by Men, they are Slaves to
all by whose help and Patronage they were advanced. With much more to the same
purpose, from whence we fully understand the true Face of the Church, and the
right State of the Controversy at that time, to displace honest Men upon
pretenses of Religion, only to get into their Preferments, as farther appears
from their wild way of proceeding, as it is there described. Whereas no man
ought to be concluded Guilty, without some show of Evidence, our Bishops are
condemned only by being accused, and punished without any proof at all, some
never knew their Accusers, others never saw their Judges; some were never
accused at all, but conveyed away by dark Night, hurried into Banishment, and
kept in perpetual Imprisonment. This was the deplorable state of the Church at
that time under Valens and his Eunuchs, for the redress whereof, not only
Meletius, but Athanasius and St. Basil wrote to the Western Bishops, to implore
the Assistance of the Western Church and Empire. Athanasius his Letters are
lost, Epist. 70.
but that of St. Basil is very remarkable for its Eloquence and Ingenuity. But
at this time St. Basil laboring in the Settlement of the distracted Churches
in the East, by the advice of St. Athanasius, visits the Churches in Armenia,
where he unadvisedly receives that old insinuating Prevaricator, Eustathius of
Sebasta to the Communion of the Catholic Church, upon his reiterated
Profession of the Orthodox Faith. Upon which Theodotus Bishop of Nicopolis,
where the Reconciliation was made, who better understood the Man, though Basil
was not unacquainted with his former Shufflings, falls out with him. But
Eustathius like himself, finding, that by reason of that great opposition that
was ma^e against him, and knowing that his Enormities were so great, that St.
Basil was neither able nor willing to restore him, falls foul upon him, and
loads him with so many base Calumnies, which, though St Basil at first despised
for some years, it was the great work of his life to wipe off; one part of
Mankind, it seems being so credulous, and another so ill-natured, as easily and
greedily to swallow any ill surmise, and of this he often complains, even in
his own Friends, till he was at last tempted to sing the burden of our times,
that there is no Faith in Man, V. Greg. Naz. de laud. Basil.
as he often does in his Epistles, but especially in the 79th to Eustathius
himself. And all this upon no other account, Good man, than because he could
not compass a kind Office for an unworthy and ungrateful Man, and this found
him work to his Dying day, especially, as he expresses it, with the Pride and
Superciliousness of the Church of Rome.

But among these various Transactions, the great Athanasius dies, about the
year 371, or 372, perhaps sooner or later, for I am not concerned in
Chronological Niceties, my Business is to trace the Tradition of Christian
Truth, not to turn Hour-glasses, or watch the Motions of Pendulums. But his
Fall was the occasion of great stirs in the Church, both Parties being at such
a time highly concerned for a fit Successor to so great a Man, and so great a
See: Peter a grave and ancient Presbyter of that Church, was by the dying
recommendation of Athanasius unanimously chosen, but Euzoius the Arian Bishop
of Antioch, upon the first News of the Vacancy flies to Court, to move for his
Friend Lucius, who had been joined in Ambassy with him to Jovian against
Athanasius, and by the help of the Eunuchs succeeds, and is sent to Alexandria
with Magnus, a great Court-Trader in the Cause; but before they came the
Prefect of the City, a zealous Heathen, had driven Peter into Banishment, and
when they came, the People were so averse to the Intruder, that they were
forced to place him in the Sea by Military Power, upon which, what bloody
Tumults and Disorders followed, may be seen in all the Historians, but most
accurately in Theodoret.

Somewhat before this time arose the Heresy of Apollinaris, consisting of a
great many Profane or rather wanton Novelties, the chief whereof was, That our
Savior had no other Soul, than the Divinity it self; and the Conceit, because
it was a new one, began to take very much among the People, who naturally run
after any thing that is strange and unusual. But it is soon quasht by the
diligence of the Pastors of the Church; and that not only by Writing, though
all the Learned Men of that Age appeared against it, as Athanasius, Gregory
Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen. St. Basil, and Epiphanius; but much more effectually
by the Discipline of the Church. A Council was called at Rome by Damasus, the
active and leading Bishop of his time, though he was here more particularly
concerned, because he had unwarily given reputation to the Heretics, by
granting them recommendatory Letters. And here every particular Article is
condemned by an Express Anathema against it, Theod. l. 5. c. 10.
and an account of their Proceedings is given by Damasus in a Synodical Epistle
to the Eastern Bishops; the Epistle is of a very peculiar strein, and shows
that the Gentleman began to have some thoughts of advancing the state of the
Apostolic See, and it is the first, that I have observed, of that stiff
strein. But however the Heresy was soon quasht by that unanimous Agreement of
all Churches to suppress it every where by executing the effectual Discipline
of the Church upon all its Followers. In so much that I can not call to Mind
more than one Imperial Law against them at that time, and that was enacted by
Arcadius in the year 397. against their secret Conventicles at Constantinople,
de Haeret. l. 33.
they not presuming to appear in Public. And when a Sect is brought so low, as
that it dares not venture to make any public Appearance, it is vanquished, and
scarce worth the Notice of the Government.

IV. In the year following, i. e. Anno 374. a Council was held at Valentia in
France, for reforming some Abuses and Corruptions, that had crept into that
Church, and restoring the force of some ancient useful Canons In the same year
happened that strange Election of St. Ambrose to the Bishopric of Milan after
this manner. Theod. lib. 4. c. 6.
Upon the Death of Auxentius, the Emperor Valentinian happening to be then at
M^lan, calls the Bishops together, and Exhorts them to take care to choose a
Person of eminent Abilities for so great a See. They in all humility refer it
to his Majesty's own choice, No, says he, that is a Province not proper for me
to undertake, but to you that are enlightened by the Divine Spirit, most
properly belongs the Office of choosing Bishops. Upon this the Bishops take
time to debate among themselves, but whilst they are consulting, the People of
each Faction flock together into the Marketplace, and there, as it usually
happens in popular Assemblies, from Disputing proceed to Tumult. St. Ambrose
being Governor of the Place, flies according to his Office to appease the
Multitude. Who no sooner appears, than they all cry out, An Ambrose, an Ambrose
for their Bishop; at which he being astonished, ascends the Tribunal with an
austere Countenance, as if he were resolved to put some of them to Death, but
they still cry the louder. Upon that he accuses himself of such scandalous
Crimes, as by the Canons of the Church render him incapable of the Episcopal
Office, but that is all one to them, neither will they believe him. And
therefore in the last place, he betakes himself to flight by Night, and designs
for Ticinum, but having wandered all Night, and thinking himself near his
Journeys end, he found in the Morning that he had walked in a Circle, and was
just entering into one of the Gates of Milan, at which being surprised, and
fearing lest there should be something of the hand of God in it, he returns
home and submits; they acquaint the Emperor with it for his consent, Cod.
Theodos. de Episc and Cler. l. 3.
because by the Constitution of Constantine the Great, they were forbidden to
take any Officers either Civil or Military into the Clergy without it, lest the
Commonwealth should be left destitute of able Men. But the Emperor is highly
pleased with the Election, and is proud of his own choosing such Magistrates as
are fit to be made Bishops, and through this odd concurrence of Circumstances,
is he made Bishop contrary to the Can. Apost. 80.
Canons, for he was then no more than a Catechumene, which Learned Men think
may be excused by the miraculousness of the thing, as if it had been
immediately brought about by the special Interposition and Authority of God
himself, and for such extraordinary cases the Canon it self has provided an
Exception, adding this Clause at the end of it, (...), unless it be done by the
special favor of God. And that this was so done, all Parties concerned in it,
thought they had good reason to conclude, from so great a Conjunction of
Wonders. Am. Marcel. lib. 30. C. 6
Soon after this, Valentinian dies of an Apoplexy or some sudden Death, upon
which Ammianus Marcellinus reads a Lecture with as much Gravity, as if he were
President of the College of Physicians, as he takes all Opportunity of showing
his Knowledge in all sorts of Learning, a fondness very incident to all
half-learned Men. But in the mean time Valens goes on in his old road, as his
Eunuchs are pleased to drive him, Epist. 140.
till Gregory Nazianzen solicites his ingenious Friend Themistius, a great
Philosopher, and a great Man in the State, to take him off from his Fury, which
he might the more easily do, as being unconcerned in the quarrel, and like a
Gentleman he undertakes it, and in his Speech entitled (...) persuades the
Emperor for some time to lay aside his Bigotry for the Eudoxian Faction. And to
say the truth of him, he was both a Gentleman and a Philosopher, he was first
made Prefect of the City by Julian, who was possess't with a vehement Ambition
of preferring Learned Men, he was always a Friend to the Catholics for their
Integrity, and as much as a Man of his Temper and Principles could be, an Hater
of the Eusebians of all sorts for their shuffling and dishonesty, saying in his
Oration to Jovian Soc. l. 3 c. 25.
that they Worshiped not God, but the Imperial Purple. And after the overthrow
of Procopius, he out of pure good Nature intercedes with the Emperor for Mercy
and Clemency to the vanquished, Orat. 9
and withal advises him to beware of listening to Whisperers and Flatterers, by
whom he means his Eudoxian Courtiers, that thrust him upon all his extravagant
Actions. So now here at the request of his Friend Nazianzen, he rubs up the
Emperor's good Nature in behalf of the Catholics. And for the sweetness and
gentleness of his temper, he was a Favorite to all the Emperors from Julian to
Theodosius the Great, between whom, notwithstanding the difference of their
Religion, and the distance of their Station, there was a particular Friendship
and Endearment cemented purely by the likeness of their Tempers, in so much
that the Emperor Theodosius left him the Guardianship of his young Son Arcadius.

But notwithstanding this learned Gentleman's advice to Valens, his Officers
proceed in their old Track of Violence in the East, whilst his Nephew the young
Emperor Gratian in the West, steers the contrary course, for being sensible of
the great disorders in the Church and Commonwealth, by reason of his Father
Valentinian's remisness, he thought it high time to settle things better by a
stricter Government, for though Valentinian was a wise Prince, and Orthodox in
the Faith, yet he was possessed with one unhappy Principle, that spoiled his
reign, that indeed has been most fatal to Princes in all Ages, and that is, as
lib. 30.
Ammianus describes it. Post^emo hoc moderamine principatus inclaruit, quod
inter religionum diversitates medius stetit: nec quenquam inquietavit, neque ut
hoc coleretur imperavit, aut illud, neque interdictis mina^ibus subjectorum
cervicem, ad id, quod ipse voluit, inclinabat; sed intemeratas reliquit has
parts, ut reperit. He excelled in the moderation of his Government, in that he
stood unconcerned among all the diversities of Religions, and never disturbed
any Man, neither commanded this or that way of Worship, nor forced his Subjects
necks to look which way he pleased, but left these Matters altogether
inviolated. But by the Soldiers leave, who was not bound to be an accurate
Lawyer, this is not universally true, for there is extant in the Theodosian
Code Ne Baptisma iteretur* l. 1.
a particular Law of his own making against the Donatists, to forbid their
rebaptising upon pain of Deposition; and there is another under the title de
Haereticis l. 3.
against the Manichees, though indeed they were rather Villains than
Heretics, who taught and practiced all kinds of Vice and Wickedness, as the
Principles of their Sect, and therefore no wonder if they were excepted out of
his Clemency, but otherwise it extended equally to all. By which means the
Christian Church was not only overrun with Heresies, and its discipline
utterly defeated, as we have seen in the case of that wicked Man Auxentius, who
though he were so justly deposed by the Judgment of the Catholic Church, yet
it took no effect, because Valentinian was withheld by this Principle, from
doing the Office of a Christian Emperor, in abetting the legal Decrees of the
Church, and such an one he himself thought that against Auxentius. But beside
this Calamity within the Church, Heathenism hereby gained great ground, and
appeared publicly in the World, especially by his Edict to restore the heathen
Priests to their ancient Immunities, L. 75 de Decurionibus.
and for the sake of this it is, that Ammianus commends this Emperor's
moderation; for it is the most certain rule of Government, that all Parties
that are under most are for this Principle, because it is the only ground, that
can give them advantage to mount uppermost. But the young Emperor Gratian a
Prince of great Wisdom and Virtue, finding things in so great a disorder by it,
he at his first coming to the Crown, takes particular care for the Churches
Peace and Settlement. de Haeret. l. 4.
And publishes a Rescript against the public Meetings of all Heretics, i. e.
(as the Law it self defines it) all Parties whatsoever, that did not join in
Communion with the Catholics, under punishment of Confiscation of their
meeting Places, whether Fields or Houses, and because by reason of the
connivance or corruption of his Officers it was not executed, he reinforces it
two years after, with a threatening Injunction to his Judges, to neglect its
execution at their Peril. And yet Valens perishing soon after in the East, and
that part of the Empire falling to this Emperor, who left the Western Parts,
that were better settled to his younger Brother Valentinian, when he came
thither, he found things in such confusion by Valens his mis-government, that
he was forced to submit to the necessity of the Times, and for that reason
published an Edict at Sirmium, granting the liberty of public Assemblies to all
Sects, excepting only Manichees, Photinians and Eunomians. Soc. l. 5. c. 2.
Sozom. l. 7. c. 1.
This the Historians Socrates and Sozomen set down as the first act of his
Government, but they were ignorant of what he had enacted in the West. Theod.
l. 5.12.
As for Theodoret, he is quite lost in the whole story, turning this act of
Indulgence into a severe Law, but the apparent ground of his Mistake is, his
confounding this Rescript with another of Theodosius de fide Catholica, l. 2.
that bears this Emperor's Name, though enacted by Theodosius alone. For that
was the custom, that though the Law were made by one Emperor, it was published
in the name of all. But to proceed with Gratian, he having settled things as
well as he could in the East, and returning the year after into the West,
publishes de Haeret. l. 5.
a Rescript at Milan to cancel the Sirmian indulgence, and forbid the
Assemblies of all Sects that had been adjudged Heretics by the Church and
Imperial Laws; thus we may see what Princes are frequently forced to do as to
their Penal Laws by the necessity of the Times, and vary their Edicts as the
present temper of the World will bear them. But now this Emperor having by this
seasonable Law given check to the Heretics, in the next place he restores the
effectual Discipline of the Church de Epist. l. 23.
by a Rescript bearing date the year 376, that the same Custom should be
observed in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as was in Civil Causes, that Controversies
belonging to Religion, should be judged by the Synod of the Diocese, but all
criminal Causes should be reserved to the Audience of the Secular Governors.
Not to inquire at present into the particular occasion of this Law, which
Gothofred conjectures was made in the controversy of punishing the
Priscillianists with the Sword, it is agreeable with the practice of the
Empire, and so this learned Civilian divides all Controversies into Causes
ecclesiastical and political, the Ecclesiastical into Controversies of Faith or
Discipline, these, he says, appertain to the Church. The political are divided
into Causes pecuniary, or Causes criminal, and these, he says, appertain to the
Civil Power. This I know is the common state of the bounds of Jurisdiction, and
has made great confusions in Christendom, whilst both Powers contend to keep
their own ground: and especially since the power over the Catholic Church was
swallowed up into the papal Omnipotency, what troubles have the Popes given the
Christian Emperors, for daring to intermeddle with spiritual Matters? But this
Argument of the bounds of Jurisdiction I shall fully state, when I have first
set down the exercise of it in matter of Fact, and therefore though I need at
present only say that it is a dangerous Mistake to divide them by the different
Matters about which they are conversant, when they are both conversant about
the same Matters, and unless they are so, both of them will be too weak to
attain the ends of their Institution. Yet because it is the fundamental Mistake
on both sides, and because I may never come to finish this wide undertaking,
and lastly because I find it to be the great stumbling block to the wiser and
more judicious Men of the Church of Rome, I shall here a little briefly
consider its consequence. de concord. l. 2. c. 1. 4.
The learned Petrus de Marca one of the wisest Writers of that Church affirms,
and believes the bounds of these two Jurisdictions to be so plainly determined
by the Matters themselves, about which they are employed, that no Man can
possibly miss their true boundaries, that does not industriously overlook
them, in that it is so evident that the regal Power extends only to things
secular, and the Ecclesiastical to things spiritual. Whereas on the contrary
nothing is more evident, than that all Actions are both Secular and Spiritual,
the same Action as it relates to the peace of the World, and the Civil
Government of Mankind is of a secular Nature, and as it is a moral Virtue, and
required by the Law of God as a duty of Religion, so it is of a spiritual
Nature. And so on the other side, those things that are esteemed Spiritual, yet
as they have an influence upon the public Peace (and nothing has a greater)
they must come under the cognizance of the civil Government. So that these
Jurisdictions are so far from being distinguished by the Objects about which
they are conversant, that they are always both equally extended to the same
Objects, so as that if we limit either to one sort of Actions, we destroy both.
For to take Matters spiritual in their strictest acceptance, and as they are
vulgarly understood, for the Offices of divine Worship, and especially the
public Devotions, that are performed by the Sacerdotal Order in the public
Assemblies, yet if the Sacerdotal Power reach not beyond this to secular
things, it can never reach its end, for that is to procure the future happiness
of the Souls of Men, and that very much depends upon their good or bad behavior
in the Affairs of this life; so that if their spiritual Guides and Governors
are barred from intermedling in all such Matters, they are cut off from the
chief part of their Office, and what remains, will be too weak to attain its
end, for when Men have been never so careful in all the Offices of Religion,
yet if care be not taken to regulate the Actions of humane intercourse, all
their Devotion will avail them very little in the World to come. So on the
other side, when the Civil Power has done all that it can, to settle and secure
the quiet of the Commonwealth, by the wisest Laws of Justice and Honesty, yet
if they may not take notice of what Doctrins are instilled into their Subjects
by their Teachers, or what divisions or commotions are raised by them in the
Church, they may soon be involved into disturbance or confusion, without any
Power to relieve themselves. I am not at present concerned to prove that this
is now actually done by any Party of Men, it is enough to my present purpose,
that it is a possible thing to disturb the peace of Government, under Pretenses
or by Mistakes of Religion, or to pray and preach Men into Rebellion. And if it
be so, then the consequence is unavoidable that it must be subject to the power
of the Civil Magistrate, if that be any of its Office to take any care of the
peace and quiet of the World. But in truth this distinction has been all along
chiefly cherisht by the Bishops of Rome since the time of their Usurpation:
because when they had got all the spiritual Power of the Church into their own
hands, their next care was to hug and keep it entire to themselves, and
therefore they confined the Power of Princes wholly to Matters of State, but as
for all things, that concerned the Church, they were bound with all submission
to resign themselves to his Holinesses Orders, and if they presumed to gainsay
any of his Edicts, though never so prejudicial to their own Affairs, it was
open defyance to Holy Church, and though the Popes never proceeded any farther
against him, as none of them did, till Hildebrand, yet that alone was at that
time a forfeiture of the Affections of his best Subjects, i. e. all those plain
and good People, that have any real love or value for their Religion. And this
one thing alone gave the Popes of Rome, though they had never proceeded to the
scandalous boldness of deposing Princes, an absolute Empire and Authority over
all the Princes of Christendom. And it is observable that they were the high
flying Popes, that were the chief sticklers for the advancement of this
distinction, as appears not only from the Collection of Gratian, Distinct. 69.
where it is largely exemplified, but from Petrus de Marca himself, warranting
the truth of this Doctrine from the Authorities of Gelasius, Symmachus, Gregory
the second, Nicolaus the first, Innocentius the third, who in their several
high Contests with the Emperors, that endeavored to check and bridle their
Ecclesiastical Insolence, still bid them mind their own business, and not
presum^ to meddle with the Church, the Government whereof was entrusted to St.
Peter and his Successors. But their Adversaries have been even with them,
especially the Erastian Heretics (for what greater Heresy can there be in the
Church, than to take away the very Being of the Church) by distinguishing
between the sacred Function, which they grant to be the proper office of the
Church, and the Power over sacred things, which they annex entirely to the
Civil Power, by which distinction they leave the Governors of the Church no
other Power, than to administer the Offices of Religion, without any Power of
punishing Offenders against the Laws of Religion, and then they have none at
all, for there can be no power without a Power of inflicting Penalties. And
there lies the true distinguishing point between these two Jurisdictions, not
in the Matters about which their Power is employed, but in the Penalties, by
which it is enforced. Thus to be short and give one example for all, whereas
Novel. 83.
Justinian leaves to the Church, the (...) the sins committed against the
Ecclesiastical Order by the Clergy, and to the State the (...) or Sins against
the Laws of the State. This division is so far from being true, that both
Powers are equally concerned in both Crimes, for if any Clergyman disturb the
Government, as the Donatists did by a Contest about a Canon of the Church, then
though it were an Ecclesiastical sin, it concerned the Civil Government to
check the Mischief by the proper Penalties of Sedition, as Honorius drove them
into banishment, and thereby restored the long interrupted Peace of the Empire.
And on the other hand, if any Clergyman, let him be never so regular to the
Laws and Rules of the Church, shall in a state-Faction engage in a Rebellion
against his Sovereign, that is properly a Political sin, the Church is bound to
inflict such Penalties upon him, as are denounced by the Laws of their Religion
against all Traitors and Rebels, i. e. to cast him out of their Society, and
the capacity of Salvation. And that is the only difference in the case, that
when the King cuts a Traitor off for this life, the Church cuts him off ^or the
next, and so it is in all other Crimes, where the Prince punishes for breach of
the Laws of the Land, the Church punishes proportionably for breach of the Laws
of Religion. And as by the Laws of the Land the Penalty is proportionable to
the Crime, so is it by the Laws of the Church: for as some Offenses are
Capital, and some only Penal in the State, so in the Church, some are punished
by Penance, some by utter excision or cutting off from the Kingdom of Heaven,
which is the same thing in its kind, as cutting off life in this World. So that
the same Crimes are so far from belonging to different Judicatures, that all
belong to both, the only difference is, that one punishes here, and the other
hereafter. And now this one observation of the difference of Penalties in the
same cause being supposed, which cannot be be avoided, without destroying or
intrenching upon the Rights of Church or State, the bounds of Jurisdiction are
evident enough without splitting of Causes, and it is easy enough to understand
how the same Causes belong to both Jurisdictions from their different ends,
without setting any restraint to either Power. And thus having in this short
digression, as briefly as I could, secured this point of the Controversy, which
is the main Hinge upon which depends the disingenuous Contention of both the
extreme Parties, both Papal and Erastian, I now return to the course of the
History, which was broke off at the year 376. Am. Marcel. l. 31.
At which time, the Huns breaking into the Eastern Empire, and Valens being
extremely distressed by them and the Goths at the same time, in Cron.
St. Jerome and l. 7. c. 33.
Crosius say that he repented of his former severity, and upon it recalled the
Orthodox Bishops from banishment, lib. 4.35. c. 37.
but Socrates only says, and that much more probably, that being otherwise
employed he desisted, and so the banished Bishops, particularly Peter of
Alexandria had opportunity of returning home And that I doubt was all,
notwithstanding St. Jerome's lavish story of his Repentance, which good Father
partly by his boldness, partly by his eagerness, has occasioned the greatest
Mistakes in the story of the Church, and therefore when he is a single witness,
his Testimony is not to be regarded in any Matter of Fact, unless when he
speaks of his own knowledge, for he was an honest Man, and would not lie, yet he
was so very hotheaded, that it often betrayed him into false-hoods, and
therefore his single Authority ought not to be trusted, unless in Matters of
his own knowledge. And by relying upon it, and that contrary to the testimony of
calmer Authors great darkness has been brought upon the Records of the Church,
and has particularly blemished Baronius his Annals, who has very often followed
his Authority not only without, but against all other Authors, and by it run
himself into a great many Mistakes against the best Records of the Church. And
this I take to be one, though no material one, that Valens repented of his
Persecution, and called back the banished Bishops, for which there is no proof
but only his saying so, and they that followed his Authority, otherwise we do
not find that they were solemnly recalled, till Gratian came into the East
after his death, when indeed Soc. l. ^. c. 2. Soz. l. 7. c. 1. Theod. l. 5. c.
2.
all the Historians agree that they were restored.

In the Year 377 a Council was held at Antioch, for preventing or rather curing
a Schism in that Church, that was first created by Julian's spiteful and
treacherous toleration to all Sects, for by that means 3 Bishops had been set
up in one Church, Meletius who was first an Acacian, but afterward revolting
to the Nicene Faith, Euzoius was put in his place by the Acacian Faction, and
Paulinus set up by that hot Man Lucifer Calaritanus, who would accept of none
of Meletius his repentance, in opposition to both. With Meletius the Arian
Converts communicated, with Paulinus the old Orthodox, because Paulinus himself
had ever been so, and as for Euzoius he presided over the Acacian Party. But he
dying about this time, a Controversy arose who should be the true and proper
Bishop of the Place, in which not only the People of the City made Parties, but
the Bishops of other Churches. St. Basil was zealous for Meletius, Pope Damasus
for Paulinus, so that it became a Controversy between the East and West. But at
last this expedient was found out, that both during their lives should keep
their own shares, but when ever one of them dyed, the surviver should govern
the whole Church, and that the Schism might not be perpetuated, an Oath was
administered to six of the eldest Presbyters of that Church, who were the only
Candidates for the Election, to submit to the Decree, and this, for the
present, ended the Quarrel. And yet when after this Meletius dyed, Flavianus
one of the six Presbyters that had sworn never to invade the Bishopric, whilst
either of the present Bishops survived, violently thrusts himself into the Sea,
and sets up a Schism against Paulinus to the great and long disturbance of the
Church, as we shall afterward see, though Theodoret lib. 3. c. 3. et c. 23.
either out of a picque to Paulinus or partiality to Flavianus, relates the
whole Matter so awkerdly, as not only to pervert, but apparently to falsify
the whole Story.

. V. In the Year 379 is the great Theodosius taken into a partnership of the
Government, who by his Wisdom settled all the distractions of the
Eastern-Empire, and by his courage recovered the Western when it was lost. At
first he is left to the Government of the East, as being at that time by the
folly of Valens and the wickedness of the Eunuchs and Eudoxians, much the most
troublesome, and therefore in the next year after his being settled in the
Government, he takes care for the settlement of Religion, and for that end is
himself baptized by Acholius Bishop of Thessalonica, that at that time belonged
to the Eastern Empire, and as the first fruits of his sacramental Vow, he
immediately set out, and that probably at the good Bishop's motion, that
famous, or as it is commonly styled, Golden Rescript l. 2.
de fide Catholica to the divided People of Constantinople, commanding the
universal Reception of the old Orthodox Faith, ut secundum Apostolicam
disciplinam, evangelicamque doctrinam, Patris et Filii et Spirit^s sancti unam
Deitatem sub parili Majestate, and sub pia Trinitate credamus, that we believe
one Godhead of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, all of equal Majesty in the
holy Trinity, according to the Doctrine of the Apostles and Evangelists. And as
for all that refused this Faith, of what Faction and Denomination soever, they
were all adjudged Heretics, and the Laws against them put in force. Soc. l. 5.
c. 4.
And soon after this the great Church of Constantinople, is by his command
taken from the Heretics (who had in one shape or other kept possession of it
full forty years) and delivered up to the Catholics. And this was seconded by
another Rescript in the year following to the Proconsul of Asia, that had been
all along infested with the most numerous swarms of Heretics, in which he
strictly commands all Churches to be taken away from all Bishops and Priests,
that refused to subscribe the Nicene Faith, and for better security further
Orders that no Man should be admitted to any Church, but such as were approved
by a certain Committee of Orthodox Bishops, appointed by himself for that
purpose. Here I must confess that I Account of the Government of the Church 20.
once thought this Law an invasion upon the Rights of the Church, by
confounding the old bounds of Provinces, and destroying the Prerogatives of
Metropolitans, because they were chosen without regard to either; but having
now traced its history more accurately by comparing the Imperial Laws with the
Records of the Church, (and indeed it is impossible to gain a full knowledge of
either, without a competent knowledge of both) and so considering the time and
occasion of enacting it, it plainly clears it self from any such ill suspicion.
For first, if it were made before the Council of Constantinople, as some will
have it, it was then but a temporary Provision, till a better settlement could
be made by the approaching Council, and therefore if it had been an
intrenchment upon the Church, it was not designed to be perpetual, but was
taken up as the best expedient, that the necessity of the Times would admit,
and all necessity is its own dispensation. But if it were enacted after the
Council, and if its Date be not mistaken, and so it was, for the Council sat in
May, June, July, and this bears date August, then it is only a confirmation of
the Decree of the Church, that had settled the Nicene Faith. But which soever
it was, this institution of the Communicatory Bishops was no alteration either
of the bounds or the Rules of Discipline, for the Ecclesiastical Government of
Provinces under Metropolitans stood as before, but it was only a Rule to his
own Officers, not to deliver up Churches to any that did not bring Certificates
from some of these Bishops, but when they brought them, they were to be
admitted after the usual manner; if Presbyters, by the Bishop and his Synod of
Presbyters; if Bishops, by the Metropolitan and his Synod of Bishops. Neither
can any thing be inferred for equalling Diocesan Bishops or preferring them
above Metropolitans, by Nectarius his being made the first Man in the
Instrument, for it was no matter of power but of trust, the Emperor chose them
not with any regard to their Authority, but from his knowledge of their
Integrity in the Orthodox Faith, and therefore being best acquainted with
Nectarius the Bishop of his own City, and his old Favorite, he naturally named
him in the first place, and the rest probably by the information of others.
This is all that I can find intended by this Emperor's erecting this Committee
of Communicatory Bishops, it was to guide himself and his Officers, not to
determine the Church. And now are we come to the great Council of
Constantinople, whose main business it was to settle the Nicene Faith, and
anathematise the Arian Heresy, and all the Sects that had been spawned out of
it; but because the Macedonians had as we have seen above, so often owned the
Nicene Faith, and particularly in the Council at Lampsacus, the good Emperor in
hopes to bring them over, Soc. l. 5. c. 8. Soz. l. 7. c. 7.
summoned them to the Council, 36 in number, but it seems they were at that
time in a sullen fit, and would not be prevailed upon to stand to their former
subscriptions, and so depart the Council. But the Fathers proceed, and in the
first place vote the Nicene Faith unalterable, condemn all the several
dissenters from it by name, make some Canons useful for the present settlement
of the Church, and give an account of their proceedings to his Imperial Majesty
in these words. That meeting at Constantinople in obedience to his Summons,
they had preserved Peace among themselves, confirmed the Nicene Faith,
anathematised all Heresies, that had been raised against it, enacted diverse
Canons for the due settlement of the discipline of the Church, they now request
his Majesty that he would be pleased to ratify the Decrees of the Council,
that as they were called together by his Imperial Letters, so he would be
pleased to give an effectual conclusion to their Decrees. That was the true
state of the Church under his wise reign, as it was under Constantines, to
summon them to Council by his own Authority, and leave them to the liberty of
their own determinations, and then if he pleased, to enforce them by his own
Imperial Laws and Penalties. And that he did to purpose, for beside the former
Law of Communicatory Bishops, that was most probably published at this time, he
enacted de Haeret. l. 6.
another injoining the Nicene Faith, forbidding public Assemblies to all, that
would not subscribe it, condemning the Photinians, Arians, Eunomians by name,
and commanding all Churches within the Empire to be delivered up to the
Orthodox Bishops, or such as kept close to the Nicene Faith. The Rescript is a
plain Epitome both of the Creed and Canons of the Council, and for the most
part expressed in the very same words. And because when the Churches were taken
from the Heretics they attempted to build new ones, de Haeret. l. 8.
he seconds it with another to forbid that, under pain of Confiscation. Upon
this the Heretics meet in private Conventicles, or assemble Multitudes
together in the Streets and Fields, which occasions de Haeret. l. 11.12
two Laws in the year 383, to forbid all manner of Meetings in all Places
whatsoever, to restrain wandering Bishops from preaching or ordaining successors
in the Heresy, and the Execution of these Laws is enjoined the Governors of
Provinces upon pain of Deposition from their places. But because the Heretics
were ferretted out of all other Places, and took sanctuary in the great City of
Constantinople, ibid. l. 13.
he publishes another Rescript the year following, requiring the Magistrates to
make a diligent search to find out their lurking holes, and so we hear no more
of them, till the year 388, when all these Laws against them, were contracted
into ibid. 14.
one Rescript, the Emperor being provoked to renew the execution of his old
Laws, by their saucy behavior upon any cessation against them. But now leaving
the Eastern parts to go to the assistance of Valentinian the younger against
the Tyrant Maximus, who had driven him out of his Empire in the West, he
chooses Tatianus a Man eminent for Courage, Wisdom and Conduct, to be his
Praefectus Praetorio in his absence, and when he comes into Macedonia, where he
meets the distressed young Emperor, and finding himself engaged in a dangerous
War on his behalf, for the better security of the Peace, sends him a new sort
of Rescript, de his qui super Religione contendunt. l. 2.
strictly commanding him, that he suffer no disputes about Religion, and if any
shall dare to do it, that he punish their presumption with just severity. A Law
that has been found so useful and necessary to the public Peace, that it has
been from time to time renewed by wise Princes in all Ages. He himself was
forced four years after, to impose it upon the Egyptians and Alexandrians under
pain of deportation, and no wonder, when they have been remarked in all Ages
and by all Authors, as the most contentious and quarrelsom People in the World,
and particularly at that time great Tumults were raised by the Anthropomorphite
Monks. It was afterward renewed by the great and wise Emperor Marcian, inserted
into the Laws of the Vice-Goths, the Capitulars of Charles the Great, and the
Additions of his Son Lewis. And this they did not only for the security of the
public Peace, but for the honor and reverence of Religion. For it cannot but
bring that into great contempt, to see it bandied up and down in popular
Tumults and Seditions, and therefore in the Primitive modest Times, they
endeavored to keep Matters of dispute and controversy from the notice of the
People, V. Gothofredi Notas in legem.
and distinguished between the (...) things fit to be preached, and the (...)
notions fit to be concealed. And it was the familiar form of Expression in
their Sermons, when they came to any controversial point, to break off
suddenly with an (...), but this the learned know. Gregory Nazianzen has an
excellent Sermon upon the Subject, Orat. 26.
fit for our own conceited and capricious Times, in which the good Father is so
popishly affected, as to recommend to his disputing Citezens of Constantinople,
ignorance above curiosity. But this wise Emperor having settled things in as
good a posture, as he could in the East, prevails at the same time with the
young Valentinian, who by the instigation of his Mother Justina, had been a
great Patron of the Heretics, to publish the same severe Rescript against them
in the West, that himself at his first coming to the Empire had enacted in the
East, and to cancel the former Law, that he had two years before made in their
behalf, viz. de fide Cathol. l. 4.
that we grant liberty of public Assemblies to all those, that believe
according to that Faith, that in the time of Constantius was agreed upon at
Ariminum by all the Bishops of the Roman World, and let those Men know, that
presume that themselves alone ought to have liberty, that if they shall attempt
any disturbance against this our Command, they shall stand guilty of
High Treason, and pay for it with their blood. This is a very high Act in
behalf of all the Heretics, for by the Faith agreed upon at Ariminum is to be
understood, the cheat that Valens and his Party put upon the Council, that
comprehended all the different Parties whatsoever. And yet that is the Faith
that is here confirmed to last forever, and whoever shall publicly oppose any
that publicly promote it, shall forfeit his head. This came from the furious
zeal of Justina, who prosecuted it with the same zeal and outrage, wherewith
she had procured it, and it was so highly displeasing to Benevolus the
Emperor's Secretary, Ruffin. l. 2. c. 16.
that he chose rather to lose his Office and the Offer of much greater
Preferments, than so much as transcribe it. And this was the Rescript, that
brought so much trouble to St. Ambrose, when he refused to deliver up his
Church to the Arians, and indeed it was particularly aimed at him. And the
first Mover of all the Mischief was one Auxentius a Scythian, that had a great
mind to that wealthy Bishopric, but partly because the Name of Auxentius was
hateful to the People of that City, and partly because he was infamous for many
Villainies in his own Country, he took upon him the name of Mercurin^s. But this
whole business being a very remarkable transaction, and of very great
consequence to my Argument, I shall set it down with the greater Nicety: that
we may not only see the outward Actions themselves, but the inward Springs and
Motives of the Court-Intrigues.

. VI. And first of all Auxentius challenges St. Ambrose to a dispute before the
Emperor then only a Catechumen; but the Bishop disdains the Motion, that when
the Faith had been so fairly determined by so many Councils, he should
prostitute the divine Authority of the Church, by referring it to a secular
Judicature, but chiefly by making a Catechumen supreme Judge of the Faith. But
Dalmatius the Tribune is sent by the Emperor to command his appearance, upon
which advising with some Bishops, that were then present with him, he returns
his Answer in writing, in which with equal courage and modesty he reproves him
for meddling with things that did not originally belong to his Judicature, and
so proceeds to state the Power of the Emperors in Ecclesiastical Matters, from
the practice of his Predecessors. And it was then but time to be hot in the
Cause, this being the first open breach, that was made upon the Church; for
though Constantius had often done it underhand or rather unadvisedly, yet what
he did, was by the pretended Authority of Councils, but this is the first time
that any Prince challenged a Power to judge of Faith by his Imperial Authority.
And as it happened, it was as good a season as the Experiment could have been
tried in, when the Trial fell upon such a Man as St. Ambrose, a Man of infinite
Courage and Integrity, and he has distilled the very Spirit of both into his
Reply, the short of it is this. Lib. 4. Epist. 32.
Sir I hope I return you a sufficient Answer, though I come not to Court upon
the Errand that I am sent for, neither let any Man judge me contumacious, when I
only maintain what your Father of blessed Memory was not only wont to say in
discourse, but to enact by Law, That in Causes of Faith or Ecclesiastical
Discipline, he alone ought to be Judge, who is qualified for it by Right and
Office. He would have Bishops judge of Bishops, nay if a Bishop were guilty of
Crimes of any other nature, he was pleased to refer them also to the
Ecclesiastical Judicature. But when, I beseech you, Gracious Sir, did you ever
hear, that Laymen made themselves Judges of a Bishop in a Cause of Faith? No,
Sir, I cannot crouch to so mean a Flattery, as to forget my Sacerdotal Trust,
that I should part with it to any other, when God has committed it to my
Charge. If a Bishop is to be taught by a Laick, let the Laick preach too.
Believe me, Sir, it is certain both from the Holy Scriptures, and the practice
of the whole Church, that in matters of Faith, Bishops are to guide Emperors,
and not Emperors Bishops. Execute, if you please, your late bloody Law upon me,
Ambrose is not so much worth, that for the sake of his own poor self he should
prostitute not only his own Priesthood, but the dignity of all the Bishops. If
there be any Controversy of Faith, know, that it is their business to decide
it, as was done under the great Constantine, who prescribed nothing to the
Bishops, but left them to their own liberty of Judgment, and the same was the
practice under his Son Constantius, tho what was well begun, was afterward
perverted. For the Bishops agreed upon an Orthodox Faith, whilst some few
would have the thing determined at Court, whereby they at last imposed upon the
Bishops, who as soon as they understood the cheat, recalled their Sentence, and
ratified the Nicene Faith. (This has a peculiar reference to the Council of
Ariminum.) In short, Sir, if Auxentius desire a Council, though it is by no
means fit that so many Bishops should be put to so much trouble by the
petulancy of one Man, who though he were an Angel from Heaven, ought not to be
regarded, if he oppose the Peace of the Church, whenever a Council is called I
shall not absent my self. This is the sum of his resolute Answer, as far as it
concerns my Argument, where we see that the Power of Judicature in Matters of
Faith was always owned to be an unalienable Right in the Governors of the
Church, and was never challenged by any Emperor before this young Prince, who
was boisterously thrust upon it by the importunity of a furious Woman and her
Scythian Priest. And they having now begun the Work, resolve to go through with
open force, and for that end, procure a Law for the ejectment of Catholic
Bishops out of their Churches, under Penalty of Death to all those that refuse
to resign them, and for the first execution of it, send a Party to seize St.
Ambrose, and take possession of his Church. But the People defend the Doors.
The Officers command him in the Emperor's Name to deliver up his Church and the
Goods of it. At this the People are afraid that he will comply. No, says he,
fear not that, I cannot forsake my Flock, and deliver it up to the Guardianship
of a Woolf. If they will dispossess me by force, they may carry away my Body,
but not my Mind. I am ready to submit to any thing that the Imperial Power can
inflict, but as long as I can, I must and will discharge the duty of my
Priestly Office. Why then are you troubled, I will never willingly forsake you;
if I am forced, I must not resist; I can mourn and weep and pray, my Tears are
Arms against the Goths, these are our Priestly Weapons, any other way I neither
ought nor can resist. And as for delivering up the Goods of the Church, he
tells the Officers, Gentlemen, if the Emperor be pleased to command any thing
that is my own, I would freely present him wi^h it: but I can take away nothing
out of the House of God, nor give that away which was only entrusted with me to
keep. And being often pressed to a voluntary resignation, this was his constant
and peremptory Answer, and withal boldly advising the Emperor to beware what he
did in seizing the Goods of God, and invading the Rights of the Church. And
thus things stood three whole days; St. Ambrose would not deliver up his
Church, nor the Emperor durst not take it by force. And when the Courtiers
persuaded him to go in Person and turn him out, he replied, I thank you for
that, for if Ambrose should command you to deliver me up bound into his hands,
you would obey him, and therefore for fear of farther mischief he was forced to
desist, though by his proceeding so far, he brought great disgrace upon
himself, in so much that the Tyrant Maximus wrote a smart Letter to him to
upbraid him with the folly and dishonor of his Attempt; it is very well
written, but s^mm'd up in this one short saying, Periculose, mihi creed, divina
tentantur. Believe me, it is a dangerous thing, but to touch the Ark. But this
was done in order to his Invasion of Italy, to engage the Orthodox on his side,
as if he had taken up Arms to vindicate their Cause, for the Rescript of
Valentinian reached not St. Ambrose alone, but all Churches under the Emperor's
Jurisdiction, as appears not only by the Rescript it self, but by the Tyrants
Epistle. Audivi enim novis Clementiae tuae Edictis, Ecclesiis Catholicis vim
illatam fuisse, obsideri in Basilicis sacerdotes, mulctam esse propositam,
paenam capitis adjectam, et legem sanctissimam sub Nomine nescio cujus legis
everti. I am informed that by some new Edicts of your Grace, force has been
offered to the Catholic Churches, that the Priests have been besieged in their
Cathedrals, that the punishment annexed to the Law is no less than pain of
Death, and that the most religious Law of the Empire is destroyed, under
pretense of I know not what new Law of your own. And so the next news we hear
of the Tyrant, is his declaration of open War, by which the young unadvised
Emperor being in a great distress, supplicates St. Ambrose to undertake an
Ambassy, to dissuade the Tyrant from his Design, which he frankly and readily
undertakes, Ambros. l. 5. Epist. 27. in which Letter he gives an account of his
Embassy to the Emperor,
and behaves himself in the discharge of his trust with the same liberty for
his Master against the Tyrant, that he had used toward his Master for his
Savior, requires him in the name of God to submit to his Sovereign Lord the
Emperor, and lays open to his face, all his shifts and pretenses wherewith he
would have mask't his Rebellion, with that freedom and boldness, with that
dexterity and quickness of Wit, as bafled the Tyrant out of all his Artifices,
and laid the Villainy of his Actions open to all his Court, who were present at
the Audience. And as for all Bishops that had owned communion with the Tyrant,
he disowned and defied all communion with them. And in the conclusion of his
Letter, advises the Emperor to beware of the Tyrant and his Practices, who
under specious Pretenses of peace and friendship, would lie at watch to work
his destruction. But the Emperor not satisfied with the effect of Ambrose his
Embassy, nor regarding his Advice, sends another Ambassador one Domninus, a
very fine and artificial Courtier; that instead of the roughness of St.
Ambrose, might conveigh himself in to the Tyrant by the neatness of his
Address; but when Maximus saw what a pretty Puppet he had to manage, he treats
him with all possible complaisance, and makes him giddy with kindness and
flattery, Zosimus lib. 4.
and for a demonstration of his friendship to his Master the Emperor, lends him
part of his Army to assist him against the Barbarians, that at that time
infested Pannonia, and so by this Complement very civilly made himself Master
of all the Passages through the Alps, which being done, he secures Domninus
with all his Company, till he past with his whole Army into Italy. Upon which
sudden surprise Valentinian is forced to fly, and gets to Thessalonica, where
he sends to Theodosius to acquaint him with his forlorn Condition and implore
his Assistance. But Maximus meeting with no opposition sweeps all before him,
and endeavors to conquer by Civility as well as the Sword, Ambrose Ep. 26.
courts all Parties, grants liberty to all Religions, not only Christians, but
Jews and Heathens, and to oblige the Catholics, that were much the most
numerous Party, declares himself of their Communion, cancels the late Law of
Valentinian against them, and See his Epistles in their proper place in Labbe.
courts Siricius Bishop of Rome with wondrous pangs of Sanctity. But on the
other side Theodosius finding the young Emperor in such miserable Distress, he
makes all possible speed to his Assistance. And this brings us back to the Law
of Valentinian against all the Heretics, which was enacted at this time, for
he having so unfortunately miscarried by the Importunity of his Mother in
persecuting the Catholics with such an hateful severity, and by it given so
much advantage to the Tyrant, Theodosius finding him in Macedonia, in the first
place, advises him with speed to damn his form^r Rescript, and in order to his
March into Italy, to reconcile God and the People to him, to publish a severe
Rescript De Haeret. l. 15.
against all the Heretics. The very discourse between them is extant in Suidas
in the Name of (...). And so Theodosius marches against the Tyrant, overthrows
him in a moment, restores the Empire to the young Prince, Sozom. l. 7. c. 14.
and the young Prince to the Orthodox Faith. I have been forced to take this
compass for the Explication of this Law, because without this Historical
account of it, its true force and meaning could not have been understood.

But in the Absence of Theodosius from Constantinople, Ambros. Ep. 29.
the Heretics grow saucy, burn the Bishop's Palace, make Tumults and justify
all their disorders by a pretended Grant of the Emperor for Liberty of
Conscience in his Absence, when he was so far from it, that he would not so
much as grant Liberty of talk, but he being so far off, they might fasten their
Lies upon him the more securely. And here the Method of talking the People into
Tumults is very accurately described by the Soc. l. 5. c. 13.
Historian. It is (says he) the natural Genius of some men to fain Reports, and
when there is any great Transaction upon the Stage, every man believes them as
himself is inclined, and withal improves the Lie with some accessional
Invention for the Advantage of his own Party; and so it was at this time at
Constantinople, there was a great War a great way off, about which every
discontented man divulged his own Tale, always hoping and presuming the issue
of things on the worst side, and when the War was not so much as begun, they
describe all its turns and motions as accurately as if themselves had been
Spectators of the Battle, viz. that the Tyrant had utterly routed the Emperor's
Army, that such and such numbers were slain on both sides, and that the Emperor
himself was taken Prisoner. Upon this the Arians, without any more to do, being
enraged that their Churches, that they had so long possessed, should be taken
away from them by those Men that they had so long persecuted, improve and
aggravate the Story, and by telling it with so much assurance, persuade the
first Authors of it, that it was really and indeed true. So that tho they
received it only by the report that others had raised, they now make the first
Founders believe their own Lie, by assuring them that it was true of their own
knowledge. And upon this the Arian Rabble take Confidence, run into Tumults,
and burn down the Bishop's Palace. This is the natural way of talking People
into Confusion. But the Emperor being informed of these Disorders, at the
intercession of his Son Arcadius, whom he left there in his absence, forgave
the Tumult, though as to their lying pretense of Liberty of Conscience, he
publishes De Haeret. l. 16.
an Edict to declare to all the World that he never granted any such
indulgence, and to command them to be punished according to his known Laws. And
in the year 389, he publishes l. 17.
a Rescript particularly to outlaw the Eunomians, that were boldest of all the
Factions, by which they were made incapable either of making their own Will, or
receiving any benefit from another's Will, any manner of way, directly or
indirectly, by Trustees, or any other Devices, but that the Estates of all such
Persons should be immediately forfeited to the Crown. This Law has occasioned
great Disputes among the Critics and Lawyers, being particularly made against
the Eunomiani Spadones, the Eunomian Eunuchs, about the meaning of which words
they cannot agree, and after a great Variety of Conjectures to be seen in
Gothofred's Notes upon it, he himself is confident that the word is corrupted
for Histapodes, i. e. Men standing upon their Heads, it being one of the absurd
Customs of that Sect, that when they rebaptized any Catholics that Apostatized
to them, to Baptize them with their Heads downwards, and their Heels upward,
whence they received the Nickname of Histapodes. But it is strange that we
should never hear of this word but in this Law, for he brings no examples of
it, and though there is Evidence of such a Custom, yet there is none of such a
Word, and therefore I think there is no need of any such far-fetcht Curiosity,
when the words are so intelligible in their natural sense against the
Court-Eunuchs, that had been all along the Patrons of this Faction, and so were
to be restrained by this Law of forfeiture of Estates, being generally Men of
great Wealth; No, says Gothofred, that was only under Constantius; yes, say I,
they first set up their Trade of Simony under him, but continued it in all
following Reigns, and did all that Mischief that was brought upon the Church
under this Emperor's Predecessor Valens; and therefore for preventing this
Disorder for the time to come in these great Courtiers, he forbids them to act
at all for these Heretics under the great Penalty of Confiscation of their
whole Estate. Or rather it is most probable that Eunuch was become a Proverbial
Nickname to the whole Party, for the Trade between the Court Eunuchs and the
Eunomians was so notorious under Valens, that it might in just derision be
named the Eunuchean Sect. This is, I fancy, the most easy sense of the words.
In the same year he puts out De Haeret. l. 19.
another Rescript to restrain the Meetings of all sorts of Heretics in the
City or Suburbs of Constantinople, Gothofred conjectures that the Suburbs are
here added, because Eunomius being expelled the City, kept his Conventicles
there, Lib. 7. c. 17.
as Sozomen informs us, but that is one of Sozomen's Mistakes, for he was not
at that time banished from Constantinople but Calcedon. But his Conjectures why
all sorts of Heresies and Errors ar^ here named, is more probable, because at
that time Soc. l. 5. c. 20, 22, 23. Sozom. l. 7. c. 17.
the Eunomians themselves were broke into several Factions and Animosities,
though this is not singular to this Law, but all the Laws of this Emperor run
in the same comprehensive style to prevent all Shifts and Evasions. In the
years 392 and 394, to all the former Edicts and Penalties he publishes his
Rescripts against all Ordination by Heretics under a severe Pecuniary Mulct
upon the Persons both Ordaining and Ordained. The same Law that his Son
Honorius at first executed against the Donatists, as we have seen in the
History of that Schism. The last Law that he made about these Matters, was to
abrogate the 17th Law that disabled the Eunomians from making Wills, and as he
often, as well as all other Emperors, varied his Laws upon Reasons of State, so
he had now some particular Reason that induced him to reverse this, and what
that was, is not to be known but by Conjecture; he was then departing to the
War against Eugenius, and so was willing to leave all People as easy and
peaceable as he could, especially the Courtiers, if the Law referred to them,
or the whole Party, whom its severity had made Malcontents. And therefore this
Indulgence was in a short time after, taken away by his Son Arcadius, this
Emperor dying in his return home, and before he could reverse it. But the most
usual reason of their altering their Rescripts, were the various Tempers of
their Ministers of State. The former Laws were enacted when Tatianus was
Praefectus Praetorio, a Vigorous and an Active and an experienced Man that
prosecuted them with all severity. But this was made when Rufinus succeeded to
the Office, who being at his first entrance upon it more wary, though otherwise
of a bold Temper, advised the Suspension of that severe Law for those nice
times, and as soon as they were over, again advised its execution. And thus
this great Prince broke the heart of the Faction by abetting the Sentence of
the Church against them with vigorous Laws: And that had been sooner done, had
they been more vigorously executed by his Judges and Officers, whose Neglect or
Connivance was the reason of his so often renewing the same Law. And there
indeed generally lies the greatest Miscarriages of all Governments. And of this
his Son Honorius was so convinced, both by his Father's and his own Experience,
that he made all his Laws effectual by annexing severe Penalties upon their
non-execution.

VII. But beside these Laws to back these new Decrees of the Church against
Heretics and Heresies, he enacted others by his own Authority to rescue the
Ancient rules of Discipline, that were grown obsolete by the abuses and
corruptions of time. And first he reduces the Order of Deaconesses to their
Primitive Institution, commanding in pursuance of the rule of the Apostles, and
Practice of the Primitive Church, De Episc. l. 2^.
that none be admitted into that Order under the Age of Sixty, and that too
with several Limitations, that she appoint Curators or Trustees for her
Children, that she carry away with her none of the Plate or Jewels of the
Family, and that she bequeath nothing by Will to the Church, Clergy, or Poor,
though the particular occasion of this Law was that wicked Fact that Sozomen
reports to have been committed at this time by a Deacon of the Church of
Constantinople with one of the Deaconesses of the same Church, who had probably
settled her personal Estate upon him, not for the Churches Service but her own.
And in the same Rescript commands, That all Women who shave their Hair upon
pretense of Religion be cast out of the Church, which was done not only in
pursuance of the rule of the Apostle, and the Canons of the Church,
particularly the Council of Gangra, that was then taken into the Codex of the
Laws Ecclesiastical, but of the Law of Nature it self to prevent the Confusion
of Sexes, the distinction being chiefly preserved by this Custom. This Rescript
was published in July, but in September following the Clause disabling
Deaconesses to dispose of their Movables by Will to Pious and Charitable Uses,
is reverst, provided the Will be made in time of Health, and not upon their
Deathbeds, when they might be too apt to be imposed upon by Superstition and
the Frauds of Priests. At the first Law An. 390. N. 70, 71.
Baronius takes fire, as if it were a violent restraint of Devotion to God, and
Charity to the Poor, and an Abridgement of the Privileges of Holy Church,
which therefore, he says, was soon canceled by the Advice of St. Ambrose, that
great Assertor of Ecclesiastical Liberty. But that St. Ambrose had any hand in
reversing it, we have no Authority of any Historian that I know of but the
Cardinal himself. But beside by his leave, such restraining Laws are requisite,
nay necessary in all Commonwealths; for there is nothing so Prodigal as
Superstition, and wherever there is Religion, that will creep into great
numbers of the People, and therefore it concerns the Government every where, to
take care that Families and the Public be not defrauded by Prodigal Zeal or
under pretense of Devotion. And this abuse was so early, that when Constantine
the Great made a Law to the Citizens of Rome, to enable all Persons whatsoever
to give by Will to the Church, not only what Legacies, but what Lands they
pleased, which was the occasion of the great Wealth of that Church, that Lib.
2^* c. 3.
as Am. Marcellinus observes, was made fat with the Offerings of Widows. This
Liberty the succeeding Emperors found such a consumptive profuseness from the
Public, that they were forced to limit it in some cases, and in some, to stop
it quite up. Valentian the Elder directed De Episc. l. 20*
a Rescript to Damasus Bishop of the City, to be read in all Churches under his
Jurisdiction, to for^id the Clergies acceptance of any Legacies from Religious
Women. Which Law was variously censured by the Fathers themselves. St. Ambrose
Epist* 31.
complains of it as a particular Spite and Unkindness to the Church, St. Jerome
approves of it, as being extorted by the Rapaciousness of the Clergy. But it
continued in force till it was by name abrogated by the Emperor Marcian
Marciani Novella 5.
as too rigid and severe a restraint of Pious Uses, and an entire Liberty
granted to all Widows and Religious Women to dispose of their own Estates
according to the old Constantinian Law. Justinian De Testam. l. 48.
limited the sense of it, so as that it should not extend to the wrongful
disinheriting of Children, because, he says, when Princes grant such Liberties,
they cannot be supposed to grant any thing contrary to the Law of Nature and
the known Custom of the Empire, and therefore the Right of Inheritance
belonging by both to the Children or Kindred of the Family, if the Alienation
from them by such Gifts be apparent, the Government ought to stop it, and not
suffer the Subjects civil Rights to be defrauded by their too religious bounty,
so that these Imperial Concessions are to be limited to such cases only, in
which no other Person is wronged, but if any be so, that anticipates the Grant.
And in truth this Imposture (and so it is, when it is imposed by the Artifice
of the Priests upon the Folly of the People, (grew so exorbitant in the times
of Superstition, that almost all the States of Christendom were forced to make
Statutes of Mortmain, as well as we in England, and it was such a Law, that was
the ground of that famous Quarrel between Paul the Fifth and the Venetians. But
though former Ages were so wise as to stay their hand when they supposed the
Church had enough for it self and the Poor (for in those days they were no
Parish Charge, but were the care of the Church) yet they were never so Profane
and Sacrilegious, as to Strip and Plunder her, when they were pleased to
imagine that she had too much. That is the peculiar Glory of our last worthy
Age of Reformation, when some great Pretenders swept away its Abuses and
Revenues together. Reforming Rectories, that were a competent maintenance for
Men of Education, into Vicaredges, the meanness of whose Revenues cannot but
expose the poor Incumbents to the contempt of the People; for be the Men what
they will, or do they what they can, not only the Common People, but all men,
will trample upon their Poverty. And when all is done, that is the true ground
of the contempt of the Clergy: Though there are many more Reasons for it, as
the Profaneness of the Age, and contempt of the Function it self, though that
in a great measure first comes from the contempt of the Men and their Poverty:
The wicked licentiousness of the Schismatics in venting perpetual Lies and
Calumnies against all Men that are truly honest for the Church: yet the bottom
of all other Contempts, and that which will make them everlasting, is this
Remediless Poverty. And it is to be feared that the curse of God has, and does
hang very heavy over this Nation for this wrong done to himself, and I doubt
will never be removed, till some Public ^^re be taken to make him some
competent Restitution; for if there be any one Sin punished with signal and
remarkable Judgments from Heaven, it is this daring Sin of National Sacrilege,
of which I shall give the peculiar Reason, when I come to show the high
Obligation that is laid by God upon all Christian States to endow the Church
with settled Revenues, which is so great, that without it, they cease to be
Christian States. But to return to the Series of the History, as this Prince
reformed by himself the abuse of Widows and Deaconesses, so did he correct the
disorders of Monks, or the Professors of solitary life (for the first Monks
were properly Hermites) and enlarge or contract their Privileges according to
his own Will or Pleasure, or according to the Temper of the Times. Thus whereas
it had been an old Custom indulged them, to intercede with the Emperors Judges
for Mercy to Criminals and Malefactors, they grew so bold and insolent as to
besiege the Courts, raise Tumults, and obstruct the whole course of Justice, of
which Disorders complaint being made by the Judges, he Publishes De M^nachis,
l. 1.
a Rescript to Command them from all Cities into their Solitudes. And two years
after, either upon change of Mind, or change of Affairs, or change of Councils,
he cancels it. A very frequent thing that, with all Princes to alter their Laws
of Privilege, as the conveniences of things altered. So the Emperor Valens,
when great numbers of Men left their civil Employments to herd among the Monks
for ease and idleness, De D curionibus l. 63.
ferrets them back to their business under pain of forfeiture of Goods and
Chattels. And so when Constantine the Great had granted great Immunities to the
Clergy, and Exemptions from Public Burdens, great Multitudes quitted their
Stations in the Commonwealth to enjoy the Privileges of the Church, De Episc.
l. 3.6.
this forced him to enact a Rescript forbidding the admission of Civil and
Military Officers into Holy Orders, lest under Pretense of Religion, the
Service of the State be starved and defrauded. And there are no less than 16
Laws in the Theodosian Code against this abuse of Clericatus, as they style it,
they may be seen all together at one View in Gothofred's Paratitlon to the
Title De Decurionibus.

But the most observable Act of Reformation is his Law to restrain the abuse of
Ecclesiastical immunity, or the Sanctuary of Christian Churches, where all
sorts of Persons that escaped to them, were protected by the Clergy against the
Execution of the Law, and they were grown so bold in the abuse of that
Privilege, that they would not deliver them up till they had sued out their
Pardon, 9 Cod. Tit. 45. De bis qui ad Eccles. conf^g. l. 1.
and therefore this Emperor strictly forbids them to receive or conceal any
Debtors, especially those of the Crown, upon penalty of paying the Debt
themselves. This was the first Law that was made of this kind, though the
following Emperors were very quick-sighted in watching this abuse. For as such
Customs naturally spring up of themselves from that respect that all Men have
to their Religion, and therefore this right of Sanctuary was common to all
Religions in the World, so having Superstition to back it, it as naturally runs
into abuse to the subversion of Justice and Honesty, when under pretense of
Mercy and Humanity, ill Men were sheltered against the Laws, and honest Men
cheated of their Rights; for I do not find any case in which it was at this
time excepted, but only Treason, and therefore it was often requisite to give
check to its Licentiousness, as Theodosius here does in the Christian Church,
Tacit. Annal. lib. 3.
and Tiberius was forced to do as to the Heathen Asyla.

. VIII. But beside these Laws made to abet the Laws of the Church, he made
diverse relating to Matters of Religion, which though they concerned the Church,
concerned the State more, and therefore by virtue of that Authority, that he
enjoyed as a Sovereign Prince antecedently to the Institution of Christianity,
he made these Laws merely by his own Imperial Authority, without consulting the
Church, for the Security of the Empire. And among these, the most remarkable,
were the Laws against the Manichees, who tho they pretended to the Name of
Christians, under that pretense, warranted the Practice of all manner of
Wickedness and Debauchery, and therefore were prosecuted by the Emperors of all
Principles, as the common Enemies of the Peace of Mankind, but most severely by
this Great and Wise Prince. Though before him De Haeret. l. 3.
Valentinian the Elder, when he allowed Liberty to all other Sects, Christi^^s,
Jews, and Heathens, by which he embroiled and endangered the Empire, enacted
against their Meetings with all manner of severity, as a debaucht sort of
People, not to be endured in humane Society. Or as Theodosius the younger
expresses it in his Rescript De Haeret. l. 65.
against all sorts of Heretics, in which the Manichees are named in the last
place with this particular severe Character, Et qui ad imam usque scelerum
nequitiam pervenerunt Manichaei, as the very dregs of all Wickedness. De
Haeret. l. 7.9.11.18.20.
And therefore they are from time to time outlawed by Theodosius from all civil
Rights; and as for their Religion, De Apoatis l. 3.
they are thrust down into the Catalogue of Apostates from the Christian Faith,
and reckoned in the same rank with Jews and Heathens, and that was a Civility
to Men, that were Apostates from humane Nature. Now as to such Laws as these,
it is evident, that the Sovereign Power is enabled to enact them in both
Capacities, both as a Sovereign, and as a Christian Sovereign; and therefore
because it belonged to him to punish all Principles and Practices of
Debauchery, antecedently to his Christianity, he for that reason proceeded
against them without any consulting with the Church, and that is the apparent
reason why the Laws of the Empire against this debaucht Sect of Men are enacted
purely by the Imperial Authority; whereas all their. Laws concerning Matters of
Christian Faith or Discipline, still warrant themselves by the Judgment and
Advice of the Church.

But beside these Laws against these humane Beasts, he enacted diverse other
Laws against Apostates, Pagans, and Jews, by his own Imperial Authority. His De
Apostatis l. 1.
first Rescript against Apostates to Paganism was published in the year 381,
and it was the first, that was ever published against them. For under
Constantine and Constantius vast numbers of Heathens turned or pretended to
turn Christians for a very obvious reason, as too much appears through the
whole train of the Story: And the same Men under Julian turned Heathens again,
and so had the Liberty to continue under Valentinian the Moderate; so that this
was the first Emperor that had occasion to give check to the Sin of Apostasy.
And indeed he alone, had Power to do it at that time; for when they turned
Apostates, they were out of the Churches reach, because the utmost Punishment
that the Church can inflict, is to cast them out of its Communion, which is
here done by the Crime it self. And therefore such rank Offenders, are only
obnoxious to the Civil Powers, for which reason, Christian Princes were usually
the more severe in their Penalties against them, and here the Penalty is, as
the Lawyers Phrase it, Intestability, or disabling the Offenders from the Power
of making a Will, which was under that Government in a great measure to outlaw
them, or as it is expressed in the next Law, ut sint absque Jure Romano, to
deprive them of the Roman Rights and Liberties, of which this was the greatest
branch. For, in the Roman Empire there was no settled Inheritance of Estates,
but every man disposed of his own as he pleased, by Will; so that to deprive
him of this Power, was in a great measure to dispossess him of the Power over
his own Estate. And that was the proper Proportion of the Penalty to the Crime,
that whoever cast himself out of the Christian Church, should be cast out of
the Christian Empire too.

De Haeret. l. 2.
In the year 383, he publishes another Rescript against Apostates; and in that
distinguishes between Catechumenes and Christians baptized, and limits the
Penalty of the former Law to the latter sort of Offenders, because they alone,
were properly to be accounted Christians, whereas the Catechumenes were not as
yet admitted into the Society of the Christian Church, but were only Candidates
for it, and so they could not in any sense, be termed Apostates from the
Church, who were really never of it. And at the same time, that Theodosius
published this Rescript in the East, De Haeret. l. 3, 4, 5.
Valentinian published another in the West, against all sorts of Apostates, not
only to Paganism, but Manicheism, and Judaism. Which he reinforced Qui sanctum
baptisma prophan.
in the year 391, limiting the meaning of the Law to the Christians baptized,
after the example of Theodosius, by whom he was entirely governed in all
things, (who indeed was so grateful to the Prince that advanced him to the
royal Dignity, that whilst he lived, he was a kind and tender Father to his
Son.) but as he mitigated the Law by restraining its extent, so he enhanced its
severity by doubling its Penalties, deposing the Apostate from all Honors and
Dignities, as well as depriving him of the Power over his own Estate, and this
without any hopes of Restitution upon Repentance, Sed nec unquam in statum
pristinum revertentur; non flagitium morum obliterabitur poenitentia, neque
umbra aliqua exquisitae def^nsionis, aut Munimini^ obducetur.

But to return to Theodosius; at the same time that he restrained Apostasy by
his own Imperial Authority, without any concurrence of the Power of the Church,
so did he by the same Power make severe Laws against Paganism it self. De
Paganis, l. 7.
His first Law against their Sacrifices bears date the same year, and Gothofred
thinks it the first that was made since the time of Constantius, which is the
Interval of 25 years; and yet he could not be ignorant that even Valentinian
the Elder made a severe Law against their Night Sacrifices; and therefore I
suppose the Learned Lawyers meaning is, that this was the first Law that was
made in all this time against all Heathen Worship in general; De Maleficis, l.
7.
and so it was, for there is no other beside that particular Law of Valentinian
against the Night Sacrifices. And though Gratian showed not a little
displeasure at Rome against their Idolatry by overthrowing some of their
Altars, yet he enacted no Laws against it; whereas this great and pious Prince,
is resolutely bent upon its utter Extirpation, and therefore forbids all
Heathen Rites whatsoever under pain of Proscription. But having taken away
their Sacrifices, he thought good to preserve their Temples, and convert them
to some other public Use, and to this end, De page l. 8.
he writes the next year to Palladius, injoyning them to let the Temple of
Edessa lie open to the common use of the People, in the Nature of an Exchange
or a Guildhall, but to be watchful that no Sacrifices be privately offered in
it, and withal to be careful of preserving the Images wherewith it was adorned,
for the sake of their Art and Beauty, like the Giants and Judges in Guildhall.
In the year 385 he renews De Page l. 9.
his Law against Sacrifices upon pain of Death* In the year 391 Valentinian by
his Advice, who was then with him at Milan, Publishes Ibid. l. 10.
a Rescript both against Sacrifices, Temples, and Images under a great
pecuniary Mulct. And himself at the same time Publishes the same Decree Ibid.
l. 11.
upon Pain of Death, by which was occasioned the utter Destruction of the
Famous and Ancient Temple of Serapis. And in the year 392 he seals up all, with
Ibid. l. 12.
a peremptory Rescript against all the particular Rites of the Gentile Worship.

And lastly, as for the Jews, he by the same Imperial Authority without the
concurrence of the Church, made some Laws in their favor, to protect and
defend them in their Privileges. For all the Emperors had all along indulged
them the exercise of Discipline among themselves, by the Power of
Excommunication: which was chiefly put in Execution by their Primates or
Patriarchs, that presided over all the Synagogues within a Province, after the
same manner as Metropolitans do over all the Churches. These were the Supreme
Judges of Scandals and Offenses, and beyond them, there lay no appeal to any
other Courts. But it seems some of the Emperors, Judges, and Officers (and it
is much more easy to bank out the Sea, than the covetous Encroachments of this
sort of Men) had broke in upon their Privileges, and usurpt a Power to
themselves of commanding the restitution of ejected Persons. But to restrain
this disingenuous Abuse and Subversion of their Discipline, the Emperor
Publishes De Judais, l. 8.
a Rescript to all his Officers, commanding them not to control the Decrees of
the Primates and Patriarchs, who were by the Imperial Law permitted to be the
sole Judges in Matters of their Religion. And this was no more than a just and
reasonable Civility after the grant of Discipline and Jurisdiction among
themselves: for that could be of no Effect, if once Offenders might gain
Liberty to appeal to foreign Judicatures. And because the Jews had never been
forbidden the exercise of their Religion by any Law, and yet were at that time
disturbed in some Parts in the East by some overzealous Christians, to the
spoiling and destruction of their Synagogues, he writes to the Governor to
restrain these Disorders with all possible severity. And this was the occasion
of that hot Contest between the Emperor and St. Ambrose, when he enjoined the
Bishop of the place to rebuild the Synagogue, because he had encouraged the
People to pull it down. In which matter I cannot but think St. Ambrose was more
busy and zealous than became him, Lib. 5. Epist. 29.
(as Men of great Spirits are apt to over-do) For what the Emperor enacted in
the case, was only as Vindex disciplinae Publicae. When the Imperial Laws had
given the Jews Liberty, who had Power to take it away, but the Power that
granted it? And therefore if any of the Christians in a violent and tumultuary
way, took to themselves the liberty of demolishing them contrary to the
Imperial Charter, they stood guilty of a Scandalous Riot, both against the Laws
of the Empire and the Sovereignty of the Emperor. And whether the Government
did well or ill in granting the Liberty, the Subjects had no Authority to
control it. They might have addressed to his Imperial Majesty, humbly
representing the inconveniences of that liberty in that place, which had they
done, it is not to be doubted, but this great and pious Prince, would have
given them both a wise and an obliging Answer. But when in a popular Tumult and
out of intemperate zeal, they shall presume to take a liberty to themselves by
force to control the gracious Concessions of their Prince, I think (by the
good Fathers leave) that they deserved a more severe correction, then their
Prince in his great Clemency was pleased to inflict upon them.

. IX. Having represented in one view the Laws of this great and wise Prince in
Ecclesiastical Matters; we may now proceed to the remainder of the History of
the Church under his Reign in the several Parts of the Empire. And the most
remarkable transaction next after the great Council of Constantinople, in which
the Arian Heresy with all its Branches and Of-sets were for ever lopt off from
the Body of the Christian Church, was the Council of Aquileia summoned the same
year, viz. Anno Dom. 381. consisting of Italian, French, African and Pannonian
Bishops, that acted in the capacity of Legates from their several respective
Provinces. This Council was convened by the Emperor Gratian in the West, as the
Council of Constantinople was by Theodosius in the East, two Months after its
breaking up, which was at the end of July, and the meeting of this, at the
beginning of September. The occasion of it was this, Some of the Heretics of
the Arian spawn, presuming upon the favor and patronage of the Empress Justina,
complain to the Emperor of their unjust condemnation for the Arian Heresy, and
petition to purge themselves in a general Council. This was vehemently opposed
by St. Ambrose, as an unreasonable thing, that all the Bishops of Christendom
should be perp^tually forced to leave their Churches only to satify the
curiosity, or (as he calls it) the scabbedness of two or three Men. But the
Queens importunity overcomes the Emperor so far, as to prevail with him for a
Council, which yet he summons with that moderation, as to leave all the foreign
Bishops at their own liberty to come or not. Which civility all the Bishops of
the Western Church use with that respect, as to send their Legates and
Representatives, and as for the Eastern Bishops, they inform his Majesty, that
they had but just before assembled about the same Matter, and given in their
peremptory determination. The Council being met, Palladius and Secundianus two
Bishops that had been censured for the Heresy, together with Attalus a
Presbyter appear: and for clearing their innocence, they are required to
condemn the Position of Arius, that the Father alone is Eternal. This they
refuse, but this alone will satisfy, they must either subscribe his
condemnation or submit to it. But they refuse both, and appeal to a General
Council, but they are answered, That it is needless that all the Bishops of the
Christian World should be forced to such tedious Journeys, to censure Men that
had been already so often condemned in so many Councils. And withal, that this
was a General Council, all the Bishops being acquainted with it, who might have
come if they pleased, that the Eastern Church had already given judgment
against them in the Council of Constantinople, and that all the Western Bishops
were present in this Council, either in Person or by their Legates. Then after
a thousand other Tergiversations, they move for secular Judges and Moderators,
the constant sanctuary of the Faction, and probably the Queen and the Eunuchs
had packt an Ignoramus Jury for them. But here St. Ambrose takes him up
roundly, and throws off all farther patience. Et si in multis impietatibus
deprehensus sit, erubescimus tamen, ut videatur, qui sacerdotium sibi vendicat,
a Laicis esse damnatus. Ac per hoc, quoniam in hoc ipso damnandus est, qui
Laicorum expectat sententiam, cum magis de Laicis Sacerdotes debeant judicare,
juxta ea quae hodie audivimus Palladium profitentem, and juxta ea, quae
condemnare nolvit, pronuncio illum sacerdotio indignum and carendum, and in
loco ejus Catholicus ordinetur. Although he be convicted of many Crimes, yet it
puts us to confusion, that one who pretends to the Priestly Office, should
choose to submit himself to the judgment of Laics. For which alone he ought to
be condemned, when as in such Matters as these, it is the peculiar Office of
the Priesthood to judge of Laymen, but these have no Authority to judge of them,
and therefore according to this Profession of Palladius this day, and his
refusal to condemn the Heresy, I pronounce him unworthy of the Priesthood, to
be deprived, and a Catholic Bishop to be placed in his stead. Which sentence
against him and his Accomplices being ratified by the Council, they broke up,
and acquaint the Emperor with the Result of their Proceedings. First thanking
him for the gentleness of his Summons. Vt nemo de esset volens, nemo cogeretur
invitus. Quam grave autem si propter duos in side cariosos, toto in orb essent
Ecclesiae sacerdotibus destitutae? Qui etiamsi venire propter itineris
prolixitatem nequiverunt, tamen omnes prope ex omnibus provinciis
occidentalibus, missis adfuere legatis. That no body might be absent but by his
own Will, no body might be forced against his Will. What an hard thing is it,
that all the Churches in the World should be deprived of their Priests for two
or three wormeaten Heretics? who though they could not come by reason of the
tediousness of the Journey, yet almost all the Bishops of the Western Provinces
were present by their Legates. And secondly they acquaint him with the reason
of their beginning with the Epistle of Arius. Ea videlicet gratia, ut quoniam
Arianos se negare consueverant, Arii blasphemiam aut incusando damnarent, aut
astruendo defenderent, aut certe non recusarent nomen ejus, cujus impietatem
perfidiamque sequerentur. For this reason, that seeing they denied themselves
to be Arians, they should be forced either to condemn the Blasphemy or to own
it, and not refuse to be called after his Name, whom they followed in his
Impiety. That was the state of things all along, that though they were Arians,
they would not own it. Thirdly they petition that he would be pleased to give
Orders to his Officers to turn the Heretics out of their Churches. And lastly,
thank him for his De Haeret. l. 6.
late Law against the Meetings of the Photinians, and inform him of one at
Sirmium, with a request that he would break it up. Beside this, they write two
other Letters to the Emperors to petition their assistance toward quenching
the Schisms on foot at that time at Rome, Alexandria and Antioch, that as Truth
was, so Peace might be restored to the Church. Equidem per occidentales parts
duobus in Angulis tantum, hoc est in latere Daciae Ripensis ac Maesiae fidei
obstrepi videbatur. In Orientalibus partibus cognovimus quidem, summo gaudio
atque laetitia ejectis Arianis, qui ecclesias violenter invaserant, sacra Dei
Templa per solos Catholicos frequentari. In the Western Church we found not
above two obscure Bishops in the remote Corners of the Empire that opposed the
Faith, in the Eastern Church all the intruding Arians were ejected, and the
Churches filled with none but Catholics. And thus we see from reign to reign,
that the Heresy could never lift up its Head after the Nicene Council, and it
was so far from overspreading the World at this time, that there were but two
Bishops in all the Western Church that were tainted with it, and though there
were some more in the East, yet they were Intruders, such as came in by
Violence and Court-Power, as we have seen through the whole Series of the
Story. But as for the Schisms in the three great Sees, that the Council
Petitions the Emperors to remove, they were at that time of a very fatal and
pernicious influence over the whole Catholic Church, and therefore that I may
satisfy the Reader with a complete History of all passages in this remarkable
Reign, I shall as briefly as I can, give a full and comprehensive Relation of
them.

As for the Schism at Rome, it was kept up against Damasus by Vrsicinus, whose
restless Spirit for a long time employed all the Power both of Church and State
to suppress it. The Occasion of it was this, At the Death of Liberius, there
were two Parties in the Church of Rome; his own, and the Party of Foelix, that
had been substituted in his room by Constantius in the time of his Banishment,
and that was the bottom of this Schism, one Party choosing Damasus, Anno 368.
and the other Vrsicinus; but Damasus having the Majority of Votes, carried the
Election, though Vrsicinus and his Party will not yield it, till the Emperor
Valentinian the Elder writes to Praetextatus the Prefect of the City, to give
Damasus possession of the Cathedral; and for Security of the Peace for the
future, to drive the Schismatics out of the City with Liberty to reside any
where but at Rome, and with leave too, to continue in it upon promise and
security of peaceable Behavior. Upon this, Anno 369.
they unanimously leave the City, and settle in the Suburbs, and there keep
their Meetings and Conventicles under Bishop Vrsicinus, which makes great
Tumults and Disturbances both in City and Suburbs. Of which the Emperor being
informed, he directs a Rescript to the Prefect, strictly charging and
requiring of him, that no such Assemblies be kept within Twenty miles of the
City. But the Schismatics continuing turbulent, they are banished into France,
though in the year 371, the Emperor is graciously pleased to release their
Confinement, and give them Leave to reside in any Part of the Empire, but the
City of Rome and the Suburbicary Regions, with this Reserve, that if they
transgress't their limits, they were to be punished with all possible severity,
not at all as Christians, but merely as Subjects, that were Factious and
Seditious in the Commonwealth. Qui si ingrata pertinacia Statutum mansuetudinis
nostrae egrediendum putaverit; eundem non jam ut Christianum, quippe quem a
communione Religionis mentis inquietudo disterminat, sed ut hominem factiosum,
perturbatoremque publicae tranquillitatis, Legum and Religionis inimicum juris
severitas persequatur. And in the same Rescript the same Decree is made against
his Followers, as Baronius gives it us out of his Vatican Manuscript. Anno 371.
N. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Upon this they are quiet all the Reign of Valentinian, but after this under
Gratian and the young Valentinian, they raise greater Stirs and Tumults. So
that in the year 378 they are again Condemned by a Council at Rome, though
Baronius places it in the year 381, whereas it is evident from the Inscription
of the Letter of the Council to the Emperors, that it was in this year of 378,
for it is directed only to Gratian and Valentinian, and therefore it must have
been written after the Death of Valens, and before the choice of Theodosius to
the Empire. Now Valens was killed in August 378, and Theodosius chosen in the
January following, and therefore it must have been transacted in that interval
of time and no other. But they having done their part, they write to the
Emperor Gratian to solicit him to do his, who as we find by this Letter had
not been negligent in the Business, for that is the Contents of the first part
of it, to return him thanks for his former Rescript. When this former Rescript,
V. Labbe, Vol. 2. Anno 381. p. 1001.
that the Letter speaks of, was published, I know not, neither is it, that I can
find, any where extant. Baronius, that first brought the former Rescripts of
Valentinian the Elder out of the Vatican Manuscript, is altogether silent about
it. Labbe says it was in the year 374, upon what Ground or Authority he says
it, I know not, for that Law, that he refers to, in the Theodosian Code, Lib.
9. Tit. 29. c. 1.
is only a general Law against the Concealers of all sorts of Criminals, to
make them liable to the same sort of Punishment, that is due to the Offender
himself. But whenever it was Published, the Contents of it are evident from this
Epistle, viz. to drive Vrsicinus into Banishment upon the Ecclesiastical
Sentence against him. But for all that, Vrsicinus and his Faction grow
stubborn, and are suffered through the negligence of the Governors, to spread
their Schism, and in some places (as the Council here inform the Emperor) to
overawe his Judges with Tumults, threatening them with no less than Death it
self; and for that Reason they request his Majesty to renew his former Rescript
against them. Upon this the Emperor writes a very chiding and threatening Letter
to Aquilinus, Vicarius of the City, complaining of the Negligence and
Dishonesty of his Officers, qui privatae gratiae imperialia praecepta
condonant, who sacrificed the Emperor's Commands to their own private concerns,
and as he afterward expresses it, Hactenus stertit iners dissimulatio Judicum,
Notwithstanding all our Commands hitherto, the Judges snore and counterfeit
inadvertency. And therefore he requires him under high and unusual Threatenings,
to put his Law in execution against them for their Banishment an Hundred miles
from the City, and gives him this general Rule, Vt condemnati Judicio recte
sentientium Sa^erdotum, reditum postea vel ad Ecclesias, quas contaminaverant,
non haberent, vel redintegrationem Judicii frustra a nobis impudenti pervicacia
precarentur. That when they were condemned by the regular Sentence of the
Priestly Order, they should not be permitted to return to their Churches, that
they had defiled, or to move for a re-hearing in the Civil Courts. And after
this we hear no more of them till the Council of Aquileia in the year 381, who
sent a Letter to the Emperor Gratian, first Published by Sirmond, Ne inter
bellicas necessit^tes obreptio importuna te^t^tur.
lest whilst he was involved in Wars he should be prevailed upon to abate of
his Severity against them. And to their former Crimes of Faction and Sedition,
they now inform him that they had joined Communion with the Arians, to
strengthen their Party, and enable them more effectually to disturb the Peace
of the Catholic Church; what was done upon it, I find not, for we hear no more
of them till the Death of Damasus, and the Election of Siricius in the year
385. who was violently opposed by Vrsicinus, but Vrsicinus was utterly rejected
by the People, and condemned by a Rescript of Valentinian the younger, extant
only in Ad annum 385. M. 6.
Baronius out of his Vatican Manuscript* and after this we never hear any more
either of him or his Schism.

The second Schism was that of Alexandria, that began immediately upon the
Death of St. Athanasius, by whom upon his Deathbed Peter an ancient Presbyter
of that Church, and the inseparable Companion of all his Troubles, was
recommended for his Successor, and was accordingly accepted with the unanimous
Suffrage both of the Clergy, the Magistrates, and the People. But he was scarce
warm in his Episcopal Throne, before he is forced by the Governor of the
Province to quit it to save his life, and so takes Sanctuary at Rome. He was
scarce gone, but Euzoius, that had been at the beginning of the Heresy with
Arius, that was the only Man that stuck to him in his Banishment, and had now
at last by the help of his good Masters the Eunuchs thrust himself into the
great See of Antioch, and with him one Magnus, a great Officer at Court, and an
eminent Instrument at that time in all the Persecutions against the Catholics,
Soc. l. 3. c. 4.
bring Lucius to Alexandria with a strong Guard and an Imperial Mandate to put
him in Possession of that See. This Lucius had been often catching at the
Prize, but could never seize it till now. Upon the Death of George in the Reign
of Julian, he put in for it against Athanasius; and in the Reign of Jovian he
and his Friend Euzoius in vain preferred Articles against him for his
Ejectment, but now (...), Theod. l. 4. c. 22.
by the help of his Money, as Peter upbraids him, and the Procurement of the
Eunuchs under Valens, he takes violent Possession of it. And being an Usurper,
he is forced to govern as all hated Usurpers do, and outdoes his bloody
Predecessor George in Cruelty and Barbarity; a large Description of the
unparalled outrage against the Catholics by Magnus may be seen in Peter's
Lib. 4. c. 21, 22.
Letter extant in Theodoret. And so things continued in the same Posture till
the year 377, when Valens was terrified with the Invasion of the Goths, that
were come up to the very Walls of the City of Constantinople, at which time say
the Historians he called home the banished Bishops, or rather, as others say, he
and his Courtiers being otherwise employed, they take that Opportunity to
return home. And so Peter comes to Alexandria with the Recommendation of
Damasus the great Bishop of Rome, and is restored with universal joy of the
People, and Lucius forced to fly for help to the Emperor and his Court-Patrons
then at Constantinople, that was at that time little better than Besieged, and
before the Emperor had any leisure to mind his Complaints, he by his own
rashness came to his Unfortunate end, of being Burnt by the Enemy in a Cottage,
where he had taken shelter in his Flight. And so from this time Lucius
continued in Exile at Constantinople, till Demophilus the Arian Bishop that
succeeded Eudoxius in that See, and all his Party, among whom Sozom. l. 7. c. 5.
Lucius is particularly named, were turned out of the City by Theodosius the
Great in the year 380. At which time Peter dies, and Timotheus succeeds him,
for Lucius now having but small hopes left of recovering his Bishopric under
such an Orthodox Emperor, made no attempt for it. And now comes the great
Council of Constantinople, where the Nicene Faith is established for ever, and
in pursuance of it De Haeret. l. 6.
an Imperial Law made to take away all Churches through the Empire from the
Heretics of all Denominations. For which the Council of Aquileia soon after
sitting in the West, send him the forementioned Letter of thanks, farther
imploring his assistance for the Settlement of the Church, and this of
Alexandria in particular, where the present Bishop was overwhelmed with
inveterate Schisms and Dissentions. In order to which they move his Majesty,
that he would be pleased to call a Council at Alexandria, particularly to
determine who of the Heretics should be received to the Communion of the
Church, and upon what terms, which they thought in such a vast number of
Offenders, too invidious a work for the Bishop to undertake by his own
Authority. What followed upon it I know not. For Extrav. de Episcopali Judicio,
l. 3.
the Rescript of this Emperor to the Prefect Optatus to give Timotheus full
Power of Judicature in Ecclesiastical Causes, and to be assistant to him is
apparently forged (for there was no such Prefect as Optatus at that time) as
well as all the other Laws under the Subdititious Title De Episcopali Judicio,
the unanswerable proofs of it may be seen in Gothofred's Extravagans. But
probably without any farther care, things settled of themselves under so wise a
Reign, for Timotheus sat peaceably in his See to his dying day, without any
disturbance that we read of from his Enemies. When they saw the Church defended
by such an Emperor, they were content to sit still, for Men are not wont to
make their Attempts, where they have no hope of Success. But still we see by
the whole progress of this Alexandrian Schism, that the Disorders of the Church
proceeded not from it self, but the Dishonesty of the Court Eunuchs.

The last great Schism of that Age, that the Council of Aquileia mentions in
their Letter to the Emperor, was that at Antioch, which began sooner, and
lasted longer than either of the other. How the matter was composed between
Paulinus and Meletius, we have seen above, that upon the Death of one of them,
the Surviver should have the Government of the whole Church. But upon the Death
of Meletius, Flavianus sets up against Paulinus, and his own Oath too, for he
had abjured the Bishopric as long as either of them should live. And he makes
so many Friends as to keep it till the great Council of Constantinople, and
have it confirmed to him by the Authority of the Council, where the Business
was transacted by a Seditious Party with such disorderly Heats and Tumults, as
almost put the great Gregory Nazianzen out of love with Councils, whose angry
words upon a particular occasion against the abuse of some in his time, are
peevishly and absurdly applied by our Innovators against the use of Councils in
general. The Ecclesiastical Abridger almost runs mad for joy of his Satirical
Expressions, and though as an Orator the good Father represented his Complaints
and Invectives bigger than the life (for that is the use of that sort of
Eloquence) R. B. has pretty well improved it with a scurvy Translation, and
made it look more like railing than handsome Satyr. But what would you have of a
mere Abridger of Binius, poor Man, he never looks into the secret of the Story,
and the connection of things, but he finds in Binius that such a Council was
held such a year, and out of him he gives a crude Epitome seasoned with some
malicious Reflections against the Bishops, and so has done. But alas, if he had
but had any insight into the Series of the Story, and understood the Mystery of
the Eusebian Faction, by whom all these Disturbances were raised in the Church,
it would have spoiled the Malice of all the Abridgment. For whereas his whole
design is to load the whole Body of Bishops with the Miscarriages of the Church
in all Ages, it is evident all along, that the Body of the Bishops labored
against all those Miscarriages that he has ignorantly and maliciously charged
upon them, and that all those Disorders committed in the Church from the time
of Constantine to the time of this present Council, were the Acts and
Contrivances of some wicked men that crept into the Church by Simony and
Court-favour, and were enabled to do all that mischief that they did in it, in
spite of the Opposition of the Good Bishops, by the Power of the Eunuchs. So
that all these Disorders were so far from being the Acts of the Ecclesiastical
Power, that they were the mere effects of its Oppression. And such were these
very Men that labored to raise this Tumult in the Council, as is evident from
Nazianzen's own account of them, and that in short is this. He at first
earnestly endeavored to persuade them to acquiesce in the former Agreement,
and to have but a little-Patience, in that Paulinus was a very old Man, had one
foot in the Grave, and could not long stand in their way upon the other. But he
is hiss't down by the factious Party, as a Betrayer of the Supreme Prerogative
of the Eastern Church, that (they said) ought to be preferred above the
Western, because our Savior was Born in that part of the Empire. For that was
the pretense of their Zeal in this foul Matter, that Paulinus had been ordained
by Lucifer Calaritanus a Western Bishop, which they will needs have to be a
dishonorable Intrusion upon the Eastern Church, and therefore in despite to
that Usurpation, they will set up Flavianus, and by their noise and clamor
tire the old Bishops into a compliance, but Gregory Nazianzen quits the Council
through mere indignation, and seeing how things were like to go, and what
troubles he was like to encounter in that great See, he soon after resigns his
Bishopric of Constantinople. Of which the Faction make their advantage of
playing over their old Game for creating a Division between the Eastern and
Western Church. An Artifice, as we have seen, first started by Eusebius of
Nicomedia, and ever after kept on foot by the Faction. For the Western Church
had been all along true and faithful to the Orthodox Faith, and happy in a
succession of Orthodox Emperors, and therefore the Easterling Merchants that
hitherto made a trade of their Religion, and changed their Faith with their
Interest, greedily seized all Opportunities of breaking with the West, where
the Faith was fixed and settled, because such a settlement would break the
Court-Exchange for Preferments upon every Turn of Affairs. And such Eceboliuses
were the Bishops that raised and promoted this disorder. They had ever changed
their Faith with the Times, and as they had bought their Bishoprics of the
Courtiers under Constantius and Valens, so were they resolved to keep them
under Theodosius. And therefore finding his Resolution to stand by the Nicene
Faith, they readily vote with the Council for its establishment, but to prevent
the establishment of the Church, they start this new and unseasonable
Controversy about the Ordination of Paulinus, to keep up the division between
the East and West. Their wrigling and changing of Faith, and their buying and
selling of Preferments, is admirably described by Gregory himself in the Poem
of his own Life, upon his resignation, from whence I have chiefly collected
this whole Story.

(...), etc.
You are welcome Chap-Men, how often soever you may have bartered your Faith,
now it is high Fair-time, let no Man depart without a good pennyworth.

And now let R. B. here set his Presbyterian hand, as his custom is, to point
out this Character of this profane Faction against all the good Catholic
Bishops, with his cold Exclamation. Are not these lamentable descriptions of
the Bishops of those happy Times and excellent Councils? But no
multiplying-Glass like Malice, unless, perhaps Ignorance. Upon this Hinge all
along turned this Controversy, it was not kept up by any zeal for the Arian
Heresy, but the Heresy it self was only pretended to keep up divisions in the
Church, and by that means a good Exchange was kept up at Court for the sale of
Church-Preferments upon every turn of Times. And so here upon Gregory's
Resignation, every Man hoped for a good pennyworth, but the Courtiers were
grown too cunning, and it being so valuable a prize, instead of sharing with
the Churchmen by Simony, seize the Bishopric for themselves, Nectarius an
unlearned Man, but a great Courtier, I know not by what art, but I am sure by
too much interposition of the Emperor, being against all the Canons of the
Church hoisted into it. And it is the great blemish of that Princes reign,
though it may perhaps be some excuse that he stretched a point to serve a
Friend. But the Western Church is startled at these irregular Proceedings, and
upon them Pope Damasus a resolute Man, and one of the first that valued himself
upon the great Authority of the Apostolic See, moves the Emperors Gratian and
Theodosius to grant a General Council at Rome for the better settlement of
things. But the Eastern Bishops baulk their appearance upon pretense that they
cannot be so long absent from their Flocks, having been assembled the year
before at Constantinople, and therefore send only their Legates with a Copy of
the Acts of the Council. With which the Council at Rome were so (...)
satisfied, (...) with very little (...) adjudged the Sea of Antioch to Paulinus
alone, and yet forbore to denounce the sentence of Deposition against
Flavianus, for fear the Faction should take the advantage that they watched for,
to break off Communion with them. In order to which it is probable that they
raised the Bishop of Constantinople to so great an height of dignity, as to
take place and precedence next to the Bishop of Rome, who upon the account of
the Grandeur of the Imperial City had all along held the greatest esteem in the
Christian Church. And by virtue of this Decree of the Council at Rome, Paulinus
takes and keeps possession of his Bishopric to his dying day, and is succeeded
in it by Evagrius. Of the legality of his Succession against the claim of
Flavianus, see St. Ambrose his 78 th Epistle, that runs parallel so luckily
with l. 5. c. 23*
Theodoret's partial story, as to discover all its particular flaws and
dawbings: For says Theodoret, after this they would never let Flavianus be at
quiet, but tired the Emperor with Complaints against him, till he undertook his
defense himself, and by it so satisfied the Western Bishops, that they promised
reconciliation to him, upon which he sent his Legates to treat the Peace, which
was at last agreed on in the time of Innocent the first. But according to St.
Ambrose his account, who was an Actor in the business, the Story runs thus. The
Emperor upon the Complaint of Siricius, that succeeded Damasus, against
Flavianus, refers the Cause to a Council at Capua, but Flavianus refuses to
appear, and moves for an Eastern Synod. But the Bishops at the Council being
aware of this old device of dividing between East and West, immediately vote
Communion with all Bishops of the Eastern Church, that owned the Nicene Faith,
of whatsoever side in this Controversy, to cut off that old pretense of Schism,
upon which Flavianus relied. Upon it he peremptorily refuses all appearance,
and upon that they refer it to Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria and the Egyptian
Bishops, but he shuns the reference and takes shelter at Court. Upon which the
good Father thus expostulates. Frustra ergo tantorum sacerdotum fusus labor.
Iterum ad hujus seculi Judicia revertendum? Iterum ad Rescripta? Iterum
vexabuntur Sacerdotes senes, transfretabunt maria? Iterum invalidi corpore
patriam peregrino mutabunt solo? Iterum sacrosancta Altaria deserentur, ut in
longinquum proficiscamur? Iterum pauperum turbae Episcoporum, quibus ante
onerosum paupertas non erat, externae opis egentes compellentur inopiam gemere,
aut certe victum inopum itineris usurpare? Interea solus exlex Flavianus, (ut
illi videtur) non venit, quando omnes convenimus. But soon after this Soz. l.
7. c. 15.
Evagrius dies, and Flavianus bestirs himself that no Successor should be
chosen, but yet for all that the People would not be reconciled to him. And St.
Chrysostom coming at this time to the Throne of Constantinople, Soz. l. 8. c. 3.
he prevails with Theophilus of Alexandria to join with him in an Ambassy to
Rome, to reconcile Flavianus to the Western Church, and by that means to remove
those heart-burnings, that were kept up between the Eastern and Western Bishops
upon that account. Which was done with some success, for it abates the Schism,
though it does not end it. And so things stood till the death of Flavianus in
the year 404, who is succeeded by Porphyrius, Pallad. dial.
a Bishop of the Court-mould, of as bad a Character, and as true an Huckster,
as ever was bred up in the shop of the Nicomedian Eusebius. He procured both
the banishment of his Competitor and his own Ordination by money, and when he
had once got into his See, he governed by force of Arms, and gets de his qui
super Religione contendunt. l. 6.
an Imperial Rescript from the young Emperor Arcadius, commanding the Bishops
to communicate with him upon pain of deposition. And this became a profitable
Fair at Court, many of the Eastern Bishops rather choosing to be deposed, than
to defile their Consciences by allowing Communion with so vile a Man. But at
length the Wretch dies in the 408. And Alexander is unanimously chosen, who put
an end to the Schism, that had lasted 45 years. And thus we see from whence
almost all the Schisms and Disorders of the Church proceeded, merely from the
Ambition of ill Churchmen, supported against the Churches Authority by the
Power of the Court. This was the great Plague of the Church after the Emperors
became Christian, and we shall find all along that the Church was either
oppressed or protected, according as the Emperor himself watched against this
abuse of his Courtiers. And to defend the Church from it, was in all Ages the
highest Act of the Imperial Protection. And this we have here seen at large by
the example of this great Princes reign, who was himself careful of the
Churc^^^ Li^erties, and as far as he could (...) s^ffer'd no Court-merchandise
in it. And yet many Enormities were committed, and that even in the great
Council of Constantinople it self, in the case of Flavianus, but that was by
reason of ill Men, that were got into the Church by this ill practice, under
his Predecessors Valens and Constantius.

. X. The last remarkable transaction that I shall take notice of in this reign,
was the Heresy of the Priscillianists, and the concurrence of the Powers both
of Church and State for its suppression. For though the Emperor Theodosius was
not concerned in it, yet it being upon the Stage in the time of his Reign, I
shall take it into the Story of his time. The matter of Fact is described with
most accuracy by Sulpitius Severus, who lived at the same time, though he lived
not long enough to see the end of the Heresy, for he concludes his history
with the four hundredth year of our Lord in the time of Honorius, whereas this
blasphemous Heresy was not utterly rooted out till some time after. And
setting aside his gross defect of judgment, and his excess of partiality on the
wrong side, which yet is so enormous that it cannot impose upon any Readers
understanding, unless such an one as Mr. B -- 's is, perverted by rank malice,
the Heresy is so described both by himself and diverse others of the Ancients,
as shows the necessity of suppressing it not only by the Civil Magistrate, but
the Civil Sword. For by all accounts of it, it was no better than a mere Cento
of all the Blasphemies of the Gnostics and the Manichees, together with some
new secret and obscure Sacraments among themselves, and the religious practice
of all sorts of Villainy and Dishonesty. That is the compendium of it, as it is
set down by St. Austin. De Haere^^bus.


Priscillianus instituit, maxim Gnosticorum and Manichaeorum dogmata permixta
sectantur. Quamvis et ex aliis Haeresibus in eas sordes, tanquam in sentinam
quandam horribili confusione confluxerint. Propter occultandas autem
contaminationes et turpitudines suas, habent in suis dogmatibus et haec verba.
Jura, perjura, secretum prodere noli.
The Priscillianists, that were founded by Priscillian in Spain, held chiefly
the Opinions of the Gnostics and the Manichees, though they drew together the
dregs of all Heresies as into a common sink of uncleanness, and for the
concealing of their horrible brutishness among themselves, have set up this
among their Principles, Swear or forswear, but be sure not to betray the Secret.

Epist. ad C^esiphontem.
Or as St. Jerome adds to the Character, that as they devoted themselves wholly
to Lust, so in their unclean Embraces they were wont to sing this Stanza of the
Prince of Poets.

Tum Pater omnipotens, faecundis imbribus ether,
Conjugis in gremium late descendit, et omnes
Magnus alit, magno commixtus corpore, foetus.
The very lake of Sodom, and I might add of Geneva too, they as well as their
Masters, the Gnostics and Manichees being branded by all the Ancients for the
Atheistical Principle of Fatality. This Heresy was first brought out of Egypt
into Spain by one Marcus, and by him Priscillian a Man of a sharp Wit but
infinite Vanity was poisoned, who by his eloquence and neatness of address soon
dispersed the contagion over all Spain, and especially among the Female sex,
who, as Sulpitius expresses it, being always greedy of Novelties, Ad hoc
mulieres novarum rerum cupidae, fluxa fide, et ad omnia curioso ingenio,
catervatim ad eum confluebant.
of unsettled Principles, and of wanton Fancies, flockt after him in whole
sholes of Proselytes. And it took with that success, that the Plague got among
the Bishops themselves, Instantius and Salvianus, both Bishops, being seduced
into the Party, and initiated into the Secret, which being discovered by
Adigynus Bishop of Corduba to Ithacius Bishop of Emerita, he with Idacius
prosecuted them with all severity, not only by ecclesiastical Process, but
before the Civil Magistrate, as they supposed, to nip the mischief in the bud,
but as the Historian thinks, arbitrantes posse inter initia malum comprimi.
with too much fury, or with more zeal than discretion, by which, he says,
they were rather exasperated than reclaimed. But for my part, I cannot
understand how men of such lewd and desp^rate principles, that destroy the
natural modesty and the common faith of mankind, can ever be pursued with too
much violence. Such men as these are not proceeded against as Heretics in the
Faith, but as Apostates from humane Nature, as Thieves, Robbers, Cutthroats,
and Banditi, that declare open hostility to the Peace of the World. But the
Historian was led into his soft-natur'd Opinion by the Authority of St. Martin,
a weak and unlearned man, of great devotion, but very little understanding, who
interceded with great zeal to save the Lives of the Malefactors, and if he had
begged them of the Government as an Act of Mercy, it might not have been
altogether unbecoming the tenderness of a Religious man, but when he required
it as a duty of his Superiors to keep hands off from such vile Offenders, he
only showed the pertness of his humor and the weakness of his Understanding.
But first of all, they are proceeded against by the Censure of the Church in
the Council of Caesar Augusta (i. e. Caragosa, the Metropolis of Aragon in
Spain) in the Year 380, in which the Bishops are deposed, and the Laymen
excommunicated, and the Sentence signified to all foreign Churches, to prevent
their receiving them into Communion. And withal several Canons are enacted
against the particular customs and practices of the Heretics: As first, That
Women be not permitted to preach in Public, as Agape one of the first of the
Sect, a wanton and immodest Woman had done, and others after her Example, and
this privilege no doubt was the great Lure that drew the talking Sex so thick
into the Faction. The next Canon is made against fasting on the Festivals of
the Church, and that crossgrain'd temper was common to all the Fanatique
Heretics in all Ages, to do every thing in contradiction to the established
Laws and known Customs of the Church, as we have seen above by the Canons of
the Council of Gangra against the Eutactans or Eustathians. The next Canon is
to anathematise those who receive the holy Eucharist without eating it: For
that was the common Practice of those profane Wretches, that they might avoid
discovery, to seem to communicate with the Catholics even in this great
Sacrament, but that they might not be guilty of joining in true and real
communion, secretly to conveigh it away, and so turn it into occasional
Communion, as we call it. And to the like purposes are the other Canons. The
Heretics being thus condemned in Council, they make Priscillian the Bishop of
their Sect, upon which Ithacius and Idacius apply themselves to the secular
Magistrate, and at length gain a Rescript from the Emperor Gratian to banish
them, not only from all Citys, but out of the Empire it self. For the words in
Sulpitius, extra omnes terras, can signify no less, though Notae in leg. 35.
de Episcopis.
Gothofred surmises that their meaning reaches no farther than the Territories
belonging to that particular City that they inhabited: As when any man was
banished from Rome, he was banished an hundred miles from it, because so far its
Territory or Suburbicary Diocese extended. As in the case of Vrsicinus, who
when he was driven out of Rome, was confined to keep at that distance. But I
would fain know of the learned Civilian, where he ever met with this sense and
construction of extra omnes Terras, when put absolutely, though he knows it was
a common phrase to express the whole Empire. And so it must be taken here, for
the men were condemned to banishment for propagating wicked and debauched
Principles; and if that were only out of the Province in which they lived, that
would be but a means to spread the Contagion over all the Country. And
therefore the Priscillianists upon the Publication of the Rescript were not
only forced to quit their own particular Provinces, but Spain it self, and
farther their Prosecutors were not concerned to pursue them. But having quitted
Spain, they betake themselves to Italy, and there endeavor to clear their
Innocence to Damasus Bishop of Rome, and Ambrose Bishop of Milain, but they are
so wise, as to refuse so much as to see or hear them. Upon that they are forced
to betake themselves to the standing shift of all Heretics, to buy off the
Laws of the Church with the Courtiers. And to this end they bribe Macedonius
the Magister Officiorum, who thereupon prevails with the Emperor to reverse
his Rescript against them, whereupon they return home with triumph, and rebribe
Volventius the Governor so powerfully, that he forces Ithacius to fly his
Country. Who thereupon betakes himself to Gregorius the Emperor's Praefectus
Praetorio in France, to whom Volventius was subject as his Vicarius, and
acquaints him with the disorders in Spain, and upon the information he
immediately commands his Spanish Vicarius to send the Heretics to him, and in
the mean time, whilst they were upon their Journey, informs the Emperor of all
their wicked pranks.

But all in vain, Sed id frustra fuit: quia per libidinem and potentiam
paucorum, cuncta ibi venalia erant. Igitur Haeretici, suis Artibus, grandi
pecunia Macedonio data, obtinent, ut imperiali Autoritate Praefecto erepta
cognitio, Hispaniaru^ Vicario deferatur. Sulp. Sever. l. 2. p. 445.
for by reason of the exorbitant power and wantonness of a few men at Court,
all things were there exposed to sale, and therefore the Heretics after their
old custom with a great Sum of Money bribed their old Patron Macedonius, to
persuade the Emperor to take the cognizance of the matter from the Praefectus
Praetorio, and refer it back to his Vice^rius in Spain.

Which was accordingly done, and a Messenger sent by Macedonius to seize
Ithacius and carry him Prisoner into Spain, though at that time he escaped his
hands. In the Year 385. the Tyrant Maximus rebels, and overcomes Gratian in
France, and after his Victory coming to Treives, where Ithacius then resided,
he immediately makes his address to him against the Heretics, who storms at
them, and immediately commands the Governors of France and Spain, to conveigh
them safe to a Synod at Bordeaux, in which Instantius is deposed. But
Priscillian appeals from the Judgment of the Council to the Emperor, and
accordingly himself and all his Partisans are carried before him at Treives;
where St. Martin being at that time, he advises Ithacius to desist from his
Prosecution, and Maximus to spare their blood, Namque tum Martinus apud
Treveros constitutus, non desinebat increpare Ithacium, ut ab accusatione
desistent; Maximum orare, ut sanguine infoelicium abstireret: satis superque
sufficere, ut Episcopali sententia Haeretici judicati, Ecclesiis pellerentur:
novum esse et inauditum nefas, ut causam Ecclesiae judex seculi judicaret.
because it was more than enough that they were condemned by the Episcopal
Sentence, and deprived of their Churches, and that it was a new and unheard of
Profaneness, that a Secular Judge should give Sentence in an Ecclesiastical
cause.

In which Advice the good man has betrayed great Ignorance of affairs, and
great Weakness of understanding: Ignorance, in that it was so far from being a
novelty or prophanness, for Princes to enact penal Laws in Ecclesiastical
causes, after the Judgment of the Church, that it was ever looked upon as a
piece of their duty to abet it, if they approved it, with secular Laws and
Penalties. And weakness, in that he thought deposition from their Bishoprics a
sufficient punishment for such men, as Sulpitius himself says were not worthy
to live. Homines luce indignissimi.
And if they were not so, how could he find fault, as he there does, with the
ill example of putting them to death? Pessimo exemplo necati.
For they were not proceeded against as mere Heretics, but as Villains, and
therefore it was a great meanness of Understanding in St. Martin, to think an
Ecclesiastical Censure a sufficient punishment for such men, as had renounced,
not only the honesty, but the modesty of humane Nature, and that was their
crime, as appears by the condemnation of Priscillian. For though St. Martyn
whilst he continued at Treives kept off their Trial, yet he was no sooner gone,
than Maximus referred the Examination of the whole matter to Evodius, of whom
Sulpitius gives several Characters; C. 23.
here he is vir acer et severus, in the life of St. Martin, Vir quo nihil
unquam justius fuit. But before him upon a double hearing Priscillian is
convicted of all the Crimes laid to his charge, Qui Priscillianum gemino
judicio auditum, convictumque maleficii, nec diffidentem obscaenis se studuisse
doctrinis, nocturnos etiam turpium saeminarum eg^sse conventus, nudumque orare
solitum, nocentem pronunciavit.
and himself confesses that he taught Doctrines of uncleanness, that he kept
night-Conventicles with lewd Women, and that he was wont to pray naked before
them Upon which he is condemned. And a Narrative of the Proceedings delivered
to the Emperor. Who was so satisfied with the Evidence of the Testimony and so
disgusted with the foulness of the Confession, that he immediately beheaded
Priscillian with some of the Ringleaders and banished the rest, and he thought
the Matter so foul, that he had not confidence to express it, as he affirms in
his Letter to Pope Siricius.

Quid adhuc proxime proditum sit Manichaeos sceleris admittere, non argumentis,
neque suspicionibus dubiis vel incertis, sed ipsorum confessione inter Judicia
prolatis, malo quod ex gestis ipsis tua sanctitas, quam ex nostro ore
cognoscat: quia hujusmodi non modo factu turpia, verum etiam foeda dictu,
prol^qui sine rubore non possumus.
What discovery was lately made of the wickedness of the Manichees, for so the
Priscillianists were at first vulgarly called, not from doubtful or uncertain
Suspicions, but from their own Confessions, I had rather that your Holiness
should be informed from the Acts themselves than my Mouth, because I have not
confidence to say such things, as are too foul not only to be acted but spoken.
And I think the most merciful Prince could scarce have been less severe to such
a Crew of debauched Ranters: They are the worst sort of Men, that turn Religion
into open wickedness, and practice all the lewd and dishonest things, that the
worst of Men can act, with the confidence and authority of a divine Commission.
I am sure it was no more severe than what was done by the great Theodosius
himself in his Laws against the Manichees, De Haeret. l. 9.
in one of which he distinguishes between the Contemplative and the Practical
Heretics; the first he outlaws, but as for the others, known by the names of
Eucratitae, Saccophori, Hydroparastatae, and I know not what salvage Sects
more, he brings them under the sentence of death. And is withal so severe, as
to appoint an Inquisition for their discovery; and in truth no care can be too
great nor punishment too severe, when Men under pretenses of a stricter Piety,
bring in the practice of all sorts of uncleanness and immorality. And that was
the case of these brutish Wretches, they pretended to singular mortification,
and under it acted all the Wickedness, that humane Nature was capable of
committing. And therefore in such Cases as these it was a great mistake in St.
Martin, to think a Censure of the Church sufficient punishment, and to dissuade
the Prince from drawing the temporal Sword against them, when if ever it is
necessary, it is certainly most so, when Men pervert Religion to the subversion
of humane Society. And then if they are executed, it is not for their Heresy
against the Faith, but their Treason against the State, and such Traitors all
such Men are that teach such Doctrins, as destroy the Faith of Mankind, and the
Peace of humane Society. And therefore how blameworthy soever Ithacius might
be in his own life or manner of prosecuting, (and Sulpitius gives him a very
ill Character as to both) no wise Man could ever have blamed him, so severely
as he has done, as to the prosecution it self, and no good Man could have been
too active in bringing such brutal Wretches to their due punishment. And
therefore it was at best, but an indiscreet action (supposing the truth of the
Indictment, which Sulpitius himself allows) in Theognostus and his Followers in
separating Communion from him for prosecuting, though in a cause of blood. When
what he did in that case, he was obliged to do as a Member of the Commonwealth
and antecedently to his holy Orders, which certainly to whatsoever degree of
Gentleness they may oblige a Man, they cannot cancel that duty, that by nature
he owes to his Country. And it is no better than Julian's Sarcastick Abuse of
our Savior's Laws to apply his Precepts of Mercy and Forgiveness against the
just execution of Laws, as if his Religion were set up (as the Apostate
profanely objected to it,) only for the subversion of Civil Government. The
duty that he commands is a point of Prudence as well as Virtue, that Men
preserve the temper of their Minds in all the intercourses of life: they may
prosecute a Malefactor to the Gallows without strangling themselves with spite
and revenge, but only for the same ends, for which the Government, that owes
him no malice, inflicts the Penalty of the Law upon him. A Man may hang a
Thief, and forgive him too. And therefore it was no better than a rash and weak
action of Theognostus, St. Martin and their Adherents in general to condemn
Ithacius his prosecution of the Priscillianists, as if it had been inconsistent
with the meekness of a Christian, but much more the exemplary mercy of a
Bishop. It is indeed an Office that no good-natured Man can ever be fond of,
and less becomes a Clergyman than any other; but yet it is not unlawful, nor
the breach of any Precept of our Religion, and therefore he could not be justly
condemned for it; nay it was so far from being a Sin, that it was a duty both
in him and all other good Subjects to take care of the preservation of the
Commonwealth, by endeavoring to remove such plague-sores out of it. And
therefore Maximus did but do him justice to call a Synod at Tr^ives to absolve
him from the Excommunication of Theognostus, and if he had beside that, punished
Theognostus for endeavoring to intercept and obstruct public Justice, I
cannot see but that he had acted as became a good and a wise Governor. At least
I am sure it is much less decent for a Clergyman to patronize wicked Men
against the Laws than to prosecute them, provided they have reputation enough
(which the Civil Law requires, and all other Laws ought to do) to qualify them
for Evidences. If indeed these had been Malefactors of an ordinary size, it
might not have been unbecoming a Bishop to interpose for mercy, but Men that
were made up of nothing but Villainy, were beyond the reach of compassion, and
no Man, in whatsoever station he was placed, ought to spare their prosecution.
And therefore it was no better than Monkish stubbornness in St. Martin, to
refuse communion with the Prosecutors after the judgment of the Council; and
though he was at last induced to communicate with the Council it self by
Maximus, who bought that condescension of him, by giving him the Lives of two
of his Friends, that had been loyal Officers under Gratian (though our crude
Abridger says, that it was for the sake of a great Priscillianist) yet upon it
he quitted the Council, and could have no peace till he received absolution
from an Angel, after which he would never more communicate with the Bishops,
and that I take to be no better than Monkish Enthusiasm. These affectations of
mercy are very popular things, and easily seize Men possess't and tainted with
mortified Vanity, for there is generally the height of pride and ostentation,
under the pomps and shows of Humility. And this I doubt was St. Martin's case,
who though he was a devout Man, yet he was altogether unlearned and indiscreet
and most miserably overrun with the Scurvy of Enthusiasm, and not
understanding the true nature of Pride (as none of that sort of Men do) he was
apparently acted by it in all his singularities to the very height of a Cynical
vanity, that is the rankest sort of Insolence in the World. And this is too
evident from his Story, as it is told by De vita Martini c. 23.
Sulpitius himself. To give one instance for all, when he was treated by the
Emperor, who invited all his Nobles to the Entertainment, he carried one of his
Presbyters along with him, and the Emperor being very proud that he had
reconciled to himself and his ill Cause, a Man so much adored by the People,
treats him with all the flatteries of Civility, seats him next himself, and
places his Presbyter in the midst of his Nobles, that was the highest Place at
the Table. A Cup is brought to the Emperor according to custom to drink in the
first place, he commands it to be given to St. Martin, expecting at least that
he would have returned the Complement, but he without any farther formality
very fairly takes off his draught, and so delivers the Cup to his Presbyter, as
the best Man in the Company next to himself. And this piece of rudeness the
Emperor was forced to applaud, because his Inter^st at that time obliged him to
flatter the holy Man, though otherwise, as far as I can discern, it seems very
much to exceed the saucy Answer of Diogenes to Alexander the great, when he
offered him whatever he would ask, thrusting him aside with a Prithee friend
stand out of my Sun. This Cynical Vanity is very incident to Monkish Men, and
there are few of them that escape the itch, but when it is predominant and
meets with success and applause in the World, as it did in this good Man, it
becomes downright Enthusiasm and perfect drunkenness, whence came his so
frequent Visions, and converse with Angels, and incounters with Devils, and a
great number of strange things that he told of himself, the poor Man seriously
believing his own dreams and deliriums for want of animal Spirits, to have been
true and real transactions. But to let that pass, whether there were any touch
of vanity in this intercession for the Priscillianists, or not, I am sure there
was very little discretion. Baronius would excuse him from the reason, upon
which he proceeded, viz. the abuse that would follow upon an inquisition of the
Heretics, which Maximus intended in Spain. That I confess was one reason (and
I think) a good one too, for dissuading the Emperor from sending the
Inquisitors, such Persons being so very apt to abuse their trust, as he had
already found by experience, but the general ground that he stood upon was
this, that they ought not to be punished by imperial Laws, but only by the
Censures of the Church, and that it was no less than an act of unheard of
profaneness in the Emperor to proceed against them. That reason is general,
and extends to all proceedings abstracting from the abuse, and so Sulpitius
Severus confesses in the very place where he gives that reason in the life of
St. Martin, as well as in the history it self as it is set down above.

Pia enim erat solicitudo Martino, ut non solum Christianos, qui sub illa erant
occasion vexandi, sed ipsos etiam haereticos liberaret.
For St. Martin was possess't with a religious care, Dial 3.
that not only the good Christians, that might have been prosecuted under that
pretense, but the Heretics themselves might escape the Prosecution. So that
when Priscillian had confess't such foul things at his Trial, as are recorded
by Sulpitius, and were not to be endured in any heathen Commonwealth, yet
because he called himself a Christian, he was not according to St. Martin's
Politics to be punished according to the merits of his Crimes, and that is the
thing that Maximus himself informs him of, that they were condemned by the
common Rules of Justice and ordinary proceedings of Courts, Dial 3.
Haereticos jure damnatos, more judiciorum publicorum, potiusquam
insectationibus sacerdotum.
rather than the prosecutions of the Bishops. And yet even Epist. l. 7. sp. 58.
St. Ambrose himself seems to be against cutting them off with the Civil Sword,
but at that distance of place, it is to be supposed that he understood not
their Offenses, but only took them for a new sort of Heretics, as is clear
from the Epistle it self. And in point of Heresy all Men would be tender of
sanguinary Laws, and so most of the ancient Fathers were, who though they were
for Laws penal, yet they were for such only, as reached not Men's lives. But the
case of the Priscillianists was of another kind, they were not Heretics from
the Faith, but Apostates from humane nature, and the common Faith of Mankind.
And therefore if St Ambrose had understood the secrets of the Sect, he would
never have opposed cutting off such unheard of Crimes with the Civil Sword,
that were not to be endured under any Government, without any regard to
religion. And therefore when the heathen Orator Pacatus in his Panegyric to
Theodosius the Great, aggravates this prosecution of the Bishops as unbecoming
their Function, his design was only to cast an Odium upon them, and their
Religion, otherwise it was no piece of inhumanity to prosecute such enormous
Crimes as were proved by the very Confessions of the Offenders themselves; Quid
hoc majus poterat intendere accusator Sacerdos? Fuit enim, fuit et hoc
delatorum genus, qui Nominibus antistites, revera autem satellites atque adeo
carnifices, non contenti avitis evolvisse patrimoniis, calumniabantur in
sanguinem, et vitas premebant reorum jam pauperum, etc.
and that the Orator himself tho an heathen, nay though an Atheist, ought to
have been as vehement in their prosecution, as he represents the Bishops to
have been, though it were not only to preserve the present Peace and Government
of the World, and that is every Man's concern for his own particular safety.
And as for Sulpitius Severus his angry remarque upon it, that it gave
Priscillian the advantage and reputation of Martyrdom, and by that means gave
new life and confidence to the Party, it is a weaker surmise than all the rest.
For though Martyrdom in a good Cause is a very popular Argument, yet in a bad
one it soon sinks into the dishonor of a just Execution. And though it is no
hard matter to bear it up a little time among the People to support the honor
of a Faction, as was done by the Donatists of old and our Regicides of late,
yet when they have done all, such foul things will sink by the weight of their
own Wickedness. And so did this, for after this time we hear no more of them in
the Imperial Laws. For though there are some Laws enacted against the
Priscillianists by Honorius and Theodosius the younger, among the whole rout of
Heretics, especially the 40 th and 65 th de Haereticis, yet these related not
to the followers of Pris^illian in Spain, but to a branch of the old Gnostick
Heresy, that (as 2. Var. 175.
Pancirolus and Ad annum 428. p. 531.
Baronius observe) had their name from Priscilla, and was synonymous with the
old name of Phryges. So that this severity of Maximus was so far from animating
the Party, (as Sulpitius injudicouisly suggests,) that for all their great
noise of triumph, it struck it dead. For though lewd Men will venture upon
strange and extravagant things, where they have any presumption of impunity,
yet when they find their lives at stake for the debaucht frolic, that quickly
spoils the jest. And that was the case here, the lewd Heresy was really chopped
off with the Author. And though Sulpitius complains that it lasted 15 years,
yet it lasted no longer, and was the most short-lived of all the Heresies,
whereas the Gnostics and the Manichees, of both which it was compounded,
continued some Ages because not prosecuted with the same severity. And this too
might have ended sooner, had it not been protected by the indiscretion of St.
Martin and some others, that either did not, or would not understand the true
state of the Controversy. Which after all accounts of it is best stated by Pope
Leo in his Epistle to Turibius Bishop of Asturicum. In whose time the Vermin
began to appear again in a remote corner of Spain or Portugal, Epist. 93. v.
Labbes Council. vol. 3. p. 1409.
as they did again afterward, but never more, in the time of Pope Vigilius, as
appears by his Letter concerning them to Eutherius or Profuturus a Bishop in
those Parts. Pope Leo's Epistle determines the Matter thus -- Merito Patres
nostri, sub quorum temporibus haeresis haec nefanda prorupit, per totum mundum
instanter egere, ut impius furor ab universa Ecclesia pelleretur: quando etiam
Mundi principes ita hanc sacrilegam amentiam detestati sunt, ut auctorem ejus
ac plerosque dicipulos legum publicarum ense prosternerent. Videban^ enim omnem
curam h^nesta^is auferri, omnem conjugi^rum copulam solvi, simulque divinum jus
humanumque subverti, si hujusmodi hominibus usquam vivere cum tali professione
licuisset. Our Ancestors, in whose time this profane Heresy sprung up, took
all possible care to root the madness out of the Christian World, when at the
same time the secular Princes so abhorred its outrageous wickedness, that they
put to death with the Sword the Author of it, together with his chiefest
Proselytes; for they were sensible that by it, all the Obligations to honesty
were destroyed, all the sacred bands of Marriage dissolved, all Laws both
Divine and Humane subverted, if these Men were allowed to live any where with
the profession of their debaucht Principles. This is the true state of the
case, and yet it is the only great instance of cruelty, that R. B. is
perpetually bellowing out against the bloody, the persecuting, the turbulent,
the destroying, the proud, the contentious, the ambitious, the hereticating,
the merciless, the furious, the confounding, and the God-damn-you Prelates, and
fire brands of the World. For these are the most usual Titles of honor, that
this Man of meekness and healing is pleased to bestow upon the reverend Bishops
of the ancient, as well as the present Church. But though he is pleased to
throw them out at random among the whole Order, yet when he comes to
particulars, his whole Catalogue of Bonners and bloody Bishops is nothing but
this story of Ithacius and the Priscillianists continually repeated in his
fourscore books and upwards, and by repeating one tale so often has made it so
many stories. But poor Richard transcribes in so much have, that he has not
leisure to examine and weigh his Records, no nor for the most part (which is
much worse) to construe them; for though he is very abounding with his in
specie, he is very defective in his In speech, and has of late bless't and
obliged the World with such heaps of historical Ignorance, as cannot but be a
full satisfaction to the Age, that Presbytery and skill in antiquity, are
inconsistent things. But as for this particular outcry about Ithacius, if he
had but in the least understood the true state of the case, he could never have
prevailed with himself to triumph over its cruelty, with so much transport and
insolence as he has done, in so much that he seems to be more pleased with
their Execution, then the bloody Prelates themselves, only because it serves
him for a Common Place of railing at them, and that is the sweetest
gratification to his healing Spirit. But what were these poor silly harmless
Heretics that were so barbarously butchered by these inhumane Prelates? Were
they mere Heretics in a point of Faith, as the Arians were? Were they mere
Schismatics from the Communion of the Church, as the Donatists were? No, but
they were a rout of Villains that under the pretense of a greater Purity,
taught all the leudness and wickedness that humane Nature could commit, and
daily reduced their Doctrine to practice among themselves. So that their Crime
was not any heresy against the Christian Faith, as this crude Rhapsodist
supposes, but an Apostasy from humane Nature, and subversion of humane
Society, and an utter debauching of humane Kind. Now when such Monsters of Men,
that were implacable Enemies to the Peace of the World, arose within the
Neighborhood of some Christian Bishops, I cannot see how they could any way
have excused themselves to God and their Country, if they had not endeavored a
speedy stop of the Contagion. For this concerned them not as Christian Bishops,
but as Men and Members of the Commonwealth which it was apparent that these
Men's Principles utterly subverted, and therefore for that very reason were they
bound to let the Government know its danger. And though their Office as
Christian Bishops obliged them to mercy, yet not to such foolish mercy as would
undo the World. And that was their case, they did not prosecute Heretics, but
Rebels and Traitors. And that Office I think as much becomes a Bishop, if he
loves his King and his Country as another Man. But it seems there is no cruelty
so terrible in the Eye of a Presbyter, as to bring Rebels to their due
punishment. And it looks like strange confidence that Men who have confess't
themselves Men of Blood, and cut honest Men's Throats for their Loyalty, should
complain of the cruelty of executing Villains for their Rebellion. So that in
the Result of all, and granting the truth of the whole Story, the conclusion
will amount to no more than this, That the difference between the Prelatical
and Presbyterian Ithacians is, That the one is for gleaning up a few
Malefactors to preserve a Nation, the other is for reaping the whole field, and
that is the true thorough Presbyterian Reformation.

. XI. Theodosius dies in the year 395. after an happy and glorious reign,
having cleared the Eastern Empire of Goths, Persians and Arians, and twice
recovered the Western from the Usurpation of Tyrants, Maximus and Eugenius, and
le^t both Church and State in a settled and prosperous Condition, insomuch that
it is but a due and just Character, that is given of him by Bar^nius. Nullus
unquam Romanorum Imperatorum, Ad annum 395. N. 2.8.
qui non hereditario jure parenti Augusto successerit, ita legitime, ita
opporrune, ita fructuose atque fideliter ad regimen Romani est cooptatus
Imperii. That none of the Roman Emperors, that came not to the Crown by
inheritance and lineal Succession, were ever taken into a share of that Power,
that managed it with more skill or honesty, and to the greater benefit of the
Empire. And yet he can no more escape the Barkings of Zosimus (as Photius calls
them) than all the other Christian Emperors, but his Calumnies consist not in
ill Stories, but in ill Characters, that are as well consuted by his whole
History of this great Princes actions, as by Paulinus his Apologetick, and St.
Ambrose his Funeral Oration, to which I refer the Reader, and shall only give
this Character out of a more knowing Author, because contemporary, and an Eye
witness of his Actions, and though a more impartial, yet no bribed Author,
because an heathen too as well as Zosinus, and that is Aurelius Victor who
concludes his History with this Character of him, having compared him to Trajan
he adds that He was a Prince courteous, merciful and familiar, thinking himself
to be distinguished from other Men only by the Imperial Robe: bountiful to all
Men, but to a degree of prodigality to good Men, he loved Men of Integrity, and
honored Learning, if without craft, he bestowed his great bounty with a greater
mind. He loved his Subjects, and loaded them with Honors, Wealth and
Kindnesses, especially those that he had found faithful to him in any distress.
And yet he had so great a detestation of those Vices, for which Trajan is
blamed, luxury and love of triumph, that he never raised Wars, but found them,
and strictly forbid all luxury and extravagance at his Table, and was so tender
of continence and modesty, that he forbid the Marriage of Cousin-Germans as
well as Sisters. He was competently learned, he was inquisitive and curious to
know the Monuments and Actions of his Ancestors, and expressed an high
indignation against such, who by their Pride or Cruelty had attempted any thing
against the public Liberty, as Cinna, Marius and Sulla, and all Tyrants
whatsoever, especially if false and ungrateful. He was apt to be offended at a
base Action, but soon appeased, and therefore in a little respite he would
soften harsh Commands; and he had that virtue by Nature, that Augustus learnt
of the Philosopher, who observing him to be somewhat too passionate, advised
him, that he might do nothing rash and cruel, whenever he found himself begin
to be angry, to repete the Greek Alphabet, that his sudden Passion being
diverted, it would in a short time cool. But that which is more miraculous and
unusual, he grew better by his Prosperity and great Victories. For whereas the
Tyrants had robbed the Subjects of great sums of Money, he reimbursed them out
of his own Exchequer, whereas the most gentle Princes thought it enough to
leave them their bare Estates and harrass't Lands. But now as for smaller
Matters, and things acted within the Court, which because they are more secret,
more invite Men's curiosity: He honored his Uncle as a Father, his Nephews he
loved as Sons, he was a Father to all his Relations: he loved neat eating, but
hated extravagance. He was facetious in his discourse, but so as to keep up his
gravity: a kind Father and a loving Husband: moderate in his exercise which was
chiefly in walking at leisure times, he governed his Appetite by his Health,
and so died in Peace at Milan in the 50 th year of his Age. This is the Man
that the rude Historian is not ashamed to accuse of destroying the Roman
Commonwealth by his Luxury, Negligence and Oppression, both without giving any
one instance of any of those Vices, and against his own history, by which it is
evident, that he was the Savior of the Empire. But Theodosius was a true lover
of his Religion, and that exasperated the Zeal and Malice of this bigoted
Pagan. Insomuch that notwithstanding the unparalled success of his Arms, the
highest Character that he can give of him, is that only, that he was no ill
Soldier, though this civility he soon after eats again, by saying that he
destroyed the military Forces and brought them to nothing, so that it seems he
vanquished all his Enemies without an Army, or which is as likely, as he reports
it, that he conquered all the Barbarians by their own Renegado's without any
Order or Discipline.

After him succeed his two Sons, Arcadius in the East, and Honorius in the
West, who finding things so well settled by their Father, it was enough for
them to preserve them in the same posture, in which they found them. But though
he had pretty well quelled all the other Heretics, especially the Arian spawn,
yet the Donatists in Africa had escaped his just severity, and therefore
Honorius undertakes them, and how they were at last reduced and utterly
destroyed, we have already seen in the history of that Schism. So that the main
Transaction of this reign is already dispatched, and what remains, will not
require much difficulty, their other Ecclesiastical Laws being for the most
part only ratifications of their Fathers Rescripts, and by their persisting in
the same way of Government, and Theodosius the younger following in the same
track, they brought the Church to a better settlement, than it ever attained in
any other Age. And in the first place, from the 24 to the 36.
there are 12 Laws of Arcadius extant in the Theodosian Code, against
Heretics, enacted in the first five years of his Reign, that were nothing but
Enforcements of former Rescripts, but chiefly his Fathers, that had not been
executed through the negligence or treachery of Officers.

His first Law was enacted in the year 394 in his Father's lifetime, and when
he was absent in the War against Eugenius, and the occasion of it was the
connivance of the Judges, as he declares in the Law it self, by which all the
Imperial Constitutions were defeated and in effect evacuated. Against which
abuse of Government, this Constitution is particularly enacted, and that was
the Calamity of the Church in all Ages, to be oppressed by the Courtiers at
home, and betrayed by the Judges abroad. For as we have observed, that after
the disposal of Preferments in the Church came into the Court, the Eunuchs
under careless Princes, turned the Church into an excise of Simony; so it is
observable, that though Laws were continually enacted against all sorts of
Dissenters and Recusants, yet it was the complaint of every Reign, that they
lost their effect by the remisness or dishonesty of the Underofficers, who
cared not to carry any thing thorough for the benefit of the Church, but when
they saw it coming to any Degree of settlement, they let fall the execution of
those Laws, by which it might have been brought to perfection. And till smart
Fines and Penalties were set upon the heads of the Governors and Judges
themselves, the Imperial Laws in behalf of the Church, lost the force of their
obligation, and that was the true Reason why most of the Rescripts of the
former Emperors came to no more effect, because their Officers cared not to put
them in effectual execution. And though they durst not at first, and whilst
they were fresh, wholly slite their Authority, yet in time, when ever the
Emperors were diverted to other thoughts and cares, they let them sink into
contempt and oblivion. And that was the true reason, why the same Emperors were
forced from time to time to renew the same Laws, and of this Theodosius himself
was at last sensible. But from this time forward that these young Emperors,
made the Judges themselves Parties upon the Non-execution of any of their Laws,
they had their true force and did their business, and by this method they
vanquished that stubborn Schism of the Donatists, De Haereticis l. 25.
that had for so many years bafled all the Power of the Empire. The next Law of
Arcadius was made at his first entrance upon the Government, by which he
confirms all his Fathers Rescripts against the Heretics, and cancels all
private and special Indulgences to them, and particularly as to the Eunomians
or Anomaeans he revives the former Law of Intestability, which his Father a
little before his death upon the straight of Eugenius his Rebellion, had
revoked. l. 27.
And so did this Emperor himself in the very same year, by a Rescript to
Caesarius, who was made Praefectus Praetorio by Eutropius the Eunuch after the
murder of Rufinus, changing his Councils with the change of Ministers of
State. And that was another unhappy miscarriage of several of the Emperors,
especially whilst raw and unexperienced at their first coming to the
Government, that they were not constant to themselves and their own Measures;
for that brought contempt, not only upon the Laws, but upon their own
Understandings, and frequent change of Opinion argues both fickleness of Mind
and want of Consideration. And though when once a Law is made, though it may
not be so convenient, as might have been expected, it is better to bear with
it, than lightly to reverse it, the reverence that Resolution brings to the
Authority of the Government will be an ample compensation for the inconvenience
of the Law. His next Law is made to give force to all his Royal Fathers Laws
against the Meetings of Heretics, L. 26.
and to put them in execution without reserves and limitations, whether the
Conventicles were held by Bishops or any other Ecclesiastical Order. Which last
clause was probably added, Lib. 8. c. 1.
as Gothofred very well observes, against the Macedonians at Constantinople,
who as Sozo^en relates, had no Bishop of Constantinople at that time, but from
the time of Eudoxius who deprived them of their Churches under Constantius,
were under all the succeeding Emperors governed only by Presbyters. Upon this
Aurelian, Pro-consul of the lesser Asia, where the Heretics had always chiefly
nested (though their swarms were never numerous) inquires of him in the case of
Euresius, what his Majesty intended by the name of Heretic. L. 28.
To which he returns this short and smart Answer, That it comprehended all that
departed from the Catholic Church, tho in never so small a Matter. The meaning
of this Law has very much puzzled the Canonists, or rather they have puzzled
themselves about it, it being their Trade, because it is their gain, to create
obscurity and raise variety of Opinions about all Laws. Otherwise the true
meaning of this Law is sufficiently evident from the Words themselves and the
occasion of its enacting, viz. that all departure from the Catholic Church as
such, is Heresy. The Heretics even of the Arian Faction, were subdivided into
diverse Parties and distinguished by such Niceties, that it was hard to
understand their different Metaphysics, and therefore the Emperor to make
short work of it, and without perplexing his Laws with Entities and Quiddities,
plainly defines, that be they what they will, if they are not Catholics, to
him they are Heretics. The occasion both of the Inquiry and the Law was
Euresius a Luciferian Bishop, who coming about that time out of some other Part
of the World into the Pro-consular Asia, but not joining Communion with the
Catholics, nor yet holding any different Opinion from them* the Inquiry was,
Whether he ought to be comprehended in the Catalogue of Heretics. Yes, says
the Emperor, if he be not a Catholic, that is enough: It concerns not us to
inquire into his particular Fancy, his mere dissenting, be the difference never
so small, is to us and in the Eye of the Law, Heresy. This was truly Imperial,
and became the Greatness of a Sovereign Prince. He knew not what Euresius was,
nor would he inquire, as long as he dissented from the Catholic Church,
whatever was the ground of his Quarrel, it was all one to his Government. Now
the singular conceit of the Luciferians was this, that they were over-zealous
in the Catholic Faith to the subversion of Catholic discipline; and because
the Catholic Bishops received the Heretical Clergy upon their repentance to
communion in their Clerical Capacity, they broke off Communion with them. So
that though they were in propriety of Speech only Schismatics, yet the Emperor
will trouble himself with none of those Niceties, and be they what they will,
they are in the sense of his Law, Heretics. This is the plain meaning of this
intricated Rescript, and though it may seem somewhat severe to punish all
Opinions alike, and make no difference between the least and the greatest
Heresies: yet if we consider the design of the Imperial Laws, they can make
none, for it is the Church, that is the proper Judge of the Heresy it self, so
as to proportion the Punishment to the Crime. But when that is done, the Civil
Power only comes in to abet its Sentence, for the settlement of Peace in Church
and State. That is his proper care and province, so that if the peace of either
be any way broke, that is the Crime that he is properly concerned to punish.
And indeed the less the difference, the greater the fault, for what it wants in
pretense, it exceeds in peevishness* and that is of all others the rankest
Affront to Government, it carries open contempt in the Crime, it is disdain as
well as disobedience, and a plain spitting in the very face of Authority. The
same year this young Prince issues out an Order to Marcellus the Magister
Officiorum, L. 29.
to make inquiry after Heretics in the Army or any Place of Trust,
particularly the Court and the Guards, and if he discovered any, not only to
disband or displace them, but to banish their Officers, by whose connivance
they had crept in, out of the Walls of Constantinople. And in the year
following he interdicts all Meetings of all Heretics not only in Churches, but
in Vestrys, L. 30.
Church-Prisons, and all other Places by Night or by Day, by which little
shifts they thought to elude the Laws of Theodosius the Great, that only
prohibited their Meetings in Churches. And the execution of this Law is
enjoined with a severe Pecuniary Mulct upon Clearchus Prefect of Constantinople
to whom it was directed, and upon his Underofficers, that had hitherto winked
at such illegal Meetings, if by his or their connivance such shufflings with
the Law should for the time to come be made use of to evacuate its Obligation.

At this time the Eunomians raised new Tumults by new Divisions among
themselves: Soc. l. 5. c. 24. Soz. l. 7. c. 27.
One Theophronius having got a little smattering in Aristotle's Logic, set up a
new Metaphysics of his own, and was opposed by Eurychius an illiterate
Tradesman. And this made a new fewd not only among themselves, but the old
Eunomians, and upon it the Emperor enacts two Rescripts in the years 396, and
397, to banish all their Leaders first from all Cities, and then out of the
whole Empire, or as they express it, c^^tibus humanis, from the conversation of
all Mankind. So endless a folly is metaphysical nicen^ss in Divinity, if once
indulged the wantonness of its own curiosity. And upon the same account the
Macedonians subdivided into two new Factions, Dorotheus heading one, and
Marianus the other, there is no end of scabs and scratching, when once Men are
overrun with the itch of Disputation. L. 34.
But upon what account unless the stubbornness of the Faction I know not, his
next and last Edict against them commands their perpetual silence in all
Places, and the burning of all their Books, and both upon no less Penalty than
Death it self. This Law being of so severe a strein, was no doubt made upon
some special Provocation, as generally capital and sanguinary Laws were,
particularly the 51 and 56 of Honorius against the Donatists, and therefore
being made in some sudden transport of Passion, we do not find that they were
ever put in execution, for the Emperors never put Men to death for mere
Heresy, the Circumcellians were hanged as highway Robbers, the Priscillianists
and practical Manichees were put to death as Debauchers of Mankind, but
otherwise the Imperial Laws reached not Men's lives in case of Heresy, it being
a standing rule of the Fathers, that their punishments ought to be such, as to
leave the Offenders in a capacity of repentance. Nay they were so far from
touching Men's lives, that they rarely or never, that I remember, inflicted any
bodily punishments. Their usual Penalties were proscription of Goods,
confiscation of Estates, forfeiture of the Meeting Houses, deprivation of the
Privileges of a Roman Citizen, incapacity of bearing Office in Church or
State, intestability, and last of all, banishment of the Preachers and all that
concealed them: which last, as it proved the most easy and effectual punishment
for the extirpation of any Heresy, so it was least odious and grievous to the
People, extending not to the generality, but only to a small handful of Men.
This Law with another at the tail of it, inflicting severe Penalties upon all
Officers that neglect its execution, is strong enough to master the most
headstrong Faction in the World. And with this sort of Law does this young
Emperor conclude all his Laws against the Eunomians. ^. 36.
In the year 399 he remits the usual punishment of Intestability, and beside
the infliction of the other common Punishments, relys chiefly upon the
deportation of the Preacher, and so after that, we hear no more of them in his
reign, and as by this means he rooted the Eunomians out of the East, so did
Honorius vanquish the Donatists in the West, for all the following Rescripts of
this reign under this Title de Haereticis, are his Constitutions against that
Sect, of which we have had an account already.

. XII. But beside these Penal Laws against Heretics, Honorius enacted diverse
Laws of Privilege to the Catholics: No wonder then if (as the Historians
observe) the Heretics flockt so fast into the Church under the reign of these
two Princes, Sozom. l. 8. c. 1.
when they followed nothing but Sunshine and Court-favor. And therefore seeing
that these Princes were resolved to tread in their great Fathers steps, and to
annex the Preferments of the Church to the Orthodox Faith, they had no other
hopes left, than to tack about to it: and when they could not after all their
pains make the Church come to them, it is not to be supposed that Gentlemen of
their yielding and waxen temper, would be so stout as not to bend to that. And
so at length this powerful Faction, that had so long imbroil'd the Christian
World with Wars and Tumults of Wars from the very time of Constantine the
Great, now began to forsake themselves. And those very few that stuck to the
Cause rather out of peevishness than Principle, relied only upon their remains
of Court Interest for their support, as we are informed by Synesius concerning
some of them that came into his little Diocese of Ptolemais, (...).
to debauch the Church there, setting up Quintianus for their Bishop, backed, as
they boasted by Court-power, so that it seems though the Emperors had declared
against them, they were so far from wanting Friends there, that they were proud
of their strength. ^
At his first coming to the Crown he confirms all manner of Privileges granted
by any of his Predecessors to the Church, and commands his Officers that they
diligently perform the duty of Tuition: i. e. that they defend and protect the
Privileges of the Church against all Invasions, and if it were requisite from
Violence. And therefore this Office was both Civil and Military. Civil Tuition
was the standing Office of the Civil Magistrate to protect the Church in its
Privileges: The Military was a lawful Guard allowed by the Civil Magistrate to
defend any Public Assembly from violence, ^
and therefore this kind of Tuition was not granted in the Contests of private
Men (and there is an express Law of Theod^si^s the Great to restrain it) but
only to Public Societies, as to the Jews to guard their Synagogues, and to the
Navicularii, (...) l. 6.
i. e. those Officers that carried away the Tribute Corn from other Places to
Rome or Constantinople, who were constrained to have Guards for their defense
against the fury of the hungry Rabble: and to the Christian Churches to protect
them from the Assaults and Outrages of Heretics, though this was rarely put in
Execution anywhere but in Africa, where it was necessary to defend the
Christian Assemblies against the Troops of the Circumcellians. De Episcopis l.
31.
And this Emperor was at last forced to restrain their fanatic Violence by
Capital punishments, requiring withal of all his Officers to put it in
execution by virtue of their Office without the Complaint or Information of the
Bishop, because his Function obliged him to acts of Mercy; and if the Offenders
made any resistance, they were empowered to fall upon them with the Emperors
Forces, whose assistance they were by this Rescript authorized to demand in his
Majesty's Name. This was a brisk Law, but nothing more gentle than this, could
make any impression upon Men of their temper and bloody Principles. And here
the clause commanding the Officers to proceed against them without staying for
the Bishops complaint, cui sanctitas ignoscendi solam gloriam reliquit, is very
remarkable, because it becomes Bishops in such Cases to spare Men's lives, Ad
Don^tum Epist. 127.
and therefore St. Austin tells the Proconsul of Africa, that if he put the
Donatists to death, they should cease their Information against them. But this
is quite different from the Case of the Priscillianists, because these are
particular Offenses and Miscarriages against particular Men, whereas their
fault was a general Offense against Mankind; in the one the Crime lay in the
Action, that may be forgiven, because but transient; in the other it lay in the
principle, that cannot, because perpetual. So that though it may be a decent
Act of Mercy in a Bishop to interceed for pardon to a criminal Action, yet to
do it for a debaucht Principle, were to make himself Patron of the Wickedness.
De Episcopis l. 30.
But to proceed, in the year 397, he publishes a Law against the Mutilation of
the Privileges of the Church, and this the Emperors were often forced to do,
because their Officers and Governors were apt to oppress them. Especially where
the Church was wealthy, and the Governors heathen, as Theodorus was to whom
this Rescript was directed, they were very forward to hook them in toward
bearing their share in those public burdens, from which they were exempted by
Law. And in the year 399 the same Law is repeated with a pecuniary Mulct, Ibid.
l. 34.
not only upon the Offender that commits the Crime, but upon the Judge that
connives at it. De Religione l. 1.
And in the same year another Rescript is published to refer Ecclesiastical
Causes to the Ecclesiastical judgment, but contentious about Civil Rights to
the Secular Courts. And there are many more Laws of the same strein in the
Imperial Code, the meaning whereof is, not wholly to limit the Judgment of all
Ecclesiastical Causes to the Church, and of all Civil Causes to the Secular
Courts, because most Causes, as I have shown above, appertain to both: But
their plain intention is, that Causes purely Ecclesiastical, or Offenses
against the Canons, Rubricks and Orders of the Church, for the preservation of
Peace and Decency, or Offenses against the Rule of Faith, shall be judged by
the Church alone, and as for civil Controversies, they are to receive their
decision only from Civil Courts. For the final power of Decision, is all the
Authority that can be used in that case, but though the Church has none of
that, yet it has a Power to judge of the same Actions, as far as they concern
the Laws of their Religion, or as Theodosius the younger expresses it,
Christianam sanctitatem. And though when one Man stands convict of having
defrauded another, they have not Power to right the Person wronged, or to
enforce a Restitution, yet they have a Power to pass sentence upon the injury
as a breach of the Christian Law, and that sentence will have its effect. So
that though they have not a Civil Authority in Civil Causes, yet they have an
Ecclesiastical, that is distinguished not by the Matter, but the Penalty of the
Law. But the true and proper meaning of these Laws is best understood by the
occasion upon which they were enacted, and the occasion of this was, that the
Emperors had empowered Bishops to decide Controversies by arbitration and the
consent of Parties, which they in process of time challenge as their right, and
derive their Authority for it, from Apostolical Law, as was done by the African
Fathers at this time, petitioning the Emperor, That if any Persons will choose
to have their Controversies decided by the Church, Cod. African. 59.
Vt si qui forte in Ecclesia quam libet causam, jure Apostolico Ecclesiis
imposito, agere voluerint, et fortasse decisum Clericorum uni parti
displicuerit, non liceat Clericum in judicium ad testimo^ium devocari eum, qui
cognitor vel praesens fuerit, ut nulla ad testimonium decendum Ecclesiastici
cujuslibet persona pulsetur.
according to Apostolical Law, and one Party shall appeal from the Award, that
the Priest, who was the Judge shall not be cited to the temporal Courts by him,
to give in any account or testimony of the proceedings.

To which Petition the Emperor returns this Law as a just denial, though that
neither does, nor can take away their Power of Ecclesiastical Censures, that
they received from our Savior, but of civil Decision that was granted them by
the favor and indulgence of Princes, and when once they pretended to an higher
Commission for it, it was but time to clip their pretenses. De Episcopis, l. 35.
But in the year 400 he published a very remarkable Rescript in defense of the
true power and discipline of the Church against all Appeals from their Sentence
even to the Imperial Throne it self Whoever shall be deposed from his Office in
the Church by a Synod of Bishops, if he shall presume against the modesty of
the Church, and the Peace of the Empire, to resume that Office to himself, from
which he is deposed, he shall according to the Law of Gratian of blessed
Memory, be banished an hundred Miles from the City that he infested, for it is
but fit that he should be banished their Assemblies, who is cut off from their
Society. And be it farther enacted by the force of this Law, That no such
Persons apply themselves to our Secretaries to procure our Rescripts in their
behalf, and if they shall by stealth obtain any, all Rescripts granted to such
Persons as are deposed from their Priesthood, are hereby declared null and
void. And lastly let such Persons, upon whose favor they rely, take notice,
that they shall not escape the punishment due to such as shall undertake the
protection of such Men, as are already cast by the judgment of God. This Law of
stopping all Appeals from the Church, was of all others most necessary for the
preservation of discipline in it, and therefore it was always with greatest
care established by the Canons against all Invasions, and observed with the
greatest tenderness by all the wisest Emperors. And we have seen through the
whole series of this History, that from the very time that Princes took upon
them the protection of the Church, the only thing that debaucht and defeated
the Efficacy of its Discipline, was Church-mens taking sanctuary at Court
against the Authority of their Superiors. And the mischiefs of this abuse
having been so often experienced, it was but high time to take it quite away,
insomuch that the Emperor was pleased to tie up his own hands from untying any
sentence of the Church. As for the occasion of this Law, there are many
conjectures about it, but I think the most probable is that of Gothofred, that
it was made at the Petition of the African Fathers, who were actually sitting
at that time to restore the ancient and effectual discipline of the Church, and
reform the Abuses and Corruptions that were crept or were creeping into it, and
so among others, implore the Emperor that he would be pleased to stop all ways
of appeal to Persons that stood legally condemned by the sentence of the
Church, and to injoin this to all his Officers, as they word it, interposita
poena damni pecuniae atque honoris. And this Petition the Emperor grants with
that frankness, as to take away this abused Power of Appeals, not only from his
Judges, but himself, and damn their Authority by this Rescript once for all and
for ever. In the year 401 he exempts those of the Clergy, De Episcopis l. 36.
that were forced to trade to get a Livelihood, from the payment of all
Customs, the same Law that was made by Constantius in the year 343. So that it
seems the Church was not as yet endowed with sufficient Revenues to maintain it
self, when some of the Clergy were forced to traffic for bread. Tho they were
afterward forbidden all manner of Trade by Valentinan the third, Novilla 12.
when it seems the Church was grown rich enough to subsist upon its own stock.
In the year 407 he not only confirms all the ancient Privileges and Immunities
of the Clergy, De Episcopis l. 38.
but he grants them a new sort of Tuition, viz. Secular Advocates for the
management of all their Secular Affairs, but lest by this means the Church
should be cheated by these Trustees, the Bishops of the Province are required
to survey their Accounts. This Law was made at the Petition of the African
Fathers in the fourth Council of Africa, and is extant in their Code Canon 97.
And it was done for this end, that the Clergy might not be forced to appear in
Law-Courts, and leave their Functions to follow Lawsuits. And this is the
first time that Laymen were taken into the concerns of the Church, and that
not to intermeddle with any thing of its discipline and jurisdiction, but only
as their Stewards and Solicitors. And this Emperor was so kind to them, as to
follow this Rescript with another, De denunc. Rescript. l. 7.
commanding that the Advocates of the Church should be put to no delays in the
Common-Law-Courts, but admitted to Audience at their first appearance. De
Episcopis l. 40.
In the year 412 he recites the particular Privileges granted to the Clergy,
and commands all his Officers to keep them inviolable upon pain of perpetual
Banishment. The Privileges he enumerates are these six,

(1) Exemption from Offices.

(2) From repairing of Highways.

(3) From extraordinary Taxes.

(4) From building of Bridges.

(5) From maintaining the public Carriages.

(6) From the Gold-Contribution, which was a particular Tax imposed at that
time. In short they were excused from all Payments but their Canonical Tribute,
the rate of which was known, and customary. For their Lands were never exempt
from Taxes, and the proportion that they paid was called the Canonical
Contribution, and whatever Officer demanded more than their standing rate, he
was by this Rescript banished for ever as a sacrilegious Person. In the same
year he publishes another Rescript, forbidding the accusation of Clergymen
before any Judge but the Bishops, Ibid. l. 41.
and if any Person of what degree and quality soever, shall bring an Indictment
against them, and be not able to make it good, he shall be branded with public
Infamy, as the Person accused must have been, if found guilty. This Rescript
notwithstanding its general words that the Clergy ought to be accused before
the Bishops and not else where, the Lawyers will have to be understood of
Ecclesiastical and not Civil Crimes, but this proceeds from their common
Prejudice, that I have noted above, that only Ecclesiastical Offenses fall
under the Judicature of the Church, but Civil and Political Crimes are
restrained to the cognizance of the State, whereas both are punishable by both,
with those different Penalties that are proper to the different Jurisdictions.
And as for this Law in particular, it cannot be understood of any other but
Civil Crimes, and this is evidently proved by those very Arguments, that are
alleged by Gothofred himself to appropriate it to Ecclesiastical Miscarriages.
First that they are such Crimes as are punished by the shame of Deposition, and
therefore most properly Civil Crimes, for there were very few Ecclesiastical
Offenses so great, as to deserve so high a Punishment, and those few that did
so, as in the case of Schism and Heresy, were always appropriated to the
Ecclesiastical Judicature, before this Rescript, and therefore not by it. And
this appears more pregnantly from his second reason, the cause of enacting this
Law, viz. that Laymen and even Persons of the greatest Quality, being apt upon
slite provocations to bear spite to the Clergy, would be apt enough to way-lay
their Reputation with popular defamations and false reports. So that the
apparent design of the Law was to prevent these scandalous Informations, before
the Secular Judges, and restrain them from so much as taking them, till they
had been first examined by the Ecclesiastical Judicature. And in the last place
this is still more evident from the particular occasion of this Law, that Heroes
a worthy Man Bishop of Arles had been thrust out by Constantius a great
Court-Officer there* and afterward Emperor for six Months, upon a tumultuary
Accusation and Patroclus an infamous Person placed in his stead, and therefore
to prevent the like Disorders for the time to come, it was but seasonable to
enact this Law, to restrain Secular Governors from receiving accusations
against the Clergy, till they have been first heard by the Provincial Synod. So
that this Law does not exempt the criminal Actions of the Clergy from the Civil
Courts, as Gothofred imagines, when he objects that it is against the Jus
Commune, but only limits the exercise of their Jurisdiction, viz. that they
neither receive nor proceed in such Causes, till the Judgment of the Church had
been passed upon them, and after that, they were at liberty to punish them
according to Law. This is the fairest and most ingenuous sense that I can make
of this Law.

These are the chief Laws of these Emperors in the Church, the Penal Laws
against the Heretics, and the Laws of Privilege to the Catholics.

. XIII. But beside these, there were diverse others enacted either to abet the
Discipline of the Church, by removing Abuses that were crept in upon its
ancient Constitutions, or by backing its present Decrees with the Imperial
Authority. Or else to set in order such Matters of Religion, that though they
related to the Church, were yet without its Jurisdiction, i. e. those Laws that
concern Jews. Heathens and Apostates, in all which they followed the example of
their Royal Father Theodosius. And first they take care of the due and regular
Ordination of the Clergy. Constantine the Great had been forced to forbid his
Officers both Civil and Military to be admitted into Holy Orders, and the same
Decree was frequently renewed by his Successors, with alterations and
limitations as the Prince thought most convenient for the present time, that
the State might not be defrauded or indamaged by too much bounty to the Church,
and when Men flockt so fast into it, it was but requisite to lock its doors
upon such as were already useful to the Commonwealth. Which Constantine did
with a peremptory and universal Law, but Valentinian the first with this
limitation, That any Person, who had an Office in the State, might be admitted
into the Church, so that he provided an able Person to supply his former
Office. But before this time the Privilege of Clergy had taken place, and the
Bishop was empowered to redeem any Criminal from Justice, or Debtor from Goal,
if he judged him qualified for doing Service in the Church, that was grown into
such an abuse, that the Monks took them away by force and tumult, to the
hindrance of Public Justice, and the subversion of private Men's rights. For
when they were once entered into a Monastery or into Orders, their Crimes were
canceled and their Debts paid, to redress which abuse Arcadius enacts a severe
Law in the year 398, Lib. 9. Tit. 40. de pae^is. l. 16.
as his Father Ibid l. 15.
Theodosius had done before him, against these violent interpositions of the
Monks, and threatens the Bishops that if any such Riots were made by the Monks
under their Jurisdictions, De Episcopis l. 32.
and not punished by them, the fault should lie at their Doors, and commands
them for the time to come, that whenever they wanted Clerks, they should take
them from the Colleges of Monks, if they found them clear of all Debts both
Public and Private, otherwise as they ought not to have been admitted into the
Monasteries, so he now commands that they shall not be adm^tted into Orders.
And this Law was but agreeable to the Constitution of things in those Times,
when the Monasteries, as now our Universities, were the proper Seminaries of
the Church. These Laws, viz l. 16 de paenis, and l. 32. de Episcopis, were at
first but one, however they came afterward to be distracted, and placed under
such distant Titles, and therefore the first breaks off with an etc. where the
second begins, thus. Ex quor^m [Monachorum] numero rectius, si quos sort sibi
deesse arbitrantur, Clericos ordinabunt, etc. With which Words the second Law
begins, and then adds, non obnoxios publicis privatisque rationibus cum invidia
teneant, sed habeant jam probatos. Now both Laws being joined together, their
history and their use are very apparent, but when separated, it is difficult to
find out their meaning, especially of the latter, that was only made in
pursuance of the former. To both which ought to be added the third Law in the
Title de his qui ad Ecclesias confugiunt, by which the Privilege of Protection
by the right of Ecclesiastical Immunity is utterly stopped up to all Persons
engaged in public or private Debts, which I think was as necessary a piece of
Reformation, as the former part of the Law against the Tumults of the Monks.
For what can be a greater dishonor to the Church, than to be turned into a
Sanctuary against Common Justice? Though most Men are very much offended at the
unkindness of the Law, and the Historians remark an unlucky Judgment upon the
Author of it, Eutropius, at that time in high favor with the Emperor, but soon
after falling into disgrace, he was the first Man upon whom it was executed,
flying for Sanctuary to the Church of Constantinople, and hiding himself under
the Communion Table, in which posture he was in an elegant, but I doubt, a very
unseasonable Oration, rated and upbraided by St. Chrysostom for his rudeness to
the Church, and so is dragged out by the heels, and immediately haled to
Execution, and as Sozomen adds, his Law was immediately abrogated and erased
out of the Public Register. But that is one of his many dreams, when we find
it carefully recorded and confirmed for ever by the Emperor's Son in the
Theodosian Code. Ibid. l. 2.
And a Law not unlike this we find in the same Title made the year before
against the Ecclesiastical protection of Jews from their Creditors, upon their
pretense of conversion to the Christian Faith: which it seems was a common
cheat at that time, for which reason there are diverse Imperial Laws to prevent
it, and command the Clergy to receive no Converts, till they have cleared
themselves of all Crimes and Debts: a very good Rule, and an Example worthy the
imitation of our Church. De Episcopis l. 33.
The next Rescript is of a peculiar strein, and too strict out of his
overgreat care to prevent Confusion, viz. that wherever there are Churches in
Villages, the Clerks that serve them, shall not be ordein'd from other
Villages, but out of that Village where the Church is, in which they Officiate,
lest thereby they rob their Neighbors. What particular Reason he had to enact
this Law at that time I know not, but it looks very odd and severe, that every
Village must be supplied with a Pastor out of it self; and not very wise, when
our Savior's observation is so very true, That a Prophet has least honor in his
own Country, and it is evident that every Preacher has least Authority in his
native Place, where the Vices and the Follies of his youth are remembered. And
therefore I cannot but think it would have been somewhat a wiser Law rather to
have restrained all Men from accepting a Benefice in the Place of their
Nativity.

His next Rescripts are made in the particular case of St. Chrysostom, who
being deposed from his Bishopric of Constantinople by the Council sub quercu,
and that as I have elsewhere proved, too justly for so good a Man; the sentence
was ratified by the Emperor, and because the People raised Tumults upon it, he
is banished, and the very same day happens a great fire at Constantinople, that
burnt down both the Cathedral and the Senate House. This is laid to the
Johannites, as they nicknamed the followers of St. Chrysostom; and upon it
many of the Clergy are imprisoned for suspicion of the Fact, but no proof being
found against them by the Prefect Studius, the Emperor directs a Rescript to
him to set them at liberty, De Episcopis l. 37.
to give over all farther Inquisition after the fire, to prevent all Meetings
and Conventicles of Chrysostom's Faction, and to banish all out lying or rather
trespassing Bishops and Clerks from the City, who had in great numbers resorted
thither from all Parts to join in with the Factions, and by that means the
Tumults were raised to that height, that the Emperor was forced to command
their expulsion for the preservation of the Public Peace. But though this
seasonable Banishment of the foreign Clergy slaked, yet it broke not up the
fury of the Tumults, that were partly kept up by the Inhabitants of the City,
and partly by the expulsed Mutineers in other Parts of the Empire, and
therefore it is followed with other Laws to suppress both. And first all
Swordmen are forbidden to frequent the Conventicles of the Johannites under
pain of cashiering and Proscription of Goods, De his qui ^uper religione
contendunt l. 4.
that sort of Men being most likely to engage into Quarrels upon occasion of
such Meetings. In the next place all Servants are restrained with a pecuniary
Mulct upon their Masters, Ibid l. 5.
and the Bankers, and all Members of the City-Companies, with a round Fine upon
the Company that sufferd such Members. And because the Clergy that were banished
Constantinople, set up their Conventicles, especially in Thrace, Egypt, and the
East (properly so called) a third Rescript is issued out, That all Persons
should be expelled all Churches, who refused to communicate with Arsacius,
Theophilus and Porphyrius, the three sovereign Bishops of those Diocesses,
Arsacius of Constantinople for Thrace, Theophilus of Alexandria for Egypt, and
Porphyrius of Antioch for the East. Under the Title of Apostates we have but
one Law in this Reign, and that was enacted by Arcadius upon the punishment of
Intestability, De Apostatis l. 7.
as was done by Theodosius the Great; but this Law of Arcadius was made with so
many favorable concessions, that it seems to have been contrived for no other
end, than to take away the severity of the fo^mer Theodosian Law. For whereas
that takes away all disposal of their Estates, this allows the settlement, if
made upon Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, Brother or Sister, Niece or
Nephew, but no farther, and that was far enough, for Men were seldom without
some of these Relations, and when they had them, they as seldom cared to settle
their Fortunes upon any other Persons.

But he was much more kind to the Jews, taking upon himself the Patronage of
their old Privileges and granting new ones. De Judaeis l. 10.
His first Law gives Authority to their Governors to set Market-prizes upon
their Goods, because the Christian Officers out of hatred to the Jews set their
Prizes so low, that they took away their lawful Gains. His next forbids all
contumelious language in public against their Patriarchs. His third commands
all his Governors of Provinces to protect them and their Synagogues from all
violence of the People. Ibid l. ^1.
L. 12.
His fourth restores and confirms to the Patriarchs and Clergy, L. 13.
the Privilege of Exemption a Muneribus curialibus from Public Offices, that
had been granted by former Emperors, Constantine, Constantius, L. 15.
Valentinian and Valens, but had been since taken away by Gratian and
Valentinian the younger. In his fifth Law he renews the same, together with an
addition of all those Privileges that had been granted by his Royal Father. To
which may be added his Grant to them impowring them to determine all their
Lawsuits by the arbitration of their Patriarchs, Cod. 2. Tit. 1. de
Ju^isdictione l. 10.
if both Parties consented to it, enacted the same year, in which he granted
the same Power to Christian Bishops.

But as indulgent as Arcadius was to them in the East, they were at first
treated ruggedly enough by Honorius in the West, De Judaeis l. 14.
who first of all forbid the payment of the Crown-gold to the Patriarch of the
Jews and his Apostles, i. e. his Assessors, where he resided, and the
Collectors of it in the several Provinces. This Tribute had been ever paid from
the destruction of Jerusalem, though it is now intercepted by Honorius with
expressions of high displeasure: He calls it a cheat, and the Patriarch a
Thief, and orders his Apostles to be punished by his Judges as Pick-pockets. But
all this was done more out of spite to his Brother Arcadius than to the Jews;
for the two Brothers had first by the instigation of Rufinus, and afterward of
Eutropius Consul this year, conceived a mortal hatred against each other, and
therefore because the Patriarch of the Jews resided in the Eastern Empire under
the Government of Arcadius, Honorius thought it unworthy his Majesty (as he
declares in his Rescript) to suffer one of his Brothers Subjects to exercise so
high a Power over his Subjects as to impose Taxes and Tributes upon them. And
for the same reason when Arcadius granted the Jewish Clergy exemption from all
Offices in the year 398, Honorius forbids the execution of that Law within his
Dominions as prejudicial to his Government, De Decurionibus l. 158.
and commands them, and all Men of whatsoever condition, to undergo their share
of the public Burdens. And therefore five years after, viz. in the year 404,
when the Brothers were reconciled, De Judaeis l. 17.
Honorius in token of his Reconciliation cancels this Rescript, and restores
them to this and all the other Privileges, that had been granted them by any
of his Predecessors, and from this time forward he was the most indulgent of
all the Emperors to the Jews. But his next Law is of a peculiar Nature, against
a certain new Sect of Jews, that he calls Caelicolae in the year 409, De
Judaeis l. 19.
commanding them, because they pretended to be Christians, to join Communion
with the Catholic Church within a years time, otherwise to be obnoxious to all
the Laws against Heretics, and forbids them making any Converts for the time
to come, as they would not incur the guilt of High Treason. Now what these
Caelicolae were, or why so named, it is difficult to find, because we no where
meet with any mention of them but in this Emperor's time, nor any description
of them, but in this Rescript, unless once in St. Austin, as Gothofred
observes, and though it is found in Justinian in the Law of Constantius against
the Jews, yet as he observes, it must have been foisted in afterward from this
Law, because we hear of no such Sect any where else till this time, and
Honorius never mentions them but with the Title of a new up-start Sect. And as
for the other two Laws in which they occurr, viz. 43 d and 44 th de Haereticis,
he only names them in the rout of other Heretics, and therefore all that can
be guessed at them, is from this Law, where they are described to be pretenders
to Christianity, but Jews in reality. So that they seemed to have been a sort
of Mongrel Christians, such as the Nazarites were of old, confounding both
Religions together, and observing the Sacraments of both, i. e. they were both
circumcised as Jews, and baptized as Christians, being such another hotch-potch
out of both Religions, as was afterward made by Mahumetanism. But how the name
of Caelicolae came to be appropriated to them, I cannot find the least
foot-step for a probable conjecture. How the Name came to be in former Times
given to the Jewish Nation in general, I am pretty well satisfied, viz. not
allowing any Images and Representations of the Deity, they were Sarcastically
represented by the heathen Poets, as if they had address't all their Devotions
to the Clouds and Sky. But how it came to be appropriated to this particular
Sect as distinct from the other Jews, I believe is scarce capable of a guess,
there being no other Record of them, than what I have mentioned, in which we
only find the Name, but no reason of it, and as the Sect began, so it ended
under this Reign; for we hear no more of it, whether it sunk by its own
absurdity, or the severity of the Law against it.

De Judaeis l. 20.
His next Rescript to the Jews in the year 412 is a confirmation of all their
ancient Privileges, in the free use of their Sabboths, their Synagogues, their
Festivals, and all the other Rites of their Religion. Of the same nature and to
the same purpose, is his third Law under the Title de feriis, and the eighth
under the Title de Executoribus, and were no doubt but one and the same Law at
first, as diverse others were, though afterward torn into several Parcels, to
reduce them to their proper heads, by the Collectors of the Code. There remains
but one Law more of this Emperor under this Title enacted in the year 416, De
Judaeis l. 23*
and that is to redress that common abuse of counterfeit Converts to
Christianity from among the Jews, only to avoid their Crimes and their Debts,
commanding all his Governors to seek out all such Impostors in all Places, and
for the honor of Christianity, to turn them out of the Church, and return them
back to their own Religion. And this was done at the request of the Jewish
Governors, to whom the Rescript is directed, thereby to give them Authority to
demand the execution of it of his Officers in his name. Which was a much higher
favor than if he had sent his Rescript immediately to the Officers themselves,
because by this means the execution of this Law was put into the Jews own
hands. To all which Laws we may add one more under the next Title ne
Christianum Mancipium Judaeus habeat, L. 3.
that is very singular, and shows this Emperor's great kindness to the Jews,
and that is to give them the liberty of keeping Christian Slaves and Servants,
which was forbidden by all the Emperors both before and after him, and for that
reason it is I suppose that Trebonian has wholly left it out of the Justinian
Collection.

Under the Title de Paganis there are three Laws of Arcadius, L. 13.
viz. 13, 14, 16, and five of Honorius, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20. The first Law of
Arcadius was enacted at his first coming to the Empire in the year 395, and was
only a Ratification of all his Royal Father's Laws both against Pagans and
Heretics with very severe comminations upon his Officers, that neglected their
speedy and vigorous Execution, no less than death it self, in supercapitali
supplicio judicamus Officia [i. e. Officiales] coercenda quae statuta
neglexerint. L. 14.
By a second Rescript in the year following all Privileges whatsoever
heretofore granted to the Heathen Priests, are utterly abolisht. L. 16.
And by a Rescript in the year 399 all their Temples still remaining in
Villages in the Province of Syria Phaenice, are commanded to be pulled down,
but not without Tumult, many of the Monks, who were usually most busy at that
Work, being wounded and slain by the Country People. In the same year Honorius
takes away their Sacrifices and Temples in France and Spain, L. 15.
but so as to preserve their public Ornaments, after the example of his Father
Theodosius in the eighth Law of this Title. And in the same year also he being
petitioned by the African Fathers in their fifth Council to remove all the
Relics of Idolatry, that as he had already taken away their Sacrifices, so he
would be pleased to abolish their public Festivals, quae ab errore Gentili
attracta sunt, i. e. that were Customs at first derived from the old
Heathenism, L. 17,
to this he returns a peremptory denial, That though it was his Royal Pleasure
that the profane Rites should be taken away, yet he would not have the People
deprived of their Solemnities of mirth according to ancient and immemorial
Custom. And whereas the same Fathers moved, that the Heathen Temples still
remaining in Villages and more remote Parts of the Country might be destroyed,
the Emperor denies that too, L. 18.
the Idols he will have removed, but not the Buildings themselves demolisht.
But in the year 408 the Emperor is of another mind, L. 19.
being inflamed to it, by a particular Provocation. For Stilic^o being slain
that year, both the Heathens and the Donatists (as we have seen in their
History) grow insolent, and give out that all the Laws that had been enacted
against them were only Stilico's without the Emperor's Consent, which being
signifi^d to the Emperor by the African Fathers with a repetition of their
former Requests, he upon it, grants all that they ask and more, and nothing
less will serve his turn than the utter extirpation of Paganism. Upon it he
takes away all their Revenues, and settles them upon his Army, destroys their
Images and their Altars, turns their public Temples to other public Uses,
commands the private Chapels to be demolisht by the Owners, takes away the
solemn Festivals, and imposes the execution of this Law upon his Officers under
the Penalty of a very severe Fine. L. 20.
His last Rescript was enacted in the year 415, in which he permits the Heathen
Games yearly exhibited by the Priests in their Metropoles or great Cities, upon
condition that the Priests return home to their own Habitations as soon as the
Solemnity is ended. Secondly he sequesters all Revenues belonging to the
Temples, to his own and to the Churches use. Thirdly he removes all their
Heathen Images from the Baths, and all other public Places. And lastly he
inflicts Capital Punishments upon the Ringleaders in their Sacrifices and
superstitious Processions. And thus by these several Penal Laws under these
several Titles, and against these several Factions, he so settled the Peace of
the Church and Empire, that though he lived ten years after, for he died not
till the year 425, he had no necessity of making any more news Laws about these
old Matters, for when things are once settled in their right Method, the World
jogs on in good order of its own accord. So that it was really this reign, that
vanquished all the inveterate disorders of the Church, that utterly rooted out
the Schism of the Donatists, and broke the heart of the Heresy of the Arians,
for it was at this time that it received its fatal blow, though afterward it
made some weak Essays and fainting gaspings to recover life. Neither do I
remember that after this time he had occasion of making any other Laws about
Ecclesiastical Matters, but one Law of Discipline in the year 420, De Episcopis
l. 44.
to recover the obsolete force of an Ecclesiastical Canon, strictly forbidding
all Clergymen to cohabit with any Women, unless their own Mothers, Sisters or
Daughters, and commanding all that had been married before they entered into
Orders, to retain their Wives after it. The first part of which Law was made in
pursuance of the Nicene Canon, that had been frequently renewed both by the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Law, by reason of a common Abuse, that was crept into
the Church, that Men professing Caelibacy took Women into their Houses commonly
called (...) beloved Sisters to minister to their necessities, and join with
them in their Devotions, by which odd kind of liberty they brought great and
just Scandal upon the Church, and for that reason we meet with continual
Complaints in all the Ancients against them. The other part of the Law against
the Clergies divorce upon pretense of stricter Sanctity, is taken from the
sixth Apostolical Canon, so that it is evident from this Law that the Caelibacy
of the Clergy was not at this time enjoined, though afterward it crept into the
Church by insensible degrees, till it was at length imposed rather by the
Authority of Custom than Law.

. XIV. But the management of the Civil Policy of this Reign in Church Matters,
as happy as it was, it was not so happy, as the Ecclesiastical Government, that
runs parallel with it, was deplorable. For in this very Period of time happened
such a fatal Revolution in the Church, like those great Deluges and
Conflagrations, that Plato dreams of, by which old Worlds are destroyed and new
ones made, as swept away the whole frame of the ancient Church, and swallowed
up all its power in the exorbitant Usurpation of one Bishop. For now it was,
that the old Constitution of the Catholic Church, as it had stood from the
time of our Savior and his Apostles, divided into Provincial Jurisdictions,
and those again uni^ed into a Catholic Communion with an equality of Power
among themselves, was gulft up in the unlimited and universal Supremacy of one
single Bishop over all. This was first challenged by Innocent the first, who
began to reign in the year 402, and was ever after eagerly pursued by his
Successors, at which great change of things it might be convenient to make a
stand, and take a sad view of the dismal Ruins, under which the Primitive
Church with all its liberties lay buried for many Ages. But as it is too great
a Work for this place, so being a Matter purely Ecclesiastical, and wholly
transacted within the Church it self, it would not be very proper: For the
design of this Work, is to give an account of those Transactions of the Church,
in which the State was concerned, and thereby to exemplify the exercise of the
Civil Jurisdiction within it, without invading the Churches own original
Authority. And therefore this Matter being wholly transacted within the Church,
without any interposition of the State, it belongs not to this Argument, and
for that reason I shall at present wave it, not forgetting that I am under an
Obligation to Baronius of an hunting match for the painted Ha^r^* In the mean
time I proceed, And as for the Laws of Theodosius, they are to be divided into
two Parts, those that were enacted before the compiling of the Theodosian Code,
that are taken into the body of the Code it self under their several Titles,
and those that were made after it, that are annexed as an Appendix under the
name of Novells. The Code was composed in the year 438 and the 30 th year of
his Reign out of the Rescripts of Christian Princes of both Empires, from
Constantine the Great to that time, containing the Records of 127 years, from
the year of our Lord 312 to the year 438, taking in the Laws of 16 Princes;
Constantine and his three Sons, Julian, Jovian, Valentinian, Valens, Gratian,
Valentinian the younger, Theodosius the Great, Arcadius, Honorius, Theodosius
the Younger, and his contemporary Emperors Constantius and Valentinian the
third. It was drawn up by eight Commissioners chosen out of his chief Officers
and Ministers of State, whose Names are recorded in the Emperor's Novel for
ratifying the whole Code. His design was to make the Law more easy, certain
and intelligible for the time to come. That Men may not wait for formidable
Answers, Nov. 1.
Ne Jurisperitorum ulterius severitate mentita, dissimulata scientia, velut ab
ipsis adytis expectarentur formidanda responsa: cum liquido pateat quo pondere
donatio deferatur, qua action petatur haereditas, quibus verbis stipulatio
colligetur, ut certum vel incertum debitum sit exigendum, quae singula
prudentium detecta vigiliis, in apertum lucemque deducta sunt splendore Numinis
nostri radiante.
as it were of a profound Oracle from the formal superciliousness and falsely
pretended Learning of the Lawyers, when it is made so easy to understand how a
Deed of Gift is to be drawn up, what way an Inheritance ought to be sued for,
how a conveyance is to be made, what Debts are certain or uncertain, all which
are drawn out of obscurity and placed in the light by this work of our Sacred
Majesty. And indeed this Reformation of Laws when they grow numerous,
intricate, and perplexing, is one of the noblest acts of Government: for all
Laws in process of time naturally degenerate into so much niceness and
curiosity, as to be of no use, at last, than only to defeat the very end for
which they were instituted at first, viz. the security of Men's Rights and
Properties. And when they are come to that pass, as to perplex and involve,
rather than fix and clear their Titles, they are then, nothing but snare, cheat
and vexation, which of all Governments is incomparably the most intolerable.
The most heavy Arbitrary Government is much more easy to the Subject, than
legal Oppression; for when Men oppress without Law, they are usually restrained
within some bounds by Modesty, because then the whole blame of it must light
upon themselves, but when they have Law or pretense of Law, to abet their
Oppressions, then is the Abuse both boundless and shameless, and how
barbarously soever the poor People may be oppressed, the Law must bear the blame
of all, whilst the Oppressor runs away with all the profit. And therefore it is
but a weak distinction that is vulgarly made between Arbitrary Government and
Government by Law, for either may or may not be arbitrary as they are executed.
A Government without Law may tie it self to the Rules of Justice, and a
Government by Law may turn all the Laws into fraud and oppression, and when
they do so, they are guarded and fortified in their Tyranny by the Law. So that
whereas there are two sorts of Arbitrary Government, one without Law, another
with it, the case of the first is very hard and deplorable, when Men have no
security from the Government for their Rights beside its own good Will. But the
case of the second is intolerable, both because it takes off the grand
restraints of modesty and discretion, which all Men are under that have no
other rule to justify their Actions beside the Justice and Equity of the
Actions themselves, and withal because it leaves Men at liberty under the
shelter and formality of Law to do all the dishonest things in the World with
confidence and a good grace. And therefore the wisest Princes in all Ages have
not been more careful to make good Laws for the security of the Subjects
Rights, than to see to their fair and easy execution. For when Suits are made
tedious, difficult and chargeable, and Men are generally forced to pay more for
Justice than Justice is worth, the Law serves no other end than to rob them of
their Rights, and when my neighbor has taken away one half of my Estate, if I
will seek to right my self by Law, I must spend the other, so that if I get the
Victory, and that is uncertain, I get nothing, if I lose it I am utterly
undone. The removing of this great Abuse, which length of time had brought upon
the Imperial Law, was the Emperor's great design in this magnificent Work,
which though it have its defects, is yet an excellent and useful body of Laws,
and has met with great acceptance in all Ages and civilized Nations. And even
the barbarous People themselves, when they vanquished the Empire, submitted to
its Laws, as we shall particularly see in the Laws of the Goths and Franks. I
have here dropped in this short account of the Theodosian Code, both because it
came in my way under this Emperor's reign, and because every Reader might
understand the great Authority of this Book, upon which we rely so much
through this whole discourse.

But now I proceed to his own particular Laws. His first in the Title de
Episcopis in the year 416 was made for the regulation of the Parabolani of
Alexandria, ^. 42.
a sort of Monks, that practiced Physic, especially in times of the Plague or
other contagious Diseases; therein laying aside all regard to their own safety,
whence they had the name of Parabolani, i. e. desperate or fearless Men, hence
in St. Paul's description of Epaphroditus his great Zeal for the Gospel, he
tells the Philippians, among other Praises, Chap. 2. v. 30.
that for the sake of Christ he had been near unto death, (...) neglecting his
own life, or as an old Latin Interpreter renders it, parabolatus est animam
suam, he parabolated his own life. Now these Men taking upon themselves such a
popular piece of Charity, they, as it naturally falls out in such Cases, grew
insolent, and became very troublesome to the Government, raised Tumults, thrust
themselves into Public Affairs, and will have all things governed by their own
Will and Pleasure. Upon this the Alexandrians Petition the Emperor to restrain
their outrage, and he for a remedy against the Mischief for the time to come,
makes a Law consisting of these seven heads:

First, to forbid their intermedling with any Proceedings in the Emperor's
Courts.

Secondly, to reduce them to the number of 500.

Thirdly, to enact that none should be capable of admission into the Order, but
poor Men.

Fourthly, that they should be chosen by the Citizens.

And Fifthly, approved and confirmed by the Governor.

Sixthly, that they refrain from all Public Meetings and Courts of Justice,
unless as they are forced to appear as Parties.

And lastly, that as vacant Places fell, for the time to come they should be
filled up by the Governor.

The occasion and history of this Law, is described at large by Socrates. Lib.
7. c. 13, 14.
There had been an old grudg between Orestes the Prefect, and Cyril the Bishop
of Alexandria, because as the Prefect thought the Bishop's great Power in that
City seemed to abate of and check with the Authority of the Emperor's
Viceroys, and because he knew that Cyril watched his Government, but it happened
once, that whilst the Governor was present at a Public Show to prevent a
Tumult of the Jews, there were present, several of Cyril's Friends, and among
the rest one Hierax a zealous Schoolmaster, who was seized and punished for a
Spy, upon this St. Cyril threatens the Jews, and upon his threatenings, their
Rabble enter into a Conspiracy to destroy the Christians, and in the Night
raise an outcry that one of their Churches was on fire, and as the Christians
run from all Parts to quench it, they with Protestant Flails murder them in
the Tumult, upon which Cyril the next day turned them all out of Town, and the
People plundered their Goods. This fretted Orestes to the heart, so that though
Cyril used all means of reconciliation with him, he vowed an eternal and
implacable Enmity. Upon this Animosity the Monks of Nitria, as the Historian
has it, but whatever they were, they must by the circumstances of Time and
Place be the same Men, that this Law calls Parabolani, make Tumults in the
Streets, affront and assault the Prefect in his Chariot, and one of them breaks
his head with a stone, who being taken is wrackt to death by him, but honorably
buried by Cyril. Upon which complaint is made to the Emperor from both sides,
but he takes his Governors part, and for that end makes this Law to put these
Ecclesiastical Men under his Government, who had hitherto been subject to no
Authority but the Bishop's. Though 16 or 17 Months after being again reconciled
to Cyril, De Episcopis l. 43.
he puts them wholly under his Jurisdiction, restores the Power of Election and
Substitution into his hands, and increases their number to six hundred.

His next Law enacted in the year 421 relates only to the Churches of
Illyricum. De Episcopis l. 45.
We command that all Innovation ceasing, the ancient Canons and Customs, that
have hitherto prevailed, be observed through all the Provinces of Illyricum,
and if any Doubt or any Controversy arise, it shall be determined by the Synod
of Bishops, but not without consulting the most reverend Archbishop of
Constantinople, that ought to enjoy the Prerogative of old Rome. There is no
one piece of Antiquity that has been more canvassed and controverted than this
Law among learned Men, and yet to this day it lies undiscovered in the dark,
and no wonder, whilst the Records of it lay buried in Rubbish. It were tedious
to recite the several Conjectures of Photius, Baronius, Perron, de Marca,
Blondell, Gothofred, and diverse others, because they are all but mere Guesses
without any bottom to support them. But since their time, the Records have been
brought to light by the learned Holstenius, who first published them to the
World out of a Vatican Manuscript in the year 1662. And they agree so
punctually with all the Records of that time, as by it, setting aside the
Authority of the Manuscript it self, to justify and in reality demonstrate
their own Credit. Now the short of the Story is this, That the Bishops of Rome
and Constantinople were at that time contending for Supremacy of Jurisdiction,
and Illyricum being situated in the Confines of both Empires, was naturally the
Seat of War. For though all Illyricum had in former times belonged to the
Western Empire, yet it was divided by Theodosius the Great, and one half of it
laid to the Eastern, and upon that, the Bishop of Constantinople claims
Jurisdiction over it, Constantinople then pretending to the same Prerogative in
the East, that Rome enjoyed in the West. This pretense was set up immediately
after the Council of Constantinople, that only gave it pre-eminence of honor
next to old Rome, and that they fairly construed Equality of Jurisdiction,
whereas on the other side the Romanists challenged Supremacy of Power over
those Churches, by prescription from the time of Innocent the first, H^lst^n
Ep* 5:
who had set up the Bishop of The^saloni^^ as his Legate over all Illyricum,
and to justify his Innovation, pleads Prescription from Damasus, but that is
according to the constant Custom of the Man, rank Forgery, when Damasus never
in the least pretended to any such Power, but only kept up Correspondence with
Acholius Bishop of Thessalonica, as the chief Metropolitan in those parts,
without any Intimation of any such Relation between them. V. The particular
occasion of this Contest by Perigene his Election to the Sea of Corinth, Vales.
Annot. in Soc. p. 90.
But Rufus, who was then Bishop of Thessalonica, having received such a
Supremacy of Power from his Master Innocent, was faithful to his Masters
Interest, and so continued till the very time of this Rescript, and fighting it
out manfully against the Usurpation of the Constantinopilitans. Now the point
of War, as it was managed by the Bishop of Constantinople was this, that
Illyricum ought to be wholly governed by its own Synod of Bishops. But as by
Rome, that the Bishop of Thessalonica ought to have, and exercise a Supremacy
of Jurisdiction over them. And so it stood at the time of this Rescript,
Boniface the first, then Bishop of Rome, in the year 419, which was but two
years before the date of the Rescript, commending his Courage and great Service
to the Apostolic See; and this Victory was so great, that as Boniface himself
attests, the greatest part of the Illyrican Bishops came over to his side. But
Atticus then Bishop of Constantinople more a Lawyer then a Divine, and
therefore chiefly governed and overruled the Church by Imperial Authority, who
had bafled an Excommunication of Pope Innocent with the Emperors Rescript, and
by it seized a Jurisdiction over the Province of Hellespont, as I have
elsewhere shown, finding Illyricum in danger to be lost, procures this crafty
Rescript from the Emperor against Rufus, and under pretense of asserting the
Laws and Liberties of the Church, by preserving the Supreme Power of Provincial
Synods, takes the Supremacy of all to himself, in that nothing was to be done
or concluded by them without his consent. And here the confidence of these men
is very remarkable in pleading Antiquity on both sides, notwithstanding the
Innovation of both, was so very notorious: But this served the turn well enough
against the Adversary, as here by this Rescript to Abolish all Innovation, the
Power of the Bishop of Thessalonica was utterly destroyed, and when that was
done, Atticus having gained the Bishops to his own side by it, knew how to do
his own work. This fires Pope Boniface, for as the Rescript was published in
June, so in the March following he sends a Letter to Rufus full of Thundering
and Lightning, Epist. 8.
Commanding him in St. Peter's name to maintain his Ground and Power against the
Attempts of saucy and pragmatical Innovators, exhorting him to defy the Storm
and fear no danger, after the example of his Master St. Peter, who would stand
by him, and carry him through all difficulties against those Violators of the
Canons and the Churches Rights, and concludes with a Command to him to disperse
the approaching Synod, that it seems had been appointed upon the publication of
the Rescript, because the matter about which they were to consult, had been
already determined by the Apostolic See. Epist. 9.
And beside this, he writes a threatening Letter to the Bishops to submit to
Rufus and St. Peter; and so he has the confidence to tell them, that he was
Constituted Head of the Catholic Church by our Lord, and so acknowledged by
the Nicene Council, and therefore whoever divides from him, is thereby cut off
from the Communion of the Church. And yet for all that, it grieves him to hear
of some, that have contrary to the Law of God and the Church forsaken the
Apostolical See, to join with a pitiful Somebody, that has no Power at all, as
they will find by searching the Records of former times. And so commands them
to repent and return for fear of what may follow, and submit themselves to
Rufus, whose Power was no new thing, but as it had been granted by the
Ancients, so it was to remain for ever, or in short, as he concludes, Cesset
novella praesumptio. And this is seconded with a longer Epistle to the same
purpose. And thus did these bold Usurpers with equal impudence lay claim to
antiquity on either side, when all the World knew the Innovation of both; but
that was all one to them, because it would beat the Enemy from settling in the
Possession, and then themselves might gain an opportunity of leaping into it.
Neither did Pope Boniface think it enough to make use of his own Authority in
the Case, but he engages the Emperor Honorius on his side, and prevails with
him to write a smart Letter to Theodosius for reversing the late Innovations in
Illyricum. And that he promised to perform, but of its own accord it came to
nothing; for when two Parties, that are both in the wrong, contend for a right,
it cannot be adjudged to either without injustice to a third Party, whose real
Right it is; And thus when these Emperors went about to remove Innovation on
either side, it lay in both their ways, which way soever they moved. And how
they went on to wrangle from Age to Age, for the Usurpation on both sides, with
the confident Plea of Antiquity and the Precedents of their Ancestors, may be
seen more at large in Holstenius his Collection, my present Business is to
discover the true meaning of this hidden Law, from the present Contest between
Boniface and Atticus, which as without it, it is not to be understood, so by
it, we understand not only the sense of the Law it self, but the foul
subreptions of both the Usurpers.

De Epist. 46, 47.
There remain but two other Laws under this Title Enacted by Valentinian the
Third, to confirm all Privileges granted by any of his Predecessors to the
Clergy, and particularly to Abolish the Act of John the Tyrant, who upon the
death of Honorius invaded the Western Empire, and took away all exemptions of
the Clergy from the Secular Courts, for which Gothofred suspects him to have
been an Arian though without any other ground then this, that it had been the
constant Custom of the Arians to take Sanctuary at Court against the Church
under bad Reigns, but whatever he were his Law is here Cancelled by this
Emperor, then but a Child and upon a very childish reason; that it was not
lawful that the Ministers of God should be subject to the Judgment of Temporal
Powers, which is such a Contradiction to all the Doctrines of the Fathers, and
to all the Laws of the preceding Emperors, who in all their Rescripts declared
all such Grants of Privilege to be mere Acts of Grace and Favor, that this
Rescript could be nothing else then the subreption of some Clergyman, who
taking advantage of the times, the Childhood of the Prince, then not above 7
years of Age, the weakness of a Woman his Mother Placidia, who then Governed
all, but chiefly from their fears under their late great distress to which they
were reduced by the Tyrant, took this opportunity of enhancing the Privileges
of his Order to the claim of a Divine Right. I know Gothofred would soften this
Law as if it referred only to Ecclesiastical, not to Civil Causes, first
because in his 12th Novel afterward he made that distinction. That is to say,
as he grew older he grew wiser, and so corrected this childish Oversight, but
otherwise the reason given for this Law is general, that it is not fit that the
Ministers of God should be answerable to Secular Powers. Secondly, that the
Tyrant had removed all Causes, Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, from the Church
to the Secular Courts, which he infers from the word Indiscretion. But if we
will stand to the Practice of the Empire, this Law can relate only to Civil
Causes, notwithstanding that ambiguous word, for Ecclesiastical Causes were all
along left to the Church either in pretense or reality, but Civil Causes
reserved by some Emperors to their own Courts, and by some granted to the
Judgment of the Church it self as an Act of Favor, and therefore it must be
understood of the Cancelling of these Acts of Grace by the Tyrant, when the
same favor is restored, especially when backed, by that general reason, that
it is not fit that the Ministers of God should be accountable to the Secular
Powers, because by the Practice of the Empire, they were not for the d^scharge
of the Ministerial Off^ce, and therefore this Law cannot relate to their duty
as Priests, but as Citizens, to refer them in all such Causes, as some former
Emperors had out of kindness done, to the Ecclesiastical Judicature.

All the Laws of these Emperors under the following Titles are scarce any thing
else then the Ratifications of the Rescripts of former Emperors, especially of
Theodosius the Great, and his Son Honorius, against the small Remainders, that
were left of Heretics, Jews, and Heathens. And as for the Heretics in
particular, they were reduced to an inconsiderable handful of Men, never able
to make any Head against the Catholic Church, that was never after this time
troubled with any of the old Schisms and Heresies. Though it was assaulted with
new ones, and so it must be, as long as the Taint of Vanity is left in Humane
Nature; but as fast as it sprung up, they were cut off by the same Method of
Government. So that by the reiterated experiments of so many Emperors here
Recorded in this Code, we find the true Efficacy of Penal Laws against all the
extravagant wantonness of Schism and Singularity. Under the Title de
Haereticis, there are ten Laws of Theodosius the Younger, beside two other
under the Title of Ne sanctum Baptisma iteretur, and three of Valentinian the
Third, but they are only Recapitulations of former Laws, to glean up the small
scatterings that were left of the Ancient Schisms and Heresies. The most
remarkable of them all is the 65th Law by Theodosius in the year 428, that is
an Epitome of all the former Laws, by which he sweeps away at once 23 Sects, by
enjoining the Execution of the former Laws against them, upon the Judges under
the same Penalty that the Law inflicts upon the Offenders. Quae omnia ita
custodiri decernimus, ut nulli Judicum liceat delatum ad se crimen, minori aut
nulli coercitioni mandare, nisi ipse id pati velit, quod aliis dissimulando
concesserit.

Under the Title de Apostatis there is only one Law of Valentinian to tie the
Punishment of Intestability upon Apostates with more severity in the year 426,
to which may be added the like Law against the Jews under that Title, under
which are extant seven more of Theodosius the Younger; L. 28. l. 18.
the first is very particular forbidding the Jews upon their great Festival of
Aman to burn the Holy Cross in show of their Contempt of the Christian
Religion. For that had been their Custom ever since their deliverance by Hester
from the Conspiracy of Haman, to Celebrate that day with extraordinary
extravagance of Joy and Mirth, and among other Customary Solemnities, they were
wont to burn the Effigies of Haman, and his Gallows with mighty Triumph and
Acclamation. But it seems they had at this time changed the Gallows for a
Cross, thereby to reflect Contempt upon our Savior and his Religion: And for
that very reason are they forbid that Custom under Penalty of forfeiting all
their other Liberties. The following Laws under this Title, viz. l. 21, 22*25,
26, 27. were only enacted to defend them and their Synagogues from the violence
of the Rabble, only the 27 th is made to restrain the Insolence of Gamaliel the
Patriarch in the year 415, upon which followed the dissolution of that Office
among the Jews. For four years after, in the year 419, he published a Rescript,
the last under that Title, L. 29.
commanding the Jewish Governors to refund all the Crown-Gold, that they had
collected since the abolition of their Patriarchs, and withal commanding all
his own Officers for the time to come to collect the same Tribute for the use
of his own Exchequer. And so ended the succession of Jewish Patriarchs, that
had continued from their dispersion to this very day, by what accident, it is
uncertain, but it was probably occasioned by the great Misdemeanors of
Patriarch Gamaliel, who as we find by the 22 d Law had highly abused the
Emperor's favor to the Oppression of the Christians themselves. To these Laws
may be added two more under the next Title, L. 4.5.
ne Christianum Mancipium Judaeus habeat, forbidding Jews to keep Christian
Slaves upon pain of death.

Under the Title de Paganis, there are only five Laws of Theodosius to renew
the Laws in force against them, upon supposition that there are any Pagans
remaining in the Empire, as it is expressed in his second Law. L. 22.
Paganos, qui supersunt, quanquam jam nullos esse credamus, promulgatarum legum
jamdudum praescripta compescant. And thus was this body of Imperial Laws
finished and consigned, that has ever since been the Standard of Law to most
parts of the Christian World, and from it we are fully instructed in the proper
method of curing Schisms and Heresies, viz. by abetting the Discipline of the
Church with Penal Laws effectually executed upon the Offenders. This, after all
the Experiments that were tried by several Emperors, was found the only proper
Remedy against all the Distempers of the Church, as Theodosius himself observes
in his third Novel concerning all sorts of Dissenters. Quos si ad sanitatem
mentis egregiae lege medica revocare conemur, severitatis culpam ipsi
praestabunt, qui durae frontis obstinato piaculo locum veniae non relinquunt.
If we endeavor to reduce these Men by sharp Physic to sobriety of Mind, they
themselves must bear the blame as well as the Punishment of our Severity, that
by their wicked obstinacy stop up all Avenues of Mercy or Pardon. That is the
true state of the Case, there is always a natural stubbornness mixed with
Schism, and nothing but smart can cure it. And this is the thing, that makes it
so necessary to add Penal Laws to the Discipline of the Church, thereby to
stanch that peevishness, that without it will naturally fly out into all the
follies and wildness of humane Nature. And all Princes, that either out of
their own natural Curiosity to try the experiment, or being forced by the
necessity of the times, have taken off the Penal Laws, or suspended their
execution, have soon been convinced of their mistake by the fatal Consequences,
that it has brought upon their Government.

As for the Laws that were enacted by these Emperors after the sealing of the
Code, and for that reason called Novels or new Laws, Tit. 3.
there are two of Theodosius and three of Valentinian. The first of Theodosius
is only a revival of his own 56 th Law de Haereticis, commanding the execution
of all Laws against Jews, Heathens and Heretics. Tit. 21.
His next Law takes away all manner of exemptions from Public Taxes, and among
others those granted to the Clergy by his Predecessors, which the Emperor
excuses by the pressing difficulty of the present time, though it is evident
that granting or withdrawing such favors, are mere Acts of the Prerogative
Royal. The third Law placed in the Novels of Theodosius, belongs not to him but
to Valentinian the third, directed to his Prefect in France, and is of a
peculiar Nature from all the other Laws in the whole Code, being indeed not so
properly an Imperial as a Papal Rescript, and extorted by the Importunity of an
assuming Pope to justify his own Proceedings. There had been an old Contest
between the Bishops of Arles and Vienna for the Metropolitical Superiority, for
though it had always belonged to Vienna, yet Patroclus a very ill Man getting
into the Bishopric of Arles by Court-tampering, usurps it to himself, and is
backed in it by Pope Zosimus with the pretended Authority of ancient Canons. But
this is contradicted by his two next Successors, Boniface and Celestine upon
the very same Plea of ancient Canons: And that was the custom of all Popes at
that time, following the dance of Innocent the first, to make the Canons speak
what themselves pleased, and when they pleased to speak Contradictions. But in
the time of Leo the great, Hilarious Bishop of Arles and a mettlesom Man, would
not be content with his Metropolitical Authority, but sets up for a Patriarchal
Supremacy over all France and Independency upon Rome. This transports that
proud and jealous Pope beyond all bounds of revenge and outrage, and upon it he
writes in great fury to the Bishops of France, to depose him from his
Metropolitical Authority, and cancels all Acts of his Government in that
capacity. And as for the Grant of his Predecessor Zosimus to that See, he has
the confidence to pretend that it was only temporary and personal, though by it
he imposed as grossly upon Zosimus, as Zosimus himself did upon the ancient
Canons; and to ratify all, he procures this Imperial Rescript commanding
absolute Obedience to all his Commands, and in effect erecting an universal
Supremacy for him. But the matter, the style, and the spirit of the Rescript,
too much betray the rough hand of Leo himself in it. And it was no hard Matter
for so bold a Man to extort what he pleased from such a softly Prince. And yet
this very same Man, when Hilarious dyed, got Ravennius a very weak Man to
succeed him, and then restored the Metropolitical Authority to him and his See:
and thus did these Men set up and pull down as served the ends of their own
Ambition, and all out of pure Reverence to the ancient Canons. And to speak a
plain truth plainly, they merely lied themselves into their universal
Supremacy, as I shall show more at large not only from this instance of Arles,
but from two other great transactions on foot at the very same time, that is,
their Usurpation over the Churches of Africa and Illyricum. And though in the
first, they were shamefully baffled by the Africans, who exposed their gross
and scandalous Forgeries to the World, yet it shows that they trusted to
nothing so much at the time of their usurpation as the Sovereign Power of
lying. But to keep to our present business. His next Law is to confirm all the
Rescripts of former Emperors Pagan as well as Christian, Tit. 2.
to outlaw the Manichees. This Law was made upon the discovery and confession
of some very foul matter by one of the Ringleaders of that Sect, what the Fact
was, it was not thought decent to express, and it is only in general thus
described. Quorum incesta perversitas Religionis nomine Lupanaribus quoque
ignota vel pudenda committit, such a foul incest under pretext of Religion that
it was not so much as named in the public Stews. His next Law is against the
Robbers of Tombs and Sepulchers, it is a very severe one, and one of the most
eloquent for the style in the whole Collection. Servants and poor People
convicted of it are punished with death. Men of fortune with forfeiture of half
their Estates and all their Honors, Clergymen with deposition from their
Orders, and perpetual banishment. And as for all Governors, that shall neglect
the execution of this Law, they forfeit both Estate and Honor. His last Law is
to regulate the Bishops Courts, and to revive some Laws of former Emperors
relating to the Clergy, it gives the Bishops power of Judicature, praeeunte
vinculo compromissi, by way of Arbitration, but no otherwise. It allows Bishops
and Presbyters to appear in the Civil Courts by their Proxies for all Causes
unless Personal Crimes, and lastly it prescribes what Persons may, or may not
be received into Holy Orders, according to several forementioned Rescripts of
former Emperors.

. XV. But the most material Law of this reign is still behind, and that is the
Law to confirm the Decrees of the great Council of Ephesus, that was both
called and ratified by Theodosius the Younger, which I have reserved to this
place, to treat of it by it self, because as it is the greatest transaction of
this Reign, so is it another eminent Instance of the right Concurrence of the
Powers of Church and State in the determination of Ecclesiastical
Controversies, and enacting of Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons. All the old
Schisms and Heresies being vanquished by the Methods already described, such is
the wantonness of Humane Wit, that it fell upon contriving new Conceits, for
its own sport and entertainment. There is such a natural Vanity in some Men's
Tempers, that they can scarce live without singularities and innovations; from
whence comes that necessity of Heresies, that St Paul speaks of; they are the
certain effects of Pride and Pedantry, and as long as there are and will be
born in all Ages Men of that Complexion, nothing can hinder them from venting
their own novel and homespun Metaphysics. And therefore it cannot be expected
that the Church should be altogether free from Heresies, for that cannot be
done without an alteration of Humane Nature, it is enough that it is furnished
with means to stop and cure the Disease, whenever it breaks out in the body of
the Church, as we have seen great numbers of Botches dispersed and reduced to
nothing by the right exercise and concurrence of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. And after this time it is observable that Heresies were not so
long-lived, for now the Method of their cure being understood by experience
(which when all is done, is the best Art of Physic) it was so soon dispatched,
that they rarely survived their Author; and after one sentence effectually
executed, they scarce ever put the Government to a second trouble, as will
appear by the following History. Soc. lib. 7. c. 29. Evag. l. 1. c. 2.
Nestorius being chosen to the swelling Throne of Constantinople, by Theodosius
the Younger out of the Church of Antioch, to avoid or rather end a violent
competition at home, he brings along with him one Anastasius, a Presbyter, his
inseparable Friend and Companion, Annot. in Evag. l. 1. c. 2.
and Valesius is pleased to be so critical as to affirm that he was his
Syncellus, an Office in the Palaces of Patriarchs, who had power to choose
what Presbyters they pleased, to cohabit with them, who were therefore styled
Syncelli or Concellanei. But I doubt this learned Man here derives this Office
too high, for we find no footsteps of any such State in the Records of the
Church till after the Institution of Patriarchates by the Council of Calcedon,
and then we have frequent mention of it in History, though nothing but deep
silence before. But whatever he were, whereas the Title of (...), or Mother of
God had been so familiarly given to the Virgin Mary by the Ancients, that it
was by custom become her proper Title and always annexed to her name, against
this Anastasius inveighs in a Sermon, and affirms that she ought not to be
styled (...), the Mother of God, but (...) the Mother of Man. But the People
having been accustomed to the Word, put themselves into Tumults in its defense,
whereas Nestorius in stead of correcting his Presbyter, justifies his Doctrine,
and to mollify the roughness of the expression, and appease the Dissension,
whilst some cried up the word (...), and others the word (...), invents the
middle word (...), as himself gives an account of his own Opinion in his
Apology to the Prefect of Egypt in the time of his Banishment. Apud Evag. l. 1.
cap. 7.
And to justify his Conceit, he starts a new Notion, that our Savior was
compounded of two Persons, one Divine, and one Humane, that only the humane was
born of the Virgin Mary, to which the Divine was united after his Nativity.
These Novelties put the whole City into an Uproar, and he being a Man of a
furious and a fiery Temper, instead of appeasing the Tumult, as any Man of
discretion would have done, like a mad Man he resolves to encounter, and
overcome it by the mere strength of Fury and Violence, and this raises the
Contest into perfect Outrage, so that as Socrates truly enough describes it,
Lib. 7. c. 32.33.
it was turned into a Midnight scuffle, in which both Parties fought in the
dark, not knowing where they aimed their Blows, or what they affirmed, or what
they denied, the People on one side unjustly charging Nestorius with the
Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus; and Nestorius on the other side being an
ignorant unlearned Man, a mere popular Preacher, and altogether unacquainted
with the Writings of the Ancients, and for that reason rashly rejecting this
old Word, as an upstart Novelty, and being withal a very proud and supercilious
Man, he would rather run himself into any wild Assertions, than confess any the
least Mistake. This seems to have been the true and impartial account of the
rise of this Heresy, though Baronius according to his great Faculty of
straining all things into far-fetcht Guesses, Ad Annum 428.
is zealous to derive it from Paulus Samosatenus. But where or whenever it
first began, the noise of it at this time flies from Constantinople, Cyrilli
Epis^* 1*
into foreign Parts. And first Cyril of Alexandria endeavors to antidote his
own Province against the Poison, that some of his Monks had already sucked in
from Nestorius his Agents, which he sent into other Parts to propagate his
Heresy. After this to check it before it spread too far, he writes to the
Emperor Theodosius, and to the Empresses Pulcheria and Eudocia distinct and
large confutations of it. Act. Council. Ephesians. part. 1. cap. 3*4.5.
But Nestorius was a Courtier, and no doubt so much the dearer to the Emperor
as his Creature, for he rather created, then made him Bishop of that great
Throne; And having the Emperor's Ear, he exasperates him against Cyril,
(though he named him not) as appears from the sour Answer that he returned him,
Ibid. c. 31.
in which he charges him as a disturber of the peace of the Church, loads him
with envy at the Honor that Nestorius had by his savor, and interprets it as
a reflection upon himself, to prefer a man so high, that Cyril represents so
ill, and looks upon his writing three several Letters, to himself, his Queen,
and his Sister, as a design to make division among them; and lastly tells him,
That it is saucy and pragmatical for a man at so great a distance to inform him
of his own affairs, and what was done at his own doors. But after all he
graciously forgives all these Misdemeanors, and refers the examination of the
cause to a Council of Bishops, who he says were the only fit Judges of it, and
to their determination he promised to stand, and he was as good as his word.
After these Attempts upon their Majesty's, Ibid. c. 6.
Cyril tryes in the next place to reclaim the Man himself by a Civil Letter, in
which he desires him for the love of God to stop such wild Propositions that
were vented abroad under pretense of his Authority, as that Christ was not God,
but only the Organ and Vehicle of the Divinity, and tells him that the Church
was put into disturbance by such loose, profane and licentious Expressions,
and not by any thing (as Nestorius had been pleased to suggest) that himself
had done to oppose them, and so passionately expostulates with him, that he
should be so unkind and so unjust as to load him to their Imperial Majesty's,
with the odious Character of the Master of Disturbance. Ibid. c. 7.
To all which he returns him a very short and surly Answer, and that he might
not interpret any Answer at all for too great a Civility, he tells him over and
over, that it was extorted from him by the importunity of his Messenger Lampo.
At this time some of Cyril's Clergy that he had deposed for their Scandalous
Misdemeanors and Debaucheries, Cap. 8*
endeavor to make this Breach wider by carrying false Stories and Calumnies
against him to Constantinople, but that for the present Cyril sets aside, and
entreats him with all manner of Friendship and Civility, as he loved the Truth
of God and the Peace of his Church, to consider the strange Consequences of his
Opinion. Cap. 9*
To this he prevails with himself at length to return him an haughty Answer,
and scorning (as he expresses it) to take notice of the contumelious and
scurrillous Language of his wonderful Letters, proceeds to dispute the Point
with great Contempt of his Ignorance, but much greater exposing of his own. And
at last assures him that all the ill Stories that had been brought to
Alexandria from Constantinople, were carried by some Clergymen, that had been
deposed for no less Crime then the Manichaean Heresy. And that was not
improbable, for it is evident through the whole Story of the Christian Church,
that all Schisms and Animosities were ever promoted by the obnoxious Clergy,
that so in the Tumult themselves might escape Scot-free from the severity of
its Discipline. But these heats not being so well understood at their first
Eruption, Cap. 10.
some of St. Cyril's friends write to him to forbear his warm and vehement
Contests with Nestorius, in Answer to which he removes the blame of all from
himself upon Nestorius, who had justified Dorotheus, that had denounced before
him a public Anathema against all that affirmed the Virgin-Mary to be (...),
which he says was no less then Anathematising both the Present and the Ancient
Church, whereas on the other side himself had Acted with so much temper, that
he had hitherto forborne to Anathematise their Assertion, and had only advised
them to forbear damning all the Fathers. But because he continued Vigorous and
Resolute in his Prosecution of this Profane Novelty, Cap. 11.
they spread abroad Reports, that it was done out of mere Envy to the Greatness
of Nestorius, and his own love of Contention, of which he being informed by a
moderate friend, he protests that by his natural humor of all things in the
World he abhors nothing more then wrangling, and that for the sake of Peace, he
would freely sacrifice all that is dear to him, but the Truth of God; and that,
as for Nestorius, though he had received many injuries from him, he was so far
from bearing him any ill Will, that what he did was out of kindness to him,
only to put him upon clearing himself from those errors in the Faith, that were
vulgarly, and he hoped falsely charged upon him, which if he would be pleased to
do, himself should be very glad of his Friendship. But the Quarrel advances,
whilst Anastasius pretending Peace undertakes to prove in a Discourse before
the Clergy of Constantinople, that Cyril in his Book against him was at last of
the same Opinion with himself. Cap. 12.
Upon this Cyril writes to them to convict him of manifest leasing and
impudence, Cap. 13.
and upon that the Clergy of Constantinople draw up a Schedule to parallel the
Assertions of Nestorius with the Doctrines of Paulus Sam^satenus, as the Father
of this Heresy, (from whence Suidas, Ad (...) 428. p. 530.
and from him Baronius rashly suppose him to have descended of his Offspring)
and when they had so done, they by common consent publish it in their Churches,
which could not but be an unpardonable Provocation to his Proud and Violent
Spirit, and indeed it was a just ground of displeasure against them, it being a
false and unjust Charge against their own Bishop. But Cyril finding by his
furious temper that he was not to be reclaimed, endeavors to engage all the
Bishops of the most eminent Churches against him, Cap. 14.
and first he writes to Celestine the great Bishop of Rome, to inform him of
the whole matter and beg his Assistance and Advice, Celestine immediately takes
very high offense at Nestorius, Condemns him in Council, Cap. 15.
and by the Authority of the Apostolic See deposes him, if he repent not
within 10 days, and writes to John of Antioch, Rufus of Thessalonica, Juv^nal
of Jerusalem, and Flavianus of Philippi to desire their Concurrence to his
Sentence. And no doubt he took the Complaint so much the more greedily, as
being glad of any opportunity to take down the Proud and Aspiring Prelates of
that See, of whom he had too much reason to be jealous at that time, when they
had made several Attempts to mount the Throne of the Imperial City above the
Apostolical Chair it self. But now Nestorius perceiving the Clouds to gather,
and that a Storm was like to overtake him by Cyril's Activity, he follows him
with his Letters to Celestine, though pretended to be written upon another
occasion, Cap. 16, 17.
viz. Concerning the Pelagian Bishops that had been cast out of the Western
Church for their Heresy, but were then at Constantinople filling all Peoples
Ears with Complaints of their unjust Sentence, and daily soliciting both the
Emperor and himself for restitution, and therefore desires to let him know
their Crime, that he may rid both his Royal Master and himself from their
Importunity. After this his own Controversy is brought in as it were by way of
Postscript, to prevent false Reports against him, and soon after he sends him
larger discourses in his own Justification. Upon which he returns him a very
stately and supercilious Answer (as if he were particularly pleased in
insulting over a Bishop of Constantinople) cutting him off from the Communion
of the Catholic Church, Cap. 18.
allowing him only 10 days from the time of the Receipt of the Instrument, to
redeem himself from the Fatal Decree, by a public and open Repentance. And as
for the Cause of the Pelagians, he rates him very smartly for giving them any
Countenance or Entertainment, and reflects suspicious of that Heresy upon him
for his presuming to interpose in their behalf, however it is not time for him
to intercede for others, but to take speedy care of himself. Cap. 19.
This being done, he certifies his Sentence to the Clergy and People of
Constantinople, letting them know that if Nestorius did not recant within 10
days, they should no longer own him for their Bishop. And the same thing is
done by his several Epistles to the forementioned Bishops, all which is
seconded by Cyril, who was glad to fortify himself with the Authority of the
Apostolic See, and therefore he sends by the same Messenger that first brought
Celestine's Letter to himself, a particular account to them and to Acacius of
Beraea of all the fair means that had been used for reclaiming Nestorius before
they proceeded to this severity, who all agree with him against Nestorius, Cap.
23.
as it is evident by Acacius his Answer to it, this he particularly assures him
for himself, and John of Antioch, who upon it writes a very kind and prudent
Letter to his old Friend Nestorius, Cap. 25.
conjuring him by all the Ties of Friendship, not to disturb his own and the
Churches Peace by contending about a word, whilst himself professed to own the
sense of it. And withal tells him, that if he would suffer himself to be
persuaded to disclaim the Controversy, it would be so far from the dishonor
of a Recantation, that it would be an eminent Act of Wisdom and Greatness of
Mind, to forego Contentions and his own Opinions, that were not necessary to
the Faith, for the Peace of the Church, and this he writes as the unanimous
sense of diverse Bishops that were his Friends. This Letter might probably have
made some impression upon his great Spirit, had not Cyril spoiled all by his
own over eagerness, for now finding himself so well backed, he would not be
satisfied with the mere quitting his opinion, but he must be obliged to
anathematise it too, and accordingly tenders him 12 Anathema's to subscribe,
which though they were Theological Verities, were, I think, too nice to be
imposed as Articles of Faith and necessary conditions of the Peace of the
Church. And I am withal very apt to think, that if this new Imposition had not
made the breach wider, it might have been made up, for both Nestorius and
Anastasius seemed by this time not to have been very fond of their Cause, if
they could any way have quitted it with honor. But this new Imposition of
Cyril so enflames his Choleric Nature, that he now forgets all Temper, and
encounters Anathema's with Anathema's, and throws himself into an utter
incapacity of Reconciliation upon the Terms of Pope Celestine, and that which
is worse, it gave him the advantage and reputation of a Party, for John of
Antioch was so offended at their rigor, Liberati Brev. cap. 4.
that it made him side with Nestorius against Cyril: and it was this that
enflamed the Zeal of Theodoret, who as appears by his Epistles to Sporadius and
Irenaeus, was before and after this time no Friend to the opinions of
Nestorius, but an irreconcilable Enemy to Cyril and his Anathema's, and
therefore though he were one of those Bishops that had subscribed John of
Antioch's Epistle to Nestorius, he could never after brook this Imposition of
Cyril. But now Nestorius having gained this advantage by this over Pursuit,
rallies with greater fierceness, and rages with greater Cruelty then ever,
especially against his own Clergy, and upon it they Address to the Emperor with
a Petition for Redress against his oppressions, Cap. 30.
and for a general Council to settle the Peace of the Church, which he
immediately grants, and so Summons a Council to Ephesus in the 24th Year of his
Reign, and in the Year of our Lord 431. And sends Candidianus one of his great
Officers to the Synod to keep good order in it, and not, Cap. 35.
as he declares in his Letter to the Council, to intermeddle with the
determination of Questions or Controversies, that should be debated about
matters of the Christian Faith, because it is not lawful for any man, that is
not admitted into the Order of the Holy Bishops, to interpose himself in
Ecclesiastical Affairs and Debates: And so bids them proceed to a peaceable
decision of the present Controversy, and no other, and as he gives them full
Liberty and Freedom of Debate, so he assures them that whatever they agreed
upon, he would ratify. The Bishops met at the time appointed to the number of
above 200, M. Mercator, In praefat. ad Symb. Theod.
who himself was present there, says precisely 274. Only Capreolus Bishop of
Carthage writes to the Council to have the African Bishops excused, who could
not Travel at that time because of the Incursion of the Vandals over the whole
Country: so that there were none wanting but only John of Antioch and his
Eastern Bishops, and after he had made the Council wait 16 days, he at last
sends them word not to stay for him, because his coming would be altogether
uncertain. It was easy for him to foresee which way the Council would incline,
and therefore he was unwilling to be present at the Condemnation of his old
Friend. And so the Council suggest to the Emperor, that he sided with Nestorius
(...), Act. 5.
(...), or as they express it in their Letter to Celestine, that he avoided the
Council either out of Friendship to Nestorius, because he had been a Clerk of
his Church* or because he was overcome by the persuasions of others, though the
true reason was the disgust that he had taken against the Anathema's, and a
Compact between him and Nestorius by them to disturb and perplex the
Proceedings of the Council, as will appear by the Event. For when the Council
proceeded upon it, Nestorius refuses to appear till the coming of John of
Antioch, but they after 3 Summons and 3 days patience, go on to Judgment, and
upon hearing the whole Evidence, he is Condemned and Deposed by the Unanimous
Vote of the Council, and his Condemnation is proclaimed through the City by the
public Crier, and fixed up in Writing in the Chief Places of Resort to the
great joy of the People. And an Account of their Proceedings is with all
possible speed certified to the Emperor, beseeching his Majesty to keep the
Condemned Doctrine of Nestorius out of all Churches, cause his Books to be
burnt in all places with such Penalties upon Offenders, as he should think fit
in his Royal displeasure to inflict, and so the Apostolical Faith will ^e
protected and preserved by your Imperial Power. But this Letter was delayed by
Candidianus who sided with Nestorius against the Council, which Cyril
suspecting informs the Clergy of Constantinople of the* real truth to prevent
false News, and it was but necessary, for before the Letter came to the
Emperor's hands, Act. 4.
Nestorius and ten other Bishops that stuck to him had sent him a fair Story of
the illegal and violent proceedings of the Council.

But as for all Letters from the Council, Act. 6.
they were diligently intercepted, and as the Clergy of Constantinople inform
the Council, all ships were searched, and the highways beset, so that no
Person that came from the Council was suffered to pass to the City, whilst
correspondence was free and open to the Enemy, and this was done with that
strange diligence that the Messengers who brought the Letter from the Council
to them, could find no other way of conveighing it into the City then by a
begger-Man, that had it closed up within a walking Cane.

Liberati Brev. c. 6.
But when John of Antioch comes to Ephesus a few days after the Sentence, he
protests against it, requiring them upon pain of Deposition and Excommunication
to acquiesce in the Nicene Faith, to piece no Novelties to it, and to reject
Cyril's heretical Anathema's, and by the encouragement and persuasion of
Candidianus, rakes together a little Council of forty three Bishops, whereof
the greatest part had been deposed, and some were merely titular, for
re-hearing the Cause. And here he is solemnly informed by Candidianus himself,
that he was ordered by the Emperor not to open his Commission but in full
Council, and that when Cyril and Memnon and their Associates combined to meet
before the arrival of the Eastern Bishops* he forbid them in the Emperor's
Name, but they forced him to comply for fear of a Sedition, and that he left
the Council and protested against their Proceedings, and that when he found the
sentence of Deposition set up against Nestorius, he caused it to be pulled
down, and knew nothing of it till he was informed by its publication in the
Marketplace. And yet being farther asked whether they entered upon the
Examination of the merits of the Cause before they past sentence, he replys
(like a raw and unexperienced Evidence) that they made no Inquiry at all, and
this he attests as an Eye witness, though he had all along declared, that he
was absent from the Council, and knew nothing of the Sentence till it was
published in the City.

But though the contradiction of the Testimony did not convict it self of
falsehood, yet the Acts of the Council would, the particular Votes and Debates
of the several Bishops, as they were taken by the Notaries, standing there upon
perpetual Record. But upon th^s the Conventicle de^ose Cyril and Memnon,
anathematise the Anath^ma's, and all that refuse to anathemati^e them, and
certify to the Emperor the deposition of Cyril and Memnon in the name of the
Council. Though Socrates is here so far mistaken as to impute that to
Nestorius, Lib. 7. c. 34.
which was now done by John of Antioch, viz. that himse^f and his sma^l Council
of 10, had deposed Cyril and Memnon immediat^ly upon the Sentence of the
Council against him. But the Schismatics having charmed the Emperor by their
Letter, and by his President Candidianus who sung the Chorus to their Song,
the^ sing over the same Tune in several Addresses to the Clergy, the Senate,
and the People of Constantinople, and to clinch all, to the Empress and
Princess Royal. But about this time arrived the ^ope's Legates with Letters
from his Holiness to the Council, that f^r the greater State are only to be
read in the Latin Tongue, and afterward by way of Condescension in the Greek at
the Petition of the Fathers, though they were writ^en in both Languages, this
was one of the most early Affectations of Lordly State in the Papacy. The next
day they require all the Acts of the Council to be read over, as their Master
Celestine had given them in command, which being done, they by the Sovereign
Authority of St. Peter and his Successors in the Apostolic See give validity
to the Sentence, without which state of the Papal Veult Le Roy, it could have
had no effect. But the Council were glad of their Concurrence, to balance it
against the opposition of John of Antioch, and upon it they write a second
Letter to the Emperor, Act. 3.
informing him of the agreement both of the Eastern and Western Church in the
Sentence against Nestorius, and request him not to credit the Letters, that
after the sentence of the Catholic Church so fully declared in Council, were
threatened to be sent abroad by some Men, tha^ preferred their friendship to
Nestorius before the Peace of the Church. After this Cyril and Memnon move the
Council to call John of Antioch to account for the injury that he had done to
them in their Deposition, and to the whole Council in controuling its sentence.
Upon this they send some of their number to cite John to appear, but by the
favor of Candidianus he has his Guards as well as Nestor^us, and by them the
Bishops are affronted and repulst, and finally refusing to appear, he and his
Associates are condemned and deposed, and their deposition certified to the
Emperor and Pope Celestine. But the Schismatics had the Courtiers to back
them, and therefore are so far from submitting to the Sentence of the Council,
that they both defy that, and depose the Council it self, and send their
Complaints to the Emperor of the violent courses used against them as if they
were in continual danger of their Lives, and ply the Courtiers with dismal
stories of barbarous usage, beg them by all the motives of Humanity to rescue
them from their dismal condition. But their complaints to the Emperor being
vouch't by Candidianus, the Emperor sends Letters to the Council by Palladius
to null all their Acts, for which the Schismatics you may be sure, return
their letter of humble thanks, applauding the Wisdom and Goodness of his
Imperial Majesty. But the Council finding hereby that the Emperor had been
abused with false tales, write to him by Palladius to assure his Majesty of the
truth of those Acts that they had sent him, and whereas Candidianus had given
him other Information out of his friendship to Nestorius, they assure him that
he was altogether ignorant of the Proceedings of the Council, and had not so
much as ever seen the Books in which their Acts were entered. That the Bishops,
who joined with Nestorius were either such as had been already deposed, or such
as knew themselves obnoxious to the Discipline of the Church, and so must have
been deposed, though they had continued with the Council. And as for their
complaints of Violence they were so far from truth, that all the Guards
attended Nestorius and his Party, that Irenaeus broke into the Council in a
tumultuary way, and with Military force to the great danger of their Lives, and
humbly petition his Majesty that five of the Council might attend him to give
him farther Information in the presence of Candidianus. Upon this Irenaeus, who
was a Courtier, that accompanied Candidianus to the Council out of mere zeal
for Nestorius, is posted away to Constantinople by the schismatical Party with
fresh Certificates of the wild and disorderly behavior of Cyril and Memnon.
Neither was he remiss in his Embassy, and so improved their Tales by word of
Mouth, that though he had been prevented by Messengers from the Council, who
came three days before him, and had p^epossest the greatest part of the People,
and staggered the Emperor himself, yet he so satisfied him with his Relation of
the whole Matter, that he confirmed the deposition of Cyril and Memnon, as well
as Nestorius. And sends John his Comes Sacrorum, another favourer of Nestorius,
to see it put in execution, who finding the City in a Tumult about those three
Persons, he commits them all to prison, and then takes upon him to pre^ch Peace
and Reconciliation to the Bishops, and censures them very severely for being so
implacable in their Quarrels, as he is pleased to call their resolution for the
Orthodox Faith, and the Discipline of the Church. And setting aside the cause
of truth in the case, it was an unpardonable Affront to the Discipline of the
Church, that when the Controversy had been determined, and the Heretics
deposed by the sentence of so great a Council, this unlearned Courtier should
presume to set aside their Authority, and as if they stood upon equal ground
after the sentence of the Church was passed, advise both Parties to shake hands
and be friends, and because the Bishops scorned to put such a childish slur
upon their own Authority, and the discipline of the Church, as to admit
Offenders to communion without Canonical satisfaction, call them implacable
Prelates. Act. 6.
But now the Council finding that both the Emperor and themselves had been
abused, in that the Letter of the Nestorians to the Emperor about the
deposition of Cyril and Memnon was written in the name of the Council, and the
Emperors Letter to confirm their deposition as well as that of Nestorius, was
directed both to the Council and the Conventicle, as if they had been but one
body of Men, they write two Letters to him, to inform him of the Imposture, but
they are intercepted by the Courtiers, who still persist to lay all the blame
of all these heats and disorders upon the Council it self. In which Office
Count John was most busy at his return home, thinking himself affronted by the
Council, when they would not prostitute the sacred Discipline of the Church to
his illiterate device of Peace and Comprehension. But the Council having no
return from the Emperor to their Letters, and suspecting their suppression,
they write to the Clergy of Constantinople to inform the Emperor by Address of
all the Abuses that were put upon his Majesty and the Council. But this falls
short, for the next Letter that we have, is from the Clergy of Constantinople
to the Council, complaining of the want of Correspondence, all Passages both by
Sea and Land being blockt up, and declaring that they were ready to do any
service that the Council would be pleased to command them. By which the Council
perceive that the first came not to their lands, and therefore send a second to
the same effect, that came safe, and upon it they petition the Emperor, and
inform him of the true state of the whole Matter, and the Emperor being puzzled
with all these cross Stories, orders Commissioners from both Parties to repair
to Constantinople, that he might understand the real Truth of the Controversy.
Eight Commissioners are sent on each side, and the Legates of the Council are
commanded in their Instructions to insist upon the deposition of Nestorius, and
nothing else, as the Article of Peace. And the Legates from the Conventicle on
the other side are commanded to insist upon the abolition of Cyril's Anathema's
as Heretical, Schismatical, and unwarrantable Additions to the Nicene Faith.
But when they came, they were not admitted into the City for fear of Tumults by
the Monks, the Schismatics were dismiss't to Calcedon, and indeed the business
was over eight days before their arrival, when the Emperor understanding the
Cheat that had been hitherto put upon him, condemned Nestorius to perpetual
Banishment, and set Cyril and Memnon at liberty. And though the Legates of the
Conventicle press't him with three Petitions, one upon the neck of another for
a Conference, he would not for a long time grant it. But at last their
importunity prevails, and as themselves boast, they shock the Emperor, for tho
he would hear nothing in behalf of Nestorius, yet he was offended at Cyril's
Anathema's, that were represented with too much advantage by the adverse Party
as unwarrantable additions to the Nicene Faith, of which the Emperor was very
jealous, and that was the point that put him upon some Demur. Nestorius stood
condemned by him from the first sentence of the Council, but on the other side
Cyril's Anathema's were offensive, as his own private additions to the settled
Faith. And therefore Nestorius his Friends let fall his Cause, and only pursue
the condemnation of the Anathema's, and that Plea was too plausible with the
Emperor, for though they might be Theological Verities, they were no Articles
of Faith, not being expressed in the Nicene Creed, and yet so they were made by
being imposed upon the Church under the Penalty of an Anathema. And here stuck
the pinch of the Controversy all the time that it depended at Court, that the
Nestorians press't for the examination of the Anathema's, which the Cyrillians
at last endeavored to baulk, and insist only upon the Heresy and Condemnation
of Nestorius, and having the Emperor sure on their side in that point, they
were sure to carry the Cause at last, for he being tired with the Disputes
about the Anathema's, lets that Controversy fall, and only abets the Sentence
of the Council against Nestorius with his own sentence of banishment, and
commands the Bishops to choose a Successor into the Sea, who electing
Maximianus are dismissed without any determination of the other Controversy. And
as if the sentence of the Council and the Confirmation of the Emperor had been
invalid without it, Pope Celestine sends his Pontifical Rescript to confirm
all, by the Authority of St. Peter. Longius quidem sumus positi, Act. part. 3.
cap. 20.
sed per s^licitudinem totum propius intuemur. Omnes habet beati Petri Apostoli
cura presents, non nos ante Deum nostrum de hoc possumus excusare quod scimus.

In all this Contest the greatest Looser next to Nestorius, who lost all, was
John of Antioch, who being run down in Council, his confining Adversaries take
that advantage to beat him out of his late Usurpations. The Bishops of Cyprus,
over whom he had extended his Jurisdiction, make their Complaints to the
Council, by whose Decree he is expelled the Island. And whereas he had usurpt
over the Provinces of Arabia and Phaenice, upon which Juvenal the new Bishop of
Jerusalem, a brisk and ambitious Man had cast his Eye and made some inroads of
Usurpation, he now thinks by the advantage of the animosity between Cyril and
John of Antioch to have it confirmed to him in Council, and this was the thing
that made him so active there, for which reasons he was nominated one of the
eight Commissioners to the Emperor. Which Design is plainly suggested to the
Emperor, by John and his Party in their first Petition from Calcedon. It is
evident, Sir, (say they) that some among them have contrived and carried on
this wicked design for their own ends, and your Majesty will see them, when
they have carried through their Treachery, to divide the Spoils of the Church
among themselves. And though Juvenal of Jerusalem took upon him to ordain some
of of us, we held our peace, notwithstanding that we ought to have contended
for the Canons, lest we should have seemed to contend for our own Ambition.
Neither are we ignorant of his Designs and Devices at this very time upon the
second Phaenice and Arabia. So that it seems he had made some overtacts of his
design in Council, but Cyril detested and damned the Motion, as Pope Leo in his
16 th Epistle tells us, That Cyril himself informed him by Letter. But though
he could not carry it in Council, he got at last both those Provinces, and the
three Palestines beside, and kept them till the Council of Calcedon, when both
Parties, being conscious to themselves of their having no right to the whole
Child, consent to its division, the three Palestines falling to Juvenal;
Phaenice and Arabia to Maximus of Antioch.

But though the Nestorian Controversy was ended, the quarrel was not, that run
very high between those two great Prelates, Cyril of Alexandria and John of
Antioch, and their greatness drew great numbers of Bishops after them to the
great disorder and disturbance of the Church, and great grief of the Emperor,
Liberati Brev. cap. 8.
who therefore advises with Maximian and other Bishops how to redress the
mischief; they answer, that there is no remedy but John of Antioch's
subscribing the condemnation of Nestorius and his Heresy. Act. part. 3. cap.
24.
Upon this the Emperor writes to John by Aristolaus commanding him to meet
Cyril at Nicomedia, and be reconciled to him upon pain of his displeasure. And
this Letter he seconds with another to the famous Monk Simeon Stylites, Acacius
Bishop of Beraea, Ibid. c. 25, 26.
and the Bishops of all the Eastern Provinces to persuade John to return to the
Peace and Unity of the Church. Upon this a Council meets at Beraea, and agree
upon this Proposal, that they would condemn Nestorius upon condition, that
Cyril would call in all his own Writings about the Controversy. But this being
refused, and John being wrought upon, C. 27.
either by the Emperor's threatenings or the importunity of his friends,
declares his assent to the Decree of the Ephesine Council, Anathematises the
Heresy of Nestorius, subscribes his deposition, and approves the ordination of
Maximinian. But for the greater solemnity of the business, and to salve the
dishonor of an absolute submission, he sends Paul Bishop of Emesa as his Legate
to Alexandria to treat with Cyril about terms of Peace, and sends by him a
Confession of Faith, which if Cyril would accept, he was his humble Servant.
Now the Confession being Orthodox, and having nothing in it of his own, but
only the form of Words, it was as easily accepted as offered: and so after all
this contention about nothing but mutual misunderstanding, C. 34.
are they at last reconciled, as both Cyril objects to the Antiochians in his
Letter of Reconciliation, and Theodoret to the Cyrillians in his Letter to
Andrew the Monk. But though they were agreed, the Contest is still kept up by
some Men's zeal, and other Men's malice. The Nestorians finding themselves every
where excluded the Church by this Union, C. 35.
spread abroad reports that Cyril had embraced the Nestorian Faith, and Letters
are forged in his name condemning the Council of Ephesus, and some new fanatic
Heretics plead his Authority for their own foolish Novelties. And some over
zealous Men of his own Party accuse him of too much compliance with the
Heretics, and this cost Cyril some trouble and time to clear himself as well
from the jealousy of his Friends, as from the spite of his Enemies. And so was
the Catholic Church at length restored to Peace and Unity, and as Cyril
relates, C. 44.
most of the Nestorians repenting of their Heresy, were upon their submission
restored to the Catholic Communion. C. 41.4^.
And to perfect the work Pope Sixtus writes to both the Bishops to commend them
both for his white Boys, quia ad beatum Apostolum Petrum fraternitas universa
convenit. And thus the Emperor having at last compast the Restitution of the
Churches Peace, for its lasting security, he enacts a Rescript in the year 435
to root the Nestorian Heresy out of all his Dominions. But why no sooner, says
Gothofred? Because, says he, the Emperor might suppose that the Heretics had
been reclaimed by the sentence of the Council, but now finding that they
continued to spread abroad their Books and Opinions, he thought it high time to
stop the mischief by this severe Rescript. This may be true, though it is mere
guess, but if this learned Man had observed the contest between Cyril and John
of Antioch, and that it was 2 or 3 years after the Council before the Emperor
could gain John and his Eastern Bishops entirely from the Party of Nestorius,
he would have found a very good reason why this Rescript was not sooner
published, viz. because till then, Affairs were not ripe for it, and if it had
been published before this strong Party had been taken off, it might have
tempted them to join with the Heresy in good earnest. But now when they had
declared against it, and Nestorius his own small Party was left alone, it was
seasonable to prevent its growth by the Execution of this smart Law, and it did
the work effectually, for though for a time the Ghost of the Heresy skulkt up
and down in other shapes and other languages, yet it could never after get so
much courage or confidence, as to appear in its own form in public. The
Rescript consists of three Parts. First it commands, That the followers of
Nestorius should be called by no other name than the nickname of Simonians,
from Simon Magus, as if he were the Author of their Sect, as Constantine the
Great named the Arians Porphyrians. Secondly, that all his Books and all other
Books whatsoever contrary to the Decrees of the Ephesine Council should be
brought in, and publicly burnt. Thirdly, that they should be debarred of all
Meeting Places either in Public or Private, with the Penalty of Proscription
of Goods upon all Offenders against any branch of this Law. And because after
this, some Men published the same Opinions in new obscure and ambiguous Terms,
and indeavor'd to revive them under the Authority of some of the Ancients, V.
Liberat^ Breviar. c. 10.
particularly Theodorus Mopsuestenus, and Diodorus Tarsensis in their Writings
against Eunomius and Apollinaris, he publishes another Rescript in the year 448
against all such Attempts under the same Penalties. The execution of both which
Rescripts, being injoined in good earnest by the Praetorian Praefects upon
their Judges and Underofficers, soon did their own work. And thus ended the
Council and the Heresy together. And things might have been much sooner and
much more easily settled, had they not been perplexed, partly by the
over-eagerness of Cyril in imposing his Anathema's as Articles of Faith, which
made John of Antioch and his Party fly off, so that he was forced to quit that
imposition, before they could be reconciled. But chiefly by the dishonesty of
the Courtiers, who took part with the Heretics against the Authority of the
Church, and abused the Emperor with false tales and reports, but otherwise all
the proceedings in this Matter were fair and regular: the Controversy was
determined by the judgment of the Church, and the judgment of the Church
abetted by the Power of the Empire, and that is the true and proper concurrence
of both Jurisdictions in framing Ecclesiastical Laws.

. XVI. The Nestorian Heresy being broke and vanquished by the Authority of the
Ephesine Council, and the assistance of the Imperial Power, the Church enjoyed
Peace for the space of eighteen years, and governed it self by its own
Provincial Synods, without the need of any concurrence from the Civil State,
till the fiery Zeal of Abbot Eutyches, an over-driving stickler against
Nestorius, broke out in new Combustions, who out of too fierce and eager
opposition to the exploded Heresy, as it usually happens to Men of furious
Tempers, runs headlong into the contrary extreme. So that whereas Nestorius
held that the Divinity and Humanity in our Savior were two distinct Persons as
well as Natures, he teaches that though they were two distinct Natures before
the Incarnation, yet after it they were blended into one. Epist. ad ^ulcber. 11.
And for this dull and absurd Metaphysics of a thick-skull'd Monk (or as Pope
Leo calls it, Error qui de imperitia magis quam de versutia natus est* not a
whimsey of subtilty but dullness) must the Christian World be set in Flames and
Ashes rather then part with the honor of the deep Invention, so that it
brought much more perplexing trouble and disturbance to the Christian Church
then the Nestorian Dream. For though that was not overcome without great
difficulty through the Treachery of the Eunuchs and the Courtiers, yet
Theodosius being now grown old and desirous of ease, he submitted to their
Power, especially the Eunuch Chrysaphius, who as he was his particular
Favorite, so was he Eutyches his particular Friend, and he so managed the
Emperor as Eusebius did Constantius, and Eudoxius Valens, that instead of
assisting the Church with his Imperial Power, he oppressed and opposed it. From
whence it was that during all his Reign, it could never cope with this Heresy,
though by the good providence of God it was effectually vanquished under his
Successor Marcian, who came to the Crown both by the Marriage of Pulcheria
Sister of Theodosius, and the Choice of the Senate and the Army; one of the
greatest Princes in the Imperial Succession, and the man that next to
Constantine and Theodosius might have deserved the Surname of Great
Marcellinus Comes in his Character of Theodosius. Omnibus Orientalibus
Principibus praeponendus, nisi quod Marcianum tertium post se principem
imitatorem habuerit.
. A Prince of great Conduct, Courage, Prudence, and Piety, a Lover of Justice
and Honesty, a strict observer of the Laws of the Church and the Empire, and
who by his wise management left all things in such a quiet posture, as perhaps
no other Reign can equal, when the Successor came in, not by Inheritance but
Election.

And therefore I shall give the most exact account that I can, of the
Ecclesiastical Transactions of his Reign, it being so clear an Exemplification
of my design, to show the right and the wrong ways of exerting the Civil Power
in Matters of the Church. In the Year 449, Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople,
who succeeded P^oclus, that succeeded Maximianus, held a Council of the (...)
or the Bishops then Resident in the City, for which reason in the Acts of the
Council, it is called (...), the s^journing Synod, according to the new and
corrupt Custom of the Bishops of that City upon their Usurpation over the
Rights of Metropolitans, to receive Appeals from the Legal Sentence, and
determine them in the Synod of these Indwelling Bishops, who attended at Court
for their own Affairs and Preferments. A device that the Bishops of
Constantinople were forced to make use of, because that See being at first but
an inferior Bishopric, and subject to its own Metropolitan of H^raclea, it
could not pretend to a Power of Convening Synods, and therefore they seize this
opportunity of consulting with the Bishops Resident in the City without any
Summons, and this by Time and a little Custom became a standing Synod superior
to the Provincial Synods. And that was the particular occasion of this present
Council under Flavianus, viz. A Contest of Florentius the Metropolitan of the
Lydian Sardis, Liberat. Brev. c. 11.
with John and Cossinus two Bishops of his Province, who had Appealed from
their Metropolitan to Flavianus and his Court-Conclave, though they upon
hearing of the Cause were so civil (and that was not usual either with them or
any other Usurpers) as to judge it on the side of the Metropolitan. But that
matter being fairly and easily dispatched, Actio prima.
Eusebius the Bishop of Dorylaeum a City of Phrygia Salutaris, and a man
eminent for Piety and Learning* rises up and accuses his old Friend Eutyches
(having long in vain endeavored, as he declares to the Council, to reclaim him
by private advice or discourse) ^f holding and teaching Heretical Opinions, or
a different Faith from that delivered from the Apostles, and received by the
Nicene Fathers, and delivers up the Articles of his Charge in Writing. Upon
this Eutyches is summoned to appear, and is after three Citations, and all the
shifts of delay, unkenell'd out of his Monastery, and stripped of his Orders. But
the great Eunuch Chrysaphius was his friend, and before the Heretic would
appear, he flies to him for help and protection, and he prevails with the
Emperor to send Florentius a Courtier and one of his Creatures, with a Rabble
of Monks and a Guard of Soldiers along with Eutyches to the Council, but for
all that upon a full hearing and debating of the Cause, he is again deposed,
and eased of his Abbey. Upon this he makes his Address to Pope Leo, procures the
Emperor's Letters in his behalf, and among his many other Grievances, makes
that acceptable Complaint* That his Appeal to the Apostolical See was rejected
by the Bishop of Constantinople. Leo was glad of any opportunity to exert his
universal Pastorship, but much more to break the Power of that Rival See, and
therefore he greedily takes the Judgment of the Cause to himself, writes a very
huffing Letter to Flavianus, rates him severely for not acquainting his
Holiness with his Proceedings, but much more tartly for denying an Appeal to
the Apostolical See, and peremptorily Commands him to return all the Acts of
the Council to himself as the only Supreme Judge, or as he expresses himself in
his Answer to the Emperor, Ad praedictum autem Episcopum dedi literas, quibus
mihi displicere cognosceret, quod ea quae in tanta causa gesta fuerant, etiam
nunc silentio reticeret, cum studere debuerit primitus nobis cuncta reserare.
Flavianus knowing the Spirit of the Man, and being afraid of giving him any
Provocation, returns him a very civil and submissive Answer ^^gether with the
Acts of the Council, humbly requests his Concurrence and Approbation, and
assures him that Eutyches had never made any Appeal to his Holiness, and
therefore had abused him with a palpable falsehood. Leo upon this Information
and the perusal of the Acts is satisfied, Act. 11.
and agrees to the Condemnation of Eutyches, and returns Flavianus that Famous
Epistle in confutation of the Eutychian Heresy, that was afterward so
magnified by the Council of Calcedon, as to be made of equal Authority with the
Decrees of the General Councils. Upon this Eutyches flies a second time to his
friends at Court, and complains that the Acts of the Council had been falsified
by Flavianus, and upon that the Bishops that were present at the Council, were
re-summoned, and are required to give in their Answer to the Interrogatories
upon Oath, but this they unanimously refuse as an affront to their Order,
because, as Basil Bishop of Seleucia replied, it was never yet heard of that an
Oath was offered to Bishops, and therefore upon their word they vouch the truth
and sincerity of the Record, and declare that Eutyches never made any offer of
Appeal to the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria, as he pretended in his Bill of
Complaint. In short, the Acts themselves being examined and compared with
Eutyches his own Copy, exhibited by his Procurators (for he refused to appear
in Person) they were found to agree so exactly in all particulars, as not only
to put himself but his friends out of Countenance. And therefore finding no
shelter either at home or at Rome, he betakes himself to Alexandria, and there
engages Dioscorus who succeeded Cyril in that See, on his side. And he being a
man of an ungovernable temper, and willing to put an affront upon the great
Bishop of Constantinople (according to the practice of those times, for the
Top-Bishops to endeavor to check each others greatness) embraces the Quarrel
with all possible Zeal, and pursues it with as indefatigable diligence,
earnestly solicites the Emperor for a General Council to rehear^ the Cause of
Eutyches, which he represents to him as nothing else then an opposition to the
Nestorian Heresy, V. Theodos. Lit. ad Juven. Act. 1.
and so the Emperor himself took it. And though Flavianus and Leo opposed it
with all their Zeal and Power, yet Eutyches having the Eunuchs favor, and the
Emperors own aversation against Nestorius to back him, he prevails, and a
second Council is summoned to Ephesus 19 years after the first, consisting of
130 Bishops, and the Presidency of the Council is by Chrysaphius his Power with
the Emperor determined to Dioscorus by special Commission. Pope Leo is invited,
but his Answer is, That he neither would nor could come, he could not, because
at that time Rome was distressed by the Huns, and he would not, because it was
not becoming the State of the Apostolic Chair to appear in any Council, but
however he sends his Legates with Letters to the Council (little suspecting
those Irregularities that ensued, but by the Artifice of Dioscorus they were
not so much as suffered to be read, and upon it the Legates quit the Council,
and upon that all things are carried with Tumult and Violence by Dioscorus of
Alexandria, Juvenal of Jerusalem, Thalassius of Caesarea, and Barsumas a
debauched Abbot, who was particularly summoned by the Emperor, and his Vote
made equal with the Bishops contrary both to the Canons and the Custom of the
Church, as appears by the Subscriptions to the late Council of Constantinople
under Flavianus against Eutyches, Action the 7th, where the Bishops subscribe
in this Form, IN Bishop subscribe as Judge, and the Abbots in this only, IN
Presbyter and Abbot subscribe the Condemnation. And beside all these
Irregularities, Count Elpidius, who was sent by the Emperor to preside and keep
good order, favoring Eutyches out of Compliance with Chrysaphius took the
Judgment of the Council to himself, so as to hinder all Canonical Proceedings,
and that soon run the whole matter into Tumult and Confusion, Barsumas and his
Monks breaking into the Council, beating some, imprisoning others, and forcing
others to subscribe a Blank for Eutyches his Absolution, and so Eutyches is
absolved, Flavianus and Eusebius of Dorilaeum Condemned, and imprisoned too
together with the Popes Legates, only Hilarus escaping by Flight. And to
confirm all these unpriestly and unchristian Enormities, Chrysaphius procures
an Imperial Rescript, which we shall find afterward reverst by the Emperor
Marcian. But within three days after the Scuffle Flavianus dies in Goal of the
Wounds given him by Barsumas and his Mirmidons, and to him succeeds Anatolius,
though he cannot pass at Rome without absolute submission to Pope Leo his
Epistles, and the Catholic Church, as if they were the same thing. But
Dioscorus having carried things with so high an hand and bold success, returns
home flusht and drunk with Victory, and in one of his Fits excommunicates Pope
Leo himself. But the only effect of all these disorders and disturbances in the
Church at that time, was the advancement of the Papal Greatness, for as this
Pope never failed to exert his Power to the utmost, so every success raised his
Throne to a greater height, and he so managed this advantage, as to bring the
design of the Papal Supremacy, as it was laid by Innocent the First to its full
perfection. For though the Title of Head of the Universal Church was not gained
till Boniface the Third, yet Pope Leo went away with the Power, and as will
appear by the Event, exercised a real Supremacy over the Catholic Church. For
being informed of these wild disorders, he immediately calls a Council, and
writes to the Emperor to Conjure him by the Holy Trinity, and as he will answer
it at the Divine Tribunal, to null all the Acts of that Profane Council, and
by Virtue of an Appeal, that Flavianus made to himself before his death,
demands a General Council to be held in Italy. And this he seconds with another
to his Sister Pulcheria, begging her intercession with the Emperor. And the
Emperor Valentinian with his Mother Placidia, and his Queen Eudoxia happening to
visit Rome at that time, Leo so plyes them with ruful Stories of the late
Ephesine Persecution, that he dissolves the Women into Tears, and engages all
their Zeal to intercede with Theodosius for an Italian Council, and this they
all do out of that dutiful respect to the Supremacy of St. Peter, to whom Leo
tells them, that our Savior and all Antiquity had ever given the Sacerdotii
Principatus, (...), and (...), as they express it in their several Epistles.
But the Emperor was so prepossest by his Eunuchs, and his Zeal against
Nestorius, that no importunity could prevail upon him, the thing being already
Canonically determined, as he replies to the Empress in answer to her Letrer of
Intercession, and by an Imperial Rescript ratifies the deposition of Flavianus
as guilty of the Nestorian Heresy, and justifies all the Proceedings against
him at Ephesus, but if we may rely upon the Crude Reports of Nicephorus and
some later Writers (which I never do) he repented before his death and sent
Chrysaphius into Banishment, however that was, no public satisfaction was made
to the Church till after his death, when Marcian reverst all the Acts of the
Council together with the Rescript of Theodosius by which it was confirmed,
restored the banished Bishops, and removed the Body of Flavianus to
Constantinople, and for the complete settlement of the Church summoned a
Council of 630 Bishops in the Year 451, first at Nice, and afterward at the
request of the Fathers, at Calcedon.

For these being sensible of the Abuses that had been put upon the Church, by
the Imperial Delegates in several Councils, they were desirous that the Emperor
himself might, if there happened any Contest about their Proceedings, interpose
by his own immediate Authority; he being then detein'd by urgent Affairs of
State at Constantinople, and Calcedon being no more then a Miles distance on
the other side the Thracian Bosphorus. And by this putting themselves into his
Imperial Majesty's own Protection, they in a great measure secured the
Liberties of the Church, and rescued it from the long continued Abuses of the
Court-Debauchees; insomuch that though the Emperor sent many of his Chief
Officers of State to manage and moderate in Council, yet they never presumed to
conclude any thing, till himself was present at the 6th Session. But the
Council being met at the Emperor's Summons, Pope Leo sends his Legates and his
Letters, in which he is pleased to take notice of his Majesty's particular
Respect to the Apostolic See, in that he did not Summon, but only invite him
to the Council, when he was not obliged to appear in Person, or as Hilarus, one
of his Delegates, afterward pleads in the Council it self, that it was without
Precedent and against all Prescription for a Pope of Rome to appear in Council.
Act. 1. p. 122. in Labbe.
But his Holiness not being obliged to execute the Office of Supremacy in
Person, he sends his Legates or Curates as his Representatives to preside over
and manage the Council. And the Council being opened, Paschasinus, that was the
Foreman of the Ambassy, moves in his Masters name, the Bishop of Rome, the
head of all Churches, that Dioscorus of Alexandria may be called to the Bar,
and not suffered to sit as Judge in Council, otherwise himself and his Brethren
were commanded by their Commission to remonstrate. Here the Judges require his
Accusation. To this Lucentius, another Legate, replys, That his Crime was too
evident, in that he had presumed to assume to himself the Authority of a Judge,
and passed sentence, not only without, but against the judgment of the
Apostolic See, which as it never ought to be done, so it never had been done;
and for this reason he is not admitted to sit upon the Bench, but is turned
down to the Bar, and his Indictment is exhibited by Eusebius of Dorilaeum. But
its Prosecution was at present superseded by Theodoret's appearing in Council,
that occasioned a Tumult of the Egyptian, Illyrican and Palestine Bishop,
against him, and the Eastern, Pontick, Asiatick and Thracian Bishops for him,
upon the account of the Animosity between him and Cyril about the Anathema's.
From hence they fall to the Examination of the Acts of the Ephesine Council,
where the forgeries, the frauds, the violent and illegal Proceedings of
Dioscorus, Juvenal, and their Associates against Flavianus and Eusebius are at
large most shamefully exposed to the World, but their punishment is referred to
the Emperor, and so ends the first Action.

In the second they proceed to treat of the settlement of the Faith, where they
establish the Nicene Faith against Arius, the Ephesine against Nestorius, and
the Epistle of Pope Leo to Flavianus against Eutyches, as necessary Expositions
of the Faith. In the third Session (which Valesius says ought to have been the
second) comes on the Trial of Dioscorus, who upon diverse Accusations brought
into the Council against him, and after three Citations refusing to appear, is
deposed. It is pretty to observe in this sentence, how under this swelling Pope
the Acts and Forms of Court were innovated for the advantage of the Papal
Power. The Libels or Petitions against the Offender are addressed in the first
place to the Ecumenical Archbishop and Patriarch of Rome, and then to the
Council it self. And then none must denounce the Sentence, but his own Legates,
and that too must be done, not in the name of the Council, but in the Name and
by the Authority of Pope Leo and St. Peter, and this being done, the Council
signify their sentence to the Emperor and Empress, where again they give all
the glory of the Action to Pope Leo. In the fourth Action, beside repeting the
former Decrees, a Committee is appointed to debate farther concerning the
Faith, and Leo's Epistle, which they represent to the Council as agreeable in
all particulars to the Nicene Faith. After that, the Judges acquaint the
Fathers that the Emperor is pleased to refer back the sentence against the
Accomplices of Dioscorus to themselves, but they tacking about, and following
the dance of that shameless Ecebolian Juvenal of Jerusalem, and subscribing the
Epistle of Pope Leo, are reconciled and admitted to sit. In the next place the
Egyptian Bishops refuse to subscribe either the Condemnation of Eutyches and
Dioscorus, or the confirmation of Leo's Epistle, during the Vacancy of the Arch
bishopric of Alexandria upon the deposition of Dioscorus, it being both
against the Canons and the Custom of their Church, to act any thing without the
consent of their Archbishop. But this the Council interpret a mere shift and
tergiversation, to escape the subscription to their Decrees, and therefore
insist upon it before their dismission. And tell them withal, that the Canon
was valid as to the ordinary Affairs of their own Province, but ought to be
anticipated and superseded by the determinations of general Councils, that
include and overruled all Provincial Jurisdictions. In answer to this they
declare their own readiness to subscribe, but dare not for fear of the People
when they return home, who they knew would lay violent hands upon them, for
betraying the Rights of the great Alexandrian Metropolitan. And after long
drawing on either side, the matter is adjusted by the mediation of the Secular
Judges, that their subscription should be respited till the election of a new
Archbishop, which was accepted by Paschasinus the Popes Legate, upon this
condition that they would give Security by Oath or Sureties not to depart the
City till that was done, which being readily performed it ended the
Controversy. After this follows the Petition of the Eutychian Monks of
Constantinople to the Emperor, which he referred to the Council, as he did all
other Addresses, but it being in behalf of Dioscorus against the Council, and
particularly their own Bishop Anatolius, from whom they threaten to divide
Communion, if they persist in their Sentence against Dioscorus, they are taught
by Aetius the Archdeacon of Constantinople in a Praemunire against the 4 th and
5 th Canons of the Council of Antioch, whereby all Presbyters are actually
excommunicated, that presume to separate from their own Bishop. But before they
can be farther heard in Council, they are required to subscribe the Epistle of
Pope Leo against Eutyches and his profane Novelties, which refusing they are
deposed from their Orders and expelled their Monasteries. The Imperial, or (as
the Council phrases it) the external Power, according to the holy Laws of their
Ancestors, backing their Decree against the Contumacious. This Action is shut
up with a very fair decision of a Controversy between Photius Bishop of Tire,
and Eustathius Bishop of Beryte, who being a subject Bishop to Photius had
(...) by subreption procured a Rescript in the time of Theodosius the Younger,
to bring part of the Province into subjection to himself, and by force and
threatening extorts Photius his consent to it. But this great Council now
sitting, Photius Petitions the Emperor to write to the Council to redress his
wrong, which is easily granted, where the cause being debated, Eustathius
confesses the Canon against him, but pleads the Imperial Rescript against that.
But this Plea is utterly rejected both by the Judges and the Bishops, to whom
the Judges referred its final judgment, who determined it upon this rule,
(...). The Imperial Pragmaticks are of no force against the Canons. Upon this
Eustathius pleads the Authority of Anatolius, and a Synod of his (...), or
Bishops sojourning at Constantinople who had proceeded so far in this contest,
as to excommunicate Photius, though uncited and unheard; upon this the Judges
refer it to the Council, Whether that were a legal Synod; to which Anatolius
pleads, That it was so by Custom, though not by Law: But against this the 4 th
Canon of Nice is urged, that no Bishop can be ordained without the consent of
his Metropolitan, which Eustathius having done, by whatsoever other Authority,
it was an open breach of that Canon, and so adjudged by the Council, to whom
the Secular Judges entirely lest the Judicature, as proper to their
Jurisdiction, (...) (...), (as they declare) to give the final Sentence about
these Matters, which being done by the Council in behalf of Photius, it is thus
confirmed by the Judges, (...). Let the Decrees of the Council stand established
forever. And upon it Cecropius Bishop of Sebastopolis is encouraged to move,
That all Imperial Pragmaticks for the Alteration of the settled bounds of
Provinces may be taken away forever, as bringing certain disturbance and
confusion upon the Government of the Church; which being seconded by the Synod,
is confirmed by the Consent of the Judges.

In the 5 th Action after many Debates, the Judges having no mind to the
Imposition of Leo's Epistle, the Fathers proceed to the settlement of the
Faith, and having first approved the Creeds of the three other general
Councils, they add a 4 th of their own framing against Eutyches, not that they
intended to make a new Creed; but as a necessary declaration of the ancient
Faith against his upstart Heresy. The sixth Action is one of the most
remarkable Instances of the right use of the Imperial Power in the Christian
Church, that we have upon record in all the Histories of it. For the Council
being fully agreed about the settlement of the Faith in the last Session, in
this the Emperor with his Empress attended by a great Train of Nobles, comes to
confirm their Decrees, as he professes in his Speech to the Holy Fathers. Nos
enim ad sidem confirmandam, non ad potentiam aliquam exercendam ex^mplo
religiosi Principis Constantini Synodo interesse voluimus. He came into the
Council not to make, but confirm and ratify their Decrees, by his Imperial
Power. And therefore having the Acts of the last Session read before him, with
the Subscriptions of all the Bishops to the Confession of Faith, he there
immediately enacts this Penal Law to enforce the observation of their Decree.
The Catholic Faith being declared by the holy Synod according to the Tradition
of the Fathers, we think it both decent and our duty to cut off for the time to
come all farther Debates about it. If therefore any private Citizen, Soldier or
Clergyman shall hereafter make any disturbance by attempting any public
Disputation about the Faith, the Citizen shall be banished, the Soldier
disbanded, and the Clerk deposed, and be obnoxious to further punishment at our
Royal Pleasure. And thus having with so much Prudency and Decency exerted his
Imperial Authority in Controversies of Faith, (...) not at all to interpose his
own Power in making the determination, but to embrace and confirm the
resolution of the Holy Fathers, the proper Judges in the Case, in the next
place he exerts his Authority in matters of Discipline. For having observed
some defects in the Clergy, both against the ancient Canons and the Imperial
Laws, he propounds it to the Council that they would take care to provide for
their Reformation. And this, he declares, he does out of mere Respect and Honor
to their Function, as thinking it more decent that they should be canonically
determined in Council, then enacted and enforced by his own Imperial Laws. And
as it was a civil Decency, so it was no more, for the Abuses that he complained
of, were such as concerned the Peace of the Empire, as well as the Church, as
the Tumults and Disorders of the Monks, frequent Instances whereof as we have
met with through the whole progress of this Story, so were they the Masters of
these present Revels. And certainly such Disorders concerned his own Imperial
Power, if the Peace of the Empire did so. As for his other two Proposals, the
first against the trading, and the second against the wandering of the Clergy,
they were properly subject to the Imperial Power, because though these and the
like irregularities were first forbidden by the Ecclesiastical Canons, yet they
had before this time been often restrained by the Imperial Laws, as we have
seen above out of the Theodosian Code. After this the Emperor in Complement to
the memory of the Holy Martyr St. Euphemia, in whose Church the Council was
held, gives the City of Calcedon the honor of a Titular Metropolis, securing
all the Rights of Metropolitical Power to the Metropolitan of Nicomedia. And
here some say the Council ended, the Fathers having dispatched the whole work,
for which they were summoned, the following Sessions being only taken up with
casual and personal Controversies, and therefore by some of the Ancients they
are made distinct Councils, and this latter part in some of their Writings goes
under the name of the 5 th Council.

The seventh Session is spent in confirming the Agreement or Concordate between
Juvenal of Jerusalem and Maximus of Antioch about dividing their Usurpations.
How Juvenal that had been all along such an active Confederate with Dioscorus,
and stood guilty of the same Crimes, came to meet with so much favor, is easy
enough to conceive, being a great Court-Parasite, and Church-trimmer, and so by
his cringings and flatteries had wrigled himself into the good Opinion of the
Fathers. In the 8 th Action Theodoret is restored to his Church, upon his
anathematising Nestorius and his Heresy; and that was a very easy matter for
him to do, when he had all along done the same, having only opposed the
unseasonable imposition of Cyril's Anathema's. The 9 th and 10 th Actions were
taken up with the case of Ibas Bishop of Edessa, who had been accused to the
Emperor Theodosius by some Eutychians, as guilty of the Nestorian Heresy, and
by him the cause was referred to a Synod at Beryte, in which he anathematised
Nestorius and all his Doctrines, and was cleared of his Indictment. But in the
violent Council of Ephesus he was again accused by Eutyches himself, and
without being heard, deposed and imprisoned. But now upon his Petition is heard
in this Council, and after the examination of all Records and Witnesses, he is
again found clear of the Nestorian Heresy, all the Accusation being grounded
upon his opposition to Cyril's Anathema's. And the true State and Account of
that Controversy between Cyril and Nestorius, and the Eastern Bishops against
both, is best described by Ibas himself in his Famous Epistle to Maris Persa,
recorded among the Acts of the 10th Session. The subject of the 11th and 12th
Actions was a Contest between Bassianus and Stephanus for the Bishopric of
Ephesus, but they being both uncanonically ordained, are both deposed. Upon
this occasion the Asiaticks move that the new Bishop may be Consecrated at
Ephesus according to the Canons. No, say the Constantinopolitans, but in this
City according to Custom, as they falsely pretended for all their Usurpations,
to do illegal things, and then make them a Precedent to warrant their illegal
doings. This occasions a new Contest about the Prerogative of the Bishop of
Constantinople to ordein other Metropolitans; but he and his Party being
conscious to themselves of the weakness of their own pretense, they let fall
the Controversy. The most observable passage in this Action, next to the
Contest it self, and the Constantinopolitan Plea to justify their Usurpation
by illegal Custom against Canon, is the Plea of Bassianus to make good the
Title to his Bishopric, viz. That he was Consecrated by the Bishops of the
Province, and his Consecration allowed and confirmed by the Emperor, and that
is an instance of the Custom of those times, that the Princes Approbation was
necessary to the Instalment of a Bishop, though the Power of Election was
placed in the Provincial Synod. Upon what reason of State this Power of the
Prince was grounded, I shall show, when I come to argue the reason of the
thing, at present I only allege this as an instance of the practice. And of
the same nature is the next Action, of a Case setting up a new Custom and the
pretense of an Imperial Rescript against Canon and Ancient Practice. For
whereas Nicomedia had ever been the Metropolis of Bythinia, the Emperors
Valentinian and Valens had conferred the Title and Honor of a Metropolis upon
the City of Nice, reserving the Metropolitan Power to Nicomedia. Upon occasion
and pretense of this Grant Anastasius Bishop of Nice usurps to himself the
Power of Jurisdiction over some part of the Province, and particularly
Basilonopolis; of this Eunomius Bishop of Nicomedia and Metropolitan of
Bithynia makes his Complaint to the Council: and they to adjust the
Ecclesiastical Canons and the Imperial Rescript, grant the Honor of a
Metropolis to Nice, but so as to reserve the Power entire to Nicomedia.
Hereupon Aetius the Archdeacon of Constantinople, (who lay at catch for all
opportunities to advance the Grandeur of that See,) interposes a provision that
this Decree may not be interpreted to the disadvantage of the Bishop of
Constantinople, of whose Power to ordain the Bishops of Basilonopolis he was
ready to produce diverse Precedents. But this was rejected by the Fathers, as
being, whether true or false as to matter of Fact, contrary to the Canons, so
that hitherto they were not able to fasten any of the Constantinopolitan
Usurpations upon the Authority of the Council.

The next Transaction is to correct and rectify another Irregularity of that
pilfering See in the Controversy between Athanasius and Sabinianus, for the
Bishopric of Perrha. For whereas Athanasius had been Canonically deposed by
his own Metropolitan, he repairs to Constantinople and makes his Complaints to
Proclus, who according to his Custom greedily embraces his Appeal, and writes
to Domnus Archbishop of Antioch in his behalf, who upon it calls a Council to
review the former Judgment; which he had in great kindness committed to
Panolbius, that was an intimate friend to Athanasius, and upon enquiry finds
that Athanasius was so conscious to himself of the Crimes laid to his Charge,
that he never durst stand his Trial, and to avoid it, had resigned his
Bishopric, and withal was so diffident of his Cause at the second hearing,
that he durst not so much as appear, under pretense that Domnus his
Metropolitan was his Enemy, and so is again deposed. And yet for all this he is
so restless as to bring his old Complaints even to this Great Council, and they
taking a full Examination of all the former Proceedings, find that they can
afford him no Relief, and yet because he had an excuse for his Nonappearance
at his last Trial, viz. The enmity between him and Domnus, they were so tender
as not to give final Sentence against him, but refer the effectual Judgment of
the Cause to Maximus the present Bishop of Antioch, against whom he could make
no Exception.

Hitherto the Proceedings of the Council were fair and regular enough, but in
the next Session, in which they draw up their Canons, the Clergy of
Constantinople with some others that they had pack't together* being not above
a third part of the Council, put a slur upon the whole Council, for whereas 27
Canons were Voted and Subscribed by all the Fathers, after the rising of the
Council, the Judges, and the Legates, they Vote another Canon granting an
exorbitant and illegal Power to the Bishop of Constantinople over the
Metropolitans of three whole Diocesses, and clap that to the Canons of the
Council; but with what ingenuity it was done, and how worthily defended, when
the Abuse was complained of in the next meeting, and how slitely the Business
was carried by the Judges, and what fierce and bloody Wars it occasioned in the
Church between the two Great Prelates of Rome and Constantinople, I have
already elsewhere represented, and therefore shall forbear any farther Account
of it here, where my main design is to give an account of the H^story of the
right Concurrence of the distinct Powers of Church and State in its Government.
And setting aside this last Action, that was carried by fraud and stealth, this
Council seems to have been more decent and regular in its Proceedings then any
other whatsoever since the Council of Nice, and had this advantage above the
rest, that it was not left to the superintendency of one or two Courtiers, but
was committed to the Care and Conduct of a great number of Persons of Honor
and Quality, who behaved themselves with all the decency of temper, prudence,
and civility. For as they managed the order of proceedings and interlocutions
with great Art, cutting off all impertinency and unnecessary talk; so they
never interposed the Authority of their own Judgment in any matter, but
entirely referred every thing little or great to the determination of the
Bishops, and were so complemental in their respect to the Church, that they
would not presume to be so much as present at those Sessions, in which the
Confession of Faith was drawn up, that being only a work proper to those who
were Commissionated to it by our Savior himself. And when it was finished the
Emperor declares, That it was not established by his own, but by the Councils
Authority, that he came to own and confirm what they had Enacted* and so
requires all his Subjects to acquiesce in what was settled by their Authority,
under severe Penalties to be inflicted by his own. In all which all Partie^
seemed to have observed all the Rules not only of Justice but of decency, and
to have shown that Civility to the Church^ that all men, though there were no
other Obligation, then mere good manners, owe to the Religion that themselves
profess. And though the Clergy of Constantinople and their Confede^ates were
guilty of great and shameless disingenuity in the last Session, not only
breaking, but perverting and falsifying the Canons of the Church, yet the
Emperor and Judges cannot be very much blamed, who were Strangers to these
matters, and took the motion to be nothing else then a Complement of particular
respect and honor to the Imperial City, and as such they pass it, that as the
Ancient Canons had given pre-eminence to the Bishop of old Rome out of respect
to the dignity of the head City, so new Rome being now advanced to an Equality
with it in the Empire, it was but fit to raise it to the same degree of honor
in the Church. And that had been no great harm, had it been done without
robbing other Churches of their just Rights and Privileges, which though the
Clergy understood, the Laics did not, because what was here settled by Law,
they had always seen practiced by Custom, and therefore had no reason to look
upon it as an Innovation. But as for the Eutychian Heresy, that was the proper
business of this Council, it being so fairly Condemned by the Ecclesiastical
Judgment, they according to Form and Custom send the Relation to the Emperor
for his Royal Confirmation, wherein they do not so much acquaint him with their
Decree, (with which he had been before acquainted, having confirmed it in the
6th Session) as justify their Authority to make it, and it is a very rational
discourse of the true use of Councils and their Authoritative determinations in
the Christian Church. It is not (say they) to make new Doctrines of Faith, but
to protect the old Truths against the wantonness of Innovators; so that if all
men would be content with the Ancient Faith, it would be needless for the
Church to make any new Declarations, but when men leave the old Track of
Religion, to loose themselves in their own new contrived Labyrinths, and
corrupt the plain and simple Truth with over nice and curious Inventions, it is
then necessary for the Church to stop their Vanity, by its Authoritative
Declaration of the Truth it self. Not as if there were something defective in
the Faith, and the Church were always adding to it, but to make such wholesome
Provisions, as it judges most convenient against all Innovated Doctrines. And
this they exemplify by ^ll the Decrees of the several Councils against the
Profane Novelties of Arius, P^^tinus, Macedonius, and Nestorius, and show that
they were only Fences to guard and defend the simplicity of the Ancient Faith
against the petul^nt Assaul^s of these several Heretics, and that they declare
to be the ground of their present determination against Eutyches, that it was
only a Declaration of the old Truth against a new Heresy. And much more to
this purpose, and it is the true State of the Authority of Councils, to make
Decrees, to stop the vanities and singularities of Innovators; and when they
are made, they become obligatory by their own Authority, and nothing can hinder
or take off their Obligation, but an apparent contrariety to the Divine Law. So
that it neither concerns nor becomes the Subject to make a strict and
Philosophical search after the truth of the Decree, it is enough to him that it
is not apparently false. In all other Cases the Authority of the Church is
sufficient to justify his Obedience before God, by whose Providence they were
placed under their Government. And the want of this just Civility to Superiors
has in all Ages been the true Original of all disturbances in the Christian
Church. And this was the sense of the Emperor himself, who imm^d^ately upon the
Receipt of this Report from the Fathers, publishes an Edict to the talking
Citizens of Constantinople, forbid^ing all farther disputations about the
Christian Faith, in that all Controversies were now determined by the Authority
of the Council; against which, he says, it were profaneness and sacrilege for
any man to presume to set up his own Opinion, and no less madness then to gr^pe
after more Light at noon day; and therefore after this clear discovery of the
truth, whoever will not acquiesce in it, but makes farther Enquiry, he can
neither seek nor find any thing but falsehood. And for this reason all farther
disputes are peremptorily forbidden as an insolent and intolerable affront to
the Sacred Authority of the Council, and this is enacted under the
forementioned Penalties, that he declared in the 6th Session for the
Confirmation of their Exposition of Faith, Deposition of the Clergy, Disbanding
of Soldiers, and Banishment of Citizens.

And this was afterward alleged as a proper instance by Facundus Hermianensis
to the Emperor Justinian, Lib. 12. c. 2.
against the condemnation of the tria capitula after they had been tried and
acquitted by the Council of Calcedon, with this remark upon it. The Emperor
Marcian judged it no less than Profaneness and Sacriledg to review the
Sacerdotal Judgment, and therefore that being once passed, it was an end of all
Controversy. Here behold a Prince indeed, a true Father of the Commonwealth,
and a true Son of the Church, that does not dictate, but follow Ecclesiastical
Decrees, declaring by his Edict, That whoever after the settlement of the
truth, shall pretend to make any farther inquiry, can seek for nothing but
Error. For this saying forever blessed be his Memory all the World over, who
not only recovered the sinking Empire, but also restored lasting Peace to the
poor distracted Church.

This Edict was reinforced by a second a Month after, and Copies of it sent to
all the several Praefecti-praetorio for its more effectual Execution. And they
are both revived in a third Rescript, published the year following, in which
this Heresy, and all the ways of propagating it, are suppressed by all the
punishments against all other Heretics: So that it is in reality a neat
Compendium of all the Laws under the Title de Haereticis in the Theodosian
Code. And because the bastard Council of Ephesus under Dioscorus, in which
Flavianus, Eusebius, Theodoret, and many other Catholic Bishops were
condemned, had been ratified by a Rescript of Theodosius, he here cancels its
full force as to all the Sufferers that were surviving. And because the
Eutychian Itch was got among the Monks of Jerusalem and Alexandria to the
raising of botches and tumults, especially at Jerusalem by the disorderly
behavior of one Theodosius, who made himself Bishop of the place, the Emperor
and Empress write to them to desist at their farther peril. But it seems some
were stubborn and irreclaimable (and no sort of Men so obstinate as those that
live remote from the Conversation of the World) and therefore in the year 455
the Emperor renews his former Rescript, particularly to be put in Execution at
Alexandria, where the Heresy most reigned, and that is the last time that he
appeared against them. And thus in four years time by protecting the Church in
its due Authority, and by abetting their Decrees with Penal Laws, and by seeing
his own Laws put in effectual Execution, he put an end to this powerful and
prevailing Heresy, though it had gained both the Eunuchs and the Empire to its
side.

. XVII. And thus this great Prince, this pattern of Government to all his
Successors, as Evagrius styles him, having settled all things both in Church
and State, two years after dies, and is succeeded in the year 457 by Leo, who
was chosen by the unanimous Vote both of the Senate and the Army; a Prince,
says Nicephorus, that would have carried the Election in the most flourishing
times of the old Commonwealth, when only worth gave right and title to
Preferm%nt, a Man of that strict and severe Virtue, that he must have been
chosen Augustus by the Cato's themselves. But as great a Man as he was, he
found it an hard task to keep things in that good order, in which they were
left by his Predecessor. For no sooner came the news of Marcian's death to
Alexandria, that Metropolis of Sedition, Evag. l. 2. c. 8.
but a few of the Eutychian Party, among whom were only two Bishops,
accompanied with the City-rabble, make Timotheus Aelurus their Bishop, Liberati
Brev. c. 14.
and most inhumanely murder Proterius at Divine service, who had been chosen
to that See by the Bishops of the Province upon the deposition of Dioscorus,
and not content with his blood, they treat the dead body with all the
circumstances of rudeness and barbarity: Upon this Complaints are carried to
the Emperor by both Parties, Ibid. c. 15.
with Petitions on one side for abrogating, and on the other for confirming the
Council of Calcedon. The Emperor considering of the Matter, refers it to the
Judgment of the Church, and being unwilling to put the poor aged Bishops to the
tedium of long Journeys for assembling in Council, he takes a more compendious,
but no less effectual course: directing his Letters to all the Metropolitans of
the Christian Church within the Empire, requiring their impartial Judgment of
both Controversies, without fear or favor, or ill will, having only the fear of
God before their Eyes, and as they would one day answer it to the divine
Majesty, viz. the Ordination of Timotheus Ael^rus, and the ratification of the
Council of Calcedon. And this brought forth that famous volume of Encyclical
Epistles, that make up the third part of the Council of Calcedon, and that are
so often and so much commended by the Ancients, Liberatus, Facundus
Hermianensis, Evagrius, Victor Tunonensis and Cassiodorus, at whose persuasion,
Divin. Lect. ^.11.
as himself informs us, Epiphanius a learned Man translated them into the Latin
Tongue, and that is the only Copy of them that is now extant. An excellent
Collection it is of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, and a true representation of the
ancient Unity and Communion of the Catholic Church, without the formality of a
general Council. The Authority of the determination is the same, consisting in
the Concord of Bishops, and the Resolution it self much more easy and
expedient. For it required much time and expense to assemble Councils, it put
infirm old Men to long and tedious Journeys, it robbed most Churches for a time
of their Guides, by the absence of their leading Prelates, whereas by this way
of Encyclical Correspondence the dispatch was equally speedy and effectual. For
the Result of all their Answers was the approbation of the Synod of Calcedon,
and the deposition of Timotheus, there being but one Dissenter, and he but half
an one, and that was Amphilochius Bishop of Sida, Apud. Photium Cod. 230.
who at first disallowed the Council of Calcedon, but earnestly p^^ss't the
deposition of Timotheus, tho wit^^n a little time he was brought to subscribe
the Council, as Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria reports, who withal says, that
there were no less than one thousand six hundred subscriptions returned to the
Emperor, which if true, it is a much greater number, than all the four General
Councils put together amount to.

Upon this transaction the Remarque of Facundus is very smart and acute, Lib.
12. c. 3.
Behold here the true Liberty of the Church in those days, when the most
Christian King did not over^aw the Priests of God with his temporal Power, but
on the contrary armed and warned them against all such fear by the overruling
fear of God. Neither did he suggest any thing of his own thoughts, lest it
should be suspected that their Answer was suited to his Royal Will, and this he
did, not only out of respect to the Discipline of the Christian Church, but
because he very well knew that no forced Decrees were of any Authority in
themselves, for when a Sentence is forced, it is not his Sentence by whom it is
pronounced. And the cause that carries it, gains nothing by it, but the
advantage lies on the side of the Party condemned, for it is evident, that he
was not at liberty to judge aright, whose Judgment is forced, for a forced
Judgment is none at all. And therefore this Emperor of blessed Memory preserved
the Peace of the Church, because he would not presume to establish any Doctrins
by his own Authority, and usurp that Power that is proper to the Priesthood
alone. Whereas had he prescribed to the Council, and they merely lacquied to
his instructions, it is evident that one Layman, that was no competent Judge of
those Matters, really passed the judgment, and not those who were the only
proper Judges of the Cause. And withal he very well understood, that forced
Councils never came to any good effect, as the Council of Ariminum under
Constantius, and the false Council of Ephesus under Dioscorus. And therefore
though himself could have passed a right sentence, yet he would not, because he
would not render the Sentence of the Church suspected, and by that means
evacuate its Authority.

But as the whole Eastern Church agreed in this business, so no Man was more
active, not to say more imperious, in it than Pope Leo, who was ever for
carrying all things through with an high hand, and having raised himself to the
height of Authority, resolved to keep it up. For it was no small point of
Grandeur that he gained, when he procured that his own private Epistle should
be imposed upon the Catholic Church, and made equal with the Decrees of
General Councils. But that which advanced him to the top-round of Power, was
his signal Victory over Constantinople and the Eastern Bishops, when he forced
them to eat and reverse their 28 th Canon, made Anatolius submit and beg his
pardon, brought the Emperor Marcian himself almost upon his Knees, and forced
him to renounce his own Imperial Rescript, tho made in favor of his own
Imperial City. This great success could not but swell his mind, that was
already but too great of it self, and thereupon he takes the supreme and indeed
single management of all things into his own hands. And when no Man, no not the
Emperor himself dares withstand his Commands, so severe and peremptory were
they, that for a good time he kept the Eutychian Cause sufficiently low and
humble. And to say the truth, setting aside his by-design of advancing the
Grandeur of his own See, he acted nothing, that was not only warrantable but
justly praiseworthy. For when once a Controversy is decided by the Authority
of the Church, no Christian Bishop can be too vigorous in his proceedings
against all that refuse submission to the Decree. Here Peace and Government lie
at stake as well as Truth, and unless they are preserved, the Church is lost,
and the Society dissolved into mere Tumult and Confusion. Whilst Controversies
are on foot and have not received the Judgment of the Church, we may allow Men
to be moderate or eager in their Disputes about them, according to the variety
of their apprehensions or natural Tempers. But after the Church has interposed
its Authority, there all moderation is at best but Treachery, and the Reverence
due to its commands will call forth every honest Man's utmost zeal in its
defense. And that was the case here that the Eutychians moved for a review by a
new Council: No, says Pope Leo, that were to offer an Affront to the Authority
of the Church in the great Council of Calcedon, and instead of putting an end
to Schisms and Contentions, to make them perpetual for the humor and pleasure
of every peevish talker. Epist. 25.
Nam cum nihil sit convenientius fidei defendendae, quam his quae per omnia
instruente spiritu sancto, irreprehensibiliter definita sunt, inhaerere; ipsi
videbimur been statuta convellere, et Autoritates, quas Ecclesia Vniversalis
amplexa est, ad arbitrium haereticae petitionis infringere; atque ita nullum
colligendis ecclesiis modum ponere, sed data licentia rebellandi, dilatare
magis quam sopire certamina. For when the most proper means for securing the
Faith is, that we acquiesce in those things that are legally settled by the
direction of the Holy Ghost, otherwise we shall but destroy what is already
well settled, and affront that Authority that has been owned by the Catholic
Church, for the humor of every petulant Heretic, and so shall have no means
left to preserve the Churches Peace; but opening a gap to all rebellion, we
shall rather propagate than quel Contentions, and so concludes, 'that when a
thing is once determined by the Authority of the Universal Church, Quis est
nisi aut Antichristus aut Diabolus, qui pulsare audeat inexpugnabilem
firmitatem? qui in malitia sua inconvertibilis perseverans per vasa irae et
suae apta fallaciae, falso diligentiae nomine, dum veritatem se mentitur
inquirere, mendacia desiderat seminare. Who but these great Enemies to
Christianity the Devil and Antichrist, would dare to shake the settled
foundation, who presevering stubborn in his Malice, by his Vessels of Wrath,
that are apt Tools for his Craft, under a false pretense of a greater
diligence, whilst he counterfeits to search after truth, sows his Tares And
therefore when the Heretics only m^ved for a conference, and the Emperor being
inclined to a request, as he thought, so easy, No, says Pope Leo, this is as
great an Affront to the Calcedon Fathers, as to grant them a new Council,
Epist. 78.
Evidenter agnoscitis quod magnis haereticorum audetur i^sidiis, ut inter
Eutychetis Dioscorique discipulos, et eum quem Apos^olica seeds direxerit,
diligentior, tanquam n^hil ante fuerit definitum, tractatus habeatur; et quod
totius mundi Catholici Sacerdotes in sancta Calcedonensi Synodo probant,
gaudentque firmatum, in injuriam etiam sacratissimi Concilii Nicaeni efficiatur
infi^mum. Your Majesty cannot but observe the crafty attempts of Heretics,
that there should be a farther Debate between the Heretics and us, as if there
had been nothing already determined, and the settlement made by the Holy
Council of Calcedon to the great joy of the Catholic Church all the World
over, should be slited to a dishonorable reflection upon the Council of Nice it
self. And whereas the Emperor desired him to send Commissioners, he offers to
send them, not to dispute with the Heretics, that he scorns, but to put the
Sentence of the Church in effectual execution against them. Which was
accordingly done, and Timotheus Aelurus was deposed, banished and imprisoned,
and when he petitioned for leave to come to Constantinople, there to make a
public declaration against the Eutychian Heresy, to this Pope Leo says No
again, for though that may set him right as to his Faith, yet it can never wash
away the guilt of his wicked and bloody Actions, the Absolution whereof
requires some other expiation than fair Confessions, and therefore he enjoins
Gennadius then Bishop of Constantinople, not so much as to admit him into his
presence at his peril, as he had not long before schooled his Predecessor
Anatolius for being too remiss against the Heretics, and suffering one Atticus
a Presbyter publicly to dispute the Eutychian Controversy, after the
determination of the great Council. The sum of all is, that the matter was
already decided by the Authority of the Church, and after that there remains no
liberty of Dispute. And therefore instead of indulging that, he advises the
Emperor to exert his Imperial Power in defense of the Faith, and that when the
Church had done its part in declaring it, it was now his duty to maintain it
against the Assaults of restless Spirits. Cum enim Clementiam tuam Dominus
tanta Sacramenti Illuminatione ditaverit, debes incunctanter advertere, Regiam
Potestatem tibi non solum ad Mundi regimen, sed maxim ad Ecclesiae praesidium
esse collatam: ut ausus nefarios comprimendo, et quae been sunt statuta
defendas, et veram pacem his, quae sunt turbata, restituas, etc. Seeing your
Majesty is, by the Grace of God, endued with so good an Understanding, you
ought out of hand to consider that Your Royal Power was given you from above,
not only for the Government of the Empire, but chiefly for the Protection of
the Church, that by suppressing seditious Attempts, you may defend what is
already established, and restore Peace, where things are in disorder. That is
the true state of the use of Regal Power in the Government of the Church, to
protect and assist it in the free exercise of its own legislative Authority,
not to assume and annex it to the Imperial Crown. It would be an endless thing
to transcribe all the Passages to the same purpose, out of the several Returns
made to the Emperor from the Eastern Bishops, they all move upon this one
hinge, that what was determined by the Church was Sacred Law, and therefore no
review or farther dispute of the Resolution of the Calcedon Council. And thus
was this stubborn Controversy laid, and the Church settled in Peace and Unity
all this Emperor's Reign. But beside these Laws of Discipline to enforce the
Authority of the Church, he made diverse other Laws in behalf of the Church,
that were mere acts of his Royal Grace and Favor, bestowing several Privileges
and Immunities upon Churches and Churchmen. Thus he granted the right of
Sanctuary to all Religious houses, Cod. Justin. C. de his qui confugiunt ad
Ecclesias.
so as to punish its violation with no less Penalty than Death. Another Law he
enacted to forbid all Plays and profane Sports on Holy Days, and to protect
Men from Lawsuits, Leg. Ult. de Feriis.
Arrests and Vexations at times dedicated to the Service of God, L. 15 de
Episc. Audientia. L. 31 de Episc. et Clericis ibid. L. 33.
upon pain of forfeiture of Estate. And a third Law to forbid all but
Christians to plead in Courts, a fourth against the Sacriledg of Simony, and a
fifth to exempt the Clergy from being forced to appear before Secular Courts,
beside a great many other Privileges granted to particular Churches.

. XVIII. But he dying after he had Reigned 17 Years and 6 Months in the Year
474, his Son-in-Law Zeno unhappily succeeds, to the great loss both of Church
and State, a man altogether unfit for Government, being not only a weak, a
careless, and a dissolute Prince, but one that affected to expose himself to
the contempt of the World by making his Follies and Debaucheries public,
esteeming it a poor and sneaking thing to conceal his wickedness, but brave and
Prince-like to be wicked in sight of the Sun. And consequent to this strange
folly he was a shameless Oppressor of his Subjects, robbing and defrauding
them, and wherever he could by any indirect shifts seizing any thing into his
hands, and no wonder, when Millions of Worlds are not sufficient to defray the
Charges of an unbounded Luxury. These practices so turned the hearts of his
Subjects against him, as to encourage Basiliscus, his Uncle in Law, to invade
his Empire, in which distress he was so deserted, that without being able to
make any defense or resistance, he had no Remedy but to betake himself to
flight, and lie concealed in his own Country of Isauria. And so the whole
Empire was left as a naked prey to the Tyrant, and being an apparent Usurper,
he was forced to take cross measures to his Predecessors, and in pursuance of
his design recalls Timotheus Aelurus from Banishment, and by his advice and
persuasion issues forth an Encyclical Epistle to the whole Christian World, to
Anathematise the Novelties, as he styles them, of the Council of Calcedon, and
is not ashamed to warrant his illegal Proceedings by the example of Constantine
the Great and Theodosius the younger. Imperial Constitutions he might have
found enough to ratify the Sentence of the Church, but for an Emperor to pass
an Anathema by his own mere Authority upon any Opinion, much more against a
solemn Decree of the Church, was a rudeness and presumption without Precedent
as well as Law, and no man that was not a Clown as well as a Tyrant would ever
have attempted it. But as profane a piece of Buffoonry as it was, it is owned
by the Eutychian Faction in a Council at Ephesus, and that too under the
profane Title of a Divine and Apostolical Epistle. But it is as vehemently
opposed by Acacius and his Monks of Constantinople, till the People tumultuate
in defense of their Bishop against the Tyrant, so as to force him to quit the
City, who in revenge takes away all the Privileges of the Church and City. But
being informed of Zeno's marching from Isauria in the Head of an Army, he begs
pardon, and to appease Acacius and the Clergy of the City, he publishes his
Antencyclical Epistles, as they are called, to reverse and cancel the former,
and restore the Authority of the Council of Calcedon (And what will not
Usurpers do to keep possession?) but all in vain: for at Zeno's approach to the
City he is utterly deserted, and deposed with more ease then he had usurped, is
put to death at Acusus or Cucusus in Cappadocia, and his Encyclical Epistle
cancelled and burnt. Upon this the very same Bishops of the Eutychian, or
rather the then thriving Party, that had subscribed it at the late Cabal or
Conventicle at Ephesus, and there declared it to be their own voluntary Act
without any force or compulsion, are now most forward to write to Acacius to
condemn it, and protest before God and the World, that what they had done was
forced upon them against their own Judgments. And thus were things wheeled
about into the same posture, in which Leo had left them, but this poor
d^ssolute Prince had not skill to make use of any advantage, and instead of
fixing upon the same Foundation of that settlement, that was laid to his
hands, blows it up, and for his own ease, as he dreamed, and for the
satisfaction of all Parties, publishes by the contrivance of Petrus Moggus and
his Eutychian Friends at Court, and some say of Acacius himself, an healing
Instrument of Union or Comprehension, commonly known by the name of Henoticon,
designed to please all Parties, and couch't in such comprehensive and ambiguous
terms, that they might all challenge it to themselves against each other: viz.
Setting up the Nicene Faith as the only condition of Church Communion, and
thereby tacitly but effectually condemning the Council of Calcedon without
taking any notice of it. So weak was this Prince as to flatter himself, that
this slender Artifice was a Cement strong enough to repair all the Breaches in
the Christian Church, when it really served no Bodies turn but Petrus Moggus
and his Eutychians, for he having a strong Inclination to the rich Bishopric
of Alexandria, of which he could not be capable till the terms of Conformity,
that were settled by the Council of Calcedon, were taken off: which being done
by this slite, the Church Doors were again left open to the Eutychian
Heretics, and all things reduced to the same disorder and confusion that they
were in, before they were settled by the Authority of the Church. Lib. 12. c. 4.
And so Facundus here argues upon it with his usual acuteness: Who can endure
the Arbitrary Proceedings of the Emperor Zeno to Enact in Contempt of the
Divine Authority of the Church, in which Action his precipitate Power did not
consider what it ought to do, but what it was able to do; neither did he
understand that confusion never makes Unity. For if Unity be to be compast, not
by the Conversion of Heretics, but mixing their Contagion with the Communion
of the Church, why are the Acephali alone, and not all the other Parties of
Heretics received into the Church without renouncing their errors, and
submitting to the Churches Sentence against them? But the Emperor when he
invites them to return to the Communion of the Church, he gives them the Title
of Orthodox. But this becomes the wisdom and circumspection of that man, that
can be so insipid as to think of invading the Office of the Priests. He calls
them Orthodox, when at the same time he confesses them to be separate from the
Communion of the Church. If they continue Orthodox after their separation, to
what purpose does he exhort them to return to their Mother the Church. But he
would have them unite Communions. But he understands not that there can be but
one Communion. And if they are not of one Communion with the Church, they are
of none at all. I pray for what advantage should they return to the Church,
when they are of the Orthodox Communion without it? But what an abuse of
Secular Power is this, and worse then all the rest, that the Holy Catholic
Church and those that preside over it, should every where be obliged to believe
only as he believes, as if the Faith of all Churches depended only upon his
pleasure, and it were not lawful for any man to believe any thing than as the
Emperor commands? It were much better that he would contain himself with in his
own Limits, then to transgress them to the ruin of many without the gain of
any. For we know that even Mechanics have their Shops and Warehouses proper
to their own Trade. We never hear the Anvil beating or the Fire glowing in the
Weavers Workhouse, nor the Tailor taking measure of the height and proportion
of Buildings, because they very well know that those things* belong to those
that are instructed in those Trades. What is the Divine Law only to be despised
and profaned, so as not to need its proper Schools for instruction, but that
every man should pretend to understand it, without any competent Education in
it. In short, the only effect of all these disorderly Proceedings is, that
these Violators of the Churches Peace divide among themselves as well as from
the Church, as in this particular Case we have by sad experience found a long
and fatal Schism, till the Divine Providence cured the wound by your Majesty's
Care and Power (speaking to Justinian) and therefore great Sir in the name of
God persevere in so good a work, that has been accepted with the joy of the
whole Christian World, and blot not out its glory by deserting it, etc. And
that is the natural and inevitable Event of all trimming tricks, that instead
of reconciling Parties, as it is pretended, it only lets them loose to worry one
another. And withal, first adds to the insolence of that Party that had been
tied up, the contempt of that Authority that restrained it, and then kindles
the rage and indignation of the other Party that had gained the upper-hand, and
lastly, that which is worst of all, it makes breaches for new Divisions And so
it happened here, Peter Mongus having by this device got possession of his
Bishopric, he endeavors to trim and comply with both Parties, and by it
incurs the hatred of both, loosing his own without winning the other: And they
communicating neither with the Catholics nor with their own Bishop, became a
new Sect, called Acephali, i. e. Men without an Head, so natural is it for all
shufflings in Government to end in Anarchy and Confusion: It was this wise way
of quacking to cure the wounds of the Church by Irenicum Plasters and
comprehensive Weapon-salves, that brought the breach between the Eastern and
Western Churches to an incurable Eresipulus, or Fire of Contention over the
Face of the Christian Church. For Petrus Moggus being by that means received by
Acacius not only to Catholic Communion, but advanced to a Top-Bishoprick,
contrary not only to the ancient Canons, but to the late Decree of the Council
of Calcedon: Acacius is upon it called to account by Pope Simplicius, and
persisting in his Treachery, is excommunicated in a Council at Rome, and that
laid the ground of all those Contests, that followed after upon the Acacian
Schism (as the Romanists style it) to the final Separation of both Churches.
And what else can be expected from such a daubing Cement of Peace, to unite men
in the same Communion as leaves them under all their differences and
contrarieties of Opinion, a contradiction in the nature of the thing; for if
they are in good earnest, they will pursue their differences, if they are not,
indulgence is needless, and they are to be reclaimed another way: but whether
they are, or are not, if they are allowed their liberty, every man will be of
his own mind, and an enemy to every man that is not, and the result of all is,
that how much soever they dissent among themselves, they shall be forced to
counterfeit an agreement, but dissembling is no Tie. And therefore after such
devices the next thing that we always hear of, is, that the breach is made much
wider. And thus here beside the Contest between Acacius and Simplicius, Petrus
Moggus falls out with both, and instead of taking the Catholics into his
comprehensive Embrace, in a short time, finding they would not quit their
Principles and the Council of Calcedon, raises a severe Persecution against
them, and peremptorily refuses all Communion to all that adhere to the Council,
and upon it the Church of Alexandria continued in a State of Schism through a
long Succession of Bishops into the next Century, till the Pacisicators again
fell out among themselves, and subdivided into new and fiercer Factions and
Animosities. And not only that Church, to which the healing Henoticon was
particularly directed, but the whole Catholic Church was every where dissolved
into irreconcilable Wars and Confusions. But as sad as the event of the
Henoticon proved, there is one pleasant Passage to be observed about it, that
whereas before there were but two Factions in the Church, i. e. for and against
the Council of Calcedon, this created a third, called the Haesitantes or
Neuters, that were neither for, nor against the Council, and as both Parties
hated these more than they did one another, as Traitors to both; so they again
under pretense of indifferency and moderation, requited them with all the
violence of Persecution, and when they had got the Emperor Anastasius, a
serious Prince, into their hands, they stirred him up to prosecute both the
extreme Parties with a more than ordinary severity, as we shall see more at
large when we come to his Reign. But first let us take a view of the particular
Mischiefs, that it soon produced under Zeno himself, who too after all his
trimming was forced at last to turn Persecutor.

By whom the Henoticon was contrived, it is not easy to determine with any
certainty, I know it is generally laid upon Acacius, but I suspect that Report
to have been raised by his Enemies at Rome only to blast his Reputation. But
though there is no clear Evidence that it was his contrivance, yet it is
undeniable that he gave it too great acceptance, and by that means gave too
just advantage to the Bishops of Rome to insult over him. For though their
private Design was to beat down the growing greatness of the Sea of
Constantinople, yet he deserved the utmost severity, that they could use
against him, by betraying the Discipline and Authority of the Christian Church
so dishonorably, as to receive such Persons into its Communion, that had been
cast out of it by no less Judgment than the Sentence of a General Council, and
that upon no better Warrant than a Mandate from Court. And that I take to be
the Shop in which the wise Contrivance was forged between the Courtiers, out of
an Itch to be tampering with Church-work, and the outed Eutychians either to
recover their Preferments, or usurp other Men's; and through the whole sequel of
the Story we shall find the old Eusebian Game playing over again. But whoever
was the Author of it, it was cunningly enough contrived to impose upon the
World, and serve the Eutychian Cause without owning it. Lib. 3. c. 14.
The best copy of it is the Greek in Evagrius. The Latin Version in Liberatus
is false and barbarous, perverting the sense for want of sufficient skill in
both Languages. It established the Nicene Faith as owned by the following
Councils, it condemned both Nestorius and Eutyches by name, and though it says
nothing of the Council of Calcedon it self, it established the Faith of the
Council, but without regard to its Authority, and the Emperor himself declares,
That as for his own part he embraced the Council of Calcedon, though he would
not have it imposed upon the Catholic Church. So that at the bottom, the whole
design of the Project was only to take off the Authority of that Council, and
then the Eutychians were at liberty to play their Game and drive their own
Bargains, and so the Markets were soon set up in the greatest Sees, and the
chief Chapmen were Peter Moggus at Alexandria, and Peter ^ullo at Antioch.
Liberati Brev. c. 10.
Upon the death of Timotheus Aelurus, who poisoned himself upon Zeno's
recovering the Empire, Peter Moggus was chosen his Successor by the Eutychian
Faction, but is deposed by the Emperor's own Command, and Timotheus
Salophasiolus their Lawful Bishop, is restored. This Timotheus was chosen to
the Sea of Alexandria upon the deposition of Timotheus Aelurus by the Emperor
Leo, was ejected by Basiliscus, restored by Zeno, and after 23 years from the
date of his Election dies. And his keeping that See so long did not a little
contribute to the Disorders of that Church, he being a softly and unactive Man,
that would never put the Discipline of the Church, nor the Imperial Laws in
execution against the Heretics, and though Complaints of his remisness were
carried to the Emperor, and though the Emperor sent him particular Orders to
break up their Conventicles, he could not be prevailed upon to act, but instead
of that suffered himself to be prevailed with upon pretense of Peace and
reconciling, V. Simplicii Epist. 11.
to put Dioscorus himself into the Dyptichs, and by this gentleness he became
very popular among the factious Alexandrians, insomuch that as he at any time
passed through the Streets, the Rabble were wont to salute him with this
outcry, viz. That though we cannot communicate with thee, yet we cannot but
love thee. And the silly Man was so charmed with this childish Rattle, that he
parted with his Episcopal Authority to purchase it, and by this means it was
that the Faction grew so great in that City. And certain it is that the
Courtiers of Popularity are of all Men most unfit for Government in the Church,
they will certainly betray their Trust and their Duty to the applause of the
People. But upon his death in the year 482 the Clergy of Alexandria elect
Joannes Talaia, who is rejected by the Emperor's Command, and who but Petrus
Moggus put in his stead? This the Historians say was done by the instigation of
Acacius out of a private picque against Talaia for neglecting to send Synodical
Epistles according to custom, to signify his election to him, Liberat. c. 17.
as he had done to the other great Sees. But however, outed he was upon
pretense of enormous Crimes, Perjury and Simony, in that he had obliged himself
under Oath never to accept of that Bishopric, and yet for all that, had
purchased it with Money, Lib. 3. c. 12.
as Evagrius reports from Zacharias Rhetor the Eutychian Historian. C. 17.
And Liberatus says that he was Treasurer of the Church of Alexandria, and out
of the Churches Treasure purchased the Bishopric of Count Illus, at that time
a powerful Man at Court. It is certain, that that was the occasion of the
miscarriage of his Synodical Letters to Acacius, they being enclosed in others
directed to his Patron Illus, who happening to be absent at that time as far as
Antioch, the Messenger thought himself obliged to continue his Journey forward
for the safe delivery of his Letters, in which Interval of time Acacius being a
very proud man, was pleased to conceive his Jealousy against Joannes Talaia,
and procure his deposition upon the forementioned Articles, and then treats
with Petrus Moggus and his Court-Patrons, and receives him to communion upon
his acceptance of the Emperor's instrument of Union, but that was to please the
Emperor, for in private he obliged him to receive the faith and authority of
the Council of Calcedon, as himself like a time-rigling Knave, as the Historian
calls him declares over and over in his Apologetical Epistle to Acacius, Evag.
l. 3. c. 17.
to vindicate himself from the calumny of his having contrary to his Faith
renounced the Council. And the same shuffling Arts are observed of him by
Liberatus, Cap. 18.
that he prevaricated with both Parties, pretending to Acacius to communicate
with the Synod, and to the Alexandrians to defy it. And the Emperor Zeno
himself assures Pope Foelix, that he was not admitted to his Bishopric but
upon his owning the Council of Calcedon, in an Epistle extant in Liberatus.
Cap. 20.
But when the wicked man had gained his point, he forswears all his
subscriptions, anathematises the Council and Leo's Epistle, blots Proterius and
Salophasiolus out of the Dypticks, and puts in Dioscorus and Timotheus Aelurus.
And now here do we find by virtue of this Imperial Instrument of Union the
whole Christian World involved in a Civil War, one Party asserting the Council
of Calcedon, another anathematising it, a third despising both, and trampling
upon all the Discipline of the Church in defense of a Court-irregularity. But
the quarrel run highest between the two powerful Bishops of Rome and
Constantinople; for Acacius Bishop of Constantinople, having the Court and the
Emperor to back him, bids defyance not only to the Pope, but to the Catholic
Church and all its Laws. For though himself was the first man that had appeared
against Petrus Moggus, and convicted him of manifest Heresy, and certified his
conviction to Pope Simplicius, yet now without any due satisfaction receives
him not only to Communion, but prefers him to one of the highest dignities in
the Christian Church. And tho after all these obliging streins of Courtesy
Moggus discovered his obstinacy by anathematising the Council and changing the
Dypticks, Acacius winks hard and will not see it, but stands by him to the last
drop of blood, calls all the Power of the Court into his assistance, to support
him against the Discipline and Authority of the Church, slites he admonitions
of the greatest Bishops in it, Imprisons their Legates, defies their Sentence,
lives and dies excommunicate, and all this for a Man that himself could not but
know to be a s^ubborn Heretic. The full account of all these transactions,
beside the Relations of the Historians Liberatus and Evagrius, is to be seen in
the Letters of Pope Simplicius and Foelix, the Breviculus Hist^riae
Eutychianistarum, and the Acts produced in the Cause of Acacius at the Council
at Rome, all which are printed together in their proper place and order of time
in Labbe's Councils. The first correspondence about this matter against Petrus
Moggus was (as I have already intimated) opened by Acacius himself in his
Epistle to Simplicius, Inter Epist. Simplic. an^^nonam.
informing him that upon the death of Timotheus Aelurus, one Petrus Moggus an
excommunicate Person, being a Thief and a Son of Darkness, had at midnight
stolen into the Throne of Alexandria, having only one Companion to attend him,
by which Act of madness he made himself obnoxious to greater Punishments, than
had been hitherto pronounced against him, but however he was defeated of his
Design, for Timotheus Salophasiolus being restored to his Throne, this foolish
thief durst never show his head more. In answer to this, Epist. 9.10.11, 12.
Simplicius returns diverse congratulatory Letters, not only to Acacius, but the
Emperor Zeno, exhorting him to banish Moggus out of the City. Epist. 14.15.
But in the next Letters, he complains of the neglect of his Advice, and
suspects warping and luke warmness in Acacius, and the next news we hear is,
that upon the death of Timotheus, Petrus Moggus is by the power of Acacius
advanced to the Sea of Alexandria. Of which when Simplicius sends him Letters
of Complaint, Ep. 17.18.
one after another, he would never vouchsafe him any Answer, and so Simplicius
dying the ^udgels are immediately taken up by his Successor Foelix the 3 d, and
the first Act of his Government is to call a Council, Foelicis Ep. 1.
in which a Synodical Letter of Admonition is written to Acacius, chiding him
for his sullenness to Simplicius, charging him with Pride and ill-manners
toward the Apostolic See, advising him to use his Interest with the Emperor
to rectify the late Misdemeanors at Alexandria in the election of Moggus,
otherwise he must be thought an Apostate from his own Principles, and a
Renegado to the Heretics; for not to proceed against wicked Men, when it is in
a Man's power to curb them, is to give them protection, and he incurs suspicion
of secret friendship, who gives over his opposition to a manifest impiety. And
in the same Council another long and pathetical Letter is drawn up to the
Emperor, and sent by the same Legates Vitalis and Micenus, conjuring him to
keep fast to his old Principles against the Heretics, and gauling him in the
same Dilemma, in which they had involved Acacius, viz. That if he stood firm to
the Council of Calcedon, he must renounce the Heretics, and therefore if he
did not oppose them, he protected them against the Council, and that was
manifest opposing it. But the Emperor was big with his new Project of
comprehension, and was deaf to all advice against it, and Acacius being secure
of him, he slites Foelix his Letters, imprisons his Legates, and draws them in,
to join Communion with himself and Moggus. Upon the news whereof another
Council is immediately summoned at Rome, where the sentence of Deposition and
Excommunication is denounced against him. But he being warm and safe at Court
slites the force of all Ecclesiastical Discipline and requites Foelix in his
own coin, striking his name out of the Dypticks, and persisted in the exercise
of his own Function to his dying day, which was 4 years after the Sentence,
that was decreed in the year 484, and he dyed in the year 488.

This was the effect of this shrewd Instrument of Comprehension, in these three
head Churches of Rome, Constantinople and Alexandria, nothing less than a total
breach of Communion, and one of the fiecrest Schisms that ever befell the
Christian Church, and though the Peace between them was patcht up about 34
years after, by the Power and Activity of Pope Hormisdas, yet they were never
heartily reconciled to this very day. As for Acacius it is a dispute what he
was, some indict him of Heresy or Church-treason, others only of high
Misdemeanors, though as for my own part after all streins of Candor, I cannot
but think him guilty of both, or I fear something worse, the want of a serious
sense of Religion. To free him from the high charge of Heresy, it is pleaded
that he never in the least owned the Eutychian Faith, that he ever declared
against it, that he was never charged with it by the Ancients, and that in the
Sentence against him at Rome, where all his Crim^s were strictly enough
enumerated, this is no Article against him. But yet for all this I see not how
he can be absolved from it, for in the Eye of the Law, and indeed the common
sense of the World, all Commun^on with Heretics is and ought to be judged
Heresy, as in all Civil Laws all consulting with Traitors is deemed Treason.
For it concerns not the Government to fish out every Man's Opinion or motive of
his Practice, that can judge only by overtacts, and then to communicate with
Heretics is Heresy, and to consult with Traitors Treason. But much more in
this particular Case, in which all Communion with the Heretics had been
Canonically declared Heresy by the Church in the great Council of Calcedon,
and without it the sentence of the Church had been of no force, for that can
reach no farther than their outward Communion. So that after all, the Henoticon
was so far from compromising the Controversies, as it pretended, and I believe,
designed, that it only reverst and contradicted the Decree of the Church, and
by an Imperial Rescript declared that to be no Heresy, that had been judged so
by the Council, and that I take it, is plain bidding defyance to it and its
Authority.

As for the other Crimes charged upon him, they are enormous enough, his very
friendship with such ill Men as Moggus and Fullo, shows he had but very little
sense of Honesty, or indeed of Reputation, otherwise he would have loathed and
defied Men of such rank Practices. But the leading Sin, that betrayed him into
all his other Miscarriages was his Pride and Ambition* and to gratify that, it
is plain that he stuck not to subvert all the Discipline of the Christian
Church. For finding the Emperor Zeno fond of his Henoticon, he at least frankly
complied with it, to the subversion of the first and fundamental Law of all
Church Communion, in receiving Heretics into it without Canonical Repentance
and Satisfaction. And this is suggested in the Decree of the Council at Rome
against him, that he preferred the Emperor's favor above his own Faith; and
then it is no matter to what Religion such perfidious Men pretend, when it is
too apparent that they have really none at all. And the case of the Church at
this time was much the same, as it was under the Reigns of Constantius and
Valens: ill Men got into the Court, and from thence crept into the Church, and
to gain Preferments for themselves flattered the Prince into an exorbitant use
of his Power, against the true and regular Discipline of it. And that would at
once give them interest at Court, and make vacancies in the Church for
themselves, and this weak Prince was so drunkenly fond of this little Project,
that he would throw away the best Preferments in the Church upon any Parasite,
that would but seem to hugg his fondling-Ape, by which means great numbers of
very bad Men came into the best Churches. But one of the greatest Instances of
it is the great Church of Antioch, we have already seen the other three leading
Churches brought into a Civil War among themselves, but here it came to blows
and cutting of Throats, that I shall very briefly describe as another
observable Example of the good Effects of this gracious Instrument of
Accommodation. Petrus Fullo a Monk had been expelled his Monastery for the
Eutychian Heresy in the time of the Emperor Leo, flies to Calcedon, and being
a talkative Man is soon driven thence for the same Cause, and so takes shelter
at Constantinople, and there insinuates himself into the favor of the Princess
Ariadne, and by her recommends himself to the Patronage of her husband Zeno,
and having gained that, he endeavors to dis-place Martyrius Bishop of Antioch,
Zeno being then Governor of the Place, but Martyrius making his Application to
the Emperor Leo, he is restored, and an Edict published against the tumults of
Monks. But the Monks so little regard the Emperor's Authority, that upon it
they increase their fury against the good Bishop, till at length he being quite
tired out quits his Bishopric, into which Petrus Fullo immediately leaps, and
is as soon thrust out by the Emperor, but is restored by Basiliscus, and again
displaced by Zeno, excommunicated by Acacius, and Stephanus chosen to the Sea,
who being barbarously murdered, another Stephanus is chosen, and contrary to
the Canons consecrated by Acacius at Constantinople, and Petrus Fullo the
Author of all these Dis-orders is banished into Pontus, and Stephanus dying
Calendio succeeds with the same illegal Consecration, but falling into
dis-favor with Acacius, partly for siding with Pope Foelix against himself and
Petrus Moggus, and partly for being too stiff for the Council of Calcedon, he
procures his ejectment by Imperial Power upon an Accusation of Treason, and
Petrus Fullo after all these turns is placed by Acacius his own Interest in
that great See. And thus we see both the old Trade of Ejectments and
Sequestrations returned by prostituting the Discipline and Authority of the
Christian Church to the Power of Court-Favourites, and the whole World
shattered into numberless Schisms and Heresies. For when once the Authority of
the Church and the Law is trodden down, there is no other effectual stop aganst
the rovings of fancy and wantonness, and it is certain that men who differ in
Opinion will never agree, as long as they have liberty to differ. And thus was
it here, when this unskilful Prince had once broken up the Pale of the Church
as it was fixed by the Council of Calcedon and fenced by his Predecessors, he
could never after restrain the People from running into all the wild Conceits,
that Frenzy and Madness could blow into their Heads. And whereas he only
designed to unite the Eutychians to the Communion of the Church, he divided the
Communion of the Church into a thousand new Factions. The Acephali, Severiani,
Theopaschitae, Currupticolae, Phantasiastae, Agnoetae, Tritheitae, beside the
horrible fewds between the Scythian and Acaemetan Monks. The Acephali began at
Alexandria, being Eutychians that separated from Moggus uyon his owning the
Council of Calcedon, out of these were spawned the Severiani at Antioch, so
called from Severus, who had ravished that See, and made himself Captain of the
Acephali by Anathematising the Council, but of him we shall give an Account
under the next Reign, as under the Reign of Justinian they sub-divided into the
Factions of the Gaianitae and Theodosiani, and the Heresy being transplanted
by Jacobus Syrus into Armenia, thence came the Jacobitae. The Theopaschitae
were the Disciples of Petrus Fullo, who to the Eutychian Heresy added, that
the Divinity in our blessed Savior was Crucified and Buried. The Corrupticolae
were the followers of Severus at Alexandria after his Banishment from Antioch,
affirming our Saviors Body liable to decay, and therefore to have been really
repaired by nourishment; but this was opposed by Julianus of Halicarnassus, a
Bishop of the same Party, and flying to Alexandria for the same Cause, who
affirmed that our Savior never took any sustenance, but only seemed so to do,
and therefore were called Phantasiastae, and between these two the Rabble of
the City were disputed into Tumults and Outrages. And out of the Corrupticolae
sprang the Agnoitae, that from the Corruptibility of our Saviors Body, were
pleased to infer some ignorance in his Soul. The Tritheitae were the followers
of Philoponus, who was so far transported in the heat of disputation, as to
assert three distinct Natures peculiar to each Person in the Holy Trinity, and
one common to them all, to which he was betrayed by his Aristotelian
Philosophy, of which he was an extravagant Admirer, that teaches that there is
one and the same general humane nature really common to all men, and another
particular nature appropriated to each individual. And thus when all the Lords
People were permitted the liberty of Prophesying, every man took up his own
Parable and believed his own Dream, the Ass as well as the Prophet, till the
Church was shattered into so many chips and fragments, that it was never after
reunited, as we shall see by the Progress of these Mischiefs, that I have here
only briefly represented. And thus this luxurious Prince having ruined the
Church by so many years licentiousness, only because his laziness would not be
at the pains to see it governed, after he had Reigned 18 years dies of a
Debauch.

. XIX. Zeno being dead Ariadne bestows both her self and the Crown upon
Anastasius a small Officer about the Court, and at his first coming to the
Crown he was forced by Euphenius Bishop of Constantinople to declare for the
Council of Calcedon; For the Bishop suspecting his Religion, refused to Crown
him till he had made a public profession of his Christian Faith, which he
registered and laid up in the Archives of his Church, as a Testimony against
him, if he should ever relapse to the Haesitantes, as he afterward did and
turned a vehement Persecutor in pursuance of moderation, banishing any man
either for owning or disowning the Council of Calcedon. But of that afterward,
for at first having got the Crown Imperial upon his Head, he endeavors to make
himself popular, and for that end in the first place he takes off that heavy
and scandalous Tax called the Chrysargyrum. It was a Tax by Poll not only upon
Men, Women and Children, but upon all Beasts and Cattle both of profit and
pleasure even to Dogs and Cats. This was by immemorial Custom (though Zosimus
is pleased to impute its Contrivance to Constantine the Great) collected every
fourth year, and being a Customary Impost without any Formality of Law to
warrant it, it was no doubt with severity enough exacted by the Officers, not
so much for the profit of the Crown as their own. And this made it extreme
heavy to the Subject, but that which made it Scandalous was its being a
Rentcharge upon the Stews and public Houses of Debauchery, granting (as
Evagrius describes it) a License to all their wickedness upon a certain Rate of
Excise. L. 3. c. 39.
And for that reason it was commonly called Aurum paenosum, the Syntax or
Commutation Money, which being so offensive to the People, and so foul in it
self, as seeming to grant a Liberty to all manner of wickedness upon the
reserve of a Pension to the Government; upon that account as it was a just, so
was it a plausible Action in this Emperor to contrive its Abrogation. And he
did it with that Art and Diligence as to destroy not only the
Exchequer-Records, but the Collectors Books; For counterfeiting a Repentance of
his Folly in parting with so fair a Revenue, he Summons in all the Collectors
to bring in their Court-Rolls for retrieving a new Register out of them, this
they greedily comply with in hopes to recover their several Offices in the
Collection, which being done he consumes all their Books in a public
Bone-fire, to prevent his Successors from ever recovering any of its Memoires,
and so ended this barbarous Imposition, unbecoming, as the Historian observes,
not only any Christian but any Heathen Commonwealth. But soon finding this too
great a retrenchment of his Revenue in Money, he is forced to supply it another
way as heavy upon the Subject. That whereas the Provinces had hitherto paid
their Tribute in kind, he exacts it by way of Composition in Money, and whereas
hitherto it had been managed by the Magistrates of Cities, who used their
Neighbors kindly, he farmed it out to his Collectors, and they to be sure
would loose nothing that was to be got, but setting aside their oppression, it
proved a very great oppression in it self to the poor Farmers, for though they
might have plenty enough of Corn and Cattle to spare, yet they had scarcity
enough of Money, and for that very reason out of mere humanity and compassion
this way of Taxing had been often forbidden by diverse of the preceding Emperors.

As for the State of the Church under his Reign, it gives us a true Character
of the Conequences of Comprehension, as it is described by Evagrius. L. 3. c.
30.
That being excessively desirous of Peace, he would permit no Innovation, and
labored all manner of ways that the Church should every where remain without
disturbance, and that all his Subjects should enjoy perfect Peace without
brawling and contention. And for that end the Council of Calcedon was in those
days neither openly abetted nor rejected. But every Bishop followed his own
conceit; some stickling with all their might for all the determinations of the
Council, not allowing the alteration of the least Syllable in its Decrees, and
refusing with the greatest disdain to communicate with any that rejected any
part of it: others on the contrary did not only reject but anathematised the
Council and all that adhered to it; others again cried up Zeno's Henoticon, and
though these two Parties differed among themselves about the Eutychian
Controversy, yet both Parties agreed against the Council, some being seduced
by the Imperial Letters, others by the pretense of Peace. So that all the
Churches in the Christian World were rent into numberless Schisms and Factions,
and the Communion of the Bishops shattered all in pieces. Hence arose infinite
Quarrels between the Eastern, Western and African Churches; the Eastern
refusing Communion with the Western and African, and they on the other side
denying them the same Civility. And not only so, but the business was carried
on to an higher degree of folly, for none of them agreed among themselves, the
Eastern Bishops breaking Communion at home, neither did the Western and African
Bishops, though they both joined against the Eastern, communicate themselves,
or with any other Foreign Churches whatsoever. All which the Emperor
perceiving he deposed all Innovating Bishops, all that stuck to the Council,
and all that Anathematised it, and so cast Euphenius and after him Macedonius
out of the Sea of Constantinople, and Flavianus out of the Sea of Antioch. A
goodly Account this of the natural effects of this wise Project of Peace and
Moderation, to set all the World in a flame without redress, till at last the
Peacemaker himself is forced to quit his own pretense, grows angry, and
violent in proceeding against all that refuse to comply with his own Will, and
it is a very obvious observation of this sort of men, that when they are
disappointed in their Project, they grow moody and sullen, and are of all
others the most revengeful and implacable to all that differ from them. And as
for these dire effects of love and meekness no Man need to wonder at them,
because the design it self is no better than casting away all manner of
Discipline and Government, without which all Societies soon fall into War and
Anarchy. Neither do these Mischiefs end in the Church, but they break out into
Tumults and Rebellions in the Commonwealth, as we shall see anon in the
Rebellion of Vitalian.

But though all Christendom were actually in Arms, the Fight was hottest and
the Contest run highest at Rome and Constantinople between Euphemianus and
Gelasius, who, though they agreed in the Orthodox Faith, could never be
reconciled in the point of Discipline concerning Acacius, and those Bishops
that communicated with the Eutychian Heretics after they were condemned by the
Council. Gelasius will listen to no terms of Reconciliation, till the Acacian
Schismatics are thrown out of the Dyptichs, and Euphemianus on the contrary
importunes him to condescend from the strictness of Discipline for the sake of
Peace and Unity, and assures him that his Severity could have no other effect
in the Eastern Church but to make the breach wider. But for all that Gelasius
stops his Ears at all motions of condescension, Epist. 1.
and by virtue of the Authority of St. Peter will abate nothing of the settled
Discipline of the Church, upon any account or pretense whatsoever: And
therefore advises him, as he hoped ever to recover the favor of the Apostolic
See, to anathematise Acacius as well as Eutyches. And to the same purpose he
writes to Faustus Ambassador to Theodorick King of the Goths, and at that time
Master of Rome and Italy* then residing at Constantinople, upon a treaty of
Peace between his Master and the Emperor. Epist. 4.
Though in it he all along betrays his great concern to be more for the
Grandeur of his own See, than the Discipline of the Catholic Church. However
Faustus labors to the utmost of his Power to gratify his Holiness, but all in
vain, for they are resolved at Constantinople never to deliver up a Bishop of
their own, much less so stout a Champion as Acacius, to the ambition of Rome.
And even the Emperor himself storms at him for his unyielding obstinacy, upon
which his Majesty is accosted with a Letter in a very high style, demanding his
Obedience to the Apostolic See, discoursing at large the pre-eminence of the
Pontifical Power above the Regal. Epist. 14.
And this he follows with a Circular Epistle directed to the Bishops of
Dardania, wherein he magnifies the Sovereign Authority of his own See above the
whole Catholic Church, in such high streins, as were indeed nothing less than
an open challenge of an absolute Monarchy over it. And therefore Acacius dying
in Rebellion against his Highnesses Predecessors, neither himself nor any that
communicate with him ought to be received into Grace and Favor. And in the same
lofty language he directs his Mandate to the Eastern Bishops upon the same
Argument: Epist. 15.
And not content with this, he issues out his Proclamation to the whole
Christian World, to declare the validity of the Sentence against Acacius and
his Accomplices.

To him succeeds Anastasius in the Papacy, who, though stiff enough, sinks much
below the height and rigor of his Predecessor, Epist. 1.
and condescends to send his Legates, and tender an humble Address to the
Emperor for Peace and Reconciliation, and insists upon no other terms than only
the suppression of the name of Acacius. But now the Emperor instead of yielding
to any Rules of Discipline, finding he had a coming Pope, endeavors to draw him
to the Henoticon, and obliges one Festus a Senator of Rome then at
Constantinople to undertake it, but before his return home the Pope dyed in the
year 498. And he is with great difficulty succeeded by Symmachus, for Festus to
carry on his Design of Comprehension, set up against him one Laurentius, a Man
that he very well knew would do any thing to comply with the Emperor's Will for
the advancement of his own Ends. And that gave Being to one of the most furious
Schisms, that ever happened in that Church; not only the People and the Clergy,
but the Senators themselves, being engaged in each Party even to Blood and
Slaughter. And the Quarrel grew so high, that King Theodorick was at last
forced to repair to the City with his Army to prevent a Civil War, and at
length after great pains by the Assistance of a Council at Rome, commonly
called the Synodus Palmaris, gave Symmachus Possession.

And at Constantinople Tumults became so furious that above 3000 of the
Orthodox Christians were murdered at one time at Divine Service by the
Soldiers, as was affirmed, by the Emperor's Instigation. And upon it Symmachus
writes to him to reprove him for the cruelty of the Action, and require him to
forbear all farther Communion with Heretics, but he grows more violent, and so
is excommunicated, but that transports him to that indecency of Passion, that
he condescends to write Libels against the Pope, that are answered again with
sufficient rudeness, the Pope telling him in plain terms, that he is as good a
Man as himself. Upon this the Emperor looses all patience, and so with as great
an Extravagance on the other side, publishes a fraudulent Rescript, that no Man
shall be capable of any Preferment in Church or State, Cod. de Episc. Audientia
l. 19.20.
unless he take the Sacrament upon it, that he will be true to the Orthodox
Faith, and what he meant by that, is too too evident from his present wild
behavior about the Henoticon, and so the Rescript is interpreted by Theodorus
Lector. And sometime after, i. e. in the year 510, Cod. de Haeret. l. 10.
he publishes another Rescript to incapacitate all that were not Orthodox in
his own sense, for all Ecclesiastical Preferment. And at the same time
endeavors with all his might to remove Macedonius from the Sea of
Constantinople, though he had been placed there by himself upon the banishment
of Euphemius, Theodorus Lector lib. 2.
till at length the barbarous Rabble and Soldiers again broke in with Clubs and
Staffs upon the Catholics, as they were at Divine Service in the Church of
Archangel, adding after the Trisagion this form of Words, who was Crucified
for us. This came to blows and tumults, that were chiefly managed by Severus
the Monk, of whose goodly Virtues more anon, and Julian Bishop of
Halicarnassus, a Man much of the same Kidney, till a vast Rabble of the
Orthodox joined in a Body together, and as is the manner of Tumults, cried one
and all, so that the Emperor was forced to engarrison himself within his own
Palace, and was taking Ship to secure himself by flight, but that bethinking
himself to send for Macedonius and sweeten him with some good Words, by his
means (who good Man was much more troubled at the Disorders than the Emperor
himself) appeased the Tumult, and for his reward of so good a piece of Service,
he was immediately conveyed away by night, kept in close Prison, and one
Timotheus placed in his See.

And the same Method of Moderation was put in practice every where in the
Eastern Church, and among the rest the great Flavianus of Antioch was banished,
and Severus the Monk, that mortified Man, who had long watched for the Sea of
Constantinople, placed in his stead. He was first bred to the Law, where he
might, if he would but give his Mind to it, learn all the shifts of fraud and
oppression, from thence he betook himself to a Monastery, to accomplish himself
with all the slites of Hypocrisy, being expelled thence, he at last betakes
himself to Court, to make all his other good Qualities useful and practicable
by a sufficient stock of Impudence, and what cannot that Man do, that is made
up of so good a warp of knavery, so well wooft with Hypocrisy, lined through
with immodesty? Thus accoutred to Court the demure Man comes, and finding which
way the Weathercock of Preferment stood, soon insinuates himself into the
favor of the Religious Empress, and that was an easy passage to the Emperor,
whom he soon got into his possession, and put him upon his severe Courses in
pursuance of moderation, only to make some good vacancy for himself. He had
heaved twice at the Bishopric of Constantinople in the Expulsion of Euphemius
and Macedonius, but finding it would not take there, he is content with
Antioch, and so procures the expulsion of Flavianus, for his not quitting the
Council. And though the Emperor according to the Tenor of his Henoticon,
obliged him by Oath never to anathematise it, yet he could not forbear doing it
publicly in the Church at the very time of his Consecration. Neither does his
zeal and fury confine it self to his own Church, but he vents it in other
Diocesses, and particularly procures the banishment of Elyas Bishop of
Jerusalem, who had with many Conflicts and for many Years weathered it against
the Emperor's own folly. But at last his Enormities grew so intolerable, and
his contempt of the Canons so scandalous, that notwithstanding all his power at
Court, he is solemnly excommunicated by a Council at Constantinople at the
Emperor's own doors, and such was the rudeness of his Tongue as well as his
Actions, that after the death of Anastasius, it was condemned by the Emperor
Justin at the instigation of the Courtiers, to be cut out for a Penance for its
foul language, had he not saved both that and himself by ^light. It Is still we
see this sort of precious Saints, that are for promoting the dissettlement and
oppression of the Church for their own ambitious Ends.

But things being every where in such confusion, and the People under such
discontents, this gives both a pretense and an opportunity to Vitalian General
of the Army to revolt, and he (God knows his heart) takes up Arms only to right
and restore the banished Bishops, and at last yields to a Peace upon condition
that the Emperor would call a free Council at Heraclea, for the settlement of
the Church and the restitution of the Bishops, and the Emperor to make good the
Article summons about 200 to the place appointed, but dismisses them without
any Debate. Upon this Vitalian threatens and arms again, but is at present
bought off with a round sum of Money. And now the Emperor finding at last into
what streights he had brought himself and his Government by his violent
moderation, he grows weary of it, and writes to Pope Hormisdas, who succeeded
Symmachus, to request his assistance for the resettlement of the Church. But
this Pope was both a stout and a crafty Man, and would hear of no other terms
of Peace but entire submission to the Council of Calcedon, Pope Leo's Letter,
and the condemnation of Acacius: And the poor tired Emperor is ready to yield
all except the last, and by his Resolution in defense of Acacius luckily
recovered the love of his Citizens, among whom there was none of their Bishops
whose Memory was more valuable than that of Acacius. And therefore in that
point he begs his Pardon, and having by that Artifice secured the People to
himself, he now ventures to disband Vitalian, and puts Ruffinus in the head of
his Army. And the Pope sending a second Embassy to him the year following
against Acacius, the Emperor now defies him, charges him with rudeness and
incivility, and tells him, that for the time to come he will have no
intercourse with a Man so utterly void of good Manners, as to yield nothing to
his Royal Will. And so ended his reign, for tho the Romish Writers tell strange
Tragedies of I know not what bloody Persecution that insued upon it, they rely
merely upon the monkish and fabulous Historians of later Times, without any
Authority from the Ancients and more timely Records, and therefore are of no
Credit.

. XX. Anastasius after 27 years reign dying* Justinus, who at first had been
but a common Soldier, succeeds by the choice of the People, and the Guards,
whose Votes he had bought with the Money that Amantius the Eunuch (the great
Patron of the Heretics under Anastasius, and the main instrument of all the
Mischiefs against the Church in his reign) had entrusted with him to bribe
their Voices for Theocritus, to whom he designed the Empire, as Evagrius
reports from Zacharias Rhetor the partial Eutychian Historian, Lib. 4. c. 2.
whereas Justin himself protests in his first Letter to Pope Hormisdas, That
the Empire was forced upon him by the Senate and the Army, without his own
seeking and against his own Will. And he seems to have been a Man of that
plainness and simplicity through the whole course of his life, that his
Protestation may, if in that case any Man's may, be trusted, and it is no great
wonder, if he were not very forward to accept the Government, when he could not
but be conscious to himself of his unfitness for it, being a Person of no
Education, only having the good fortune by his Courage to raise himself from a
common Soldier to the chief Command in the Army.

This Emperor at his first coming to the Crown finding all things in confusion
by the irregular actings of Zeno and Anastasius against the Council of
Calcedon, publishes an Edict commanding subscription to it by all the Clergy,
the restitution of the banished Bishops, and expulsion of the Intruders. Among
whom Severus of Antioch bearing the blackest Character, Evag. lib. 4. c. 4.
and being the most busy Promoter of the Faction suffered in the first place.
But though he were very carefully watched and way-layed by Irenaeus the Prefect
of the East, he made his escape to Alexandria, where the Heretics had kept
possession to that very time, Athanasius succeeding to Petrus Moggus, to him
Joannes Mela, to him Joannes Machiota, to him Dioscorus the younger, to him
Timotheus in the year 519, all Henotical Men. Liberati Brev. c. 19.
In this time it was that Severus came to Alexandria, and was very welcome to
him, as Julianus Bishop of Halicarnassus had been before him, but these two
disputing Gentlemen meeting together, could not long agree. Severus setting up
the Sect of the Corrupticolae, and Julianus of the Phantasiastae, but
Themistius a Deacon of that Church divides from both, and founds a new Schism
of the Agnoetae. But now the Emperor having in some measure settled the Eastern
Church, he labors for its reunion with the Western, and for that end writes to
the stiff Pope Hormisdas, to offer Proposals of Peace and Reconciliation, after
a rupture of 34 years, that began in the year 484, when Acacius and Foelix
excommunicated each other; and after many Treaties, Embassies and
Inter-messages, the Peace is concluded in the year following, viz. anno 519.
And Acacius is now at last given up and sacrificed to his revenge, without
which the Pope let them know at first, that it was in vain to treat of Peace
upon any other conditions. Neither will he be satisfied with the sentence
against Acacius alone, but all his Successors must be expunged out of the
Dyptichs only for keeping him in, and so must his two Patrons, the Emperors
Zeno and Anastasius, and this being done the Peace is concluded with great joy
on all sides, and Hormisdas writes to the Emperor to exhort him to proceed in
the same good work in other Places, especially at Alexandria and Antioch. But
things were so much out of order, and Men were grown so unruly by the latitude
and licentiousness of the late Times, that they would rather raise Tumults then
lay down their Disputes, though the greatest Disorders were raised at
Constantinople it self by the Scythian Monks, a spawn of the Henotical Liberty,
and this run to that height of Sedition, that it awed the Emperor himself,
engaged the greatest Men in the Empire into Parties, enflamed the Church of
Africa, and set Rome it self on fire. In the year 518 they first broke out
under the Patronage of Vitalian, and the Conduct of Maxentius a witty and
learned Man, and they must have this Proposition, that one of the Holy Trinity
was crucified in the flesh, imposed upon the Catholic Church as a necessary
Article of Faith. But the Novelty and Ambiguity of the expression was offensive
to all Men, that were for acquiescing in the Council of Calcedon, and so they
fell to disputing pell-mell, Victor a Deacon of that Church being head of the
opposite Party, and followed by the Acaemetan Monks, as indeed all the fewds of
the Christian Church were every where carried on by that idle sort of Men, that
had little else to do than to wrangle. But the Popes Legates coming to
Constantinople this present year 519, the Scythian Monks present them an
Address in their own defense, in which they embrace all the 4 Councils,
anathematise all the Heretics, only they must have their own new Proposition
added to the determinations of the Church. But the Legates wholly shift the
business, as being limited by their Commission from intermedling with any
Matter that was not expressed in it. Upon this the zealous Monks repair to Rome
to besiege the Pope himself with their importunity, and as Vitalian had
espo^sed their Cause, so Justinian appeared against it, and writes a sharp
Letter to Hormisdas against the petulancy of the Monks, tho afterward he became
not only their Patron but their Advocate, earnestly soliciting the Pope in
their behalf, but he not well knowing at that distance what to make of all this
Contest, adjourns its examination till the return of the Legates. In the mean
time there being then a famous Society of African Bishops in Sardinia, that
were banished their own Country by Thrasamond King of the Vandalls, a zealous
Arian, and at that time Master of Africa, to these the Monks apply themselves,
and present them a Confession of their Faith, wherein declaring to the height
against the Pelagian Heresy, they thereby ensnare their Affections, who had
been the greatest Champions against it, in so much that Fulgentius himself
writes an Apology in their behalf. But upon the return of the Legates, the
Monks knowing that they were none of their friends, they hang upon their
Remonstrance in the most public Places of the City to raise Sedition among the
People, and so betake themselves to flight. Of their unruly behavior at Rome
Hormisdas has given an account in his Letter to Possessor an African Bishop,
that they were a sort of vain, proud, petulant Men, that under shows of
mortification kept up the height of Pride and Insolence, and were swollen to that
degree of Arrogance, that they would have the whole Christian World to truckle
to their imperious dictates, and instead of obedience, that ought to be the
peculiar glory of Monasteries, set up obstinacy and stubbornness, etc. this
Letter is answered by Maxentius, (whose Works are extant in the Bibliotheca
Patrum) where his great Holiness is treated with rudeness enough. At
Thessalonica one of the Pope's own Legates was murdered in a Tumult, in
defense of their intruding Bishop Dorotheus. At Jerusalem John an Eutychian had
by the help of Severus of Antioch thrust out Elyas, and usurpt the Chair to
himself, but the Times being changed, so is his Faith, and he becomes a zealous
defender of the Council against the Heretics, and upon it is very acceptable
to the People, who sue to the Emperor for the pardon of all his former
Misdemeanors without any farther process or solemnity of Discipline. And in the
same manner are popular Addresses and Petitions brought from all parts in
behalf of their Bishops, that had been of the Acacian Faction (who by the Terms
of the Concordate between the Pope and the Emperor were all Condemned Men) to
keep those that were dead in the Dyptichs, and those that were living in their
Sees: in short, that Peace may be settled without too much triumph over the
condescending Party. This so perplexes the Emperor that he refers it wholly to
Pope Hormisdas, who was now grown to that Authority in the Christian Church,
that he alone transacted all things in it. And therefore to him the Emperor
dispatches his Ambassadors, to soften him to the m^ldest terms of Peace, for
fear of Tumults if he should stand upon too much severity. And to prepare him
for it, his Majesty Petitions his Holiness by Letter, that he would be
satisfied with the Execution of the Names of Acacius, Petrus Moggus, Timotheus
Aelurus, Dioscorus, and Petrus Fullo, but as for all others that dyed in the
Schism to let them pass in silence. And as for the Cause of the Scythian Monks
that was by this time spread over all the Eastern Church, he proposes that they
may be indulged the Liberty of their Opinion, because though it might be too
curious, yet it was harmless and agreeable to the Orthodox Faith. This motion
is seconded by several Letters from Justinian, who indeed governed all, and by
others from a Council at Constantinople, and by others from Epiphanius Bishop
of the City. But Hormisdas is inflexible, will yield nothing to their
importunity; and let the Event be what it will, and let the People rebel if
they will, nothing of the Discipline of the Church can be abated: And to
receive Schismatics into its Communion, instead of reconciling Parties, it
will only expose its Authority to contempt, or as he expresses it in his Letter
to Epiphanius, Nosti, frater Charissime, quae ecclesiasticam servent vincula
concordiam, quae nos ab Haereticorum tueantur insidiis, per quae etiam Canonum
custodiatur Auctoritas. His in robore suo omni circumspectione servatis,
remedia sperantibus conferantur. And writing to the Emperor, he begs that his
Majesty would not think him more austere than his Predecessors for standing
upon higher terms, they insisting only upon the name of Acacius, and assures
him that it is not stubbornness, but the sad experience of those grievous
Scandals, that had followed upon the unhappy rupture, that made him the more
severe. At the beginning of the Schism there might have been room for some
condescension, but the mischiefs, that have followed by so long and stubborn a
continuance of it, especially their affront to the great Council of Calcedon,
cannot be pardoned or expiated without some public satisfaction. But yet that
he may not be too hard-hearted, he leaves it to the Conscience and Discretion
of Epiphanius, to receive such as he believes true Penitents, or seduced out of
Ignorance and Simplicity, but so as to oblige him to return all their Libels of
Confession to himself at Rome. And as for the Cause of the Scythian Monks, he
will by no means admit their Proposition because of its Novelty; and when the
same thing was less ambiguously expressed by the Scriptures and the Ancients,
as that the Son of God suffered in the Flesh, he would allow of no new Phrases,
that would but give occasion to new disputes and farther divisions. Haec si
quemadmedum a Patribus constituta sunt, servent, credant, non definita
transcendant, a quo tramite qui decli^ant, ipsi sibi nebulam dubitationis
offundunt. And therefore he will have all men acquiesce in the definition of
the Council; and for the same reason though he will not directly condemn the
Proposition of Heresy, yet he damns it as a needless, a peevish, and an over
curious Novelty. And here the Modern Writers of the Church of Rome are at a
great loss how to reconcile this Sentence of Horm s^^as with that of Pope John
the Second, who expressly anathematised the Acaemetan Monks for denying it, and
voucht it for an Article of the Christian Faith, and constant Tradition of the
Christian Church. But the present Historian Natalis Alexander thinks he clears
the difficulty by proving against Baronius that Hormisdas did not condemn the
Scythian Monks of Heresy, Saec. Sext. diss. 2.
and therefore though John the Second past that Sentence upon the contrary
Opinion, it was no contradiction. The observation is good, but the Evasion bad;
for Baronius, as his manner is, here stretches beyond his Records, when he
endeavors to draw them into the List of Heretics; and yet for all that the
Contradiction is as palpable, as if their Sentence had been for Heresy. For
when one Pope shall Condemn a Proposition as a needless and profane Novelty,
and another shall abet it as a constant Tradition of the Christian Church, and
so much an Article of Faith, as to anathematise all that oppose it, is I think
a contradiction too tough to be reconciled by infallibility it self.

As for the behavior of Hormisdas in this whole business, it may seem too
stiff and rigorous, but setting aside his design to trample down his Rival at
Constantinople, and taking upon himself the single Authority of governing the
Christian Church, his severity was but seasonable and necessary at that time.
For ever since the unhappy Publication of the Henoticon, and the Schism of
Acacius, the Discipline of the Church was wholly laid aside by the Acacian
Party, and that could not be restored to its effectual exercise, without
bringing the Offenders against it to a public Confession of their fault.
Neither indeed without that, was it lawful by the Canons of the Church to
receive any man, that had been Canonically judged a Schismatic, to Communion.
And as for the Scythian Monks, though their Proposition were true, as in one
sense it might be, when they applied the Crucifixion not immediately to the
Divinity it self, but to the flesh in which the Divinity resided. Yet however
it was in the first place as they express it in general terms, capable of too
harsh a sense. Secondly, it was without Authority, when private Persons will
take upon themselves the confidence to impose upon the Christian Church.
Thirdly, it was an unmannerly reflection upon the Council of Calcedon, as if
that had not made sufficient provision against the late Heresy, but stood in
need to be patcht out by this new Addition. And for these reasons I cannot see
but that it was justly censured and rejected by this Pope, though otherwise and
in most other Cases he was a man of much too stiff and unyielding a Temper. The
rest of the Acts of his Reign are lost, for tho he lived two years after, yet
after this time we have no remaining Records of his Transactions.

But the Emperor having cleared the Church of these wanton Schisms, that owed
their Birth merely to the liberty granted by his Predecessors, he now proceeds
to root up all the ancient Heresies that it seems had peep't above ground again
by having been so long neglected. And it is certain that there is no setting
limits to liberty of opinion, for if men are once allowed the wantonness of
Philosophising as they please, there is nothing so absurd that somebody will
not assert. And here from this particular Case we may observe the woeful effects
of a few years indulgence and licentiousness, when all these wild Heresies that
the several Emperors had from time to time rooted up by effectual Laws, now
take root and spring up again, and probably had they not been timely prevented
by this Emperor and his Successor, they might have grown to as great an head as
ever they did in former times. But they are cut up all together at one blow by
one Law, Cod. lib. 1. Tit. 5. l. 12.
viz. That the Manichees be every where destroyed and put to death, and that
the rest of the Heretics (and an Heretic is every man that is not Orthodox)
together with Heathens, Jews, and Samaritans, bear no Office in the
Commonwealth. And if any shall presume to do it, he is to be severely fined,
excepting only the Gothic Arians, because they are our Confederates. Where we
may observe, that the punishment of the Manichees is Capital, but that of the
other sort of Heretics Pecuniary, because Manicheism was not mere Heresy, but
downright Debauchery, and that of the blackest Dye, teaching men the practice
of all wickedness from the Principles of Religion. And therefore this Heresy
was as severely proceeded against by Heathen as by Christian Emperors, as we
may see by a Rescript of Dioclesian and Maximinian in the Gregorian Code
against the Manichees, Lib. 12. Tit. Vlt.
those new and unheard of Monsters in the Roman Empire, that were first spawned
in Persia, where they committed all manner of wickedness, raised Tumults and
Seditions among the People, and caused great slaughters in every City.

And as for the exception of the Arian Goths, it could not well be avoided at
that time, both because the Emperor was Confederate with their Powerful King
Theodorick, whose displeasure would then have been very dangerous to the State
of the Empire: and because he would not provoke him to use any Severity against
the Catholics in the West, he being then King of Italy, and had hitherto been
so far from all thoughts of Persecution, that he protected the Church in all
its Rights and Liberties, and abetted its power with as Religious care and
respect as any Emperor had ever done. It is reported by Baronius and those that
follow him that Justin afterward reverst this Indulgence to the Goths, and put
the Laws against the Arians so severely in Execution, that Theodorick forced
Pope John the First to go his Ambassador to Constantinople to take him off from
his severity, and because he did not, or would not effect it, cast him into
Prison at his return home, where he died. This is the common Tale, but I doubt
it wants Authority. For as for Anastasius the Librarian, who is the chief
Author upon whom the learned Annalist relyes, he is a very late and fabulous
Writer, living in the 9th Century, and that under Pope Nicolaus the first, that
great Father of Lies, whose whole business it was to corrupt the Records of the
Church for the advancement of his own See, and as he for that reason imposed
upon the World the forged Decretals of the Popes from Clement down to Cyricius,
so his Librarian extracted the History of that Interval out of those Forgeries.
And though he had or might have had better Records of the following Popes, yet
I know not by what fate it comes to pass, his Story is altogether as ill-told,
and is no better then rank Legend. But so it was that he lived in a dark and
barbarous Age, when the Records of the Church were buried under heaps of Tales
and Fables, and men only studied to out-stretch one another in the strangeness
of their Reports. And therefore I cannot but wonder that a man of Labbes
Learning and Judgment should follow him as the best Author of the Papal
History, when it is so inconsistent with all those Records, that himself has
examined and published, of every Popes Actions. As for the Letters of Pope John
to the Italian Bishops about this business, they are apparently spurious.
Gregory Turonensis indeed tells a Story somewhat like it, but then he has it
only upon Report, at a great distance of place, and that a very crude one, and
different from other Records, for he says nothing of the Embassy to
Constantinople, which was the only considerable transaction of this Popes
Reign, but only says that he was told that the cause of his Imprisonment was
that Theodorick putting all the Catholics in Italy to the Sword (it is strange
that no Historian of that time should make any mention of it) Pope John went to
him to persuade him from so bloody a Persecution, for which in a rage he threw
him into Prison. As for the Story of Gregory the Great, it is so childish and
such mere Legend, that out of respect to so great a man, I will not recite it.
All that certainly appears is this, that there was at that time some
misunderstanding between Justin and Theodorick, for that was the Accusation
upon which the Great Boethius was then put to death, that he held correspondence
with Justin. And that Pope John was sent by Theodorick to treat with the
Emperor, but what was his particular Errand is not recorded, but whatever it
was, it seems he managed it so as to fall into the King's displeasure, and this
is all that we have of that Popes Actions, and this Emperor's reign.

. XXI. For he dying, after he had reigned nine years, in his extreme old Age,
before his death saw his Nephew Justinian fixed in the actual possession of the
Imperial Throne by the choice of the Senate, one of the greatest Princes in the
whole Succession, whether we regard the Success of his Arms, the Magnificence
of his Buildings, or the Wisdom of his Laws, the three greatest Ornaments of
any Princes Reign. And yet Envy, and one ill-natured Libel of a malecontent
Courtier (if it be his) has been able (such is the ill nature of Mankind) to
slur all the Miracles of his reign. But I find that the ground of all the late
displeasure against this great Prince was (as some Men suppose) his too busy
intermedling in Church Matters: this is the thing that is taken unkindly by the
Churchmen at Rome, as an invasion of their Province. But others on the
contrary top him up for a Pattern to all Princes to keep the Jurisdiction of
the Church in their own hands against all the pretenses of Ecclesiastics. But
as it falls out, and ought so to do, they are both equally mistaken; for
Justinian never attempted any thing in the Church, that was not warranted by
continued Precedents of his best Predecessors. He only protected the Power of
the Church in the exercise of its Jurisdiction, as they did, but never claimed
it to himself, howsoever he might err (as sometimes he did) in the execution of
his Office. And whereas they load him so severely for presuming to make so many
Novels, or Laws of his own about Religion, the whole charge is founded merely
upon ignorance and mistake, they being all known Canons of the Church, before
ever he enacted them into Laws. And therefore he is no more to be blamed than
the best of his Predecessors, unless it be for his too pious and watchful care
to preserve the Discipline of the Christian Church. So that it is no less than
high ingratitude in the Clergy of Rome to requite so great a Benefactor to the
Cause of Religion, with nothing but unkind Censures and foul Calumnies. But the
ground of all their present Quarrel is his taking down the pride of one of
their most haughty Popes, Vigilius, though by their own confession one of the
worst of Men, and that too was done at a time, when their Holinesses had been
accustomed to trample upon the state of the Imperial Majesty it self. And if in
these contentions the Emperor fell into any indecencies, that cannot be
justified, yet he ought not only in good Manners, but in justice, to be
excused, because it is evident from the Design of his whole Reign, that his
only aim was to resettle the long-disturb'd Peace of the Church, and if at any
time he failed in his Measures, his Integrity ought by all the rules of Candor
to atone for the defect of his Politics. But whether all his Acts of
Government in the Church are justifiable, or not, I dare insure for all his
Laws, and for that I shall here account, to finish the parallel between the
Ecclesiastical and Imperial Laws in this Matter; because by this Prince the
Imperial Law was brought to its full Perfection. And after that it will be
needless to inquire into the practice of succeeding Princes, who received
either the Theodosian or Justinian Body of Laws, as the sixth and standing rule
of the Imperial Government.

Though of the two the Theodosian Code met with much the better Fortune, for
that having had ninety Years possession both in the Eastern and Western Empire,
it was not easily removed, especially when it had been received by the
barbarous People that invaded and conquered some Parts of the Empire, as the
only established Law of the Romans. And so it was by that great, wise and
prosperous Prince Theodorick King of the Goths, who enacted its obligation upon
his own People in a compendious Edict drawn out of it, consisting of 154 heads,
extant in Cassiodorus. But Alaric his Successor and Grandchild by his Daughter
Amalesuntha, that greatest of Women, made a new body of Institutes out of it,
vulgarly known by the name of the Breviary of Anianus, not that Anianus
composed it, but because he by his Office compared and examined the Original
Copy that was laid up among the Crown-Records, and subscribed his Approbation,
from thence in after-Ages it came to bear his Name. But after the Goths, the
Lombards, the Franks, the Burgundians, and other People of Germany, overrun
the Western Empire, and these when they came to settle, blended the Theodosian
Laws with their own ancient Customs, from whence came the Feudal Law, that to
this day carries the greatest sway* in the Government of all the European
Nations. But as for the Justinian Law, that was received only in the Eastern
Empire, and there it had scarce reigned 300 years, when it was thrust out of
Authority by the Basilica of Leo the Philosopher, who added to the Justinian
Collection the Novels of all the succeeding Emperors down to his own time. But
in the West it was never so much as heard of for 600 years after the death of
Justinian; there are not so much as any footsteps of it in the Capitulars of
Charles the Great, or any other European Laws. Neither were they ever made
public to the Western World till the time of that great Prince Lotharius the
second Emperor and Duke of Saxony, V. Marquardi Freheri Praefat ad L^unclavium.
who reigned not till the year 1125. And he first brought it to light at the
persuasion and by the assistance of Irnerius the most learned Man in that Age,
from which time forward, it has kept possession together with the Feudal Law,
not only in the Schools and Universities but in the Government of the Empire.

But as for the Law it self, it consists of two parts, the Code and the Novels,
that is, Laws made by himself after the publication of the Code, and these are
again to be subdivided into Laws concerning Faith, and Laws concerning
Discipline, in both which he has behaved himself with as much decency and
respect to the Church, as any of his most admired Predecessors. As for the
Code, it is a Collection of former Laws with some additions of his own: Of the
former Laws we have treated in order, under the several Reigns in which they
were enacted, and therefore need say nothing of them here, but only to
vindicate the Integrity of this Record. Because the learned Gothofred to
enhance the value of his Theodosian Code, Proleg. c. 4.
that indeed can never be over-valued, has made very great Complaint of the
unfaithfulness of Tribonian in reciting the Laws of former Emperors. But I must
confess that I cannot discern any such enormous Faults, that may deserve the
hard title of Triboniani Facinora, as he styles them. He has indeed cut off all
superfluities and unnecessary Prefaces, he has fil^d off all temporary and
antiquated Laws, he has avoided, as much as conveniently he could, the
repetition of the same Laws under several Emperors to the same purpose,
otherwise I can see no Alteration but for the better. I shall not enter upon a
particular collation of Laws with Gothofred, that would be too wide a
digression from my Undertaking, and therefore I shall only examine that
Specimen of the Triboniani Facinora, that himself has here given in the Laws
relating to the Subject of Religion. His first instance is in the 6 th Law
under the Title de Haereticis, and that is the Law of Theodosius the Younger
against the Nestorians, that they should be called Simonians, as Constantine
the Great caused the Arians to be styled Porphyrians. And the Original Law it
self runs thus. Quemadmodum Ariani Lege divae memoriae Constantini ob
similitudinem impietatis, Porphyriani a Porphyrio nuncupantur; sic ubique
participes nesariae sectae Nestorii Simoniani vo ^entur. But in the Justinian
Code after Ariani is foisted in ab Ario, and instead of Simoniani it is written
Nestoriani, as if the Arians were to be denominated from Arius, the Porphyrians
from Porphyrius, and the Nestorians from Nestorius. But granting this mistake,
it is no facinus, no sin of Malice, and then beside it is too gross an Escape
for a Man of Tribonian's Learning to make at that time, the Law of Constantine
being then so known and common, and therefore a Man of Gothofred's Candor and
Ingenuity ought to have imputed it to the ignorance of Transcribers in later
Times, after the Book had layen so long buried in dust and rubbish; In other
like Cases learned Men are always wont to impute such Mistakes of Ignorance
rather to the misfortune of the Copy, than to the fault of the Author himself,
if a Man of known learning, especially when it might be corrected by other
authentic Copies, that met with better fortune, as this is both by the
Theodosian Code it self, and Photius his Nomocanon. But in the times of
Ignorance, it was but any ignorant hands clapping either into the Text, or
rather the Margent, the word ab Ario, and there is the whole mistake. And after
all I see not why it might not be done by the first Publisher Irnerius himself,
who, as Vrspergensis informs us, corrected the Copy and interposed some Words
of his own, and in that dark Age it was very easy for a Man very learned, as
the times went, to fall into such a Mistake, when all the Ancient Records of
the Imperial Law had lain so long neglected.

And the same easy mistake is his second Instance in the Law of Valentinian
concerning the Age of Deaconesses, viz. that they should not be admitted into
that order till they were 60 years of Age according to the Precept of the
Apostle, whereas in the Justinian Code the number is sunk from 60 to 50. But
the mistake of figures by Transcribers is so very easy, that it ought to be
supposed, wherever it is discovered, and it is not improbable that Irnerius
his own hand was in this too, for he finding the time set by Justinian's own
Novel to be but 50 years, it was natural for him, who knew nothing of the
Theodosian Code, to conclude that it ought to be so here. The third and last
instance of Tribonian's prevarication is a much leaner exception then either of
the two former, viz. the Rescript of Valentinian the Younger against Apostates,
which Gothofred says reached only Apostates from Christianity to Heathenism,
whereas Tribonian has perverted the sense of it by foisting in those words, de
Haeretica superstitione, as if the Rescript aimed at all sorts of Heretics,
that deserted the Catholic Church. But that these words were foisted in, I see
no ground to suspect, or if they were, they might come in from other hands as
well as Tribonian's. But however the meaning of the Law is so plain, that I
cannot but wonder how so accurate and diligent an Observator, and one of such
exquisite Learning as Gothofred was, should overlook it; for the Law it self
expressly refers to a former Rescript, enacted by the same Emperor, and that is
the Law immediately preceding in the Theodosian Code, and the only Law made
before this by this Emperor, in which he explains what is here meant by
Apostates, of which he there makes three sorts, viz. to Heathenism, to Judaism
and to Manicheism, and therefore this Law that was enacted eight years after in
pursuance to that, must be understood of those three several sorts of Apostates
and none other. And it was no impropriety to call the Manichees Heretics, for
though they were worse than Jews and Heathens, yet they were only accused of
Heresy, because they pretended to Christianity. Neither was it any Solecism to
impute heretical Superstition to the other two Sects, for though they were not
usually accused of Heresy, yet when the word Superstition was joined with it,
by which they then vulgarly understood any false Religion, it comprehended
Pagan and Jewish as well as Christian Heretics. These are all the Instances
that this diligent and learned Man has alleged upon this Argument in his
Chapter de Triboniani Facinoribus, and I think I may now safely leave it to the
Reader to judge, Whether the Proof be not very much too slender to fill up the
Body of the Charge. But when I have vindicated the faithfulness of this great
Man in this great Work, it will not be altogether improper to do that right to
his Memory, who has deserved so highly of all Posterity, as to clear him from a
Calumny or two, that have been so unjustly dashed upon his Reputation. De Bello
Persico lib. 1. cap. 25.
Procopius himself magnifies him for all kind of Virtues, and charges him with
no other blemish than too much love of Money. And as for Suidas, that is the
only Man that has blackened his Memory, as he is a Writer of very mean
Authority of himself, so his Story here is plainly felo de se, when he says,
that Tribonian was a zealous Pagan, a tale so improbable in it self, against a
Man that has taken so much faithful pains to do service to Christianity, that
it would require some very strong proof to make it but merely credible.

. XXII. But now having vindicated the Integrity of the Justinian Code, as to
the Laws of his Predecessors, we may proceed to the examination of his own. And
his Laws of Religion take up the first thirteen Titles of the first Book, and
are of two sorts, concerning Faith, and concerning Discipline. His Laws
concerning Faith are far from being numerous, only three of his Predecessors
and three of his own, and all in pursuance of the Decrees and Definitions of
the Church, and those of his own are not so properly Laws, as Confessions and
Declarations of his own Faith sent to some Christian Bishops for their
satisfaction, and are nothing else than an owning or ratification of the four
General Councils, by whose Authority (as he declares) the Apostolical Faith was
conveyed down through all Ages to his own time, and for that reason he receives
both the Nicene Faith, because it was delivered down from the Apostles, and the
several Expositions of it by the following Councils. Not as if that had been
defective in perspicuity, but because the Enemies of the truth had endeavored
to subvert it, some one, and some another way, therefore it was necessary for
the Church in the following Councils to explain and defend its truth by
Testimonies of Scripture, and to anathematise all the Authors of profane
Novelties. And for this very reason he lets all his Subjects know, that there
is no living for any Man within his Dominions, that does not submit to the
Authority of these Councils. In all which he expresses so much Civility and
Respect to the Jurisdiction of the Church, that there is not an higher
declaration of it in all the Imperial Laws, so free is he in this matter from
that imputation so confidently charged upon him by the Italians, In Praefat. ^d
Procopium.
as Alemannus expresses it, ad Religionis dogmata definienda ecclesiasticasque
sanciendas leges effusa licentia, a bold and saucy tampering with the Christian
Faith, which he was so far from ever attempting, that no Prince ever declared
more vehemently against that sacrilegious abuse of the Imperial Authority. In
the three following Titles de Sacrosanctis Ecclesiis; de Episcopis et Clericis;
de Episcopali Audientia; all the Laws enacted by himself are only so many
Charters of Privilege to the Church, that express an high sense of Piety and
Devotion, and are withal contrived with so much prudence, that whoever would go
about to find fault with them, must lay aside his Understanding as well as his
Integrity. And yet these are all the Laws of his own enacting in the Code, for
under all the following Titles he has only collected the Laws of his
Predecessors without adding any of his own.

In his Novels, as mighty and Ecclesiastical Legislator as he is taken to be,
his Laws of Religion are not so very numerous, and those that are, only revive
Ecclesiastical Canons or Ecclesiastical Customs, but are no new Institutions.
And any attempt of that kind was so far from finding any entertainment in his
thoughts, that he ever shunned it with all manner of tenderness, and declares
upon all occasions that his Laws only wait (as he is pleased to express
himself) upon the Canons of the Church. The first Novel upon this Argument is
the Third, Enacted Anno 535* in the 9th Year of his Reign, where he Enacts that
in all Cathedral Churches the Clergy be stinted to a certain number, but I hope
no man can be so weak as to think that this was never Enacted before that time.
The next is the 5th, de Monachis, in which he only keeps the Monks to the Rules
of their Institution, but makes no new Rules of his own: The 6th regulates the
other Clergy according to the Canons of the Fathers, as he declares in the
Preface to it, and there occurs nothing in it, but what had been often
commanded both by the Ecclesiastical and Imperial Law. The 7th forbids all
Alienations of the Goods of the Church. The 9th gives the Church the Privilege
of prescribing for one hundred Years, whereas the Plea of Possession against
all other Prescription was limited to 30, and this he presents as a Religious
Oblation to Almighty God. These were all published in the same Year. In the
11th he raises the place of his birth to the honor of an Archbishopric or
Patriarchate, to which he subjects Six Provinces, that had hitherto belonged to
the Archbishop of Thessalonica, and justifies his Power of doing it, because
the dignity of the Church naturally followed that of the State, and therefore
his Imperial Majesty having established a new Civil Prefecture in that City,
that gave it a new Prerogative in the Church: for as in former times when the
Prefecture of Illyricum was fixed at Sirmium, then the Episcopal Primacy resided
there, but when afterward those Parts were invaded and laid wast by Attila King
of the Huns, Appennius the Prefect was forced to retire to Thessalonica, the
Archiepiscopal Dignity followed him thither, Et Thessalonicensis Episcopus non
sua Authoritate, sed sub umbra praefecturae meruit aliquam praerogativam, i. e.
And the Bishop of Thessalonica obtained the Prerogative not by Virtue of his
own Authority but under the shelter of the Civil Prefecture. And therefore the
Emperor having instituted a new praefectus praetorio in his own City, upon the
Recovery of that part of the Empire that had been lost, it was but fit and
decent that upon that occasion it should be made an Archiepiscopal See: And to
it he subjected all Dacia and Pannonia; Dacia then containing Transylvania,
Valachia, and Moldavia: Pannonia the lower Hungary, the upper Austria,
Carinthia and Carniola, as they are now divided. And this being done he obtains
of Pope Vigilius to grant the new Archbishop his Legantine Dignity in those
Provinces. But here Baronius storms, and says he extorted it by force and
cruelty after the great falling out about the tria Capitula, and that it was
not honest to rob other Churches to enrich and advance his own. But his passion
has run him into a continued Train of mistakes. For first the Grant of Vigilius
was made at his first coming to the Sea, as appears by Justinian's 131st.
Novel, in which it is mentioned, that bears date in the Year 541, whereas there
was no Quarrel between the Pope and the Emperor, till after Vigilius his
Journey to Constantinople, which was not till the Year 547, neither did he
suffer any force till the Year 551, as Baronius himself very well knows, who
has placed the Story of that Persecution in the History of that Year. Neither
secondly did the Pope grant the Metropolitical Dignity, but only the Legantine
Power, the first was stablisht before by the Emperor, and more then that, an
Archiepiscopal or Patriarchal Supremacy, for at that time those words were
synonymous to express the new Jurisdiction above Metropolitans. Nor Thirdly,
were the Ancient and Original Rights of Thessalonica defrauded, but only that
part of the Empire that was newly Recovered, and formerly belonged to Sirmium,
was settled in its Ancient State under the Metropolis of Justiniana. But
lastly, the Cardinal has little reason to complain of robbing Peter to pay
Paul, if he would but reflect upon the Actions of the Popes about that time,
who with Force and Arbitrary Power both against Canons and immemorial Custom
transferred the Metropolitical Power from Vienna to Arles, and that without any
other reason, then to make a Precedent and give a cast of their absolute
Supremacy, disposing of the Affairs of Christendom not by the Laws of the
Church, but according to their own Arbitrary Will and Pleasure. Whereas the Law
of Justinian was sounded upon the universal Practice of the Church, as it was
settled by the Apostles themselves, by whom its Jurisdiction was every where
accommodated to the convenience of Civil Governmen^* And therefore this City
being made both a Civil Metropolis, and the Seat of a Praefectus Praetorio, it
was but natural both according to the Canons and the Customs of those times, to
make it an Ecclesiastical Patriarchate, which then answered to the Diocesan
Jurisdiction of the Civil Prefects over several Provinces.

The 16th Novel is a Repetition of the Third, to limit the number of the Clergy
in Cathedral Churches, particularly applied to the Church of Constantinople.
The 36th and 37th are enacted upon his Recovery of Africa from the Vandals, to
restore the Discipline, the Revenues and the Privileges of the African Church,
to suppress all kind of Heretics with all manner of severity, and the
execution of all former Laws upon them, and to bestow all their Churches upon
the Catholics, and to grant them the right of Sanctuary in all Cases,
excepting the Crimes of Rape and Murder. The 40th (...) particular Grant or
Dispensation to the Church of Jerusalem called the Resurrection-Church for the
sale of certain Lands. The Forty second is a Confirmation of the Sentence
against Anthimus as guilty of the Eutychian Heresy, according to known Custom,
as he declares in his Preface, that as often as any of the Clergy were judged
unworthy of the Priesthood by the Sacerdotal Sentence, the Royal Power should
join with the Authority of their Decree: that so both Powers, Divine and
Humane, agreeing, a good correspondence might be kept between both, and so the
World be well governed. The Forty Third is a revival of a Rescript of the
Emperor Anastasius, to limit the Exemption of Taxes upon the Revenues of the
Church, which grew so very great, as to defraud its contribution to the Civil
Government, and to that purpose he excuses only one thousand Tenements in the
City of Constantinople belonging to that Church, but requires all other Estates
that were purchased since the Edict of Anastasius, to contribute in their just
proportion to the public Burdens of the Commonwealth. The 45 th subjects all
Jews and Heretics to the public Burdens, but interdicts them all
Privileges. The 46 th ^^ctifies the 7 th, that forbid all Clergy-m^^ he
alienation of their Lands, which Law some of them so scandalously abused, as to
run in debt without any obligation to pay their Creditors. In which cases,
especially of Debts to the Crown, he permits the sale of Church Lands to defray
Church-debts; and that I take it is no Law of Religion, otherwise than as it is
an act of Civil Justice. The 55 th is only an interpretation of the several
Laws against the alienation of Church-Revenues, viz. to allow their sale by way
of Exchange, so it be done without fraud or fiction. The 56 th is a revival of
the Laws and Canons against Simony, of which it seems there were great
Complaints at that time. The 57 th is a revival of a Law of the Emperor Leo,
enacting that if a Clerk forsake his Cure, the Bishop take care to have it
supplied, and that no Patron or Founder of a Church present his Clerk to it
without the Bishops approbation. The 58 th forbids the erecting of Chapels in
private Families to the defrauding of the public Churches, and though it
allows them for Prayers, yet by no means for administration of the holy
Sacraments. The 59 th is a confirmation of the gifts of Constantine and
Anastasius to the Church of Constantinople for Burials without Fees and
Charges, which it seems, notwithstanding the Revenue that was settled by those
Emperors for that purpose, were at that time demanded by the Clergy of that
Church. The 65 th is a dispensation to the Church of Mysia, to sell certain
Lands for the redemption of Captives. The 67 th provides that no Churches be
built without the Bishops consent, and that Bishops reside within their own
Diocesses. The 76 th only reforms Abuses among the Monks. The 77 th restrains
Sodomy and Blasphemy. The 79 th refers all the Lawsuits of Monks and Nuns to
the determination of the Bishop. The 83 d enacts the same privilege for the
whole body of the Clergy. The 86 th impowers any Subject to appeal from the
Secular Judge of the Province to the Bishop, who is required to examine the
Proceedings, and authorized, if the Appellant desire it, to sit in Commission
with him, and if upon his Complaint the Judge refuse to do Justice, he is
commanded to inform the Emperor against him. This is a Law that the
Ecclesiastics had no reason to complain of as a diminution of their Authority,
when in effect it put the whole Government of the Empire into their hands:
Though the Judges had but too much reason to take offense at it, in having
spies set over all their Actions, and all spies are apt to be too busy and
officious. The 109 th revives the Laws of his Predecessors Leo and Justin
against all sorts of Heretics of what Sect soever, and whereas by Law
Daughters Portions were to be paid before any other Debts, he debars all
Female Heretics of that Privilege. The 111 th is an amendment of the 9 th
Novel, that gave the Church the privilege of pleading against all Prescription
less than 100 years, whereas other Subjects were allowed that Plea no higher
than 30 years, but the Inconveniences were found so great by reason of the
great distance of time, exceeding the term of Man's life, that in this Novel he
brings it down to the compass of 40 years. The 120 th is a revival of his
former Laws against the alienation of Church-Goods. The 123 d. is a compendium
of the Canons of the Church for the regulation of the Clergy, but chiefly
Bishops. But it consists of so many particulars, and is of that great length,
containing no less than 44 Chapters, that it would be too tedious to repete it
here, though it is highly worth the Readers perusal, being a very judicious
Collection of the best Laws of the Church in that matter. The 129 th grants the
Samaritans, because they now behaved themselves modestly and peaceably, the
power of making Wills, which he had taken from them by a former Law, V.
Chronicon Alexa^drinum p. 775.
upon occasion of their Tumults in Palestine, as may be seen in the life of St.
Saba, who was sent Ambassador from those parts to the Emperor Justinian at the
beginning of his Reign to complain of their Violences. The 131 st is a very
famous Law, and a kind of recapitulation of all his former Laws concerning
Church Matters, and therefore contains nothing new in it. The 132 d is against
the Conventicles of Heretics of all Herds. The 133 d reduces Monks to the
observation of the Laws of the Church, and the Rules of their Order. The 137 th
re^ulates Ordinations of the Clergy by the ^anons. The 146 th is an indulgence
of Liberty to the Jews: and these are all the Laws enacted by this Emperor
about Religion, for those few that follow, were made by his Successor Justin,
though they are placed under this Princes name by mistake. Now I pray what is
there in all this that is not warrantable in a Prince? What is there, that is
not highly praiseworthy? What is there, that is not warranted by Precedents of
his Predecessors, unless it be this, That he exceeded them all in his care and
kindness to the Church? What then can be the meaning of those ungrateful Men,
who requite him with nothing but Calumnies and unkind reflections for being too
busy in Church Matters, unless it be this, That they care not that Princes
should inspect and observe the Neglects and Disorders of the Clergy? Anno 528.
I am sure Baronius betrays great dis-ingenuity, in loading him so heavily as
he has done, when yet at the same time he is forced to excuse him, first from
the necessity of the times for recovering the Discipline of the Church, for the
Canons having lain neglected all the time of Zeno, Basiliscus and Anastasius,
that obliged him to be the more active to recover their Authority, and if he
were so, why does the Cardinal charge him with pragmaticalness against the
Power of the Church? Secondly from Justinian's own declaration, that runs
through all his Laws, that he does not take upon himself the Authority of
enacting Ecclesiastical Laws, but of abetting them, and putting them in
execution by secular Penalties: Anno 534.
a fault that would be very commendable in all Princes. But some distance after
the great Cardinal so far forgets his displeasure against this great Emperor,
that upon his sending an Ambassy to Pope John the second against the Acaemetan
Monks, he writes a Panegyric upon his decent and regular Proceedings in the
Church, in that he always acted by the Authority of his Bishops with the
consent of the Pope. Adeo ut nihil his sanctius rectiusque perfici potuerit ab
Orthodoxo Imperatore, qui Catholicae fidei patrocinium studio indefesso
susceperit. And beside this he might have remembered, what himself says in the
year following, ought never to be forgot, Pope Agapetus his high Commendation
of the Emperor's acting in Church Matters, in his Epistle to the Emperor:
Firmamus, laudamus, amplectimur: non quia Laicis Auctoritatem praedicationis
admittimus, sed quia studium fidei vestrae Patrum nostrorum regulis conveniens
confirmamus atque roboramus. Anno 535.
Another excuse he has made, that with him outweighs all the rest, that he was
under the Government of a wicked Woman knead^d up of no less than six
she-Devils, Eve, Dalilah and Herodias, Alecto, Megaera and Tisiphone (and there
is not one Lady in all his story, if she be out of his favor, that he does not
compound of some or all of these Ingredients.) And concludes that he might have
been the greatest Prince that ever swayed Scepter, had it not been for this
Penelope or six-fold Devil, who made it her business to cross and control him
in all his Designs, and unravel as fast as he could wind up in all his great
Under-takings. So true is that of the Preacher, It is better to dwell with a
Lion or a Dragon than with a wicked Woman.

. XXIII. And thus having vindicated his Laws from the Cavils of these ungratful
Men, I come now to vindicate his Person and his Actions from their more
disingenuous Aspersions. And here lies the main ground of the Quarrel against
him, not his meddling too much with Church Matters but with Churchmen. He would
not suffer himself as some of his Predecessors did, to be outhufft by the Papal
Insolence, but brought Vigilius one of the proudest of them all to compliance
and submission, and that is a Crime never to be forgiven. And for want of
better or rather worse Information against him, they are content to take up
with a scandalous Libel, i. e. Procopius's Anecdota. Baronius was grieved to
the heart, that he could not find it, because from thence, he says, it would
appear, what the Humor, what the Wisdom, what the Piety of Justinian was, when
his sauciness against Ecclesiastics was such, as no good or pious Prince could
be guilty of. But Alemannus a Convert from the poor Greek Church, and one of
the Cardinals Successors (as he proudly intitles himself) in the Office of
Apostolical Librarian, chancing it seems to light upon it as he was brushing
the old Manuscripts in the Vatican, is transported with joy, and is all on fire
to oblige holy Church with the publication of so useful a Work, that the World
might now see what manner of Man this same Justinian was, who treated a Bishop
so rudely as he did the good Pope Vigilius, and not only so, but he has helped
out the original Copy in his Latin Translation, and what Procopius relates only
as a flying Report, he makes bold to set down as a known and certain truth. And
among many other strong strains of disingenuity, he has been so injudicious, as
to undertake to make out the truth of this Libel by Procopius his own History,
that was published to the World in Justinian's own time, approved of by himself,
and the Author advanced for it to the highest Preferments in the Empire. Now
that Man that will seriously go about to prove a Panegyric to be a Satyr, only
shows that he is a little too much in good earnest* But before I prove the
false-hood of these Slanders, it will be convenient to show the occasion of
raising them, and that was the great heats in the Controversy about the tria
capitula, in which the Emperor created to himself a great number of Enemies by
his zeal and resolution on that side that he unhappily took to. I shall
therefore first set down the progress of that Story, that was the only false
step of his Reign, but so unluckily made, that he could never wholly recover
himself again, before I engage the Librarian and his supposed Author. This
Emperor then having appeared so zealously in behalf of the Orthodox Faith,
having declared so severely against all Heretics by several Edicts, and
particularly published a Rescript against the singularities of Origin upon
complaint of the Palestine Monks, set on by Pelagius the Popes Legate at the
Court of Constantinople, in spite to Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea his Rival in
Court-favor, but a great Admirer of Origin, having appointed a Conference at
Constantinople in the year 533 to reconcile the Acephali to the Church and the
Council of Calcedon, in which he expresses a very high Passion for the
resettlement of Peace and Unity. Having been so bold as to consent to the
deposition of Anthimus Bishop of Constantinople and the Queens Favorite, at
the instigation of Pope Agapetus for suspicion of the Eutychian Heresy, and
after that to confirm the Decree of the Council under Mennas against him by
adding Banishment to his Deposition. And being now upon a design of publishing
a Rescript against the Acephali in behalf of the Council of Calcedon, upon this
Theodorus a friend to Eutyches as well as Origin, Liberati Brev. c. 24. Evag.
l. 4. c. 38.
having insinuated himself into the Court by the Empress, and being endeared to
the Emperor by his great Officiousness, partly to be revenged of Pelagius for
the Affront to his Master Origin, and partly to divert the good Emperor from
his Design against the Acephali, craftily persuades him that he might spare his
Pains, and reconcile them to the Council at a cheaper rate. If three Offensive
things were taken out of its Acts, i. e. if the Writings of Theodorus
Mopsuestenus Master to Nestorius, if the Epistle of Ibas Bishop of Edessa to
Maris Persa, and if the Book of Theodoret against Cyr^l's Anathema's might be
condemned of Heresy, though they had been absolved by the Council. The Motion
was plausible to the Emperor, and he thought it a very easy Method to
reconcile all Parties, only by suppressing the Writings of two or three private
Men, so that the Authority of the Decrees of the Council it self stood unshaken
as before; for though the Council did not condemn, yet it did not commend but
on^y acquit them, and therefore it was not directly concerned in their
suppression. And Theodorus finding that by this Device he had decoyed the
Emperor into his snare, that he might secure him from a Relapse, prevails with
him in the absence of his Rival Pelagius, who was then at Rome, to publish an
Edict of Condemnation by his own Authority, but drawn up, as Facundus
Hermianensis tells the Emperor, not by himself, but Theodorus and his
Accomplices, that so having once publicly appeared in the Cause, that would be
an obligation upon him to persevere in it against all opposition, otherwise he
understood the gentleness of his Temper so well, that when he saw the Mischiefs
and Inconveniences that followed upon it, he would quit the Cause, and leave
them in the lurch to answer for their Affront to the Council of Calcedon. And
the better to secure themselves, the Edict was as craftily composed as it was
contrived. All the Councils were confirmed, all the Heresies of all
denominations condemned, only in the tail of all, these three particular
Authors were apocryphised. And that the good Emperor's design was merely Peace
and Concord, is very observable from the conclusion of all. Si quis igitur post
ejusmodi rectam confessionem, et haereticorum condemnationem, salvo manente pio
intellectu, de nominibus, vel syllabis, vel dictionibus contendens, separat se
a sancta Dei Ecclesia, tanquam non in rebus, sed in solis nominibus et
dictionibus posita nobis pietate: talis utpote dissensionibus gaudens, rationem
pro semetipso, et pro deceptis et decipiendis ab eo reddet magno Deo, et
Salvatori nostro Jesu Christo in die Judicii. By which it is evident that the
Emperor accepted the Model, after the security and settlement of the Christian
Faith against all sorts of Heretics, as the only remedy expedient at that time
against contention and curiosity, without any design against the Council of
Calcedon or any other determinations of the Church, but on the contrary rather
with a religious and entire submission to their Decrees; and for this reason it
is approved and subscribed, though not without reluctance, by all the four
Eastern Patriarchs, and most eminent Prelates of the Eastern Church.

Whereas on the other side the Western and African Bishops concluded it a
direct reflection upon the Wisdom and Authority of the Council it self, to
condemn those Writings of Heresy, that it had upon a fair Trial acquitted. And
thus by this unhappy Legerdemain of that false and juggling Man Theodorus, under
which the Emperor suspected no ill Design, instead of finishing the settlement
of the Church, after so fair a progress that he had made in it (for it was he
that governed and managed all things in his Uncle Justin's reign) he brings all
things back into the same Tumult and Confusion, into which they were brought by
the Henoticon. It was but a slite and a very remote breach, as one would think,
upon the Churches Authority, yet it broke down all Bounds of Discipline and
Government, that it seems is a thing so tender, that it can endure no
tampering, and unless it be made sacred and inviolable, it loses all its force:
And so this great Emperor after this slite Wound, in a matter in which it was
so little concerned, could scarce make it up again by the Authority of a
General Council. Though I must confess that the occasion of raising the Quarrel
so high was the turbulent spirit of Pope Vigilius, who as he was guilty of all
other Wickedness, exceeded in Pride, as appears not only from the Historian,
but the Sentence of Excommunication against him by Pope Silverius in the time
of that Popes banishment. Liberati brev. c. 22.
Quippe qui nequissimi spiritus audacia, ambitionis phrenesin concipiens, in
illius Apostolici Medici, cui animas ligandi solvendique collata et concessa
potestas est, versaris contumeliam, novumque scelus erroris in Apostolica sede
rursus niteris inducere; et in morem Simonis, cujus discipulum te ostendis
operibus, data pecunia, meque repulso, qui favente Domino, tribus jam jugiter
emensis temporibus ei praesideo, tempora mea niteris invadere. That by the
instigation of the Devil being mad with pride he rebelled against St. Peter and
his Authority, committing a new and unheard of sin in the Apostolic See it
self, and following the example of Simon Magus, whose Disciple he showed
himself to be by his works, by purchasing my Bishopric with Money, and
expelling me out of it for these three years. And if we may believe the angry
Africans; he bought the Apostolic See of the Empress Theodora, whose Creature
he was, and procured the banishment of Pope Silverius by forging treasonable
Letters to the Goths in his name, and when Justinian suspecting some Abuse,
recalled him home, this wicked Man caused him to be murdered by two of his own
Servants. So that it is a just Character that is given of him by Baronius
himself. Cedit huic Novati Impietas, Pertinacia Vrsicini, Laurentii
Praesumptio, ac denique aliorum omnium schismaticorum Antistitum superbia,
artogantia, atque facinerosa temeritas, etc* He out-stript Novatus in
wickedness, Vrsicinus in stubbornness, Laurentius in impudence, and all
Schismatics that ever were, in pride, insolence and presumption. But however
by a train of wickedness mounting himself into the Apostolic See, according to
his Simoniacal Articles with Theodora, he enters into league with the Henotical
Bishops, sends an Encyclical Letter to them, extant in Liberatus, to assure
them that he was really of their Communion, but desires that it may be kept
secret, and that they would seem to suspect him more than ever, that he might
have the better opportunity of doing effectual service to the Cause. This is
the substance of the Letter, but Baronius and the Roman Writers suspect it to
have been forged, because in all his following scuffles about the tria
capitula, he was never upbraided with it. But what wonder is that, when the
thing was to be kept secret, though it might, and it seems did come to the
knowledge of some, as appears by Liberatus, an Actor in the business, who
procured and published a Copy of it. But he having secured possession of his
Throne by the death of Silverius, he now writes a flattering Epistle to the
Emperor for the Council of Calcedon, damns all the Heretics, disclaims all
correspondence with the Acephali, assures him that he will live and dye by the
Council, and requests him not to believe any Information whatsoever against him
to the contrary. But after all he is so crafty, as to send his main Message
about the best means for settlement of the Church by word of Mouth, to baulk,
as much as it was possible, the full discovery of himself. All which
atheistical hypocrisy Baronius takes great pains to impute to his miraculous
Conversion only by virtue of St. Peter's Chair.

But the Emperor having published his Rescript against the tria capitula, and
finding storms gathering upon it, sends to Vigilius who^e private sense he
understood, to repair to Constantinople with his advice, and thither he comes,
being ready to sieze any opportunity to show his Power, but instead of joining
in free Council with the Bishops, in effect takes the whole judgment to
himself. Of his fraudulent behavior in that whole transaction Facundus, In
libello ad^. M^cianum.
who was an Eyewitness, and indeed the chief Transactor in it, has given us a
particular account, viz. That when he dissembled ignorance of the whole
Controversy, and Facundus offered his service to give him full information, he
having aforehand obliged himself by promise to give sentence against the
Capitula, and designing to excuse himself with pretense of Ignorance,
shamelesly refuses the proffer, cuts off all farther proceedings, and desires
the Bishops that sat with him to give in their Answers singly in writing. For
they being newly come to Constantinople to consult with his Holiness, and being
not pre-engaged by any subscription, were by this Artifice over-reacht to give
in their Answer against the Capitula and the Council. And to prevent their
drawing back, they are obliged to do it, not by Vote, but by Writing. And when
he had received their several Answers, away he carries them to Court, and there
delivers them into the hands of the Acephali to be laid up among the former
subscriptions that had been made against the Council. And that he might not be
thought a Traitor by his own Party (for he hitherto pretended to side with the
Orthodox) he pretends that he would not keep them himself, lest hereafter there
should be found in the Registry of the Church of Rome so many Subscriptions
against the Council. As if (says Facundus) he could not as well have torn or
burnt them, or returned them back to the Authors, from whom he ought never to
have received, much less to have extorted them, if he had been at all concerned
that nothing should be done in prejudice of the Council. And thus (says he) by
this his customary dissimulation, counterfeiting a zeal in behalf of the
Council, he effectually promotes the designs of its Enemies. And what could do
it more than that 70 Bishops sitting in Council with the great Bishop of Rome,
should beside those many more that had before subscribed, prejudg the
Controversy? Anno 547.
All this prevarication Baronius out of his infinite zeal to the Apostolic See
endeavors to excuse, because before Vigilius heard the Cause he supposed that
the condemnation of the tria capitula reflected upon the Authority of the
Council, but now upon hearing the reasons on both sides, and being satisfied
that it was unconcerned in the Controversy, he grew more moderate and
indifferent, and for Peace sake inclined to comply with the Emperor and the
Eastern Bishops. But what ever Apology this may be for his change of mind, it
is no excuse for his juggling and underhand dealing; and withal as for his
change of mind, by the Cardinals good leave, to condemn writings of Heresy by
an Imperial Rescript, that had been cleared of the Charge by the Sentence of a
General Council, is plainly to subvert, not the Authority of that Council
alone, but of the whole Catholic Church. This was the blot of Justinian's
Reign, that no Candor can cover, nor Excuse wipe off. And his Holiness by his
time-serving compliance with it, did but give a cast of his old dishonesty,
when by the Cardinal's own account he exceeded all Mankind in Wickedness, and
proves that he was still acted by his six-fold Female Devil Theodora, (as he
calls her) who was the great stickler in the design in favor of the Eutychians;
because whether the condemnation of the tria capitula were in it self any
direct reflection upon the Council or not, those that promoted it, were
resolved to make that use of it. And that was the true ground of the zeal of
the African Bishops against it, as Facundus himself declared to Vigilius at the
Conference. Ego enim fateor simpliciter beatitudini vestrae, non pro Theo^ori
Mop^suesteni damnatione me a contradicentiae communione subtraxisse: In libello
ad. (...).
hoc enim vel si approbandum non sit, ferendum tamen existimo, nec tantam esse
causam judico, pro qua deberemus a communione multiplici segregari: sed quod ex
Persona Theodori Epistolam Ibae Nestorianianam probare conati sunt, and quod ex
Epistola Ibae Synodum Calcedonensem, a qua suscepta est, improbare: nam quae
alia causa fuisse dicenda est, ut post centum and viginti suae defunctionis
annos damnaretur cum dogmatibus suis Episcopus in Ecclesiae pace defunctus. I
confess freely to your Holiness, that I am not concerned about the Condemnation
of Theodorus, for though it be not to be approved, yet it may be born, neither
do I think the thing of that weight, that we need to divide Communion about it,
but because from a Sentence against the Person of Theodorus, they endeavor to
charge the Epistle of Ibas with Nestorianism, in which his Writings are
commended, and then from the Epistle of Ibas to strike at the Council it self,
by whom it was allowed; for what other Cause can be imagined of all this stir,
that a Bishop who died in the Peace of the Church^, shoud be brought to
Judgment above one Hundred and Twenty Years after his death? And that was the
reason that the Africans were so resty, which Vigilius finding, and withal his
own Clergy offended, he again shrinks back, and in a Consult with Theodorus and
Mennas suspends all disputes and determinations to the Summary of a General
Council, which they were certain by their united Interest to obtain of the
Emperor. But this continual shufling and prevarication provokes the adverse
Party beyond all bounds and patience, and they now unanimously discard him for
a man of no faith and honesty, that chopped all points of the Compass, as the
Weathercock stood for his own convenience, now standing point blank for the
Council, then veering to the quite contrary point for the Acephali, and now
again standing neuter, and wavering between both. But all this trimming and
counter-trimming, and shifting backward and forward, Anno 547.
St. Gregory and Baronius plead was then necessary for the Peace of the Church,
at a time when the heats were run so high to both extremes. I will grant that
both Parties might be too blame. But what can we think of him that is first
furious on one side, and then turns Traitor to his own Party, and then when he
sees that will not pass, quits both? If this be Ecclesiastical Prudence, I
would fain know what is Ecclesiastical Honesty. And therefore it is no wonder
that his own Clergy, and particularly his own Favorites, that he chose for his
Companions to Constantinople, Rusticus and Sebastianus, were so offended at the
gross dishonesty of his Proceedings, as to renounce him and his Communion, and
to certify his Apostasy and Prevarication to all the Bishops of the Western
Church, as Vigilius himself has left it upon Record in his Sentence of
Excommunication against them for their Rebellion against their Bishops. But it
is much less to be admired that it should provoke the Choler of the honest
Africans, that were not used to the Italian Craft: and that is a clear
justification of the tartness of Liberatus, Victor Tunonensis, but especially
Facundus Hermianensis, the wisest man of the Party, in their Writings both
against him and the Cause, when the whole Business was transacted, with nothing
but open fraud and preva^ication. And that is the reason often assigned by
Facundus to justify the br^ach of Communion with Vigilius and his Party, Quod
Praevaricatorum communio vitanda sit.

But now it is observable, that at this time the Empress Theod^ra dies, that
had managed all the motions of this Puppet-Pope ever since his coming to Court.
I am not ignorant that Gregory the Great says, that they were fallen out, and
that she died under his Sentence of Excommunication; Lib. 2. Epist. 36.
but he writes so lavishly in this Cause, and so without all manner of proof,
and so different from all other Records, that his Testimony ought scarce to be
taken upon Oath; and to speak a blunt but an honest truth, no man that has read
his Legend-Dialogues, can with the utmost stretch of Candor or Charity salve
the Honor or Reputation of his Integrity. But now the Empress being gone, and
Vigilius finding himself deserted by his own Clergy, and the Bishops
dissatisfied in all parts, revives his old Expedient of a General Council. But
Theodorus being now thoroughly acquainted with the Genius of the Man, and so
suspecting some new shuffle, persuades the Emperor to stand by his own Rescript
against the tria Capitula: And here the Contest runs so high between these two
honest Gentlemen, that at last it came to an open breach. And Vigilius finding
his Adversary too strong for him at Court-Interest* betakes himself to
Church-weapons, and in a rage stabs him with the Sentence of Excommunication,
and that for this real reason, among some other formal pretenses, Nam usque ad
hoc animum Christianissimum Principis falsis suggestionibus perduxisti, ut
Clementia ejus, quae in suis hostibus pia semper apparuit, contra nos graviter
moveretur. And because Mennas Bishop of Constantinople joined with Theodorus in
his Crime, he is joined with him in his Sentence, together with all the
Metropolitans and Micropolitans of his Diocese. And that Quibble is intended
for a smart Gird to all those Metropolitans, that were so poor-spirited, as to
submit themselves to the private Bishop of Constantinople. But finding himself
over-topt at Court, he takes Oars for Calcedon, and there pretends that he was
forced to secure his life by taking Sanctuary in the Church of St. Euphemi^, as
he had done before in the Church of St. Peter at Constantinople. But here
Baronius works another Miracle, (and all his Gospel concerning this d^baucht
Pope is mere Legend of his own Contrivance) in that the Emperor should not send
his Guards to seize his Holiness, but some of his Privy Council to invite him
back, and give Oath for his Security. But though I must confess it was no
Miracle, yet considering the peevishness of the man* it was a kind of wonder,
and a very high proof that the Emperor was a very civil Gentlemen, that could
command his passion so as to d^gest the most provoking folly, and out of mere
respect to his place and office, treat him with that civility that by that time
Custom had made due to so great a Bishop. And that is all the wonder that I can
discern in this Affair, that the Emperor had manners, though the Pope had none.
But behold a wonder indeed, his Holinesses Return to the Imperial Civility,
upon the approach of the Lords only to court him home, he clings about the
Altar, as if they had come to cut his Throat, there declares that he will trust
neither their own nor their Master's Oath, and that he will never condescend to
enter into any Treaty, till his Majesty has revok't his Rescript, and all other
Acts about the tria Capitula, and sends an Encyclical Epistle into all Parts of
Christendom, to inform them what violence had been offered to his Person by the
Imperial Power, and by it raises such Tumults and Commotions every where, that
the Emperor is forced to submit, suppress his Edict, and leave the whole
business to the determination of a General Council. And so Theodorus and Mennas
finding themselves deserted by the Emperor, they are forced to tack about, and
with all humility tender their Submissions and Protestations to his Holiness,
to sue out his pardon, and upon it this goodly Trium-virate are once more
pieced together. And at this the good Cardinal cries out, the Finger of the
Lord in defense of the Apostolic Rock. It is true indeed that the divine
Providence co-operates with us in all our Actions in order to its own ends, but
the whole mystery of this great business is no more than this, that some Knaves
that had crept into the Church by Court-favor, fall out among themselves for
Court-factions, till at last one side finding it self to be forsaken, sues to
be reconciled to the prevailing Party, and that is all the Miracle that the
Cardinal has magnified at so high a rate, as to apply to it all the Prophesies
of the Old Testament concerning our Savior's being a Rock and a Cornerstone.

But here Mennas dies, and one Eutychius a Monk, that had insinuated himself
into the Court by great shows of Mortification, succeeds. He was a Man, that of
all things defied all ambitious thoughts and designs of Preferment, and yet was
perpetually dreaming that he should one day be the great Bishop of
Constantinople, and by virtue of his own real dreams, and one pretended by the
Emperor, who knew him to be zealous in his Cause, and withal very manageable,
he is advanced to that high dignity. And so it is that none gallop so fast to
Preferment in the Church, as those that creep to it. And after his Instalment
the first thing he does is to submit himself to Vigilius, and so does
Apollinaris of Alexandria upon the death of Zoilus, whose Bishopric he had
usurpt, and thus are Hypocrites and ill-Men always on the right side. But
Vigilius finding himself Master of the field, and having forced all his
Enemies, even the Emperor himself to submit, is resolved to show his Autho^ity.
And in the first place he contends with the Emperor about the place of the
Council; one will have it in the East, and the other in the West, but at last
they agree upon Constantinople, upon condition that an equal number of Eastern
and Western Bishops be summoned. But before the Council meets the Emperor
desires the Pope to give his own Opinion, and that was an hard task to put him
upon declaring himself, and therefore he desires to be excused, but the Emperor
presses so importunately upon him, as to provoke his Choler, and to be revenged
he turns cross-grained, and so affronts his tria capitula, and when the Council
meets, is sick and sullen, refuses to join with them, and no Courtship either
of the Council or the Emperor himself can draw him to any compliance, but on
the contrary he commands the Council not to presume to determine any thing,
till he had declared his own Judgment. And that he does at large in an
Instrument sent to the Emperor, that he calls his Constitutum, in which though
he condemns and confutes the Writings themselves, yet he will allow no sentence
against the Persons, because they dyed in the Communion of the Catholic
Church, and had been absolved by the Council of Calcedon, and at last concludes
with this peremptory threatening. His igitur a nobis cum omni undique cautela
atque diligentia propter servandam inviolabilem reverentiam praedictarum
Synodorum et earundem venerabilia constituta dispositis, statuimus et
decernimus, nulli ad ordines et dignitates ecclesiasticas pertinenti licere
quicquam contrarium his quae praesenti asseruimus vel statuimus constituto de
saepe dictis tribus capitulis aut conscribere, vel proferr, aut componere, vel
docere, aut aliquam post praesentem definitionem movere ulterius quaestionem,
etc. But the Council regard neither him nor his threatenings, and so condemn the
tria Capitula, and to expose him for an egregious Prevaricator, publish to the
World his own several Declarations against them. Upon which Baronius has a very
pleasant observation, that this they were forced to, because they knew their
Decree would be of no force without the Authority of the Pope. What Inferences
will not Zeal and Partiality make, when they produced his own testimony against
himself, to convict him of manifest prevarication, to conclude that this was
done out of dutiful respect to his Authority, by which, if they had regarded
it, they stood all at this very time deposed from their Holy Orders. But things
being carried so disorderly on all sides, the Council came to nothing, and the
Emperor after he had once made a breach upon the Authority of the Church, could
never heal it again, for the Heretics instead of being reconciled, made
advantage of it against the Authority of the Church it self (as Leontius a
Writer of that Age informs us) who argued thus upon it, De Sect. Act. 6.
aut boni scilicet erant aut mali, si boni, cur^anathematizatis? Si mali, cur a
Synodo recepti sunt? And as for the Catholics, some were for an expedient of
Peace against the Authority of the Council, and others for the Authority of the
Council against trimming for Peace. But the Emperor having proceeded so far in
the business, is now resolved to carry it through his own way, and all that
will not comply, are deposed and banished, and this lights chiefly upon the
Illyrican and African Bishops, but they were soon reduced by the Emperor's
severity, whereas the Bishops in the Western Empire, that was then under the
Franks, set up a formed Schism, especially in the Parts about Venice and
Istria, that lasted for many years, and cost both the Church and the Empire a
long train of trouble and vexation.

But as for Pope Vigilius when he saw there was no way of escape but by
compliance, though he loved his Will too much, yet he loved his Bishopric much
more, therefore after all his stubbornness he comes in, and fairly subscribes,
and approves the Decree of the Council. But here the Roman Writers are again at
a great loss to salve his Reputation, but I think it would be more for their
own to let him alone. For before he was in lawful possession of St. Peter's
Chair they own him to have been a Villain, and withal confess that he got into
it by Simony, Sacriledg and Murder. But that being done, out of duty and
gratitude to his Patroness Theodora, he beats down the Council of Calcedon; but
seeing the Emperor resolute in his Design, he turns a fury on that side, and
publishes his Judicatum to damn the tria Capitula, and then in a little time
suspends his own Sentence till the meeting of the Council; when the Council
meets he contradicts them in his Constitutum: But because he saw the Emperor in
good earnest against him, and the African Bishops beginning to scowr out of
their Bishoprics, he fairly comes in and renounces the Constitutum, yet after
all these turns of prevarication since the time of his sitting in St. Peter's
Chair, we must have him to be a very honest Man, notwithstanding that he all
the while stands guilty of the same Impieties that he did before. In my Opinion
they would much better consult the honor of St. Peter's Chair by confessing him
so ill a Man, that even his sitting in that could not mend him, or rather that
he never had legal Possession of it, but was all his lifetime a mere Usurper,
for by the Canons a Man that comes into a Bishopric by Simony, renders himself
incapable of it forever. So that if they would leave him under his own
disgrace, it would be no dishonor to St. Peter's Chair, but when they are at
such mighty pains to prove that it was not defil^d by his sitting in it, it
leaves wise Men under a suspicion that some indecent uncleanness was left
behind.

But however the discovery of his last Conversion which was first brought to
light by Petrus de Marca, and was dated within six Months after the rising of
the Council, clears that great and enormous difficulty, that has so long puzzled
us to make out, how this Council should be so received in the Church among the
General Councils without the Popes Authority. But whether the Recantation were
spurious or genuine (and that is still in the dark) it will not salve the
business, for if it were genuine, it is only a confession of his old
Wickedness, and that he was managed in it by the Devil after he sat in St.
Peter's Chair, but what the real Devil was, that tempted him, is too evident
from his shifting sides, as his Interest lay. Though the greatest demonstration
of it is his Plea, that he had hitherto erred for want of information and right
understanding of the Controversy: whereas it is too notorious from the whole
progress of it, that no Man could be better acquainted with it than himself,
and whoever reads his Judicatum upon it at the conference at his first coming
to Constantinople, and his Constitutum sent to the Council seven years after,
will never of all Excuses allow that of ignorance. If it be spurious, then if
the Apology were good for any thing, it is lost. And I must confess it seems
somewhat incredible to me, that so public an Instrument concerning so great an
Affair should be altogether unknown to his immediate Successors, that were so
deeply engaged in the Controversy against the Schismatics, especially
Pelagius the second and Gregory the Great, who never produced its Authority
against them, but most of all Gregory, who transmitted the Acts of the Council
to Queen Theodelinda. But though the writing be forged, it is plain enough that
he actually complied as Eustathius a Cotemporary Writer affirms in the life of
Eutychius, and Liberatus broadly suggests, when he says that Vigilius suffered
much in the Cause, though he were not crowned, which was then the proper Phrase
for Apostasy. But that he was received into the Emperor's Favor appears from
the Imperial Grant of certain Privileges to the Citizens of Rome, that was
sent by Vigilius to endear him to the City, though in his return home he dyed
of the Stone in Sicily, and is succeeded by Pelagius the first, who though he
had been banished by Justinian whilst he was Ap^crisiary at Constantinople to
Vigilius, upon account of his zeal in defense of the tria Capitula, yet before
he is admitted to the Papacy he both owns the Authority of the Council of
Calcedon, and condemns the Capitula, and after incites Narses then Governor of
Italy, to reduce the Schismatics of Venice and Istria by the Secular Power,
and the same was done by all his Successors till the Schism dyed. So that in
short it was not the Pope that determined the Council, but the Council that
determined the Pope: and if it was confirmed by Vigilius, as that does not make
the Council good, so it is only another proof of the shuffling dishonesty of
the Man. If it were not confirmed by him, but by his Successors, and that was
the only Plea in its behalf before De Marca's discovery, Vide B^^ron. anno 553.
then it is not the Pope that makes or unmakes a General Council, for if so,
then this was none because rejected by the present Pope Vigilius, and yet it
was one by the approbation of his Successors. Though when all is done, the
Notion of a General Council is but a Notion, for there was never any such thing
in reality, and all those that bear that name were more properly Councils of
the Eastern Empire, there being very few Western Bishops present at them. And
they were only called General Councils in opposition to Provincial, and ought
rather to have been styled Imperial, as summoned by the Emperor himself,
whereas other lesser Councils were summoned by the Bishops themselves. And that
places this Council in the same rank with the other four, because it was
summoned out of all parts of the Empire, and not confined to Provinces and
Diocesses, as the Metropolitical or Patriarchal Councils were. But that the
Summons of the Bishop of Rome was necessary to the calling of a General
Council, and his confirmation of their Decrees necessary to their Validity is
one great branch of the Papal Usurpation, as I hope in its due place to prove
at large against Petrus de Marca.

But to proceed in the business of this present Council, all Parties concerned
in it labor to clear themselves of all blame, and lay all the burden of these
Disorders upon other Men's shoulders, but though it may seem a severe, yet it is
an impartial Judgment, that they were all too faulty. As for the Emperor's own
part, it is evident that the publication of his Imperial Edict was an illegal
act, because against the Authority of a Council owned by himself, though had he
understood it so, he would never have done it, but he was persuaded that it was
no reflection upon the Council it self, because it was no contradiction to any
of their own direct Decrees, but only concerned the Opinions of some private
Persons, that the Council thought not fit to condemn at that time, though
seeing what use the Eutychians made of it, he supposed it now useful to the
settlement of the Church without any Affront to the Council, it being only to
change Counsels with change of Affairs. This was all the Emperor's meaning, and
it could have done no great mischief, had it not been abused by the craft of
Theodorus and his Acephali, who persuaded him that it could be no abatement to
the Authority of the Council, and yet when it was done, used it as an Argument
to subvert it.

And then as for those that fought so furiously as the Africans did for the
honor of the Council against the tria Capitula, though the honor of the Council
was remotely concern^d in it, yet because it was not so apprehended or intended
by the Emperor, they might and ought in duty to have complied with his Royal
Pleasure, only adding a Sa vo to the honor of the Council, that had been easily
granted, and that would have disappointed the craft of the E^tychians, and
caught them in a snare of their own setting, and they must either have owned
the Council, or put off their Vizard. So that which side soever was in the
right, they were all in the wrong, when they made a Schism in the Church about
it, for the thing was not Tanti in it self as to warrant the breach of
Catholic Communion. Though at last the bottom of all these unhappy Quarrels
was founded in St. Cyril's over-doing Anathema's against Nestorianism, that yet
he endeavored to impose upon the Catholic Church, as so many Articles of
Faith: Which because Theodoret and Ibas supposed to be too hard an Imposition,
the Eutychians took advantage of, to represent them as Favorers of the
Nestorian Heresy, though it is plain from the tenor of all their Writings,
that they were as little guilty of that as Cyril himself, but were cautious of
spoiling the Cause by too much niceness of Speculation, and thought it
sufficient to condemn the Heresy it self, without imposing his private
Anathema's as necessary Conditions of Peace and Articles of Christian Faith
upon the Catholic Church. And this was, if we pursue it to its head, the true
Case of the tria Capitula, and St. Cyril was so well convinced of it at last,
that he let fall his Anathema's, Facundus Herm. l. 6. c. 5. In Historia secuil
6 ti dissert. 4.
and allowed the Epistle of Ibas that condemned them of rashness. Natalis
Alexander has written a long dissertation to prove that the tria capitula were
justly condemned, but I find very light weight in the Arguments. For as for
Theodorus and the several Fragments alleged out of him by Marius Mercator and
the Council it self, I can discern no designed Nestorianism in them, and at
worst they seem no worse than unwary Expressions before the starting of the
Controversy in his zeal against the Heresy of Apollinaris, and so he is
excused by St. Cyril himself in his Epistle to John of Antioch. And as for the
sixty Capitula collected by Vigilius out of his Writings and charged with
blasphemy in his Constitutum, it is plain that he draws blood of his Premises
to wring out his Conclusion. And in real truth Churchmen were by this time (as
Baronius himself complains in this very case) grown too nice and speculative in
Matters of Faith, and were not content with the simplicity of the old
Tradition, but were every day starting new Points of subtilty, in so much that
it was a very difficult thing for a Man to express himself so warily, as to
avoid the exceptions of one or other Party. And this Facundus Hermianensis
insists upon, beside his vindication of particular Passages from their perverse
Glosses through his whole third Book, which this late learned Author either
ought to have answered, or to have let the Argument alone, Lib. 12. c. 1.
and withal shows that there are none of the Ancients, who lived before the
birth of the Heresy, out of whom he is not able to alledg as offensive
Passages, as any that they have culled out of the Writings of Theodorus. And
therefore it is not fairly done of our Historian to conclude against the tria
Capitula so severely as he has done, without examining the Arguments of
Facundus in their defense, when he has so long since prevented all his
Objections. But more particularly when he has written so many learned and
accurate Books in defense of Theodorus and his Writings, and the several
Passages objected against him by his Adversaries, I must confess it looks
somewhat odd that this Writer should overlook all these large Discourses, Lib.
3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and only cast his Eye upon one straggling Passage, that was casually cast in
upon another Man's Cause, as he has done out of the 7 th Book and 6 th Chapter,
for that is all that he cites out of Facundus in the Cause of Theodorus. But it
was wisely done to take so little notice of that acute Writer, that has for
ever bafled the Cause of the tria Capitula, and as he was never answered then,
so I am sure he never can be now, I mean as to the main design of his Discourse
abstracted from his African heat, that for a time run him beyond his Argument
into a needless Schism.

As for that part o^ the Argument against Theodorus that he was put out of the
Dypticks of his own Church, I answer that it is certain that he was kept in all
Theodoret's time, i. e. to the year 457. but when he was put out and by whom is
uncertain, Dissert. de 5 ta Sy^odo c. 6.
and it is very probably conjectured by the learned Jesuit Garnerius, that it
was done by Petrus Fullo and the Eutychians in the Reigns of Basiliscus or
Zeno, when all things were in confusion, and the Eutychians under the Conduct
of Fullo committed whatever Disorders they pleased, and then it was that they
might with ease suppress the old Dypticks, and in their room coin new ones, and
so put out Theodorus, that they accused of Nestorianism, and put in Cyril, whom
the Eutychians boasted to be Head and Father of their Party. The only proof
against Theodoret is taken from his Writings and Actings against St. Cyril in
opposing his 12 Anathema's: But this, as I have shown above, is founded upon
mere mistake, as if his Zeal in the case had been engaged in behalf of the
Nestorian Heresy, whereas it was only levelled against the Bigotry of Cyril in
imposing his own nice Propositions upon the Catholic Church. And when Cyril
recalled them or rather let them fall, they were friends, and Theodoret was as
ready to anathematise the Nestorian Heresy, as himself ever was in the
greatest heat or huff of the Controversy. And the case of Ibas was the same,
nothing but his zeal against the rigor of Cyril's Anathema's, as is evident
from the whole Tenor of the Epistle it self. And therefore in the Result of
all, I cannot but think that this packt Council (and so it was) would have done
better to have let these Men lie quiet in their Graves, when they had been
Canonically discharged upon fair Trial by the great Council of Calcedon, though
they had been guilty of those mis-prisions of Heresy, for which their Ashes
were now arraigned and condemned. But yet when a needless Decree was made
against them, I cannot but think too that the dissenting Bishops would have
been much better advised to let it pass, rather than to have raised a Schism in
the Church about it. And so, as far as we can find by the Records of the
Church, the Illyricans and Africans did in a short time, though the
Schismatics in the Western Church kept up the separation with great zeal and
fury into after-ages: And thus having given a true and impartial account of
this Transaction of Justinian, that created him so many enemies both in his own
time, and afterward as long as the unhappy Schism lasted, I now come to a
particular Examination of the several Accusations against him by the supposed
Procopius, but real Alemannus. And when I have vindicated this greatest of
Princes from their unmannerly slanders, it will be time to put a Conclusion to
this work, and to end it with his life, because with it ends the Body of the
Imperial Law.

. XXIV. And though this may at first sight seem to be no more then a private
Controversy concerning the reputation of one man, that has been dead above
this 1200 years, and so at best but an entertainment of curiosity rather then
any useful enquiry for the benefit of our own Age: Yet granting it were so, it
is a duty that all men owe to those great Persons that in their times were
Benefactors to the World, Fathers and Patrons to all Posterity, leaving them a
better World then themselves found, to preserve their Monuments from dust, but
much more from dirt, not only to honor their names, but vindicate their
honors from all unworthy aspersions. And if any man may challenge this
respect, it is Justinians right, who as will appear by his Story, was as great,
not to say a greater (only to avoid envy) a Benefactor to Mankind, as any
Prince in the whole Succession. He delivered Christendom from the Incursions of
the Barbarians, and when he found it not so properly invaded as besieged and in
a great measure possessed by them, he not only subdued them all to the Empire,
but which was a much greater work, to Civility and the Christian Faith, and by
that means he left the Peace of the World much better secured, and its manners
much more improved then they were before. His next Improvement of the Creation
were his numberless and prodigious Buildings, by which he lest the World more
habitable then he found it: neither do I speak merely of that vast number of
great Cities that he built, but of his great care to make Commerce easy and
pleasant, and remove the difficulties of traveling, by building Bridges,
making Highways, founding Publick-houses for the reception of Strangers in all
convenient places; in these kind of works he was so munificent in all places,
that he might not improperly be styled the Founder of the Roman Empire, that as
it were turned those vast Dominions into one City. A Third Benefit to Posterity
is his excellent Body of Laws and Rules of Government gathered out of the
Records of that wise State for about 1300 Years. A work so glorious in it self
that it had been often attempted by the greatest men, V. Guineti Justinianus
Magnus cap. 3.
not only those of the more ancient Commonwealth, but of the most polite and
emproved Age, it entertained the ambitious thoughts both of Caesar and Cicero.
But in vain, so great a work was preserved for the glory of Justinian, and
though if we consider the remote Antiquity of the Laws, the seeming
inconsistency among themselves, and the immense bulk of Books and Records in so
long a Tract of time, the undertaking must have seemed an impossible thing to
any other man, yet he pursued it with that diligence as to bring the greatest
work that was ever undertaken, to perfection in a little time. Now for all
these good Deeds that he has done to all Posterity, I think no man, that
pretends to any thing of gratitude or ingenuity, can excuse himself from the
obligation of doing honor, but much more right to his Memory. But beside all
this his Cause is become the Controversy of all Christendom, because the Power
that he challenged and exercised in the Christian Church, for which he is so
much condemned by the Court of Rome, is one of the inseparable Branches of
Sovereignty, and was always challenged by all Christian Emperors, so that if
the Princes of Christendom should suffer themselves to be stripped of it, they
are thereby outed of one half of their Empire. And the true rise of the Court
of Romes displeasure against him, was not upon the account of any of his own
Actions, but a late Contest; viz. The Famous Quarrel between Paul the 5th and
the State of Venice (as Eusebius has very well observed) about these three
Articles; Praesat. n. 50.
(1.) The Power of the Civil Magistrate to judge the Clergy in Criminal Causes.
(2.) The Decree of the Senate to prohibit the erecting of new Churches or
Religious Houses without the Consent of the State. (3.) Their Statute of
Mortmain against settling Lands upon the Church without the same Consent.


How high this Quarrel run is vulgarly known; but it was so managed by the
Learned Men that appeared in behalf of the Senate as to refer its whole
decision to the Justinian Law, whereas the Pope on the contrary challenged a
Superiority over all Laws, and would submit to no Rule but his own Authority.
Now the reason why the Venetian Advocates insisted so stubbornly upon the
Justinian Code, was not only for the advantage of those several Precedents,
that we have seen above to warrant the proceedings of the State in the several
matters of the present Controversy; but chiefly because the Code of the Canons
of the Universal Church were taken into the Justinian Code and made part of the
Imperial Law; and if they could but bring the Pope any way under the Canons,
that would carry their Cause, for it not only proved in behalf of the State,
that the power of prohibiting Ecclesiastical Laws to be imposed upon their
Subjects without their Consent, was a right challenged by all Christian
Princes, but owned by the Church in the General Councils, it being the known
Custom of the Fathers to send their Decrees to their Imperial Majesty's for
Approbation, before they presumed (to publish them) to the World or impose them
upon the Church.

This is the Argument insisted upon by Jacobus Leschasserius a Learned Civilian
at Paris in his Apology in behalf of the Senate, who recommends the Justinian
Code as the Bull-wark of the Liberties of Christendom. And this little Treatise
first gave the hint to Christophorus Justellus, to publish the Code of the
Canons of the Universal Church. Now when the Court of Rome had for so many Ages
been used to an absolute and unlimited Authority, it could not but gawl and
fret their proud Spirits, to hear of being brought into subjection to Imperial
Laws, and for that reason they set themselves with all the Arts of Malice to
beat down the Credit and Reputation of the Justinian Code, till at length from
his Laws they proceeded to vent their Revenge upon his Person: and that was the
thing that gave so much joy and transport to Alemannus his (...): that now the
World might see what kind of man this Justinian was, who was so profane as to
take upon him a power of meddling with Sacred Things, and controuling Popes
themselves. But the indignity of so base a design soon provoked Learned Men to
expose it to the World with that scorn, that it deserved. The first that
appeared in the Cause (that I know of) was a Learned Man of our own Nation in
the Year 1626, viz. Dr. Rive Advocate to his late Majesty, a Gentleman equally
eminent both for Learning and Loyalty, in a little, but a very ingenious
Treatise upon the Argument, Entitled Imperatoris Justiniani desensio adversus
Alemannum. The Book, which is great pity, is hard to be procured, neither
indeed had the Learned Author the advantage of some considerable Records, that
are now brought to light, and though he was a Learned Man not only in his own
Profession, but all other Polite Learning, yet I find that he was not so well
acquainted with the Records of the Church, as to be able to state that matter
aright. And therefore he is altogether mistaken in that part of his defense,
especially as to the Controversy of the tria Capitula, but he followed the
common opinion as it was stated by the Romanists against the Africans, as I
think all Writers have done to this very day. But otherwise he has with great
eloquence and strength of reason cleared the reputation of this great Prince
from all their dull and dirty aspersions, and Convicted the whole design of
willful Malice and apparent Forgery.

In the same undertaking he is followed (...) Eichelius* Professor at Heltusted
in Franconia, in the Year 1654, who has after the German Fashion of writing for
Marts improved the little Treatise into a great Book, by transcribing those
Quotations at length, which the other only referred to. And though both the
substance and the wit of his Book are too grossly borrowed, and that sometimes
in the very same words, without owning his Author, yet he was a Learned man,
and has added a great many useful Remarks of History from his own observation,
has prosecuted the design more at large, and demonstrated the disingenuity of
the Procopian Author from these 11 Topics.

(1.) That he writes many things impossible in themselves. (2.) Many things
contradicted by Co-Temperary Writers. (3.) By himself. (4.) That what he
vehemently commends in his other Writings, he here as vehemently inveighs
against. (5.) That what came to pass by chance or by other men's default, he
imputes to Justinian. (6.) That he blames many commendable Actions. (7.) That
he praises what he ought to blame. (8.) That he exaggerates things indifferent
to the disadvantage of Justinian. (9.) That he wrests many of Justinians
bravest Actions to an ill sense. (10.) That he picks up all trifling Reports of
the Vulgar against him. (11.) That he writes diverse things of great moment,
that are no where attested by any Co-Temporary Writers.
All which are, I think, sufficient to over-whelm the Reputation of any Writer,
and yet they are all so visible through the whole Vein of this Libel, as to
expose themselves to every man's view without searching for them. But though
this Author has quitted himself in the Historical Part of his Book, as became a
Learned Man, yet he being an Erastian by principle, he has all along failed in
his observations upon Matter of Fact, proceeding every where in that
Fundamental mistake about Justinian, as if he had pretended to give not only
his Ratification but the first Validity to the Laws of the Church. And
therefore though I shall gratefully accept and acknowledge any assistance, that
th^se Learned Men have given me, I shall be forced to make my own observations,
especially as to those things that concern Religion, in which they are both
mistaken. And as for the Historical Part, I shall not trouble my self or the
Reader with any later Writers as they have done, such as Zonaras, Nicephorus,
Cedrenus, etc. but shall merely rely upon Co-temporaries, or such as lived
upon the next Confines of the Age, that they write of; as I have carefully done
through this whole History. And such are in the Age that we are now treating
of, Procopius himself, Agathius, Marcellinus Comes, Facundus Hermianensis,
Liberatus Diaconus, Cassiodorus, Jornandes, Victor Tunonensis, Gregorius
Turonensis, Evagrius Scholasticus under Mauritius, and the Chronicon
Alexandrinum under Heraclius. And from them, though the greatest part of them
were either enemies or disobliged Persons, I doubt not but to show the falsehood
of the Libel it self and the Malice of its Abettors.

In the first place we have all the reason in the World to reject the Book it
self as a spurious Pamphlet dishonestly fathered upon Procopius, when we find
it never so much as mentioned by any of the Ancients, or by any Writer
whatsoever for many Ages after his own time. And yet it is next to impossible
but that they must have taken notice of a work of such a peculiar stre^n, if it
had been extant in their time, especially when his other Writings were so well
known in his own and all following Ages. Evagrius who writ in the same Age,
though some time after, viz. under Mauritius, commends his other Histories
without any mention of this Agathias Scholasticus that both Epitomized, and
continued his History, and Johannes Scholasticus, that writ not long after the
death of Justinian knew nothing of this work, though both were so well
acquainted with his other Writings. Photius that diligent and judicious Critic
gives an high Character of his other works, but is utterly silent about this.
In short the first Author that makes any mention of it, is that crude and
injudicious Rhapsodist Suidas who lived not till the 11th Century, 500 Years
after Procopius, but he comes too late, not being vouch't by any more Ancient
Testimony, and then his own can be of no Cred^t, especially considering the
humor of the man, who was a mere Collector without choice or judgment, setting
down whatsoever came to his hands without examining into the truth of the
Record, so that it seems this Libel being forged before his time he embraces
it, contrary to the fundamental Law of the Critics without any ancient
Testimony to certify its legitimacy. Alemannus pleads that the reason why it
was so long unknown, was because Procopius was forced to suppress it for the
security of his own life. That might be a good reason for Procopius his own
time, but certainly not for the long interval of so many Ages, as from the
sixth Century to the eleventh. And to give any credit to a Book, that never
appeared once in the World till 500 years after the death of its pretended
Author, is a Civility that the Critics would never allow in any Case, neither
do I know it ever challenged unless in this. I know indeed Books may have been
buried five hundred or a thousand years, but then they have always had some
ancient Testimonies that there were once such Books written by such Authors,
and upon no other terms were they ever received, and this was the case of St.
Clement's Epistle. But however this Vatican Plea for suppressing* Procopius his
Book for his own safety may be consistent with it self, I am sure it is very
inconsistent with the pretense that he has undertaken to make good, viz. that
it may be all proved out of Procopius his other Writings, in which he tells
many more and many worse Stories than in this little Epitome: And yet they were
not only seen but approved by the Emperor himself. But if so, he ought either
to have suppress't all or none, and not to have published the sharper Invective
to gain the Emperor's favor, and keep back the milder to avoid his displeasure.
These are pretty consistent Dreams, that could never have come into any Man's
head, but in a Vatican Nap.

But beside the want of sufficient Certificates to warrant the reception of the
Book, the thing is so very unlikely in it self, that Procopius should write so
dirty a Libel both against Justinian and Belizarius, that it would require very
strong proof only to make it a thing credible. For when he had through his
whole life been so infinitely obliged by both; when he had been raised by
Justinian from a low Condition to the highest Preferments in the Empire; when
he had ever kept the most entire and intimate friendship with Belizarius; and
lastly when he made it the great work of his life, both before and after the
writing of this Book to consecrate their Fames, and conveigh down the glory of
their Actions to all future Ages, who can easily suffer himself to believe that
the same Man should endeavor to spoil all this by a railing Lampoon? Though
whenever or by whomsoever it was forged, it is no wonder that it was laid to
Procopius, according to the custom of all Lampoons, to fasten them upon
Authors, that of all Men living were most unlikely to write them. To these we
may add some other unlucky Objections suggested by Alemannus himself in his
Preface. As that the Glory of Justinian's Actions is so bright in it self, as
to be able to outshine all detraction. For what Man can believe that he ruined
the Roman Empire, that recovered so many Cities, Provinces and Kingdoms to it,
that conquered so many barbarous Nations, and plainly recovered the Empire,
that had been almost lost and tottering for many years, to its full force and
Power? One would think that the Man who makes the Objection, should be
concerned to rid himself some way or other of it, and yet he fairly dismisses
it with all Civility, because (he says) it is at this time a thing only
existing in History An admirable Vatican reason this! but so it is, whenever
Men are over-seen and eager in their pursuit of Revenge, that they always leave
their Sense and Understanding behind them.

And whereas some Men conclude Procopius to be Father of the Bastard, from the
likeness of its features to his other Books, I should from the same argument
draw the contrary conclusion. For though it is no hard matter for any Man to
imitate or rather steal another Man's style as to forms and schemes of Speech,
by making it familiar to himself with constant reading. Yet the Spirit and the
Genius of an Author is a thing very rarely imitable, and that too plainly
discovers it self in this counterfeit Procopius; for if we compare the Anecdota
with his other Books, and observe what perspicuity and neatness of Method, what
gravity, what candor, what ingenuous freedom runs through all his other
Writings: And on the contrary in what confusion and indigested heaps things are
laid together in this Libel, with what silliness and malice, with what
buffoonry and affected rudeness the whole work is contrived, it seems to me
impossible that they should both be the Offspring of the same Man. And
therefore it is but a true and a sharp censure, that is given of it by
Balthazar Bonifacius in his Epistle to Molinus. In summa sic statuo esse in
hac, cujuscunque illa sit Auctoris, rhyparographia, loquentiae satis, licentiae
nimis, insolentiae plus nimio, multum livoris, plus odii, plurimum inscitiae,
pa um ordinis, minus facundiae, minimum judicii, nihil memoriae, minus nihilo
sinceritatis. In fine, my Opinion is, that in this rhapsody, whosesoever it is,
is to be found babble enough, rudeness too much, arrogance more than enough,
much spite, more hatred, but most ignorance, little order, less eloquence,
least judgment, nothing of memory, but less than nothing of honesty. From all
which enormous defects, it is but reasonable to conclude with him, that the
true Procopius so eminent for all the contrary perfections could never be the
Author of the Libel. And indeed the folly of the design makes it no less
incredible than the meanness of the performance, for if Procopius upon some
affront at Court resolved to revenge himself by this Libel, yet to own it and
publish it to the World in his own name, was a ranker piece of spite against
himself, than against his Royal Master; for it not only blasts the Credit of
all his other Writings, but it leaves himself a base and unworthy Parasite upon
Record, who spent all his Wit and Life, in magnifying the Virtues of a Man,
whom himself knew to exceed all Mankind in the studious practice of all
wickedness: For that is the Burden of the Libel. Neither is it to be less
suspected from the time in which it pretends to have been brought forth, viz.
in the 32 year of the reign of Justinian, as the Author often declares, whereas
Procopius his Books de aedificiis that are all panegyric and abound with quite
contrary Characters, were not written till the 36 th year. Now is it not very
credible that when Procopius was fallen out so bitterly with his great Patron
after all the Obligations in the World, as he is in this Libel, he should
afterward be transported into so much kindness as he expresses in those books,
without blasting and retracting his own slanders. Or if we can reconcile the
possibility of the thing, yet however the books de aedificiis are an
unanswerable confutation of the anecdota, and not only convict the characters
of Malice, but the Matters of Fact of false hood. So that granting Procopius to
be the true Father, I will prove him guilty of rank falshhood through the whole
tale both from his own Writings before and after, from the testimony of his
co-temporaries, but most of all from the nature and the circumstances of the
Actions themselves. And as for the Librarians spiteful endeavors to improve the
malice of the Libel, I shall discover so much baseness in the Attempt, as to
leave him under that disgrace that is due to such ill-natured Pedants, that
will be gnawing at the Reputations of great Men. And to this purpose I shall
reduce this confused heap of Calumnies to certain heads as the most easy way
of confuting them, for whilst they lie confused together they are not so easily
discerned or exposed, but when parted, like false Witness, every Lie betrays it
self.

. XXV. The first crime that he lays to the Emperor's Charge, is the worst that
a Sovereign Prince can be guilty of, and that is cruelty, which the Author of
the Libel aggravates in every Page, at that extravagant rate, as if he had
outdone all the Tyrants that ever were, Cap. 6 of Maltretus Edition.
in blood and slaughter. For he was the Author of so many and so great
Calamities to the Romans, as exceeded all the Miseries of all former Ages, he
made nothing of siezing other Men's Estates, he broke out into numberless
slaughters, so that he counted it a trifle to destroy innumerable Multitudes of
innocent Persons. The great devouring Plague that I described in my former
Books, and that reigned through almost all parts of the habitable. World,
spared as many as it destroyed. But no Man escaped Justinian's cruelty, who was
sent as a Plague from Heaven to sweep all away. Some he was so kind as to
destroy, but others he granted their lives, to suffer all the miseries of want
and poverty, making them much more miserable than the others, when they would
be content to be delivered from the Evils that they endured by any the most
exquisite Tortures. Neither did he think it enough to destroy the whole Roman
Empire, but he endeavored to master Africa and Italy, that he might throw
those Nations together with the Provinces subject to himself into one common
ruin. Cap. 12.
And again. Justinian and Theodora seem^d to me and all others of the
Senatorian Order, not of the race of Mankind, but the worst breed of Devils,
and the very Plagues of Humane kind, that consulted together how they might
destroy the Universe with most expedition, and for that reason assumed Humane
shapes, being as it were half-Man, half Devil, and so over-turn'd the whole
World. And this may be proved by the great enormity of their Wickedness, in
which these Devils infinitely out-stript all the villainy that Mankind is
capable of acting. For tho there have been diverse Tyrants in former Ages, that
were cruel beyond all bounds of Barbarity, that dispeopled whole Cities,
Provinces and Kingdoms, yet these were the first that utterly destroyed the
Race of Mankind, and laid wast the universal World. And once more (not to be
too tedious, this Story of mowing down the Inhabitants of the whole World,
being the Subject of every Page) That Justinian was in reality no Man, Cap. 18.
but the Devil in the shape of a Man, is evident from those unparalleled
Mischiefs that he brought upon Mankind: for the height of all Wickedness is to
be taken from the depth of it Authors Villainy. But for that it were more easy
to compute the Sand upon the Seashore, then all the Nations destroyed by
Justinian. And as for my own part, I am able to reckon up two hundred and ten
Millions of Men, that were offered Victims to his Barbarity. A very fair
reckoning this, were the particulars well cast up, for by the sum total one
could expect to hear of no less than the old Pranks of Caligula, Nero and
Commodus, of Phalaris his ten thousand bulls, and Pharaohs ten millions of
Brick-Kills, of the outrages of the thirty Tyrants, and the fury of the ten
persecutions: of firing the City, assassinating the Senate, putting whole
Provinces to the Sword? but what do I speak of all these trifles of Cruelty, if
compared to the destruction of the whole habitable World? for that is the
Chorus to all our Tragedies, that he did not only cut the throats of all the
Inhabitants of the Roman Empire, but buried the whole World in one common ruin.
What not one Man left alive? the whole Race at once destroyed? How then came
the face of the Earth to be peopled again? by Deucalion's Stones, or Cadmus's
Teeth? Oh no, says Alemannus, these are only certain Schemes of Speech, that
the learned call hyperbolical Expressions. It may be so, but we, that are
unlearned, cannot distinguish them from impudent Lies and Impossibilities. For
if every Man living were not destroyed, then the tale, as it is told, is all
fable, but if the destruction were universal, then the question returns how the
Earth ever came to be re-inhabited, without those Absurdities that we commonly
call poetical Hyperboles. But not to be too severe upon the license of
Lampoons, we will grant that possibly the Hydra or the Dragon might spare some
few alive; but in compensation let us compute how many millions of his Subjects
he devoured at every meal. Where lay the Cities? where the Provinces? where the
Nations, that he so universally dispeopled? How great a part of the Empire he
recovered, we know from his Wars with the Goths and Vandals in Italy and
Africa, but that he ever destroyed any one Province, is news to this very day.
How many stately Cities he built is recorded by Procopius, but if he ever
reduced either any of them or any other to Ashes, he would have done well to
have told us in his own defense, if he could but have alleged any one Example.
What strange way of writing history is this to tell us of such vast numbers of
Cities, Provinces and Nations destroyed, without specifying but one Village?
But though he might not mow down whole Cities and Provinces at a stroke, yet he
might commit such vast numbers of outrages at diverse times and in diverse
places, as might amount to the two hundred and ten millions of lives. That may
be, but as vast as the Empire was, I doubt it would scarce afford pasture
enough for so great a Butchery. But if it would, I would only know where, when
and by whom these vast Oceans of blood were shed. He reigned 39 years by
himself, and governed nine years more under his Uncle Justin, in all which time
if we inquire of our Libeller the Catalogue of his Executions, Why, to be
short, Amantius and Vitalvanus were put to death. They were so, but what are
two Men above two hundred millions of Men! This is the privilege of
hyperbolical Historians. But seeing this is all our Martyrology, let us inquire
into the merits of the Cause, for it is that, they say, and not the suffering
that makes the Martyr, and by that we shall easily discern that these unheard
of Cruelties were so far from that, that they were not only necessary Acts of
Government, but of common Justice too.

Amantius had been the Author of all the Severities against the Catholics
under Anastasius, insomuch that at the Coronation of the Emperor Justin the
People cried out for his blood. But that was not the cause of his death, Act.
1. Council. contra Anthinum.
but his endeavor to set up Theocritus against him in the Empire, for which as
they were both justly put to death, Evag. l. 4. c. 2.
so was it an Action necessary to the preservation of the Government it self.
But as the Author of the Libel tells the Story, he discovers himself to be no
true Procopius; for first he says that Amantius was put to death by Justinian,
whereas he was immediately executed by Justin at his first coming to the Crown,
as appears not only from all the co-temporary Historians, Marcellinus Comes,
Jornandes, Evagrius, Victor Tunonensis, but from the matter of Fact it self, he
being taken off for setting up Theocritus for the title of the Crown against
Justin. But when he farther adds the Cause of his death, he utterly betrays the
Imposture of the whole Libel, viz. that he had been too saucy in his language
to John Bishop of Constantinople, whereas there was no such Bishop of that name
in all the long Reign of Justinian, till the last year of his life. But here
for a Reconciler commend me to the Apostolical Librarian, Praefat.
that when there were two Patriarchs of Constantinople, one that dyed in the
first year of Justin surnamed Cappadox, and another that came to that See in
the last year of Justinian surnamed Scholasticus; to make sure of a John in his
reign, he pieces up one Bishop of these two Men, and says that Procopius meant
Johannes Scholasticus Cappadox, though Cappadox was dead near 50 years before
Scholasticus was consecrated, and four Bishops of other Names were ranged in
the Dypticks between them, Epiphanius, Anthimus, Mennas and Eutychius. And yet
the learned Librarian is so strangely or rather so wilfully ignorant, as to
make that the grand Article against Justinian, that he was the Man, who first
granted the Title of Oe^umenical Bishop to this Joannes Scholasticus Cappadox,
and this he affirms not only without any Testimony from Records, but against
the most obvious and known story of those times; by which it is evident that
this Title was first challenged and granted to another Johannes surnamed
Jejunator or John the mortified under Mauritius. But however when it is certain
not only from Record, but from matter of Fact it self that Amantius was put to
death, for endeavoring to depose the Emperor, if Procopius himself imputed it
to a little foul Language, it argued great malice, but if it were done by any
other counterfeit Author, it argues great ignorance in the Affairs of those
Times. And indeed the Author has every where betrayed so much of that, as
plainly discovers himself to be no true Procopius. And such is his story in his
6 th Chapter of Justin's being analphabetus, void of all Learning, not able to
write his own name, which he proves from the invention of the Printing Plate
with his name in it, that he stamped upon all his Commissions, because he could
not write. This is all the Authority for this wild Story, and we never hear any
thing of it, till Suidas transcribed it hence, and yet it is strange that none
of the Historians of that Time, should ever take notice of a thing so very
strange in the Empire, had it been true. But however this story of the printing
Plate is a very unlucky discovery of the asses ears under Procopius his skin,
when it is so well known, that it was the custom of all the Roman Emperors, to
stamp their names to their Commissions for expedition. And this Alemannus
himself confesses was the ancient usage, and describes the forms of it out of
Pluta^ch and Ausonius, and shows that it was used by Justinian himself* though
it was in aftertimes disused by the Grecian ^mperors. Now for any Man to go
about to prove that Justin could not write his own Name, because he had it
engraven on a printing Plate, when all other Emperors used the same Instrument,
it clearly demonstrates his ignorance of the Customs of those times, and proves
him some unlearned Greek, that lived after the disusage of that Custom in that
Empire. And as for Justin's acting so little, and Justinian's acting so much in
the public Affairs, Procopius himself in his first Book de Bello Vandalico,
imputes it to no other cause then his extreme old age, and not to any want
either of natural Parts or ingenuous Education, as this malicious and ignorant
Libeller has done, who sticks not to call him a fool and a blockhead. And it
was no doubt a sign of his being so, when he raised himself from so low a
fortune into the Imperial Throne, and when he was in it, governed so well, as
we have seen in the History of his Reign. But here again commend me to the
Ingenuity of Alemannus, that cites the very passage in the Book de bello
Vandalico, which imputes Justin's inability for business to nothing but his
extreme old Age, to confirm this passage that lays it wholly upon his natural
incapacity and blockishness.

But having convicted this story of the Murder of Amantius for an unmannerly
word, of extreme malice and ignorance, let us now examine the other hundred
Millions of instance in the death of Vitalian, and there we shall find as
strong streins of the same malice and ignorance as in the Amantian Fable. For
first he is so miserably informed as to place this transaction immediately
after the death of Amantius, whereas he was for a good time one of the greatest
Favorites of the Emperor Justin, and kept up an intimate Friendship with
Justinian, and joined with him in transacting that great Business of uniting
the Eastern and Western Churches with Pope Hormisdas, as appears by Justinian's
Epistles to that Pope; and therefore the death of Vitalian did not follow the
Execution of Amantius (...), a short time after, as if it were the next Action,
as this Author expresses it, for it was not done till the third year of
Justin's Reign, and for that reason Evagrius when he tells this Story
immediately after that of Amantius, he adds, (...), but this was done
afterward: by which it is evident that this Author was utterly ignorant of the
right order of the Transactions of that time. But the true Story of Vitalian is
this, That he had often stein'd himself with Rebellion against his Master
Anastasius, and had caused the slaughter of many Thousands of Citizens for his
own Ambition, but the Emperor was at last too hard for him, so that whilst he
reigned the Rebel lived in Exile, Marcel. Com. Chronicon.
but was restored by Justin, taken into great favor, advanced to great honor,
first made Master of the Militia and afterward Consul, but he seizing all
opportunities of encouraging Faction and Sedition, and heading the Tumults of
the Scythian Monks at Constantinople, he perish't some way or other in the
Attempt, but the manner of his death is not certainly known; Marcellinus Comes
only says, that he was stabbed within the Palace with sixteen wounds, Evagrius
says from Zacharias the Eutychian, that he was trapan'd by Justin and
Justinian, and if it were so, yet that Partial Historian against those Emperors
has set down two very good reasons to justify it, first that it was to cure
his insatiable Thirst after the Crown, which they saw nothing but his own Blood
could quench, and secondly, to punish him for all that Train of Mischief and
Treason, that he had practiced against the Roman Empire. But Victor Tunensis
both a co-temporary and a disobliged Writer* ^^ing one of those African Bishops
that were banished for their Zeal against the Tria Capitula, only says that it
was reported that his Throat was cut within the Palace, by the Faction of
Justinian; so that it seems he could get no certain knowledge of it, whether it
were done by the Emperors command, or by a Tumult of the Guards, and that is
most likely; for Soldiers of Loyal Principles are never wont to forgive (as
indeed they never ought) revolting Rebels. But which way soever it was brought
about, it was a just Execution of one of the vilest men living, that had often
embroiled the Empire in bloody Wars, that had called in the barbarous People to
invade it, that had besieged Constantinople it self, and had utterly destroyed
it, had not Proclus fired his Fleet, as Archimedes did that of Marcellus, with
burning Glasses. These two just and unavoidable Executions, are the only too
bloody Actions by which this Prince outstript the cruelty of all the Tyrants
that ever were in any Age or Nation, and destroyed more People then an
Universal Plague, not only cutting the Throats of all the Inhabitants of the
Roman Empire, but dispeopling the whole Creation.

. XXVI. But what were there no Acts of Mercy in his Reign? nay what if there
were nothing but Acts of Mercy? what if no other Reign can vie Acts of Clemency
with it? And for the issue of that Challenge I will farther Challenge both the
Libeller and the Librarian to find any one Offender in all his Reign, that did
not meet with more mercy then justice, or to find me in all Records from the
beginning of Mankind so many instances of a great and generous Nature in any
one Prince. With what barbarity were his Confederates assassinated, and with
what fury was his own Empire beset, by Gilimer King of the Vandals, and Vitigis
King of the Goths, yet when by the Event of War, they were made his Prisoners,
with what Prince-like respect did he treat them? Instead of any revengeful
usage they enjoyed the Wealth and State of Princes; Vit gis chose to continue
at Court, Gilimer had the grant of vast Revenues for himself and his Relations
in Gaul, and was courted to accept of the dignity of a Patriarchate, but
rendered himself incapable of it, by refusing to quit the Arian Heresy.
Johannes Cappadox, a man that Justinian had obliged above all men, having made
him both Patriarchate, Consul, and P^efect of the City, in which last Office
the Empire being ensured to him by the Magicians, he is foolishly drawn in to
conspire the death and destruction of the Emperor, and is undenyably Convicted
of it, De Bello Persico, lib. 1. c. 25.
yet after all this discovery this wicked man (and Procopius gives a blacker
Character of him then of any man in his whole History) is so far from being put
to death, that he is only put into a Monastery, and that with such vast wealth,
and so many advantages of life, that as Procopius observes, if he had been
endowed with Wit enough to estimate his happiness by the measures of Reason,
not of Ambition, he would have valued his Misfortune, as the most happy thing
that ever befell him. But now to compare the truth and the ingenuity of the open
and the secret Histories concerning this unhappy man, by the first it is proved
that he was guilty of all manner of wickedness and oppression, an Atheist and a
Villain, that designed the Crown for his own Head by the Murder of his Royal
Master, and that certainly is enough to put any Subject out of all capacity of
mercy. And yet in the Anecdota his fall is imputed merely to Theodora's
Revenge, for endeavoring to alienate the Emperors Affections from her. And if
it were so, that was so ill an Office, that (if any thing could) would warrant
the lawfulness of it. But whether there were, or were not any thing of Pique in
the Case, it is certain that he had discovered his Ambition to supplant his
Master, and if after that the Empress by slite over-reach't him, whatever
private design she might have in it, it was in it self an eminent act of duty.
And by this we may judge both of the Wisdom and the Petulancy of this Libeller,
when he snarles at an Action so commendable in it self, and so commended by
Procopius himself in his relation of it. In short, when Procopius had painted
this Man in such black Characters, in common discretion he ought not, he could
not have made his Prosecution a Crime; for setting aside the Empresses disgust,
by Procopius his own report from the deposition of the Witnesses, he deserved
death for his Treason, and then after that, what ever motives she might have to
prosecute, no Man could have any just ground to blame the Prosecution. And yet
after all the good Emperor spared the Traitors blood, and only condemned him to
say his Prayers, and sue out his pardon in Heaven, as he in great mercy had
granted it here on earth. But so blind was the importunity of the Man, that he
rusht into farther Disorders, till he was at last turned loose to beg Bread and
Farthings, which story was in the Legend Age of Christianity fastened I know not
by whom upon the great Belizarius. But now considering the heinousness of this
unhappy Man's Offenses, Theodora and Antonina, who entrapt him, as great Furies
as they are represented for it by the Libel, are not less to be commended for
their honesty in the design, then the dexerity of their Wit in its management.
Neither upon the whole Matter do I find them to have been such instruments of
Cruelty, as they are made not only by this Libel, but the common vogue. It is
evident that they were Ladies of great Art and Subtilty, that had great power
over their Husbands, and by that means great share in the Government, in which
as they had opportunity of doing many other good Offices, so the discovery of
this Traitor was none of the least. And as for Theodora, how black soever she
is painted in this Libel, I cannot find but that she bears a very fair
Character in all other Writers both for Wisdom, Piety and Charity. Procopius
himself gives an high commendation of her Wisdom in his first Book de bello
Persico: Lib. 1. cap. 9.
And in his Books de Aedificiis reckons up many of her foundations for pious
and charitable Uses, especially that of destroying the public Stews* and
building and endowing religious Houses for the maintenance of lewd People taken
out of them, there to repent of the Wickedness of their former lives, and
sequester themselves to Prayer and Devotion. And as for her goodnature he has
left this Character of it upon Record, De Bello Gothico, l. 3. c. 31.
that it was in her temper to relieve and protect the oppressed, and therefore
she forced Artabanes, a great favorite with the Emperor, to receive his
injured Wife, a piece of Justice that laid the foundation of a Conspiracy
against the Emperor's life, as we shall see afterward. And as much as that Age
abounded with Writers, none of them have left any ill character or ill story of
her upon Record, unless in the point of Religion, that she favored the
Acephali and the Eutychians. So that whereas this Libel reports that she was at
first a Player, a common Strumpet, the most infamous Prostitute of the City,
it is as probably true as the other tale of her being a Witch, and having carnal
copulation with the Devil. And it is very likely that so wise a Prince should
take a Woman of such public infamy into his Bed and his Bosom, but if he did,
it is much more so, that when the thing was so universally known in the whole
Empire, and out of it too, (for such Reports stop no where) that yet not any
the least footsteps of it should appear in any Writer either of the same or the
adjoining Ages. There were at that time several Historians, that lived out of
the Dominions of Justinian, as Jornandes, Cassiodorus, Paulus Diaconus, who
might have spoke out with freedom and without danger, and yet they are
altogether silent. There were many angry and disobliged Writers, as all the
Africans, who suffered in the Cause of the tria capitula, and their African
Blood would have been tempted at least to make some remote Reflections upon a
thing so foul and foolish. Evagrius did not write till the Justinian Family was
extinct, and it is too evident, for what reason I know not, unless it be that
he followed an Eutychian Historian, that he had no kindness for it, and yet he
knows nothing of the matter. Now that a thing of so strange a nature, of so
great concernment, so known, so public in all parts of the World should never
be so much as mentioned or intimated in such a great variety of Writers, it
must require a very greedy Faith to swallow it. But Alemannus, as his custom
is, vouches the story out of Almoin a French historian, that lived not till
near three hundred years after the death of Justinian, and accordingly he gives
such a false and fabulous account of the whole reign, as only proves his
barbarous ignorance of all the transactions of that time.

As for the treatment of Pope Silverius, it was foul enough, but as far as the
Empress was concerned in the Plot, I cannot see, that she was farther
chargeable with any thing than the Eutychian or rather Acephalan Heresy. She
was a Patroness of the Party, and as most Women are, zealous to advance her own
Sect, and that no doubt made her willing to be rid of Pope Silverius, who would
not be wrought to any compliance with her or condescension to her Faction. But
as for the forging of Letters in his Name to the Goths, if there were any truth
in the story, it was none of her Action, Rome being the Scene of it, whereas
she always resided at Constantinople. But for my own part I care not to be too
credulous in the Reports of those times, when Men were so factious and partial
in their Relations. Though that such Letters there were either true or
counterfeit it is certain, but whether, uncertain. The Africans affirm that they
were forged, and that is easily said, when Men are wrangling for a baffled
Party, but upon what ground they say it, it is utterly in the dark, and will now
never come to light, Silverius dying before it ever came to Trial. Neither is
it so improbable that he should side with the King of the Goths, for the sake
of his great Master Theodorick, by whose favor he had been advanced into the
Papal Chair. De Bello Gothico l. 1. c. 11.
That he was solicited to it by Vitigis we are assured by the true Procopius,
but that he gave his consent, he cannot tell, but rather on the contrary that
he sided with Belizarius, and persuaded the Citizens to open their Gates to
him, C. 14.
but whether out of fear or favor, was known to himself alone. Though the first
motive of fear is most probable, as Procopius tells the story, C. 25.
that Belizarius being after his entrance into Rome strictly besieged by the
Goths, he sent away all that were useless or suspected, and among these
Silverius himself. And that I take to be all the mystery of his Banishment, and
all the black circumstances added by the Africans to be their own choleric
Surmises, out of whom this malicious Rhapsodist borrowed most of his Fables,
and then improved them with his own Venom.

And lastly as for the barbarous murder of the great Queen Amalasuntha, which
this Author says, was contrived by Theodora to prevent her designed Journey to
Constantinople out o^ envy and jealousy of her beauty; for which end she
employed Peter the Emperor's Ambassador to Theodatus, to persuade him to put
her to death. But beside that this story has the ill fortune to have no
Vouchers, and that on the contrary it is cross't by all co-temporary Writers, it
is here told so awkerdly, as plainly to give it self the Lie. And if the
Pamphleteer had consulted Procopius himself, De Bello Goth. l. 1. c. 4.
he would have told him, that though the Queen had once designed for
Constantinople, yet at this time she was so very far from any such thought,
that she had taken the whole burden of the Government upon her self, and
though she had admitted her Kinsman Theodatus to a partnership of the Pomp and
Title of Majesty, she by an Oath of Allegiance from him reserved all the Power
to her self. And as for Peter the Ambassador, he had so little hand in
persuading the Tyrant to the Villainy, that he had not so much as ever seen
him, when it was committed, being at that time on his Journey, and staying at
Apollonia for farther Orders from his Master: by whose command, when he came to
Rome he declared an eternal War against the Goths in revenge of her Majesty's
death. And the Emperor was (as he always was) as good as his word, for he never
left them till he had utterly destroyed both their Government, and their
Nation. We see here how hard a thing it is to file a Lie so square, as that it
shall light even on all sides, for this Libeller is so unfortunate, as to cross
with Procopius himself in every part and circumstance of his story; and to
betray his Forgeries as much by his innocent as malicious Mistakes, and what
could be more unhappy than for the same Man to tell us that Peter after his
Arrival at Rome persuaded Theodatus to murder Amalasuntha, and yet tell us
that she was murdered before he set foot upon Italian Ground.

So much for Theodora, the next Fury is Antonina, the inseparable Companion of
all her Wickedness, who therefore ought to be cleared and acquitted by her
discharge; but for her commendation I must add, that she is every where
celebrated by Procopius for a Woman of prodigious Wit, to which he very much
ascribes Belizarius his success in his Wars, in which she never left him, but
when she stayed at Court to watch the Motions of Joannes Cappadox, who out of
mere malice and envy lay at catch for his destruction, and how neatly she tript
up the great Statesman, we have seen above, though the Reader may see it more
largely described by Procopius himself. So little design of Cruelty had this
Lady in the overthrow of Cappadox, De Bello Persico lib. 1. cap. 25.
that she did no more than what was necessary for her Husbands security, an
Action that I think no Man can deem a fault in a Court-lady. And as for those
many and shameless Adulteries, that the Pamphlet loads her with, it is but a
single testimony of we know not whom, no such thing being in the least
suggested against her by any other Writer. But this sort of tales are proper
materials for Lampoons, for as it is hard to prove them, so is it as hard to
disprove them, and withal they take most easily with the Ill Nature of Mankind,
though without undeniable proof they ought to be rejected as the standing
Topics of Calumny. But that Belizarius should imprison her for her Lewdness,
and yet be so very strangely fond of her, as this inconsistent Scribler tells
the Tale, is a thing so incredible in it self, that scarce any Testimony can
have credit enough to give it reputation. And it is of the same stamp with
Theodorus being a Player and a common Strumpet, that a thing so notorious and
public as this should never be mentioned by any other Writer, especially in an
Age so abounding with Historians of contrary Factions. But to proceed in the
history of Justinian's Cruelty: De Bello Goth. (...) c. 31* ^2*
There was one Artabanes, that the Emperor had raised from a mean Condition to
the highest Honors in the Empire, and would have given him his own Sister in
marriage, had not the Banes been forbidden by a former Wife. But he to revenge
the disappointment conspires with one Arsaces against the Emperor's life. This
Arsaces had been convicted of High Treason; and conspiracy with the Goths, for
which, when he was legally condemned, he was not so much as fined or banished,
but only whipped to shame him out of the folly of his Design. These draw in other
Conspirators, till at last the Plot is fully discovered to the Emper^r, and
conf^ss't by themselves; and yet is he so far from putting any of them to
death, that he only put them out of their Preferments, and enacted nothing more
severely against them than an honorable Confinement, imprisoning them in his
own Palace, and not in a Common Goal. And not long after we find Artabanes
received into favor, made Viceroy of Thrace, Ibid. cap* 39.
and Lord High Admiral in the Expedition against Totilas the Goth, when he
invaded Sicily. But as generous as he was toward his own Enemies, he was wont
to infuse a stronger tincture of Justice in the punishment of other Men's
Wrongs: Thus when Gubazas King of the Colchi or Lazi, his Confederate, was
murdered by a Conspiracy of the Principal Officers of the Roman Army, and
complaint of the Villainy brought to the Emperor, he refers the examination of
the Matter to a fair Trial, as we may see in Agathias, who has set down an
exact Narrative of the Pleadings on all sides; Lib. 4.
and after a full hearing, the Offenders being found guilty, they were executed
according to Law. Only Martinus for his many former good Services was reprieved
from Execution, though put out of all Employment and confined to a retired
life. For though, as the Historian sets it down, he ought to have suffered with
John and Rusticus his Associates, yet the Emperor out of regard to his many
Victories, and the great conduct that he had showed in all dangers, thought it
best to remit the strictness of Law, and temper its rigor with some mixture of
Mercy, and therefore he gave him his life, but deprived him of all Command, and
thought it sufficient to punish so great a Man with disgrace, thou^h he had so
deep a share in ^o great a Wickedness. These are the bloody Acts of a De^il and
a wild beast in humane shape, always busy in the destruction of Mankind, as he
is in every Page styled in this dull and insipid Libel. But before we quit this
Head it will be proper to vindicate both Belizarius, and the Emperor's
demeanor toward him. For how it comes to pass I know not, but it has long
past among the Writers of later Ages, that he was banished for High Treason, had
his Eyes pulled out, and forced to beg upon the Highway, so that da Obolum
Belizario is become one of the most common Pulpet-Texts. And yet it is all pure
Fable and Romance, not only without any Authority from Ancient Records, but
against the undoubted Reports of Co-temporary Writers, especially Procopius and
Agathias who have followed the H^story of his good Fortune to the end of his
life, but most of all from his last expedition in his extreme old Age against
the Huns, by which the Historian says, he gained more honor than by all his
former Victories, Agathias l. 5.
and then it is certain that he was not reduced to the condition of a blind
Beggar; so that this Story is to be rejected as mere Fable without any farther
Confutation. But because this great man has fallen under the lash of this rude
Satyrist, we must do right to the memory of the greatest man upon Record: for
though Procopius has done it to purpose in the History of his Actions, that as
he describ^s them, are not to be paralleled by any of the Ancient Greeks or
Romans, yet this counterfeit represents him as a mean, contemptible, and
cowardly wretch, the very laughing stock of the common People, and that he fell
into disgrace with the Emperor after his Conquest of Gilimer and Vitigis, out
of envy to that vast Treasury, of which he defrauded the Exchequer; that he
walked the Streets of Constantinople sad and solitary, expecting to be stabbed by
every man that met him: that after he was restored to favor he lost Italy by
his covetousness, and so again became the object of public contempt, with a
great many more streins of the same Civility and Eloquence. And thus is this
mighty Hero, this great wonder of the World, so Glorious for all his Virtues,
V. Procop. ^^ Bello (...). lib. 3. cap. 1.
Greatness and Constancy of Mind, Conduct and Skill in War, singular Temper and
Clemency, Bounty and Liberality, Faith and Loyalty shrunk into a thing as
contemptible as a Knight Errant in Burlesque* But of all Liars this Romanc^r is
the most unhappy that I ever met with, and is so unfortunate as to contradict
the true Historians not only in his Characters, but undeniable matters of Fact.
For at what time and upon what occasion did he fall into this disgrace? If we
may believe our Author* it was after the Conquest of Gil^mer and Vitigis, for
not delivering up his spoils into the Emperors Treasury. But what says the true
Procopius the Eyewitness and Companion of all his Fortunes. De Bello Goth. l.
3. c. 1.
When he was offered the Kingdom of Italy by the vanquished Goths, he flatly
refused it as an Act of Treason against his Royal Master, immediately repaired
to Constantinople with Vitigis and all his Wealth, and all the Treasure of King
Theodorick, with which the Emperor was so surprised, it being the greatest that
ever was amassed together in one heap, that he made a solemn invitation of the
Senate to view and admire it. And though at this time he gave not Belizarius a
public Triumph, as he did at his return out of Africa, yet he was the wonder
and the praise of all men, having obtained two such Victories, as never any man
did before him, brought two Captive Kings to Constantinople, and above all men's
expectation delivered into the hands of the Romans both the Families and the
Treasuries of Gezarick and Theodorick (than whom never were greater Princes
among the Barbarians) and restored the Wealth taken from the Enemies to the
Commonwealth* and in a little time restored one half of the lost Empire to the
other. So that at Constantinople he was the delight of all men's eyes; the
People thought they could never gaze enough upon him, and his appearance in
public was like a Pompous Triumph, always attended with a mighty Train of
Goths, Vandals and Moors. After this follows a long Character of all his
Virtues, especially his incredible Bounty to his Soldiers, which the Reader
may peruse at leisure, it being too long to be transcribed. And then as for the
infinite wealth that he brought out of Africa, and delivered into the Emperors
Exchequer, De Bello Vandal. lib. 3. c. 9.
it is set down by Procopius in the description of his Triumph, as the greatest
Treasury in the World: And among the rest were the Vessels and Furniture of
Solomon's Temple, that Titus brought to Rome, and Gizerick carried away when he
sacked it, and the Emperor to avoid the Misprision of Sacrilege, thought it
his duty to return them to the Christian Churches at Jerusalem. Now if we
compare this Account of Procopius with the Anecdota concerning the same Time
and Action, how could the Wit of Mankind have better way-layed the Malice of
this Scribler? For this was no part of secret History, no closet- or
bedchamber Transaction, but all such public show as was not capable to be
be-lyed. And therefore when Procopius writes it to his own age, to thousands of
Eyewitnesses, that Belizarius was worshipped both by the Prince and the People
for that vast Treasure that he brought into the Chequer, what can we conclude
of the secret Historian, that has the confidence and the ignorance, as to
obtrude such an incredible Flam upon all Posterity, that he was the contempt of
all Men, deserted by his Friends, sad and solitary, and that the occasion of
all this disgrace was embezelling the Emperor's Treasury. Compare but these two
Reports together of one and the same thing that was not acted in secret, but
upon the most public Stage in the World, and from that alone we may learn what
Faith is to be given to this goodly Romance.

And lastly as for the ill-success of his second Expedition into Italy, which
the Libel lays entirely upon his ill Conduct, he has here some little truth to
help out his malice: For it is true that his second expedition was not so
successful as his other Wars, but whose fault was that? Every Man's rather than
Belizarius. For at his first Expedition against Vitigis, he left Italy in a
settled State of Peace and Safety: De Bello Goth. lib. 3. a capite tertio ad
decimum.
but in his absence at the Persian Wars, it was lost by the negligence of other
Captains, upon this Belizarius is recalled from Persia (where he had in a very
short time broke all the strength of the great King Chosroes,) and is posted
away with all speed into Italy without Men or Money. The last is confessed by the
Libel it self, that upon that account charges him with Covetousness and
Oppression. And it is not to be doubted, but that the Contributions of the
Inhabitants must have been very heavy. But it was not in Belizarius his power
to ease them, for he came to defend their Country, and having no other
Supplies, they must either maintain the Charges of the War or submit to the
Enemy. But alas he was not able to act or attempt any thing for want of
Forces, De Bello Goth. l. 3. c. 10.
as Procopius himself informs us, that he could not make up a body of 4000 Men,
and those but raw Soldiers and unarmed, C. 12.
that he had picked up in his passage through Thrace and Illyricum. Upon this he
writes to the Emperor for Men, Money and Arms, and tells him plainly that
Belizarius his mere presence in Italy was not of force enough to recover it,
and therefore supplies he must have, particularly the Soldiers, that were
immediately under his own Command. For that was his custom in all his Wars to
lead 7000 of his best Horse in Person, Cap. 1.
and it was chiefly by their courage that he obtained all his great Victories.
But no relief coming, Totilas carries all before him, and lays siege to Rome it
self, till Narses came with new Forces: At whose arrival Belizarius had raised
the siege with 500 Men, had he not been betrayed by Bessa the Governor of the
City, who when the whole Gothish Army was put into disorder within his sight,
refused to sally out, though he had 3000 Men in the Garrison. Upon this
Belizarius moves forward with his whole Army, and being much inferior in force,
he made it up with Art and Stratagem, and managed his first On set with that
Conduct and Dexterity, that he had given an utter Defeat to the Gothish Army,
notwithstanding that the Governor never sallied out in all the Engagement:
though he could not complete his Victory, being forced to make a sudden
Retreat by the rashness of one of his Commanders: who being left behind to
secure the Treasure and Ammunition, and hearing of the great Victory, he
resolved to have a share in the honor of it; and so leaves his Post, falls upon
a Party of the Enenemy, is routed, and not only the whole Baggage is in their
power, but the security of Belizarius his retreat is cut off. And for that
reason he was forced to leave his Victory unfinished; and the City being very
ill defended by the Governor, and betrayed by some of the Guards, who in the
Night set open the Gates to the Besiegers, it became an easy Prey to the
Enemy. And yet Totilas was so shockt with this rough Encounter, that he
dispatches to the Emperor Letters to request Peace. In the mean time Belizarius
goes on with success, and upon it Totilas in a rage resolves to destroy Rome,
but desists upon a Letter from Belizarius partly civil and partly threatening,
and marches away with the Body of his Army toward Ravenna. Whereupon
Belizarius surprises Rome, and makes all possible have to repair the
Fortifications, but before he could set up the Gates. Totilas returns with all
his Forces, and in two general Assaults is beat off with prodigious Slaughter,
and forced to retreat with great fear and consternation; in so much that the
Goths broke down-all the Bridges over the Tiber, lest the Romans should pursue
them, and so Belizarius went on to repair the Walls and the Gates, and when he
had finished, sent the Keys of the City for a Present to the Emperor. And the
Emperor in requital sends him fresh Supplies; but Belizarius sailing to
Tarentum for their reception, is driven by storm into Croto, and in his absence
his land-Army engage the Enemy, at first with good success, but at last for
want of good Conduct they are utterly routed. Upon the news of this irreparable
loss he sails for Sicily, there receives some Recruits, and attempts to raise
the Siege of Ruscia, but is again defeated by another storm, upon which he
changes his Councils, and new Models his Army, Cap* 30.
and at this very nick of time is he called back by the Emperor to Command in
the Persian War, that was then very pressing on that side of the Empire. This
is all the ill conduct that this great General was guilty of in this
Expedition; it was not indeed so honorable as his other Wars, because not so
successful, but where the Miscarriages lay we have seen in the Premises, from
whence it appears that Belizarius was so far from committing any Faults, that
it was his greatest work through the whole War to retrieve other Men's losses.
De Bello Goth. lib. 4. c. 21.
And therefore he is received by the Emperor and the Court with all possible
expressions of Honor, and all Men contend who shall give him most homage, to
the great contentment and satisfaction of the Emperor. And that was the only
true reason why he commanded not in the third Expedition against the Goths,
because the Emperor could not part with him from his own Person, and so he
continued at Court all the remainder of his life in the height of favor and
glory, till in his extreme old Age he rescued the Empire from the Huns, and set
in that glorious Action. So dull a Fable is this of our Rhapsodist, that he was
the object of public contempt ever after his return from Italy. But though to
blast a Man's good Fortune be an action barbarous enough, yet to blot out his
Virtues, and place the blackest Vices in their stead, so as to turn a Man of
the greatest Honor in the World into a false and perjured Villain, is a depth
of malice below (if it were possible) the bottomless pit it self. And among all
the Evils under the Sun, I think this a deplorable one from this Example, that
the Reputations of the greatest Men lie so much at the mercy and in the power
of every ill-natured Pedant, to dispose of them as they please to Posterity.
Though it is some comfort again, that the Actions of great Men are too big and
bright to be eclyps'd by the interposition of every trifling Meteor. And that
is ours in the case of Belizarius, whose Glory will for ever outshine and
baffle all the Attempts of Envy and Malice both in figure and brightness. And
if we compare the true story of Belizarius his Actions with the little blind
tales of this barbarous Pasquil, it must for ever leave the Author of it under
the most scornful indignation of all Men that have any regard for Worth or
Honor.

. XXVII. And thus having done a little justice to the memory of this great Man,
the greatest perhaps in history, unless the great Scipio Africanus may be his
parallel, to use some comparison with him: we may now proceed in his Master's
Cause, and having already cast up the small retail of his Cruelties, let us a
little reckon for his wholesale Executions: And here the sum total in short is
the Whole Empire and the Whole World. But here who would not lift up Hands and
Eyes to Heaven, to find a Man so utterly bereft of all Sense and Modesty, as to
charge the utter subversion of the Empire upon that Prince, whom he had before
represented as immediately raised up by the divine Providence for its Recovery?
Whether it were a true or a Perkin Procopius, he must rave and not know what he
says, when he talks of Justinian's losing the Empire, that Charge being the
most unluckily fastened upon him, of any one Prince in the whole Succession. I
may safely challenge any Man to produce me any three Men either of the old
Commonwealth or the new Empire, that did more service to their Country than
this Prince alone. The other great Men that were honored with the Titles of
Fathers and Protectors of their Country, only saved it from the Invasion of a
single Enemy, or perhaps two or three, but he beat back the incursions of the
whole barbarous World from all Points of the Compass, and recovered the
greatest part of the Empire long since lost: And tho it were overwhelmed with
Multitudes of Enemies on all sides, yet he left it in a greater and a much
firmer state than ever it was before at its greatest glory. In short, let any
Man read Procopius his eight Books of the success of his Wars, and parallel the
undeniable greatness of those Actions, if he can, out of all the Records even
of the Roman State it self. If any Man can equal the Fortune of his Arms, it is
Caesar, but as for the glory of their Wars, there is this one unhappy
difference, that all Caesar's aimed at the subversion of the settled Government,
and all Justinians at its Preservation, or rather Restitution. So that as
Agathias observes toward the conclusion of his History, Page 157.
he was the first Man of all the Emperors that reigned at Constantinople, that
could in good earnest pretend to the style of King of the Romans both in Title
and Reality. But seeing this Procopian Libel is pretended by its Author to have
been written in the 32 year of Justinian's Reign, pray let us take a short view
of his great Actions for the Empire both before and after that time. And this
is best done out of Procopius himself, the first from his eight Books of
History, that were finished in the 26 th year of that Reign: the second out of
his Books De Aedificiis, that were composed in the 36 th year. To these if we
add Agathias, who continues Procopius his History to the end of the Reign, we
shall then have a complete Prospect of that universal Desolation, that
Justinian brought upon his Empire.

The greatest Match for the Romans in the World were the Persians, upon whom,
though it was often attempted by the Ambition of their greatest Captains, they
could never make any considerable Impression; but rather were for the most part
sent home with loss and shame. And yet this powerful and warlike Nation
Justinian at the entrance upon the Government, so amazed with the Prowess of
his Arms, Conduct of his Captains, and Courage of his Soldiers, that even after
a great Victory on the Persian side, De Bello Persico lib. 1. c. 22.
they were brought in the 6 th year of his Reign, to sign an overlasting Peace
between the Crowns, an Article that I know not, whether it were ever obtained
by the Romans before that time. This gave the Emperor opportunity to employ his
Arms in Africa and Italy, with what success we shall see when we come to those
Wars, but it was so great that it provoked Chosroes the great King of the
Persians, Lib. 2. c. 2.
out of pure Envy to the glory and fortune of Justinian, to break the Peace, as
Procopius relates it, to which he subjoins this Remarque: That Chosroes and his
Consederate Kings were angry at that, which of all good Qualities was most
commendable in a gallant Prince, his care to enlarge the bounds and the glory
of his Empire. They might as justly have blamed Cyrus or Alexander for their
great Actions. And yet this was the very same man, that our ingenious Author
says was sent into the World for the destruction of the Roman Empire. Ibid. c.
9.
But Chosroes being a Man of a false Nature, crafty, apt to make Promises and
seal them with an Oath, which for Interest he would as readily break as take;
he contrary both to his Faith and the Law of Nations, surprises the Romans
though his Confederates with an unproclaimed War; so that the Emperor being
unprepared for a speedy resistance, and his Armies being then employed in
Italy, he was for the present forced to buy Peace upon dishonorable Terms. But
the next Campaign having finished the War with Vitigis, he sends Belizarius,
though with no great Army, and after several Engagements Chosroes his proud
Spirit is so taken down, as to condescend to sue for Peace, and upon it sends
his Ambassador to Belizarius with a further design to discover what Captain he
was, and what strength he had. But Belizarius only returns him this resolute
and careless Answer, That Chosroes did by no means treat like a Prince with his
Imperial Majesty; for Princes, if they have any Quarrel with their Neighbors,
are wont first to send their Complaints and Demands, and if they can obtain no
satisfaction, then to betake themselves to Arms, whereas Chosroes had contrary
to his Faith broken into the Heart of the Roman Dominions, and therefore it was
too late for him to offer at any Treaty of Peace. And with this short and
peremptory Answer, and with some Stratagems of flight he dismisses the
Ambassador, who upon his return persuades Chosroes to be gone with all speed,
it being a vain thing to think of fighting a Captain of that Conduct and
Courage. Upon this Chosroes immediately steals away, and when he was got over
Euphrates, where he thought himself pretty secure from the Romans, he again
sends his Ambassadors to Belizarius to move for Cessation of all farther
Hostility, which upon Hostages given was at length granted, and he suffered to
return home without any Pursuit, Belizarius not having Forces enough to
intercept his passage. This Action, as the Historian affirms, was so
prodigious, that it exceeded all his former Victories, and his bringing those
two mighty Kings, Gilimer and Vitigis, Captives to Constantinople, appeared not
so glorious as this brave (...). And it looks like Miracle, that when the
Romans were skulk't within their own Fortresses, and Chosroes with a numerous
Army had overrun their Dominions, Belizarius as it were riding Post with a
small Body of Men should so suddenly stop the Cariere of the Persians, and
force Chosroes out of fear either of the great Courage or good Fortune of the
man, to retire with a pretense of Peace, but in good earnest to run away. And
yet this Prince, as we have his Character from Agathias, Lib. 4.
who has drawn it from his Actions, as they are described by Procopius and
himself, was the greatest of all the Persian Kings, even Cyrus the Son of
Cambyses, Darius the Son of Histaspes, and Xerxes that marched over Seas, and
sailed over Mountains. And what is as considerable, beside his own Forces he
had the Assistance of the Goths, and the revolted Armenians, but most of all
the Moors in the West, and the Huns in the East, who at that time and in diverse
places broke into the Empire like violent Land-floods, and were as furiously
driven back into their Dens and lurking Holes. But Chosroes his great Spirit
could not digest this dishonorable Repulse, and therefore he makes a fourth
Invasion, though as he pretended, not upon the Romans, but the Christians of
the City of Edessa, to revenge the Affront that they had put upon him in his
second Expedition when he carried all before him. The Story is very remarkable,
especially out of the mouth of a man so curious and inquisitive as Procopius.
Chosroes being informed that it was a received Opinion among the Christians,
that our Blessed Savior had foretold in his Letter to Agbarus, that the City
of Edessa should never be Conquered; for that reason in his Triumphant Return
home he resolves to take it, only to prove him a false Prophet. And here the
Historian relates the Correspondence between our Savior and Agbarus out of the
Records of the City agreeable to the Story of Eusebius, and in farther
Confirmation of of it, adds that this Prophecy, That the City should never be
vanquished, was not to be ^ound in the Ancient Copies, but was only an old
Tradition of the Christians, that the vulgar believed to be in the Letter it
self, and for that reason they reposited it in the Gates of the City, to make
them impregnable. Chosroes sets down within a days Journey of the place, and
moves early with his whole Army to beset it, but having wandered in a Maze all
day, finds himself at evening in the same place that he left in the Morning,
and so a second time, but when at last he came to the City, he was suddenly
struck with a Rheumatism, and is so scared with it as to raise the Siege upon
it. But being a Bigoted Pagan he was prevailed upon by his Priests and
Magicians to wipe off this Dishonor, as if himself and his Gods had been
Conquered by the God of the Christians, and therefore he vows to plow up the
City, and make Slaves of all its Inhabitants, but all in vain, he is bafled in
every Skirmish, and is so shamefully beaten in a general Assault, that neither
himself nor his men had any heart to make any farther Attempt, and though he
had often refused any Terms of Treaty, yet now to s^lve his honor he takes a
small Sum of Money of the Citizens to raise the Siege. And from thence he turns
his Forces upon the Lazi that were under the protection of the Romans, but is
in all Engagements so soundly beaten, that he is at last forced to sue for
Peace, and so we hear no more of him till we hear of his inglorious end, which
happened not till after the death both of Justinian and his Nephew Justin, and it
happened thus as Agathias relates it: Lib. 4.
That Mauritius (who was afterward Emperor) General of the Army in the East
under Tiberius making an inrode into his Country, and bearing all before him
with Fire and Sword, and Chosroes beholding the sad spectacle, but not being
able to make timely resistance, bursts with grief, after he had reigned 42
Years. This short Epitome I hope is sufficient to satisfy the Impartial
Reader, that the Roman Empire lost neither Power nor Honor in this Persian War.

Now let us take a short view of the Vandalick and Gothic Wars, by which our
Pasquil affirms, that he ruined both Africa and Italy, and we shall find that
he lost those Countries just as the Christian Army lost the Christian Empire
last Campaigne, or rather as we hope they may this, by recovering all Europe
out of the Enemies hands. For that was all the loss that Justinian brought upon
the Empire by those two Wars, that he entirely restored those two great
Branches to it, that had for many years been possessed by the Barbarians. It was
lost by that weak Prince Valentinian the Third to Gizerichus King of the
Vandals, De Bello Vandal. lib. 1. cap. 3.
who enjoyed it 39 years, and was settled in it by Articles of Peace between him
and the Emperor Zeno, that were successively ratified by Anastasius and Justin.
But he at length dying, Cap. 7.
by his Will settled the Kingdom upon his own Lineal Succession of the Male
Line, which was observed for 5 Successions, till Ildericus the lawful H^ir was
seized and imprisoned by Gilimer that was next of Blood, and the News of it
coming to Justinian he resents it with great indignation, Cap. 9.
and immediately demands the Restitution of his Friend and Allye, which being
denied, he declares War against the Traitor, and this our worthy Libel calls a
Breach of the Treaty of Peace between Gizericus and Zeno, when the War was
entered into purely in its defense against an Usurper. And what was the Success
of this War is vulgarly known, the Vandals that had kept Africa 45 years, were
utterly beat out of it in 3 Months, and their King carried Captive to Rome. And
if the Reader would know Procopius his own Judgment of it, it was plainly this.
All past Ages have seen many things come to pass beyond Humane Expectation, and
so will all Ages to come, as long as the State of Humane Affairs continues in
the same posture. And some things have been brought about, that were supposed
impossible, and when they have been so, they have astonished the undertakers
themselves. But whether any thing happened like this Transaction I remember not.
For what a Prodigious thing is it, that 5000 Strangers (that was the Number of
all the Horse that Belizarius brought with him, by whom alone the Vandals were
vanquished) when they had not one Port to land in, should in such a Moment of
Time overthrow the Grandchild of the Great King Gizerick, and make an entire
Conquest of a Kingdom of so great Wealth and Strength? And this in my weak
Opinion may very well pass for a Miracle both of Fortune and Virtue. And as for
the Gothic War in Italy, as it had the same Cause, so had it the same Event:
It was undertaken in defense of a Confederate Prince, and ended in the Conquest
and Captivity of the Usurper. But of this we have given an Account already, as
far as Belizarius Acted in it, but because the War was not ended, when he was
recalled, let us now see its last Event which our Author says was the utter
devastation of Italy. Belizarius being recalled, the War is Committed to
Narses, the only Captain equal to him for Conduct, Courage, Bounty, Justice,
and Clemency; and so he made as quick a dispatch in Italy, as Belizarius had
done in Africa. He vanquished that Great Captain Totilas in one pitched Battle,
and Teias his Successor in another, though they had called in the Franks to
their Assistance, and made such incredible slaughters of them, that both the
Nations were almost utterly extinquish't, and at last condescends to grant
Peace to the small Remainders, upon condition of quitting Italian Ground
forever, and so drove them out of the Country like a Flock of Sheep: so far
Procopius to the 26th year of the Reign of Justinian. But the Goths unwilling
to lose their present Possessions in Italy, (as Agathias continues the History)
draw in the Franks and the Almans to join Forces against the Romans, Lib. 2.
and bring an Army into the Field of Seventy Two Thousand Men, who were all cut
in pieces in the first Battle, and that was the end of the War. All which is
elegantly enough summed up by his Nephew Justin, in his Speech to the
Ambassadors of the King of the Avares, Sub quo Vandalici ceciderunt strage
Tyranni, Corippi lib. 3.

Edomitique Getae, pubes Alemanica, Franci,
Totque aliae gentes, famosaque regna per orbem
Ardua sub nostris flectentia colla triumphis
Suscepere jugum, mentes animosque dedere
Servitio, nobisque manent ex host fideles.


This is the true Relation of Justinian's Wars, which whether we consider their
Cause, their management, or their success, were the most justifiable and most
glorious Wars that were ever waged from the beginning of the World. They were
not wantonly undertaken, but either in defense of himself or his injured
Allies, whom he was bound to assist in Justice as well as Humanity. They were
managed with all the strictness of Discipline, and by all the Rules of Mercy
and Clemency no Plunder committed, no Violence offered to any of the
Inhabitants, no not to an Enemy unarmed; insomuch that when Gilimer's
Ambassadors, that were sent to the King of the Vice-Goths, fell unawares into
the Power of Belizarius, he treated them with Civility, and sent them home with
safety. And lastly, as for their success, no Reign can equal them, neither did
he only stop the War for the present, but for ever, by rooting up as well as
cutting down-all the Enemies of his Country. In short, when a very great part
of it had for many years groaned under the Tyranny of Barbarians, he restored
it entirely to its Ancient Liberties. And yet this is the Devil, the Plague,
the Fury, that was sent into the World in an Humane shape, for the utter
destruction of the Roman Empire. And thus having justified Justinian's Wars
from all suspicion of injustice or cruelty, let us briefly consider those other
Actions, by which he laid wast and depopulated the Roman Empire, and that is
best described in his Books de Aedificiis, that were written four years after
this counterfeit Libel, and that is a very unhappy stumble of this barbarous
Writer, the ill timing of his Libel. If he had written it after all the other
Books of Procopius, it might have had some seeming pretense to a secret
History. But a Libel placed between two Panegyricks looks very awkerdly, and
gives it self the Lie. Now the Character, that is given to Justinian in the
Introduction to the Books de Aedificiis, is but an Epitome of his eight Books
of History: that he recovered the shattered Empire to its ancient splendour and
greatness from the Barbarians, and whereas Themistocles could only boast that
he could make a little City great, he added great and vast Kingdoms to his
Dominions, and diverse large Provinces that were cut off from the Empire, he
reunited to it, and built numberless new Cities. And whereas the Church was
torn in pieces with infinite Schisms and Factions, he settled it in Peace and
Unity. He freed the Laws from confusion and obscurity, and made the
administration of Justice plain and easy: he was merciful to his Enemies,
bountiful to all Men, as much solicitous to preserve happiness of life to his
Subjects, as the Government of the Empire to himself. He every where guarded
the Frontiers, and compass't in the whole Empire with new Fortifications, to
fence out the barbarous People that he had driven out. Among the Princes of old
Cyrus bears one of the greatest Names for his Virtues, but whether Xenophon's
description of him be altogether real or in a great measure Poetical I know
not; But as for Justinian I am sure he was a Father to his Country indeed, and
if we observe the course of his Reign, that of Cyrus will appear but a trifle
to it. And this is best proved by his Actions, for who can doubt of his
Greatness, when he sees the Empire so vastly enlarged, or of his Clemency when
he sees so many of those very Men, that had conspired against his life, not
only to enjoy their own Lives and Estates, but to be advanced to the greatest
Commands in the Imperial Army, and to no less than Consular Dignity in the
State? A pretty Character this of an humane Devil, that came into the World to
eat up all Mankind. But if we take a view of all his Buildings, useful or
stately Structures, he will seem to deserve under God, the Title of the Founder
of the habitable World. And indeed his Foundations were so magnificent and so
numerous, that it is scarce credible that they should all be the works of one
Man, neither were they Designs for Pomp or Pleasure, but for the use and
convenience of Mankind. He wasted not his Money upon Pyramids or Amphitheaters,
but laid it out upon Churches, Hospitals, Monasteries, Fortifications, Castles,
Bridges, Highways, Aquaeducts, Sea-Moles, etc. These useful Structures our
Libeller blushes not to style mad and extravagant Buildings. Though beside his
prodigious Works for Charity and Devotion, the greatest part of his Structures
were upon the Confines, in defense of the Empire against future Invasions. On
the Persian side he fortified the frontier and important City of Daras,
repaired the Walls of Amidas, walled about Rhapdium, so as to make it
impregnable, and built so many strong Castles at all convenient Passes, as were
able every where to stop the Impressions of the Persians, he re-edified the
Walls of Theodosiopolis, Constantina and Circesium, all strong Garrisons, and
every where planted Castles at a convenient distance between his Garrisons: he
repaired the Walls of Edessa, and fenced it in against the Inundations of the
River Scirtus, he built diverse Cities and Castles in Euphratesia, he rebuilt
and fortified the City of Antioch, that had been demolisht by Chosroes in his
base second Expedition, he repaired the Cities of Calcis, Cyrus and Palmyra.
All which were in effect one entire Fortification against the Persians; and as
he walled in the Empire on that side, so he did on all other Parts, especially
about Armenia and Illyricum, that were the common Inlets of the Barbarians.
Where the number of Fortresses and Castles either newly founded or rebuilt is
scarce to be computed. It would amaze a Man only to read the Catalogues of the
Names as they are set down by Procopius in his third and fourth Books. This I
hope may suffice both to show in what way and method Justinian ruined and
depopulated the Roman Empire, and to expose the Ingenuity of this little
Scribler to lay that to the Charge of this great Prince, not only without
alleging any particular Instances to make good the general Assertion, but
against the Evidence of such infinite Matter of Fact through his whole reign.

. XXVIII. The next grand Miscarriage of this Princes Government was his siding
with the Faction of the Venetae, not only not punishing their Murders and Acts
of Violence, but encouraging them, insomuch that they every where committed all
kinds of Villainy with safety and impunity, to the endangering of the Empire it
self by Tumults and Seditions. This is the sum of the Indictment. But to
traverse it home, we must know that there was an old Game derived from the
Grecians representing a Contest between the Sea and the Earth for Victory, they
that played on the Earths side wore green Colors, representing the Verdure of
the Fields, they that wrastled for the Sea wore bluish; if the green
Ribbon-Men overcame, that was an Omen of a plentiful Crop for the ensuing year:
if the blew Men were Masters of the Field, that was a fore-boding of good
Weather at Sea, and good Success in Merchandise. This trifling in process of
time came to too much good earnest in the Commonwealth, and the Parties became
dangerous state-Factions, that often imbroil'd the Government. In the time of
the Emperor Anastasius they burnt down the City of Constantinople; but the most
famous Tumult that they ever raised, was under Justinian, and it endangered his
Crown much more than the Attempts of all his foreign Enemies put together. De
Bello Persico lib. 1. cap. 24.
The Factions were come to the utmost outrage of Hostility, and it was now a
kind of an open War through the whole Empire, it was an ordinary thing to stab
one another in the Streets, though he that escaped in the duel was certain to
be punished with death. And they were so barbarous in their folly, that it
extinguished all natural Affection, and the nearest Relations would not scruple
to cut each other's Throats, it was perfect and downright madness, though if
the Government went about to suppress them, notwithstanding the rage of their
Animosities, they would then unite and join Forces against it. And therefore
Justinian at his first coming to the Crown resolves to bridle these
insufferable Tumults and Affronts to Authority, and for that reason he
publishes very severe Laws against all Disorders at the public Games,
Chronicon Alex.
which for some considerable time overawed their fury; but it happened in the 6
th or 7 th year of his reign, that as some of the Officers were carrying some
Offenders of both Factions to the Jail, the People fell into a Tumult for their
rescue, in which some say both Parties were engaged, and no doubt but it was,
as all Tumults are, a mixed multitude, but the chief Actors were the Prasini,
and therefore the Author of the Chronicon Alexandrinum, who is the most
particular Writer in this story, makes it the action of that Party, and
ascribes the Emperor's deliverance from their fury to the loyalty of the
Venetae, and if so, the Emperor could not owe them too much kindness, to whose
Loyalty he owed both his Life and Empire. But the Rabble being embodyed
together took for their Word Victory, put to the Sword all that will not join
with them, set the City on fire, and industriously destroy the most stately
Buildings in it, besiege the Emperor's Palace, and demand Justice against evil
Counselors, and after five days fury set up Hypatius Nephew to the Emperor
Anastasius in the Imperial Throne, assault the the Emperor's Palace, and put
him into that danger, and his Friends into that consternation, that he was
advised by his Privy Council to fly by Sea for his own security, but the
Council was overruled by the courage of Theodora, and because the Speech
expresses an extraordinary and more than masculine greatness of mind; I will
set it down. It is not (my Lords) material at this time, whether it become the
modesty of a Woman to act the Man's part amongst Men, and upbraid their
cowardice by her courage. For when things are reduced to the utmost extremity
of danger, all the nicer considerations of Decency are super-seded, and nothing
is to be thought on but the most honorable way of encountering or escaping the
present danger. And as for that, my Opinion is, that though we could save our
selves by flight, it would by no means be expedient to our Affairs. All Men are
born under a Necessity of dying, but the Man that has once worn a Crown is
bound to scorn to live an Exile, and outlive his own Majesty. God forbid that
any Man should ever see Theodora live to be stripped of this Royal Purple, or
that she should survive one hour after her being saluted Empress. As for you
(great Sir) if you think good to make your escape, I grant it may be done with
ease, you have both Treasure and Shipping at hand, but consider whether you may
not fall into the Traitor's hands, and suffer an ignoble death from your own
Rebel Subjects. You may do, Sir, as you please, but I will act by that brave
old saying, that the best Inscription upon a Monument is, Here lies the King,
and that an Imperial Robe is the best winding sheet. This brave resolution of
the Empress infused both shame and courage into the Council, and they all
unanimously resolve to dye upon the Place rather than to consult their safety
by flight. Upon this result those two great Soldiers Belizarius and Mundus
sally out from different Parts of the Palace upon the Rabble in the Fo^um, who
at the sight of naked Swords, immediately trust to their heels, and are
slaughtered without resistance. Hypa^ius is siezed upon in his Throne, and
carried Prisoner to the Emperor, and is next day executed for his Treason, tho
his forfeited Estate, according to the Emperor's usual Clemency, was restored
to his Relations. This is the short account of this wild Tumult; and if the
Venetae served his Imperial Majesty against the Rebels, it is a great Crime in
a Prince to be kind to those that stood fast to their Master, and to their own
duty at a time of greatest distress, even when his own Guards had deserted him,
for when Belizarius commanded them to follow him, they refused it. Now at such
a straight as this, when the Venetae flockt in to his relief, it was an
obligation so high, that it could never be forgotten, and therefore that they
were the Emperor's Favorites, is an objection only fit for a Traitor's Mouth:
But nothing so unpleasant to Rebels as to see Loyalty rewarded. And as the
Venetae were dutiful Subjects to their Prince, so the Prasini were looked upon
as disaffected to the Government, and for that reason they were countenanced
and encouraged by the Enemies of the State, particularly by the greatest of
all, De Bello Pers. lib. 2. cap. 11.
Chosroes, who at the City of Apamaea, appointed the public Games on purpose,
to declare himself Leader and Patron of the Faction, so that in a word, the two
Factions were in good earnest nothing else than the Whig and Tory of that Age.

. XXIX. And thus having routed our Satyrist's main Battle, all his following
Attempts will appear like the weak Skirmishes of a vanquished Enemy, and such as
deserve more to be slighted than encountered, being little else than the same
general Characters and Calumnies repeted, and so are already answered. But
because I am resolved not to leave one spot of dirt upon the sacred memory of
this mighty Prince, and to expose the folly and rudeness of this Pasquil to the
utmost degree of contempt, I will trace all his smaller strokes of Malice, and
prove every line of it mere poison, spite and fiction. Of this kind of rubbish
then is the eighth Chapter compounded, viz. that Justinian was a natural Fool,
the perfect resemblance of the dullness and stupidity of an Ass, a poor Wretch
to be led up and down in a string, and to complete the conceit, having his Ears
always in the same posture and motion with Asses ears. That he made Ducks and
Drakes with the public Revenue, spending it either in extravagant Presents
made to the Huns, or making prodigious but useless Moles against the Sea: And
that to defray the Charges of these prodigal Undertakings, he plundered and
ruined all his Subjects. That he was like Domitian not only in Manners but
Features, as appears by Domitian's Statue at the ascent to the Capitol. That he
was a crafty Knave and a great Master of the Art of Dissembling; that in him
the two extremes of Folly and Dishonesty met even as a Peripatetick Philosopher
taught in ancient time, that some Colors are compounded of the two contraries,
so are some men's natures; in short, he was all Fool and all Knave. What a
Scavengers dirt-Cart is this, loaded with all the filth and nastiness of the
Town, a Fool, an Ass, a Sot, a Thief, a Knave? But let us briefly examine the
Particulars in order. And in the first place the Character contradicts it self,
that the same man should be a natural Fool and yet a crafty Knave, a great
Master of the Art of Dissembling, which I am sure no Cudden can manage. Yes but
some men (as the Philosopher holds) are made of extremes, as some colors are
of black and white. This arguing from similitudes rarely proves any thing but
the want of good Arguments, otherwise this blind Scribler would have seen that
he does not Compound but Reconcile the Extremes; if he had made Justinian a
middle sort of man, it might have been sense, though not truth, but when he
makes him perfect Fool and perfect Knave, it very much resembles the late
Famous Description of Don John, at once a very black and yet a very fair man.
For these Characters are not less inconsistent with each other than those
Complexions. I will grant all Knaves to be Fools, but if they are Crafty
Knaves, they cannot be Natural Fools, and if they are Natural Fools they can
never make Crafty Knaves. I have read of a Renowned Pedant of Greece (to vie
one Philosopher against an other) that went about to inform the World in this
useful piece of Philosophy, that Snow was Charcoal, and Charcoal Snow. For my
part rather then be put to the trouble of disputing it with him, I would grant
that to be possible, but that both should be both, I could never endure the
impudence of the Assertion. And yet that is our Authors Case in this Character
of the same Man's being mere Knave and mere Fool; a stupid Ass, and a man of a
very sharp Wit, a natural Sot, and a man of admirable Parts; expressions that
occur every where through all parts of the Libel. But next, why a Fool? what
one instance of his Folly? Why this, that he did not more resent the Affronts
offered him by the Rabble in the Circus. This dull pretense is worse then a
flat Lie: As if any man but a natural Fool would have contended with a Rabble
in such a mad sit of Outrage as they were in at that time; and Justinian if he
had been a wise man, instead of securing himself in his Palace, would have
exposed his Person to their dirt and stones and unlimited fury. Well fare our
secret Historian for a lucky Fool-finder. But what other proofs of his Folly?
was it his reforming the Laws? Was it his skill in Theological Learning, that
is attested by Victor Tunonensis, who entertained disputation with him 15 days
about the tria Capitula, together with Procopius, Liberatus, and Eustathius,
all of them Co-temporary Writers? So vain a Dream was that, that obtained so
long at the first Restoration of Learning, that he was (...), occasioned by a
false Translation of Suidas against the Greek Copy it self, putting Justinian
for Justin, of whom Suidas relates it, and with what probability I have shown
above, but as for Justinian there is not so much as the shadow of any ground to
lay it to his Charge, beside that dull and evident mistake of a Translator. But
on the contrary he carried away the Title of Doctissimus in his own time, that
is frequently given him by Theodatus King of the Goths, and the Fathers of the
5th General Council, all these are pregnant Proofs of a natural Fool. But what
shall we say to his Administration of public Affairs, when the Empire never
flourished more under any Prince then his Government, when he not only
preserved and emproved what he was possessed of, but recovered all that had been
lost and secured it to his Successors, by fortifying it on all sides against
the Incursions of all Enemies. If these are the sports and projects of a Fool,
I would be informed by our worthy Historian what undertakings are becoming a
wise man. But as for the Learned Librarian whilst he goes about to stop this
hole of his Author, he has made a much wider mistake of his own, by excusing it
that the Author only intends this Character not of the vigor of Justinian's
Age, but of his Dotage. This excuse if it were true is very key-cold, but it is
enough that the Comment contradicts the Text, for the Author speaks plainly of
the Emperors natural Constitution and habitual course of his life, and
therefore to Apologize for such a false Character by applying it to the time of
dotage, is to confess his Author a false Calumniator, for dotage is no natural
folly. But if he had doted, what then? Is it not base and disingenious to
upbraid a Great Man with the natural infirmities of extreme old Age? He lived
to the utmost bounds of Nature, and if he outlived himself, can any man of
sense or manners, think it decent or ingenuous to brand him to all Posterity,
with the mark of a Fool and an Ass? But then beside this the excuse is false,
for the Anecdota are pretended to have been written Seven Years before
Justinian's death, in which Interval of Time he performed many great Actions,
as may be seen at large in Agathias de rebus Justiniani, and Procopius de
Aedificiis. And yet Alemannus after h^s rate of pertinent Quotation cites
Agathias on his side, for relating that the Emperor in his extreme old Age
chose to quit the designs of War, and betake himself to Artifice and stratagem
not to destroy the Enemies of the Empire by hazardous Battles, but by dividing
them among themselves, by which Wisdom he destroyed the Nation of the Huns only
by making and enflaming dissensions among themselves, and so freed the Empire
of one of its greatest Plagues forever. This great reach of Policy is the last
Act that we hear of in his life and that was no Act of Folly, though Alemannus
is so great a Fool himself as to allege it to prove the Emperor one, nay worse
than this, Praefat. Page 3.
he has suffered his passion to be transported to that degree of Malice, as to
allege it in confirmation of the Anecdota, as an instance of the Emperors
Craft and Treachery beyond the common Capacity of Humane Nature, De illius
fraudibus atque fallaciis uberius quam Procopius scripsit Agathias Myrrhinaeus;
nam and arts and Epistolarum exempla profert, quibus Hunnorum ducibus ad
invidiam and odia excitatis, and ad civilia bella crudelissimo dissidio
inflammatis, eam gentem penitus abolevit. This it is to have a good Will to a
Cause, every thing will serve for a weapon to strike an Enemy. What he did
afterward, and how he died, is unknown to us, all the Ancients, which is
strange, being utterly silent in it. Some Modern Writers say he died mad, but
they mistake him for his Nephew and Successor Justin, who run mad with the ill
Success of his Wars against the Persians, but as for Justinian there is nothing
certain concerning him after the end of Agathias his History, and that is about
two years before his death, unless it be that he retired from the Affairs of
this Life, to prepare himself for the next, as Corippus informs us, Nulla fuit
jam cura senis, Lib. 2.
jam frigidus omnis
Alterius vitae solo fervebat amore,
In coelum men's omnis erat, jam corporis hujus
Immemor, hanc mundi faciem transisse putabat.


This is spoken in the Person of his Successor Justin, to excuse the
Miscarriages of his Uncles Reign, that they were the defects of his old Age,
when he gave over his Care of the Public. And yet Baronius and Alemannus make
use of the Authority of Co^ippus to prove that Justinian run his Exchequer deep
in debt to his Subjects* when this was not done till Justinian had resigned the
Government into other men's hands. But Alemannus is so ingenuous, as to leave
this Note upon this passage, how dully the Poet endeavors to turn his
stupidity into devotion, Ex quibus intelligas quam frigide Corippus eam
stoliditat^^ in sanctimoniam accipiat ac interpretetur, but if the Text be
dull, the Comment is much more so, without any ground or pretext, to conclude
his Devotion to have been nothing but Dotage and Folly.

. XXX. The next Link in this Emperors long Chain of Virtues is twisted up of
the most oppressive Covetousness and the most profuse Prodigality, and it is
the second part of the Character of Don John, a man made up of nothing but
Contradictions, a natural Fool and a crafty Knave; a griping Extortioner, and a
careless Prodigal. But the Libeller it seems is resolved to say all the ill
things of him, that are to be said of all the ill men in the World, and
therefore has in his crude and indigested way amassed together all the
Common-Places of Rudeness and Calumny. But though profuseness be inconsistent
with Covetousness, yet because it is not so with oppression, but is rather
supported by it, being a bottomless-pit that devours all things, therefore we
will consider these Vices apart, and examine what instances of either are to be
found in the Reign of Justinian. First then as for Prodigality, it is a
Childish kind of Vice that wastes it self in wanton and unnecessary expenses.
Now I pray what were the trifles upon which this Emperor laid out the public
Revenues? What! he exhausted it in Presents to the Barbarians, and in putting
shackles upon the Ocean. But was this all? If it were not, then is it a
malicious slander in the Author of the Anecdota to overlook all his other
magnificent works, and insist so impetuously upon it, as if these two had been
the only sinks of all these immense expenses. And this thing alone lays open
both the Malice and the Folly of the Man; for no man of any Sense or Modesty
could either have dared to record it, or expect to gain belief to it, when it
is so apparently contradicted not only by the whole History of the Justinian
Reign, but by the very Libel it self. For when he makes mention of the Wars
with the Persians, the Goths, and the Vandals, I would know whether nothing
were expended in defraying the Charges of those great Expeditions. And if they
cost any thing, then all the public Treasury was not exhausted in Gifts to the
Barbarians, and unprofitable Sea-walls. But for our better satisfaction, let us
briefly audit his Accounts, and then we shall find that no Prince ever did so
great things for the Commonwealth, with so little Charge to the Subject: so
hard a thing is it to defend him from the Malice of his Enemies without writing
^anegyricks upon all his Actions, so Heroic and Glorious was the whole Course
of his Reign. At present to say nothing of his many great and successful Wars,
that could not but require an immense Treasury to maintain them, though as they
were managed, they more then paid their own Charges, as I shall show anon. The
vast number of his Allies put him to prodigious expenses, especially in the
Circumstances of his Reign: For he being a great Lover of his Religion spared
neither Cost nor Pains for its Propagation, and he gave himself one great
advantage in it by his Bounty and Courtesy to Ambassadors, and Gentlemen of
Foreign Nations, who repairing from all parts to Constantinople, to see the
grandeur of that Court then famous through all the World, and being overcome by
the great kindness and urbanity of the Prince, they returned home with a kind
of transported opinion of the Christian civility. And the good Emperor, the
better to compass his pious designs, sent some of his best-bred Clergy to wait
upon them home, who by the Modesty and Neatness of their Address rivetted such
an Interest at Court, as easily made way for the entertainment of the Christian
Faith. And by this means he reformed the barbarous People with much more
fineness then Constantine did the Empire. For when that great Prince had once
declared for the Christian Faith, all Orders and Professions of men naturally
flock't into it for Interest and Preferment, whereas this great Prince won and
vanquished several Nations not at all subject to his Empire by nothing but the
Power of Courtesy and Civility. The first that were reduced, were the Blemmyes
and Nobatae two barbarous African Nations, De bello (...) lib. 1. cap. 19.
situated on the other side the Nile, that to that tim^ worshiped the old
Egyptian Idols, Isis, Osyris, and Priapus, and kept up that inhumane Custom of
humane Sacrifices; all whose Temples were demolish't by Justinian, their
Priests Cashiered and imprisoned, and their obscene Images sent to
Constantinople, and there destroyed, and that put an end to that old
Superstition. The next were the Eruli, De Bello Gothico. lib. 2. cap. 14.
seated on the North side the Ister, these exceeded the former in the barbarity
of their manners, for beside the Humane Sacrifices to their Gods, it was a
Religious Custom among them to cut the Throats of all old and sick People, and
the duty of Wives to hang themselves at their Husbands Graves. These People in
the time of Anastasius being vanquished by the Long-beards, seated themselves
on this side the Ister, and submitted to the Jurisdiction of the Empire,
without any Change of their Religion; but Justinian so wrought upon them as to
bring them over to the profession of the Christian Faith, though such was the
innate petulancy of the Nation, that it was little to its Credit, because
though they took up a new Religion, they for the most part kept up their old
manners. De Bello Gothico lib. 4. cap. 3.
The third were the Abasgi inhabiting at the Foot of the Mountain Caucasus, a
barbarous sort of People that worshipped Trees for Gods, though the worst
barbarity practiced among them was the Custom of their Princes to make all
their handsome Youths Eunuchs and sell them to the Romans. But Justinian
finding the Court full of Boys of this Nation, sends Euphrates a grave Eunuch
to prevail with the Prince for the time to come, to lay aside this barbarous
Custom, and embrace the civility of the Christian Faith, and succeeding in it,
he sent a Christian Bishop to instruct and govern them, and built for their use
a Cathedral Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary. De Bello Gothico lib* 4. cap.
4.
These were followed by the Tetraxitae inhabiting upon the River Tanais, where
it discharges it self into the Lake Maeotis, who being a wild and barbarous
sort of Christians, and hearing that the great Christian Emperor had sent a
Bishop to the Abasgi, they request the same favor of him for themselves, a
Request that was no doubt with more ease granted than it was asked. The next
are the Inhabitants about Pentapolis in Lybia, De A^^isiciis lib. 5^ cap. 2.
that worshipped Jupiter Ammon and Alexander the Great, these the Emperor with
great pains, reclaimed from their Superstition to the Christian Faith, and
built for them a Temple consecrated to the Virgin Mary. And what is the hardest
of all, I^id.
he over-came the stubbornness of the Jews, who tho they had an ancient Temple
in the Cit^ of Borium, founded, as Tradition we^^ by King Solomon, they were
prevailed upon to quit their old Religion, and transform their Temple into a
Christian Church. The next are the Maurusians and Gadabitans in Africa, De
Ae^ificiis lib. 6. cap. 4.
who retained the old barbarous Superstition of Greece, whom he brought off to
Christianity, and encompassed their City of Sabaratha with Walls, and founded a
Church in it for the Service of God. To these may be added the Iberians who are
commended by Procopius as the best of the Christian Converts, De Bello Pers.
lib. 1. cap. 12.
and them the Emperor protected from the fury of the barbarous Persians, and
with great sums of Money hired the Huns to come to their assistance. De
Aedificiis lib. 3. cap. 6.
And to mention no more, the conversion of the Zani seems more remarkable then
all the rest; they inhabited a barren Country on the North of Armenia, were
subject to no settled Government, but lived like herds of beasts, worshipped
Trees and Birds for their Gods, and subsisted upon nothing but plunder and
robbery, but being vanquished by Justinian, who was the first that ever mastered
them, they embraced the Christian Faith, and at the same time cast off their
barbarous Manners, and the Empeeror, to secure their perseverance, built them a
stately Church. These correspondencies I hope are no Childrens Rattles, for
beside their great piety in bringing over so many barbarous People to the
Christian Faith, it was a mighty Point of State to unite Religion as well as
Interest, that being the strongest Cement of all Allyances. So that laying all
this together, the Emperor's generous bounty to all Strangers, his religious
care of all his Allies, his bestowing magnificent Churches upon all co^verted
Nations, it is at once an undeniable proof of his Prudence and Piety, and as
great a reproof to all charges of profuseness and prodigality. This is the
first sum of his Accounts, which I am sure the Reader, if he be either a good
Christian or a wise Man, cannot but sign with approbation and applause.

The next head of Accounts to be cast up are his immense Buildings, though that
account is already stated above, and may be done much more particularly out of
Procopius de Aedificiis, from whom it evidently appears, not only what
incredible sums of Money he expended, but to what good purpose, all his Works
being contrived for the benefit of Mankind and the security of the Empire. But
yet however let us examine those heavy grievances against which this
Tribunitian Sophists inveighs with so much rage and keenness. And first, as for
his Fences against the Sea, there is not one by Procopius his own account, that
was not absolutely necessary against the most dangerous and sweeping
Inundations. De Aedificiis lib. 5. cap. 5.
Thus the City Tarsus had been lately drowned by the River Cydnus, against
which Calamity the Emperor provided so effectually by Bridges and Walls, and
diverting part of the Water into other Channels, as to take off the force of
those Inundations, and for the time to come to secure the Inhabitants from that
danger. And the same was the case of the City of Juliopolis against the River
Siberis, Ibid. cap. 4.
that the Emperor upon news of the destruction of great numbers of Men by its
sudden Inundation, provided against the mischief forever by strong Bridges and
impregnable Walls. Ibid. cap. 2.
Of the same nature was the River Dracho at Helenopolis in Bithynia, Ibid. 7.
c. 2.3.7.
and of the River Scyrtus at Edessa in Mesopotamia, and of the River Chorde at
Dara, to which may be added the prodigious Bridges over Sangaris and Mirmex.
Lib. 1. cap 11.
But the most famous Structure of this kind was the new Haven in the Heraeum
the Suburbs of Constanstinople, by which he secured the City from Inundations,
and the Ships from Tempests. And to this Alemannus says, that his Author had
particular regard in this passage: but if he had, then that is a very fair cast
of his Authors Ingenuity, to raise so rude a clamor against so useful a Work.
But I pray why is it to be understood of this in particular? Because, says he,
Procopius in his first Book de Aedificiis in his waggish way under pretense of
praising it has jear'd it, to prepare his way for exposing it the more broadly
in the Anecdota. But again I pray how has he jear'd it? Why, he says, that it
was a work truly becoming a great Prince, and was built by Justinian's own
skill and industry, who himself attended to every thing, but the dibursements
of Money. From whence our learned Commentator ingenuously infers that he built
it without taking care to defray its Charges. Whereas the Historian's apparent
design is to magnify both the greatness of the Works and of the Emperor; The
works, he says, were so great, that he could not express them, but that in
short as great as they were, the Emperor himself had the management of all
things, but defraying the Expenses. Now from hence to draw Alemannus his
Inference, that he wholly neglected them, is nothing but a contradiction to his
Author, who commends the Emperor for sparing neither pains nor money, only he
left the money-part to other Men's management, but took the work it self into
his own hands. As indeed he was Architect as well as Founder of all his own
Buildings. He sent for the most famous Artists from all Parts of the World,
among whom the most eminent were Anthemius of Tral^is, Isidorus of Milesia,
Chryses of Alexandria, but as great Men as they were reputed in their Way, they
were outdone by the Emperor in Skill and Contrivance; for he drew up the
Models himself, and they were little more than hi^ Workmen that followed his
directions: De Aedificiis lib. 1. ^ap* ^.
Insomuch that when they despaired of finishing the Church of Sancta Sophia (a
Structure, they say, equal to the Temple of Solomon for magnificence and
beauty) by reason of its great height and great weight upon it, so that some of
the Pillars and Arches began to fail, he gave them such directions how to carry
on the Work, that they made it firm and brought it to perfection. Neither
secondly does Procopius affirm this of that particular Structure in the
Heraeum, but of all the Emperor's Buildings, in which he concerned himself as
to every part but the disbursements of Money: And that was an equal
commendation of his ingenuity and generosity. Neither thirdly was it an hint to
prepare the way for this broad story in the Anecdota, when that was written so
many years after this, so unhappy is this Vatican Tinker, that when ever he
goes about to patch up his Authors Mistakes, he makes them wider. And in truth
the Books de Aedificiis are an everlasting Monument both of the greatness and
the usefulness of Justinian's Foundations; that neither time nor malice nor
envy will ever be able to impair. But to return to the Author himself, when he
concludes this woeful ditty of expending so much Money in giving bounds to the
Sea, with this serious Remark, that he in vain wrastled with the fury of the
Waves only out of vainglory to vanquish the Sea it self. The malice is chill
as the touch of a dead Man's hand, without life or Satyr, all phlegm and
dullness, just as if a Man designing an Invective against the State of Venice,
should seriously declaim against them for defrauding the Sea of its true and
ancient Rights, just such is the complaint against Justinian, that he should
attempt to set new bounds and confinements to the Ocean.

As for the other bottomless pit of Expenses, viz. gifts to the Barbarians,
every Man knows, that when a Man is pressed with Enemies on all sides, there is
no fighting them all without the silver Weapon, and to buy Peace of some is the
most speedy way to vanquish all. And this was the Policy of Justinian, he was
content to buy Peace of the Persians, when he undertook the Vandalick War, and
when that was done, he soon forced them to buy Peace of him, and thus by
fighting his Enemies singly, and fencing off the rest, he at last Mastered all.
A policy both just and laudable in it self, practiced by the greatest and
wisest Princes, and indeed it is impossible to wage War without it, and
therefore this exception of buying off the Barbarians i^ not less dull and
peevish than that of banking out the Sea.

And as for the great gifts to the Huns, that our Author particularly complains
of, we have already seen how well they were bestowed; the Empire had been
harrassed by their continual Incursions ever since the time of Valens, and they
were so very numerous, that it was an endless work to destroy them; so that as
fast as one Army was cut off, another was poured in. And therefore the Emperor
takes a wiser course to divide them among themselves, and to supply both
Parties with Money to destroy each other: And he managed them with that Art and
Vigor, that the Huns themselves left not the very name of their own Nation, by
which Artifice the Empire was delivered from its greatest Plague to all future
Ages. Now can any Man be so disingenuous as to cry out here, what need of this
Expense; or can any Man assign me an Instance of Money better laid out for the
good of the Commonwealth, than to destroy so great an Enemy for ever without
the loss of a Subject? And therefore though the People of Constantinople at
first murmured against it, to see the Barbarians depart loaded with so much
Wealth, yet when they saw the Event, they could not enough praise and admire
the Emperor's great Conduct and Wisdom.

. XXXI. The next Topic of Calumny is oppression and continual fleecing of the
Subject; but without any instance to abet the Charge, and therefore I need at
present only oppose to it the contrary Character that is given of this Prince
by his Successor, Quem non hominem pietate benigna
Continuit, fovit, monuit, nutrivit, amavit,
Et tamen innocuo plures voluere nocere?
Non caret invidia regni locus.


But I shall not concern my self to wipe it off, till we come to his allegation
of Particulars in the 11 th Chapter, and there we shall see that all the ground
of this pretended Crime was the Emperor's putting the Laws in execution against
Jews, Heathens, Samaritans, Sodomites, and the whole herd of Heretics, which
our ingenuous Author is pleased to surmise, was not done out of any regard to
Religion, but out of pure love to Fines and Confiscations. But in the next
place he was very like Domitian in the shape and features of his Body, who
being torn in pieces by the Assassinates, the Senate decreed that there should
be no Statue or any other Monument erected to his Memory; but his Empress being
a virtuous Lady, and extremely beloved of all Men, they gave her leave to ask
what she pleased, and it should be granted. She begs her Lords Body, and leave
withal to erect only one Statue of Brass to his Memory. This is granted, and
she to leave a Monument of the Assassinates Cruelty to Posterity, gathers the
fragments of the Body, and unites them into one Spectacle of horror, from
whence was taken his Statue, that to this day stands at the descent or foot of
the Capitol. What pains are here taken to hale in a pitiful piece of Malice?
For what if Justinian had the ill luck to be like Domitian, what follows but
that Domitian had the good luck to be like Justinian? But not to honor so mean
a Calumny with any Answer, the story it self is all fable and ignorance, for
there is no such Report in any of the ancient Greek or Latin Historians.
Suetonius, Dio Cassius, Philostratus, Sextus Aurelius, who are very nice and
particular in the Story, relate it quite another way in all circumstanc^s. They
say nothing of his being cut in pieces, but only that he was killed with seven
Wounds; Nothing of his Bodies being begged by the Empress Domitia, but that it
was buried by Phillis the Chambermaid, nothing of her erecting a Statue as a
Monument of the barbarous Cruelty of the Conspirators, but that she her self
was the head and Contriver of the whole Conspiracy. Where then this barbarous
Writer could pick up the Fable, I cannot divine, unless it be that he lived in
an Age, when it was the fashion to debauch all the ancient History with Fable
and Romance. But all this, says Alemannus, detracts nothing from the truth of
the Procopian report, because the Ancients do not contradict it. But all this,
say I, demonstrates it to be a palpable false-hood, because they do nothing but
contradict it. Yet however (he says) the thing is evidently proved by the
brazen Statue extant in the Authors own time. But this pieces exactly with all
the rest of the story, for there never was any such Statue seen before or
since. And yet such a remarkable thing could never have escaped the observation
of other Writers if it had continued so long a time in so eminent a place. So
that the Statue is so far from proving the rest, that it disproves it self, and
only proves that the Founder of the Tale lived in a barbarous Age, when Men
scribled any thing without being accountable for the truth of their Reports.
But beside all this it is very likely and becoming Romantic tale, that when a
Man has been hewed* and chopped to bits, they should again be so pieced together,
that from thence any Man should be so subtile-sighted as to discern the exact
shape of his Body and Features of his Face. And yet that we must suppose in
this story of the great resemblance between Domitian and Justinian. Though when
all is done we are still harping upon the burden of Don John, for if we compare
their several descriptions, as they are drawn by Suetonius and our pretended
Procopius, Domitian was a very tall and a very fat man, but Justinian of a
middle stature, and a moderate habit of body. But however if he resemble him
not in shape, he did so in Rapine and Cruelty: as for example, he it was that
was the first Prince that punished Heretics with temporal Penalties, Enacting
Dracho's Laws against those innocent Dissenters, Montanists, Sabbatians,
Arians, Nestorians, Manichees, Jews, Sodomites, Pagans, and Astrologers, only
to enrich himself by seizing the forfeitures of their Estates. This indeed is a
Tragical Story, but so like the Author himself, that it would have been great
pity if it had been omitted. And though it is more then enough confuted by the
account, that I have given above of this Princes Ecclesiastical Laws, yet
because the passage is of a remarkable strein, and so well stuffed with lucky
mistakes, I will be at the pains to transcribe it, to satisfy the Reader that
it is impossible that it could ever have been written by any man that was not
an utter stranger to all the Affairs of that Age. Thus then the black Tragedy
begins. There are in the Roman Empire diverse Sects of Christians, commonly
called Heresies, as Montanists, Sabatians, and several others that poisoned the
People. All these he commanded to quit their own Sentiments, threatening the
obstinate among other Penalties with the great punishment of Intestability. In
the Temples of these Heretics, especially those of the Arian Sect were
treasured up incredible heaps of Wealth: so that neither the whole Senate it
self, nor any other eminent Body of the Roman Empire could compare with these
Churches for abundance of Wealth and Riches. All their Furniture and Ornaments
were of Gold, Silver and precious Stones of value not to be estimated and
number not to be computed, beside vast Purchases and Estates in all parts of
the World; no Prince having ever before this time given them any disturbance;
so that they were able to relieve and maintain out of their common stock great
numbers of the Orthodox Christians. The Treasures of these wealthy Churches
were seized on and made a Prey to the Emperor, to the utter undoing of vast
numbers of Subjects. And his Officers prowling up and down into all parts,
forced upon all Men the change of the Religion, in which they were educated.
The Country People thought this Inquisition too oppressive, and from that
thought proceed to think of making resistance against it, but are sacrificed by
the Imperial Inquisitors: Others out of superstitious madness cut their own
Throats, and vast numbers deserted their native Country. The followers of
Montanus in Phrygia locking up themselves in their Churches, set fire on them
and perished together with them, and from this time forward there was nothing to
be seen throughout the whole Roman Empire but Slaughters and Desolations. And
the same Law being executed upon the Samaritans, it occasioned wild Tumults in
Palestine, but those of my Native City of Caesarea counterfeited themselves
Christians, to escape the severity of the Laws, though some of the more honest
sort proved real Converts. But the greater part disdained to be hectored out of
the Religion of their Forefathers, in mere spite rather than turn Christians,
turned Manichees and Pagans. Till at last the Boors rise in Arms against the
Emperor, and chose Julian the Son of Sabaris for their Leader, but after a long
and doubtful fight with the Imperial Forces are vanquished and their General
slain, there being, as it is credibly reported, no less than an hundred thousand
Men slain in the Battle. The best Estates being thrown up by the Farmers, the
Landlords, that were Christians, were the greatest Losers, who though they
received no Rents were forced to pay heavy annual Taxes to the Emperor; that
were exacted without mercy or abatement. This being done, in the next place he
turns his Fury upon the Heathens, cutting their Throats and siezing their
Estates, and they that counterfeited Christianity only to escape the fury of
the Inquisition, were watch't so diligently, as some time or other to be snapt
at their old profane Rites and Sacrifices. How he treated the Christians we
shall declare afterward. In the next place he prohibited Sodomy, punishing the
Offenders not from the date of the Law, but from any time before. And these he
punished, though none prosecuted, upon no other Evidence than the Testimony of a
Boy or a Servant, and that extorted, against his own Master. And those that
were found Guilty were punished with the loss of their Privy Members. Though at
first this severity did not extend to all, but only to the Prasini, and the Men
of great Estates, or those that were cast out of favor. Then he was much
offended with the Astrologers or Fortune Tellers, and upon that account
disgracefully whipped diverse grave and honest Men through the City. Upon all
which accounts vast crowds of People betook themselves not only to the
Barbarians, but to the farthest distant Countries. So that in every City you
might observe Strangers, that were fled from home, to hide and shelter
themselves, as if their own Country had been laid wast by some commmon Enemy.
How Justinian's reign was all ruin and desolation to the Roman Empire we have
seen above; so that when he recovered those two great branches of it, Africa
and Italy from the barbarous People, that great reckoning is discounted as an
universal Destruction. But now he cannot so much as punish an Heretic, no not
a Sodomite without the same subversion of the Roman Empire. As for the Laws
themselves in general, and the wisdom of enacting them, and the good effect of
putting them in execution, they are able to justify themselves against such
mean and impotent Cavils. And I know not how this Author could more have
betrayed his folly, malice and ignorance than by blaming such wise, such useful
and such necessary Laws to that height of aggravation, as if to punish Arians,
Manichees, Sodomites, were of no less consequence than the subversion of the
Roman Empire. And therefore at present I shall not trouble my self to answer a
Cavil, that sinks and breaks by the weight of its own folly, but shall content
my self with proving the Author of it a perfect stranger to the Records and
Transactions of those times. For I pray what could have been contrived more
absurd than the story of the infinite Wealth of the Arian Heretics, by reason
of that undisturbed Peace and Quiet, that they had enjoyed under all former
Emperors? When it is so undenyably evident that the Sect was long before that
time so reduced by the severity of former Emperors, that by that time it had
scarce any thing left but the name within the Empire. And for this reason he
never enacted any particular Rescripts against them, nor, as I remember, makes
so much as any mention of them, unless in those general declarations of his
Faith, in which he enters his Protestation against all the Heresies, that
either then were or ever had been: So unfortunate is this barbarous Writer in
this Tale of the infinite Wealth of the Arians. But behold the strange
dexterity of the Vatican Librarian at an excuse, Procopius, he says, does not
deny that the Arians were prosecuted by former Emperors, but that they were not
so publicly fined in all Cities, but rather punished only as it were by stealth
and upon certain occasions. But I say Procopius here says, as plainly as words
can express, that they were not punished at all, and therefore when Alemannus
says that he does not say it, for civility sake, I will say no more than that
he says an untruth. Nay it is not only destitute of, but contrary to the most
known and undoubted truth it self, when the former Emperors pursued them with
that rigor and severity, that if Justinian had designed to set up an
Inquisition, he would have wanted Objects to vent his Cruelty upon. There were
only a few straggling Goths of that Sect at that time, and these were
particularly excepted out of the first Commission for prosecuting all other
Heretics: so ill a Botcher is our Vatican Commentator at patching up Apologies.

But though he has every where betrayed his want of Skill, yet he has no where
failed more unfortunately than in this Paragraph, composed of no other
materials than Excuses, that apparently contradict the Author's on sense. Thus
when the Author says, that none of the former Emperors ever inflicted any
Penalties at all upon Heretics, the meaning of that, says he, is not that he
did not inflict any at all, but not so much. And now again when the Author
blames Justinian for the attempt it self: No, no, says Alemannus, he only
blames him for the wrong manner of putting it in execution. But this is a
direct Affront to the Author's own Words, for though he afterward endeavors to
aggravate the folly of the Design by its ill consequences, yet his first and
main displeasure is vented against the Design it self, as absurd, illegal, and
without Precedent, as is undenyably evident from the passage it self. But still
his hardest task is to bring off his Author from his angry Censure of the Laws
against Sodomy; for which he has no better defense than that Theophanes thought
they were too severe, so that himself could not but detest them. And yet
Theophanes says no such thing, but only that they were severely punished,
without any intimation of dislike, much lesss of abhorrence. But it was
executed upon two Thracian Bishops to the great scandal of the Church, whereas
Constantine the Great would rather have covered them in the Fact with his
Imperial Robe. That was a great Complement of that great Emperor, and it is
likely enough, that if the Crime had been known to himself alone, such was his
generous Nature, that he would never have divulged it. But that was not
Justinian's case, for the Crime was become public before it came to his
knowledge, and after that, it had been a Scandal with a witness to let it pass
unpunisht. But that after all, is the thing, that gauls at the Court of Rome,
that a Secular Prince should challenge any Power to correct Ecclesiastical
Persons, which though it has long obtained as an unquestionable Rule in that
Court, yet I have proved through the whole series of this History, that it was
both claimed by all the Emperors, and acknowledged by all the Popes and
Councils. But beside, as for this story of Theophanes concerning the two
Bishops, by my Rules of critic Law, I must pass it for mere fable, because
destitute of timely and sufficient Testimony. For so I cannot but esteem the
Reports of all Writers, that live at too great a distance of time from the
matter of Fact. And that is the case of this little Story, there are no
footsteps of any Record of it either in that or the next Ages, whereas
Theophanes, that was its first Founder, reports it not till above 250 years
after it was done; and then what reason have we to believe him in a matter of
Fact, that had been so many years beyond the memory of Mankind, any more than
if he had lived at twice the distance of time? For when a thing is once got out
of the reach of the memory of Man, an hundred and a thousand years are the same
thing. And then it is never to be admitted to any capacity of belief without
some more credible and timely Records. And for that reason I have industriously
neglected all the latter Greek Historians, as to any matter of Fact done at any
considerable distance from their own Age. For if they are voucht by any more
ancient Authority, that is proof enough without them; if they are not, their
own is none at all. And the truth is they are so much addicted to the humor of
patching Fables to the ancient Records of the Church, that whatever we find in
them not reported before them, we ought for that reason to conclude it mere
Fable and Fiction. But in the last place, which way will he bring off his
Author in finding fault with the severity of this Law, for reaching such as
were Offenders before its publication? 141.
when the Law declares it self to have been only enacted in pursuance of the
known established Laws of the Empire, especially the famous Law of Constanti^s
and Constans, that was ever after in force. What a childish piece of malice
then is it in this Author to insinuate, as if this Law had taken hold upon
Offenders, at a time when there was no known Law against them? As for the Law
against Astrologers, our Librarian has so much wit as not to touch it, and to
leave his Author in the lurch to answer for himself. For these Men commonly
called Astrologers, that is, such as profess to read all Men's Fates in the
Stars, were ever looked upon as the most mischievous and most dangerous Traitors
to the Government: and any Man that has but cast an eye upon the Imperial
Story, cannot but know that there never was any one Act of Treason contrived
against the Prince's Life or Government, without their encouragement or
direction: as in the present case Joannes Cappadox was put upon his Treason
against Justinian by their instigation. And for this reason it was ever punished
with the greatest severity by all Princes, as well Heathen as Christian. Under
the heathen Emperors down from Caesar himself, by banishment, under the
Christian from Constantine, by death. And yet this wretched Satyrist is so
infatuated as to inveigh against it as a new piece of Cruelty in Justinian,
only for setting them in a disgraceful posture upon Camels, and so whipping
them through the City, when by the Law they ought to have been executed.

But upon occasion of this fierce censure of the counterfeit Procopius upon the
Emperor's prosecuting of Heathens and Heretics, it is become a dispute what
Religion the true Procopius adhered to, or whether to any at all. Alemannus
will have him an Atheist; Rivius and Eichelius a bigoted Pagan, but they are
both apparently too severe and equally in the wrong: when through all his
Writings he expresses so high a sense of honor and kindness for the Christian
Religion, especially in his last Books de Aedificiis, that are for the most
part a Panegyric upon Justinian's great zeal to advance and propagate the
Christian Faith. And let the Reader only peruse the first Book of that History,
and he will soon be satisfied of the Author's own sense of Religion. But they
say, that he was only a counterfeit Christian for Interest and Preferment. But
this they may say, if they please, of any Man as well as Procopius. But he has
dropped some loose and slite Expressions of the Christian Religion, and both
Parties instance in the passage out of his Books de Bello Gothico, Lib. 1. cap.
3.
wherein he expresses a great dislike of the Controversies on foot at that
time, that is, the violent heats about the tria Capitula. Which it is evident
from his own description of them, that he did not in the least understand, but
supposed them to have been too curious and philosophical Inquiries into the
Secrets of the divine Nature; whereas (he says) it is satisfaction enough to
him, that God Almighty governed the World with a wise and good Providence, and
as for other more nice Speculations, every Man might for him, quietly enjoy his
own Opinion. This though it be very false Politics, as we have seen by the
Henoticon, and our own late too dear bought Experience, yet it is neither
Atheism nor Paganism; For a good and wise Providence that governs the World, is
the only Principle opposed to Atheism; and though it may (tho very hardly) be
consistent with philosophic Paganism, yet it is the fundamental Article of
Christianity. Now the dispute, as he states it, was not between the two
Religions, but about an Argument common to both, viz. as he supposed, the
Nature of God, and like a Gentleman, he frankly declares his Opinion against
all bigottry in these nice and obscure Controversies, and thinks that Men ought
not to inquire farther into the divine Nature than the Wisdom and Goodness of
his Providence. This is apparently the sense of that offensive passage, though
perhaps too loosly expressed. And as for the Opinion it self, it has too long
had too great a vogue amongst our modern Statesmen, viz. that it is below the
Wisdom of the State, to concern it self in Men's various fancies about
Religion, but rather to leave them to the folly of their own Apprehensions: and
this they suppose the best security of the Public Peace, when every Man is
indulged the liberty of his own little Conceit. But this is a very
short-sighted Prospect only providing for the present, whereas if they would
look home to the natural issue of the thing, it tears the Nation into
implacable Factions and Animosities. For it is certain the People will be
zealous for their Religion, so that if they differ, it is unavoidable but that
they will quarrel, and hence it has ever come to pass that all Schisms in the
Church have ever concluded in Factions in the State. So that here it is not
material, Whether these Controversies are of any moment or not (as these
Gentlemen would state the Matter) but the thing to be first considered is,
Whether to indulge or suppress them be the most effectual way to secure the
Public Peace, the first may do it for a short time, but the last does it
forever. For Men will not be over-fond of disputing with a Rod at their backs,
and when they receive a lash for every Syllogism. This I take to be the true
state of the Controversy about Procopius, that in this point he was (as too
many great and wise Men have been) out in his Politics, but not in his
Religion. But in the last place, say they, he frequently makes use of the old
Pagan terms and phrases, as Fortune, Fate, Genii, public Genius, Omens,
Oracles. He does so, but all learned Men know that these were long since become
Terms of Art, and even vulgar expressions. Beside that Procopius was an Orator,
and familiarly conversant in all the Eloquence of the Ancients, and therefore
it is no wonder that he endeavored to imitate their Style in familiar Phrases
and forms of Expression. Though after all he never used them in their proper
sense, but by way of Metaphor and Allusion with a quas^ in their meaning, as
they have ever been used in all Ages, and are so to this day. And therefore as
we find that Procopius has ever expressed great kindness to the Christian
Faith, so we have no reason from any thing, that occurs in his Writings to
suspect his sincerity in it.

But what though there were no cruelty in executing the Laws against
Dissenters, and what if Justinian's practice was warranted by the Precedents of
his Predecessors, yet they spoiled not a good work as he did, by doing it
merely for covetousness. For that, says our ingenuous Author and his more
ingenuous Commentator, was the only thing that set him upon the Project to
squeeze all their Estates into his own Coffers. This at best is no better than
ill-natured surmise, and betrays the malignity of the Man, for how can he look
into any other Man's secret Intentions? and if he cannot, to pass such sour
judgment upon them, can proceed from nothing but Malice and Ill Will. But as
ill-luck will have it here too, the matter of Fact it self lies cross to his
ill nature: for whereas most of his Predecessors siezed the Fines and
Forfeitures into their own Exchequer, Justinian settles them upon the Church;
thus when in the leading Law of Arcadius and Honorius all Churches of
Heretics, and all Goods and Endowments belonging to them, are confiscated or
forfeited fisco nostro to our Exchequer, in the same Law, as it is recited in
the Justinian Code, instead of Fisco Nostro we read Ecclesiae Catholicae, i. e.
they are forfeited to the use of the Catholic Churches. So little design of
Covetousness had this great Emperor in his zeal against Heretics, that he
remitted the Forfeitures due to himself by Law, and settled them upon pious and
charitable uses. So that in all particulars our Author might better have vented
his poison and ill nature upon any Man than Justinian; who of all the great Men
that ever lived will the least endure to be abused. But because his
Covetousness is aggravated in every page of the Libel as a most insatiable
gulf, so that the whole Roman Empire was not sufficient to supply its cravings,
though he used all the ways of Rapin and Oppression to fill his Exchequer, I
will show in two or three Instances that he was so far from laying new Burdens
upon the Subject, that he took off old, settled and legal Taxes of mighty value
to himself, only because he thought them too hard and heavy upon his Subjects.
The first was the Lex Papia, and all the Branches of the Law de Caducis added
to it, by which if a man had no Heirs of his own begetting, or if the next
Heirs died before their Actual Livery and Seisin of the Estate, all such
Estates came to the Imperial Crown, which in so vast an Empire could not but
arise to a Prodigious Revenue, and yet he abrogated all these Laws for the ease
of his Subjects, as he declares in the Preface to his own Law. Such is our
Clemency, that though all Bona Caduca are due to our Exchequer, yet are we
pleased to remit them all, notwithstanding our Royal Prerogative; preferring
the common benefit of our good Subjects before our own private Advantage, and
esteeming their Interest to be most our own.

The second Law was that of the Publicatio Bonorum or the Sale of the Goods and
Chattels of all sorts of Malefactors, whether Executed, Outlawed, or Banished;
and that was a greater Revenue than the former, and yet because it looked harsh
to this just and tender Prince, he takes it quite away, and setles all
forfeited Estates upon the next of Kin. The third was that old and standing
Practice of the Sale of all Offices, by which the Emperor had a certain Sum;
not for the Office, but his Suffrage, in the same manner as if one should
purchase a Bishopric by buying a Conjedelire. But this corrupt Custom he
scorns, and cashieres it as a base and unPrince-like practice, Because (as he
expresses it) Justice we know will be done, if we can any way oblige our
Prefects and Governors of Provinces to administer Justice with clean hands,
abstain from Bribery, and be content with their Pensions out of the Exchequer.
But this cannot otherways be brought about, unless they may enter upon their
places without charge, giving nothing to the Prince upon pretense of Suffrage,
or to any other Officer whatsoever. For we are well aware that though it lops
off too great a branch of our Revenue, yet it will redound to the unspeakable
benefit of our good Subjects, to be preserved from the oppression of our
Officers, and both the Empire and the Exchequer will flourish the more by a
thriving People. And if this Rule were once settled, it is unimaginable of what
advantage it would be to the public. Now is it not probable that this Prince
who cancelled all these Laws, though not unjust in themselves, only because he
thought them somewhat too harsh and heavy, should rob, plunder, and undo vast
Multitudes of his Subjects without Law, without Mercy, nay without Pretense, ^s
the Anecdot^ clamor in every Page, as indeed the whole Libel is nothing but
Echo and Cuckoo.

But there remains one Enquiry, that is so obvious for the Reader to make, from
what friends he could have Supplies to defray all the Charges of his expensive
Reign, how he could maintain so many and so great Wars? How he could build such
vast numbers of Cities and infinite other structures? how he could maintain so
many and so chargeable Correspondencies? This at first view seems very strange,
but the account being well stated, it will not appear so strange as easy. For
first he was a very great Husband, and wasted nothing in Luxury, the great Pane
of Princes Courts. In the next place he retrench't all the exorbitant Expenses
of the Theaters and public shows, as our Author often complains. Thirdly, the
standing Revenue and ordinary Taxes of so vast an Empire, as they were of an
immense value, so were they frugally managed and expended. But that which makes
the wonder quite to vanish* are the infinite Treasures taken in his Wars from
the Goths and Vandals, that had plundered all Europe, and laid all together, in
two heaps, one in Africa, and the other in Italy: that were (if we may trust
Procop^us) the greatest Treasures that ever were in the World, all which came
entirely into Justinians Coffers. Now if we lay all these things together, we
may easily see which way this great Emperor was Enabled to do these great
things, without squeezing and fleecing his Subjects.

. XXXII. The next Royal Virtue is inconstancy and falsehood to his Friends, as
well as Cruelty to his Enemies. Instances of his Cruelty we have seen in the
several Acts of his Mercy toward his most implacable Enemies; but as for his
Friends, as no man ever made a better choice, so never was any man more
constant and entire in the preservation of his Friendship. So that when he had
once taken a man into his Bosom, nothing but Treason could displace him, nor
that in some Cases, as we have seen in the Instance of Artabanes. How
immovable was his Friendship to Belizarius, notwithstanding all the boisterous
attempts of Court-envy to shock it? De Bello Persico, lib. 1. cap. 12.
he received him to favor in his Youth, and persevered in his kindness to his
last breath, and through the whole course of his life heap't more honors upon
him, than ever were conferred by any Prince upon a Subject. After the Vandalick
War Belizarius was accused by some of his Captains of High Treason and Designs
of Tyranny, De Bello Vand. l. 2. c. 8.
for by that term Procopius always expresses Usurpation, upon which he
immediately repairs to Constantinople to clear himself, though the Emperor gave
so little Credit to the Information, as to leave it to Belizarius his own
choice either to continue in the Government of Africa, or to return home with
his Spoils and Captives. Ibid. cap. 9.
And choosing the last the Emperor gave him the honor of a Public Triumph and
Honor that had been disused for at least 600 years, and never before this time
granted by Christians to Subjects unless of the Blood Royal. And not long after
he is made Consul, and in the year of his Consulship honored with a second
Triumph after the fashion of the Consuls in the old Commonwealth, when they
returned from the Conquest of any Province or Nation. After this he is
immediately sent General into Sicily against the Goths, De Bello Goth. l. 1. c.
5.
and in a trice scowres them out of the Island, and in the last day of his
Consulship, enters Syracuse with Triumphal Pomp, and so was ever after General
in all the Emperors Wars without the least frown of Jealousy or distrust,
though the Imperial Crown had been twice offered him in the head of a
successful Army, and he had him in that great esteem, that for many years he
would never spare him from his own Person, but enjoyed the pleasure of his
friendship to his dying day. The next man in favor was Narses, because next in
Virtue. A Gentleman of that high Character for Piety, for Courage, for Mercy,
For Loyalty, for Gallantry, for Magnanimity, for every Thing that is Great and
Good, that by mere worth he must have eclyp'st any man but Belizarius. And his
Reputation was so impregnable, that it was above the Attaques of Envy, insomuch
that there is nothing left of him upon Record, but the height of Praise and
Panegyric. Procopius, Agathias, Marcellinus Comes, Evagrius, Paulus Diaconus
seem to vie who shall speak the greatest things of him: But to say no more, his
shining and unblemish't Virtues placed him second, if not equal to Belizarius
in his Masters favor. His Character in Corippus runs thus, Corippi. 3.
E^i^el excelsus super omnia Vertice Narses
Ag^nina, and Augustam altu praefulgurat Aulam
Comptus Casarie, formlique insignes and ore.
Aureus omnis erat, cultuque habituque modestus,
Et morum probitate placeus, virtute verendus,
Fulmineus, cautus, vigilans noctesque di^sque
Pro rerum Dominis and honora luco c^ruscus.


From which passage we may conclude that Belizarius died before Justinian,
because Narses is described as the chief Attendant at the Coronation of Justin
the younger without any mention of Belizarius, which could not have been, had
he been then surviving. But to proceed, it were an endless work to give the
great Characters of all the Favorites of his Court. What thinks our Author of
Sittas the Emperors Fellow Soldier in his Uncle Justins Reign, that twice
overthrew the Persians, and by his great Civility brought over the T^ani to
Christianity? what thinks he of Solomon's Successor to Belizarius in the
Government of Africa, which he managed with great Wisdom, and perishing
unfortunately by an Ambush of the Moors, was not less bemoaned by his Prince
than by his Patron Belizarius, by whose Interest he was preferred to that great
Employment? What of that great Soldier Mundus, who after many brave Services
perish't at last by his own excess of Courage in revenge of his Sons death,
after his Victory of the Goths at Salona, to the great grief of his Imperial
Majesty? In short, what thinks he of Phocas and Bassus, of Basilides, and
Strategius, of Proclus and Rufinus, of Marcellus, and Justinus, and
Tribonianus, and Procopius himself, who I am sure, of all men had least reason
to complain of the Emperors Inconstancy to his Favorites, who was advanced
from honor to honor, till he came to the Prefecture of the City, that is the
highest Preferment in all the Empire? Sceleratissimos quosque semper ad
dignitates ne magistratus evexit. Aleman. Praefat. p. 9.
Of the same nature is the next Charge of Preferring ill men to places of the
greatest Trust and Dignity, i. e. all those great men, that we have but now
recited, men of that unparalleled Worth and Honor, that no Age or Reign can
show such a number of unexceptionable Ministers of State. But because the
Calumny is so apparently false, I shall not trouble my self to answer it, but
only ask the Author and his Alemannus what he thinks of Procopius himself, upon
whom the Emperor was perpetually heaping his honors. If he advanced Men only
for being more wicked than others (as the Libel reports) then how great a
Villain was this Procopius, whom he raised from the lowest to the highest round
of Fortune? But if Procopius were an honest Man, that is a proof that the
Emperor in the choice of his Ministers of State had regard to some other
Qualifications than mere Wickedness.

Cap. 11.
In the next place he was a vainglorious Innovator, that abolisht old Laws and
Customs, and enacted new ones, changing every thing in the Government, not for
any advantage to the State, but only to stamp his own name upon every thing in
the Commonwealth. This Charge, if it were true, is very mean and childish: for
what if he were too desirous of Glory, that is a Passion incident to all great
Men, and is in it self a natural effect of Greatness of Mind? and therefore to
aggravate a Fancy so common to all great Men, as a singular Enormity in
Justinian, is a piece of Malice only to be despised. And yet nothing is more
evident than that this great Prince was acted, not by an Itch of Glory but by
an eager zeal for the public Good. And first a for the body of his Laws, I
scorn to vindicate so great and so useful work from so mean a Calumny, that it
was only a design of Ostentation, and of no use to the Commonwealth. And then
as for his new modelling of the Provincial Governments, it was only a reduction
of the State to its primitive Constitution under the ancient Romans. For
whereas there were from the time of Constantine two supreme Officers in every
Province, one civil, the other military, to break the too great power of the
Praefecti Praetorio, which being done Justinian now thought good to reunite
them, for these reasons, Novel. 24, etc.
both because they were always at variance about the bounds of Power, not for
the Subject's good, but their own; and because in the contest the Civil Power,
by which Justinian designed to govern, was oppressed and born down by military
force, to the great grievance of his Subjects. And therefore to avoid these
Mischiefs of a Government divided within it self, he restores the old Roman
Praetor, in whom alone the entire power of the Province was seated; as himself
gives an account of his design in his 24 th Novel of the Praetor of (...),
where he first began to put the Model in practice, and after it reformed all
the other Provinces. In short whatever Alterations he made in the State of the
Empire, he always gives an account of the usefulness and necessity of the thing
in the Preface to the Law. And therefore if Alemannus would have made any real
advantage of his Authors Tale, instead of relying wholly upon its blind
Authority, he ought to have disproved Justinian's reasons of State; for
otherwise they stand upon Record as a Conviction against his Author, that the
Emperor made no Alterations without good reason. But he inscribed his own Name
upon all things, says our Author, i. e. says Alemannus, upon Cities, Towns,
Ports, Letters, Books, Scholars, Crowns, Magistrates, Military Officers; such,
says he, was his excessive thirst after vainglory. But if this be a Vice, it
would be happy for Mankind, if all Princes were tainted with the same Itch of
leaving a great Name and a good Memory behind them. If he had done (as many
great Men have) ill things to perpetuate his Fame, that had not been more a
crime than a folly. But when all his Works were for the benefit of Mankind,
then if they were called after his own Name, it was only a just Monument of the
Author's bounty and greatness. But what could be more childish than to find
fault with such an innocent Custom, of fixing the Authors Names upon their own
magnificent Works, when it has ever been the constant practice of all Mankind*
Alexander the Great, they say, built 12 great Cities, and was Godfather to
them all. And I pray what Emperor ever built or rebuilt any City, that did not
fix his own Name upon it? why then should this Prince alone be barred the
pleasure of this little Fancy, that is allowed to all Mankind? And yet after
all he has denied himself in it more than any Prince upon Record, as any Man
may satisfy himself, that will peruse the Books de Aedificiis; but to be short
Evagrius says he built 150 Cities, and yet Alemannus out of all these can find
no more than 18 Justiniana's, of Towns but one, of Ports none but that at
Constantinople, that Procopius says the Inhabitants out of gratitude called by
the Founders name, Palaces but one, though there was scarce a City in the
Empire, in which he did not erect some magnificent Building. But to follow
these trisles no farther, the Books that he entitled by his own Name were his
Body of Laws; and he had no doubt done very wisely to publish them to the
World, without declaring by whose Authority they were enacted. Such strein'd
and far fetched Calumnies as these discover nothing but rankor at the heart, and
a studious design to turn all things into spite and poison.

Cap. 12.
In the next Chapter we are at last served up with some particular Instances of
injustice and oppression, especially by fraud and forging of Wills to the utter
ruin of innumerable Families, and this as well as all the other Calumnies is
repeted in all the following Chapters, and indeed the whole Rhapsody is nothing
but Tautology, Echo and Repetition of the black Character in the 6 th and 8 th
Chapters; that he was a Tyrant, a Man of Blood, a thief that robbed and ruined
all his Subjects, that dispeopled whole Provinces, that laid wast the whole
Empire, in a word, a Man wicked beyond the common capacity of Humane Nature.
This is the substance of every invective against Justinian, but it is very rare
to meet with any Instance to make good any part of the Character. And how
pertinent those that we have already examin^d, are to the purpose, I leave them
to the Readers judgment. And before I have done, I doubt not but to demonstrate
this whole Libel to be the most foolish, most malicious, most ignorant Lampoon,
that was ever contrived against any Man's Reputation. And as for this story of
plundering his Subjects, in illegal ways to enrich himself, it is as consistent
as all the other Fables, when he remitted so many great branches of his settled
Revenue, only to ease and enrich his Subjects, as we have seen above in his
abolishing the Lex Papia, and all the Laws de caducis. What a contradiction in
the nature of things is this, that he should so frankly give up such vast
proportions of his lawful Revenue, and yet out of a mere covetous humor turn
Pick-pocket, and enrich himself by private pilfering. This story is so remote
from so cross to the common sense of Mankind, and the practice of Humane
Nature, that it interdicts its own belief: For it is impossible in the nature
of things that the same Man, who did one, could ever be induced to do the
other. And thus this Calumny, as well as all the rest only enhances the glory
of Justinian; who was so far from cheating his Subjects of their Estates and
Inheritances, that of all Princes he took the greatest care to secure their
Rights. And whereas the practice of the Laws had been a long time corrupted
with tricks and subtilties for the advantage of the Exchequer, he cut them all
off, and made such wise and strict Rules concerning Wills and Testaments, as
secured the right Heir of his Estate against all Pretenders, but most of all
against the Crown it self, abrogating all manner of Forfeitures to it. And in
truth there are no greater Instances of Justice and clear dealing than his Laws
de Testamentis: he has done the utmost that Man can do to prevent Frauds, and
if the practice of the Courts were re^uced to the simplicity of his Laws, we
should rarely hear of Suits about Wills and Testaments. Even that one Law of
setting aside all Forms in the Case, and inquiring only into the plain and
honest proof of the Will of the Testator, as it would stifle most
Controversies, so it would shut out all delays, for dilatory Proceedings are
never founded upon the merits of the Cause, but only upon formalities. Now it is
hugely credible that this very Man, who dealt so very fairly with the World in
this matter, that was so solicitous to secure every Man's right, and that for
that end out off such vast Revenues from himself, should be so bereft of common
Sense, as to go about (...) enrich himself by the most scandalous fraud and
rapin. It Is a madness not incident to humane Nature to part with a just and
settled Revenue, and at the same time make himself odious to all the World by
the most barbarous Acts of Oppression.

Especially if we reflect upon the inconsiderable numbers of oppressed Persons
that this Author is able to muster up under all his reign, only eight, and it is
very credible that he should for-go the vast profit that came without envy or
regret from the Laws de caducis, because he did not make them, but found them
in force from his Predecessors, and yet incur the hatred of his Subjects by
such a mean oppression, and in comparison to the other of no value at all* for
what were these eight Men's Estates, how great soever, if compared to the
infinite Forfeitures throughout the whole Roman Empire? The absurdity of every
circumstance in the Tale stares the Author of it in the face: but most of all
when by these eight Persons he would prove that this was his constant practice
all the World over. And of these eight he gives us only the names of five
without any circumstance of matter of Fact, and in the other three he sets down
the Story so perversely, as to make one part of the same Tale a flat
contradiction to the other. The first is the story of Zeno, whom he on purpose
sent Governor into Egypt, who loading a Ship with a vast treasury of Gold,
Silver and precious Stones, that was to follow him, Justinian prevails with
some of Zeno's best friends to cast all the Goods overboard in the Haven of
Constantinople, and then to fire the Ship, and make Zeno believe that all the
Goods perished in it, who dying not long after the Emperor siezed all his Goods
by virtue of a forged Will, as it is reported. This as it is reported is a very
saint end for an Accusation, for if it have no other proof but report, then it
is a Tale without a Witness, and that is mere Tale. But beside this, as Dr.
Rive ingeniously replies, were I to plead this Cause before a Court of
Judicature I should not doubt to make out by a multitude of clear and pregnant
Proofs, that the Tale it self could never have dropped from the Mouth, I will not
say of a learned or skilful Accuser, but of any Man of common Sense. For
stories ought to be like Pictures, if not true yet at least probable, but this
is all defyance to the very possibility of things. That so great a Treasure
should be cast away so privately in the most frequented Port in the World, that
neither the Master of the Ship, nor the Seamen, nor the Passengers, nor the
Servants should perceive it, no not any of his own Servants that he left on
board to see the Goods conveyed. But when he had got the Goods into his own
Possession by this device, what need had he to entitle himself to them by a
forged Will? The fire gave him full possession of all, because the Estate was
supposed to be lost, but after that to produce a Will to a lost Estate is only
to betray the form^r Cheat. This is the substance of the learned Advocates
Plea. So great an improbability supported by so weak a foundation as mere
Report, must needs sink into nothing of its own accord. The next Instance is
Basilius a wealthy Man, who dying in the Garrison of Daras, the Governor forged
a Will, by which the whole Estate was left to the Emperor. But if another
forged the Will ar so great a distance (for Daras was the last Town of the
Empire upon the Confines of Persia,) what is that to the Emperor, how can any
Man say that he was privy to it? But if you say it is likely. I think it is more
likely, than that the Governor should contrive it merely for the Emperor's
profit without any advantage to himself, if he had given himself any share in
the Estate or any good Legacy, the thing might have past, but to make no
advantage of it to himself, when it was wholly in his own power, is a thing not
credible of a Knave, nor indeed of any Man; nothing more certain than that
saying, Nemo gratuito fit improbus. Cap. 29.
The third instance is in the case of Anatolius a rich Senator who dying
without Issue Male, by the old Custom the 4 th part of the Estate ought to
devolve to the Senate, but Justinian makes a Law that only the fourth part
shall go to the Heirs, and the other three to his Exchequer. This is pure
forgery, for there never were any such Laws heard of by any Man but himself.
There was indeed a Law somewhat like it in another Case enacted by Theodosius
and Valentinian of the Curiales, that if their Heirs did not continue in the
Society, they should leave a fourth part of the Estate to their use. But of an
old Law of forfeiting a fourth part of a Senator's Estate to the Senate, or of
this new one of siezing three parts to the Emperor, no Man ever dreamed, but
this ignorant Barbarian. These are the grand Articles of this foul Accusation,
and what credit they ought to have I may now safely leave to the Verdict even
of an Ignoramus Jury. The remainder of this Chapter is nothing but raving, for
who but a mad Man would seriously report that Justinian and Theodora were
Devils in good earnest, that his Mother had carnal Copulation with a Demon
that was his Father, that he was often s^en to walk up and down without his
head upon his Shoulders, and that Theodora familiarly lay with Devils? Happy is
the Man that can be fond of such a pleasant Historian. And yet Alemannus is in
so good humor, as not only to believe it all, but to adorn it with large and
learned Commentaries. Never was Author and Commentator better met. It is pity
but he should have written Notes upon the Legend of St. Silvester, and the
Dragon, that his Predecessor Baronius sets up as the best account of the Reign
of Constantine against all the Records both of the Church and the Empire. Into
such absurdities will fanatic Zeal drive the wisest and most learned Men. But
above all the rest, his grave Apology to justify this prudentissimus Scriptor
(as he styles him) in his folly, is most pleasant, viz. that it is a common
Form of Speech in all Authors profane and sacred, to give the title of Devil
to Men eminently wicked, as our Savior calls Judas a Devil. That any Man's
understanding should be sunk so low, as to satisfy it self with such trifles
as these. When the wise Author says expressly, That he was no Metaphorical
Devil, but a Devil in reality, and the Son of a Devil in good earnest. And
there if his learned Advocate cannot prevail with himself to believe it,
notwithstanding his excuse he leaves his wise Author in the lurch to answer for
the possibility of his Legend. Had I been in his stead to plead the Cause, I
would have alleged the Precedents of Alexander the Great, and Scipio
Africanus, the two greatest Men of Greece and Rome, who^e Mothers are reported
to have told the same story of being gallanted by Incubuses; for though they
are equally incredible, yet they have the Authority of Ancient Tale, and have
been frequently related by grave Historians, and this if set off with a serious
Countenance, might have been taking and plausible, but to raise a silly
Metaphorical Devil to supply the room of a real one, it is such a Rag of Excuse
as utterly spoils the Story, and makes it look much more ridiculous than the
naked Lie it self.

But if he were not a Devil with a cloven foot, yet he was a Devil of Lust, and
though he were very temperate and abstemious, yet he out-did a Satyr in
wantonness. But what Instance? what Proofs? what one Example? That a man should
exceed all Mankind in the licentiousness of his Lust, and yet no one Act of it
ever be discovered. This Vice is not so discreet as to sec^re it self with that
Secrecy that it designs, but especially in Princes it cannot avoid being
public. The crafty Augustus, as demurely as he looked, and as severe Laws as
he made against it, was publicly known to have been one of the most notorious
Sinners of the Age. But as for Justinian, as he was more severe in his Laws
against this Vice, than any of his Predecessors, so he was never charged with
any one Breach of them. The Wife, the Daughter, the Servant that he debaucht,
are to this day nameless. Whose Bed did he ever defile, whose Modesty did he
ever attempt? was he ever so much as suspected of Love to any but his Empress?
What rudeness then, what Malice, what Impudence is it in this Scribler to cast
dirt upon such an eminent and unblemisht Chastity, without so much as
attempting to allege any one proof or example of it? and that alone is a
demonstration of its falsehood, for if he could have charged him with any one
Fact, we know he owed him not so much kindness as to conceal it. But as he
introduces the Calumny, he makes it more absurd, viz. That though he were very
much given to fasting and watching, yet he was a Devil for Lust. These things
hang very well together, a man much given all his lifetime to watching and
fasting, and yet the very Priapus of the Age, an insatiable Satyr, and
exceeding the natural capacity of Makind in Lust. This is another fair
contradiction, and as consistent as his being black and white, tall and low,
prodigal and covetous, an Ass and a Fox, a natural Fool and a crafty Knave, so
blind a thing is Malice when it is over eager in the pursuit of its rage.

The next Twins of Virtue are his great kindness to, and great oppression of
the Orthodox Christian Clergy. His favor to them was so exorbitant, Cap. 13.
that he would protect them in their frauds and oppressions, whenever they
invaded other Men's Rights, and whenever the Cause was brought before him, he
always judged on the side of the Ecclesiastics. And so preposterous was his
Piety that he Committed all his Rapins to enrich and endow the Christian
Churches, though but just now they were all swept into his own Coffers. But
with what cruelty he oppressed the Christian Clergy the Author has several times
promised to relate, but it seems having a Treacherous Memory, as we find by the
inconsistencies of his Tale, he at last forgot it, notwithstanding he has so
often rubbed it up in Cap. 10, 11, 26, 27. An ill Memory (they say) is very
inconvenient for some sort of men, but a false one is very useful, it is an
easy matter to excuse any ill-natured Story under pretense of forgetfulness,
and as easy to stab any innocent man's reputation only by suggesting some vile
thing of him, as by broad direct slander. But here behold our Vatican Apologist
at his old knack of excuse-making. His Author, he says, had it all the while in
his head, but unluckily forgot to let it out, and intended no doubt, the hard
usage of the Popes Silverius and Vigilius, and the African Bishops in the
Contest about the tria Capitula. This excuse Dr. Rive caps with this Story, of
a Jockey not less happy in a forgetful Memory, who putting a Pad-Nag into a
Friends hands upon Reputation, after the Bargain was ended, the Buyer seriously
ask't him (as the Custom is) what faults he had, to which he replies, that he
knew only two, that he paced too easily, and eat too much; upon this home he
goes with great joy of his Bargain, but he had not gone far, when he found both
Horse and Rider in the Ditch; upon this taking a stricter Survey, he fi^ds his
Palfrey stone-blind, returns to his Jockey and inveighs against him for so
unfriendly a Cheat, who replies thus upon him: If, Sir, I had then thought of
it, that the Horse had lost both his Eyes, I would have scorned to have put him
into so good a Friends hands, but thinking of something else at that time, it
was quite out of my mind. Just such is the Memory of the Author in declaring
Justinian's faults and offenses amongst the Clergy, he would have told what
strange havoc he made amongst them, but that as often as he came to mention
it, it flipt out of his Memory. Of all his faults this was the greatest, it
added Sacrilege to Oppression; his hard usage of other Sects is capable of a
defense; but for a Prince to rob and trample down his own Clergy, it is the
height of Barbarity, and therefore to leave it out in the Description of his
Vices is the exact Story of the blind Horse. But he intended the ill usage of
Pope Silverius, Vigilius, and the African Bishops in the Controversy of the
tria Capitula. This is pure conjecture, especially the guess of the tria
Capitula, which it is evident from the ^ccount that Procopius has given of the
disputes of those times, that he did nor understand. But however I have already
discoursed both that, and the Case of Silverius and Vigilius, and that will be
answer enough to Alemannus his foul surmise of their barbarous treatment. Only
I would advise him and the Roman Courtiers once more not to concern the
Apostolic Chair in the Vindication of Vigilius, but rather to thrust him out
of the List into the Catalogue of the Anti Popes, both because it is confessed on
all hands that he got into the Chair by Usurpation, when it was full already;
and because his Actions were so foul, that no Wit, no Apology, no Candor can
wipe off the Scandal. As for the Reverse of this Calumny, the Emperors
exorbitant kindness and indulgence to the Christian Clergy, I must confess it
was very great to a degree of fondness; we have seen above in his Novels what
Endowments and Privileges he settled upon the Church, what care he took to
secure their settled Revenues, and to protect them against the oppression of
great men. But that he ever run into any Act of Injustice out of Zeal and
partiality to their Interest, we have no one Instance upon Record, the only
thing that can be pretended is his Grant to the Church of Emesa, of the
Prescription of an hundred years, which as this Author tells the Story, Cap. 28.
was a very lewd act of Fraud and Oppression, but then the cheat was put upon
the Emperor, as well as upon the Subjects that suffered by it. It is this, one
Mammianus, a Man of a noble Family and vast Wealth, had long before made the
Church of Emesa his Heir. But it happened that under Justinian one Priscus was
employed to take the census of the Families of that City; who being dexterous
at imitating other Men's hands, and diligently observing the hands of some of
the Ancestors of some of the most wealthy Families, he draws upon them Bills
and Bonds for great sums of Money to Mammianus, these he communicates to the
Procurators of the Church, but because the Law of only 30 years prescription
lay against them; they repair to the Emperor to relieve them in so pious and
charitable a Suit, and he being satisfied with the piety of the Case is easily
prevailed upon to grant to them and all other Churches a power of looking back
to 100 years, whereas before 30 years prescription was a legal Bar to any
claim* Upon this they put all their counterfeit Bonds in suit to the utter ruin
of the best Families in the City. But Longinus a wise and an honest Man that
the Emperor sent thither with a particular Commission to be Judge in this
particular Cause, suspecting some cheat by the vast Sums of Money that were
challenged, he therefore takes Priscus to task, commands him to bring in all
his Bonds, but he refusing it, because that would put an end to the Plot he in
a rage beats him, who upon it fearing that he had discovered his Cheat,
confesses all; and the Emperor being informed of it, and finding by this
example the inconvenience of this Law, that there would be no stopping of
Frauds in behalf of the Church-Estates if they might be allowed to claim
against so many years prescription, he repeals it, and because he would not
utterly spoil his Courtesy, he takes it down from an hundred to forty years,
and that was ten years more than any other Plaintiff was allowed. Now which way
can the Emperor be blamed in all this Transaction, he had no ground to suspect
the imposture, and then it was evident that great sums due to the Church had
been basely embezel'd, and to prevent such Abuses for the time to come he takes
off the usual limits of Prescription in Pleas of this Nature. And yet this
impudent Libeller is so foolishly malicious, as contrary to the circumstances
of his own story, to insinuate, as if the Emperor himself were privy to the
design. Which if he were, how durst Longinus have so disgracefully exposed it,
who if his Master had any such Plot must have been privy to it, because without
him it could not be managed? and therefore when he so rudely spoiled it, that
shows both his own and his Masters ignorance of it, and he was so far from
incurring his displeasure, that he was not long after advanced to the
Prefecture of the City: If we may trust our Author, for otherwise I find no
such Man as Longinus in all Justinian's Reign, and therefore cannot but suspect
the whole story to be mere fiction. But granting its truth, the Emperor is
innocent, and when our Author suggests that he was privy to it, he ought to
have told us how himself came to know the Secret, and so indeed he ought to
have done through his whole history, but to tell us that such prodigious things
were done in the dark and with great secrecy, and give us no account how he
came to know them, is but a very poor way of vouching for an history. These are
the grand Articles of this Libel against this great Prince, for the following
Chapters are little else than the same Rhapsody repeted, and things are heaped
together so confusedly, so without art and decency, as plainly proves, that so
elegant a Writer as Procopius could never have writ it, but that the true
Author was some unpolisht and unlearned Barbarian.

. XXXIII. But though we have little else than mere repetition remaining, yet
there are some few scraps behind, that discover the Author's malice and
ignorance, upon these I shall make some brief reflections and so conclude. And
first what can we think of his ascribing all the public Calamities of the Age,
as Inundations of Rivers, destructions of Cities by earthquakes and Plagues, to
the Emperor and his ill Genius? This Malice is too childish even to be
despised, and it is hard to determine whether it have in it more of spite or
folly, though it has so much of both as forever to destroy that Man's credit,
that could prevail with himself to make and vent such an accusation against any
Man's reputation; such a River over-flowed, and at such a time it thundered, who
can we think was the cause of it but the Empero^ and his evil Genius? O
A^emannus* that thou should satisfy thy self with such a Wretch as this! Is
this stuff to put into an indictment? can you think to beat down the Emperors
towering reputation by such Tales as these? you had been much better advised,
when you first found your Vatican Manuscript, instead of publishing it to the
World with so much satisfaction of Revenge upon the Emperor, to have buried it
in some secret Corner, where it should never have been discovered, for now you
have only brought down reproach and disgrace upon your own head by opposing
such a barbarous Pamphlet to the Glory of all his Actions, and have withal
provoked more ingenuous Men to revive the Memory of his great Name, and make
the unparalled Actions of his Reign though 1100 years old, shine as bright
and look as fresh, as if they had been the Wonders and mighty Works of our own
Age. But however if the Emperor had an ill Genius to bring these Miseries upon
the World, I am sure he had a good one too to make amends, and what breaches
the one made upon any part of the Empire, the other repaired, and left it not
in the power of the bad Genius of any of his Successors to commit the same
Riots again. As the Barbarian might have learnt from the Books de Aedificiis,
had he been duly acquainted with Procopius his genuine Writings.

But in the next place from Prodigies, Cap. 19.
this Grub-street Historiographer, descends to Dreams. Once upon a time a
certain Gentleman thought he saw in his sleep the Emperor standing in the
middle of the Sea, and that he drank it all dry, and then the Rivers, and then
the Kennels, and Common-Shoars, and yet was not satisfied, and then the
Gentleman awaked. Did he so? But was the Author awake when he writ this Story,
and Alemannus when he published it to the World, to deter (as the Preface
declares) Tyrants in after-Ages from imitating Justinian's wicked Actions, when
they see how their own Wickedness will be displayed to Posterity? This dream I
doubt will be of very little use to that purpose. But he set up Monopolies.
Cap. 2^.
What then? some Monopolies are beneficial to the Public, and therefore if our
Author would have made a serious Accusation of it, he ought to have showed in
what Particulars: to monopolize Commodities of common use and necessary to the
life of Man is a great Oppression upon the People, and brings them into the
Estate of the hungry Egyptians under Pharaoh's Monoply of Corn. But when it is
limited to things of Pleasure and Luxury, it is a confinement to Men's Vices,
and gives check to their Follies. This Author gives but one Instance of his
Complaint, Cap. 25.
and that is in the Merchandise of Silks, the Emperor imposing it upon the
Company of Persian and Tyrian Merchants not to vend them, but upon a certain
high price upon Penalty of Proscription of Goods. This was a Law highly useful
to the Commonwealth, for it not only cured the meaner sort of People of their
silken Vanity, but it stopped a great Revenue that went annually out of the
Empire into the Enemies Country, i. e. the Persians. And to prevent that
Mischief for the time to come, De Bello Goth. l. 4. c. 17.
he sent certain Monks into India to discover the Mystery of Silks, who
returned laden with a whole Cargo of Silkworms Eggs, and by that means he set
up that Manufacture within the Empire it self, but how it was established we no
where read.

But he set up two new Officers in the City, Cap. 20.
because the old Magistrates were not enough to execute his Rapine and Cruelty.
One was called the Praetor of the People, to prevent Fires and punish
Burglaries; the other Quaestor, to make inquiry after Sodomy, Adulteries and
false Religions. What then! were not these useful Offices in the Commonwealth?
If they were, what malice is it in this Author to impute the design of their
Institution merely to Rapine? But still his Ignorance keeps pace with his
Malice; for the Praetor was no new Office, but as ancient as Augustus, and by
him styled Prefect of the Watch, but Justinian will have him go by the name of
Praetor, because that was the most honorable Title for all Offices among the
ancient Romans; and this Restitution of that old Word, this ignorant Writer
every where mistakes for the institution of a new Office. But as for the other
Office of Questor, for punishing the Vices mentioned, it is but another fair
cast of his ignorance, for there is no such thing extant in the whole body of
the Imperial Law, nor any where else. There was indeed the Office of a Quaestor
to find out lazy People that would follow no Employment, and force them to
work. This Office, this barbarous Scribler ignorantly ascribes to the fore
mentioned Vices: so utterly unacquainted is he with the true State of Affairs
at that time. But he put unfit Men into that great trust of City Quaestor, to
the great oppression of his Subjects, as Tribonian, Junilus and Constantinus.
But of his great care in the choice of his Officers we have discoursed above,
and if among so great a number of good ones, some few proved corrupt, that is a
Misfortune not to be avoided in this World. Though this is all Tale, for
Tribonian was admired for all his Virtues and good Qualities, only he loved
Money too well. Junilus is a Man never heard of but in this Author, and it is
likely that he should be in so great an Office as this, seven years, and never
be so much as mentioned in any Record, no, not in one Imperial Rescript. To him
succeeds Constantinus a very young Man, not yet so much as called to the Bar.
But this outbids all the rest: For Constantinus was Secretary of State, and one
of the Commissioners for compiling the Code in the third year of Justinian,
whereas Tribonian enjoyed the Prefects Office many years to his dying day,
which Alemannus computes to be in the 21 st year of that Reign; to him succeeds
Junilus, who injoys the Office seven years; now if Constantinus, who followed
both, were so young a Man, that he was not of age to practice the Law, I would
only know of the unlearned Author and his learned Commentator, of what Age he
might be in the third year of Justinian, when he was Secretary of State, and so
eminent for his Skill in the Law, that he was made one of the Commissioners for
its Reformation.

But beside the old Revenue of the Crown he imposed a new heavy Tax commonly
called the Aerial Tribute, Cap. 21.
as if it dropped out of the Air, coming neither from Law nor Custom, this was
collected by the Praefecti Praetorio, and that they might squeeze his Subjects
to purpose, he put the worst Men into that Office, and when they had enricht
themselves by oppression, he siezed all their Wealth into his own Coffers. This
is pure Romance, for there is not the least mention of any such Tribute in any
other Author or Record, and though Alemannus (as himself declares) searched all
the Vatican Manuscripts in quest of it, yet he could never trace any Footsteps
of it in Antiquity. And it is very likely that such a singular Oppression
should pass so unobserved in such a writing Age, as never to be so much as
suggested by any Author but this Barbarian. And as for the Praefecti Praetorio,
that belongs to the old Topic of corrupt Officers and Ministers of State, and
therefore needs no particular Answer, and though Alemannus reckons up 17 or 18
in his reign, yet he can find no more ill Men than Joannes Cappadox, Petrus
Barsames and Addaeus, who was put into the Office in the last year of the
Emperor's life, when he was past business. Though beside these he says there
are diverse others to be found in Evagrius, Agathias, Procopius his other Books,
Theophanes and Suidas. That is his standing figure when he has reckoned up all
the names that he can rake together, to tell us of great numbers of People that
shall be nameless. And whereas the Author adds, that it was the Emperor's
constant Custom to drain these great Officers, when they were well gorged, by
some sham-Accusation; it is so far from truth that he never prosecuted any of
them but Joannes Cappadox, and when he put him from Court, he suffered him to
carry his Wealth along with him.

But he oppressed the honest laboring Farmers. Cap. 23.
As how? why first by never remitting their customary Tribute. Very good, but
if it were due by Custom, then it could be no oppression. And if it be thought
to be too hard upon the Subject, yet I find that the ablest Princes were most
averse to the abatement of their Land-Taxes, and there are several peremptory
Rescripts against it, and therefore if Justinian were so too, he might justify
himself by the Examples of some of his wisest Predecessors, especially
considering the vast Expenses of his Wars, and that a great part of the Empire
paid Contributions to their Enemies. And yet the suggestion is as false as
foolish, when he remitted the ordinary Taxes to the Inhabitants of Palestine
upon the Insurrection of the Samaritans, and made two Christian Bishops his
Surveyors and Judges to determine what abatement was fit and reasonable. And in
the great Plague at Constantinople, De Bello Goth. l. 2.
in which the Rich were reduced to the same state with the Poor, their Servants
and Attendants being swept away, he appoints an Officer to take care of all the
sick, and to supply all that wanted, with Money, and that was a greater
kindness than mere abatement of just dues. But secondly he imposed the Corn-Tax
for the maintenance of his Army, and forced the poor country People to carry
it to the Camp. But alas, this was an old Tax long before Justinian's time,
and there are so many Laws about it in the Imperial History, that nothing but
mere barbarous Ignorance could have derived its beginning from Justinian; and
accordingly Alemannus has voucht it by the Authority of that Ecclesiastic
Romance of Simeon Metaphrastes. Cap. 24.
In the next place the Soldiers were oppressed, and that diverse ways, first he
set Muster-Masters over them, and deducted the 12 th part of every Soldier's
Pay for their Salary. This is pure ignorance, for that Office was ever in the
Army, and its Salary settled without any deduction from the Soldiers, as
appears from his 130 Novel. Secondly the Companies were not full, that is a
common Fault, but then it was the fault of the Officers not the Emperor, who
allowed them full Pay, and then the surplusage of the vacant Places came into
their own Pockets. Thirdly he dismissed his old Soldiers without maing any
Provision for them. This is likely that he should so wholly neglect them, when
he built so many Hospitals for the maintenance of Aged People, in which it is
not to be doubted but his super-annuated Soldiers that had been useful to the
Commonwealth, were preferred in the first place. Fourthly he left the
Frontiers every where unguarded. As we may see by those innumerable Garrisons
and Fortifications that he built round the Empire, to keep out the Incursions
of the Barbarians. It is pretty observable that when in the whole list of
Emperors there were three very eminent for guarding the Frontiers, that is
Constantine, Theodosius the Great, and Justinian, that these should be
particularly branded for leaving them defenseless. It is the head-topick of
Zosimus his fanatic Invectives against Constantine and Theodosius the Great,
and here it is the very Chorus of all our Rhapsodists mournful Ditties. And yet
there was scarce a Garrison upon the Frontiers, that was not built by one of
these Princes, though Justinian stopped every Passage and In-road so
advantageously, that he made the whole Empire but one entire Fortification to
it self. Fifthly from those of the Militia, that refused to go to the Wars he
withdrew their Pay. An heavy Oppression this not to reward idle People, that
refuse to serve their Country. Sixthly he defrauded his Guards of their ^ay.
But why? because, says our Author, they were useless. But if they were, they
deserved no Pay. Lastly he withdrew the quinquennial Donative. If he did,
first to withold a Gift is no Robbery, and secondly he did wisely not to
dispense his Rewards promiscuously, but according to Men's deserts, and to this
purpose he created a new Officer called Extraordinary Quaestor of the Army, to
reward such as did any signal piece of Service, and his Donatives being great
and generous, it made every Soldier forward to signalize himself.

In the next place he oppressed Merchants, Cap. 25.
and spoiled the freedom of Trade. That is to say, when he had built that
convenient Port at Constantinople that commanded the Haven, he took an account
of all Ships out-ward bound, that they might not export the Commodities of the
Empire, but especially Arms to its barbarous Enemies. That is the particular
grievance of this Complaint, the next is the regulation of the silk-trade from
Persia, which we have discoursed above.

The next that were undone were the Lawyers, Cap. 26.
by lessening their Fees and shortning their Proceedings. Then it seems their
Fees were grown too high, and their Proceedings too dilatory, and then it was a
great kindness to the Subjects to reform them. Though Dr. Rive is my Author,
that before Justinian's time the Lawyers never received any Fees from the
Client, but were maintained by Pensions from the public. But he suppressed the
very Physicians and Professors of Learning, i. e. because he enacted so many
kind Laws on their behalf under the Title de Medicis et Professoribus. But then
he abolisht the old Circensian Games and all the other Heathen sports for ever.
Then he made a Reformation, that all good Men had ever desired from the first
settlement of Christianity in the World. Lastly he oppressed the Poor. As appears
by those prodigious Provisions that he made, that there should be no such thing
as Poverty within the Empire; but for the Readers satisfaction or rather
amazement in this matter, I must refer him to the Books de Aedificiis. And now
I hope I have sufficiently vindicated the Reputation of this matchless Prince
against all the malicious Calumnies both of the Libel and the Librarian, so as
to make it appear that it could never be written by Procopius, but by some Man
in the barbarous Ages, that was ignorant of the Customs and Transactions of
that Time, and that the whole Work is nothing but an heap of ignorance, malice
and false-hood. And is proved so by the best and most undoubted Records of that
Age. And I know not what can be done more for the Discovery and Conviction of
an Imposture.

FINIS.
Books lately Published by the Author.
DIsputationes de Deo et Providentia divina. I. An Philosophorum ulli, et
quinam Athei fuerunt. II. A rerum finibus Deum esse demonstratur. III. Epicuri
et Cartesii Hypotheses de Universi Fabricatione evertuntur. IV. Mundum neque
prorsus infectum, neque necessitate factum; sed solo Opificis consilio
extructum fuisse demonstratur. V. A generis humani Ortu, et Corporis humani
structura Deum esse demonstratur. VI. Contr^^ S^epticorum and Academicorum
disciplinam, potissimum Ciceronis de Quaestionibus Academicis libros, et
Cartesii Meditationes Metaphysicas disputatur.
The divine right of the Law of Nature and the Christian Religion. The Case of
the Church of England stated. An Account of the Government of the Christian
Church for the first six Hundred years. Religion and Loyalty, or a
Demonstration of the Power of the Christian Church within it self. The
Supremacy of Sovereign Powers over it. Duty of passive Obedience, or
Non-resistance to all their Commands. Religion and Loyalty. Part the 2 d. or
the History of the Concurrence of the Imperial and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
in the Government of the Church from the beginning of the Reign of Jovian to
the end of the Reign of Justinian.

