THE Vintners Answer TO Some scandalous Phamphlets Published, (as is supposed)
By Richard Kilvert; And abetted in some points, by his Brother Roger, and
Alderman Abel. Wherein the Vintners vindicate their own Reputations to the
world, for satisfaction of all such as know not the said Kilverts Wretched and
lewd conversation, or have credited his foul impudent defamations suggested
against them.

Magna est veritas, and prevalebit.

London, Printed, Anno 1642.

Kilvert charges the Vintners of three things:
1. THat they were Projectors, and contrivers of that Imposition of 40^. per*
Tun, which the King set upon Wines imported in 1637.

2. That they were also actors, and prosecutors of the same, to the grievance
of the Subject, by Farming the same, by taking 1 d. and 2 d. per quart, upon
the consumtion of Wines above the due price, by obtaining other illegal
things, etc.

3. That in all these things they had a covetous desire of enriching
themselves, and that by these means they have greatly enriched themselves.

But it is to be noted, that in these points of Accusation, Kilvert is himself
a Delinquent, and was first accused; and yet though he act but the part of a
Recriminator against the Vintners, he takes upon him to be a competent Accuser,
and takes advantage against them, to take away the validity of their testimony,
as being by him pronounced guilty.

It is apparent also, that both Kilvert and Alderman Abel do recriminate the
more confidently, because the Vintners are a confiderable body, and supposed
able to make great restitution to the Commonwealth, if they can any way taint
their innocence, and lay them open for Delinquents; yet both are no^ equally
furious.

The substance of that which Alderman Abel says, is; That that this Project was
first contrived at Court, and for diverse years urged upon the Vintners, and yet
ever repulsed, and never consented too, till 1637. And then he being Master of
the Vintners Company, (diverse of them being then prosecuted in Star Chamber)
was requested by them, to redeem them from ruin. And thereupon, whatsoever he
undertook, was merely to preserve his Company, and for no other ends; and that
he had no benefit by it, nor aimed at any, nor did effect any thing, but with
the consent, and by the authority of the generality of Vintners.

Kilvert being (...) man endued with more boldness, makes no scruple to
allege further, That it appears by the Acts and Orders of their own Court,
that they were the plotters and contrivers of that Imposition. He instances in
the Act of 6 Nov. 1637. and the 22 of the same, when the Company consented to
treat of, and to admit the Imposition; and he says, That from thenceforth the
whole Project was managed by the Company in open Court at their Hall, and the
major part of Vintners were present at those Courts, and did consent by holding
up of hands. He instances in the 7 of Febr. 1637. when the Company appointed
ten Contractors to seal to the King; and in the 13 of Febr. when Griffith by
Letter gave instructions how to covenant. He says he was no Patentee, nor
issued money in the business, nor was at the Vintners Hall, till the Project
was concluded and petitioned for.

The substance of that which the Vintners reply hereunto, is; That the
Imposition cannot be said to be contrived, or plotted in Nov. 1637. or after
Nov. which was in being long before, much less can the Vintners be supposed to
be the contrivers and plotters of that, which for diverse years before they had
opposed and withstood at their own great peril and prejudice.

That whosoever the contrivers and plotters were in the conception, yet if the
Midwifery and Nurcery of Kilvert and Alderman Abel had not given it birth, and
growth afterward in the world, it must needs have proved Abortive.

That in 1632. an Imposition of 4 l. per Tun was solicited by some of the Kings
Ministers; and in 1633. my Lord Treasurer Weston was urgent to bring the same
to pass; but the Vintners not submitting thereto, an extra judicial Decree in
Star Chamber was procured, prohibiting Vintners to dress meat, and restraining
them from diverse benefits of their Trade; and this was prepared as a lash to
overawe them, and either to abate their courage in opposing, or to diminish
their power.

That my Lord Cottington, and some other Lords did enforce the same Imposition;
and that my Lord of Dorset pitying their condition, and thinking them not
sufficiently knowing of their own state, was so open and plain, as to tell
them, It was folly in Travelers, to deny their purses to Robbers upon the way,
and to draw harm upon themselves thereby, when they had no sufficient force,
either to defend their purses, or their own persons: And having so told them,
he applied it further, and swore it was their own case.

That this Decree being so formidable in those injurious times, and so many
great men so intentive to make use of it, in 1634. The Vintners did furnish for
the Kings use, 6000 l. upon a promise to be secured from the Decree, and to
have their due Privileges confirmed in Dec: following, and they obtained a
Warrant from the Councell-Table to that effect; and some of them being not
fully satisfied with that dilatory Warrant, my Lord of Arundels words were,
Will you not be satisfied with the word of a King?

That till Dec: aforesaid, the Company remained quiet and unmolested, but then
seeking the promised assurance, their answer from the Lords was, That the King
wanted more money, which if they would supply, more then had bin promised
should be performed, and the Imposition was again pressed.

That the Vintners not yet yielding to the Imposition, the force of the Decree
was inculcated, and the promised assurance was denied, the 6000 l. lent was
detained, and used only as a bait to draw them further on, and to entice them
into the Project.

That other great suits then hanging in Star Chamber to be solicited by
Kilvert, the Vintners enjoyed some rest till 1636. and then diverse of them were
vexed upon the Decree; and in April following Kilvert made his open boast, that
the Bishop of Lincolns case being once ended, he would immediately set himself
to prosecute the Vintners upon the Decree.

The Alderman Abel being Sheriff Elect of London before Midsummer, 1636. by
right whereof, according to the City custom, he was to be chosen Master of the
Vintners, he refused it, pretending that he should be better able to serve the
Vintners after the expiration of his Shrievalty.

That at Midsummer, 1637. Alderman Abel took upon him to be Master of the
Company, his Shrievalty expiring at Michaelmas following, the Bishop of
Lincolns trial being end^d about the same time, both he and Kilvert had good
leisure to join, and to combine about the business of Vintners.

That from Feb. and Hill. Term next, before the Vintners having been examined
upon oath in Star Chamber, and confessed the dressing of Meat, etc. contrary to
the Decree, there was nevertheless no further proceeding in Easter, or Trin.
Term against them; but in Sept. following, both Kilvert and the Alderman being
at leisure, they had meetings and conferences, as themselves confess, and then
at the Aldermans house Kilvert imparted it, that he had Warrant from the King,
to solicit against all Vintners, as well those that had given over their
Trade, as others, for breach of the Decree; and that Marq. Hamilton had power
from the King, to treat with some of the Company touching His Majesty's
pleasure therein.

That upon the 25 of October. following, at a Court of Assistance Alderman Abel
made this Overture known, and with great passion set forth the danger of the
whole Company, whereupon some were selected to make their address to M.
Hamilton, and to negotiate that affair.

That upon 31 October. they which had attended M. Hamilton, reported to the
Assistants, that it was communicated to them from the Marq. that the King
expected an Imposition but to be agreed upon by Committees, indifferently to be
appointed both by the King and Vintners; and that in respect of the same
Imposition, the Vintners should re-tail Wines dearer by especial grace, and
withal obtain confirmation of former Privileges, and a grant of further
benefits.

That the Marq. did impart his private advice for their yielding herein,
because though the Delinquents Fines were given him, yet he confidering that
the ruin of diverse private men, would not so much enrich the Kings coffers,
was willing to attend the Kings favor in some other suit, so that the
Imposition might be condiscended to, for the Kings greater profit, and the
Vintners better safety.

That hereupon a general Courts was called on Nov. 6. 1637. wherein much was
labored by Kilvert and the Alderman, both by fair promises and sharp threats,
to induce to the Imposition: It was promised, that the King would pardon all
former delinquencies, that the Vintners should have His Majesty's especial
favor, and by the same enjoy not only former immunities, but further
Privileges also, and for ever be made a glorious Company; That they should
dress and sell Victuals, Tobacco, Beer, Sugar, etc. That they should be free
from Informers, and have power to restrain the encroachments of the Coopers. On
the other side, as Benefit was the bait, so Terror was the hook, and
Destruction in the next place was laid before them; In case they did reject the
Imposition, it was menaced, that they should be prosecuted upon the Decree,
perplexed with Informers, disabled for their Trade, that the King was
unalterably resolved to have this Imposition, whether they assented, or no;
That if the Vintners were rich, the King would not be poor; That he would as
soon lose his Crown land, as this benefit, that Wines being a foreign Commodity,
the Law allowed the King to impose upon it at pleasure; that it was also in the
Kings power to suppress all but 40 Vintners in London, and that good Council
had so resolved it; And the Aldermans Conclusion was, Shall I see my Company
dug up by the roots, my Brethren ruined in the Star Chamber, and the cankerly
Cooper between the bark and the tree eat up all?

That these things being so represented to the Generality in those times of
violence, the main body voted rather to comply with the King by furnishing
another present sum, then by this Imposition, and 10000l. was nominated; but
both Kilvert and the Alderman called some of them out, and upbraided them as
beggars, not able to pay what had been formerly levied for the King, and at
last concluded, That the King expected, and would have more yearly then such a
sum. And so the Question at last being put after long contestation, Whether
they would stand out any longer against the Imposition, upon such t^rms, or
comply with the King, in choosing and authorizing a Committee to treat of the
manner of an Imposition; the Generality did choose to comply so far, and to
appoint a Committee.

That this Act of Court were not so main an Evidence for Kilvert, and fit to be
so often insisted upon, if it were not mis-alleaged, and mis-applyed; for if
the major part of Vintners did appear, and consent, yet they were persuaded,
threatened, entreated, but did neither persuade, threaten, nor entreat; and they
consented to comply with the King, and did not use means that the King might
comply with them, as Kilvert most maliciously inverts it; and their compliance
was in appointing Committees to treat of an Imposition, but not absolutely to
submit to it; and if they had absolutely yielded, yet all circumstances
considered, it ought not to be held a voluntary yielding, but such a violent
one, as the Sea-mans is in a Tempest, when he submits to the weather, and
chooses rather to cast away all his wares, then himself, and ship, and all.

That on 22 Nov. following at another general Court the Committees reported
what the Kings demands were, and the Generalities assent being questioned, it
was assented that the Committees might yield to 40s. per Tun, provided that
they might be assured to have from His Majesty the immunities and benefits
proposed and expressed, and that all this were just and good in Law; (but
indeed these words concerning legality are not entered in the Hall-book.)

That this Act of Court, if it be taken most strongly against the Vintners,
though it be Kilverts prime engine, yet it evinces no more, but that they
submitted to the Kings demands urged upon them, as has been said; and since
they had no power to hold out against it any longer, they provided for some
helps to enable them to bear it, and those also no other, but such as had been
proposed, and expressed to them; not such as they had greedily gaped after; the
Book it self will justify in that, and indeed the benefits and immunities were
inconsiderable to the Vintners, such as had no great reality in them, nor had
they any belief in the obtruders of them, nay they know they were obtruded
rather to make them guilty, then to make them gainers; setting aside exemption
from the rigor of Star Chamber, they would willingly have forgone all promised
privileges, and given great sums of money besides, to be delivered from the
Imposition.

That it is extreme malice and falsehood in Kilvert so to allege and
mis-recite this Act, as if it had no relation to former violence and
constraint; or as if it amounted to a mere request, nay to a Project in the
Vintner; as if his end had been to oppress the Cooper, and to Monopolize the
retayling of Wines through the whole Kingdom; or as if the words did testify of
the Vintners demands, and propositions, and requests, and not the direct
contrary.

That the Vintners are not destitute of further answers also; For first, the
major part, and better sort of drawing Vintners were not that day present at
the Hall, the business was so far disaffected, and they in opposing it had
been so far wearied out and worried (as it were) by Kilvert and the Alderman,
that they did forbear any longer to appear, nothing being there expected, but
checks, affronts, and disgraceful usage, and therefore the most part which
appeared that day, was of Suburbian retaylers, poor men, and such as dealt in
Rundlets, and such as faction had drawn in for a good number of them. Secondly,
of such as did then appear the more loud and turbulent part, carried it, rather
than the major part of able and modest men. Thirdly, Those of the better sort
which did give their consent, did it not with any true liking to the project,
but merely to avoid ruin in the Star Chamber. For the shipwreck of the
Sope-boylers, and others, was then fresh, and in view, and that Court had then
gotten them the same repute, as a Timariots horse has in Turkey, where they say
no grass ever grows, after the impression of his fatal hoof. Fourthly, the
entry of that days Act is much to be suspected, as well as many others, for
many passages then intervened, to which the world is not now privy: for first,
All Courts of generality were called by the Beadle, in the Kings name, a form
of summons never before used, and had now been useless, if the generality, out
of distaste to the business, had not been unwilling to appear; and if the
Alderman and Kilvert had not been very eager in obtruding upon the Company
against their liking. Secondly, Diverse other Courts were called both before and
after the 6 and the 22 of Nov. wherein the generality dissenting and disavowing
the Project* and alleging many reasons of illegality, and inconvenience in it*
no entrance is remaining thereof, nor memory of any such Courts held; and yet if
any such remembrances were now extant, they would testify for the Vintners
against the Projectors, and plainly discover who they were that pursued, and
who that rejected the design. Thirdly, Kilvert has no regard at all to the
true reciting of such acts as are remaining in the Clerks Book, but to the
perverting of justice, satisfies in all his allegations. Fourthly, The Acts
themselves were not always rightly entered. Sometimes the Clerk was checked and
overawed, sometimes entries were made contrary to his liking, and without his
privity, some things being omitted, and some inserted, and some wrested, and
mis-sensed; so that indeed the acts are more properly Kilverts, than the
Companies. The Book says always, that the major part of Vintners did always
appear, and the major part of the Appearance consent, but this was seldom so.
And the major part did never consent, but with this Proviso, That the thing
consented too was legal, and warranted by Counsel; but this was never entered.
And upon the 25 of Oct. 1637. Committees were appointed to treat with Marquess
Hamilton; but the Book adds, Concerning the advance of the prices of Wines, and
this is merely suppositious. Fifthly, Many of the Vintners were practiced and
tampered withal, especially the meaner sort, and many of the better sort were
over-powred, and born down by might and threats, and singled out from the rest.
For example, Nov. 22. Mr. Rogers, and Mr. Mason being opposers of the
Imposition, were not only controlled in public, as obstinate men, and
ill-willers to the Kings servic, but it was commanded to be entered in the Hall
Book, as a great delinquence, and there is still remains registered: and this
being not sufficient, the same men were the same day sent for by the Beadle, to
the Castle Tavern in Paternoster Row, where Kilvert and the Alderman dined, to
receive further rebuke and insolent usage: and this was for example to
disanimate the rest. For Alderman Abel, as he was an Alderman of London, and
Master of the Company of Vintners, and assisted with Kilverts infinite wiles
and impostures, and as he had to do with a distracted body of men of several
minds and qualities, holding no perfect intelligence one with another; and as
he was at that time of unsuspected faith, and in their good opinion, and as he
had the advantage of those projecting times, and influence from some great
persons of honor, and above all, the Kings name to make use of in all his
pretenses, had strange advantages to betray his brethren, and bring about his
own purposes. Sixthly, besides disadvantages common to other Tradesmen, the
Vintners were diverse other ways also liable to the lash, and obnoxious to
injuries; for by the Statute, the Lords had a power to set the re-tailing
prices of Wines so, as that they might undo the Vintners at pleasure, if they
would not submit to the Imposition; and they did lay hold of this power to this
purpose, causing them to sell cheaper then they could well afford, and that
year when the Imposition was first consented too, fearing lest the Vintners
should recede and retract, they set the prices lower, and raised them after,
but not till all things were made sure. Moreover, to affright the Vintners
further, it was represented to them, that by the Law the King might suppress
all but 40 Taverns; that he had right to impose upon foreign commodities, and
that dressing of Meat, selling Tobacco, etc. were not undoubtedly belonging to
their Trade, so that their case would be more desperate then the Sope-boilers,
or the Irish planters, and these yet in Star Chamber had fallen without mercy.
Seventhly, all these indirect passages notwithstanding, there is scarce above
one general Court, wherein the Imposition was consented to, most of the other
passages of preparing, ripening and perfecting the Project, were translated by
Courts of Assistance, and at such Courts it is sufficient if 12 besides the
Master be present, and the major part of those 12 sufficiently ingages the
whole Company. And it is to be noted, that it seldom happened at those Courts,
that there were present above five or six drawing Vintners, and of those also,
some were the Aldermans creatures: For Example, on 27 Nov. 1637. a draught of a
Petition was presented, there were then 15 Assistants, of those there were
only five drawing Vintners, all the rest had given over their Trades, or were
of other Trades, though free of the Company, and many of them were liable to
many other exceptions, and yet these referred that weighty business to be
proceeded in by any three of the Committees, the Master being one, so that if
the Alderman could procure any two to join with him, that junto was sufficient
to dispatch all; and by this means the Aldermans house was the place, and the
Alderman himself, with some of his privadoes, was the man, where, and by whom
diverse important matters were expedited. And at some times the Alderman alone
was sufficient, for 1000l. was given to Kilvert, and 3000l. to Marq. Hamilton
out of the Companies purse; but there is no Act of Court remaining, to show by
what authority these moneys were disposed, nor does the Generality understand
any thing thereof, but that the Aldermans authority was solely effectual in
that business. Eighthly, Kilvert, the most fatal of all false-Informers, the
most mischievous of all Projectors, the most impudent of all Impostors, was
introduced to sit at the Vintners Hall in Court, there to act the Lions and
Foxes part, and when that grew odious to many, he was by an adoption of mere
formality, made free of the Company, that he might insult and insinuate the
more, and by his Mercuriall trumperies prove more fruitful in mischief. And
though he denies to have been at Vintners Hall till the creation of the
Project, yet he was there often, and that before, at, and after the 22 of Nov.
for that very day it was that he so upbraided Mr Rogers and Mr Mason at the
Hall, and dining after in Paternoster Row, expressed himself in more insolent,
and taunting language. Ninthly, when the Generality was drawn together by the
Kings command, they were caused ever to attend below diverse hours till the
Alderman and his party had framed and debated the business, the Generality had
no share in the discussion of matters, it was sufficient for them to authorize
and own what the privadoes had before discussed; and if any private man
complained hereat, or took upon him to debate any thing by them resolved, he
was singled out, and treated as an enemy to the King and his service; for
example, Tho. Cox was so treated in open Court, and Mr Rowland Wilson was
convented also before the Marquess, and by him terrified, and taxed as the
Kings opposite. Tenthly, when the Company did not appear in so full a body as
was thought fit by Abel and Kilvert, the business it self not being more
displeasing, then the carriage of it, notice was taken thereof especially about
Nov. 1637. and that the absent might be known, the names of such as were
present were taken upon command; and this manifests how many wished ill to the
Project, and how few were active in the consummating of it. Eleventhly, as
Kilvert and the Alderman had too much influence in entering acts, so they had
the like in suppressing and taking away all such papers and Notes, as might arm
and enable the Vintners for a fuller and clearer defense. For example, a
Petition, and a Schedule of diverse unlawful demands annexed in Nov. 1637. is
charged upon the Vintners; whereas there is no copy of either remaining in the
Hall-book, or in the Clerks hands, Kilvert must be the only Register in this
case against his Adversaries, and though they can prove, that they never fully
agreed upon any Petition, and that which was presented to them, was by him
altered in matters of pertinence, contrary to the liking of the Vintners, yet he
still charges them upon his own papers, by himself penned, and by himself
preserved. Twelfthly, to give instances, what slavery and treachery the
Vintners lived under, two only shall serve: There was 6000l. to be repayd to
the Company; out of this the Alderman would deduct 2000l. issued for the use of
Marquess Hamilton, and Kilvert, and so there was two thirds due to the
Company; but they could never receive above 12s. in the pound, whieh is not a
full thirds; the Aldermans pleasure was sufficient to discharge them of the
rest, and against that they were utterly remediless. And next, the Alderman
being entrusted to see Counsel about the legality of the Imposition and the
Farm, he pretended to be assured by Counsel, of the legality of both beyond
all doubt, and yet he had contrary counsel given him.

All this almost which has been hitherto related, Kilvert passes over, and as
if the Imposition had never bin thought on till Nov. 1637. there he finds out
the source of it, and then he makes the Vintners the first seekers and plotters
of it. But because in Nov. the 6, and 22. there is no pregnant proof that the
Vintners solicited for the Project, nor no mention is of any Petition, till
Nov. 27. there he lays his principal charge; for to that Petition he annexes
a Schedule, containing 11 immunities; and these he entitles, The humble desires
of the retaylers of Wines: and these are (as his words express) the very
Project it self.

The Vintners hereunto answer:

That as the Imposition was before violently enforced till they did submit, so
the Petition was now as subtly obtruded, that they might seem to do more then
submit.

That the Vintners at the first proposing of a Petition, did cry out against
it, both as unnecessary, and unreasonable; Unnecessary, because without any
Petition, the King might in honor, justice, and conscience, without any
Petition grant, what he had voluntarily offered for his own profit; and if he
would not, the matter to them was of little importance: Unreasonable, because
they should now seem greedy of that, which they had so long withstood, and knew
to be destructive to themselves, and would yet, if they might be permitted, at
any rate possible, ransom themselves from.

That Kilvert hereupon assured them, that the Petition could not engage them in
any guilt, or besmear them in any crime, that it was only framed as best
beseeming the Majesty of a Prince, to whom no other address could seem
congeable, and in that form wherein it was then presented, it did intimate the
40^. per Tun, demanded by the King, and the other immunities offered to the
Vintners without any seeking, or solicitation on their part; and the Kings
promise was the ground of its prayer.

That Kilvert intending, as it seems, to pull out the hot Chestnut out of the
fire with the Monkeys paw, rather then his own, as the crafty beast did in the
Fable, did nevertheless alter the Petition to the inverting of the sense of
it, and that contrary to Mr. Shaws advice, and did new transcribe it in
contrary words, leaving no Act thereof in the Clerks book, to testify the
effect of it; nor do the Vintners yet know whether it was ever presented to the
King or no, or what reference it had, or how far that reference was pursued.

That this Petition therefore, and its appendant Schedule, ought not to be
esteemed as the act of the Vintners, but as Kilverts, nay as Kilvert criminous
act, being no less then Forgery, and that of a mischievous nature; the
Vintners thereby being not only drawn into damage, but crime also.

Another thing alleged against the Vintners, to make them guilty of projecting
this Imposition, is Griffiths Letter in Feb. following.

But to this the Vintners answer:

That Griffiths Letter giving instructions how to manage the Farm, could be no
contrivance or projection of the Imposition; for Kilvert himself says, that he
was not at Vintners Hall before the Project was petitioned for, and concluded;
and it is manifest, that he was at the Hall in Nov. before, and therefore this
is a mere contradiction, wherein he confounds times far distant, that he may
thereby confound things as far different. That which had been the laborious
business of so many years before, and the task of so many great Counselors of
State, and the design of so rare an Engineer as Kilvert, and had been brought
to such maturation before Feb. cannot now be attributed to Griffiths Letter,
dated in Feb.

2. But Kilvert says, That the Vintners were not only the inventers and
projectors of the Imposition, but in the second place, they were also many
ways actors and prosecutors of the same, viz. by Farming it, by sealing the
Quad: Indenture, by taking 1d. and 2d. per Quart, above the just prices, etc.

The Vintners answer; and first, as to the Farm:

That the Farm of the Imposition for 8 years, was obtruded upon the Vintners,
nor for that it was likely to prove beneficial to them, but for that they were
the fittest men to bring in the Kings Rent, and could collect it with the least
noise and disturbance in the world, and with least opposition and violence
amongst the Vintners: for if the Kings Rent had been to be demanded and exacted
by his own immediate Officers, or by any other Tenants and Farmors of any other
Trade, the Vintners Cellars must have been searched by strangers, and many
occasions of tumult and strife must have happened, whereby great clamours and
troubles might have been raised in the Commonwealth, to the greater scandal of
Projects. And the same was then apparent in the Sope-boylers case; for whilst
that Project was managed by strangers, and the old Sope-boylers would not
comply, the whole State almost was shaken with the outcries and distresses of
many undone Families, and the Projectors gained less, and vexed the subject
more.

That as the example of the Sope-boylers case thriving so ill till the old
Company did submit, was a motive in Kilvert, to press, and by force to drive
the Vintner the more to a submission, so the example of the Sope-boylers case,
the old Company suffering so much, and groaning so long under such grievous
things till it did yield, was a motive to the Company of Vintners, to make them
yield the sooner: and therefore, upon the 7 of Feb. 1637. after some
contestation notwithstanding; and after it had been opened, that Sir Abraham
Daws had offered above 40000 l. for it, the question being put to the
Generality, Whether they would farm the Imposition at 30000 l. per annum, they
did consent thereto; and for the Kings further satisfaction, since he would not
contract with the Generality, they did agree to nominate 10 Contractors.

That they were first advertised, notwithstanding that the mere renting of the
Kings Imposition was not contrary to Law, nor could they imagine, that since
the State would be less grieved and perturbed, if they rented it rather then
any other men, it could be held any disservice, either to the Subject, or the
King.

That if any miscarriage were in the manage of the Farm, that is wholly to be
ascribed to Alderman Abel, and some few of his privadoes, who did ingrosse the
whole power therein, and benefit thereof to his sole use, and admitting some
Farmors or sub-farmors to bear the name thereof, yet they had, nor enjoyed
nothing else but the mere name; and if they were admitted for any purpose at
all, it was to bear loss and blame, and to countenance the Aldermans tyranny,
or to be responsible for his injustice, to this purpose they were more than
nominall, titular Farmors, but to all purposes of benefit they were shadows,
clphers, and mere empty Names.

That the Vintners expected no benefit from the beginning to arise to them out
of the Farm, nor could hope for any other dealing from the Alderman, then what
they found; for they knew well, that if Sir Abraham Daws had offered more then
40000 l. and was refused, it was not out of any favor to them, but out of some
other end upon them. And they had some cause to fear, that if it proved a
bargain of profit to the Farmors, the Rent being once settled by their
compliance, the King might avoid his grant, and if it proved a bargain of
loss, then their own deed should be strongly urged against themselves: and
howsoever it proved, they knew the Alderman would have the shuffling, cutting
and dealing, all in his own hands; and that they should have, nor Law, nor
right, nor remedy, besides his mere pleasure and discretion.

That the Aldermans trains and traps from the beginning, were very gross, and
rank, and obvious to the dullest capacities; for though the Patent of the Farm
were not sealed by the King, nor did commence till Midsummer after, yet he had
chosen himself Treasurer, and taken a house, and settled Officers, and
sallaries, and removed his habitation before Lady Day. And though this
business of the Farm was no such adventure as did require any stock at all, or
bank of money, yet for other sinister ends, he demanded no less then 30000l. to
be undertaken for by the farmors, and a good considerable part thereof he did
gather in, and receive into his own hands, and diverse men being therefore
unwilling to come in as undertakers, he used extremities to draw them in: For
example, Mr Leechland being fearful, and unwilling to undertake, he was forced
and hunted in by the Alderman, and that place which he held under the King, was
threatened to be taken away; and he had not undertaken any thing in the Farm,
had it not been for fear of losing his place: And for another Example, Mr
Rowland Wilson was as much solicited to come in for an adventure, but refused,
and could never be won by any means whatsoever to join in the Farm.

That the 7 Allegations set down in the Aldermans paper, whereby he would prove
the 10 Farmors, and the 27 Sub-farmors equally interessed in the Farm with
himself, are not sufficient to prove the same.

For first, the Act of 29 March, 1638. does not prove, that his office of being
Treasurer, and his stipend of 500l. per annum was settled by the Company of
Vintners, when it is evident, that he had taken a house for that purpose, and
removed from Billeter-lane, and settled all things before Lady Day.

Secondly, the bringing in of 100 l. for every undertaker, when the adventure
required no such supply, can manifest nothing but the Aldermans tyranny and
treachery: and for the 30000 l. he subscribed men's names as he pleased, they
themselves did neither condition to be engaged for such sums, nor did they
underwrite to such conditions, and the truth is, that money which was gleaned
from the 37. though it was intended by the Alderman, as a hook to hold them in,
and engage them the faster; yet nothing was pretended, but a mere loan, and
therefore the Alderman paid them Interest according to their several
proportions, although he gave no Obligations for the same.

Thirdly, the major part of Undertakers were not present, or consenting to the
choice of Alderman Abel for Treasurer, and they which were present, and
consenting (besides some of his own privadoes) were but lookers on, and did but
only agree to that, which they had no power to frustrate.

Fourthly, those of the Adventurers, which did ride about to settle the
Imposition in the Country, and in the Out-ports, did it in obedience to
Warrants from the Lords of the Council, and to the Aldermans commands; and
though they were spectators, or assistants, yet they did but execute the
Aldermans and Kilverts Instructions, and were as merely isntrumental to them,
as they seemed to be to the King; for Example, Kilvert rode to Bristow, and
other Western parts, and though he went attended with some others of the
Undertakers, yet he, as from the Kings own mouth, took the boldness to treat
with all men, and that in very imperious terms; and when all his intimations
from the King would not prevail to make Bristow men, etc. submit, he at last
threatened them with the Star Chamber, and detected them of false Measures, and
so as a mere Informer, reduced them in the end to subjection.

Fifthly, those Acquittances which some of the Adventurers signed, have words
in them inserted by the Alderman, merely to confess a Partnership, and an
equal interest in the Adventure, without which, the Alderman would not restore
them their sums adventured, do signify nothing but the Aldermans craft and
injury; for it was after a Parliament summoned, and as he drew the Acquittances
for his own safety, so some of the Adventurers perceived his aim, and would not
sign the same, but chose rather to leave their money still deposited in his
hands.

Sixthly, those 34 Farmors which did consent to the buying in of the
Wine-licenses on 15 Nov. 1639. were drawn in, and cozned by the Alderman, for
he had bought them before, and found loss in them, and now by his
uncontrolable power he would force them upon his pretended Partners; and at the
same time he arrogated a right to himself, of turning out all such as would not
join therein, and did use threats to the same purpose.

Seventhly, that Petition which was drawn upon the approaching of this
Parliament, and signed by 28 of the Undertakers, for the discharging and
rendering up of the ^arm, was framed chiefly for the Aldermans impunity, and he
was the Author, and Solicitor in it to draw in others; and by his means it was
also moved at the Hall to the whole Company, that they would concur in the
same, and it was to this intent, that they might seem as much interested in it
as he, and he as little guilty as they.

That all these shifts and wiles of the Alderman and his faction make it very
clear, that the ten Farmors, and their under Farmors were not so in truth, but
merely Nominall, that they might suffer for and with the Alderman, if any
hazard or question were; for the Alderman made a great benefit of it: and being
indebted, and of weak estate before, by this Farm he has got a great estate,
and enabled himself for one purchase of 17000l. whereas the Farmors and
sub-Farmors, never received one penny benefit, nor had any account given them
in so long a time for it, nor had any assurance in Law, under hand or Seal,
whereby to call him to account, or to recover, or claim any thing upon account.
And as the Alderman did in Law keep all the power in his own hands, so in fact
also he did exercise that power after an arbitrary unlimited way; at some times
he openly told them, that they had no right nor interest in the Farm, but at
his mere discretion and pleasure, and that he could turn out, or take in, as he
listed; and at other times he did, upon private displeasures, put out, and
lessen some in their shares, and, upon fancy, put in, and raise others; and all
these things were transacted at his own house, by his own authority; and that
was so unquestionable, and uncontrolable, that no man thought fit to stir, or
move any thing against it.

That as all this and more may be maintained in defense of the Farmors, so more
yet may be maintained in the behalf of the 27 sub-Farmors; for the 10 Farmors
did some things without the knowledge of the 27, and have since exhibited a
Bill against the 27, to make them liable to some moneys disbursed by them, but
they are overruled, and left remediless in the case; and the 10 were first
drawn in and workt upon by the Aldermans craft; and they being the richest men
of the Company, the Alderman could not so easily have effected his ends, nor
deceived others, if he had not first deceived them.

The next thing pressed against the Vintners, to make them guilty of the
Imposition, is the sealing of the Quadri: Indenture, and agreeing to the
unlawful covenants thereof.

The Vintners answer hereunto, is;

That they having with great reluctance yielded their backs to the sore
pressure of the Imposition in Nov. 1637. conceived* That a sufficient
consummation of that affair, and hoping that the King would thereupon provide
for their delivery out of Star Chamber, and an open liberty of their trading,
did not see cause to seek for any further Deeds or Covenants to be drawn, from
them to the King, or from the King to them, much less from either to the
French and Spanish Merchants.

That it was the only policy of Kilvert and the Alderman, to have recourse to
Petitions or Indentures; for as they had taken order for their own benefit
before, in drawing the Vintners to an unvoluntary submission in Nov. so now
they would take order for their impunity, by drawing further acts of more
voluntary submissions, in show from the Vintners; before they had engaged only
their tongues, now they would engage their hands and Seals, and leave them no
retreit: before they had made them stoop to the Kings ends, now they should
seem to intend only their own; for it was now represented, that their grant to
the King was sure and perfect, but the Kings grant to them must require further
ceremony in Law, and supplication besides. And by this means the Vintners were
to be made, not only losers, but culpable also, and the Projectors having
first taken the Vintners bread, to put it into their own mouths, now take out
the thorn also out of their own hands, to thrust it into the Vintners.

That upon 15 March, 1637. when the Covenants concerning the Merchants were
first proposed to the Vintners, they were cried down as unjust, and prayed
against, and were not till the 21 of Mar: settled, and that by the interposition
of the Lord Treasurer, Marquess Hamilton, and the Attorney General.

That notwithstanding the unapproved settlement, no draught of the Quad:
Indentures were showed at the Hall to be examined and scanned till long after,
neither was the Company ever fully satisfied therein, or knew if any true copy
thereof was produced, or how it was after altered; nor did they agree, till the
16 of June following, that their common Seal should be taken forth, and set
thereto; nor do they know whether it was set thereto, or by whom, or when.

That the Quad: Deed, bearing date the 19 of June, 1638. was not sealed by any
particular Members of the Company, till Sept. following, and then those which
did seal it with their private Seals, were drawn ignorantly to the Atturneys
chamber for that purpose, and persuaded to it by the Alderman, as a thing of
mere form, and of no dangerous consequence at all: and since it had commenced,
and taken effect before, they do not yet know what vigor their seals superadded
to it, or to what purpose their seals were required, except it were to make
them criminous, contrary to the Aldermans fearful oaths.

That since the Quad: Indenture did not occasion or precede the Imposition, but
was occasioned, and preceded by the Imposition, and since it was in part
compulsive, and an effect of those calamitous, irregular times; and since the
Aldermans fraud was so notorious in it, he putting in the names of whom he
pleased, and some of those also having yet never sealed, and he having the
common seal of the Company in his sole custody, and kept the same a long time
after Midsummer, when another Master was chosen in his place; The Vintners hope
to be excused, it not a Toto, yet a Tanto.

That since the same Indentures were drawn also by the Kings Council, in whose
judgment and responsibility, the Vintners had reason to confide; and since
they were urged upon the Vintners for the Kings advantage, or the Merchants,
and not sought for by the Vintners for their behoof: and since the Vintners
grant to the King, could not entitle him to any undue thing, or prejudicial to
any but themselves: and since the Kings grant to them, as to any unjust
purpose, might be avoided at pleasure, and was known to be voydable: and since
there was no aim in the Vintners, to obtain any thing from the King but due
impunity, and liberty of Trading: and whatsoever was thrust in further, was
only to make them guilty, and plotted and acted merely by the Projectors: and
since the Vintners never did enjoy more than a free Trade, and exemption from
ruin in Star Chamber, but were rather hindered in their Trade, and
discountenanced after: and since it is manifest, That the Projectors in all
those inserted illegal Covenants, had never any respect to the good of the
Vinters, or intnent that they should enjoy them; They humbly, yet cheerfully,
submit herein their Case to the censure of all good men.

The next thing objected by Kilvert, as an execution and pursuance of the
Project, is, The taking of 1d. and 2d. per quart by the Vintner, upon the
consumption of Wines: and this is charged as an exaction, and injurious to the
Subject.

For answer hereunto, the Vintners say,

First, That the necessity of those times was so irresistible, that without
taking 1d. and 2d. per quart, they could not Trade; and without Trading they
could not subsist, for the Imposition was exacted at the Custom House; and
without paying it, they could get no wine, though they would have resisted it;
and the question was only, whether they would take the advance in the retayl,
or starve themselves and their families. And the Vintners can make it appear,
That the Shipscot was not drawn on with more violence and subtilty, nor no
project, then this; and yet if all delinquents in all such violent and subtle
proiects, were now questioned, it would shake the foundations of the State, and
disturb the common peace.

Secondly, that they never took for their Wines, but according to the prices
set by the Lords, and that such taking is justifiable by the Statute; for if
any injury thus was done, it was done by the Lords, in setting the prices
contrary to the meaning of the Statute; and to do this, the Lords were not
solicited by the Vintners, nor can they conceive it to be, by so inconsiderable
a Company, or to have any respect to the benefit of such a poor Incorporation.
But it is manifest, that they respected the Kings benefit, and were officious
therein, and that much against the Vintners will, and that thereby they had a
great power to effect their ends, and did thereupon strain their power to
effect the same.

Thirdly, the Vintners were not so far favored by the Lords, though the
Imposition was submitted too, but that they suffered hindrance, and loss
notwithstanding, and the prices of Wines were set, as if there had been no
Imposition laid upon the Vintners; but this point falls in with the third
branch of Kilverts Charge, and therefore is to be more fully opened, and
answered in the next place.

3. In the third place therefore, whereas Kilverts charge is, That the Vintners
did project, and seek the Imposition for their advantage and profit, and did
reap great profit and advantage by it.

The Vintners make answer:

That many things reckoned up by Kilvert as immunities, and benefits of the
Vintners purchased by this Project, were their Birthrights, and legal
Interests, and had been due to them without any Imposition: For Example, the
Coopers incroaching by fraudulent brokerly Offices betwixt Merchant and
Vintner, and Ivie-like sucking juice out of both, without any root of their
own, were to be restrained of common right. So the dressing of Meat, selling of
Tobacco, exemption from the extrajudiciall Decree of Star Chamber, the
restitution of 6000l. lent to the King, etc. were appertaining to their Trade,
and due by the Law of the land; and if no Imposition had been, they ought to
have been enjoyed without question or molestation.

That the taking of the Farm, the restraining Merchants to sell to any except
Vintners, the dealing in Wine-licenses, yielding to the Imposition of 40s. per
Tun, etc. which Kilvert recites, and privileges and benefits sued for by the
Vintners, were indeed no way beneficial, nor sued for, nor at all obtained by
the Vintners, though the contrary was pretended in all.

That whereas Kilvert affirms, that the Vintners have gained by the Project
above 200000l. arising to them three several ways; viz. 1. By beating down
the Merchants prices. 2. By the advance of 1d. and 2d. per quart, retailed. 3.
By selling Malagoes and Sherries for Canaries. To each of these particulars;
and first, as to the first they reply:

That the Vintners (to give a true relation of things) being much incited, and
forced to submit to the Imposition, amongst many other Objections used this as
one.

That they being loaded with the Imposition, could not sell so cheap as others,
and by that means all Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, would buy of Merchants
and Coopers, and not of them, as formerly; and so a great part of their Trade
and gain would fall away. To salve this, the Kings Agents answered, The
Merchants and Coopers shall be bound up, and shall fell to none but you. But as
this was offered to the Vintners, that without utter ruin they might submit to
the Kings benefit, and not desired by the Vintners out of any covetous desire
to Enrich themselves by other men's loss, so it was but only offered, and never
intended, or faithfully performed. Howsoever, the Merchants (by the advice of
Roger Kilvert, Brother to our main Proiector) were so politic, as to pretend,
that this restraint, or rather umbrage of restraint, was unequal to them; and
therefore to ease them in this particular, a remedy was invented by obtruding a
medium of 5000 Tun French Wine, and 4000 Tun Spanish yearly, upon the Vintner
at such high rates set in favor of the Merchant, to the great disadvantage of
the Vintner.

That on the 15 of March, 1637. at a general Court this medium Project was
proposed; but the outcry of the Vintners was, that it could not take place
without general discontent, inconvenience, confusion, difficulty, and
disturbance of Trade, and therefore they humbly prayed against it, as in the
Hall-book is verbatim registered.

That the Project being hereupon much endangered after so fair a progression of
it, upon the 20 of March the Lord Treasurer, Marq. Hamilton, and Sir I. Banks
then Attorney general, convented some of the Merchants and Vintners before
them, and then regulated the Vintners, to admit of the Medium.

That upon the 21 of March, the same was discovered to the Generality, and
their consent was obtained, although their opinion thereof was nothing altered,
for being so snafled and muzzeled as they now were, it had little booted them
to reject so potent an Order. And the Merchants could not conceal what
advantage they had hereby over the Vintners: For Example, Roger Kilvert in
derision to the Vintners complaints, answered; The Vintners are free from the
Star Chamber, and are now the Kings white-boyes, and shall the Merchants enjoy
nothing?

That the Medium in it self was a great, and violent pressure, but as it was
abused by craft, it grew intolerable. The inconveniences of it self, were;

First, that it necessitated the Vintners to buy too great quantities of Wines
from the French and Spanish Companies: for by this means the Vintners, whose
Primitive undoubted right it was, to trade as Merchants, and had been in suit
about the same, were now defeated of that Trade, they being now scarce able to
vend, and retail so much as their Medium proportion extended to.

Secondly, that it injured the Vintners in the prices and goodness of Wines,
for the Merchants before were allowed to sell at such rates, but the Vintners
might bargain at pleasure, they had an open and free market, and commonly they
bought under the prices set, and they pleased themselves with a free choice;
whereas now, the Vintner is confined to a Medium price, as well as a Medium
proportion; and as the Merchant is allowed to sell, so he is constrained to
buy; nay if the Merchant will needs require more, the Vintner must needs rise
accordingly.

That the cozenages and abuses of the Medium, were yet worse then the Medium it
self; for under color thereof, the Vintners were deceived in the quantities of
Wine: For Example, sometimes having bought of a Medium Merchant so many Tuns,
and hoping thereby to be discharged of their Medium proportion, the Merchant
would nevertheless pretend, that the Wines were none of his, that he was but
entrusted to sell them as a Factor for another, and so this was no discharge
for the Medium.

Secondly, other Merchants which were not of the Medium contract, would get the
Medium Merchants to patronize and sell their Wines, and so under that pretext,
the Vintners were forced to take off small Wines at the Medium price, which
otherwise they might have bought cheaper.

Thirdly, by this means there was no end of the Medium proportion, for
whatsoever quantities the Vintner took from the Merchant, the Merchant still
complained that his proportion was not taken off, and the Vintners for want of
true intelligence, and correspondence amongst themselves, were not able to
evince the contrary.

In the next place also, in the qualities of Wines, the Vintners were further
damnified by this Medium contract; for no vendible, merchantable Wines might be
refused from the Merchant by the virtue of the contract, and all Wines almost
were admitted good according to the contract: Whereupon it happened, that the
Vintner was forced to take too great stores of course Wines to satisfy the
Merchant at excessive rates, and yet in the mean time to satisfy customers
with richer Wines (Wine being a matter of mere pleasure) he was of necessity to
provide other store, of better Wines at an extraordinary rate.

And in the last place, though this burden of the Medium was introduced to
gratify the Merchant for his restraint, and to balance in the Vintner the
privilege of suppressing the Coopers, and some other privileges; yet neither
was the Merchant restrained, nor the Cooper suppressed, nor any other promise
entirely performed; so that the very pretenses of ease, proved in the end
burdens; and the promises of help, troubles; for the greater load being once
laid on, the staff presently which should have made it the more supportable,
was taken away, or denied. The Merchants did sell, nay (as they were able) did
under-sell to Noblemen, Country Vintners, etc. more commonly then before. The
Coopers got Tickets from Alderman Abel, and thereby passed for ^etty Merchants;
and having gotten Tickets for once, they made the same serve for many times,
and sometimes without Tickets at all they sold Wines by stealth, and they did
not always deal by wholesale, but sometimes in Rundlets, and serve Funerals:
and all this after the Vintners had taken off a great quantity of ill Wines at
a great loss from their hands, upon an agreement that they should relinquish
that Trade for the future. And at all this Alderman Abel did connive, and as is
probable, made a great advantage by it; being in that respect more inexcusable
then Kilvert, who having a Brother of the Merchants Company, and not being
himself a Vintner, as the Alderman had been, may be held less blameable. But
to shut up this point, Kilverts own words are in print; when the Medium seemed
grievous to the Vintners, he himself took a journey to Barwick for them, and
there obtained order and direction from His Majesty to the Lords, to ease and
discharge the Vintners of it, which was done accordingly: and hence it seems,
the Vintners, if they had gotten 60000 l. in three years, by beating down the
prices of the Merchant (as he before suggested) or had had any advantage
against the Merchant, they had been very inconsiderate, in sending him to
Barwick, and giving him 1000 l. to deliver them from such a profit.

The second gain of the Vintners (as is suggested by Kilvert) is in retailing
at 1d. and 2d. per quart, dearer then the usual price of Wines, and by this
advance upon the consumtion of of them since Midsummer, 1638. when the Vintner
first retailed at 7d. and 14d. he says the Vintner has gained above 130000 l.

The Vintners answer hereunto contains five things very considerable; but our
stumbling block had need be first removed.

Kilvert in all his accounts, speaks of so many Tuns of French, and so many of
Spanish, and yet the Vintners buy Spanish Wines by the Butt and Pipe, which are
but half a Tun; so that a Pipe of Spanish Wine is equivalent to a Tun of
French, and is commonly as long in drawing, and as much stock is imploid in the
one as in the other, and setting aside that a Butt or Pipe takes not up so much
room in the Cellar as a Tun, there is little difference to be observed: and
therefore the Vintners gain ought to be alike in both, and Kilvert ought not to
pretend, as if the Vintner bought of Tuns alike.

This being premised, the Vintners first answer is;

That Kilvert d^es most untruly compute from all Wines bought in by the
Vintner, to all uttered by them, for the Vintner sells not by the quart above
two parts of three commonly of Wines bought in gross, and a full third he
sells to the Country Vintners, and others, as he buys in gross, and sometimes
his benefit is small, and sometimes none.

The second answer is, That the Charge of retailing Vintners, is far greater
then of other Tradesmen, for in the retailing of 1000 l. or 1200 l. per annum,
there is necessarily required at least 300 l. charge, and yet other Trades will
retail more with half the charge. And experience in this, is a demonstration
sufficiently convincing; for if there be in London 500 Vintners, there are not
above 40 of them rich men, the greatest part by far is poor and indigent, and
the Merchants themselves have attestated this before the Lords of the Council,
and the Honorable Committee; witness Capt. Royden, etc. This is an Argument,
wherein no error can be, and which will admit of no answer.

The third answer is, That drawing Vintners are subject to many casualties and
misadventures in their Trade, many times Wines decay upon their hands, and leak
away, so that sometimes they sell to Vineger-men and Distillers, and sometimes
retail at loss.

The fourth answer is, that Retailers are often constrained to give more for
Wines, then the prices set by the Lords; and of late years they have given more
for French Wines, by 3. 4. 5. 6 l. per Tun, then the rates set; and for
Spanish, 10. 20. 30s. a piece extraordinary.

The fifth answer is, That since the Imposition, as the retailing price has
been advanced for the Vintners benefit, so the Merchants price in gross has
been advanced also to the Vintners hindrance as much: so that since the
Imposition, the Vintners condition has not been bettered: For Example, in 1636.
and before that year the Vintner bought Canary at 17l. per Pipe, and sold at
12d. he bought Sacks at 15 l. per Butt, and retail'd at 10d. but in 1637, 1638,
etc. he bought Canary at 19 l. and Sacks at 17 l. so that if no Imposition had
been then levied, yet the retailing price ought to have been advanced. French
Wines also have been of late more scarce and dear; and therefore in 1634, 1635,
1636, etc. the Vintner bought the best Gascoin Wine at 18 l. per Tun, and
smaller Wines at 15 l. and then the selling price was 6d. per quart; but the
buying price now for the best Wines, is 19 l. per Tun, and for the smallest 17
l. and yet the selling price is but 7d. So the set rates have been, and yet the
Merchants have often sold above those rates also: For Example, Mr Wilcox has
boughe Canaries of Roger Kilvert himself (the supposed Projector of the Medium)
at above 20 l. per piece, and was fain to pay down the money required above the
Medium, as a fine before hand; and many the like Examples might be given. And
whereas it is reckoned by Kilvert, that 1d. per quart is answerable to 4 l. per
Tun, this is most untrue; for by reason of want of Gage, Lees, Leakage, and
other misfortunes (admitting that Wines do not change, or sour) the Vintners
cannot draw above 220 gallons; so that in respect thereof, no less then 1
penny in 4 can be allowed the Vintner. For note, that in a Tun of French Wine
there ought to be 252 gallons. And note, that though Sherries are commonly full
gage, yet Malagoes and Canarries are under gage, and every Pipe wants 8 gallons
of full gage, besides as much Lees, and besides the damage of Leakage, etc.

Note also, That though some rich French Wines want not of gage, yet the
smaller Wines want 20 Gallons; and high Country Wines, which are the richest
of all, want so much of gage, that a Tun is not above five Hogsheads. In this
therefore Capt: Langham did ill to abet Kilvert, and he is most easily to be
disproved: and all these losses also to the Vintner mentioned, are such as come
along with his Wines when he first buys them, and are over and above casualty
at home in his own Celler. So then supposing 3 l. answerable in the Tun to
every 1d. raised in the quart, and to give account of that 3 l. The Vintners
say, that there was 1 l. new Imposition taken by the King at the Custom House,
before the srme which Sir Abraham Daws farmed; and that by this new Project
since 1637. 2 l. more also has been taken by the King, besides what the
Merchants have advanced in their price, partly by reason of Impositions set in
Spain, and partly by the dearth of Wines in France; and so for diverse years
last past, the Vintner in very truth, has been but a mere drudge to Proiectors,
employing himself, his servants, and estate, to supply the Commonwealth,
either for loss, or no considerable profit.

The third way of gain to the Vintner, which Kilvert calls a super-project, is,
By selling of Sacks and Malagoes at the prices of Canaries, the gain whereof is
12l. per Tun extraordinary; and this way since Feb. 1637. The Vintner, as
Kilvert pretends, has gotten 30000l. and his brother Roger in this, is his
faithful abettor.

The Vintners, in the first place, refer themselves for answer hereunto, to the
competent proofs of their accusers, desiring only, That the same kennell which
was once produced, and disproved before the Committee, may no more be admitted.

And in the second place, if proofs fail on the other side, they shall make it
appear on their side, That few Vintners in London vent any considerable
quantities of Sherries or Malagoes by retayl. A great number of them may safely
depose, That they scarce draw 4 Butts of Sacks in a year.

In the third place also they say, That those Vintners which do deal in any
considerable quantity of Malagoes, and Sherries, do for the most part, buy them
for the Country Trade, and utter them again in gross, at a very small
increase of profit.

And fourthly they say, That such as drive a Country Trade, do not usually send
down their Sacks in Butts, as they buy them, but in Graves Hogsheads; and it is
very certain, That 2 Butts, viz. of Canary or Malago, will but little more than
fill 3 Hogs-heads, being Rackt; and after this account, the price of a Butt of
Sack, set at 17l. and a Hogshead being sold at a 11l. Two Butts are bought at
34l. yet in three Hogsheads yield but 33 l. so that were it not for some
bargain sometimes under the prices set, the Vintners might sell at loss. For
example; Tho. Dudly justifies, That from 1637. till 1640. he has sold in gross
to Country Vintners 250 Tun of French Wine, at 5d. per quart, and under; and
180 Tun Spanish, Canaries, not above 12d. and Sacks, not above 11d. per quart,
besides many losses by trust, etc. and for this, his Books of yearly Accounts,
will be sufficient evidence. And many more like examples may be alleged.

And here let it now not be omitted, That Kilvert has diverse other general
ways of blinding and puzzling such as are not knowing in the Vintners
mysteries; for first, he charges all Wines imported at the Custom House by
Merchants, as bought by Vintners, although he cannot be ignorant that Coopers,
Merchants for other Countries, Aqua vitae men, Gentlemen and others, do vent
and buy at least a moity of Wines imported, the Vintners scarce compassing the
other moity.

Secondly, He allows and deducts 15 per cent. for leaking at Sea, etc. but he
conceals the great quantities of Lees, which, many times, the Merchant pours
out of one leaky vessel into another, and sells for neat to the Vintner.

Thirdly, He makes no allowance for leakage, or other mishaps incident to
Vintners in their own Cellars.

Fourthly, He passes over want of gage, as a thing scarce worth mentioning,
thinkingit sufficient to say, That the richest French Wines are commonly
full-gage: but the fallacy of this has been discovered.

Fifthly, He insists upon the late cheapnesse of Spanish Wines, and yet they
were scarce ever dearer before the Imposition, but in the mean time passes over
the great dearth of French Wines; for the truth is, Spanish Wines have not been
so cheap as to make the Vintner whole for the dearth of France, but the dearth
of France has been so great, as to devour all profit by Spain, and more.

And here it may be noted, That the old rates was about the beginning of K.
Char: that the retayling price of French Wines were set at 8d per quart, when
the Merchants prices were no higher than now, or of late, since the Imposition.

To draw now to a conclusion; since the Vintners can make it so visible to all
that their Company (excepting some few of them) is poor and necessitous; and
that this Project for these 3 or 4 years last past, has impoverisht and
impayr'd them more than formerly; and since they have so satisfied the
Honorable Committee therein, that Master Green has confessed it to be the
opinion of the whole Committee, they desire that it may be duly weighed, for
the Vintners have not only suffered much by this Project, but they knew long
before that it could bring nothing but loss and hazard upon them, and that was
one cause why they opposed it so long; for if it had been merely illegal, and
not very detrimentall also, it cannot be imagined that they should with so much
stoutnesse and constancy, and hard endurance have stood out aginst the violence
of it so many years together. They desire also that their Case may be warily
severed and unfolded; if they have been delinquents, let them be fined as
delinquents, according to the just weight of their several delinquencies: if
they have been gayners by the Project, let them make restitution according to
their several gains: but when they are not prosecuted as delinquents, nor
believed to be gainers, let not Kilvert, without assigning what third way he
will require it, challenge from them 200000 l. in gross. Let it also be
considered, That it is impossible in nature for any humane judgment exactly to
descry, amongst all the Vintners, who were the greatest delinquents or gainers:
and their Cases being different in both, no one indifferent sentence can justly
involve all alike in both: if they have been delinquents, it shall be confessed,
that they may be punished, though they are no gainers; and if they are gainers,
restitution may be demanded, though they prove no delinquents: but let not both
those terms be blended, as if in this case they were inseparable. Howsoever,
if necessity, and force, and fraud so extraordinary shall not excuse the
Vintners, as it does almost all the Kingdom in the Shipscot, and other late
projects, if the calamity of those times shall not acquit them which consented
to the Imposition, etc. yet all did not consent alike. Some were more active,
some more passive: a great part was not at the Hall, but had just cause of
absence, when any illegal thing was proposed; and a great part being present,
were concluded by the maiority of other men votes, and a great part of Voters
did most unwillingly vote for fear of ruin; and yet all these are not equally
culpable, nor yet now possibly severable. So also if the Project be held
gainful, yet it could not be gainful to all alike, for all Vintners do not
trade in the same quantities; nor do all, trading in the same quantities, find
the same gains coming in by their Art and Industry, nor the same blessing of
God prospering them in both: and yet in this case, justice ought to proceed
with equal respect had, as well to Geometrical, as to Arithmeticall
proportion. And as for the second part of the Accusation; it cannot be doubted,
but that the chiefest authors, are to be accounted the chiefest actors also in
the business. It is not so difficult to bring a horse to any obedience, and to
the endurance of any load after he is once thoroughly broken, as it is at first
to break him: and this Kilvert, etc. found trne in the Vintners; for after he
had once prevailed, that they should not resist the Imposition any longer, by
the same power (and less) after, he might make them beg for it, and seem
desirous of it; nay, in show, contend for it: yet still this shows them the
more servile and oppressed, and him the more tyrannous and unjust.

This might suffice for the three branches of Kilverts Charge: but it is
evident, That he is not an Accuser only, but a Calumniator also. He speaks of
diverse arts, whereby the Vintners sophisticate, and adulterate Wines; he
mentions Saw-dust of Deal, Bilberries, and the like, as used by the Vintners,
to corrupt and falsify Wines, or to put off Wines corrupted and falsified: if
this be true, he ought in justice to the Commonwealth, he ought out of justice
to Justice it self (whose eyes he now seeks to blind) to reveal the same; and
the persons offending, and the times, and certainties of each offense: but if
it be not true, he ought to confess himself, to be himself; that is, a
professed perverter of Justice, and enemy of Truth. Whilst the High Commission
tyrannized, there was no fitter Blood-hound than Kilvert to be officious in
that Court, yet even in that Court he was found too corrupt, too libidinous,
too treacherous; many Articles were exhibited against him, and at last he was
rejected, as a person infamous, and scandalous to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
His next Scene that he entered upon, was the Star Chamber; and for a good
season, he played there the part of a rare artist; and having given admirable
proof to the world of his exquisite skill in producing Deponents, and managing
of Oaths; he left it at last, uncertain, Whether that Court contributed more
to his preferment, or he that Courts ruin: but the wonder of all is, that he
dares yet appear in Parliament with any confidence, or in a time of
Reformation, publish such accusations as he does, wherein there is no one
entire, solid truth; nay, nor scarce any parcel of truth, which materially
tends to his own justification, or to the Vintners confutation. Since the
depending of this Case, some witnesses have been produced by Kilvert, or his
brother Roger* or both, to depose against Mr. Gardener, and many other
Vintners, that they sold all their Sherries and Malagoes at the prices of
Canaries. These were disproved before the Committee, and indeed by their
deposition, they must have known that in the Vintners Cellars, which the
Vintners themselves could not possibly know. In one Pamphlet also Kilvert
moving the House to retact their Votes concerning his guilt; He is bold to move
them to it the rather, because of the 200000 l. which he hopes to recover out
of the Vintners, as if this could be any motive to such just Judges: and at
another time he is not ashamed to reckon up his good services, and merits to
the State. But sure, though the man forgets where he is, or to whom he speaks,
his Judges cannot forget who he is, and what he alleadges. Of Roger Kilvert
nothing need to be said, but that betwixt him and his brother Richard there is
a true resemblance, and lively natural stamp of Brotherhood; and in the
Medium Project, that his brain was the more pregnant of the two. Of Alderman
Abel, sufficient is related in the story of Kilvert; he was as fit an engine
for Kilvert, as Kilvert was for those rigorous, projecting times.

Satan's two great attributes are, that he is a Liar, that he is a Murderer:
lying is his means, murder is his end, when he tempts into sin, and when he
accuses for sin, he is false in both, but his falsehood in both ever tends to
destruction. The Vintners have found both these Sathanicall attributes very
eminent of late in their adversaries. The same men which first assailed them to
draw them into the Project, are now their greatest prosecutors for the Project;
and there was not more deceit in representing the Project legal then, then now
in making it so odious; and it is hard to say, Whether greater ruin was
contrived to them when they were to submit to it, or now, when they are to be
punished for it.

FINIS.

