Religion and Loyalty: OR, A Demonstration OF The Power of the Christian Church
within it Self. The Supremacy of Sovereign Powers over it. The Duty of Passive
Obedience, or Non-Resistance to all their Commands.

Exemplified Out of the Records of the Church and the Empire, from the
Beginning of Christianity to the End of the Reign of JULIAN.

By Samuel Parker D. D. Archdeacon of CANTERBURY.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker at the Three-Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1684.

AN ADDRESS TO HIS MAJESTY FROM THE Primitive Church.
SIR,
THe whole Christian World being both Alarmed and Amazed at the late Barbarous
Conspiracy against the Sacred Lives of Your Majesty, and Your Royal Brother:
And Your Majesty having upon that Occasion been overwhelmed with numberless
Addresses and Protestations of Loyalty from Your dutiful Subjects of the Church
of England: I thought it not improper or unseasonable to consult the Records of
the best and purest times of our Religion for Precedents of this Loyal
Practice, and after an Accurate, Diligent and Impartial Enquiry, I dare in
their Names declare to Your Majesty and all the Christian World, their infinite
abhorrence of all Treasonable and Rebellious Attempts against all Sovereign
Powers whatsoever, as the rankest contradiction to their Christian Faith, and
the boldest Blasphemy against their own Sovereign Lord. So that though Your
Majesty were as much an Enemy as You are a Patron and Protector of the Church,
whoever shall at any time, or upon any pretense, offer any Resistance to any of
Your Royal Commands, must forever renounce his Savior, the four Evangelists,
and the Twelve Apostles, to join with Mahomet, Hildebrand and the Kirk, set up
the Pigeon against the Dove, the Scimeter against the Cross, and turn a Judas
to his Savior, as well as a Cromwell to his Prince.

And this, Sir, in those days was thought so far from flattering Divinity, that
if they had not owned and asserted it with their last drop of Blood under the
worst of Tyrants, they had judged themselves Traitors both to their Prince and
to their Lord. And this Doctrine of entire and unreserved Submission was then
so Catholic, so Universally Taught and Practiced, that Christian Rebellion
was a Sin altogether unknown in those days. It was the only Sin, for which the
Laws of the Church never appointed any Punishment, because it was the only Sin
that was then never actually committed. And though they had too frequent and
sad Occasions to enter their Protestations against it, that was never done to
correct any miscarriages among themselves, but to rectify the misapprehensions
of the Roman Emperors: Who being possessed with too just a Jealousy, that all
Alterations in Religion tended to Innovations in Government, they thought
themselves obliged in Duty, and for the honor of their Lord to represent to
their Majesty's, That the erecting of his Kingdom in the Empire, was so far
from shaking their Thrones, that it was and ever would be their strongest
Security: And when they had done this, they had nothing more to do then to
submit themselves to their Royal Pleasure, and lay their Lives at their Royal
Feet.

And this, Sir, they did with that Candor, Frankness, and Ingenuity, so
without all reserves and limitations, that the slander that some Men have dashed
upon their Memories is as false as foul, that all their Pretended Loyalty was
nothing but Hypocrisy, for want of strength to raise, and pretense of Law to
Warrant Rebellion. But some Men are so ignorant, that they cannot understand
the Doctrine of the Cross, because its Superscription was written in Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew, and were they not as great Strangers to the Primitive
Records, as to the Primitive Religion, they could never have had the confidence
to fasten a surmise so false upon so clear an Integrity; when beside giving us
their own Opinions, they have left behind them the Eternal and unalterable
Reasons, upon which they were grounded, and these are of equal force in all
Ages, and under all Governments. And this unkind Calumny is so very unjust,
that their spightful and most implacable Enemies, who spared not to asperse
them with all the vile things that could be believed, durst never charge them
either with any Overt-acts, or secret designs of Disloyalty.

And as for the Laws, though no Subject were ever more thankful for good Laws,
or more tender of their preservation then themselves, yet when they had them,
they were neither so ungrateful nor so uncivil, as to turn them upon the
Government, and make them so many Bulwarks and Sconces for Rebellion. They
thought it a very scurvey complement to invite Princes to protect their
Religion, by telling them, That whilst they were pleased to Persecute it,
Christians were under an entire Submission to their Will and Pleasure, but when
they had once owned and protected it by Law, that then their Christian Subjects
were warranted to Rebel against their Sovereign Authority, by a Commission from
their own Imperial Rescripts. As soft and simple Lachrimists as they were, they
were wiser then to give Julian so much advantage to justify his Apostasy, when
by it he recovered the Imperial Crown to himself and his Successors, that
Constantine had pawned to his Christian Subjects, by taking up the Christian
Faith. And whenever there was any misunderstanding between the Emperor and his
Laws, they thought it their duty, that were subject to both, to leave the
Contest to be adjusted between themselves. And if the Prince were at any time
undutiful to his own Laws, and so unhappy as to incur their displeasure,
whatever Power the Laws had to Execute themselves upon him, they were satisfied
that the Subjects had none.

And as they embraced this Principle of unlimited Submission as one of the
greatest duties of their Religion, so they have farther declared in all their
Writings, that setting aside all ties of Duty and Conscience, they would have
done the same upon Principles of Interest and Prudence: And tho they had lived
under the worst of Princes, and themselves had been the worst of Men, they
would have paid the same submission for the purchase of their own ease and
safety, that they thought themselves to owe out of duty to God and his Laws.
These, Sir, were the Doctrines that they taught both as Divines and
Philosophers, as Men that understood this World, as well as Christians that
believed the World to come. And though to avoid being too bold and tedious, I
have here only presented Your Majesty with the Subscriptions of all the most
Reverend Fathers of the Church for the first Three hundred and sixty three
Years; yet if Your Majesty think it worth Your Royal Acceptance, I am ready to
produce not only the hasty Votes, but the Hands of all Christian Bishops and
Doctors for above a Thousand Years, with a Nemine Contradicente.

But beside the demonstration of the Primitive Loyalty, I have here humbly
presented Your Majesty with the true State of the Primitive Church, as it was
left by our Lord and his Apostles, and taken into Protection by the first
Christian Emperors, knowing how much it will endear the Church of England to
Your Majesty's Royal Care and Kindness, when you discern its exact conformity
to the first Constitution, in all things but its Suffering. And now I cannot
pray for more happiness to Your Sacred Majesty, then they comprised in a
Collect for their Heathen Emperors under all the Storms and Outrages of
Persecution: That Almighty God would grant You a Long Life, a Quiet Reign, an
Undisturbed Family, Valiant Armies, Faithful Counselors, and Loyal Subjects:
That all things may fall out as successfully as Your Royal Heart can desire:
That Your Empire may ever increase and flourish: And that the Lineal and Legal
Succession of Your Royal Family, may inherit Your Imperial Throne through all
Succeeding Ages. Which is the daily Prayer of

Your Majesty's Most Humble and Dutiful Subject S. P.

The Contents.
. I. THE Introduction representing the seeming difficulty of the Argument, from
the niceness of the Controversy it self, from the partiality of the Writers
engaged in it, and from the just jealousy of Superiors about it, and yet
nothing more easy to determine to the Satisfaction of all Parties concerned,
and particularly to the advantage of Sovereign Powers. Page 1.. II.
Christianity supposes the power of Princes. Our Savior disclaims all Temporal
Authority, and all exemption from it to those that have it. To pretend to any
such thing by any grant from him, is to renounce him and turn Mahumetan. Christ
as he is Head of his Church is subject to Sovereign Powers. page 10. III. The
Power of Princes over the Church supposes the Power in the Church; it is no
Spiritual, but a Civil Power over the Spiritual; to deny the Authority of the
Church in all Ages, is to take away our Saviors own Authority; all the several
branches of his Commission to the Apostles proved against Mr. Hobbs to be
Authoritative. page 34.. IV. No Church Power but what is conveyed from the
Apostles by Ordination. The Supremacy of Princes is the same whether Heathen or
Christian; Princes neither gain nor loose any Power by their Christianity. Mr.
Hobbs that he may destroy the present Power of the Church, is forced to take
away our Saviors own Power over it in this present World. page 56.. V. The
danger of a competition between these two Powers wholly avoided, by the
Churches Power being founded upon the Doctrine of the Cross. The Doctrine of
the Cross explained. page 65.. VI. The Rights of Sovereign Princes secured and
improved by diverse particular Laws of the Christian Institution. The folly of
limiting the obligation of these Laws to such Governors as govern by Law,
demonstrated against Mr. Rutherford and Mr. Baxter. page 77.. VII. Submission
to the worst of Princes proved much wiser and much more advantageous to the
Interest of the Subject, then the liberty of Resistance or Rebellion in any
case whatsoever. Barclay's Concession of its being lawful in any case, shown to
be an inlet to the subversion of all Governments in all cases. page 109.. VIII.
Those that are trusted by our Savior with the Government of his Church, are
tied by him to a particular and exemplary submission to Civil Authority. They
are not forbidden the exercise of power, but the haughty and insolent use of
it. The Church of England consists not in its Laws, but in its Authority to Act
Laws. page 126.. IX. The Primitive Churches practice of Passive Obedience. No
Canons against Rebellion, because it was then never committed. The Church
careful to secure all men's civil Rights. Canons to secure the Rights of Masters
over Servants. The Doctrine of Universal submission taught in the Greek Church
by Policarp, Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Theophilus, Origin, and Dionysius of
Alexandria. p. 140.. X. The same Doctrine taught and practiced in the Latin
Church by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Minutius Foelix, St. Cyprian. It was not lawful
for Christians that were banished for their Religion to return home without
leave of the Government. To say this Doctrine was then taught because they
wanted strength, is to call them Knaves and Villains. The blasphemy of the
Independants in justifying their Treason by pretending to Inspiration from
Heaven. This done by John Goodwin, and J. O. page 153.. XI. The strictness of
Government in the Church kept up to the height, all this Interval,
notwithstanding their entire submission to the power of the Empire. The
necessity of a Legislative Power to the Being of a Church. The Government and
Discipline of the Primitive Church exemplified from the Apostolical Canons.
page 169.. XII. The State of the Primitive Church collected into one view out
of the Writings of St. C^prian, with an account of the birth, growth and death
of the Novatian Schism. His first Principle of Unity is the duty of Communion
with the Bishop in every particular Church. page 198.. XIII. His second
Principle of Unity, is the Obligation upon all Christian Bishops to keep up
correspondence and Communion among themselves. page 227.. XIV. Mr. Thorndike's
Notion of the Unity of the Catholic Church by way of External Polity,
vindicated against the Objections of Dr. Barrow, and the Doctors Treatise
concerning the Unity of the Church confuted. page 236.
Part. II.
. I. THe Concurrence of the Imperial and Ecclesiastical Power under the Reign
of Constantine the Great, in the Cause of the Donatists and Arians. An account
of the History of the Donatists from their beginning to the Council at Rome
under Melchiades. page 265.. II. A Chasm discovered in Optatus from the Council
of Rome till after the Council of Arles. The Sentence of the Council of Arles
against the Schismatics. Their Illegal Appeal to the Emperor. His resentments
of it. The Forgery of Ingentius against Foelix of Aptung discovered.
Constantine's Sentence against them at Milan without accepting their Appeal.
page 285.. III. Constantine's Proceedings against them. But forced to grant
them Liberty of Conscience upon his War with Licinius. Their insolence upon it.
Their Case parallel with our present Schismatics. page 300.. IV. A Character
of Donatus the Great, and his Circumcellians. Their behavior toward the
Emperor's Commissioners. Their Flatteries of Julian. page 307.. V. Their
divisions and subdivisions among themselves. Their Outrages and siding with
Gildo the African Rebel. Their disingenuity publicly exposed both by the
Emperor and the Church. The Imperial Laws against them, and their great
Efficacy. Liberty of Conscience again granted them upon the Invasion of the
Goths. page 316.. VI. An account of the Conference at Carthage before
Marcellinus. The Donatists design in procuring his Murder. The Faction forever
broke by the effectual execution of Laws against them under Honorius. p. 333..
VII. The History of Arianism from its beginning to the end of the Nicene
Council. Eusebius of Caesarea and Petavius vindicated from suspicion of the
Heresy. Eusebius of Nicomedia and his Faction no Arians. p. 348.. VIII. After
the Council only Arius, two Bishops and two Presbyters stood to the Arian
Cause. All the following troubles proceeded from the revenge and malice of the
Nicomedian Eusebius. His Plot against Athanasius by Ischyras and the Meletian
Evidences. The brutish and barbarous proceedings against him at the Council of
Tire. page 370.. IX. By what Stratagem the banishment of Athanasius, and the
Restitution of Arius was procured. The fabulous reports of Philostorgius and
Sandius. Constantine's innocence cleared as to the sufferings of Athanasius,
and the Charge of Arianism. page 390.. X. Of the division of the Empire between
the Sons of Constantine. The Controversy under Constantius not managed between
the Catholics and Arians, but the Catholics and the Eusebians. page 409.. XI.
The mystery of the crafty Proceedings of the Council of Antioch, against
Athanasius discovered; his Absolution at Rome, Pope Julius his Letter, and
Eusebius his death. page 421.. XII. The sufferings of Paul of Constantinople
from the Eusebians. An account of the Councils of Sardica and Philippopolis.
The craft of the Eusebians in dividing the Council. page 441.. XIII. The Issue
of both Councils. Athanasius his triumphant Restitution. By what Calumny his
second banishment was procured. The wild Proceedings of Constantius at the
Council of Milan. page 451.. XIV. The banishment of Liberius and Hosius. The
black Characters of the Ring-leading Eusebians. Particularly describing the
wickedness and cruelty of St. George of Alexandria. page 465.. XV. The
Photinian Heresy. The Council of Sirmium against it. Its right time stated
against Petavius. Made up of Eusebians. Of the forged Creed of Valens in the
name of the Council. Of the Council of Ancyra. Hosius vindicated from
subscribing the second Sirmian Creed. The ground of St. Hilary's mistake about
it. His Book against Constantius proved to be spurious. Pope Liberius
vindicated from Heresy, but not from disingenuity. page 476.. XVI. Of the
Anomaeans. A Character of Aetius. Of the Conference at Sirmium and the
reconciling Creed. Of the Council of Arimnium. Of Valens and his Conventicle.
Of the fraud and force put upon the Council. page 502.. XVII. Of the Council of
Seleucia, and the breach between the Eusebians and the Acacians. The Emperor
over-reach't by the Acacians. Of the Banishment of the Eusebians. Of the
Acacian Council at Antioch. Of the Fanatic Sects of the Massalians and
Eustathians. page 519.. XVIII. The Power of the Church owned, though oppress't
by Constantius. The great difference of his Reign before, and after the
Conquest of Magnentius. All Councils before Free, all after forced. His ill
Actings excused as proceeding from mistake not malice. His great kindness to
the Christian Church. The Reigns of Constantine and Constantius compared Of the
signal Loyalty and Passive Obedience of Athanasius. page 533.. XIX. Of the
Reign of Julian, his great zeal for Paganism. His design to destroy
Christianity by Liberty of Conscience. The Church not only preserved but
settled by the free use of its own Authority. Of the Actings of St. Athanasius
and St. Hilary for its settlement. The Apostates fury against Athanasius for
it. The baseness of his Persecution. The Passive Obedience of the Christians
under it. page 562.. XX. The gross impertinency of alleging their example to
warrant Resistance, supposing its truth. Its horrible falsehood, proved from
the whole History of his Reign, and their behavior toward the Imperial Beard
cleared of all blame. page 578.
Errata.
PAge 33. Line 9. for a read any. p. 42. l. 17. for a r. no. p. 80. l. 17. for
effect r. affect. p. 84. l. 22. for make r. makes. p. 97. l. 2. for domini r.
dominii. p. 153. l. 9. for imminent r. eminent. ibid. l. 25. for ought r. ought
not. p. 157. l. 4. for Castrian r. Cassian. p. 163. l. 22. before sufficient
strength insert want of. p. 190. l. 29. for and r. as. p. 241. l. 23. blot out
is. p. 254. l. 13. for Colleges r. College. p. 262. l. 25. for verity r.
unity. p. 272. l. 29. after sacrifice insert to. p. 277. l. 19. after they
insert are. p. 294. l. 28. for factions r. fictions. p. 306 l. 2. for whola r.
whole. p. 369. l. ult. r. sanctions. p. 392. l. 27. for the desired r. desired
the. p. 410. l. ult. for intrigue r. interregnum. p. 470. l. 18. for ill-bred
r. ill breed. p. 491. l. 13. for in r. as. p. 494. l. 23. for ferced r. forced.
p. 529. l. 24. for Photians r. Photinians. p. 533. l. 7. for our r. once. p.
537. l. 13. for lying r. flying. p. 588. l. 4. insert though before they had.

PART I.
SECT. I.
UPon the Dissolution of the Roman Tyranny, under which all Christendom had
groaned for many Ages; infinite were the disputes and controversies, that were
immediately every where raised about the true Constitution of the
Ecclesiastical State and Government. Some ou^ of an over-vehement loathing of
their late Bondage, were out-ragious for its utter Abolition, so as to leave
every man to his own liberty, and folly too, to teach and practice what himself
pleases in matters of Religion, without being accountable to any Superior,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, for any misdemeanors therein. Others are as fierce to
have all Ecclesiastical Officers (though immediately Commissioned by our
Savior for the Government of his Kingdom through all Ages) stripped of all
manner of Authority in the Christian Church, and all Government of Religion
vested only in the Civil Magistrate. Others again were neither for its utter
Extirpation, nor confining the whole exercise of its Jurisdiction to the
Secular Powers, but for dividing it into its several Provinces, assigning some
part of it to the Clergy, and some to the Civil State. Because Religion being
Instituted chiefly for these two great ends, viz. The advancement of the
present Peace and Welfare of Mankind in this World, and their safe Conduct and
Passage to the State of Bliss and Happiness in the World to come: so far as it
relates to the present quiet of humane Society, it is but fit and necessary it
should be subject to the Authority of the Supreme Powers over them, whose
proper Duty, Trust, and Office it is to provide for the settlement and
preservation of the Public Peace. And therefore seeing that Religion has a
prime and overruling influence upon that, so as either to establish or disturb
it by its good or bad management, it concerns them in the first place to
encourage such Doctrines and Principles, as in their own nature tend to the
Peace and Quiet of Government, and to root out such false Notions, as incline
or induce men to any Turbulent and Seditious practices under any pretenses or
mistakes of Religion. And if any such there be, or if any such there have been;
nay, if any such there can be, it cannot be denied by the boldest Libertines,
but that in such cases the Supreme Magistrate must be allowed power to defend
him^^lf and his Government against their Errors or Follies, by the force and
execution of present Laws and Penalties. But then as the Christian Religion
aims at the future happiness of the Souls of men, its Conduct and Government is
left to a peculiar Order of men, to whom its Founder has entrusted the care of
Souls, and for which they are accountable to him alone. For seeing the Kingdom
that he established was altogether different in its Constitution from worldly
Empire: Seeing he appointed Officers void of all Secular Power to preside over
it by virtue of his own immediate Authority: And seeing he has engaged a
peculiar Providence to be assistant to them in the Government of his Church
through all Ages, the case is plain to all Men that believe his Institution,
that all Ecclesiastical Power, whatever it is, that concerns the welfare of
Men's Souls in the World to come, is entirely vested in the spiritual Guides and
Governors of the Church.

It being therefore so manifest, past all contradiction, that in all Christian
States, there are and must be from the Nature both of Government and
Christianity, two distinct Powers, the only difficulty will be so to determine
the Bounds of ^^ch, that they neither interfere in the exercise of their
Jurisdiction, nor any way incroach upon each others Authority. An undertaking
that has been often attempted by learned Men, but generally with that vehement
biass and partiality either way, that has made it a Controversy not for truth
but interest. For it being chiefly managed by Divines and Canonists in behalf
of the Church, and by Statesmen and Lawyers in behalf of the Commonwealth,
each Party have not so much endeavored to assign the real Bounds of Truth, as
to propagate their own Empire and Dominion. And for this reason is it that the
Writers of the Church of Rome so eagerly and universally advance the
Ecclesiastical Power, (the omnipotent Sovereignty of which they settle in the
Pope alone) as to raise it above the Power of all Sovereign Princes, and all
the Powers of the Earth. Neither are they content to make it Superior to all
their Authority, but swell it to that exorbitant Greatness, till they swallow
up all Empire into its Jurisdiction. And for this very reason the learned that
have generally opposed themselves to these high and wild pretenses, have as
generally run into the other Extreme, so as to take all Ecclesiastical
Authority not only from his Holiness and his Court, but from all Ecclesiastical
Officers, to whom it was consigned by our Blessed Savior, to the utter
destruction of any such thing as a Christian Church. So that in this Partial
and in reality Profane way of managing this great Controversy, they contend
not about the true and just grounds of each Province, but both fight for the
possession of the whole. In which way of waging War, no other event of it can
be expected, then of that irreconcilable fewd between Hannibal and the great
Scipio, that either Rome or Carthage must be destroyed, and the Empire of one
entirely subdued to the Dominion of the other. And though some very few have
treated of these things with somewhat more temper and moderation, so as to
acknowledge some kind of Bounds to their respective Jurisdictions, yet they
scarce ever set and determine them with that Justice and Equality, that the
security both of Government and Religion requires; but apparently warp to their
own side, as they incline to, or depend upon the interest of the Civil or
Ecclesiastical State. And therefore that is the great and only advantage that I
can ensure to my self above those many so very much more learned Men, that have
labored in this weighty Argument, that I know my self to undertake it without
being engaged by any prejudice, or biassed by any Interest, or hired by any
Reward then purely the discharge of a good Conscience (without which the
highest pleasure and satisfaction that humane life can afford, were not a
tolerable thing; but with it an ordinary State of life with health, is a
present Paradise, and state of Happiness.) So that how much soever I come
behind others (and I am sensible of a very great distance) in the advantages of
Wit and Learning, yet I shall give place to no Man in freedom and integrity of
Judgment. And that alone I am sure is enough to make me Master of my Argument;
for if Men would only consider the Nature of the thing it self, and abstract it
from interest and prejudice, that alone would bring them into a right
understanding of it. But when instead of looking directly upon their Object as
they ought, they labor to squint and pervert their own Eyesight, it is their
own sault that they lose its natural representation. And this is the very thing
that fills the World with so many disputes to so little purpose, because Men in
their Enquiries will not follow the guidance of things themselves; whereas if
they would but be pleased to do so, the truth of every thing is as clear and
visible to a diligent Enquirer as Light it self. There is not any one Argument
that is thought more intricate, obscure, and difficult then this that I am now
undertaking, and therefore it is for the most part baulkt by the Wise Men of
the World, as a point too touchy to be handled, especially because such great
and powerful interests are engaged in the Contest, and they are sure to be
jealous (as they ought to be) of their own Prerogatives, and will hardly so
much as endure to have them touched, much less fettered and confined. So that
this dispute is not only supposed difficult but dangerous, in that it is
thought so hard a matter for the Undertaker not to incur some way or other the
displeasure of his Superiors, by his best and most honest performance. And yet
after all this wariness and wisdom, if Men would but state the thing only as
that states it self, there is scarce any one Controversy that can be more safe
or more easy then its determination. For things are so wonderfully ordered by
the wise Providence of God in settling Christianity in the World, that by
determining the power of the Church and State, as they are determined by his
own original Settlement, both Parties may have their own utmost demands, and
particularly the Civil Power more then otherwise it could have. demanded. And I
doubt not but before I have done to give satisfaction to the highest Pretenders
either way, especially on the side of the State without any invasion of the
Churches Power. To assign an inherent and independent Power in the Church,
distinct from that of the State, and immediately derived, not from the Prince,
but our Savior, and that I am sure is as much as the highest claims to
Ecclesiastical Power can, with any modesty, or without rank dishonesty
challenge. But then this being granted, I shall demonstrate, That there is as
full and unabated Supremacy in Sovereign Powers over all manner of
Ecclesiastical Authority, as if it had been entirely derived from their own
special Grant and Commission: And that certainly is as high a Prerogative as
any Prince can care to demand, to have a Sovereign Power over all the Powers
within his own Dominions: So that whether they are derived from his Authority
or not, they shall be as entirely Subject to it, as if they had subsisted by no
other Charter. And that is as high a Supremacy as Mr. Hobbs himself has been
pleased to challenge for Sovereign Princes, when he took away all Power from
the Church to vest it in them; for though it is a very gross profaneness in
him to allow no Authority for Religion it self, then as it is enjoined and made
Law by them; yet that Authority that is in the Church by Divine Right, is as
absolutely Subject to their Dominion, as it could have been, had it been
established as Mr. Hobbs contends, only by their own Authority. And this State
of the Controversy, if it can be made good, I am certain will satisfy all
Parties that can claim any share or degree of Government in Church or State,
but most of all the Supreme Powers, to whose Sovereignty all Power, whatsoever
it is, or whencesoever derived, is indispensibly Subjected. As for the
Jurisdiction of the Church as settled by Divine Right, and nothing else; I have
discoursed of that in former Treatises, and proved that it is immediately
derived from our Savior himself, and settled unalienably by him upon the
Apostles, and their Successors the Bishops forever; so that here I must suppose
the Constitution of the Christian Church within it self, and all that I am
bound to do at present, is, That supposing its distinct and independent
Authority for granted, to explain how it accommodates and submits it self to
the Civil State, and comes under the common obligation of all good Subjects to
true Allegiance and Loyalty to the Sovereign Prince.

. II.
And here the first and chiefest thing to be considered is, That Christianity
supposes the Power of Princes, Civil Government being settled in the World from
its beginning by the general Providence of God, and antecedently to our
Savior's particular Institution. And therefore as the first thing that our
Savior openly declared, when he entered upon his Office, was the erection of
his own new Kingdom; so the next thing that he took care to instruct his
Subjects in, was, that this his Kingdom was no Kingdom of this World. So that
from thence it is evident, that he left the Government of the Kingdoms of this
World in the same posture in which they had ever stood, be ore he came into it.
And therefore there could be no alteration, much less abatement of the Civil
Government any where upon the score of his Authority, otherwise the Institution
of his Kingdom had been a breach upon the Ancient Rights of those Sovereign
Powers, in whose Dominions it was erected, which was the first thing that our
Savior whilst himself conversed upon Earth, was careful to avoid. This
therefore is to be set down in the first place, as the Fundamental Article of
his Religion, that neither himself, nor any of those that he has deputed for
the Government of it, challenge any Temporal Power to themselves, or any
exemption from the Authority of those that have it. Neither is this to be looked
upon only as a positive duty, but it is necessary in it self from the nature
and the design of Christianity, which was to settle a pure Religion in the
World by the strength of its own truth and goodness, without any help of
worldly power, or mixture of worldly interest, as I have elsewhere shown at
large from the whole story of its first settlement. And therefore agreeable to
this great Observation it is very remarkable, That our Savior himself whilst
he conversed upon Earth, did not only never challenge any kind of Civil
Authority to himself, but seized all occasions to defy and disclaim it, as
absolutely inconsistent with his Commission. Thus John 6. 15. When the People,
supposing him to be that Temporal Messiah that they expected, would have forced
him to take the Kingdom upon himself, he immediately withdrew into a Solitude
to shift their importunity. And Luke 12. 13, 14. When one solicited him only to
take upon him the Authority of an Arbitrator, he perfectly disavows it, as if
he were solicitous not to give them the least pretense of Objection against him
for his intermedling with the Civil Government. And yet he might lawfully have
done ^t, according to the received custom of the Jews at that time; for in the
Babylonish Captivity, to avoid the scandal of Contention before Heathens, they
referred all their Controversies to the Rabbis and Doctors of the Law (and
such an one this Jew supposed our Savior to have been, as appears by his
giving him their proper Title of Master) and whoever refused to stand to their
award, he was Excommunicated their Society, as a scandal to the Jewish Nation.
And this privilege of being their own Judges among themselves, was granted to
them by the Romans, and for a long time continued by the Christian Emperors
themselves. And therefore though our Savior might have undertaken this Office
by the allowance and permission of the Civil Government; yet to avoid all
suspicions of any such imputation, he protests against it as unbecoming his own
Office and Person: And the case is the very same as to the Woman taken in
Adultery, Joh. 8. 3. of whom he declares that he had no such Authority, as they
imagined, to pass any Sentence upon her, according to their Law; so that if she
were not legally condemned before they brought her before him, she was at
liberty for any such Power that he had to pass Sentence upon her. But the most
remarkable passage for his disclaiming all Earthly Power, is in his Examination
before Pontius Pilate, Joh. 18. 36. to whom he freely confesses, that he is a
King, but to prevent his jealousy or mistake, he both immediately declares
that his Kingdom is not of this World, * and clearly explains what Audite
Judaei and Gentes, audi circumcisio, audi praeputium, audite omnia regna
terrena. Non impedio dominationem vestram in hoc Mundo: Regnum meum non est de
hoc Mundo. Augustine. in Evang. Johan. Tract. 115.
he means by it: For, If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants
fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews. From which words we
understand his evident meaning when he professes that his Kingdom is not of
this World, that it is not endued with any power of the Sword. So that for any
of his Officers or Subjects, to make any resistance to the Civil Power by the
Sword, in defense of his Kingdom, is to destroy the very nature of it^
Constitution, that consists in this, that it is to be governed by the power of
Truth, and is distinguished from the Kingdoms of this World, in that it is a
Kingdom without the power of the Sword. And therefore for any Officers in it to
pretend to any such Power by virtue of any Authority or Commission from him, is
at onc^ both to dethrone and renounce his Kingly Power, because it is a
contradiction to his whole design in the World, to have either such a Kingdom
or such Subjects. And that he further declares to be nothing else then the
Institution of Christian Truth in it, by virtue of its own Goodness. To this
end was I born, and for this cause came I into the World, that I should bear
Witness unto the Truth; every one that is of the Truth hears my Voice. That
is, all Men that are lovers of true Goodness will voluntarily come into my
Kingdom, and submit themselves to my Doctrine and Discipline: for that is the
evident meaning of that phrase, They that are of the Truth, they that are
ingenuous and sincere lovers of it, as in the Epistle to the Romans, c. 2. v.
8. They that are of the Contention, i. e. Persons that are given up to
Contention. So that there is the true State of Christ's Kingdom, that it is a
Kingdom without force within it self, and has no true Subjects but such as
freely and of their own accord submit themselves to it out of love to the
Goodness of its Government. So that whereas all other Kingdoms subsist by the
power of the Sword, his, taken by it self, and as not complicated with the
Civil Government, cannot subsist with it. And therefore when St. Peter drew his
Sword in defense of his Master, he commands him to sheath it, because it was a
Method inconsistent with his Design, Matthew. 26. 53. Think thou that I cannot
now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more then Twelve Legions
of Angels? If that had been the proper method to compass his design, and to
settle his Kingdom, he could easily have done it by an Army of Angels, but that
would have spoiled the whole work, had he betook himself to any forcible
defense, who was to establish an Institution in the World by no other means
then its own Truth and Goodness. Many reasons are given of our Savior's
reproof to St. Peter by learned Men of all Factions, to enhance, or abate its
obligation; but the only true reason is, that which himself has here given,
that it was utterly inconsistent with the nature of his Institution. This was
the sense of the Doctors of the Church, through all Ages down to the very time
of Gratian himself in the year 1150, an hundred years and more, after the time
of Pope Gregory the Seventh; so that though he had declared and practiced
against it, it seems his Doctrine could not speedily obtain any great footing
in the Christian Church: who treating of the power of the Sword to whom it
belongs, determines from this very passage, that of all Men the Officers of the
Church have nothing to do with it. De Episcopis Decret. secunda pars causa 23.
quaest. 8.
vero vel quibuslibet Clericis, quod nec sua auctoritate nec auctoritate Romani
Pontificis arma arripere valiant facile probatur. Cum enim Petrus, qui primus
Apostolorum a Domino fuerat electus, materialem gladium exerceret, ut Magistrum
a Judaeorum injuria defensaret, audivit [converte gladium tuum in vaginam:
Omnis enim qui gladium acceperit, a gladio peribit] ac si aperte ei diceretur,
hactenus tibi tuisque praedecessoribus inimicos Dei licuit gladio corporali
persequi: deinceps in exemplum patientiae gladium tuum, id est, tibi hactenus
commissum, in vaginam converte: and tamen spiritualem gladium, quod est verbum
Dei, in mactatione veteris vitae exerce. Omnis enim praeter illum vel
auctoritatem ejus, qui legitima potestate utitur, qui, ut ait Apostolus, non
sine caus^ gladium portat, cui etiam omnis anima subdita esse debet, omnis,
inquam, qui praeter auctoritatem hujusmodi gladium acceperit, gladio peribit.
As for Bishops and all Orders of the Clergy, it is evident that they ought not
to take up Arms either by their own, or the Pope's Authority. For when Peter
the Prince of the Apostles brandish't the material Sword, to defend his Master
from the violence of the Jews, he heard a Voice, Put up thy Sword into its
Scabbard, for all that take the Sword shall perish by the Sword. As if he had
expressly said, hitherto it has been allowed thee and thy Predecessors (i. e. I
suppose the High Priests under the Old Testament) to punish the Enemies of God
with the Corporal Sword, but from this time forward I command thee to sheath it
for an example of Patience, and use the Spiritual Sword, which is the Word of
God, to Sacrifice the lusts of the old life. For all beside him, or the
Authority of him, who is endued with legal Power, and who, as the Apostle says,
bears not the Sword in vain, and to whom every Soul ought to be Subject, every
Man, I say, that draws the Sword without his Authority, shall perish by it. And
this state of the question he proves from the Authority of diverse ancient
Councils and Popes, which I here forbear to recite, because I intend (if God
permit) to consider them in their proper Times and Places, for that is my
design as I proceed to reap the whole field of Church Records, and not Glean,
as the common Custom is, its scattered fragments. Only this passage of the
Father of the Canonists I have here dropped in, to let his modern Followers, that
are one and all base flatterers of the Roman Court against all Sovereign
Powers, see how enormously they wander from the Text of their own Law, as well
as the Holy Bible. But to return, our Savior having declared to the President
what his Kingdom was not, i. e. a Kingdom destitute of Force and the Power of
the Sword; he proceeds to declare what it was, viz. a Kingdom of Truth. Which
Pilate taking to be some kind of Stoical Kingdom, for such a thing the Stoics
pretended to at an high rate by virtue of their Philosophy, he asks him what is
the Truth that he professes. But reflecting, it seems, with himself, that it
was not pertinent for a Judge upon the Bench to enter into a Philosophic
dispute with a Prisoner at the Bar, he lets fall the Question by not staying
for an Answer.

But beside these evident passages in our Savior's conversation for
disclaiming all Civil Sovereignty, there is one Text, that is usually by
mistake applied to this purpose, though it relate to a very different matter,
Barclay contra Monarchom. l. 3. p. 157. Salmas. defens. Reg. cap. 3.
and that is Matthew. 17. 27. where our Savior is supposed to pay Tribute to the
Roman Collectors, and that is owning his subjection to their Government. But
the Didrachma, the Money there demanded of him, was not Tribute money paid to
the Roman Publicans, for we never read of any such Tax, but Temple-money paid
to the Jewish Priests and their Collectors, for the Use and Service of the
Temple, and this continued till the time of Vespatian, who, as Josephus relates
it, imposed upon the Jews this Tax of two Drachms, that they had hitherto paid
toward the repairs and annual expenses of the Temple at Jerusalem, for the use
of the Capitol at Rome. And this explains the true meaning and reason of our
Savior's demur to its payment, when he asks Peter, Whether Princes are wont to
take Tribute of their own Children; because this Tax for the Temple Service was
gathered in God's Name, and was called God's Tax; as Josephus more then once
expresses it, and therefore it was as improper for our Savior, who was the Son
of God, and as it were Prince of the Temple, to pay this kind of Tribute, as it
is for an Heir of the Crown to be Taxed by the King his Father, after the same
rate with his other Subjects. But though these Gentlemen have grossly mistaken
the Text, their Antimonarchical Adversaries profanely abuse it when they
pretend, as they unanimously do, That our Savior paid this Tax for himself and
Peter (as they conceit, to Herod, who had converted the Revenue of the Temple
to his own use) purely to avoid offense, yet they were not bound to do it, and
if Peter, because a Disciple of Christ was here made free from paying
burthensom Taxes, so are all Christians as free as he, and may legally refuse
to submit to such Tyrannous Impositions. As if our Savior were such a Prophet
as Mahomet, who headed the Rebellion of the Soldiers against the Emperor
Heraclius; or rather such another Messiah as Judas of Galilee, who pretended to
be sent of God to instruct his People, that they ought not to pay Tribute to
the Romans; and as Rabbi Gamaliel informs us, Act. 5. 37. drew away much People
after him, whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices to stop the
Contagion of their seditious Doctrines, and declared it High Treason for any
Man to teach (...), that it is not lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar. And that
very probably was the true ground why the Jews made it the chief Article of our
Savior's Accusation before Pilate, That he perverted the Nation, forbidding
them to pay Tribute to Caesar. And it is evident, that it was the craft of the
Pharisees and Herodians, when they went about to entangle him with this
Question, Whether it was Lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar or not, that they
might expose him to the Roman Officers, expecting that he would have declared
himself an Assertor of the Jewish Liberty, agreeable to the present Doctrine of
the Zealots and the Gaulonites, that it was not lawful to be Subject to any
Power but God alone. But he very wisely avoids their snare by answering, That
they might serve God, and pay Tribute to Caesar too; and therefore seeing it
appeared by the Inscription upon the Coin, that Caesar was their Sovereign
Prince, it was not only lawful, but their bounden Duty to pay him Tribute,
because it was only to render him what was his Due. And in reality, this whole
Transaction between our Savior and these Trapanning Enquirers, is the clearest
state of his Doctrine against resistance to the worst of Princes, upon any
pretense of Religion whatsoever: For Tiberius was then the present Emperor, a
Man infamous to all Ages for his Falsehood and Cruelty, Lust, and Debauchery,
whose whole Reign was nothing but Fraud and Oppression; but above all he was
most severe to the Jews, and their Religion, banished them Rome, J^s. de B^lso
Judaico; l. 2. c. 14.
and dispersed them into the worst Parts of the Empire. And yet when our
Savior is asked his Opinion concerning submission to so brutal a Prince, he has
no regard to his Personal Qualifications, but to the Rights of Sovereignty:
Whatever the Man is, it is enough that he is your Prince, and after that there
is no room left to resist his Impositions. And here it is farther to be
observed, that the Question and the Answer is general, not Whether it were
lawful to pay Tribute to Tiberius only, but to Caesar, to any Emperor; to which
the Answer is round and peremptory, Whoever is your Sovereign you are bound to
submit to his Impositions, and therefore seeing you own the Emperor for your
Sovereign by using the Coin stamped with his Image (which is the very badge of
Sovereignty in all Nations) you are as well bound in Duty to submit to his
Commands, as you are to obey God's; and as it is your Duty to Worship God, so
is it to pay Tribute to the Emperor. But according to our new Hildebrandine and
Antichristian Divinity, our Savior ought to have answered with more caution,
and distinguished concerning the Legality of Caesar's Impositions, and demurred
upon the Qualifications of his Person: If he be a good Man, and govern
according to Law, I would advise you to pay him Tribute: But otherwise, if he
be an Oppressor, and his Tax immoderate, resist and take up Arms against the
Tyrant; and as you will be faithful to your Country, your Religion, and your
Liberties, deliver them from the burden of his Tyrannical Government. This one
Principle is the result of all the Antimonarchical Pleas and Apologies to
warrant Resistance; and no doubt it would make wise work in the World, if every
Subject might lawfully take up Arms against his Prince, as often as he is pleased
in his own wisdom to find fault with his Government. And yet that, I say, is
the bottom of all Antimonarchical Pretenses, that they may, and ought to defend
their Liberties by force of Arms against the Sovereign Prince, if he do not
Govern according to Law: And so this very Text is glossed by one of the
wittiest Patrons of the Cause, Cum Dei simus, i. e. vere liberi, ob eamque
causam soli De^ reddendi, profecto Caesari nos, i. e. homini, and praesertim
Injusto, Improbo, Tyranno in servitutem tradere sine piaculo, and quidem maximo
Sacrilegio non possumus. When we are God's Subjects, and truly free, and are to
be accountable to God alone, we cannot deliver up our selves into Caesar's
servitude, who is but a Man, but especially if he be Unjust, Wicked,
Tyrannical, without Villainy and Sacrilege. A very gentle Gloss this, upon our
Savior's Text, to make it so far from any suspicion of sin to Rebel against
unjust, or wicked Princes, that not to destroy them and their Tyranny were
Villainy, Sacrilege, and Treason against God himself. And thus, if this Gloss
be once admitted, is our Savior made an open Gaulonite, declaring himself and
all his followers free from the unjust exactions of Sovereign Powers: which is
only to charge him with that very Crime that his most implacable Enemies would
have fastened upon him. So profane are these Men forced to be in their
wickedness, as to justify Treason by Blasphemy, and no Blasphemy can be ranker
then to make our Savior a Patron of Rebellion. But because this Gloss looks
too bold, they have an evasion to shift the Text, viz. That our Savior did not
Answer, but only baulk and involve the Question, in that there is no
consequence that the Money was Caesar's because stamped with his Impression, for
then all that we have would for the same reason be Caesar's too. But as the
Gloss accuses our Savior of breach of honesty, by making him invade the Power
of the Sword when he had disclaimed it; so this evasion charges him with defect
of understanding, as if our Savior had been so weak as to argue Caesar's Title
of Propriety from his Inscription. Whereas any Man of Common sense, if he will
not industriously pervert it, cannot but understand that our Savior argues
from the known Custom of all Nations in the World, to stamp their Coin with
their King's Image, so that the piece of Money that they showed him bearing
Caesar's Picture, that was an Evidence that he was their Sovereign Lord, and
therefore were they bound to submit to him in all his Commands that were not
inconsistent with the Law of God; and paying of Tribute not being so, it was
not only no sin, but a necessary Duty, or, as St. Paul expresses it, in
pursuance of his Masters Precept, Romans 13. 6, 7.
exhorting and commanding the Christians to pay Tribute not only for Fear, but
for Conscience sake, and because it is due.

This Sense is so very plain and unavoidable, that nothing but malicious
difingenuity could pervert it; and the truth of it is, this sort of men seem to
take a kind of Pride and Delight in insulting ever the Holy Scriptures, and
make them ridiculous by their own imperious glosses to avoid their force, as we
shall see as we proceed. But at present to give one example for all, there are
among them that blush not to prove our Savior's Civil Dominion over the Kings
of the Earth from the blessed Virgins Song. He has defeated the Proud in the
imagination of their hearts, he has put down the Mighty from their Seat, and
has exalted the humble and meek. In which words she glorifies the Goodness and
Wisdom of God, that he was pleased that his Son should be born of a poor
despised Maid, and not as the great Men of the World expected, of them that
sat upon the Thrones of the Earth; from which humble and grateful piece of
Devotion to infer, that she rejoiced and triumphed in the Prospect of that
Confusion that her Son should bring upon the World, by subverting and pulling
down all the established Governments in it, and erecting every where new
Kingdoms and Principalities by his own Prerogative; it is so rude an imposing,
not only on this particular passage, but upon the whole Tenor of the Gospel it
self, and the nature of our Saviors Office, as argues a strange height either
of Pride or Profaneness. For nothing can be more evident from all the
preceding passages, and the whole Scope of the Gospel, then our Savior's
disclaimour of any pretense to any Temporal Authority. And the truth of it is,
if he had laid claim to any such Power, his Religion had stood upon no better
Foundation than that of Mahomet, that was at first planted and propagated, and
has hitherto been maintained by nothing but the power of the Sword. Whereas the
Design of our Savior's Institution was pure and unmixt Religion, and therefore
abetted it self and its Laws by no other Sanctions, then only the rewards and
punishments of the life to come. And the same Power that he claimed and
exercised himself, and no other, he devolved upon his Apostles, from them to
descend to their Successors to the end of the World; so that all their power,
whatever it is, being derived from him, is of the same nature with that, which
himself whilst on Earth challenged as Head of his Church. And yet it is plain
that as Head of his Church he was so far from challenging any superiority over
the Powers of the World, that he professed nothing more frankly than an entire
subjection to them. And therefore Sovereign Princes cannot be properly said to
be vested with any power under our Savior as such, for as it is evident that
they are vested with a Supremacy of Power antecedent to his Institution, so is
it as evident that he never gave them any Commission for the Government of his
Kingdom. That power was given to his Apostles, that were as much subject to the
Civil Government, as himself had ever been; so that as he could give them no
Temporal Power because he had, or rather would have none, it is plain that
neither they nor their Successors could pretend to any by virtue of his
Commission. What he enjoys in Heaven as the Son of God, whatever it is, is
peculiar to himself upon the account of his Divinity, but he has communicated
no other to his Church on Earth, then what himself claimed whilst he remained
in it, which was purely spiritual in order to a Future State, but void of all
Temporal Power and Coercion. So that it is but a crude expression (not to call
it profane, because it is so common by customary mistake) to affirm that Kings
are Supreme Governors under Christ. They are and ever were so under God, but so
as to be superior to Christ, as Christ is Head of his Church within their
Dominions. For as Head of his Church he ever owned himself subject to the
Temporal Powers. And therefore what absoluteness of power soever he enjoys by
virtue of his Divine Nature, yet as the Messiah or the Mediator of the new
Covenant (for as such he was man, 1 Timothy 2. 5.) or as the Head and Founder of
the Christian Society, he strips both himself and his Officers of all pretenses
to, and advantages of Temporal Power. The reason of it we must carry with us
all along, because it is the Essential thing peculiar to his Institution, that
it might be able to subsist purely upon its own strength, and maintain it self
purely by virtue of its own Goodness, and that not only without the Assistance,
but against the utmost Opposition of all Worldly Power. And therefore the wise
Providence of God so ordered things, that it was sent into the World under all
disadvantages, but only of its own Truth and Goodness. And by that alone it
prevailed over all the World, before it had the least countenance from the
Civil Powers, nay whilst it was with all their strength, zeal, and malice
oppressed by them. And this is the only thing that made it pure Religion, and
distinguished it from all other Religions in the World; whereas had it any
certain Temporal advantage annexed to it as such, men had been invited to
embrace it as matter of Interest, and not of Conscience, and then it had become
Worldly Policy, and ceased to have been Religion. That then is the first
Principle upon which our whole Christianity lies, that all the Advantages,
Privileges, and Preheminences, that the Church can pretend to derive from our
Savior are purely Spiritual, relating only to the State of Souls in the World
to come. And if the Church any where enjoy any other Dignities or
Jurisdictions, it derives them wholly from the Grants and Charters of Sovereign
Princes, who may endow them with what Privileges themselves think convenient,
as they may any other Order of their Subjects. And what Powers or Privileges
all States that profess Christianity, are bound by that profession to settle
upon the Church, I shall show in its proper place, but whatever they are, the
Church cannot challenge them by it is Original Charter. So that if any Church
shall be so presumptuous as to pretend to any such Power, which way soever it
comes in, whether directly or indirectly, by virtue of our Savior's
Commission, that is not only a Contradiction to the Nature of Christianity, but
an Atheistical Abuse put upon the whole Design of the Institution. But as to
pretend to any such Power from our Savior only over Subjects, is no less then
Blasphemy against him; so to pretend to it over Sovereigns, doubles the
Blasphemy by adding the Sin of Rebellion to that of Impiety, and utterly
destroys not only the Being and Constitution of a Christian Church, but of all
humane Societies. So that how many Marks soever there may be of a true Church,
this alone is an infallible Note of a false one. And therefore every Church
that refuses to disclaim any Temporal Power over Princes, renounces the
Christian Faith, and forfeits all the Rights and Privileges of a Christian
Church; but if it should be so vain as openly to claim any such power, it bids
open defiance to our Savior, and quits him and his Religion to follow Mahomet.
So that there is no one thing in the World can so effectually unchurch a
Church, as its claiming any Temporal Authority to it self, especially over
Sovereign Powers. And this I doubt will light very severely upon the Bishops of
Rome ever since the Hildebrandine Apostasy, viz. That the Pope as Vicar of
Christ, has a power of deposing Sovereign Princes, and absolving Subjects from
their Allegiance; this they have owned whenever they durst, and put in practice
whenever they could, and would never be brought upon any Terms to condemn it,
which Doctrine certainly is the greatest unkindness that they can do
themselves, and the worst thing that their greatest Enemies could desire to
object against them; and if any thing can prove his Holiness to be Antichrist,
this is the thing, because it is an utter Subversion of the whole State of
Christianity, and makes our Savior a false Christ by making him a Temporal
Messiah, and placing him in the head of an Army to subdue the Princes and
Nations of the World into subjection to himself. I am sure for this very reason
does the Learned Cardinal Baronius make Mahomet the Type of Antichrist, because
he promoted his Religion over several parts of the World by force of Arms, Quod
armorum Ad ^nnum, 650. ^. 14.
potentia tot provincias nullo ferme negotio per suos posteros ejusdem sectae
homines subjugasset. He would have done well to have applied this Censure
nearer home, and then he would not have justified all the Rebellious Popes in
their violencies and outrages, that they acted against Sovereign Princes, and
yet no man has done it with more diligence then himself, as I shall prove when
I come to consider his Performance. Neither will this Charge of Apostasy light
only upon the Church of Rome, but upon every Church that maintains a right of
resistance to Sovereign Powers upon a pretense of Christian Religion
whatsoever, for that is still to take to themselves such a power against their
Prince by our Saviors Authority, which is the same direct contradiction to the
Nature of the Christian Faith, and the same sort of Apostasy from Christianity
to Mahumetism, putting a Scymeter into our Saviors hand, and under his
pretended conduct waging War against their lawful Sovereign, and that is the
greatest dishonor that they can bring to their Master or themselves, And yet
we shall find some other Churches a much guilty of this Apostasy both in
Doctrine and Practice as that of Rome, and though Rome and they stand at the
greatest distance of Enmity, out of Jealousy of one another who should carry
the prize, yet they both fully agree in this fundamental Antichristian
Principle. But this Charge will come home in its proper place, at present we
must take this Article of faith all along with us. No Temporal Authority in the
Church unless from the grant of the State.

. III.
But then secondly it must be granted too, that the Power of Princes, how great
soever in Church matters, supposes the Spiritual Authority of the Church, that
was as much settled by our Savior, without any dependency on the Authority of
the State, as the Authority of the State was settled by the Providence of God,
before there was any such thing as a Christian Church in the World. So that it
is undeniably evident from its original Constitution, that the Church subsists
no more upon the State as to its proper Power, then the State upon the Church.
For as the Christian Church came into the World, after the Civil Government of
States was entirely settled in it, so did the World come into the Church after
its Government was as entirely fixed within it self. And therefore as
Christianity by its coming into the World ought no manner of way to abate the
Civil Power of the State, so neither when the Powers of the World come into the
Church, ought they to diminish any thing of that Authority, that it enjoyed by
Divine Commission before they came into it. For they are received into it upon
the same terms with all other Proselytes of the Christian Faith, that they
submit themselves to it as our Soviour's own Institution. So that as our first
point is, That all Sovereign Princes have, or ought to have, an Imperial
Supremacy over all Ecclesiastical Persons, and in all Ecclesiastical Causes;
Our second is, That this Supremacy, which is the highest Power that can be on
Earth, is no Ecclesiastical, but a Civil Supremacy. For beside that, it would
be a dishonor to degrade a Sovereign Prince to the Priestly Office: The
Ecclesiastical Power is purely Spiritual, and that is a Power that was never
challenged by any Prince, nor directly given by any Man (though it is so by
plain and undeniable consequence by all that disown an Inherent Authority in
the Church, from our Savior's own Commission) but only Mr. Hobbs, who as he
made the Prince his own Priest, made him his own God too. Now these two
Principles laid together, clear up the Nature and Title of the Supremacy of
Sovereign Princes, That it is none of that Spiritual Power that is lodged in
the Church, but a Temporal Supremacy over all the Spiritual Power of it, within
his own Dominions. And now if these two Principles, that are as certain as
Christianity it self, were but calmly attended to, they would perfectly silence
all the clamours of both the extreme Parties in this Controversy. Those of the
Church of Rome must cease their noise, that we make the King a Bishop, by
acknowledging his Supremacy in all Ecclesiastical Causes, and over all
Ecclesiastical Persons, when upon this State of the Question such a Supremacy
over all things and persons within their Dominions, is inseparable from all
Sovereign Power, and Christianity, and all the Power that it brings along with
it, comes into the World upon its supposition: So that by it we are so far from
making the King a Priest, that without it, we cannot own him to be our King.
And on the other side, when we assert a Spiritual Power to the Church, distinct
from, though subject to the King's Supremacy, others cry out Popery,
Praemunires, and I know not what hard names, they would soon let fall their
outcry, if they would consider that it is such a Power as never any Prince
exercised, or wittingly challenged (though it is possible that some may have
run upon it by mistake) and is neither Temporal nor Foreign Jurisdiction. And
in those two points lies the malignity of the pretended Supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome; for as it is Temporal, it plainly subjects the Regal Authority to its
Empire; and as it is Foreign, it makes the whole Kingdom Feudatory, and brings
us into the form of a Province under an Italian Prince; both which are such
abuses of Government, as evidently subvert it. Nay farther, as a Foreign
Temporal Jurisdiction is inconsistent with the English Monarchy; so is all kind
of Foreign Jurisdiction, though merely Spiritual, irreconcilable with the
Prerogative Royal. The reason and the account whereof, I shall give in its
proper place, when I come to state that easy, but yet undiscovered Point of
the Divine Authority of National Churches. All that I am obliged to at present
is to show the difference between that Authority that we assign to the Church
of England, and that which the Bishop of Rome would Usurp; against which though
there were nothing else to be objected but its being Foreign, for that reason
alone it ought to be banished the Nation as an Enemy to the Civil Government.
Whereas the Authority of the Church of England is seated in the King's own
Subjects, who can call them to an account for it, if they use it to his own or
his Subjects prejudice, and can as well punish them for any disorders in the
abusive Exercise of it, as he can any of his own Officers for their
misdemeanors in their trust in the Commonwealth. So that so far is the King's
Supremacy, as it is stated in the Church of England, from entrenching upon the
proper Power of the Church, as the Romanists cavil, that it only protects it in
the due exercise of its Jurisdiction: And so far is the proper power of the
Church from disclaiming or abating any thing of the King's Supremacy, as the
other Factions clamor, that it first Establishes that upon the most lasting
Foundations of Divine Institution, before it makes any claim to its own Power,
and when it does, it does it upon no other Terms then of entire submission to
its Supreme Authority. And now that Man must wilfully dream, that can imagine
such a power as this in the Church, can be any way prejudicial to, or
detractive from the Civil Government; and yet that such a Power there is, is an
assertion worth no less then our Christianity it self, that stands or falls
with it. For if our Savior have not entrusted his Church with a Power within
it self, sufficient to maintain it self by virtue of his own Authority, then it
stands upon no stronger Foundation then the Will of the Sovereign Power. And
then as that can Establish, so it can Abrogate its whole Obligation; which is
plainly to say, that it is no True Religion, for it is certainly none if it
rely only upon humane Authority. So that all that can be concluded in this
case is, that upon supposition that our Christian Faith is an Imposture, there
can be no Power in the Christian Church, and that for a very good reason,
because then the Church can be no Church. But upon supposition that our Savior
founded it by Divine Authority, the peculiar Power of the Church derived merely
and immediately from himself, without any interposition of humane Authority, is
the first thing to be believed as absolutely necessary to its Being and
Subsistence.

But this will appear with a brighter evidence, if we consider the several
branches of Jurisdiction, that as they are complicated with the supposition of
Christianity, so are they such acts of Power as no Sovereign Power ever
challenged, or can with any decency exercise. As the Power of Preaching the
Gospel through all Nations of the World, in the Name, and by the Authority of
God: The Power of granting, or withholding the Instruments of Grace, the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist: The Power of the Keys, or judging who
are fit to be admitted into the Society of the Christian Church, and who ought
to be cast out of it for nonperformance of the Conditions undertaken at their
Admittance: The Power of instructing the People in the Duties of Religion, or
guiding and directing them in the safest way to Salvation: The Power of
Ordaining, Consecrating, and Constituting Ecclesiastical Officers, to succeed
in the Government of the Church through all Ages. These are the several points
of their Commission, and are granted to be so by Mr. Hobbs himself, and that at
the very time Leviath. part. 3. cap. 42.
when he undertakes to demonstrate, that all these acts of Power are no acts of
Authority. And that is one of his choicest methods of Demonstration in all
things, to bear down the undeniable Truth of all things by mere force of
Assertion; thus here he reckons up the chief Acts of Authority in the Apostle's
Commission, and then will bear us down that they are no Acts of Authority, only
by saying so, and that against the Common Sense of Mankind. For if they had a
Commission from our Savior to do these things, then were they Empowred and
Authorized by their Commission to do them. So absurd a thing is it to talk of
acting by Commission without acting by Power, whereas every Commission as such,
is granting so much Power. And therefore if the Apostles and their Successors
were Commissioned by our Savior to these several Acts of their Office (as he
grants, because it cannot be denied) every Act is an effect of that Power that
is settled upon them by virtue of their Commission. And is it not strange, that
this witty Gentleman should begin all this Extravagant discourse against all
Power Ecclesiastical as such, with this very Assertion, That the Power
Ecclesiastical was at first in the Apostles, and after them in such as received
it from the Apostles by successive laying on of hands. What thickness of
Contradiction is this, A Power Ecclesiastical, and yet no Power at all? Why
then if it be no Power, it is no Power Ecclesiastical, and if it be a Power
Ecclesiastical, then it is some Power. And then again a Power by virtue of our
Savior's Commission, i. e. a Power warranted by Divine Authority; and to say
that this is no Power, is plainly to aver^, That there is no such thing as
Divine Authority. And upon this supposition that lies at the bottom of all this
witty Authors folly and Philosophy, it must be confessed, that there can be no
Ecclesiastical Power over the Christian Church, either in the Clergy or any Man
else, because upon it there is neither Christian Church nor Christian Religion,
and then it is certain, that there can be no Power over nothing. So vain are
all the Attempts against that Authority that our Blessed Savior has granted to
the Apostolical Succession, that it cannot be removed by any other Principles,
then what directly overthrow Christianity it self, upon those Terms it must be
parted with, but upon no other. And though Mr. Hobbs speaks out more boldly
then his Neighbors, yet all the followers of Erastus, and all that will own ^
certain Form of Government established in the Church by Divine Right, cannot
avoid the Church of Leviathan. And therefore to proceed with him as Foreman to
speak for all the rest, it is evident that beside the Authority, by which the
Apostles and their Successors act, every act that they are enabled to by their
Commission, is in its own Nature, and as such an Authoritative Act.

First, such is the power of Preaching, and Teaching, i. e. the power of
publishing the Laws of the Gospel to all Nations, and requiring all Men's
Obedience to them under the sanction of the greatest Rewards and Penalties. And
if Mr. Hobbs can affirm that exacting Obedience upon such terms be no piece of
Authority, it is in vain either to reason with himself, or any other Man of his
Kidney or Understanding. But he proves it to be so, because The Apostles were
Preachers, and Preachers are Cryers, and Cryers have no right to Command. Among
the many bad qualities in this Author's way of writing, his contempt of other
Men's understandings is none of the least, for if he had not a very low Opinion
of their intellectual Abilities, he could never have presumed to impose upon
them by such childish pretenses. And the truth of it is, he talks, not as if he
discoursed to Men, but to Magpies, Parots, and Jackdaws, that are to learn to
chatter his Dictates by Rote. For is it not a strange grossness of Confidence,
that when our Blessed Savior came from God to publish a new Law to the World,
and enforce it with the severest Penalties, and when he gave the same
Commission to his Apostles that himself had received from his Father, to
publish this Law to the World, though they do it with all this Authority to
infer, that they do it with none at all, because when they declare their
Message, they open their mouths as Cryers do when they make Proclamations, and
so the original Word signifies any kind of public Declaration. And what if it
were the proper term for the Cryers Office, it may for all that, in common
Speech be applied to any other way of Publication; it will be hard to find out
any one word in the World so severely stinted to its original Import. However
every Schoolboy could have informed the old Philosopher that this word is not
so confined, and that it is not, is evident from the very passage it self,
because the Apostles that are said to Proclaim or Cry the Gospel to all
Nations, do not make a simple Proclamation, but require Obedience to what they
publish under the most forcible obligation of Rewards and Punishments. And such
Proclamation as that, whatever the term Proclaiming may signify in its naked
sense, brings with it as much Authority as it is possible for Government to put
in practice. But he farther affirms, in proof of no Authority in the Church,
That the Apostles and other Ministers of the Gospel are our Schoolmasters, and
not our Commanders. But beside that this is an Arbitrary Assertion of his own
devising to assign them the Office of Schoolmasters, for the Scripture no
where does so: The Authority of a Schoolmaster is some Authority, for though
he have not the Power of the Sword, he has that of the Rod, and that is as
effectual for his purpose among Boys, as the other among Men. So that there is
no Logique in the Argument, neither can I believe so witty a Man to have been
so weak as to have brought it for that purpose, but rather because he thought
the comparison was a witty slur upon Christianity, as if it were as childish
and contemptible an Office to instruct men in it, as it is to teach Boys and
Children their Elements of Speech. That is a shrewd hint, though the next
comparison is much more poinant, That our Savior compares Preaching to
Fishing, i. e. to winning Men to Obedience, not by coertion and punishing, but
by persuasion, and therefore our Savior calls not Apostles hunters of Men, but
fishers of Men. Now though his endeavor to prove that there is no Authority in
the Officers of the Church, because they have no Civil Authority, is altogether
vain and trifling, because he only presumes what no Man will grant him, that
there is no other Authority in the World; yet here his way of demonstration is
somewhat more then usually pleasant, viz. That they were endued with no power
of Coertion, because our Savior has constituted them, not his Huntsmen, but
his Fishermen: Where I think it would require the Acuteness of Mr. Hobbs's wit
to make it out, why there is less Coertion in Fishing, then in Hunting,
especially in Net-fishing, which was their former Trade, to which he knows our
Savior there alludes; when this mighty difficulty is cleared up, I may come to
understand the force of the Argument, but till then, I must confess it is above
my reach. But hitherto it is evident that notwithstanding all this Gentleman's
Grammatical Demonstrations from Cryers, Schoolmasters, and Fishers, that the
Commission granted to the Apostles and their Successors to preach the Gospel,
did not only carry proper Authority in it, but the highest sort of Authority,
because enforced with the greatest Rewards and Penalties, and that every man
knows is the very Life and Soul of all Power.

The next branch of their Commission is to Baptize in the Name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and though the Philosopher would here make himself
merry, not only with the Sacrament, but with the Holy Trinity, in whose Name it
is Administered, yet after all his pains to prove it no Authority, he fairly
confesses, That it is an Authority either to Baptize, or refuse to Baptize,
because Baptism is the Sacrament of Allegiance, of them that are to be received
into the Kingdom of God. But certainly if they have Power to grant or deny them
this Sacrament, i. e. to receive them into the Kingdom of God, or shut them out
of it, if there be any such thing as Power in the World, there cannot be a
greater then this. And consequent to this Authority, he says, is the Remission
and Retention of Sins, or the Power of Loosing and Binding, and for this, I
must confess he gives a pertinent reason (for so he is forced to do sometimes,
merely by the truth of things against his own petulant design) For seeing to
Baptize is to Declare the reception of Men into Gods Kingdom, and to refuse to
Baptize is to declare their Exclusion; it follows, that the Power to declare
them cast out, or retained in it, was given to the Apostles, and their
Substitutes and Successors. And so it does unavoidably, for they being received
upon certain conditions, those that received them upon promise of performing
those Conditions, must have a standing and perpetual Power to judge of their
performance, and accordingly either to continue them in the Church or Kingdom
of God, or cast them out. But would not one take the Man to be bereft of his
Wits, that should rave and talk of nothing but the Authority and Power of these
Acts, whilst he is eagerly disputing against their being Acts of Power and
Authority. Such is the inconsistency of Mr. Hobbs's rovings, and how can he
help it, whilst he would make the Testimony of the Gospel to destroy
Christianity it self, for that is the folly of his undertaking in the
Leviathan, that he would make the Christian Faith appear a forgery, and prove
it so by the Scriptures. A contradiction so round, as could never have met in
any Man's head that had not squared the Circle and Demonstratively proved from
one and the same Topic, there must, and that there must not be a God. Both
which he has confidently undertaken, and in his opinion performed, and I
believe may sooner do it, then prove the greatest Acts of Power in the World to
be no Acts of Power at all.

But after Mr. Hobbs has, in spite of himself, granted all that Authority to
the Church that he would deny, and that the Church can demand, his next work is
to render it useless and ridiculous. For first he would place it in the People,
but that I shall not at present dispute with him or any other, that deny the
distinct Power of the Church, for whether it be in the People or not is all one
to their Assertion that it is no where, and the Seat of it is another question
that supposes its being somewhere. Only by the way it is observable, how Mr.
Hobbs through his whole Book shelters his Profaneness under the then Reigning
Principles of Independency; and the truth is, that wild Confusion of things is
a fit Protection for all sorts of folly and wickedness. For when the Rabble are
made Supreme Judges in any Cause, as they are by the Independent Principles of
all Causes both in Church and State, that is breach wide enough for the Trojan
Horse to enter, and leaves the Government of both at the mercy of all manner of
Madness and Sedition. For the whole mystery of the project concludes in this,
to leave every Man at liberty to do what he pleases, without being accountable
for his actions to any Superiors; and that is in express terms to abolish all
Government, and even break up Families themselves. But though it be advantage
enough to subvert the Government, it is much more to invert it: For all
Resolution of Government into the People sets the Feet upon the Head, and the
part governed above the part governing: And the result of it, when reduced to
practice, is to set up one Great and Royal Slave as a mark for the Insolence of
the Multitude. And whenever they are put upon it by Ambitious Men to challenge
their original Sovereignty; if the Prince have the ill luck to fall into their
hands, they will be sure to treat him with a more haughty barbarity then they
would any other ordinary Person, thereby to show the greatness of their native
Power. And the wretch that durst be so impudent as to spit in his Sovereign's
face, perhaps would have scorned to have offered the same Indignity to a
fellow-subject; that had been but a common act of Power, and only an affront to
an equal; but to offer so great an indignity to a Sovereign Prince, was truly
becoming one that understood the native greatness of his own Birthright, being
by the original right of Nature a more absolute Prince then the greatest
Monarch in the World of the Peoples Creating. So that upon these terms of
putting the Supreme Power into the Hands or the Heads of the People, it is to
tell the Subjects, that no Man has any Right or Power to Govern them, but as
themselves think good to be Governed; that is, in a word, that they are under
no Government at all.

But secondly, Mr. Hobbs is not content with settling this Sacred Power in the
profane Rabble, unless he make it more idle and ridiculous, as a Power of no
use and effect in it self; because, says he, Excommunication, which is the only
Penalty by which it abets it self, is of no effect upon an Apostate, having
nothing of Damage or Terror in it; not of Terror, because of his unbelief;
nor of Damage, because in times of Persecution he is returned thereby into
favor with the World: And in the World to come is in no worse Estate, then
they which never believed. It is an hard task to struggle against common Sense,
it forces a Man in every breath to choke himself with swallowing his own words.
Thus here by Excommunication, he tells us, That a Man is put into an Estate,
wherein his sins are not forgiven, and so excluded the Kingdom of Heaven. As
great a punishment as can be inflicted upon humane nature, if there be any
punishment in Hell; and yet according to Mr. Hobbs it is none at all, if Men
will not be afraid of it. But whether they will or will not if Christianity be
not a Lie (which though he believed not, he could not suppose, for the
Discourse, if it be any thing, proceeds all along upon that supposition) the
punishment is the same in it self, and has naturally the same effect. And if
some Men at present are so hardy as to despise it, as some are to out-brave all
the punishments of this World, till they overreach them, yet when it comes to
be actually inflicted, they feel its smart as severely as the more timorous and
cowardly Offenders. But when he subjoins, that it can be of no effect in the
World to come, because it puts them into no worse Estate, then they had been
in, if they had never believed. Is not that a Condition bad enough? When by his
belief he obtained Remission of his Sins, and a Right to the Kingdom of Heaven,
and when by his Apostasy he is returned back into a State of Condemnation. And
is the difference of these two States so small, that the loss of one should be
no Damage, and the suffering of the other no Punishment? But beside this, the
State of Apostasy is much worse then that of Infidelity, because Apostates sin
more or less against the Convictions of their own Conscience, and that is the
highest Aggravation of all sins, whereas Men may remain in Infidelity, through
negligence, ^^r want of enquiry, which though a fault, is by no means so
disingenuous as acting against knowledge. But as for this Case of Apostates in
time of Persecution, upon whom, Mr. Hobbs says, Excommunication could have no
effect of Terror. If indeed the Providence of God had not given them
sufficient evidence of their Faith, I will grant it to be true, not only of
that, but of all the other Threatenings of the Gospel. But if God have given
sufficient motives of belief, (as if the Gospel be not a cheat, he has, if it
be, all Mr. Hobbs's dispute is without bottom) a Man's Apostasy is no Fence
against the Reflections of his own Conscience. For though it is in his Power to
deny his Faith for fear of Persecution, yet it is not in his Power to
disbelieve it. So that upon such a Man the Sentence of Excommunication, by
which he is cast out of the Kingdom of Heaven, lights with as much Terror as
upon any other Believer. And there is nothing more evident in the History of
the Primitive Church, then the Efficacy of this Sentence upon such Offenders.
For the greatest part of those that fell in time of Persecution, were by this
means alone recovered to the Church, brought to sue for pardon, and undergo
very severe Penances, as a satisfaction for the Scandal.

But to what purpose do I put my self to the trouble to prove these things,
when all Mr. Hobbs's discourse upon this Argument, runs upon this supposition,
as if Christianity were but a trivial and indifferent thing, that might, or
might not be believed as Men variously fancied, or were casually inclined: And
upon that supposition I will freely grant it to be of as little effect as he
would have it. But if the Providence of God has given us such a Demonstrative
Evidence of the Divine Authority of this Religion, that no Man, who inquires
into it, can wink against its Light, without doing violence to his own
Convictions, then whether Men will or no, it will be a perpetual Terror to
their Consciences. And that this slight Opinion of the Evidence of Christianity
(though upon what slight, and indeed ignorant pretenses I have elsewhere shown)
is the bottom of Mr. Hobbs's meaning, is too manifest from his next branch of
the Supremacy of Sovereign Powers, which indeed is neither better nor worse
then barefaced Blasphemy. And that is the Power of making Scripture Law, i. e.
Obligatory: But if that be the state of the Christian Religion, that it is not
at all material, whether a Man regard it or not, for any Obligation or
Authority in it self, Mr. Hobbs is not to be blamed, unless in point of
Prudence, for all those irreverend abuses, that he has been pleased to put upon
it. But if it be made Law by the Command of God, as it is, if it be not all
imposture in pretending falsely to his Authority, then whatever the Sovereign is
pleased to make of it, Mr. Hobbs and all his Followers, that will allow it no
obligation but from Man, stand Convicted of the most manifest Treason and
Blasphemy against the Sovereign Lord of all, and this part of Ecclesiastical
Supremacy of making Scripture Law, that they give to Kings, they take away from
God himself. After all this rank profaneness, it is almost needless to
consider his last branch of Ecclesiastical Power, viz. the Right of Ordaining,
and Constituting Ecclesiastical Officers, not only because it is of the same
Nature and derived from the same Divine Authority, with all the other
particulars of the Apostolical Commission, but because himself grants it in
general by placing it in the People. For if it be any where, that is enough
against himself, that denies all manner of Power in the Church, but most of all
because he has confessed (and no Man can deny it) the whole truth of the matter
both against the Hobbist and the Independent too; viz. That the Apostles
conveyed their Authority to their Successors, whom themselves Deputed and
Ordained by Imposition of hands, and if so, this Power of constituting
Successors resided in them alone, because no Man could be constituted an
Officer in the Church, but by their Imposition of hands, or those to whom by it
they Transmitted their Power. So that whatever interest they might permit the
People in their Choice or Nomination of their Officers, the whole power of
Constituting them in their Office and Authority lay in themselves alone.

. IV.
But Mr. Hobbs having hitherto treated of the Power Ecclesiastical, as it stood
before the Conversion of Kings, and Men endued with Sovereign Civil Power; and
after his rate of Demonstration proved it to be no Power at all whilst vested
in the Pastors of the Church; he comes now to prove, that it is lodged in Civil
Sovereigns, upon their Conversion to the Christian Faith, and that when it
comes to them, it becomes true and proper Power. But before I consider his
small Arguments, I cannot understand why that which was no Power before,
becomes Power now: There can be but one reason for it, and that is too obvious
in all Mr. Hobbs's Writings, viz. Because it is now abetted with the Penalties
of this life, whereas before it was only abetted with the Penalties of the life
to come; so that the plain English of the Assertion, if spoken out, is this,
that there are no penalties at all but in this life, and then I must confess,
that the power of the Church can be no Power till complicated with the Civil
Power. But the man that discourses upon such Principles as these, has nothing
to do with the Christian Religion, or any thing relating to it. But secondly,
Which way came this Power into Civil Sovereigns? Our Savior left it to his
Apostles, and they delivered it down by Imposition of Hands to others, who were
to conveigh it in the same manner of Succession through all Ages, how then came
Civil Sovereigns by it? If any were Ordained to it, they had it by virtue of
their Ordination, not their Right of Sovereignty; if they were not, which way
could they become possessed of a Power, that was never derived to them in the
way of Ordination, which is the only way in which it can be conveyed, and
therefore if they have it not that way, they can never have it any other. As
for the Principle upon which he founds this Power of the Civil Sovereign,
though it be true in it self, yet it is no proper reason for what he would
infer from it, viz. That the Right of judging what Doctrines are fit for Peace,
and to be taught the Subjects is in all Commonwealths inseparably annexed to
the Sovereign Power Civil. This is undoubtedly true, that they are the proper
Judges of what conduces to the peace and quiet of Government; but then this
Power is common to Heathen as well as Christian Sovereigns, they are all
equally concerned, and obliged to take care of the Public Peace; so that this
Power does not accrue to the Civil Sovereign by his becoming Christian, but was
antecedently and inseparably annexed to the Sovereign Power. And therefore it is
but a vain distinction that Mr. Hobbs makes of the Ecclesiastical Power of
Princes, before and after the Conversion of Civil Sovereigns. When before it,
they have all a right of judging what Doctrines are fit for Peace, that being
inseparably annex't to all Sovereign Power; and after it, they have no more as
Sovereign Princes. And then if the Ecclesiastical Power rested in the Apostles
and their Successors before the Conversion of Civil Sovereigns, it must do so
ever after, for they could not lose that Power that was left them by our
Savior, any other way, but by his own actual transferring it to another; which
he having not done, it continues, as and where it was first settled. So that
Sovereigns as Christian, as they lose no Power they gain none, their Power is
in both Cases Supreme from the nature of Sovereignty. But beside all this,
because they have a right to judge of all things, as far as they concern the
Civil Peace, it is an inference that only becomes Mr. Hobbs's Principles, to
conclude that this gives them a power of judging what is fittest to promote the
Salvation of their Subjects Souls in the World to come. And yet that is the
true and proper Province of Ecclesiastical Power, so to guide and govern the
Church in this World, as to bring the Members of it to Heaven hereafter. And
that is somewhat more then merely to provide for the Civil Peace, and therefore
a right to that, cannot give any right to this, especially when it is by
express Commission settled in another order of Men. All True Religion is indeed
very serviceable to the Interests of Peace and Government, and so far it
concerns the Civil Power, as such, to abett its force with Civil Laws. But then
it has a much farther prospect into the World to come, and the care of that is
committed by our Savior to a particular Order of Men Consecrated to that
Office. How this Power comes not to interfere with the Civil, but is subject to
it, will be shown in the next place, but our present business is only to assert
its Right. And that is so apparent from the whole design and nature of
Christianity, that it cannot subsist without it. For if our Savior enacted the
Christian Law and founded the Christian Church, not by Civil but Divine
Authority; if he Instituted the Apostles and their Successors to govern it,
then their Right of Government stands upon the same bottom with the truth of
Christianity. And if it be true that the Christian Church was planted in the
World by Divine Authority, it is as true, that they have a right to Govern it
by the same Authority. This is so undeniable to common Sense, that Mr. Hobbs
has no way to avoid it, but by denying our Savior's own Supremacy at present,
in that his Kingdom is not to begin till after the Resurrection. But beside the
falsehood and the wickedness of the Assertion, whereby Christianity is made of
no force or use in this World, in that no Man can be obliged to obey its
Precepts, because our Savior has not power to make it Law, till he enters upon
his Kingdom, and that is not till after the end of the World. Beside this, I
say, who could think that any Man that reads the Gospel, could be so
extravagantly foolish as to dream, that it was not intended for present
Obligation, and that no Man is bound to obey any part of it before the day of
Judgment, when that day is appointed on purpose for the distribution of Rewards
and Punishments, according to Men's discharge of their Duty toward it? Mr.
Hobbs would, in my Opinion, have asserted with much more modesty, that God
Almighty had sent his Son into the World upon a sleeveless Errand, though that
is as rank Blasphemy as can be vented; then with so much formality go about to
prove out of the Holy Scriptures themselves, that his coming into it is to no
purpose, because it takes no effect whilst the World lasts. This is to fasten
upon the Almighty such another piece of folly, as his Politiques have run
himself into in another Case, when he tells the World, that the serious belief
of Religion is necessary to Government, and yet that all Religion is nothing
but an Artifice of State; and then it is really no Religion, nor can be
seriously believed, and so can do no service to Government. So here he makes
God himself to send his Son into the World to publish a Law, by Obedience to
which, Men may purchase to themselves a State of Salvation in the World to
come; and yet at the same time makes the same God to declare that this Law, for
the publication whereof he sent his Son into the World, is of no force in this
World to which it was published, and that no Man whilst he lives is under any
obligation of Obedience to it. Upon this supposition would not any Man
conclude, that our Savior might very well have spared all his pains, and not
have been in so much have, and put himself to so much trouble for Enacting a
Law to no purpose, but rather to have deferred its publication to the next
World, in which it was to Commence its Use and Obligation? But the true
Consequence of this Evasion is a clear Demonstration of the distinct power of
the Christian Church, when there is no way to take this away but by abrogating
our Savior's own Authority. For if all Ecclesiastical Power be in the Civil
Sovereign, then he has none, and so Mr. Hobbs, to be consistent with his
Principle, says he has not, while there are Civil Sovereigns in the World. But
if he have any, he has power to Depute what Officers he pleases, and by virtue
of their Deputation they have a Power as independent upon the Sovereign Power,
as that Authority from which their Power is derived. So that to take away the
distinct Power of the Church, as it was settled by our Savior upon the
Apostles and their Successors, is in plain terms to deny his Power as well as
theirs. For if they had a right to it at first by his Grant, and if his grant
be of any Validity, they have the same for ever. So dangerous a thing is it if
Men would seriously consider, to disown the Authority of the Church, it is no
less then renouncing our Savior's own Authority. And I am confident no
Christian Prince would ever accept of any Supremacy of Power upon such terms,
and yet if he challenge to himself, though but a share of that Power, that our
Savior has left to the Apostolical Succession, he must plainly invade that
original Authority in our Savior himself from whom they hold it. So tha^
though we could suppose any Prince so profane, as Mr. Hobbs would make all
Princes, yet we cannot imagine any Man so impudent as to take up his Supremacy
upon no better terms then of Renouncing his Savior, for so does every one that
denies his distinct Authority, and takes it to himself. So inseparably is the
right of Governing the Christian Church annexed to the Apostolical Office by
virtue of our Savior's Divine Authority, that to take it from them and place
it any where else, is open Rebellion against the Sovereignty of God himself.

Thus far have I considered the wild Consequence of that Opinion, that gives
all Power in the Christian Church to the Civil Magistrate, and shown, not only
that it gives them what no Prince was ever so Extravagant as to challenge, a
Power to Administer the Sacraments, a Power to Ordain Ecclesiastical Officers,
a Power to do all those Offices that are known all the World over to be proper
only to the Ecclesiastical Function, but withal, that it apparently takes away
all Authority from our Savior himself. And this in the Conclusion of all I
must say for Mr. Hobbs, that though he sticks not to own all these bad
Consequences, he affirms no more then what he is forced to by his first
Assertion, and whoever gives the proper Ecclesiastical Power to the Civil
Sovereign, if he will not own Mr. Hobbs his Consequences, must quit his own
Assertion. And this I shall prove in its proper place, upon all the followers
of Erastus, that will not acknowledge any form of Ecclesiastical Government
settled by Divine Right, they must Renounce their Christianity, and be Baptized
into the Church of Leviathan.

. V.
And now having avoided these two dangerous extremes, one whereof destroys our
Government, and the other our Religion, upon the supposition of the Truth of
the Premises, there are, and ever must be in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths,
where Christianity is Entertained and Protected, two distinct Jurisdictions, so
as that if we confound them both together, or that either invade or entrench
upon the other, it is as much as our Christianity is worth, and the wrong
either way will light at last upon our Savior's own Authority. For if the
Priest challenge any Temporal Jurisdiction, as derived from our Savior; beside
the violation of the Rights of Sovereign Powers, he directly affronts his
Masters own Government, and in effect disclaims it. For his Kingdom is purely
Spiritual, and he becomes our Lord and Savior by virtue of his Supremacy over
it; and therefore to pretend to any Power of another Nature from him as head of
his Church, is the thing that I charge with turning Christ into Mahomet, and
forces upon him in spite of his own Protestation against it, a Temporal
Dominion. Which is such an abuse of his Institution, and such a contradiction
to his whole Design, that to call him Impostor would not be a greater
Blasphemy. For this implies no less then that under pretense of such a
Religious and Innocent design of erecting a Kingdom but not of this World, he
really intended no other Design then to advance an Universal Empire over all
the World, and all the Sovereign Powers of it. And on the other side, if a
Sovereign Prince shall assume to himself the Exercise of that Power, that is
peculiarly vested in the Governors and Officers of the Church, and so take upon
him the sole Government of it as such, instead of Governing the Church he
destroys it, when every Church as a Church is capable of no other Government,
then what was delegated to the Apostolical Office by our Savior's own special
Commission, after the full settlement of the Rights of Sovereign Princes. So
that after this, for them to take it to themselves, is to act not only without,
but against our Savior's own express Commission, when he has so particularly
appropriated that Power to another Order of Men. Neither is it only an
encroachment upon our Savior's own Authority, but an assuming of it to
himself. In that the Prince thereby Challenges the Supreme Government of our
Savior's Kingdom, without any Commission from him, and then has it by virtue
of his own Title, and not of our Savior's Grant, and then is our Savior
plainly turned out of his Kingdom, and another seated in his Throne.

Now this being the true State of the Christian Church, the grand difficulty
that follows upon it, and that has hitherto so much puzzled most Men in this
Debate, is the danger of Competition between two Supreme Powers. For if they
happen to contradict each other, as of later time they have too often done, who
shall overruled? If a man obey his Prince contrary to the Prescription of his
Spiritual Guide, he may endanger his Soul; if he obey the Bishop, he disobeys
his Prince, and thereby forfeits his Neck to Justice. This Knot is thought so
difficult, that instead of untying it, it is generally cut asunder, and the
competition avoided by denying the distinction. Thus the Romanists that are the
high flying Assertors of Ecclesiastical Power, unanimously confine all the
Power of Sovereign Princes to things Secular, and take away all Authority from
them in matters Ecclesiastical. And on the other side, the greatest part of
those that Assert the Royal Supremacy, deny any Jurisdiction at all in
Ecclesiastical Officers, making their whole Function merely Ministerial, or
nothing but a right to perform and administer the Offices of the Church, but as
for any Power or Jurisdiction in it, they have none but what is granted by the
Civil Magistrate. But both these run into all the forementioned ill
Consequences, the first by denying the King's Supremacy over all things within
his own Dominions: The second by denying our Savior's Supremacy over his
Catholic Church in all places, by which he has every where settled a Power in
his Deputies, distinct from the Power of Princes; so that either of these
Extremes, howsoever minced and stated, still carry us upon the same Precipice.
Though this difficulty becomes so much the more nice, because of the more
Ancient Possession of Sovereign Powers: in that before the Institution of the
Christian Church they governed their Kingdoms without Competitors; and
therefore have reason to be jealous of this new Authority, as an encroachment
upon their old Sovereignty. For whereas before the setting up of this, the
whole and sole Power within their Dominions was in themselves, now they seem to
enjoy but a kind of divided Empire, and see another erected in it, backed by no
less Authority then the immediate and miraculous Power of God himself, and that
is greater then the greatest Power upon Earth; so that by it they seem not only
to be rivall'd but over-topt in their Authority. That is that Providence that
had hitherto made them Supreme under it self within their own Dominions, seems
hereby to introduce a Superior Power over their Heads, by his own more
immediate Institution. All which seems to be an unavoidable contradiction to
the first Principle that I have laid of a Christian Church, that it makes no
alteration or abatement of the Rights of Sovereign Princes. But all these
difficulties as big and as dreadful as they may appear at first view, are
clearly scattered by one very easy and obvious consideration.

And that is, that the Christian Church, as it is endued with no Temporal
Authority, or Power of the Sword, so all the Authority that it has is founded
upon the Cross of Christ, and that obliges all that own it to a more entire and
resigned submission to Civil Government, then Men could have been brought under
by any other way without its Institution. So that the Erection of our Savior's
new Kingdom within the Kingdoms of the Earth upon the Doctrine of the Cross, is
so far from defrauding Sovereign Princes of their Ancient Authority, that it is
its greatest improvement and inforcement; but especially it makes the Power of
Christian Sovereign^ more absolute then all other Powers that are not
Christian, and even to these it raises their Sovereignty higher then it was
before, over all their Christian Subjects, by binding them to a stricter
Allegiance then their own Laws; and of all other Christians, those that have
the highest Authority in the Church are obliged by their very Office to the
most humble, peaceable, and absolute submission to the worst of Governments.
All which considerations render Christianity the most easy of any Religion in
the World for compliance with the peace and quiet of Government.

And first, as for the Notion of the Doctrine of the Cross, it is singular to
Christianity. For all other Religions both of Jews and Gentiles had some
Worldly interest twisted with them; but our Savior to avoid all mixtures of
Hypocrisy, abstracts his Institution from all considerations, unless of the
World to come. And therefore first Erects his Kingdom, not only without any
Promise of any advantages of this life, but to let his followers know what they
were to trust to by the Principles of his Religion, with a certain assurance of
the loss of all the comforts of life, and at last life it self. So evident is
it from the original Constitution of the Christian Church, that it is so far
from giving Men any claims of Worldly Interest, that merely as they are
Christians, they are obliged, whenever they are called to it, to renounce them
all. And this Doctrine lying at the Foundation of Christianity, our Savior was
careful to settle it in the first place. When he gives his Disciples their
first Commission to preach the Gospel to all Nations, that is the first
Condition that he teaches them to require of all Proselytes, He Matthew. 10. 38.
Mark 8. 34. Luke 9. 23.
that takes not up his Cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me. i.
e. He that takes not up his Religion upon condition of taking up the Cross too,
is no true Christian. By which expression of taking up the Cross, is signified
the under-going of all kind of Calamities, of which the Cross was the greatest,
being the most shameful and most painful punishment that was used at that time:
And therefore Plato in his Description of a perfect Good Man, that nothing
shall fright out of his Duty and Conscience, says of him, that when he has
suffered all miseries, he will endure to be Crucified too. So that the meaning
of our Savior's words is plainly this, Let no Man expect any Worldly profit by
following me, and therefore not pretend that I gave him any ground for it; but
on the contrary, such is the nature of my Institution, that whoever will
undertake it, it must be upon no less condition then this, that he be willing
and ready to suffer all manner of Persecutions for it, even the scandalous
death of the Cross it self. So plain is it, that Christianity when it meets
with any Opposition, is to maintain it self by nothing but suffering to use no
weapon but the Cross, and Men that are indispensably obliged to such an
absolute submission, are sufficiently tied up, if any such thing be possible,
from creating any disturbance to the Civil State; for what greater security can
be contrived against that, then that Men should be bound by the first Principle
of their Religion, with meekness and cheerfulness to resign up their Lives to
the pleasure of the Government. So it is in the case of Christianity, they have
nothing to plead but their own innocence, and if that will not satisfy, they
have no Authority from our Savior to upbraid the Power that condemns them, and
Remonstrate to the Justice of the Court, but instead of that are obliged to
undergo its Sentence as he did with all manner of meekness and silence. Here is
no disputing the Commands of Princes, whether right or wrong, nothing but
absolute submission to their most unjust and illegal Proceedings, much less any
opposition to their most unwarrantable Commands, nor any weapon of defense but
laying down their Lives after their great Masters Example in submission to the
Government. This is the true and honest state of the Christian Church, that
every Man be faithful to the Laws of his Religion, and if he suffer for it, he
shall be compensated with those Rewards that his Religion Promises, and that is
compensation enough for all that he can suffer in this World; and if he take it
not up with this condition, it is not the Christian Religion that he takes up,
for it is no Christian Religion without the Cross. And so our Savior has all
along stated the matter upon all occasions. And it being so stated, it is easy
to understand, how in cases of the greatest competition, both Powers so prevail
at the same time, as to attain both their respective Ends. For by it the Civil
Power must overruled as to all effects of this life, and when it is to be thus
gently submitted to in its most unjust Decrees, that is a full security of the
Peace and Quiet of this World, and that is the proper end for which it was
instituted. And the Spiritual Power attains its effect, as to the World to
come, i. e. the salvation of the Souls of Men by their Conscientious Loyalty to
their Savior and his Laws; and that is all that it aims at, and that every
Professor of it ought to pretend to. This is so plain and evident in the whole
practice of the Primitive Church, that one would wonder that any Man should
ever dream that true Christianity could any way interfere with Civil
Government. For when the Powers of the World at that time, particularly the
Governors of the Roman Empire, being under a mistaken apprehension that the new
Christian Religion aimed at Innovation in Government, endeavored by all the
methods of Cruelty to stop its progress, the Christians who were all bound
openly to profess their Faith, and some of them to propagate it in public,
notwithstanding all that bloody opposition that was made against it, went on in
their work without creating any the least disturbance to their Governors,
unless what they gave themselves by their own needless outrage against them.
For all that they did in their own defense was only to declare, that how much
soever they were displeased with the Christian Religion, they could have no
ground or provocation to persecute it, because it was not only by its Laws, but
by its very Constitution, in the first place tender of all the Rights of Civil
Government; but if notwithstanding that they were resolved to proceed against
them, they had nothing more to say or do for themselves, then to lay down their
Lives with all possible meekness, in submission to their Royal Will and
Pleasure, and hoped they would not take it for any piece of stubbornness or
affected disobedience, that they would not Renounce their Faith, nor quit their
hopes in the Kingdom of Heaven, out of compliance with their Commands, when
they saw them so much in good earnest as to be ready to lay down their Lives
out of pure submission to their Authority. Such a competition as this cannot be
avoided upon the supposition of the real Truth of Christianity, but then upon
supposition of its Nature, it is impossible that it can be any way prejudicial
to Civil Government, to which by its obligation to peaceable suffering under
it, it cannot avoid to discharge its whole duty of subjection to it. If it be
said, that though this is the real state of Christianity in it self, it cannot
be expected that its Professors should be so perfect and so free from passion,
but that they may be provoked to resistance by Oppression. To this it is easily
answered, that how much soever the Christian Religion allows for other
infirmities of Flesh and Blood, this is open defiance and contradiction to it;
so that the Man that pretends to Christianity, and yet can be prevailed upon by
any Temptation to entertain one thought of it, is a Villain, a Cutthroat, a
Traitor, and a Rebel, not only against his King, but his Savior. And therefore
whenever Princes are encountered with any pretenses whatsoever of disturbance
upon the account of Religion, for that very reason alone they ought to cut them
off as the most incorrigible and most unpardonable sort of Traitors. And if
they are Christians themselves, and have any kindness for the honor of their
Religion, to make such shameless pretenders to it, the Examples of their utmost
severity, it is the very top of all Blasphemy, as well as Rebellion. In short,
there can be nothing more evident then this, that Christianity it self, as it
is founded upon the Doctrine of the Cross, can never do any harm to Civil
Government, so if it be ever abused and profaned to such designs, they that do
it are the worst of Villains, that deserve the utmost punishment that can be
inflicted upon them in this life, and will be sure to meet with it in the life
to come. And that I think is all that it is possible for any Law to do, to
deterr those that it would oblige from offending against it, by all the
Penalties that God or Man can inflict.

. VI.
But secondly, beside this general Doctrine of the Cross, that cuts up the very
Roots of all resistance to Lawful Powers, there are great numbers of particular
Laws, peculiar to this Religion, that lop off all its Branches and Pretenses,
by advancing the Reverence that is due to Authority; and requiring from all
that profess any Obedience to that, a more accurate Obedience and Subjection to
their Governors, then their Governors could have obliged them to by their own
Authority. So that of all Men the Christian must be the best Subject by his
very profession; so far is he from being brought under any probable Temptation
of disrespect to his Superiors by his Christianity, that by that, be his
Governors what they will, Caligula's, Nero's or Domitian's, he is bound by a
new obligation, under no less penalty than the Divine displeasure, to give them
the highest honor and the lowest subjection. It were an endless work to
enumerate all passages in the Holy Scripture to this purpose, it being more
frequently and more earnestly urged then any other duty, because (as Mr. B.
very well observes in his Book of the Lawfulness of Rebellion) Every Man is
naturally selfish and proud, Holy Commonwealth These. 377.
and apt to break the bounds that God has set us, and to be Kings and Laws to
our selves. This Rebelling disobedient disposition therefore should be first
resisted and subdued, as a greater Enemy to the Peace of Nations, then the
faults of Princes are. And therefore I shall allege one or two of the most
pregnant Texts against it, to show both the Impudence and Impiety of those Men,
and himself in particular, who dare Reconcile any Pretense to Christianity with
the least disrespect to Sovereign Powers. And whilst they lay claims to greater
Holiness and Purity then their Neighbors, are putting continual slights and
affronts upon their Governors, and whenever they can gain an opportunity by
the assistance of the Rabble, blush not with all their demureness to wrestle
with them for their Supremacy. Which is such a rank piece of Blasphemy, such a
barefaced appearance of Antichrist, Mahomet and Hildebrand, as no good
Christian can sufficiently abhor, nor any wise Magistrate sufficiently punish.
Though the greatest affront of all, is to the Holy Scriptures themselves; for
when they have so clearly and severely forbidden all Resistance to Supreme
Powers; when the Rules that they have given in this case are so absolute and
universal to prevent all Evasion; when beside the great Authority of the
Command it self, they enforce it by its own wisdom and reasonableness; in a
word, when it is tied upon us by all the strongest Obligations both of Power,
Interest, and Ingenuity, after all this to escape the force of a Law so
carefully Enacted, is to pass an open slight upon the Wisdom of the Legislator
himself. But to make these very Precepts that were given on purpose to cut off
all pretenses of Resistance, so many Warrants and Commissions given to Subjects
for raising Rebellion against their Sovereigns, as has been done in our Age,
exceeds all the Impiety of Men, nay of Devils too, in all former Ages.

For what can be more clearly and fully expressed then St. Paul's Discourse to
the Romans, chap. 13, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; for there
is no Power but of God. The Powers that now are, are ordained of God. Whosoever
therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they that
resist shall receive to themselves Damnation, etc. Here is no Restriction, no
Reservation, it is the Catholic Duty of all Mankind, and stands upon such
reasons as equally effect all. And first from the Original of all Authority, It
is from God. It is not said, because those in Power were either the best or the
wisest Men; but be the Men what they will, they have their Authority from God
himself, and for that reason he requires subjection to them as to himself, and
therefore looks upon all resistance to these his Vicegerents, as an affront to
the Authority of his own Commission: Whosoever resists the Power, resists
the Ordinance of God. And then no wonder if the Judgment of God follow upon it:
And they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. But though this
Argument from the Divine Original of Government be so strong an enforcement of
this Duty, yet the Apostle goes on to tie it harder, and that is from its End,
the Good of the Subject: For he is the Minister of God to thee for good. And
common Sense will tell us, that submission to the worst Princes, is much more
the Interest of the Subject then Rebellion against them. So that how much harm
soever a Tyrannical Prince may bring upon a Commonwealth, he does it more
good, though it were only by being a Bar against the Miseries of War and
Confusion. And common experience will confirm the Wisdom of St. Paul's
Argument, that be the Governors the worst that can be, and so they were at that
time; yet their Government in spite of their own folly and wickedness is highly
beneficial to the Commonwealth, and in that every private man's Interest and
Property is comprehended. Now from both these Premises the conclusion is
unavoidable: Wherefore ye must needs be Subject not only for Wrath, but for
Conscience sake. That is, not only for fear of the King and his Laws, but out
of sense of duty to that God by whose Authority Kings Reign, and who has bound
upon our Consciences the duty of Subjection to them. Now one would think it
impossible for Men to escape from the obligation of so clear a Law; and so it
is, till they lay aside the natural Sense and Ingenuity of Mankind; and then
indeed Men's Consciences are armed against all Conviction, and so it happens
among us, that as once much learning made this great Apostle mad, so now much
Reliligion makes him a Fool. For so we are told that we must not think that he
would be so silly as to abett the Wickedness of Tyrants, Non ut Neronem aut
Tyrannum quemvis alium supra omnem legem and paenam constituendo, crudelissimum
unius Imperium in omnes mortales constabiliret; that he would not set up Nero
or any other Tyrant above all Law and Punishment, and establish the cruel
Dominion of one above all. And therefore we must distinguish between the King's
Person, as a Man in Concreto (to express it in Mr. Rutherford's words, though
it Lex Rex Q. 29.
is the Sense of all the Monarchomachists) and as a King and his Office in
abstracto, the Person may be resisted, though not the Office, because if the
Person govern not by Law and Justice, he ceases to be a Lawful Power. But to
what purpose is it for God to make Laws, if Men may evacuate their force by
such Metaphysical Nothings? For how can we submit to the Office of a King, but
by submitting to the King himself? If the Office it self could Govern without
him, then it might be the safest way to stick to the Abstract, but seeing it
cannot subsist without the Concrete, he that commands to submit to the Office,
commands us to submit to the Man in whom it is, or he commands us nothing. So
that this is really no better then profane trifling with the Word of God, when
we are in plain and express terms commanded to make no Resistance to our
Governors, to get loose from so useful a Law, by such childish and senseless
Trifles as plainly contradict the Law it self. For whereas the only design of
such Laws is to preserve the Peace of humane Societies, by such evasions as
these, all Men are left at liberty to disturb it as they please,
notwithstanding all the Laws in the World that ever were, or ever can be made
against it. And therefore I would advise these Men that can cheat and lullaby
their own Consciences with such Rattles as these, either to lay aside their
Metaphysics or their Religion, because such niceness and subtilty makes it a
thing of no Use in the practice of the World. For if there were no such Laws at
all, Men would be under no greater restraint from the Sin, then they are now by
the most effectual Laws, that it is possible for God himself to lay upon them.
Men that can use such abusive and preva^icating shifts to escape their plain
Duty, are arrived either to too great Profaneness, or too high Enthusiasm to
be admitted to the Rights of common Christianity. They serve their Savior just
as they do their Prince, they obey him in abstracto, and Rebel against him in
concreto; they submit to his Laws when themselves think it convenient, but when
they do not, they then cease to be his Laws. This is the unavoidable result of
these thin and precarious distinctions, that Religion, if Men will, shall be of
no use or force in the practice of the World.

But secondly, this is downright Childrens play, and make all Laws whatsoever
ridiculous, when it leaves it to those who are commanded absolute submission,
to judge when submission is sit, and when not. Do but once allow that Liberty,
and after that all the Laws injoyning this Duty can never command any thing.
For after they have commanded all that can be commanded, every Man will be as
much at liberty to do what he pleases, as he was before, being sole Judge of
the fitness of his Subjection. But if he be Judge of that, he is not bound, and
if he be bound, he is not Judge, but is absolutely bound. In our present case,
what can the Apostles Command signify, when he peremptorily and indefinitly
requires subjection to the Higher Powers? i. e. say these Statesmen to all
Powers that govern by Law, and none else. This makes the Subjects the Supreme
Judges of the Government, not the Governors themselves; for by it, whatever
these do or Command, it is of no Authority then as the Subjects judge it Legal,
and if they do not, they are at liberty to Resist and Rebel. And if this be so,
St. Paul would deserve to be laughed at, for being so serious in enforcing a
Law that can never bind, whilst he commands Subjection or Non-resistance to
higher Powers, when the Subjects after that, have full Power in themselves to
determine to what higher Powers they will or will not resist. Such Nonsense
lies at the bottom of all Rebellion; for if Men are at all bound to submit to
their Governors, they are bound to submit to all; if not to all, then not to
any, because the Power of Resistance is, by this poor Republican Principle, at
last wholly left to their own Judgment, and then they are subject to no
Authority but themselves, and their own Wills.

But thirdly, if a King ceases to be the higher Power, or to be a Lawful King,
whenever he does not act according to Law, or whenever his Subjects shall
apprehend so, how is it possible there should be any settled Government or
Society among Mankind; when it is so plainly impossible, but that there must be
miscarriages as long as Kings are Men; and much more misapprehensions of the
Government as long as the People are the People? So that the design of these
Men that advance such Niceties as these, is apparently nothing else, then to
render all Government an impracticable thing. For what security or settlement
can it ever have in the World, when by such lavish Principles as these,
Subjects are empowered, nay always Authorized to subvert the present Government?
For whatever the present Government is, it will have defects enough; and that
which is worse, the fewer it has, the more it will be complained of. For there
is never so much noise of Grievances and Oppressions, as under the kindest and
the justest Princes; in such happy times, I know not by what unhappy fate Men
run Mad with Insolence, out of mere Vanity and Wantonness. And it is observable
in all Histories, that good Kings have suffered more from the fury of the
People then Tyrants and Oppressors. So unfortunate and unruly a Beast is the
Community of Mankind, that nothing can make them happy; and when they enjoy so
great a Blessing as a kind Government, they will destroy both that and
themselves too, only to trample upon its kindness. But however upon this
Principle that Kings may be resisted, and so unking'd when they are supposed
not to govern according to Law, both good and bad must make a daily forfeiture
of their Crowns; and there never can be any such thing as Government in the
World, unless God himself would be pleased to forsake Heaven, and settle a
Visible Throne among us here on Earth. And yet if he should, though he would
fall into no miscarriages, he could never escape from the complaints and
murmurings of such Men as these. Their only delight and happiness is to be
finding fault, and were they in Heaven it self, they would be peevish and
discontented. Good God purge thy Church from such sower Leven as this! that has
for so many years fermented all Christendom into restless Tumults and
Rebellions, and has at length by its violent and eager rage, work't out the
very Spirit and Life of Christianity.

But lastly, this Principle does not only lead to confusion, but is confusion
it self, because it takes away the very Being both of Government and
Subjection. For if the Subject may resist when the Prince does not govern
according to Law, Who is to be Judge of that; if the Prince, he will be sure to
judge for himself, and that destroys the Principle that these Men proceed upon:
If the People are the Supreme Judges, then they cease to be Subjects, and are
made the Sovereign, for wherever the Supremacy of Judgment resides, there is
the Sovereign Power. So that by this Principle, there is no avoiding the
absurdity of setting at the same time the Prince above the People, and the
People above the Prince; and so I remember Junius Brutus has done in the very
Title Page of his Book: De Principis in Populum, Populique in Principem
legitima Potestate. Of the Lawful Power of the Prince over the People, and the
People over the Prince. But sure if one be above the other, then the other can
have no power over that which is above it, or if they are both endued with the
Supremacy of Power, then they are Equals, and Equals have no Power over Equals,
for if they have, they are not Equals. There is no way of Reconciling this
Reciprocal Superiority of Inferiors above Superiors, and Superiors above
Inferiors; but his Poets way, who recommending this worthy work to his dear
Country of France, he advises her for the Cure of all her present Breaches and
Distempers, to keep the Power both of the King and the People within due
bounds, and then all will be well again. Haud aliter, legum populo dum fraena
relaxas,
Dum Regis solvis vincula, tota ruis.
At Populum and Regem solitis tu siste lupatis,
Ilicet antiquus restituetur honos.


Now if the Poet or the Politician could but have found out such a Person as
France, distinct from and Superior to both King and People, to adjust their
mutual Rights, then I must confess it might have been possible to reconcile
this Project to common Sense, but without it, every Child can see that it is
mere Nonsense and Contradiction.

Mr. Rutherford has one shift more upon Ib. p. 275.
this Argument, that I will be so ingenuous as to set down, though I must
confess I know not how to Answer it, and I doubt no Man will ever attempt its
solution. And that is this, if this Proposition be Universal, that it is
unlawful to resist Kings in any Case, Then when King David deflowred
Barthsheba, she might not lawfully have resisted him with Bodily Resistance and
Violence, and if she had, David might have said to Barthsheba, because I am the
Lords Anointed, it is Rebellion in thee a Subject, to oppose any bodily
violence to my act of forcing thee; it is unlawful for thee to cry for help,
for if any shall offer violently to rescue thee from me, he resists the
Ordinance of God. One would think that these Men designed nothing else, then to
profane and ridicule the Scriptures; for how else could it ever have come into
any Man's head to parallel Rebellious Resistance to the Commands of Sovereign
Power, with not yielding to a Rape? If the Man had intended mirth and
entertainment by the conceit, it might have passed for a profane Jest; but to
be grave and serious, nay fierce and eager in such smutty impertinencies, turns
the whole matter into downright folly and dullness. And yet our great English
Divine R. B. has very much outbid Holy Commonwealth These. 349.
the Scotch Divine in the Emprovement of the Notion, inferring from hence (as
he says) a fortiori, that we are much more bound, when unjust and unchaste Kings
would commit Rapes upon their Parliaments, to rescue them by force and violence
from their Lascivious Attempts. And so it is evident that in the
long-Parliament-Rebellion against his late Majesty, they were so far from doing
or intending any harm to the King himself, that they only kept him off from
doing violence to the Chastity of the Houses. So easy is it for these sort of
Men to find pretenses or excuses for Treason, that no similitude can be so
light or trivial, but that it shall have weight and sense enough to bear them
out in all their enormities. Though I must confess, that of all Men that ever I
met with, this holy, this mortified, this daily dying Saint, has exceeded them
all in the licentiousness of his Principles, and the profaneness of his Talk
upon this Argument. As for my own part, I cannot think what to make of some
Men's Consciences; for I cannot imagine that Men who pretend to great zeal for
Religion, and take mighty pains (as they think) to promote it, who say that
they live in a daily expectation of speedy death, and a future Judgment, should
be stubborn and resolute Atheists. And yet I can as little conceive that Men,
who are serious in the belief of these things, should through the habitual
course of their Lives, do such things for the disturbance both of Church and
State, as are plainly inconsistent with any sense or design of integrity. I
know pride and passion may Transport Men into strange actions, but then those
are as great Crimes themselves, as any that they can hurry them into. But that
they should carry Men, that mean honestly, into such a constant course of life,
as no Charity can reconcile with any Principles of Integrity, is the thing that
I say lies beyond my comprehension.

Thus in our particular Case of Nonresistance (which is one of the greatest
Cases of Conscience in the World) tho there is not, nor cannot be a clearer
Precept in all the Bible, then this of St. Paul's, against all manner of
Resistance to Sovereign Princes; yet has this unhappy Man so stated the bounds
of due Obedience, and lawful Resistance from its Authority, as in the result of
all, not only to evacuate all its Obligation, but to make it the very Warranty
from Heaven of all Popular Rebellions. Thus he tells us plainly, that all
resistance is not here forbidden (though the Apostle says in express terms,
that whoever resists shall be damned, and that I think is all Resistance) For
there is a Resistance contrary to Subjection, and that is forbidden: And there
is a Resistance not contrary to Subjection, and that is not forbidden. Now he
that can Reconcile Resistance and Subjection together, may at the same time be
a Rebel and a good Subject, especially as Mr. B. has stated it. For having
distinguished between Resistance lawful and unlawful, he makes it lawful in so
many Cases, and unlawful in so few, as makes it so in all. Thus These. 340, he
says, That if a Prince Command his Subjects beyond his Limits, resistance in
such a case is not to resist the Power, but the Will of a private Man. The very
same Assertion with Rutherford's, that if he govern according to Law, we are
bound to submit, but if he exceed those bounds, that the Law has left him, then
Resistance and Rebellion are no sins. Such a wilful blindness is it in these
Men, that, that they cannot see the middle way of subjection that lies between
Obedience and Resistance; for when I cannot Obey, I can and ought to Submit,
but Resist I cannot without Rebellion. And that is the Subjects Duty in all
unlawful Commands, though he cannot obey, he can be quiet and peaceable, nay he
can do any thing to remove or redress the Grievance, but resist the Government.
When a Kingdom is blessed with good Laws, it concerns Subjects to be tender of
their Preservation by all fair and regular means; but if they once Rebel
against their Prince in defense of their Laws, they lose both, by the
Dissolution of the Government; for when that is gone, and it is certain that
all Rebellion aims at its destruction, the Laws lie dead, and can do them no
Service. And therefore there is no one Law so beneficial to the Subject, as the
Fundamental Law of Sovereignty, that it is irresistible; the security of the
public Government is the last security of every Man's Liberty and Property.
But if it be once invaded, we are immediately in a state of War, and then no
Man can have any thing that he can call his own. But of that when I come to
discourse of the Reason, and the Wisdom of Non-resistance; here it is enough to
observe that these Men are so perverse as to acknowledge no middle way between
actual Obedience and actual Rebellion; whereas the peculiar design of these
Precepts is to fix our duty, when we cannot obey, in Submission or Nonrestance.
But here Mr. B. has a subtle Notion that will baer out his Innocence, though he
wade up to the Knees in Blood, and to the Elbows in Rebellion; and that is,
That not obeying is the first and chiefest resisting, and therefore if one be
Lawful, so is the other, and then whenever we cannot Lawfully Obey, we may
Lawfully Resist. An admirable Notion this! to set all the World on fire, to
make no difference between mere Non-obedience and cutting of Throats, for that
I take it is making some kind of Resistance, yet by Mr. B's Principle, bare not
obeying is more so, being The first and chiefest act of Resistance. What cannot
these Men break their Consciences to, that can out of the duty of Passive
Obedience infer the Obligation, or at least the Lawfulness of actual
Resistance, because forsooth Passive Obedience is the first and chiefest act of
actual Resistance. I pray God deliver his Church from such Apostate Divines,
and his Anointed from such Rebel Subjects. But now are we come to the very
Fort-Royal of the Presbyterian Rebellion, Thesis 352. If a Nation (that is, as
he all along explains himself, its representative Body) wrong their King, it is
not Lawful for him to right himself by War, because it is against the Common
Good, of which the Representatives are the only Judges, by Thesis 356, 357,
358, 367. That is to say, that supposing the Parliament of Forty One had
offered the King all those Injuries and Indignities, that he so justly
complained of; yet when he went about to recover and assert his Sovereignty by
force of Arms, it was fighting against the Common Good, and Representative Body
of a Nation, in which all Men are bound to Resist him, because they are all
bound by nature to defend the Common Good. How helpless and deplorable is the
condition of poor Princes, when they are wronged they may not defend
themselves, whilst their Subjects may not only take away their Swords, but tie
their Hands, and if they please to disable them forever, cut them off too for
the Common Good. This is Forty One true blew, and I think a cast beyond it.
But what has a King no Remedy? No, none at all against the Representative Body
of a Nation. Methinks he might Dissolve them. No, says he, That is but to
betray the Trust of the Commonwealth. Page 479.
Is there then no Remedy to ease themselves? Yes, yes, If their injury be too
great to be born, they may Page 424.
lay down their Crowns at pleasure, Crowns are ^ot like Lands, that Men hold
primarily Jure Domini: They are not primarily the matter of Propriety.
Government is a means to Public Good. When any Man's possession of the Crown
does cease to be a means to the Public Good, and this without the Peoples
injury, it is then his Duty to resign it, and no injury to be deprived of it:
for the means is no means, when it is against the End. If a Nation injuriously
deprive themselves of a worthy Prince, the hurt will be their own, and they
punish themselves: but if it be necessary to their Welfare, it is no injury to
him. Thank you good Mr. B. this is right Presbyterian courtesy to Kings, to
grant them leave to rid themselves of the Trouble of their Crowns, and to
revenge themselves too of their Rebellious Subjects, by depriving them of a
worthy Prince, and punish them to purpose by resigning his Crown into their own
hands. Let them take it for a warning, if he should serve them such a slippery
trick, the hurt will be all their own, but not an Atom of injury to himself.
Revenge they say is a sweet thing, but this makes it sweeter then Empire, that
Princes should part with their Crowns only to vex their Rebellious Subjects.
However they are much obliged to Mr. B. for his kind advice, and I hope will
return him public thanks for this easy expedient that he has invented to ease
them of all their troubles. And if we should ever be so unfortunate and
abandoned of the Protection of God's Providence, as to fall into the hands of
another Presbyterian Parliament, we are now provided of a certain Remedy
against all the evils of a Civil War; it is but the King's resigning up his
Crown, and all will be well again: He will be no loser, the Nation will have
the worst of it, but it is no matter for that, if they will be so foolish as to
punish themselves by depriving themselves of a worthy Prince. Once more thank
you good Mr. B. had I any access to, or acquaintance with Kings, I would move
them to settle a Pension upon you for so noble a piece of Service. But in the
mean while, is not this an admirable Commentary upon Romans 13. and yet it is the
short result of a long discourse upon that very Text, Resist not the higher
Powers, i. e. says he, Wring their Swords out of their Hands, and fret them
till they throw away their Crowns too. But as bad as the Doctrine is, the
Application is somewhat worse: For to it he has annexed a Discourse concerning
the Lawfulness of the late Long-Parliament Rebellion, and the Reasons that
moved himself to engage in a War against the King: And in it he is so far from
giving any signs of Repentance, or so much as confessing any fault, that he
frankly declares both his readiness and obligation to do the same thing all
over again upon the same opportunity. And professes that After the strictest
Examination of his own heart Page 486.
he dares not repent of it, nor forbear the same, if it were to do again in the
same state of things. And that if he should do otherwise, he should be g^ilty
of Treason and Disloyalty against the Sovereign Power Page 488^
of the Land. And that if he had taken up Arms against the Parliament in that
War, his Conscience tells him he had been a Traitor, and guilty of resisting
the higher Page 477.
Powers, and incurred the danger of Condemnation threatened to Resisters in the
13th to the Romans. And in his Preface or Review, makes this bold challenge,
Prove that the King was the highest Power in time of Divisions, and that he had
Power to make that Wa^ which he made, and I will offer my head to Justice as a
Rebel. But this is to piece out one wickedness with another, not only to rebel
against the King, but to Depose him. Had he fought for the King against the
Parliament, he had deserved to be hanged for a Rebel, and had violated that
Command of God, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, and incurred
the danger of that Condemnation that is there threatened to Resisters: Had been
guilty of Treason and Disloyalty against the Sovereign Power of the Land, and
had been a Traitor, and guilty of resisting the higher Powers. From all which
it is undeniably plain, that not the King, but the Parliament are the Sovereign
and Supreme Power. Which is such a contradiction to the fundamental
Constitution of the English Government, to all the known Laws of the Kingdom,
to so many reiterated Acts and Declarations of Parliaments from time to time,
that as bold an affront as it is to the Law of God, it is a more impudent
out-sacing the Law of the Land; so that it seems there is no other way of
justifying that Rebellion, then by perverting and belying both. And if Men can
allow themselves such Liberties as these, I know nothing that can keep them in
any due subjection to the higher Powers, that can dispose of the Supremacy by
their own Arbitrary Will and Pleasure: For where the Sovereignty of this
Kingdom resides, is a thing so easily and vulgarly known, that to search it out
requires no deep inspection, either into the Laws of the Land, or the Nature of
Government. The Oath of Supremacy is so full a Declaration of it, that no Man,
whoever took it, can after that, deny the Sovereign Power to reside in the King
alone without Perjury [That the King's Highness is the only Supreme Governor
of this Realm.] For if he be the only Supreme, there is no other Supreme, much
less Superior. I do not argue from the bare Title of Supreme Governor, These.
363.
because that, say the Presbyterians, may be honorary, though others may share
in the Power; but from its being appropriated to the King alone. For we do not
only swear that he is the Supreme Governor, but that he is the only Supreme
Governor, and then we swear that neither the Parliament nor any other State of
Men, whatever share they have in the Government, are the Supreme Governors.

I shall not dispute with Mr. B. or any Man of the Principles of Forty One, of
the Power of Parliaments, for be it never so great, yet unless the Oath of
Supremacy be mere Perjury, I am sure it is not Superior nor Equal to the
King's, when by it he alone has the Supremacy, and then to resist him by their
Authority, is Rebellion by the Law of the Land, and Damnation by the Law of
God. So impossible is it to tie Men to any Sense of Duty, that can allow
themselves such an unconscionable liberty of perverting and falsifying Laws;
and if this be consistent with any tenderness of Conscience, or any Pretenses
to Integrity, there can never be any such thing as Truth or Honesty in the
World. Mr. B. declares that he is very desirous to Repent, if he have sinned,
that he daily prays to God that he would not suffer him to dye impenitently in
his Sin, and promises that if he could but be convinced of it, he would make
public Recantation. I verily believe that he is serious in his Protestation,
and hope to live to see it performed, and that is my only design here to
convince him (if that be possible) before it is too late. I intend not to
upbraid him, or others with old Miscarriages, or to revive old Stories long
since buried in Oblivion. For when his Majesty has been pleased in his great
goodness to pardon them as to all the Punishments of this life, God forbid but
that they should enjoy the benefit of his Mercy and Clemency. But I call upon
them to think of Repentance out of pure tenderness and compassion to their
Souls. For God never pardons Absolutely, but always upon Conditions, and with
him, nothing less will expiate a public Crime then a public Repentance. And
therefore I hope to see Mr. B. before he go hence, to make good his promise of
making his public Recantation, and remove that scandal that he has given to
the Church of God by so foul a Mistake (as he calls it) and I hope it was no
worse. Though I fear when this is done, he may find new matter of Repentance
for slandering, and traducing the whole Church of God, and for that end
perverting, and false representing all its Records, as he has done in some late
Books, especially his Treatise of Episcopacy, and his History of the Councils,
that are so full not only of falsification, but rank malice against all the
Ancient Governors of the Christian Church (against whom he could have no other
ground of quarrel then only this, that they were Bishops) that it is such a
manifest disclaiming of all Truth and Integrity, as no pride or passion can
excuse; and those two great faults are the only Pleas that can be made to
extenuate the rankness of his malice. But here are such numberless heaps of
mere falsehoods and spiteful insinuations, as could proceed from nothing better
then wilful dishonesty, unless this may be pleaded in his behalf, viz. his
gross ignorance of the things that he writes of, and that in good earnest is
the best and truest Apology for him, for it is evident from his crude way of
writing, that none but a very Novice in Antiquity, and an utter stranger to the
true Records of the Church, could ever have betrayed himself to so unlearned a
Performance. There is not any one Story in which he has not committed gross
mistakes, and such as discover themselves to proceed from nothing but his
unacquaintedness with the Primitive Records. And any one that can but Translate
any of the Modern Collections of the Ancient Councils without looking into the
Original Acts and Histories, (without which no Man can arrive to any competent
knowledge in this learning) may make just such another Church-Historian as R.
B. And therefore I would advise him, instead of boasting himself Father of
Fourscore Books and upwards, to have some patience and take some pains, to
write one well-weighed, well-digested, and wellreviewed, before he publish it.
And if his heat could but be prevailed with to submit to so much tameness, one
such discourse would outweigh, not only Fourscore, but four hundred Books of
Crudities.

I have insisted thus long upon this Apostolical Precept, because it is the
most effectual Bulwark against Rebellion, and therefore most abused by the
Hildebrandinists, who would elude its Obligation by the several forementioned
shifts to evacuate the Sense of the Law it self. But now to proceed, with the
Doctrine of St. Paul agreeable is that of the other great Apostle St. Peter, 1
Epist. Chap. 2. from verse. 13th to 25th. Where the same duty is laid down fully
in the same express and comprehensive Terms, and with the same regard of duty
to God, it must be done For the Lord's sake, and that is the biggest thing that
can be said in this or any other Case, that Almighty God requires it forever,
and as Men will own his own Authority as an indispensable Duty, and this for
all the same reasons alleged by the other Apostle, and some more. Not only
because their Authority is from God, and because the Institution it self is for
the general Good of Mankind; and because the great Governor of the World
commands Subjection to them as his Viceroys, under the severest Penalties both
here and hereafter, but beside all this it is made necessary, because it is for
the honor of their Religion, that by a meek and peaceable submission to the
most unjust sufferings, after their great Master's Example, they should
prevent, and silence those Calumnies of his and their Enemies, as if they were
disturbers of Government; so that if they did not submit with all meekness and
patience to their Superiors of what rank soever, down from Kings to Masters of
Families, whether good or bad, it would have been a just scandal to their
Religion.

But to this Mr. Rutherford very gravely and seriously replies, That patient
suffering, Q. 30.
and violent resisting, are not incompatible. That is to say, that a Man may
Resist in his own defense, but if he have the ill-fortune to be overcome, he
must then suffer patiently. This Patience per force I see is the right
Presbyterian Subjection; when their Superiors are too strong for them, they
will crouch only because they must. But as long as they are able, Princes must
pardon them if they defend themselves by force of Arms, though if they cannot,
they will be so civil as to lay them down. And of the same kind is the
Submission of Servants to harsh and cruel Masters, when they are beaten, to
defend themselves with the next Cudgel that they can seize on, but if the
Master prove the more able Fencer, then the Servant when he has lost his
defensive Weapon, has no remedy left but to lie down and suffer himself to be
beaten patiently, and this Patience of a Turkish Slave is their only true
Christian Subjection; though as the Proverb goes, It is a Virtue more suited to
the Philosophy of an Horse, then the Religion of a Man. And if this be all that
is enjoined by the Apostle, it is nothing at all, for when we are commanded to
suffer patiently, or not to resist, only when we cannot help our selves; it is
a very needless command, because so we must do, whether we will or no, and
Patience per force is no Patience at all.

But beside this dull shift, we have a more acute Evasion to elude the Text,
That these words were not addressed to Subjects that had the rights of their
own Country, but to Strangers residing and inhabiting in such places, where
they could challenge no greater rights then merely of Courtesy and Civility.
But though this is not so dull as the Scotch resistance, to yield when we can
fight no longer, it is but another way of fooling against the express Sense of
the Words themselves. For to say nothing of the distinction between Native
Subjects and Strangers, between whom there can be no difference as to this
Duty, then that it is stricter upon the natural Subject then the Foreigner. St.
Peter's reason, as it makes no difference in the Point, so it admits none,
because it is universal and unlimited, viz. from the peremptory Command of God,
that requires submission to Kings and all their Subordinate Officers, and upon
this reason it concerns all alike. And after that to let Subjects loose from
the duty of Non-resistance to their Prince, because the Law was here
particularly directed to such as were Aliens, though built upon, and enforced
by a reason common to all Men, shows, if not the profaneness of the Men, the
badness of their Cause. Though after all, the Observation is as false, as it is
trifling, when it is so vulgarly known, that the dispersed Jews were for the
most part made Denisons of those Cities where they inhabited; and there were
very few that were not, as well as St. Paul, free of some City or other. And
then these Jews or most of them, to whom this Epistle was written, were as
proper Subjects to the Government, under which they lived, as if they had been
Natives of the Province. Certainly Men must be arrived to a very slight regard
toward their own Consciences, that dare shuffle away the Obligation of such
severe and Sacred Laws of God himself, with so much violence to their own
Understandings. For it was impossible that Men of Common Sense, much less of
Learning and Acuteness, could satisfy themselves with such trifling pretenses.
But so it ever was, and so it ever will be, that as certain as Religion is at
the top of all Rebellion, Atheism and Profaneness is at the Bottom.

. VII.
But to what purpose do I take all this pains to prove the Duty of
Nonresistance from the Laws of God, the Obligations of Conscience, and the
Nature of Christianity, when that only convinces the Hildebrandists of their
Impiety and Apostasy from the Christian Faith? For what care they for that?
Religion is the least of their thought or concernment; and though they make it
the flourish to all their pretenses, it is not for any kindness to that, but
only to amuse the Common People, and dazzle them (as Men catch Larks with
Looking-Glasses) into their Party, both against themselves and their
Governors. And it is evident that the Patriots and Ringleaders of Faction have
no other measures of Conscience in the Case, then only interest, reason of
State, and the good of the Commonwealth. And here they applaud and admire
themselves with one busy and plausible pretense, that this Doctrine of
absolute Submission proceeds from a natural dullness, and want of that Sense,
that all Men of wit and courage ought to have of their Native Liberty, and
serves no End but only the encouragement of Tyranny, inviting Princes that are
of themselves ill-inclin'd, to insult over our Tameness, and how much soever
they trample upon us, and our Liberties, they know we must not only endure all,
but like Spaniels resent it well. Now though a wise Man would not refuse
Subjection to a good natured or a generous Prince, yet what Man of any Spirit,
can with any patience see a whole Kingdom enslaved to the insolence, or the
folly, or the luxury of one Man? That (say they) is not to submit to
Government, for that always takes care of the Public Good, but instead of
that, it betrays the Commonwealth to Tyranny and Arbitrary Oppression.

Now to give the utmost that these Pretenders to Politics and Innovation can
allege, not only to justify, but to admire themselves, and the wisdom of
their Proceedings, I will freely grant that it may, and often does fall out,
that Princes may be weak or wicked, or negligent, unskilful and unfaithful in
their Government; that they may injure Multitudes of Private Persons, and
neglect the Public; that their Follies and Vices may endanger a whole Nation;
and that the case is somewhat hard, that all the good People in it must be
bound in Duty and Conscience, to assist and uphold that Power with Lives and
Fortunes, that is nothing but Load and Oppression. This indeed is an hard case,
and an inconvenience that must sometimes (though but rarely) be felt by being
under, Government: But alas! there are many more hard cases in the World, and
much heavier inconveniences if we cast it off. So that setting aside all regard
to Duty, and consulting only Interest, and though we care not to be honest, yet
if we will be but a little wise, and take a true account of our own quiet and
security, let these shrewd Men of Politics, only consider, whether it will not
be more easy to bear this heavy Burden, then to cast it off with Violence to
the Government; and whether by removing one present inconvenience, we do not
run our selves into more, greater and more lasting. That is the only point of
Wisdom and Politiques in this case, whether submission to the worst Government
be not more easy to the Subject, then War and Rebellion. And this I think will
be evident to any Man of Common Sense if we only consider what we lose, and
what we gain by it. First we lose our own safety, and all that we gain, is that
loss* For all Government is the first security of every Man's private Interest
against the Injuries and Violences of all other Men, and that will make it
highly useful and beneficial at all times, though never so ill administered. For
were it not for fear of Authority, every Man would be exposed a Prey to all
Men, and all Mankind would unavoidably fall into a State of War, then which
State, nothing can be more defenseless and deplorable, and yet nothing but
Government preserves us from it. So that when we shake off our Duty and
Submission to that, we put our selves and our Families, out of all security
against the Violence of all the World beside. And therefore it was both a wise
and a witty custom that Sextus Empiricus reports to have been among Adv. Math.
l. 2.
the old Persians, that the People upon the death of any of their Kings were
allowed five days Anarchy, that by the Mischiefs, Slaughters, Rapines, O^^rages
committed in that short Interval, they might be convinced of the Usefulness and
Necessity of Government, and set the greater esteem upon the succeeding Prince.
And if Men would but consider the great Usefulness of the worst Government,
that it is a defense and protection of their own private Interests against the
Invasions of wicked Men; that would soon prevail with them to bear all the
inconveniences of a bad Government, rather then blow up themselves and
Fortunes together with it. For whosoever resists the Government, does what in
him lies to destroy it, and when that is done, he has not only endangered, but
certainly lost his own security. So great a gainer is every Subject that will
take upon him to reform the Government by force, that he pulls up the very
Fence, by which his own Enclosure and Propriety is secured. Nay though himself
may be so wise as to sit down patiently under an oppressive Government; yet if
he do but encourage this Doctrine of the Lawfulness of resistance to Princes,
he exposes himself, as well as the Government to all the Assualts of Usurpers.
For if it be Lawful for other Subjects, though they think it not wise for
themselves, to take up Arms against the Prince, his Authority is thereby made
too weak and ineffectual to be their Protection; they are exposed to the
dangers of War, and lie wholly at last at the mercy of a Conquering Army, and
that is the Result of all the Pleas for Resistance upon any pretense
whatsoever, that they all conclude in Anarchy and Confusion. And if we will but
take the Experience of our own, or other Ages, the case will be plain from that
too, as well as common Sense, That Resistance to Authority, if it were never so
Lawful, is such a Remedy as never bears its own Charges; and that no Nation
ever made use of it, that did not rue its own folly. The Vices of a single
Person are finite, and reach but to particular cases, the most bloody Tyrant
that ever was, never cut off any great Numbers; and it is truly observed by
Cardan of Nero, that as wanton as he was with the Lives of Men, in a very few
Months after his death, there was abundantly more blood spilt, then in all his
fourteen years Reign. The miseries of War are endless and universal, and
whatever the event is, or whoever wins, the Commonwealth is sure to be a
loser, and to pay a severe reckoning on all sides. Some few of the scum of the
People, may by the strength of their brawny Arms signalize themselves into
Clowns of Eminance, whilst the Ancient Gentry and Nobility endanger all their
Fortunes, and great numbers even of the first beginners of disturbance lose
their Lives, and in short the whole Kingdom must be undone for the advancement
of a Cromwell, a Pride, an Hewson, or a Desborough, and it rarely happens (and
it is pity but it should be so) but that the first Contrivers are outreached in
their own Designs, and baulkt by other Men, and other Councils, and live to
lament their own folly in much more good earnest, then they did the grievances
or miscarriages of the Government. But when the dispute is once raised, it is
not to be determined but by the Sword, and wherever success attends, that
Nation is in a sweet condition, when a Conquering Army comes with Swords drawn
to rate the Merits of their past Services, and challenge rewards equal to their
present Insolence, and that is to take whatever they are pleased to demand; and
it is a kindness in them not easily to be expected if they will stop at any
violence. At least it is certain, That which side soever is Victor, the
generality of a Nation never reap any thing by a War, then Repentance, and a
little Wisdom got by dear bought Experience. But not to mention a thousand
other great, public and lasting Calamities, that Naturally follow Resistance
and Rebellion, the certain miseries of Civil War it self, infinitely outweigh
all the Burdens that the greatest Tyranny can lay upon the Subject. What a
long Succession of unexampled Tyrants must have Reigned in England, before they
could have committed so many inhumanities, as a few years Civil War for the
Liberty of the Subject brought upon it? What one mortal Man's Salvageness could
ever have spilt half so much Blood, as was shed in any one eminent Battle? Let
therefore the Patriots of Sedition cease to upbraid Loyalty with weakness of
Understanding, when all Men of common Sense, or any Experience in the Affairs
of the World, cannot but see through the delusion of fighting for their
Liberties against their Prince, by which they hazard, and for the most part
lose both, and at least certainly bring themselves into greater Slavery, then
they could have suffered, had they been patient under the worst of Governments.
And this brings to my mind another instance of the wisdom of Submission, and
that is this, that as no wise Man that takes a thorough account of his own
interest, would care to draw himself into a War against his Prince, so it is
generally Men of the meanest understandings that are seduced by them. And they
are drawn in by such poor slights and delusions, that plainly show the contempt
that the Patriots have of their shallow reach, and the bottom of all their
Politiques is, to inveagle the common People into a conceit, that in all
contests with the Government, it is only their interest that is concerned, and
as for themselves, were it not to assert their Liberties, they would never
undergo the frowns of the Court, never expose themselves to the hazards of War,
nor venture their Lives and Fortunes for any thing less then the preservation
of their Country. And all this while the poor People must be supposed so dull
(and so they are) as not to suspect, that there is any such thing as Revenge,
Ambition and Discontent in the World, and yet it is these that have always been
the great Patrons of their Liberties. And though their Seditious Artifices are
known, and threadbare, as often discovered as used, and a thousand times over
and over exposed, yet because the common People have not the advantage to know,
or make use of the Experience of former Ages, they are in every Age as ready a
Prey for the Snare, as if it had never been set before. So that omitting diverse
other good reasons that might be urged against all kind of Resistance, and
particularly that one, That if it be once allowed the common People in any
case, there is no stop of pretenses, or end of confusions. And if Princes may,
and do abuse their Power, it is much more certain that the Rabble cannot use
theirs aright: And therefore to prevent the vast inconvenience of their ever
abusing it, it must be stopped at first, and without reserve, else the mischiefs
that follow, if it be admitted at all, will be infinite.

I know indeed, that learned Men suppose some Extravagant cases in which they
will allow Resistance to be Lawful, Barclay and Winzet suppose two, viz. Contra
Monach. l. 3. c. 16.
When the Prince sets himself to destroy the Commonwealth, or would sell the
Kingdom to a Foreign Power. But these wild suppositions are not to be brought
into the practice of the World, of which perhaps there are no Examples upon
Record. For what can be more incredible then that a King should be fond of
destroying his Kingdom, when by that he certainly in the first place destroys
himself himself, or of alienating it to another, when by that he as certainly
enslaves himself. Perhaps the thing may be possible in Nature, but it is so
infinitely improbable, that it ought not to be supposed in the practice of the
World: Least by supposing such an unexampled madness, we let Men loose from
their Duty in all other Cases; for that is the constant practice of all
Incendiaries, to persuade the People that their present Governors take the
course to destroy the Commonwealth. So that by this supposition of these two
Extravagancies, these Learned Men utterly defeat their own Design, because
these are the very Cases that are pretended in all Rebellions, and may be
applied to all Cases, as Men please to make use of their assistance. Thus when
Barclay argues, That if the Lib. 3. c. 16.
Power of calling Sovereign Princes to account for their Government, be allowed
to the People or their Representatives, it would be as destructive of good as
of bad Princes, as we may see by the insolent deportment of the Ephori against
their Kings, whom they chastised not only for their greater misdemeanors, but
for their mistakes or fancies; thus as Plutarch Records in the Life of
Agesilaus, they punished King Archidamus for choosing a little Woman to Wife. If
therefore this were the condition of Kings to be liable to the Judgment of the
People, they would be always exposed to numberless Affronts, Reproaches, and
Calumnies. And that would be ever enough for their Condemnation, only that they
did not please the People, though they fell into their displeasure not by any
fault of their own, but by the procurement of some ambitious Incendiary. And
this would be so much the more dangerous to good, then to bad Princes, because
ill Men, are more apt to assault good Men, then they them. And nothing is more
difficult, then for a Prince to manage things with that wisdom and happy
success, as not to incur the displeasure of some Parties, of their Subjects. If
he defend and relieve the Commonalty from the Oppressions of the great ones, he
makes the Nobility his Enemies, as James the Fifth of Scotland did, whom they
therefore Nicknamed The Carlis King, i. e. The King of the Clowns. If he
favor and advance the Nobility, and they any way oppress or disgust the
Commons, it will drive them into Tumults, and though at first they may be
despised as a cowardly and silly Rout, whilst they want a Leader; yet when they
are headed by any bold Captain, there is nothing more daring or more dangerous,
for casting off all fears and restraints, they will mount out of the lowest
Servitude to the top of Pride and Insolence, especially if any of the Nobility
join with them, and it rarely happens in such cafes, but that the People draw
in the Nobles, or the Nobles the People. And yet there is but one pretense for
all Rebellions, the fault of the Governor; and but one design, and that is to
save the Commonwealth from destruction. And this will put it into the Power of
all Rebels, who pretend that they are forced to take up Arms against their
Prince for the Public Safety (for all Rebels hide their wickedness under that
Veil) and if need be for the same reason Depose him.

All which discourse, as effectual as it is, is clearly defeated, and a Gap
opened to all the liberty that Rebels challenge by his allowing the Lawfulness
of resistance, When the Prince goes about to destroy the Commonwealth, when by
his own observation it is the standing Artifice, and only Pretense of all
Rebellions. And the truth of it is, if it be once granted in any one case, it
may be made as wide as Men's conveniences require.

Thus Grotius has extended it to Seven or Eight Cases more, i. e. As many as De
Jare belli and pacis, l. 1. c. 4.
were necessary to bring his Countrymen fairly off in their casting off the
Spanish Government. And so has Mr. B. from this very concession of Barclay,
justified Holy Commonwealth p. 466.
the Rebellion against his late Majesty, by recapitulating the many
misdemeanors and illegal Acts of his Government; or rather Transcribing the
long Parliaments Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom; in which they
represented to the People the great and manifest danger of the utter Subversion
of our Religion, our Laws, our Liberties, and the Commonwealth it self, under
the King's Government: And thus we see that by allowing resistance to the worst
of Kings in any one case, it will serve for a plausible and effectual pretense
for Rebellion against the best of Kings in all Cases. And therefore it is more
for the benefit of Manking to have this liberty denied even in those rare and
extravagant Cases, then by granting it in any to make a pretense for all
Rebellions: And if ever there should be a Prince so strangely beside himself,
as to set himself to destroy his own Kingdom, there would be no danger of him,
and he would be so unlikely to effect it, that he would first need to be
chained up for other acts of madness, before he could entertain such raving
thoughts: However it would be much less mischievous to the World, that such a
Bedlam Prince should rather be suffered to destroy the Commonwealth without
resistance from his Subjects, because it is so rarely done, then that his
Subjects should be permitted to rebel against him under that pretense, because
it is so frequently done; a thousand times for once: And for this reason is it,
that God Almighty has made universal Subjection such an indispensable Duty,
because however the World goes, peace is at all times most beneficial for the
good of Mankind, and that is the end of all his Laws. And its universal
obligation is so evident, upon supposition that Government is of Divine
Institution, that Grotius has no other way to escape from the Argument, but by
making it a mere humane Invention. Which is to suppose that all Men in the
World were once out of Government, and that is to suppose them both uncreated
and unbegotten, as I shall prove when I come to discourse of the Original of
Government. But at present, granting all Government to be an Artificial
invention of Men, yet it was first contrived for the common security; and
therefore it is always as necessary to keep it up, as it was at first to set it
up; for if it be at any time taken down, we are in the same state of War and
Confusion* that we were in before we agreed to submit our selves to it; and
therefore for the same reason that we first entered into it, are we obliged to
preserve its Rights inviolable, lest by breaking the present settlement, we
expose our selves to all those inconveniences of life, that we designed to
avoid by its first Institution. So that in the conclusion of all, whether
Government were first instituted by God or Man, it is agreed on all sides, that
it is necessary to Society, and Society to the comfort of every Man's life; so
that to baulk or oppose the Government, is to destroy the Society, and to
destroy that, is to destroy every Man's own Propriety; and after that, all
other pretenses, how big soever, are too light to be put into the Balance
against so weighty a Consideration. This that I have here in brief represented,
is enough to convince any Man, that Submission to a lawful Government, how ill
soever managed, cannot be more our Duty, then it is our Wisdom and Interest.

And therefore that it is not want of a good understanding or a manly sense of
things to bear Oppression, but the Effect of true Prudence, and a thorough
insight into the consequences of things. And I have here dropped in this brief
account of the folly of all resistance against a legal and settled Government,
only as a present check to the petulancy of Sedition. For be the pretenses in
any case never so strong and plausible, they can never stand before the force
and the light of this one Consideration, That how great, and how many mischiefs
soever Resistance may think to remove; it certainly creates many more, and
those much heavier, and rarely ends in any thing than universal destruction.
But this Argument I shall (by Gods assistance) prosecute more largely, when I
come to show the Grounds and Reasons upon which this Duty of Universal
Subjection is founded, and these I shall demonstrate from the Use, the Nature,
and the Original of Government, that cannot subsist but upon its supposition.
And then I shall take an account of all the republican and antimonarchical
Principles, and show that all their Hypotheses concerning Government first
contrived by the Common-wealths-men of Greece, stand upon no firmer bottom than
mere fable and poetry, and in particular that their fundamental Principle, of
deriving all Government from the People, is built upon no wiser supposition
then this, That the World was once peopled with Men and Women, that sprung out
of the Earth, both without a Creator and without Parents. And then in the last
place show, that the Hildebrandinists of all Sects; Bellarmine, Suarez,
Mariana, Lessius, Becanus, Boucherius and others on the Papal side: Buchanan,
Junius Brutus, Rutherford, Mr. B. and other of the Presbyterian side, all agree
in this one Principle of deriving the Government from the People, and make it
the last pretense of all their pleas for resistance upon what account soever.
In the mean time I proceed upon the Authority of the Scriptures.

. 8.
That is the second advantage, that the Christian Religion brings along with it
for the security of Civil Government, viz. the many Laws that it has enjoined
to bind Subjects to an entire and absolute subjection. The third is this, That
those that are entrusted with highest Authority in the Church, are most
severely forbidden to challenge to themselves any temporal power or dominion,
and strictly commanded to exercise their own jurisdiction with all manner of
meekness and humility, toward their Inferiors, and an exemplary submission to
their Superiors. And this is a new Tie upon them beside all the former
obligations from the nature of Christianity, the doctrine of the Cross, the
Precepts of our Savior and his Apostles in common to them, with all other
Christians, to an entire and unreserved subjection. Thus when our Savior had
constituted the Apostles supreme Governors in his Church, he beats them all
off from all Thoughts of worldly pride and ambition; and instructs them to
exercise their Power, though it were so very great, with that compliance and
condescension, as if they had in reality none at all. For all our Savior's
Precepts to his Apostles to avoid domination, relate wholly to the manner of
exercising their Authority; and not to the Authority it self, as the Enemies to
the Christian Church would force them to imply. For that the Apostles were
vested with true and proper Power, is evident both from their Office (all the
Acts whereof we have shown to be Authoritative) and from our Savior's own
immediate Grant, in which he expressly declares, That he leaves to them and
their Successors the same Power, that himself had received from his Father. So
that if he had any real Authority at all, so had they too; and if they had
none, neither had he. And therefore those several Texts, that are usually
alleged to take away the Power of the Church, cannot be understood of any
thing but the manner of its exercise, without any pride or haughtiness, and
with all manner of gentleness and condescension to those that were under their
Authority. And if we take an Account of the particular passages themselves,
they will force us to take them in this sense and no other. Thus when they were
contending among themselves, our Savior calls them to him, and tells them, The
Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great
exercise Authority upon Mat. 20. 25.
them, but it shall not be so among you: But whosoever will be great among you,
let him be your Minister; and whosoever will be chief [or Ruler] among you, let
him be your Servant, even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister. Which words though they are alleged by Grotius in the Book of his
Youth, de Imperio, against all manner of Authority in the Church beside that of
persuasion, which is none at all: Yet in his Notes upon the Gospels, he clearly
shows the Vanity and the Falsehood of that Interpretation. And no wonder, when
it is done so expressly by the Words themselves, in which our Savior shows his
Apostles, how they may observe this Rule by following his Example, Now it is
plain (says he) that it cannot be said of him that he had no Authority, when he
says of himself that he had all Power in Heaven and Earth, and therefore it
cannot refer to the Being of Authority it self, but to its kind and the manner
of using it. That as he notwithstanding the greatness of his Dignity, behaved
himself rather like a Servant than a Lord, and instead of imperious commanding
his Subjects, condescended to the lowest Offices toward them, thereby to
endear them to himself and the gentleness of his Government, so should all
Pastors and Governors in the Christian Church, not insult and domineer over
their Flocks, not govern them with an arbitrary Power, or (...), tyrannical
dominion, as Gregory Nazianzen expresses it; nor enslave them Orat. 28.
to their own interest and insolence as the Roman Prefects did the Provinces
particularly the Governors or Ethnarchs of Judaea, who (as Josephus informs
us) were Antiq. Jud. 13. 2.
known by the particular Title of (...), Benefactours: But to treat them with
all gentleness, and to be so far from using them like Slaves, that they should
rather behave themselves to them like Servants, i. e. in short, to mix nothing
of Arrogance with their Authority. And that truly becomes the Person and
Dignity of a Christian Prelate (as St. Chrysostom paraphrases upon it) to be
affable and courteous, to be kind and gentle, to be familiar and condescending
to the meanest Persons; this gains him respect with all Men, and makes his
Authority much greater then it would be without it, Men will much more readily
obey a Superior, that obliges more then he commands. Whereas on the contrary
(says he) if a Bishop be proud and surly, or if rough and peevish, or if when
he ought to reprove he scold and braul, or if when he should command, he huffs
or domineers; or if he affect to be troublesome to his Inferiors, and show the
greatness of his Power, by nothing else then being pert and vexatious, he
justly exposes himself to the contempt of all Men, loses the respect due to his
Person, and the Reverence due to his Place. Nothing so odious or despicable as
a Clown in any Authority, but in Church Authority it is so offensive, that the
indignity of it is not to be expressed, it is so wide a contradiction to the
Place and Office. Now the sense of this Text being thus stated, as it is by
this Eloquent Father, it fixes the meaning of all the rest; thus when St. Peter
exhorts the Pastors not Epist. 1. c. 5. v. 3.
to Lord it over God's heritage (where it is all one whether it relate to the
whole Flock, or only the subordinate Clergy) it is the very same word which is
used by our Savior, (...). And so does St. Paul, when he tells the
Corinthians, that the Apostles do not Lord it over their Faith, the word is
(...), which we improperly enough Translate, Not having Dominion over their
Faith, for the word Dominion is not always taken in a bad Sense, but often
signifies Lawful Authority, whereas (...) properly signifies nothing but
domineering, or treating them as Masters do their Slaves, whom they care not
how they use for their own gain and advantage; that is the proper import of the
word, and therefore it is very aptly joined by St. Peter with (...), to feed
the Flock for filthy lucre, as the Romans kept their Slaves. And to the same
purpose is the advice of St. Paul, that a Bishop be no striker, nor greedy of
filthy 1 Timothy 3. 3^
Lucre, but patient, or mild and gentle, not a brawler, not covetous, i. e. not
to run into any of these Vices or Disorders in the exercise of his Episcopal
Authority; but to infer from hence, that he has no true and real Authority at
all, only becomes the Man that knows no better Sanction of a Law, then a Sword
or a Cudgel. And this very thing is that (...), that moderation, that is so
frequently enjoined in the Apostolical Writings, as Phil. 4. 5. Tit 3. 2. Jam.
3. 17. It is not, as it is by some Men very ignorantly interpreted, an
unconcernedness and indifferency between dissenting Parties, for that may be
good or bad as it happens; if the controversy be trivial, it may be an
instance of it, but if it be about a matter that is settled either by the
Authority of God or the Church, there indifferency and moderation is nothing
else then Falsehood and Treachery. But the true meaning of the word, is a
mildness and gentleness in the use of Authority, the same that is attributed to
God himself in the Government of the World, Wisd. of Solomon, c. 12. v. 18, But
thou Mastering thy Power, judge with Equity, and orderest us with great
savor, (...), i. e. judge not by rigor of Law, but with mercy and
gentleness, and so Aristotle defines the virtue of (...) that its Office is,
(...), to correct and moderate the general Law when it is applied to particular
Cases. And all good Government is ever more merciful then the Law ought to be,
for that cannot be too severe to deter Men from offending, so that there are
not many cases in which it is broken, wherein the offender may not require some
mercy and compassion. But as this Virtue is so highly commendable in all
Government, so is it much more in that of the Church, in which Almighty God
shows more of it in himself toward Mankind, the Gospel being nothing but a
dispensation of his Mercy and Gentleness to Offenders. And as this is a
necessary Qualification in the Governors of the Church for guiding and
rectifying their public Government, so is it most becoming their private
Conversation, and by gaining Authority to their Persons, doubles that of their
Office. So that when our Savior instructs his Apostles in this new way to
Greatness, his instructions are wise in a literal Sense, for nothing is really
so great and commanding in the World as true Humility. Whoever will be great
among you, let him be your Minister, and whoever will be first among you, let
him be your Servant, Matthew. 21. 26. If any one desire to be first, the same
shall be last of all, and Servant of all, Mark 9. 35. He that exalts himself,
shall be abased; and he that will abase himself, shall be exalted, Math. 23.
12. The common experience of the World sufficiently attests the Truth and the
Wisdom of these Propositions, so Powerful is the obligation of Courtesy,
Condescension, and Humility. But if the Governors of the Church are so strictly
enjoined this Virtue, where they have Authority, how much more are they, where
they have none? If they may not contend with one another for Dominion, though
they have equal Power, how much less with Sovereign Princes, of whose Power
they have no share, and to whom they are bound to a more exact and exemplary
Obedience and Submission then other Subjects, by their Office and Power. So
that our Savior has taken all possible care, as far as Law can do it, to
reduce the Constitution of his Church to an entire compliance with the Civil
Government. And though he has instituted a distinct Government in it, suited to
the design of his Religion, he has so many ways brought it into Subjection to
Sovereign Powers, that they are much more disabled by their very Authority to
give them any disturbance, then they could have been without it; the very
Authority it self being a new and distinct Obligation to a stricter Allegiance.
But because notwithstanding all this Evidence some Men are jealous of granting
any Authority to the Church peculiar to it self, especially when all Power is
so apt to degenerate into abuse; and therefore though they cannot deny the
truth of it in general, are very shy of admitting it at all, lest they give it
too much advantage sometime or other to fix and strengthen an interest within
it self, against the State (And I must confess the profane boldness of the
Bishops of Rome, ever since the Hildebrandine Apostasy, in justling and
contesting with Princes, as the Vicars of Christ, has given too much ground for
this Jealousy) I shall from this general state of the Christian Law, as fixed
by our Savior and his Apostles, proceed to its particular Precedents, when it
came to be reduced to practice in the Primitive Church. Whereby I shall make it
to appear, after and beside all these foregoing considerations to forestal all
pretenses whatsoever, of resistance to the Civil State, that tho this, because
all Power is so, may be liable to abuse, yet that there is not any one point of
Government more easy then t^ prevent it, and that the danger is so very
little, that no Government that does not grossly forsake it self, can possibly
suffer any thing from it, and that the abuse is so unlikely, and so difficult
ever to be put in practice again, that there is no one thing in the World that
requires less care to watch against it; in short, that it can never come to do
any harm without such a long continued stupidity in the State, as is utterly
inconsistent with all Government of it.

And on the other side, the advantages that accrue to the State by receiving
the Church into its protection, are so great, so certain, and so universal,
that there cannot be a grosser faileur in Policy, then to refuse or deny it.
And here I say for our better direction, as every where else, we must advise
with the practice of the Primitive Church, where we shall find the whole matter
so fairly and so easily accorded, that it is next to a miracle how it should
ever be made so great a difficulty in these later times. But it happened in this,
as it did in most other things at the time of the Reformation, that men saw
themselves wrapped up, they knew not how, in woeful Errors and Corruptions, but
did not, and indeed as the World then stood, could not immediately discover the
true original state of the Church, as it was at first settled by our Savior and
his Apostles, and received into protection by Constantine and the Christian
Emperors. So that though they had Eyesight enough (and God knows very little
would serve their turn) to discern the follies and abuses of Rome, they were at
a loss how to fix the right Reformation, and for want of the ancient Records of
the Church, that lay buried in dust and rubbish at that time, could make but
slow improvements in it. So that before the true state of the Church could be
clearly and fully discovered, most of them were settled in some way or other,
and after any new settlement, it is very difficult to make any Alteration, and
therefore they continue in their first posture to this day. But the Church of
England at the very first Attempt, resolving to reform it self by the Example
of the Primitive Church, and having the good fortune to retain the Apostolical
form of Episcopal Government in subordination to the Royal Power, set it self
in a right way to Reformation. And so as the state of things came to light by
degrees, brought its work to some competent Perfection. For the Reformation of
the Church after such an inveterate degeneracy, must needs be a work of so
great bulk and difficulty, that it is an unreasonable thing to expect that it
should be finished at the first stroke. So great a design as that must be a work
of time and consideration, to be reviewed and amended as the Master-Workmen
shall find most convenient. So as that they, who had a Power first to begin it,
have an inherent right, when ever they think fit to take an account of their
own Work, and if they find any flaws, mistakes, or defects in it, to make them
up by an after-care. So that there must be a constant Power residing in the
Church to enact or abolish Laws, as it judges most serviceable to the present
state of things. And that is truly and properly the Church of England, the
Governors of it acting under the Allowance of the Sovereign Power by its
established Laws and Constitutions, with a constant power residing in
themselves, and their Successors, to enact new Laws as they shall judge most
beneficial to the Edification of the Church. And it is a very crude notion of
the Church of England (as common as it is) that it is to be found in its
Canons, Articles and Constitutions, for that is only the Law and dead rule of
the Church of England, but the Church properly so called consists in its living
Authority, as settled by our Savior, by which these Laws were at first enacted,
and are or ought to be still executed, and may in some cases be altered. And
that is the great difference between the Law and the Authority of the Church,
that one is alterable, and the other is not. The Authority of the Church may
make new Laws and cancel old ones, but that lasts the same for ever. So that
for men to talk of this or that Church, without a particular form of Government
settled in it by our Savior's own Commission, is to turn the Christian Church
into a Chimaera and imaginary state of Fairies. But as for the Church of
England, according to the design of its Reformation, it consists of a National
Synod of Bishops, together with a select Convocation of Presbyters representing
the whole Body of the Clergy in subjection to the Sovereign Power, and in
communion with the Catholic Church all the World over, as far as it can be
attained. And this is contrived so agreeably to the Primitive Platform, the
Interest of Government, the Nature of Christianity, that there is little else
defective in it, then the honesty and the confidence to own it self, and put
its own Constitution into effectual practice. But of that I shall discourse in
its proper place.

. 9.
At present for the practice of the Primitive Churches Government within it
self, and as it related to the Civil State, it must be considered in the two
Periods; before and after the Conversion of the Empire; and by comparing the
true face and posture of things in these two so different states, we shall have
an exact description of the Rights of the Church in all estates and conditions
whatsoever: But most of all of its easy compliance with the Rights of Civil
Government in Christian States; and of the safest way for Christian Sovereigns
to govern and protect the Church within their Dominions, without invading its
inherent and unalienable Authority. And then last of all, I shall compare that
Royal Supremacy, that is acknowledged and asserted in the Church and Realm of
England in Causes Ecclesiastical with the sense of the Ancient Church,
concerning the Authority of Emperors, and with the Practice of Christian
Princes, in the Exercise of this Authority. And by showing their complete
Agreement, shall from that Topic distinctly prove that we have in this, as
well as in other matters, attained a good degree of Reformation.

First, as for the Period of time, before the Conversion of the Roman Empire,
there are two things to be considered; first their behavior toward the Civil
Government, whilst it suppressed and persecuted the Christian Faith: Secondly,
the exercise of their own Authority within themselves. From both which it will
appear that the Church, as a Society founded by Christ, challenged a
Jurisdiction distinct from and Independent upon the Civil State; and that this
Jurisdiction was so far from interfering with or abating of the Sovereignty of
Princes, that it bound them to the strictest Allegiance and Subjection, to the
most inhumane Persecutors. And the Story of this Interval, whilst the powers of
the Church and the World were separate, and indeed (as much as it was possible)
opposite, will set before us a much clearer State of the Nature and Extent of
the two Jurisdictions, then we can have from the Practice of Christian States,
in which the two Powers concurring in the same Acts of Government, it is not
altogether so easy to discern their distinct influences: but will withal give
us the fullest Character of true Christian Loyalty from their practice under
the hardest usage and severest persecutions. But most of all from their
Principles upon which they founded their Obligation to their Practice; and when
it appears upon what grounds and reasons they submitted to the utmost cruelty
of the Civil Government, that will prevent the common shift made by all
Factious Parties against the Authority of their Example: viz. that they
submitted for want of strength to make resistance, because it will show that
they thought themselves obliged to suffer any thing from the Government rather
then resist, by the most Sacred and indispensable Laws of their Religion.

And first, as for their Patience and Submission under all kinds of Cruelties
and Oppressions, it is so remarkable, so entire, so without reserve or
exception, that, if it were possible, the height and glory of their practice
exceeded the Gallantry of their Masters Precepts. And though they were eminent
for all other Virtues, yet in this of patience, cheerfulness, and magnanimity
under sufferings they outdid themselves. It was the hight and perfection of all
their goodness; it was the wonder and astonishment of their Enemies; and the
glory, and if any thing could be so, the very boast of their Religion.
Numberless are both the Instances of this Practice in the Records of the
Church, and the Assertions in the Writings of the ancient Doctors of it, to own
and justify their Obligation to it. But to transcribe them would be an endless
work, and would take up the greatest part of the Records of the first three
hundred years; that are for the most part employed about these (...) (as
Eusebius In Praefat. ad lib. 5.
styles them) these peaceable Wars of Martyrs and Confessors. It is enough that
in all that time, there is not one instance of any Christians making any
forcible defense, or joining in any Sedition against their Governors. Though if
there had been any miscarriages in that kind, that could have been no objection
against the truth of the Doctrine it self, which is to be taken from the
general Practice and Sense of the Church, not from the irregularities of a few
private persons. And yet so far was it from that, that to me it looks like
Wonder and Miracle that among all the Primitive Christians, who lived under
Pagan and persecuting Emperors till the time of Constantine the Great, which
takes in the Interval of three hundred and forty years, there should not be one
instance of any one Christian, that either taught or practiced the Doctrine of
resistance in any case whatsoever; but that on the contrary they unanimously
both taught and practiced the Duty of Passive Obedience, as one of the greatest
and most indispensable Laws of their Religion.

And first as for the public Records, the Canons and Laws of the Church, the
case is the same here, as that of Parricide in old Rome; the Crime was so
unknown and so unsuspected that no Provision was made against it. For among all
the Canonical Decrees and Censures of the Ancient Church, which were all
enacted to restrain some present miscarriages, there is not one to be found
that forbids or punishes the Sin of Resistance to Lawful Superiors. The
Christians of the Primitive Church were so firmly fixed in their Duty here by
our Savior's and his Apostles Precepts, and by the constant Instructions and
Unanimous Sense of their Pastors and Teachers, that they supposed that they
could not make any resistance to the most unjust violence of their Persecutors,
without renouncing Christianity it self. And that is the reason why this Crime
was then never restrained by Ecclesiastical Censures, because it was then never
committed. And though there are scarce any other Sins for which the Church has
not appointed proper Penances, because they were some time or other put in
practice, yet the sin of Reb^llion was the only Crime for which it had no
Penance, because there never was any one instance of it, to give any ^ccasion
for a Law against it. Nay, so far was the Church from doing any thing
prejudicial to the Rights of Sovereign Powers, that it was careful and tender
of the Interests of Families, in pursuance of its Fundamental Principle, that
Christianity was to make no alteration in any Civil Rights whatsoever. And
therefore in the 82 Apostolical Canon it is provided. That no Servant be
admitted into Holy Orders without his Master's consent, because (as they give
the reason of the Law) that would be a subversion of Families. And for that
reason it was made one of the Articles framed against St. Chrysostom by his
Adversaries in the Synod under the Oak, (...), Leunclavius, l. p. 156.
That he had Ordained other Men's Servants before they were set at liberty. And
in the third Canon of the Council of Gangra it is Decreed, That whoever teaches
Servants to forsake their Masters, upon the account of Religion, be
Anathematised. This Synod of Gangra was assembled against a particular Sect of
Fanatiques in Armenia, that under the pretense of a more refined and spiritual
Religion, became perfect Ranters and Levellers, and so subverted all Rights
both Sacred and Civil, as they are excellently described in an Epistle of the
Bishops of the Synod to the Bishops of Armenia, prefixed to their Canons, and
among the many other disorders into which these wild Enthusiasts ^an
themselves, this was one, that they taught Servants to run away from their
Masters, (...), upon the pretext of Godliness, which as well as all their other
absurd Principles is here justly, and as Zonaras observes, in pursuance of the
Apostolical Doctrine, Anathematifed. These are all the Canons that I know of in
the Ancient Church, that concern Men's Civil Rights, so rarely were they invaded
or violated among the Primitive Christians; but the first Canons that I meet
with against Rebellion, were the three Anathema's of the Council of Toledo, in
the year 633: When the Romans being driven out of Spain by the Goths, and they
being settled in the peaceful Government of the Country, after the death of
Cinthilas, who first obtained the Crown, and the Peoples consent to it;
Sisinandus his Son summoned this Council in the first year of his Reign, to
Anathematise all Persons, that should any way attempt any thing against his
Crown, Life, or Dignity. But this was merely contrived for the security of his
Government against the Romans, and to preserve his new Subjects from Revolting
to their old Masters, and was not made to condemn the Doctrine of Resistance,
as if it had been taught at that time, but to abet their Oath of Allegiance,
and for that reason the Anathema upon the Offender is founded upon the sin of
Perjury. The next passage that I remember, to provide against all Rebellion, is
the fragment of a Leunclavius Graeco-Rom. Tom. 1. Lib. 2. Page 118.
Synod held by Alexius Patriarch of Constantinople, under the younger
Constantinus Porphyrogenneta, who began his Reign in the year 975. In which all
defections from, or insurrections against the Emperor are Anathematised; and
so is the Priest that gives absolution to any Rebels, before they return to
their Duty and Allegiance. The occasion of this Law I know not, but whatever it
was, I know no other of the same nature till the Hildebrandine Apostasy, whose
barbarous proceedings against the Emperor Henry the Fourth, were immediately
censured and condemned by a Council of Thirty Bishops assembled at Brixia in
the year 1080, and himself is Deposed and Anathematised, as one that destroyed
the Order of the Church, and disturbed the Peace of Christian Empire, and
compass't the Death of a Catholic Prince, and abetted a perjured Usurper, and
subverted the Peace of the World. And the same Sentence was ratified five years
after in a Council at Mentz, though all in vain, for they got nothing by it,
but the Name and the Brand of Schismatiques. But what bloody work has been made
in Christendom by the Principles of this Termagant Pope from that time to this,
will make up a Volume of it self, when we come to those times.

But to return to the state of the Primitive Church, though there are no
examples of any affront or violence offered to the Civil Magistrate in it, yet
there are numberless Instances of their quiet and peaceable Submission, and
that too upon Principles of Duty and Obligations of Conscience. Thus was it
bravely said of St. Polycarp, and worthy the greatness and wisdom of the
Martyr, to the Pro-Consul at his Trial. We are Commanded, Sir, to give all due
and decent honor E^seb. Lib. 4. c. 15.
to Princes and Magistrates, so far as we can do it, without doing wrong to our
own Consciences. They were bound to comply with, and submit to the Will of
their Governors in all things but Sin, and that by the Laws of their Religion.
But the most magnificent Account of this is to be seen in the Christian
Apologists, who in the very heat and flame of Persecutions, when, if ever, Men
should be exasperated into Passion, Glory and Triumph in their great Zeal and
Loyalty to those very Princes by whom they were persecuted. Just in Martyr is
so Apol. 2. p. 66.
confident as to Petition the Emperors to punish all such as profess't
Christianity, and yet lived not according to the Laws of their Religion, and
then immediately adds, As for our parts, we are the most forward of any
Subjects to pay Taxes and Contributions to the Emperor, as we are Commanded by
our Master, to give unto God the things that are God's, and unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's. And therefore we worship God alone, but cheerfully
serve them in all other things, as well knowing them to be Sovereign Princes
over Men; and withal praying for them, that God would add Wisdom to their
Imperial Dignity. This is our Practice and Profession, and if, notwithstanding
this, you will proceed against us, we shall be no losers, being assured, that
every Man must after death give an account of his own Actions, and then our
Rewards shall be proportioned to our Sufferings. And after the same manner, and
with the same confidence, does his Scholar Athenagoras conclude his Eloquent
Oration to the Emperors, when he had shown the Innocence of the Christians in
all other particulars, when he had wiped off all Calumnies, and when he had
represented their Piety, their Honesty, their Temperance, their Sobriety, he
adds, And now great and worthy Sirs, lend me your Royal Ear, who think you are
more likely to obtain the things that they pray for, then Persons so qualified,
and yet we daily pour forth our Prayers for the prosperity of your Government,
and that the Son may according to right succeed the Father in the Empire, and
that your Government may ever increase and flourish; in short, that all things
may fall out as successfully as your hearts can desire, which will be a benefit
also to our selves, that living under your Reign a quiet and peaceable life, we
may readily obey your Commands. That was the sum of all their Apologies, and it
was suited to the Nature of their Religion as it stood founded upon the
Doctrine of the Cross, we are obedient to all your Commands, that are not
contrary to the true worship of God and the Laws of our Religion; there we
crave leave to be excused, and if that offend you, we can but suffer for it,
which we are ready to do with all manner of meekness and submission, as being
assured of an ^ternal Reward for a short calamity.

Theophilus Antiochenus in his Address to his Friend, discoursing of the Folly
and Vanity of giving Divine Worship to the Emperors, he tells him, That it is
a much greater honor to them not to worship but to pray for them. I will
worship that God from whom Caesar received his Authority. But you will say, why
not Caesar too? Because he was not set up to be worshipped, but to be paid that
proper honor that is due to Caesar, for the King is not the Deity but ought to
remember that he is advanced by God to that height of Dignity, not to be
worshipped by his Subjects, but to do them Justice; for this end the Divine
Majesty placed him in the Imperial Throne, and therefore as Caesar will not
suffer any of his Subjects to usurp the Caesarean Title, because it belongs to
him alone, neither let himself challenge that worship, that is proper and
peculiar to the Divine Majesty. And therefore O Man honor the King, honor
him, I say by loving him, obeying him, and praying for him, and by so doing,
you will do the will of God, for this is the Sum of the Divine Law, my Son
honor God, and the King, and be not disobedient or refractory to either of
them. This was the true state of the Case in his time to show all manner of
respect and honor to Sovereign Princes as such, only in Subordination to God,
so as to obey them in all things but when their commands interfer'd, and then
indeed they choose to obey God in the first place, still preserving in all
other things the same honor and duty to their Prince. And after the same Lib.
8. p. 4^0.
manner Origin answers Celsus, when he asks him why the Christians cannot
worship and appease the Emperors, because (says he) there is only one God,
that ought to be worshipped, the Lord of all, and he is best appeased with devout
Prayers, but the favor of Princes is not to be courted by such mean and
dishonorable obsequiousness, as is inconsistent with true Piety, or such
servile Flatteries as are unworthy a generous man, and one that esteems
magna^imity to be the greatest of Virtues, but as far as our Piety to God will
permit, we are not so frantic that we should wilfully exafperate the
displeasure of Kings, to deliver us to torments and death; for we are so taught
in our Books, let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no
Power, but is of God, therefore he that resists the power, resists the
Ordinance of God. And these words are to be understood in their plain and
natural sense. And their Sense is so very plain, that it is impossible to
fasten any other Sense upon them beside their own. With all these imminent
Doctors of the Church agrees the Answer of that pious and resolute Prelate
Dyonysius of Alexandria in his Examination before AEmilianus Prefect of Egypt,
that we worship one God, the Maker of all things, and who bestowed the Empire
upon their most Sacred Majesty's, Valerianus and Gallienus, to him we offer up
our daily Prayers for the safety of their Empire, that it may continue firm and
unshaken forever.

. 10.
And as for the Latins they kept pace with, not to say that they out-ran the
Greeks in the same Track of Loyalty. Irenaeus Scholar to Policarp writing
against the Gnostics, who taught that the Lib. 5. c. 24.
Powers of the Earth ought to be obeyed, because they were set up not by God
but by the Devil, has stated the Obligation to the duty of Obedience upon its
true and proper Principles. First from diverse passages of Scripture, expressly
commanding it. Secondly from the Providence of God, who sets up Kings for the
preservation of Mankind, lest they should prey upon one another like the Fish
of the Sea. And lastly to prevent the Objection that God would not set up bad
Kings, he replies, that by whose command they were born men, by his command
they were ordained Kings, fit for the times in which, and the people over whom
they reign, for some are given for a Punishment, others for a Blessing to their
Subjects, all to all People as they deserve, the just Judgment of God equally
extending to all. Which is a full declaration not only of the Loyalty of the
Primitive Christians, but of the Principles upon which it was grounded.
Tertullian in the time of Alexander Severus under the rage of the fifth
Persecution, that was very bloody and severe, writ his admirable Apology in
imitation of Justin Martyr, and for a Foundation of his Plea, states the true
condition of the Christian Church in this World. Scit se peregrinam in terris
agere; inter extraneos facile inimicos invenire; caeterum genus, sedem, spem,
gratiam, dignitatem in coelis habere. Unum gestit interdum ne ignorata
damnetur. She knows her self to be but a Stranger and Pilgrim in this World,
and cannot but expect to meet with Enemies in a Foreign Country; but her
Kindred, her habitation, her hope, her favor, and her honor all dwell in the
World to come. She has but one thing to request or indeed to challenge, that
she may not be condemned unheard. Here is no pleading any exemption from the
Imperial Judicatures upon the Account of Christian Privileges; but he offers
himself and his cause to a fair and impartial Trial, and he is so confident of
its innocence, as to desire no other favor but only the Justice of being
heard. Neither does he any where complain of their punishing such Actions as
belonged not to their cognizance, but only of the Illegality of their Officers
Proceedings, in that they were condemned unheard and unexamined. And though
they were so, yet he no where appeals from their Courts, but only presses them
to examine and search into their cause, and so stipulates in the name of the
Christian Church, to stand or fall by their Judgment. And as for their strict
Loyalty to their Prince he farther pleads, that they pray for the Emperors that
God would grant them long Life, a quiet Reign, and undisturbed Family, Valiant
Armies, Faithful Counselors, Obedient Subjects, and whatever else they can
desire either as Men or Emperors; and then bids them proceed to murder them,
and tear their Souls from their Bodies, whilst they are praying for their
Emperors Happiness. And therefore you that think that we have no concern for
the Safety of Caesar, look into our Books and learn from them with what
Redundancy of Kindness we are commanded to pray for our Enemies and
Persecutors, and who are more so than those by whose Authority we are condemned
as Criminals. But beside that we are expressly enjoined to pray for Kings, and
all that are in Authority. We revere the Wisdom of God in the Emperors, that
sets them over the Nations, we acknowledge that Character in them, that God has
impressed upon them, and therefore we will wish them safe, whom he would have so.
But what do I say any more of the Christians duty and even Religion toward the
Emperor, whom they are particularly bound to honor as one chosen by their God?
so that I may well say, that Caesar is most of all ours, as being set over us
by our God, etc. And a while after he boldly demands, Whether there were ever
found among the Christians any Casfii, Nigri, and Albini, three known Rebels,
the first against the Emperor Verus, the other two against Severus. And in his
Apology to the Prefect Scapi^la, he tells him that we are slandered about the
Imperial Majesty, and yet there could never any of the Albinian, Nigrian, or
Castrian Rebels be found among the Christians. A Christian is no Man's Enemy,
much less the Emperor's, for knowing that he is appointed by God, he cannot but
Love, Reverence, and Honor him, and pray for his safety; and therefore we
worship the Emperor, as far as it is lawful for us, and convenient for him,
viz. as a Man next under God, only less then him, and deriving his whole
Authority from him. It is an excellent Passage in Minutius Faelix, who lived
not long after Tertullian, concerning the calm and peaceable Magnanimity of
Christians. How delightful a Spectacle is it to God, when a Christian
encounters Sorrow, when with a composed mind he meets threatenings and Torments,
when with smiles he insults over the noise of Death, and the dread of the
Executioner, when he asserts his liberty against Kings and Princes, and yields
only to God, whose he is; when with the Triumph of a Conqueror he has the
better of the Judge, who gives Sentence against him, for he overcomes who gains
what he fights for? That is the only Christian Combat, Courage, and Submission.
And therefore it is very well observed by the learned Lawyer Baldwin, in his
Prolegomena to this acute Author, that Caecitius the Heathen, though he were in
all other things a very bold Calumniator, and insisted fiercely upon all the
vulgar slanders against the Christians, yet he never durst charge them with the
least suspicion of Disloyalty or Rebellion. To which they might have added,
That though they were usually indicted of Treason by their Enemies, yet the
only proof of it, was their resusing to Sacrifice by the Emperor's Genius: And
setting that one act of Idolatry aside, there is not any one charge upon Record
of any one act of Disloyalty, and that (as says the learned Lawyer) was the
glory of our Ancestors, that they would be provoked by no injuries to any
thought of Hostility against Lawful Sovereigns, howsoever barbarously they were
treated by them; or enter into any Conspiracies against them, though at that
time they were frequent and plausible, as being always mindful what became
their Patience, Meekness, Modesty, and Sobriety; so far were they from being
Turbulent and Seditious, and running mad with a thirst of Revenge. And in
reality if they had behaved themselves otherwise, they had laid wast the very
Foundations both of their own Religion, and all humane Society too.

And to mention no more, St. Cyprian Ad demetrianum.
is as express for Passive Obedience joined with Loyal Prayers as any of his
Predecessors: Nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur, reluctatur, nec^^se adversus
injustam violentiam vestram, quamvis nimius and copiosus noster sit Populus,
ulciscitur. Innocents nocentibus cedunt, insontes paenis and cruciatibus
acquiescunt. None of us, when he is apprehended, resists, and though our
numbers are great and considerable, we do not think of revenging our selves
against your unjust Oppressions: the Innocent submit to the Guilty, and sit
down quietly under Pains and Tortures. And then a little after this he adds,
That though we are treated thus barbarously, yet we cease not to pray for the
expulsion of your Enemies, for seasonable Rains, for removing or abating
public Calamities, begging of God day and night with the greatest importunity
for your peace and safety that are our Persecutors. And in this time they were
so tender of doing any thing offensive to the Civil Government, or any way
contrary to their Commands, that they judged it not lawful for a Christian,
that was banished for his Religion, to return into his own Country without the
leave and warrant of Authority. So that St. Cyprian reckoning Epist. 13. Edit.
Ox^n.
up in his Epistle to the Confessors in the Decian Persecution, diverse scandals
that some of them had given to the Christian Church, particularly of some that
lived in continual Debauchery, and Uncleanness either from their very Baptism
or their Confession, next to these he tells them, Alius in eam Patriam, unde
extorris factus est, regreditur, ut deprehensus, non quasi Christianus, sed
quasi nocens pereat. Another returns back into his Country, from whence he had
been commanded into Banishment, where if he be apprehended, let him know that
he suffers not as a Christian, but as a Malefactor. From all which passages it
is evident beyond all contradiction, that it was the unanimous sense of all the
most eminent Doctors of the ancient Church, that nothing was more contrary to
the whole frame and constitution of Christianity then resistance to the Civil
Government in any case whatsoever, and that in case of Persecution, and
Oppression for it, Passive Obedience was their indispensable duty, which upon
any provocation to violate any way, was judged no less a Crime then renouncing
the Christian Faith. It were easy to have collected a vast number of passages
out of the Writings of the Ancients to the same purpose, and diverse such
Collections have been made by Learned Men, but I have selected these peculiar
passages out of my own little observation, because they do not only give us
their Opinion, but the ground upon which they build it, from the reason and the
nature of their Religion, and that gives it a perpetual and unalterable
Obligation in all times and cases; and how various soever the Affairs of the
World may be, yet this duty can never be altered by any change of
circumstances; because it is as unchangeable as the nature of our Religion; so
that as long as Christianity lasts, it must for ever equally oblige all
Christians under all circumstances and in all conditions.

Neither do they teach the Doctrine of Non-resistance merely as Doctors of the
Christian Church, and as it is a Law of their Religion, but as Philosophers, or
men that understood the Interest of Mankind, and the Original of Government.
For the reason which they unanimously allege for it, is this, that all
Governments in the World are every where fixed by the Providence of the Supreme
Governor of it, and for that reason they take it to be their Wisdom, as well as
their Duty, peaceably to acquiesce in the settled and established Government,
how ill soever administered, and leave the punishment of its ill-administration
by particular persons, to him from whom they received their Authority. Now this
Doctrine of Nonresistance or Submission being so universally taught, and that
upon such unalterable principles and reasons, one would think it enough to set
it above all manner of exception or evasion; And yet such is the perverseness
of the several Antichristian Factions of Christendom, that they break through
all these Restraints into all the licentiousness of Rebellion. But this they do
with that impudence against the common sense of Mankind, and that violence to
their own Consciences, that they would have done much more prudently to have
wholly slighted and rejected the Authority of the ancient Lacrymists, then
admitting it, to make so poor and dull a mistake from its obligation. For they
all agree in this one slender and inconsistent Plea, that this Doctrine was
only suited to their present necessity, because they then wanted power to make
resistance. That is to say in one soft and friendly word, that they were a Race
of the rankest Knaves and Fools that ever appeared among Mankind. That when our
Savior had strictly forbid it as inconsistent with the nature of his Religion,
and the Fundamental Doctrine of the Cross. That when the Apostles reinforced
the same precept with all the earnestness and all the motives in the World,
particularly out of duty to God and their Religion. And that when the whole
succession of Christians from their time to After-ages professed and practiced
the same duty upon the same Principles. To tell us after all this, that it is
all Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, nothing but a Primitive Jesuitical Trick to
blind their Governors with fine Stories of the unlawfulness of taking up Arms
in their own defense, when the only reason of it was, that they had no Arms to
take up, and that it was nothing but sufficient strength and ability to resist,
that kept them off from actual Rebellion, This is such a contradiction to all
their avowed Protestations, to the Notoriety of the matter of Fact itself, to
all their Apologies, and to their own defiance of so durty a surmize, as
amounts to no better account then giving them all the open Lie, and for that
reason I think it would have been much better to have at first once for all
trampled upon the Authority of such tame Creatures, then to shift it off with
such a senseless and shameless Evasion. And upon that account I suppose it was,
that it was at last forsaken in our late Rebellion, and new pretenses devised
in its stead; but of such a daring boldness and blasphemy against Heaven
itself, that they would sooner affright a wise man to hear them, then puzzle a
Fool to answer them, and those are the profane Pleas of the Independants to
justify his Majesty's Murder, viz. New Discoveries and Revelations from
Heaven it self. It seems the Villainy was so horrid in itself, that nothing less
could bear out their confidence in committing it, then the immediate Authority
of God himself. And thus they are not ashamed to tell us, That the Doctrine of
Non-resistance was not a seasonable privilege for that age, and therefore not
discovered, because it would have hindered the birth of Antichrist, whose coming
into the World, God had preordained, and for the more easy letting of him in,
and the appointed continuance of him in his Throne, there was a special
necessity that no such Opinion as this of the lawfulness of resistance, whether
true or untrue, should be taught and believed. Whereas now on the contrary that
the time of God's preordination and purpose for the downfall of Antichrist
drawing near, there is a kind of necessity that those truths, which have
hitherto slept, should now be awakened, as the necessary means to ruin
Antichrist, particularly that God should reveal to his faithful Ministers and
Servants the just bounds and limits of Authority and Power, and the just and
full extent of the lawful Liberties of those that live in subjection. This is
the sum of the new discoveries of John Goodwin in his Book Entitled the
Anti-Cavalier. And there are diverse passages to the same purpose in the
Writings of John Owen about the same time, who has warranted all the Villainies
of Cromwell and his Independants, even the King's Murder itself, by pretending
to new Lights and Revelations from Heaven. Particularly, That when God is doing
great things, Eben Ezra, p. 14, 15, 16.
he gives glorious manifestations of his excellencies to his secret ones. So
that he that is called to serve Providence in high things without some especial
discovery of God, works in the dark, and knows not whither he goes, and what he
does, such an one travels in the Wilderness without a directing Cloud. Clear
shining from God must be at the bottom of deep laboring with God. What is the
Reason that so many in our days set their hands to the Plough, and look back
again? Begin to serve Providence in great things but cannot finish? Give over
in the heat of the day! They never had such Revelation of the mind of God upon
their Spirits, such a discovery of his Excellencies, as might serve for a
bottom of such undertakings. Men must know that if God has not appeared to
them in brightness, and shown them the horns in his hand, hid from others,
though they think highly of themselves, they will deny God twice and thrice before
the close of the work of this Age. Hence is the suiting of great Light and
great work in our days. Let new Light be derided whilst men please, he will
never serve the Will of God in this Generation, who sees not beyond the line of
foregoing Ages. But what is this new Light, that was never seen in the World
before? to this it is fairly answered, plainly the peculiar Light of this
Generation, is Sermon. to the Parl. April 19. 1649, P. 35.
that discovery which the Lord has made to his people of the mystery of Civil
and Ecclesiastical Tyranny. By which a Monarchy of some hundred years
continuance, always affecting, and at length wholly degenerating into Tyranny,
was destroyed, pulled down, and swallowed up: a great and mighty Potentate,
that had caused terror in the Land of the Living, and laid his Sword under his
head, was brought to punishment for Blood, as he expresses it in his
Thanksgiving for his present Majesty's overthrow at Worcester, p. 15, where he
very familiarly bestows upon him the honorable Titles of a Tyrant full of
Revenge, a man of Blood, a Son of Belial, Absalom, and Sheba the Son of Bichri.
And lastly, he encourages the Rebels and Traitors the day immediately after his
late Majesty's Murder, with a jacta est Alea, i. e. the cast of a Dye thrown
by the hand of God himself, whose Providence (he says) must be served in it,
according to the discovery made of his own unchangeable Will. But such
pretenses as these are such desperate pieces of Villainy in themselves, so
framed to serve any wickedness in the World, such rank Blasphemy and Rebellion,
so destructive of all Government and Society, that for any man to make use of
them is the very height of Profaneness, and when men are come so far, it is in
vain to confute them, because it is impossible to object worse things against
them then they are ready to own. But however they unawares make a fair
confession that their own Doctrine and Practice is contrary to the Doctrine of
the Gospel and the Practice of its Primitive Professors, and then we care not
whence they receive it; for whencesoever it comes, it makes them Apostates from
the Christian Faith, that did not only suppress it, but expressly condemn it, so
that if their new discovery be true, there is an end of the Gospel. To that
height of Profaneness were these men blown up by their success in Villainy,
that they would rather renounce their Savior openly before God and the World,
then quit their Rebellion. Though the highest aggravation of it is, that after
so daring a defiance to the Christian Religion, they dare pretend to the
highest claims of Gospel Purity. But that has ever been the Policy of
Enthusiasts to piece out their notorious forfeiture of all Integrity with
infinite pride and confidence. But thus we see it is, and thus it must be, that
if men once forsake the Doctrine of the Cross, there is no stopping till they
come to the Gospel of the Pigeon and the Scymeter. And thus having proved the
first Proposition, the Doctrine and Practice of Submission and Passive
Obedience under the severest Cruelties and Per^ecutions, I now proceed to the
second thing to be considered in this Interval, viz. That notwithstanding this
absolute and entire submission to the Civil Powers under all Persecutions, they
kept up a strict Government and vigorous Discipline within themselves by virtue
of their own Authority. And that will be a new demonstration from experience
and matter of Fact, that the highest exercise of Ecclesiastical Power (for then
it was at the height) is so far from interfering with the Civil, that it is
every way compliant with the lowest state of Subjection to it.

. 11.
In the first place it is already made evident that our Savior by his own
appointment, settled Governors over his Church, and that these were the
Apostles and their Successors the Bishops through all Ages. Now the proper
office of all Government, is to see to the execution of all Laws already in
force; and to enact new ones upon particular occasions and emergencies, as they
shall judge most advantageous to the present state of the Society. And this was
the work of the Apostles and Primitive Bishops, always to promote the Practice
of their Masters own Laws among his Subjects, and as often as it was needful, to
make occasional provisions for the peace and order of the Church. Of the former
I need say nothing, because it is granted and supposed on all hands, but of the
latter, it will be requisite to give a full account, because though it is the
only means that our Savior has provided for the Unity of his Church, and
though by the use of it the Church was preserved in Peace and unity in its best
and purest times, and lastly, though without it there can be no Government in
the Church, nor any bar to endless confusions, yet I know not by what blind and
unhappy fate it is become a popular and a reigning principle among us. All
Innovators lay it at the bottom of their new Projects of Reformation, it is the
fundamental Principle of Grotius as well as all other Erastians, Legislativam
Potestatem jure divino non competere ecclesiae, that the Church has no
Legislative De Imperio cap. 8.. 10.
Power by Divine Right. At present to say nothing to the falsehood of the
Proposition itself, yet methinks Grotius, who was so well acquainted with the
Records of the ancient Church, of all men should not have said it, when it was
so constantly both challenged and put in practice, and that not only all the
time before the Emperors became Christians, but after. But he was then a young
man, and the Book is written with great rawness, and betrays lamentable want of
consideration. It is the very Foundation of all Independency, that nothing
ought to be imposed by the Governors of the Church upon the Members of it, but
what is clearly revealed in the word of God. And that there is no other Rule of
Unity then that rule prescribed by our Lord himself, which is so far from
truth, so inconsistent with the Being of a Church, that it is a mere
contradiction to the Nature and the use of Government, whose proper Office it
is to make Provisions for the Peace and good Order of the Society, upon all
occasions, by the common rules of Prudence and Discretion, and such things it
is necessary to leave to the judgment and determination of Men, because their
convenience and usefulness is alterable with change of times and circumstances,
and therefore must be left to the liberty of the Governors of the Church to
impose or remove them as they shall judge most suitable to the present State of
things. This was the standing rule in the Primitive Church, that points of
Faith were unalterable, and when they were once determined by the Judgment of
the Catholic Church, they were never after that to be debated, but as for all
Laws of Discipline they were alterable with change of times and circumstances.
And to name one for all, Regula quidem fidei De Virgin. Vel. c. 1.
(says Tertullian) una omnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis. Hac lege
fidei manente, caetera jam disciplinae and conversationis admittunt novitatem
correctionis. The Rule of Faith is always the same, this alone is unchangeable
and unreformable. But as this remains forever, so matters of Discipline and
Government admit the Novelty of change and amendment. So that next to the
Fundamental Charter of being a Church, this is the grand Principle of its
Government, that its Governors be endued with an Authority of imposing some
things that are not required in the Word of God, because the Church must be
governed as all humane Societies are, i. e. by men of common sense, that have
Wit enough to judge what is fit to be done upon any emergent cases, and whose
Authority is sufficient to oblige the Members of the Society to their Decrees,
and without it there could neither be Church nor Government. So that this
principle is so little suited to the state of Church-Purity, (as the
Schismatiques pretend) that it is only set up as an impregnable pretense for
everlasting Schisms and Divisions. For it was never started or so much as
thought of till the other day, when the Puritan Faction for want of something
more material to object against the Constitutions of the Church, were forced at
last to make this their main quarrel, that they were not prescribed in the Word
of God. And as long as they were resolved to stand to that Exception, they were
secure in their Schism; for it is an Objection not against the particular
Constitutions of this Church, but the practice of the Universal Church, and the
exercise of any power in all Churches of the World, and therefore it being so
good a Fund for Confusion, it is for that reason so carefully nursed by the
Independent Faction at this day; it is the result of all J. O's Books about
Schism, because it makes all peace and settlement an impossible thing, when
there is no such rule of worship or discipline as is pretended, by attending to
which the Unity of the Church is to be preserved; and therefore to refer us to
a means of Peace that is not in being, is to leave us remediless. And if the
Church may not make occasional Provisions to restrain some men's extravagancies,
and to settle good order, all men are let loose to all the follies in the
World, and it will look more like a Bedlam than a Christian Church. In short,
it serves to no other purpose then to be an everlasting pretense of Sedition,
when it takes away not only from the Church, but from theCivil Government too
all Authority of making any Laws for the settlement of Religion. And yet this
very Principle of Confusion, this Darling of Independency, this bulwark of all
Schism is crept into the Church of England it self, or some pretenders to it,
and is laid down by our Reconcilers and Peacemakers as the first Rule of
Accommodation between the Church of England, and the present Dissenters. Though
if it were admitted, the different Parties would be so far from being taken
into the Bosom or the Peace of the Church, that it would only widen the
differences, and harden them in their Schisms. For first the contest is not
primarily about unscriptural Impositions, but about divine Commands; they
contend that their Form of Church Government is of God's Institution, and that
the form now established in England is an humane Government set up against it,
and destructive of it; this is the whole design of Mr. B's Treatise of
Episcopacy, and this has ever been the main controversy from the beginning of
the Schism, whether the Episcopal or the Classical Government were set up by
our Savior in the Christian Church (for Men were not so unthinking in those
days as to imagine he should set up the Society of his Church without settling
any Government in it) and therefore it is but an imperfect, a partial, and a
treacherous account of the Separation, to state the controversy only in
Ceremonies, when the main controversy has been from the beginning to this very
day about a matter of Divine Right, and therefore to take no notice of that in
the History of the Schism, is to intimate, that as to that part of the
controversy, neither had the better of the other, but they both equally
contended about what never was, and that all the blame of the Separatists is
their refusing to submit to some lawful Impositions: But that reaches not their
cause, the ground of their Separation is pretended Divine Law, they must be
beaten out of that, or they must be let alone. But secondly, this Principle of
accommodation by rejecting unscriptural Conditions of Communion, would be so
far from reconciling the Dissenters to the Church, that it would only give up
the Churches Cause to their demands, and justify them in their Schism, because
they dissent not from her in any matters clearly revealed, which alone the
Church has Power to impose; and to charge the Church of Tyranny, for daring to
impose any other conditions of Communion, then what are imposed by Divine
Authority. An excellent way of accommodation this in behalf of the Church of
England, to condemn her whole practice of illegal and unwarrantable Usurpation,
and allow the Pleas of the Dissenters just and reasonable: And, what is worst
of all, to take away all Government in the Church for ever, and the Church it
self too, when it is evident from common sense, that it can never subsist
without a Legislative Authority within it self, but that I shall have occasion
to discourse of more copiously hereafter, when I come to show what injury is
done to the Church of England by these false Principles of accommodation. I
shall at present content my self with proving it by experience, and
representing the particular Laws made by the Ancient Governors of the Church
from time to time, to secure and provide for its own Peace and Tranquillity. And
by it I shall make good these three considerable Points. First, the great
Authority inherent in them, and independent on any Civil Power. Secondly, their
great wisdom in the use and exercise of it, for by the particulars it will
appear, that they generally acted upon wise and prudent reasons. And thirdly,
the absolute necessity of it, when we shall see by the Example of every age,
that there is no way of preserving any manner of Peace in the Church without it.

And to begin with the first Decree made by the Apostles themselves, to
accommodate the contrary prejudices of Jews and Gentiles: If they had obliged
the Gentiles to comply with the whole Law of Moses, that would have looked like
an attempt to bring them under the old intolerable Bondage, and tempt them
rather to renounce Christianity then submit to such a grievous Yoke: And if
they had wholly exempted them from the Mosaic Law, that would have as much
endangered the Apostasy of the Jews; thinking that they should thereby have
renounced the God of the Law; for it was not easy to every capacity to
distinguish between rejecting the Law and the Lawgiver. And therefore to
satisfy and avoid the prejudices of both Parties, they agreed To lay no
greater burdens then these necessary things, that they abstain A^^s 15. 20.
from Meats offered to Idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled,
and from blood. Where by things necessary, it is plain that they mean things
necessary at that time and place; for that they were not so in all times and
places is evident, not only from the direction of their Synodical Epistle to
the particular Churches of Syria and Cilicia, but from their not imposing the
same Decree upon other Churches, that were not in the same Circumstances. In
the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, that confined upon Judaea, the Jews were
very numerous, and therefore to avoid offending, i. e. tempting them to
renounce the Christian Faith, it was requisite to make it a standing rule to
them at that time, that all Christians abstain from the Oblations to Idols, and
that would wholly prevent their great fear of Idolatry. But on the contrary,
because the Church of Corinth consisted chiefly of Gentiles, the same rule was
not made peremptory and universal to them, but they were left to their own
liberty to eat Meats offered to Idols, as they judged most consistent with
Christian prudence and charity, as they are directed by their Ghostly Father
St. Paul. This is all that I can make of that great Council; and though they
were endued with the Holy Ghost, yet they proceeded by no other Rule then
common prudence and discretion. And if they had taken the same method that our
Schismatiques and Pacificators would oblige the present Church to, to search
for a determination of this casual dispute in their Masters own Laws, I doubt
they would have been very much at a loss to have found any thing like such a
decree amongst all his Precepts. And yet there was as much reason that they
should refer all Acts of Government to be determined by his own express Decree,
as that their Successors should refer them to theirs.

But next to this Apostolical Synod, the Apostolical Canons are the greatest
and earliest Demonstration of the Legislative Authority of the Christian
Church, being compiled by their next Successors in the second and third
Centuries, by which we understand the true settlement of the Church as the
Apostles left it, for all the Canons relating to Government are no new Laws,
but only declarations of old Customs; so that though they were not Apostolical
Laws, they were true and early Records of Apostolical Customs, and by them the
practice of Church Government was so entirely settled, that they were ever after
the Rule and Pattern to the determinations of following Councils. And most of
the chief Canons, both General and Provincial, were only Ratifications of these
old Decrees, to recover their just Authority, when any of them had been
neglected or violated, or additional provisions in pursuance of their general
design in new particular Cases. For which it seems every Age found matter
enough to suppress some Men's extravagant and wanton fancies; and it was the new
rising of Schisms and Heresies that gave occasion to enacting all the Laws of
the Church. But these Apostolical Canons being as it were the Institutes or
Magna Charta of the Ecclesiastical Laws, and being withal enacted in this
Period of time, that we are now in, by pure Ecclesiastical Authority, I shall
give a brief view of them, to let the Reader see the exact Model of the
Primitive Church, as reduced to practice, and brought to perfection by the
Apostles and their immediate Successors. In the first place therefore, because
nothing has so great an influence upon the welfare of the Church, as the
setting up good and wise Governors over it, great care is taken against rash
Ordination of Bishops; so that though every Bishop has an inherent Right in
himself to conveigh his own Authority to another, yet is it here fixed, and has
remained so through all Ages, as a standing Law to the Church, that every
Bishop be Consecrated by three Bishops at least, or two in cases of necessity.
Now though this Rule has been observed and practiced in all Churches over all
the World, and is so highly useful to the good Government of the Church, by not
entrusting a matter of such weight to the discretion of a single Person, yet I
believe it will be a very hard task to find any thing like a clear Precept
requiring it in the Holy Scriptures. So apparently repugnant is the principle
of the Projectors of Accommodation against unscriptural impositions to the very
first Law that was made in the Christian Church after the Apostles, and if they
pleased it might as well be used to take away this prudent Practice as any
other Ceremony whatsoever. Now the Bishop being with this great care and
caution admitted to his Trust, he was considered in a treble capacity; first in
relation to his own Diocese; secondly to the Bishops of the Province; thirdly
to the Catholic Church. Within his own Diocese he had the Supreme Government;
for every Diocese, though it be but a Member of the Catholic Church, is yet a
distinct Society of it self, and ordinarily Governed by a Jurisdiction within
it self, and that was by the Bishop and his College of Presbyters; in which he
enjoyed such a Supremacy, that no act of the Presbyters could be valid without
his Consent and Authority; and yet his Supremacy was so confined, that he could
as little act without the concurrence of his Presbyters as they without his.
Now this Episcopal Superiority acting only in conjunction with the Presbyters,
was the most proper method that could have been contrived to prevent confusion
on one hand, and Tyranny on the other. For where a Body of Men act in an
equality of Power without some real Authority above them, nothing can be
expected but perpetual Factions and Animosities. And on the other side a Power
purely Monarchical, without any Associates in the Government, may easily, if it
please, degenerate into Tyranny, and when it does so, has nothing to restrain
it; and though Tyranny be an ugly thing in Civil Government, yet in the
Ecclesiastical it is far more indecent, because Church Power is founded upon
the profession of Meekness and Humility. But though the Bishops ever associated
the Presbyters in Authority with them from the time of the Apostles, yet I
imagine that there are no Footsteps of any Divine Command requiring it, though
its early practice may prove it an Apostolical Custom and Tradition, but if it
was, it was (for any thing we know) their own voluntary act, as becoming the
modesty of Christian Governors.

But the Jurisdiction of the Church being thus seated in the Bishop and his
College of Presbyters, matters were so effectually ordered, that their Acts
were not only valid within their own Precincts, but in the Catholic Church all
the Can. 12.
World over. Thus it is Enacted that if any Clergyman or Layman excommunicate
or any way unfit to be received, shall be received in another City (i. e.
according to the Language of those times, in another Diocese) without
commendatory Letters, both he that receives him Can. 15.
and he that is received, shall be excommunicate. And if any Clergyman shall
quit his own Diocese without his Bishops leave, he shall be degraded from his
office. And the Bishop that shall receive such an Can. 16.
one in his Clerical Capacity shall be excommunicate, (...) as a Master of
confusion, or an enemy to the peace and unity of the Catholic Church. No
Clergyman that is excommunicate by his own Bishop shall be absolved Can. 32.
by another, as long as that Bishop lives. And no Clergyman of what Order Can.
33.
soever, not a Bishop himself is to be so much as relieved, without
commendatory Letters. No Bishop is to ordain in Can 35.
another Diocese upon pain of Deposition. There is no Flight or Appeal from
one single Bishop to another, but if any man thought himself aggrieved by his
own Bishop, he had power of Appeal to the Bishops of the Province, who were to
assemble twice a year in Council to Debate Matters of great weight in the
Church, especially to review the Acts of Government in every particular Diocese
of the Province, that if they found any wrong Judgment, they might reverse it,
or if any harsh or too severe, they might mitigate it. Here is all the care in
the World taken to preserve the Efficacy of the Discipline in every Church, and
it was so religiously observed in the Primitive times, that I do not remember
one instance of its being violated till the time of the Constantinopolitan
Usurpation. And it is reckoned among the many other strange Enormities of
Dioscorus by the Council of Calcedon in their Epistle to the Emperors
Valentinian and Mar^ian, in Act. 3.
which they give an account of the reasons of his Deposition, viz. That he had
received several Persons legally excommunicate by his single Authority in
contempt of the Holy Canons, which command, that those that are excommunicate
by one, be not received into Communion by another. And in pursuance of the
forementioned Apostolical Canons, to preserve the Authority of every Bishop
within his own Jurisdiction, it was afterward decreed by the Nicene Can. 5.
Council, that there shall be no redress, no nor complaint against the Sentence
of the Diocesan Bishop; unless it be at the meeting of the Provincial Synod.
And it is said that at the motion of Atticus Bishop of Constantinople for
prevention of Frauds and Cheats in Canonical Epistles, such an artificial form
was contrived by the Council, as was impossible to be counterfeited. The form
is extant in Gratian Distinct. 73. it is somewhat remarkable and very well
worth the perusal. But it is plain that they confined every Bishops power
within his own Circuit, and every Clergyman to his own Bishops Jurisdiction.
And all the following Councils stick close to the same principles of
Discipline, though the African Bishops were more strict then other Churches in
this as well as all other points of Government, no Traveling among them
without dimissory Letters. And if any Bishop Can. 26.
carried a complaint to any Foreign Can. 31.
Church, he stood ipso facto excommunicate to all the African Churches.

But lastly, beside this form of Provincial Government, in which all matters of
common concernment were determined by the major Vote of the Episcopal Synod,
and by which all the Diocesses within the Province were united and cemented
into one Communion, there was a common tie of Government between the Bishops of
several Provinces, in whose Concord consisted the Unity of the Catholic Church
so much talked of by the Ancients. And this was chiefly kept up by
Communication of Synodical Letters, which was not an Arbitrary correspondence,
but an indispensable duty of every Church to every Church, so that whatever
Bishop neglected it, he was for that reason cast by all others out of the
Communion of the Catholic Church, and by this device every Act of Discipline
in every Church was of force in all Churches all the World over, and whoever
was taken in a Member of one Church, had a right from it to communicate in all
Churches, and whoever was cast out of the same, stood excommunicate to the
whole Christian World. And this was done with all security and expedition by
settling the power of correspondence in every Province upon the Metropolitan,
and by the mutual intercourse of Metropolitans, all the general Affairs of the
Church were transacted. And therefore upon the choice of a new Metropolitan, it
was the custom to signify his Election to all the rest, that they might know
to whom to direct their corresponding and communicatory Letters. Thus the Synod
of Antioch, that deposed Paulus Samosutenus in the year 270, write to Dionysius
Bishop of Rome, and Maximus Bishop of Alexandria, and all other Churches
through the whole World, that they had deposed Paulus, and placed Domnus in his
stead, and this, say they, We therefore signify to you, that you might write
to him, and receive communicatory Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c. 30.
Letters from him. Thus both Cornelius and Novatian, when they contended for
Epist. 42.
the Bishopric of Rome, acquaint St. Cyprian with their Elections, who
communicates the matter to all the Bishops within his Province, and by that
means the Election of Cornelius was approved not only by himself, but by all
his Colleagues, as he always calls them. And when St. Cyprian writes to Steven
Bishop of Rome to procure the Deposition of Marcian Bishop of Arles, he
desires, when it is done, to inform him who is chosen into his place, that he
might know to whom to direct his Letters, and his Brethren, significa plane
nobis quis in locum Epist. 67.
Marciani Arelate fuerit substitutus, ut sciamus ad quem fratres nostros
dirigere, and cui scribere debeamus. And when Fortunius the Donatist Bishop had
the confidence to affirm to St. Austin that his Epist. 163. v. Carthag. Collat.
p. 631. Editionis Baldwini.
Church was the Catholic Church, and kept up the Catholic Communion, St.
Austin rebukes his presumption only by demanding of him whether himself kept
correspondence with other Bishops by communicatory Letters. And when Pope
Zosimus took upon him to constitute Patroclus Bishop of Arles, Metropolitan of
the Province of Vienna, he declares that no literae formatae, or corresponding
Letters shall be valid, but what are signed by him. And so Pope Vigilius, when
he restored the same Prehominence to Aurelius Bishop of Epist. Vigil. 10.
Arles, after some considerable interruption of it, annexes this Authority to
the Sea, ne quis sine formata tuae fraternitatis ad longinquiora loca audeat
proficisci, that no man without his Certificate ought to be owned in Foreign
Churches. By all which it appears that the Power of granting Letters
communicatory out of the Province, was one branch of the Metropolitical
Jurisdiction. And that beside ^he power of summoning Provincial Councils was
the only thing that he was empowr'd to do by his own single Authority. For the
practice of it being altogether occasional and uncertain, and yet very
frequent, it was necessary to entrust it with some single person; and for that,
none fitter then the chief Bishop that resided in the chief City. And for the
discharge of his trust he gave an account of this as well as all other parts of
his Jurisdiction, in the Provincial Synod, that was assembled twice a year, to
take a review of all things that concerned the state of the whole Province in
reference to all Churches without it, as well as of the Government of every
particular Diocese within it. And thus by this subordination of Diocesan
Bishops to Provincial Synods, and correspondence of Provincial Synods with each
other, was the Government and Discipline of every Church effectual in all
Churches, because no Member of one Church could be admitted into Communion with
another without his Letters-Testimonial. Whereby it was so ordered that whoever
was admitted into one Church, was admitted into all; and whoever was
excommunicated out of one, was shut out of all. And no wonder then that the
Canons of the Church are so careful in this part of Discipline between Church
and Church, when the Efficacy of all other Acts of Discipline depend wholly
upon it. For if a Sentence given in one Church, were not valid in every Church,
it was in any man's power to elude it, only by slipping into the next
Jurisdiction. And therefore because nothing could be more pernicious to the
whole Discipline of the Catholic Church, then for the Bishop of one Church to
receive and protect the Member of another against the Sentence or without the
consent of his own Bishop, for that reason it is, that the Primitive Church was
more watchful in that part of Discipline then any other, and for the same
reason it is, that I have here traced its practice, thereby to direct us to the
true way of restoring the effectual Discipline of the Ancient Church in
Christendom. Which has for many ages been with scandal and dishonesty enough
utterly defeated by one single Judicatures making it self a common Sanctuary
against the Jurisdiction of all other Churches. And till this intolerable abuse
and corruption be removed, it is in vain to hope for any amendment of the poor
distressed and despised Estate of the Christian Church, and some men have been
pleased to express it, whether out of scorn or pity I know not, but if the
Church will crouch under such a pettifogging abuse, it deserves both.

But by the Premises we see that whilst the Church preserved its Original
liberty, it was able to preserve its Peace and Government too by observing the
Canonical obligation to mutual Concord among all Christian Bishops, and that
was so far from being arbitrary, that whoever broke the Rule, was by it
immediately deprived of all Trust and Authority in it. And the practice of this
Discipline was preserved entire and effectual in the Church, till the
settlement of Patriarchates, who swallowed up this Authority, as they did all
the other Metropolitical Rights, into themselves, till at last the Pope
swallowed up theirs. And then the whole power of granting commendatory or
dimissory Letters, was in all Provinces entirely appropriated to their Legates,
This is a short account of the Polity of the Primitive Church, and in it I
think all things are so neatly composed for an easy, a civil, and an effectual
Government, that I may safely challenge all the great pretenders to Politiques
and Framers of Commonwealths, to find out a more useful or more artificial
Scheme of Government.

But beside these great and more lasting Rules of prudence and good order, they
were forced to make many occasional Laws to restrain some Men's particular
follies, and superstitions. I will for brevity sake instance only in two
Apostolical Canons. In the fifth Canon, the Clergy of all degrees are forbid to
put away their Wives upon pretense of Religion, under pain first of suspension,
and if they persist deprivation. The occasion of which Canon was the Opinion of
several Heretics, especially the followers of Saturninus, of whom Irenaeus
Lib. 1. c. 22.
reports, Nubere and generare a Satana dicunt esse: that they affirmed, That
Marriage and Propagation was the Devil's invention; and this Opinion grew
prevalent in the second Century; so that Tertullian among many others was
carried away with it: But more especially, That the Clergy were bound to leave
their Wives, that they might devote themselves the more entirely to Prayers,
Fastings, and Religious Exercises, the Devotions of married Persons being less
pure, and less acceptable to God. Now to stop this Superstition, as if Marriage
were any way inconsistent with the Service of God, this Canon was at first
Enacted, and is afterward Ratified by diverse following Councils. And the truth
of it is, this Opinion of the great merit of Caelibacy was one of the first
Superstitions that invaded the Christian Church, and was in every Age more
busy and forward than any other, though I do not find that it could ever
obtain the force of Law in the Eastern Church, till the Council in Trullo in
the year 691, by whom Bishops, and no other, are forbidden to cohabit with
their Wives after Consecration; and as that is the first Canon of this kind, so
is it a flat contradiction to the Apostolical Canon. And though the Council
endeavor to excuse it, yet they do but the more grossly entangle themselves by
their own Apology, and instead of defending their fault, confess it. For when
they have made the Canon, they tell us, that they do not intend thereby to
contradict the Apostolical Canon, when the very making of it is an express
contradiction to it. And in the very next Canon they condemn the Church of Rome
for prohibiting marriage to Priests and Deacons, and make good their Decree
from this very Canon, that equally allows it to all Orders. But above all
commend me to Gratian Distinct. 30, 31.
upon this Argument, who when he has in two whole Chapters recited several
Ancient Canons of the Church against this Superstition, especially those severe
ones of the Council of Gangra, and last of all this last mentioned Canon in
Trullo, in which the marriage of Presbyters and Deacons is expressly warranted,
he begins his next Chapter with this general Assertion, Servanda est ergo
continentia ab omnibus in sacris ordinibus constitutis. And then proves it by
the Decrees of later Popes, injoining Caelibacy as a Duty of Piety to all
Orders of the Clergy. But if they can thus confidently justify their
Innovations out of the Ancients, by concluding contrary to their own avowed and
express Sense; I confess they may make good any Cause, though I should think it
would be much more advisable to let fall such a Cause, as can be no better way
defended. Another remarkable Law that was Enacted during this Interval by mere
Ecclesiastical Authority, was the exclusion of all voluntary Eunuchs from Holy
Orders. And that was made upon occasion of the Heresy of the Valesians, who
thought themselves bound to this severity against themselves, by too rigid an
Interpretation of some passages of our Savior, especially that of St.
Matthew's Gospel, 19. 12. And the same Canon was afterward renewed in a Synod
at Alexandria against Origin upon the same account, and after that by the great
Council of Nice, upon occasion of the fact of Leontius, who being a Presbyter,
and very much delighting in the conversation of a young Virgin, by name
Eustolia, and being upbraided with the scandal of using so much freedom with
her, to prevent that, without losing her Society, he made the same attempt upon
himself that Origin had done, for which he was deposed by the Council, though
afterward he was, contrary to the Canon, or rather in defiance to the Council,
promoted by the Eusebian Faction, with whom he sided, to the great See of
Antioch. But hereby we may see the necessity of a Legislative Power in the
Church, without which there would be no means to restrain all the wild Conceits
and Extravagancies that Superstition can blow into Men's fancies. So exorbitant
a Principle is it, so inconsistent with the Peace and preservation of the
Church, so absurd, so foolish, and contrary to the Common Sense of Mankind,
that nothing ought to be imposed by the Governors of the Church, but what is
expressly imposed by the Word of God. There are many more Examples in this
Interval, both of the settlement of that Polity in the Church that I have above
described, and of diverse wise and prudent Laws made upon particular Occasions;
but to avoid being too tedious, and yet to do the work effectually, I shall
confine my self to the Writings of St. Cyprian, in whose time the State of the
Church was brought to perfection, and who, I may be bold to say, understood it
as well as any Writer of the Christian Church, either before or after his own
time, and who has stated the whole matter with the greatest clearness and
strength of Reason, and reduced it to practice with the most unblameable
prudence and wisdom, and therefore I shall give a more particular and exact
account of his Sense of the Government and Unity of the Catholic Church, both
for the enlightening of some Men's minds, who pretend to be so dull, that they
cannot understand how it should be governed in way of external Polity, and for
a proof of the exact agreement of the Church of England in its designed Model
of Reformation, with this Ancient State of the Christian Church. This is made
much more easy at this time by the late labor of a very learned Prelate of
our own in digesting his Writings, that had hitherto lay not a little confused,
into their due and exact order of time. For when we certainly know at what
time, and upon what occasion every discourse was written, it must needs make it
much more easy, and much more useful then otherwise the discourse could have
made it self. For that Unity is a very desirable thing is agreed on all hands,
the only dispute is, wherein it consists: Some will have it to be only an Union
of Faith and Charity; others of External Polity, so as that all Christians are
some way or other United under one Government. And these we may subdivide into
two Parties: Either those that place the Unity of the Catholic Church in a
Subjection to one single Monarch: Or those that set up an Obligation to a
Political Unity among all Churches under several Governments. So that though
every particular Church or Diocese have Supreme Government within it self, as
to all things that concern its own State, yet it is accountable to the
Catholic Church, i. e. to all other Churches for the Peace of the whole. For
though a Church may be at Unity within it self, yet if it do any thing
injurious to the peace of Government in any other Church, it becomes
Schismatical to the whole Body of the Catholic Church; presuming, as much as
in it lies, to overthrow the Discipline of all other Churches. This as I take
to be the true State of the Controversy, so to be St. Cyprian's sense of it.

. 12.
And the first Principle that runs through all his Writings, and lies at the
bottom of all his Notions concerning Church Unity, is, that there is but one
Episcopacy settled in the Church by Divine Appointment, distributed among the
several Bishops of the Catholic Church, every one retaining the whole Power
within his own Bishopric, as he expresses it like a Lawyer, Episcopatus De
Unitate Eccles.
unus est, cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. There is but one
Episcopacy, of which every one holds his own share with full Title and
Possession. For the word in solidum is a Law-term denoting a Plenitude of
Title; so that though an Estate be divided into two parts, yet both inherit
their own share in solidum; and so if two Men be bound for the same Debt; if
they are bound each Man in partem, they are obliged to pay but half share, but
if they are obliged in solidum, either of them is bound to pay all. And this is
St. Cyprian's State of Episcopacy, that though many share the Authority, yet
every Bishop has as full possession of his own share within it self, as if
there were no other. Seeing (as he elsewhere Cum singulis Pastoribus portio
Gregis sit adscripta, quam regat unusquisque ac gubernet, rationem sui actus
Domino redditurus.
expresses it) a Parcel of the Flock is allotted to the care of its particular
Pastor, which every one is bound to guide and govern, and to account to God for
the discharge of his Episcopal Office. Neither was this his singular Notion,
but the unanimous and settled Sense of the Ancients: Thus the Author of
Clement's Institutions brings in the Apostles Writing after this manner to all
Christian Bishops: We being all gathered together have written to you this form
of Catholic Doctrine, For the Confirmation of (...), lib. 6. cap. 14.
you to whom is entrusted the Catholic Episcapacy of the Church. This was the
entire Sense of all Ignatius his Epistles, which suppose the full Jurisdiction
of every particular Church to be placed in the Bishop and his own Clergy.

So Tertullian, It Necesse est itaque tot ac tantas Ecclesias unam esse illam
ab Apostolis primam, ex qua omnes, sic omnes Prima and Apostolicae. De
Praescrip.
is necessary that so many and great Churches should be that one and first
derived from the Apostles, from whom all are derived, and therefore they are
all but one, and yet several Apostolical V. Can. Apost. 35.
Churches. So all the Ancient Canons inhibit every single Bishop, even the
Metropolitan to intermeddle in another Diocese, upon pain of Deposition.
Neither is this Supremacy of Power in every Bishop any abatement of the just
Rights of Metropolitans; For in the Primitive Church (as I have shown in a
former Treatise) Metropolitans had no Power over inferior Bishops, but in
conjunction of the Synod of the Province. So that it was the Synod, not the
Metropolitan, that had the Superior Power over every single Bishop. And it is
evident that he was as liable to the Sentence of the Synod, as the meanest
Bishop of the Province, as appears from the case of Paulus Samosatenus; and
Metropolitans, considering their number, were as often censured and Deposed as
other Bishops. And this is the reason of St. Cyprian's so earnestly disclaiming
the Title of Episcopus Episcoporum, because though his own Metropolitical
Jurisdiction were of great extent, yet as a single Bishop he had no Superiority
over any other Bishop; no Authority to punish his Misdemeanors; to receive
Appeals from his Sentence; or to order and rectify any thing within his
Diocese. All such Power was to be exerted only in Synodical Conventions, in
which he had the Honor and Authority of Presidency, but the Jurisdiction was
seated in the Body of the Council, without whose concurrence had he presumed to
do any thing more then any other Bishop, his least punishment had been certain
Deposition. This was the real State of things in the Ancient Church, and
Metropolitans never took upon them any Power over their Colleagues or
Brother-Bishops by their own single Authority till after the Papal Usurpation,
neither then did they challenge it as Metropolitans, but as Legates to the
Pope, and that was one of the highest branches of the Usurpation. But before
that time the Governors of the Church were not more watchful against any one
thing then that one Bishop should not claim any power over another.

Now this Principle being first laid, That the whole Episcopal Authority is
vested in every Bishop, the next that is consequent upon it, is, That whoever
separates from the Communion of his Bishop, or sets up another against him is a
Schismatic: and this was the Subject of almost all his Epistles concerning the
Restitution of the Lapsi, or such as fell in time of Persecution. For they
according to the Ancient Discipline of the Church, were not to be received into
Communion but by these degrees. First they were to Petition to be admitted to
Penance, and that upon confession of their fault was granted, and then having
undergon the Penance imposed, they made a public Confession of their Crime
before the Congregation; and upon that they received Absolution by the
Imposition of the hands of the Bishop and C^ergy, and after that they were
admitted to the Holy Eucharist or Full-Communion. But instead of this solemn
severity of Discipline, some of his own Presbyters had been so rash as without
the consent of their Bishop to give them entire Absolution, and admit them to
entire Communion. This was the opening of that unhappy Schism that afterward
created so much trouble Ante actam Paenitentiam, Ep. 15. Edit. Oxon.
ante exomologesin gravissimi atque extrmei delicti factam, ante manum ab
Episcopo and Clero in paenitentiam impositam, offerre pro illis, and
Eucharistiam dare.
both to himself and the Church of God. For when these Presbyters had so
illegally restored those Enormous offenders they prevailed by their Importunity
upon the good Nature of the Martyrs and Confessors to intercede for their
Restitution; it being an Honor and Prerogative allowed them in the ancient
Church, to admit Sinners more easily to repentance V. Baron. An. 253.. 6.
upon their Request, because they had by the constancy of their sufferings
compensated for the scandal that the others had given by their Fall. But
instead of interceding for their admission to Penance these well meaning men
move St. Cyprian for their complete Absolution without it, to which he replies,
that they who had with so much courage and devotion Ut a quib. tam devote
Epist. 15.
and fortiter servatur fides domino, ab eisdem lex quoque and disciplina domini
reservetur.
kept the Faith of our Lord, ought to be as ^areful of keeping his Law and
Discipline Epist. 16. per totum.
.

But yet he is willing to excuse them not only because they did it out of
ignorance of the Laws of the Church, and out of modesty, being merely overcome
by the importunity of others, but because they proceeded no farther than only
to intercede with him, in whom they acknowledge the Power and Authority of
granting Absolution, whereas the Presbyters had subverted all the Order of the
Church, by presuming upon it without him. These slighting that dignity and
respect which the Martyrs Hi sublato honor, quem nobis beati Martyrs cum
confessoribus servant, contempta domini lege and observatione quam iidem
Martyrs and Confessores tenendam mandant, ante extinctum persecutionis metu^,
ante reditu^ nostru^, ante ipsum pene Martyru^ excessum, communicent cum
lapsiis and offerant, and Eucharistiam tradant.
and Confessors care fully observed, and despising the Law of God, which those
Good Men required to be kept, before the fear of Persecution is over, before
our Return, before the very consummation of the Martyrs themselves, communicate
with and give the Eucharist to the Apostates. And therefore at the beginning of
this Epistle in which he so heartily excuses the Martyrs, he reproves the
rashness and disorder of the Presbyters with more then usual warmth and
vehemence of Expression. What Punishment Quod enim periculum non metuere
debemus de offensa domini; quando aliqui de Presbyteris nec Evangelii nec loci
sui memores, sed neque futurum domini judicium, neque nunc sibi praepositum
Episcopum cogitantes, quod nunquam omnino sub antecessoribus factum est, cum
contumelia and contemptuPraepositi totum sibi vendicent.
ought we to expect from the divine displeasure, when some of the Presbyters
forgetting both the Gospel and themselves, neither regarding the future
Judgment of God, nor the Authority of their Bishop, Challenge what was never
done under our Predecessors, the whole Power of the Church to themselves to the
reproach and contempt of their Bishop: These are very severe words, and the
Crime it seems was looked upon as a thing so horrid at that time, that it was
till then without Precedent. And therefore for the prevention of any further
mischief and scandal, he writes at the same time an earnest Letter to the
People themselves to warn them against the disorderly Actings of his
Presbyters. But in his Epist. 17.
next Letter considering the sickly Season of the year, he gives power not only
to the Presbyters but to the Deacons to grant Absolution in case of Sickness,
by virtue of this hisCommission; for the Deacons had no Authority of their own
to do it, and therefore what they did, was valid purely by virtue of his
Deputation, and the validity of Ecclesiastical ministrations depends not upon
the outward Act, but theAuthority by which they are warranted. But it happened
that about this time Celerinus a Confessor at Rome writes to Lucianus a
Confessor at Carthage to grantAbsolution to some women that had fallen in the
Persecution, but had made ample satisfaction for it by their eminent
Hospitality to the Confessors. Upon this Lucianus with the rest of his Brethren
Epist. 22.
with great heat and rashness grant their peremptory Absolution, and signify
their resolution to St. Cyprian with a threatening, if he refused to join with
them, that they would not communicate with him. To such a wild abuse was the
customary privilege of mere intercession grown, that they came at last to
supersede and overruled all the Episcopal Authority. Upon this St. Cyprian
writes a peremptory Epistle to his Clergy, commanding Obedience to his former
Orders, Epist. 26.
to restore no man to the Church till it first pleased God to restore peace to
it. Inst^tur interim Epistolis, etc. And the mischiefs of this licentious
Practice to the Subversion of the Peace and Discipline of the Christian Church
he represents in an Epistle to the Clergy of Rome. That this did but expose the
Bishops to the hatred Quae res majorem nobis conflat invidiam, ut nos cum
singulorum causas audire and excutere caeperimus, videamur multis negare, quod
se nunc omnes jactant a Martyribus and Confessoribus accepisse. Denique hujus
seditionis Origo jam cepit, etc.
and envy of the People, that when they would make particular enquiry into
every man's case they would seem to the People to defraud them of that favor
that was bestowed on them by the Martyrs, which had been already the cause of
some Seditions in his Province, etc. And they in an Eloquent Epistle Epist. 30.
written by Novatian himself, as St. Cyprian informs us in his Epistle to
Antonianus, approve his Judgment, and declare themselves peremptory in his
Opinion, and so do Moses and the Confessors then Epist. 28. 31.
in Prison at Rome, to whom St. Cyprian at the same time writ about the same
matter. Upon this he writes to the Lapsi themselves that had received
Absolution without his Authority, to let them know that whatever was done
without the Bishop was void and good for nothing. The Ordination of Bishops and
the Succession Per temporum and successionum vices, Episcoporum Ordinatio, and
EcclesiaeRatio decurrit, ut Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, and omnis
actus Ecclesiae per^eosdem Praepositos gubernetur. Cum hoc itaque divina lege
fundatum sit, miror quosdam audaci temeritate sic mihi scribere voluisse, ut
Ecclesiae nomine literas facerent. Quando Ecclesia in Episcopo and Clero and in
omnibus stantibus sit constituta.
of the Church run together hand in hand through all times and ages, so as that
the Church is built upon the Bishop, and every act of the Church is authorized
by the Bishops; seeing therefore this is established by the Will of God, I
cannot but stand amazed at the bold rashness of some [i. e. Lucianus and the
Confessors] that dare write to me that they may give Letters of pardon in the
name of the Church, when the Church is made up of the Bishop the Clergy and the
faithful Layity.

Novatus the first contriver of theSchism seeing himself and his Party thus
universally run down, sets Faelicissimus in the head of it, by his boldness and
impudence to keep up the sinking cause, though Baronius is here so far mistaken
as to make An. 254. N. 32.
Faelicissimus the first Founder of the Schism, notwithstanding St. Cyprian has
so expressly given that honor to Donatus together with the occasion of his
Quarrel, which was nothing else then a design to escape the Discipline of the
Church, to which he knew himself so obnoxious, that he could no other way avoid
it but by raising Tumults. St. Cyprian after a very severe Character of his
wicked temper of Mind, thus tells the Story plainly. This is the Novatus that
first sowed the Idem est Novatus Epist. 53.
qui apud nos primum discordiae and schismatis incendium seminavit, qui quosdam
istic ex fratribus ab Episcopo segregavit, qui in ipsa persecutione ad
evertendas fratrum mentes alia quaedam persecutionostris fuit. Ipse est qui
Faelicissimum Satellitem suum Diaconum, nec permittente me nec sciente, sua
factione and ambitione constituit.
Seeds of Schism and Discord among us, that separated the Brethren from their
Bishops, that in the very time of Persecution became another Persecution
himself to subvert the minds of our Brethren. It is he that made Faelicissimus
the Hector his Deacon without my knowledge or permission, by Faction and
Ambition.

And after this account of the Author, he lets us know the occasion of the
Schism: That beside many other scandalous Enormities committed by him, Not long
before the breaking out of this Uterus uxoris calce percussus and Abortione
properante in paricidium partus expressus. -- Hanc Conscientiam criminum
jampridem timebat, propter hoc se non de Presbyterio excitaritantum, sed and
communicatione prohiberi pro certo tenebat; and urgentibus fratribus imminebat
cognitionis dies, quo apud nos causa ejus ageretur, nisi persecutio ante
venisset. Quam iste voto quodam evadendae, and lucrandae damnationis excipiens,
haec omnia commisit and miscuit; ut qui ejici de Ecclesia, and excludi habebat,
judicium Sacerdotum voluntaria discessione praecederet, quasi evasisse sit
paenam, praevenisse sententiam.
Persecution, he had so wounded his Wife by a kick upon the Belly, that it
caused a miscarriage. For which brutish behavior he was cited to appear
before his Bishop St. Cyprian; but before they came to Judgment, the
Persecution overtook them, by which means Donatus escaped his punishment at
present, and to avoid it for the time to come, sets afoot this Schism, to
overthrow all the Discipline of the Christian Church.

Such was the Author and the Occasion of this pernicious Schism, and he now
seeing the Persecution begin to cool, and St. Cyprian resolute to keep up the
Efficacy of Discipline, cunningly sets up Faelicissimus to be head of the
Party, who, he knew, would thrust himself forward enough into the quarrel,
merely out of his factious nature, and for the mere love of discord and
contention, as St. Cyprian expresses it. That out of a natural instinct
Instinctu suo quietem Epist. 41.
fratrum turbans, proripuit se cum plurimis, ducem se Factionis and Seditionis
Principem temerario furore contestans.
to disturb the quiet of his Brethren, he conspired with many others, with the
rage and rashness of a mad man to declare himself the head of the Faction, and
Prince of the Seditious Association.

And according to this Temper of his, when St. Cyprian a while after sent his
Commissioners to Carthage for the settlement of Ecclesiastical Discipline, this
Boutefeu with his Rabble openly oppose and affront them, and threaten
Excommunication to all that should obey either them or St. Cyprian. Of which
St. Cyprian being informed, he immediately sends his peremptory Sentence of
Excommunication against him and his accomplices. Against him, Because he
attempted Quod cum Episcopo Ibid.
portionem plebis dividere, i. e. a Pastore oves, and filios a Parente
separare, and Christi membra dissipare tentaverit.
to share the flock with his Bishop, which is to divide the Sheep from the
Shepherd, Children from their Father, and to disperse the Members of Christ.

And against them that Not regarding Sed and Augendus, qui nec Episcopum nec
Ecclesiam cogitans, pariter se cum illius conspiratione sociavit, si^^ ultra
cum eo perseveraverit, sententiam ferat, quam ille in se factiosus and
temerarius provocavit. Sed and quisquis se conspirationi and factioni ejus
adjunxerit, sciat se in Ecclesia nobiscum non esse communicaturum, qui sponte
maluit ab Ecclesia separari.
the Bishop or the Church, they had associated themselves to his Conspiracy,
and therefore had brought the same Sentence of Condemnation upon their own
heads, that his Schismatical folly and rashness had drawn down upon his, and
for that reason whoever joined with his faction, was denounced excommunicate
from theChristianChurch, as one who had made himself so by his own separation.

This being done, he signifies his Sentence to his People, requiring them, as
Epist. 43.
they would not ineur the same Sentence, not to Communicate with the
Schismatics against their Bishop, and presses them to it with this Argument:
There Deus unus est, and Christus ^^us, and una Ecclesia, and Cathedra una
super Petrum Domini voce fundata. Aliud Altar constituiaut sacerdotium novum
fieri praeter unum Altar, and unum Sacerdot' non potest.
is one God, one Christ, one Church, one Chair founded by our Lord's saying
upon Peter; another Altar, beside that one Altar and Priesthood cannot be
erected.

To divide from their Bishop, as Faelicissimus had done, was a breach of the
Unity of the Priesthood, and that was a breach of the Unity of the Church,
which is here expressed by the word Altar, as it is frequently in the Ancient
Writers of the Church, but especially those that writ against the Novatians and
the Donatists. All the Christians under one Bishop were said to appertain to
the same Altar, because they belonged to the same Communion; and therefore when
any separated from him, they were said to erect a new Altar, because they set
up a new Communion. And this Rebellion against the Bishop he farther aggravates
as an utter Subversion of the Christian Church; It is adulterous, Ibid.
it is profane, Adulterum est, impium est, sacrilegum est, quodcunque humano
furore instituitur, ut dispositio divina violetur.
it is sacrilegious, whatever is innovated by the passions of Men, to the
injury of God's own Institution.

And then passionately exhorting the People to avoid them, he thus expresses
himself: Let no Man draw you Ghristians Nemo vos Christianos ab Evangelio
Christi rapiat, Nemo filios Ecclesiae de Ecclesia tollat. Pereant sibi soli,
qui perire voluerunt. Extra Ecclesiam soli remaneant, qui de Ecclesia
recesserunt, soli cum Episcopis non sint, qui contra Episcopos rebellarunt.
from the Gospel of Christ, let no Man take away the Sons of the Church from
the Church, let them perish alone, who have a mind to perish, let them alone
remain out of the Church, who have departed from the Church, let them alone not
communicate with the Bishops, who have rebelled against the Bishops.

Thus we see how it is all along with him, one and the same thing to be out of
the Communion with the Bishop and with the Christian Church, whilst the Bishop
was in Communion with that. But matters being thus prepared, and the storm of
Persecution laid, St. Cyprian in a little time returns home, and Summons a
Provincial Council, in which the Cause of Faelicissimus (whose zeal had now
made him proud of being head of the Party) and his Factious Associates, was
Examined, and after a full and fair hearing, the former Sentence of
Excommunication by their own Bishop was Synodically ratified. But Schism never
ends where it begins; for the Incendiaries finding themselves thus defeated in
Africa, they fly to Rome, and carry the flame with them from Carthage thither,
where they found combustible matter enough at that time to set the whole
Christian World on fire, from the contest between Cornelius and Novatian for
the Bishopric^; for as the Council of Carthage was held in the Month of May, so
this Contest happned the June following, as the learned Annalist has made it
evidently appear. Cornelius being chosen Bishop by the much greater Majority of
Votes, Novatian Remonstrates to his Election, loads him with a great heap of
Crimes that would render him incapable of the Episcopal Office, but chiefly
refuses Communion with him, because he had Communicated with the Lapsi; and
upon this severe Principle, that they were never to be admitted to Absolution
he builds his Schism, at which lucky juncture of time the African Schismatics
coming to Rome, they join interest with him, and set him up Anti-Bishop against
Cornelius, and by the severity of their pretense drew into the Party many
wellmeaning Men, that had been eminent Confessors in the late Decian
Persecution, and by their Reputation for some time kept up the Schism with some
credit and confidence. But here the honesty of Schismatics is not a little
observable, in that though their Opinions were extreme, yet they join in the
same Schism against the Catholic Church. For Novatus and his Party were so
loose as to be for Absolution without any due course of Penance and
Satisfaction: But Novatian was so severe as to be against allowing any
Absolution at all; and yet in this distance from one another they both piec't
together against the Catholic Church, that taught and practiced the middle
way of Absolution upon Penance and Satisfaction. But the Opinion of Novatian
being the most plausible (for that of Novatus was a mere inlet to all
Debauchery) it soon swallowed up the African Schismatiques into it; for Novatus
having by his Schism escaped with all his Crimes the Discipline of the Church,
he cared not what became of his Opinion, Schism was his only business, and
therefore he would quit his Opinion or any thing else, to strengthen himself by
a stronger Faction. And the Faction being now emboldned by their strength and
number, they signify the Election of Novatian to the several Provincial
Churches, and among others to St. Cyprian. But he and his Colleagues then
assembled in Synod, having been beforehand certified of the Canonical Election
of Cornelius by Synodical Letters, like Men wise and stout, are so moved with
the irregularity of the action, that they would not so much as give them
Audience, but immediately throw them out of all Communion. When by their
Letters Sed enim cum ex Epist. 44.
literis quas secum ferebant, and ex eorum Sermon atque asseveratione,
Novatianum Episcopum factum comperissemus, illicitae and contra Ecclesiam
Catholicam factae Ordinat^onis pravitate commoti, a Commu^icatione eos nostra
statim cohibendos esse censuimus.
and their Discourse, we understood that Novatian was made Bishop, being
provoked by such an irregularity of an Ordination made against the Catholic
Church, we immediately forbid them our Communion.

And when they press't that the Cause of Novatian and accusations against
Cornelius might be publicly heard, the Council peremptorily rejected the
motion. Gravitati nostrae negavimus Ibid.
convenire, ut Collegae nostri jam delecti and ordinati, and laudabili multorum
sententia comprobati ventilandum ultra honorem maledica aemulantium voce
pateremur.
We judged it unbecoming our Gravity that we should suffer the honor of our
Colleague already chosen, and ordained, and approved by common suffrage to be
farther prosecuted by envious and spiteful men.

And this he discourses with great wisdom Epist. 45.
in his next Epistle, Honoris enim communis memores, etc. For being mindful of
our common reputation, and bearing special regard to the honor and dignity of
the Priesthood, we refused to hear their Accusations sharpened with bitter
Reproaches, considering and weighing with our selves, that in so great an
Assembly of the Brethren, in the presence of the Priests of God, and before the
very Altar, they were neither fit to be read nor to be heard. Neither are
things to be rashly and easily made public, that may cause scandal int he
Hearers, and raise an ill Opinion of their Brethren, who live at a great
distance off, too great to clear their own innocence. And now having rejected
the Schismatics with so much contempt and dishonor, St. Cyprian writes to the
Confessors, who had given reputation to the Schism and Scandal to the Church,
and very severely schools them for their disorderly and Epist. 56.
Seditious behavior. Gravat enim me atque contristat, etc. It grieves and
troubles me, it pierces my very heart with unspeakable sorrow, when I found
that you, even you against all Ecclesiastical Constitution, against the Law of
the Gospel, against the Unity of the Catholic Church had consented to the
Creation of another Bishop, i. e. to erect another Church, to tear asunder the
Members of Christ, to divide the very Soul and Body of the Lords Flock. And so
goes on pathetically to exhort them, that as they would not lose the honor and
reward of their past sufferings, that they would speedily return into the Unity
of the Church, and out of that it was in vain for them so much as to pretend to
the Confession of Christianity. And for their more ample satisfaction sends
them his Book, de unitate Ecclesiae. Where among many other effectual
Arguments, he represents to them that their Schism is a much more heinous Crime
then that committed by the Lapsi, and that they had offended God less if they
had fallen in Persecution, then standing in it to fall into Schism, which he
tells them is a Crime not to be expiated by Martyrdom it self. Though they were
slain for the Confession Tales etiam sroccisi in confessione nominis fuerint,
macula ista nec sanguine abluitur. Inexpiabilis and gravis culpa discordiae,
nec passione purgatur. Ess^ Martyr non potest, qui in Ecclesia non est.
of his Name, yet their Sin is a blemish not to be washed off by their own
blood. The sin of Discord is heavy and expiable, not to be purged away by
Martyrdom it self. Neither can he be a Martyr that is out of the Church.

The Martyrs being alarmed with these and the like discourses, (for they
received another Letter about the same business, and much about the same time
from that Wise and Great Man Dyonisius Bishop of Alexandria) are awakened to
enquire more narrowly into the matter, upon which they find that Letters full
of Calumnies Epist. 49.
and Reproaches, of which they were utterly ignorant, had been scattered and
dispersed in all Churches in their name, and confess that they had been
circumvented by ill men, beg forgiveness, and acknowledge their great
miscarriage in the public Congregation, and submit to Cornelius as their true
and only Bishop. And that immediately broke the Schism and scattered the
Schismatics. Hic enim quosdam fratres nostros, etc. Epist. 51.
For this was the thing (says St. Cyprian) that seduced some with us, that they
followed the Communion of Confessors, which strong prejudice being removed they
are able to see the Light, and understand that the Peace and Unity of the
Church ought not to be broke and divided, neither will they be so easily
perverted by every furious Schismatic for the time to come, when they are now
convinced by experience that these brave Soldiers of Christ, could not long by
all the Arts of Craft and Subtilty be kept out of the Church. But if the Reader
desire a more compendious Account of all the Scenes and Motions of this
Controversy, he may meet with it in St. Cyprian's admirable Epistle to
Antonianus a Numidian Bishop, who not thoroughly understanding the state of the
Resolutions concerning the Lapsi, nor the contest between Cornelius and
Novatian, writes to St. Cyprian for better information about them both. Who
returns him a full Answer to both, but more especially to the whole Tragedy of
the Contest between Cornelius and Novatian, wherein he proves that Cornelius
was lawfully Elected and Consecrated before Novatian, and therefore that that
alone was enough to null the Title of Novatian. Et cum post primum, etc. And
seeing when there is one Bishop there cannot be another, whoever pretends to be
second after a first, who ought to be alone, is not the second but none at all.
And though he gives a large Account of Cornelius his Virtues, and the Vices of
Novatian, yet the Principle that he relyes upon is the Priority of Cornelius
his legal Ordination, after which for any other man to thrust himself upon what
pretense soever into the same Bishopric, is really to thrust himself both out
of the particular Church that he invades, and out of the Catholic Church
against which he Rebels, because by the Rules of both, one Church is not
capable of receiving two Bishops. But the Martyrs being reduced, and the
Schismatics scattered and every where rejected, St. Cyprian sets himself to
bring the War to a Final Issue, and for that end summons a Council at Carthage
to settle the Case of the Lapsi forever, whereas he informs Antonianus it was
after mature debate determined with true Ecclesiastical Moderation. Scripturis
diu ex utraque part prolatis, etc. The Scriptures b^ing alleged and urged on
either side, we tempered and poised the matter with an healing moderation, that
neither the hope of Restitution should be wholly denied the Lapsi, lest despair
should drive them into utter Apostasy; nor that the censure of the Church
should be so loosned, that the Offenders should be lightly admitted to
Communion, but that upon due Penance and Humiliation, every man's particular
cause and circumstances being examined, he should be accordingly treated. Which
Decree being certified by a Synodical Epistle to Rome, Cornelius at the
Petition of St. Cyprian, as Labbe according to the manner of the Romanists
expresses it, allows his Confirmation. And for the proof of it alleges St.
Cyprian's words to Antonianus, in which he declares Cornelius his Compliance
with the Authority of his determination, so that instead of giving force to his
Authority he only followed it, And as if the number of Ac si minus sufficiens
^piscoporum Numerus in Africa videbatur, etiam Romam super hac re scripsimus ad
Cornelium Collegam nostrum, qui et ipse cum plurimis Coepiscopis habito
Concilio, in eandem nobiscum sententiam, pari gravitate et salubri moderatione
consensit.
Bishops in Africa were not sufficient, we writ to Cornelius our Colleague at
Rome, who calling a Council of a great many Bishops approved our Judgment with
equal Wisdom and wholesome moderation.

The Schismatiques being thus utterly routed at Rome, they fly back into
Africa, and there associate to set up another Bishop against St. Cyprian, and
agree upon Fortunatus, which being done, Faelicissimus with a Guard of rude and
desperate Fellows posts to Rome, signifies the Election of their new Bishop to
Cornelius, and demands Communion with him, but is rejected with all manner of
scorn and disgrace. Upon this they huff and domineer, and scare the old Bishop
with their loud threatenings and louder Lies, particularly that this business
was transacted by the concurrent Vote of five and twenty Bishops; this puts
Cornelius to a stand, and hearing nothing all this while of it from St.
Cyprian, writes to him to know the whole state of the matter, who returns him a
large and pathetical Narrative of it, where he states the whole matter with
that Epist. 59.
clearness and strength of reason, with that evidence of proof, with that
fullness of Testimony, that vanquished the Faction forever, for after that time
we hear very little of this sullen Schism. And the Fundamental Principle upon
which he insists is the Divine Institution of his own Episcopal Superiority.
Heresies and Schisms arise from no other Fountain, Neque enim aliunde Haereses
obortae sunt, aut nata sunt Schismata quam inde quod Sacerdoti dei non
obtemperatur, nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos, et ad tempus Judex vice
Christi cogitatur, cui si secundum magisteria divina obtemperaret fraterni tas
Universa, nemo adversum sacerdotu^ collegium quidqua^ moveret, nemo post
divinum judicium, post populi suffragium, post coepisco, porum consensum,
Judicem se jam non Episcopi sed dei faceret.
then because the Priest of God is not obeyed, nor one Priest at a time is
thought to preside in the Church as Christ's Vicegerent. To whom if the whole
Brotherhood would obey according to the divine commands, no man would move
Sedition against the College of Priests, no man after the Sentence of God, the
good liking of the People, the consent of the Bishops, would take upon him to
judge not the By shop but God him self.

That was his case that when he had been Canonically Elected and Constituted in
the Sea of Carthage, his own Presbyters should presume to out him of his
Bishopric that he held for his life by Divine Authority,

And therefore to Travel no farther into this Controversy, though the
Schismatiques, according to the restless Genius of such Men, made some faint
sallys to save and redeem themselves, we plainly see that this was the first
Article of St. Cyprian's Unity of the Christian Church, the Unity of a Bishop
in every Diocesan Church, and the dutiful and regular Communion of all its
Members with him.

13.
The second grand Article, and that which has a more diffusive influence upon
the Peace and Unity of the Church, is the obligation upon all Christian
Bishops, to preserve Concord and Communion among themselves. And as the former
unites every Christian to some particular Church; so this unites every
particular Church to the Body of the Church Catholic. And this is that which
St. Cyprian and the Ancients intend by the Catholic Church, viz. All Churches
in the World united into one Body by the Concord of Bishops in the same Rules
of Discipline and Government. And this is his meaning in those several
Passages, in which he makes every Church both a perfect Church within it self,
and yet only a Member of the Church Catholic, as in the formention'd Passage
in his Book De Unitate: Episcopat^s ^nus est, cujus a singulis in solid^m pars
tenetur: There is but one Episcopacy, of which every Bishop possesses his own
share with plenitude of Power. And in his 56 Epistle, A Christo una Ecclesia
per tot^m orbem in multa membra d^visa, Christ has founded one Church,
dispersed through the whole World in many Districts or Divisions. And in the
same Epistle, Episcopatus unus, Episcoporum multorum concordi numer sitate
diffusus, There is but one Episcopacy spread every where by the Concord of all
Bishops. And in the 68th Epistle, Etsi Pastores multi sumus, unum tamen gregem
pascimus, and oves universas, quas Christus sanguine s^o and passio^^
q^aesivit, colligere and fovere debemus: Though we are many Pastors, yet we
^eed but one Flock, and we are all bound to fold and cherish all the Sheep that
Christ has purchased with his Blood and Passion. By which, and the like
passages, which are very frequent in his Writings, nothing less can be
understood than the Obligation of all particular Churches to mutual Concord,
for the preservation of Peace and Unity in the Church Catholic. And agreeable
to this Doctrine was his practice through the whole course of his Government,
to give an account of his proceedings to Foreign Churches for their Judgment
and Approbation; and by that means a stricter Unity of Discipline was at that
time kept up in all Christian Churches then in any other Age. Thus when he had
cast Faelicissimus and his Associates out of the Church of Carthage, they could
never after it get footing in any other Church: And when Cornelius had cast
Novation out of the Church of Rome, though he made many bold and plausible
Attempts to insinuate himself into diverse other Churches, yet he could never
meet with entertainment in any, but found himself doomed to the Fate of Cain,
to be a Vagabond all the days of his Life. This Correspondence of Discipline is
the subject of the greatest part of St. Cyprian's Epistles. Thus he wrote to
the Church of Rome, to give an account of his Discipline and Diligence,
Necessarium duxi has ad vos literas facere, quibus vobis Epist. 20.
act^s nostri, and Disciplinae and Diligentiae ratio redderetur. And then gives
a particular Account of all his Proceedings in the Case of the Lapsi, and the
illegal Pardons of the Martyrs and Confessors; Lest (says he) our Resolutions
that Ne actus noster, qui adunatus esse and consentire circa omnia debet, in
aliquo discreparet.
ought to be uniform and agreeable in all things should be dissonant in any.

The very same that is done in his Epistle to Caldonius, in which he tells
Epist. 25.
him, That he had sent the same Account to diverse other Churches, and desires
him to conveigh it to as many Bishops or Colleagues as he could, That the same
Resolution and Agreement in all things might according to our Lords Command be
preserved in all Churches: Ut apud omnes unus Actus, and una consensio secundum
Domini proecepta teneatur. And again in his Epistle to the Clergy of Rome, he
informs them of the disorderly Proceedings of Lucianus, and other Confessors,
in giving Absolution without his consent, and desires their farther assistance,
assuring them, That their former concurrence with him, had supported him
against that old dead weight of Envy, and saved him a World of Trouble:
Laborantes hic nos, and contra invidiae impetum, totis fidei viribus
resistentes Epist. 27.
multum sermo vester adjuvit, ut divinitus compendium fieret. And when in
another Epistle to them he had cautioned them against Privatus an Heretical
Bishop, they return him thanks for his great care of the Unity of the Christian
Church, a duty (say they) equally incumbent upon us all, Omnes enim nos decit
pro corpore totius Ecclesioe, cujus Epist. 36.
per varias quasque Provincias membra digesta sunt, excubare. And so when the
African Bishops had agreed to make an abatement of the rigor of Discipline
Epist. 57.
toward the Lapsi upon the foresight of a new approaching Persecution, they
acquaint the Church of Rome with their Resolution by a Synodical Epistle. But
the most eminent correspondence at this time, and about this business, was that
between Cornelius Bishop of Rome, Dionysius of Alexandria, Fabian of Antioch,
and Cyprian of Carthage, by whose Concord and Conduct the fury both of the
Epist. 5^.
Schism and Schismatiques was at last utterly vanquished. And it was this
breach of the Unity among Christian Bishops, that was the great Aggravation and
Enormity of the Sin of Novatian, as it is represented by St. Cyprian in his
excellent Epistle to Antonianus; Cum sit a Christo una Ecclesia per totum
mundum, etc. When there is but one Church in the whole World divided into many
Parts, and one Episcopacy diffused all over by the numerous Concord of many
Bishops, this Man slighting the Command of God, and the settled Unity of the
Catholic Church, endeavors to erect an humane Church, sends his new Apostles
through diverse Cities, to lay the Foundations of a new Institution. And whereas
there had been of a long time Bishops venerable for Age, Orthodox in Faith,
proved in Trials, proscribed in Persecutions, Ordained in all Provinces and
every City, yet he dares presume to set up over them his own False-Bishops, as
if he resolved to vanquish the whole World merely by his stubbornness, and by
the propagation of Discord to tear in pieces the whole Union of the
Ecclesiastical Body. That was a plain dissolution of the Unity of the
Catholic Church, the dividing the Body of Christian Bishops, in whose Concord
and Agreement the true Catholic Unity consisted. But the most remarkable
Discourse in all St. Cyprian's Writings Epist. 66.
upon this Argument is his severe Epistle to Florentius or Pupianus an African
Bishop, who took upon himself to disclaim Communion with St. Cyprian by his own
single Authority, notwithstanding that St. Cyprian was in the Communion of the
Catholic Church, [Ecclesiae universae per totum mundum nobiscum Unitatis
vinculo copulat^^.] Quando Ecclesia, quae Catholica una est scissa non sit
neque divisa, sed sit utique connexa, and cohaerentium sibi invicem sacerdotum
glutino copulata.
And therefore when the one Catholic Church cannot be rent nor divided, but
is united and combined together by the Cement of the Epis^opal Concord* He
charges Pupianus with casting himself out of the Communion of the Catholic
Church, by denying to Communicate with St. Cyprian, with whom all other Bishops
communicated. And withal tells him, That his Crime is so great, that he can
scarce be restored upon Repentance and Satisfaction, and that for his own part
he dares not do it without some express Commission from God himself. I shall
beg advice from God whether you Ut prius Dominum meum consulam an tibi pacem
dari, and te ad Communicationem Ecclesiae suae admitti sua Ostensione and
Admonitione permittat.
shall be restored [after having made satisfaction] and that he will be pleased
to let me know by some sign and intimation of his Will, whether he will ever
permit such an one as you to he received into the Communion of his Church.

And this is the thing that St. Cyprian means by a Bishops making himself
Episcopus Episcopi, with which he here particularly charges Pupianus, when one
Bishop presumes by his single Authority to judge another. Which was in those
days justly esteemed the most unpardonable breach of Catholic Communion. For
upon that pretense, he might if he pleased, disclaim and condemn every Bishop
of the Christian World. And therefore though any other Offender that stood
Excommunicate even by a Council of Bishops might be admitted to the peace of
the Church upon satisfaction; yet in this case St. Cyprian doubts whether
Pupianus his Repentance will be ever accepted. Insomuch that if upon it he
should be received into the Communion of the Church, his Absolution must not be
peremptory as in other cases, but so as still to refer him to the fear and
danger of the Judgment of God. Si temeritatis and saperbiae and insolentiae
tuae agere vel sero paenitentiam caeperis, si Deo and Christo ^jus plenissime
satisfeceris, communicationis tuae poterimus habere rationem, manente tamen
apud nos divinae censurae respectu and metu. This was a singular Severity in so
gentle a Person as St. Cyprian, who allowed full Restitution to all other
Offenders, but in this case he does it with an If. And in plain truth the
Nature of the Crime deserved it, for it is an Eternal Subversion of the Peace
of the whole Church, if the Pride or the Peevishness of one single Man may be
suffered to censure and condemn the practice of the whole Catholic Church.
For though this pique of Pupianus lay only against St. Cyprian, yet he being
(as he tells him) in Communion with all the Bishops and Churches through the
whole World, though the blow were aimed at him singly, it lighted upon all, and
the whole Church was equally involved in the Censure. Which was then thought
such a piece of Luciferian pride, that it was by him placed next to the
unpardonable Sin. The passages in St. Cyprian to this purpose are innumerable,
and there is scarce an Epistle, in which he does not expressly declare the Unity
of the Catholic Church to lie in the Concord and Agreement of the Episcopal
College; that was a Succession to the Apostolical, between whom the Government
of the Church was equally divided, yet so as to agree all together in one
Catholic Communion. This is a thing so easily to be understood that I cannot
but stand amazed to find Men of Sense, Learning, and Ingenuity pretend to be so
dull as not to be able to comprehend, how the Unity of the Church should be
reduced to practice by way of external Policy, when all the Lines of it are so
plainly traced out in the Universal practice of the Primitive Church, and
particularly in the Writings of St. Cyprian. It were easy to give a much
larger account of it by transcribing almost all the Records of the Christian
Church, the chief Affairs whereof were all along transacted by this way of
Epistolary Correspondence: And therefore the best way of attaining knowledge in
Ecclesiastical matters is not by following set and formed Histories, so much as
by consulting particular Epistles, in which we have a distinct account from
time to time, of the true Springs and Motions of all the public Transactions
of the Christian Church.

14.
But because this Argument of Unity and Communion, by way of external Polity in
the Church is become a Controversy among some learned Men of our own Church,
though what I have already discoursed in general be more then enough, or at
least as much as is in it self needful to state the Case, yet unless I assoil
some particular Arguments that are at this time on foot, notwithstanding all
that I have said, I shall leave some Readers under the power of great
prejudices, and those prejudices being maintained by the deserved Reputation of
some good and learned Men, they are not to be easily removed, not otherwise
then by particular Confutations. The two great Men at first engaged in this
Controversy are Mr. Thorndike, and Dr. Barrow, Men of equal value both for
Modesty, Learning, and Piety. Mr. Thorndike is peremptory for the necessity of
one United Government in the Catholic Church. The Dr. granting it to be a
thing very desirable, and in some rare cases practicable, as when all
Christendom was almost confined within the Roman Empire, cannot conceive any
Necessity of it, or Obligation to it. But with all due Reverence to the memory
of so great, and so good a Man, I must make bold to say, That, however it comes
to pass, he answers neither his usual Acuteness or Ingenuity in this
performance. Probably it might have been an imperfect work, and an Essay upon
the Argument by way of exercise to himself; or if he were serious, and the
discourse were the result of his own Judgment, it will appear when I come to
consider his way of discoursing it, that he had by no means weighed the matter
as he ought, that he did not comprehend the Arguments that he undertook to
answer, that he was not consistent with himself, but expressly asserts the
Opinion that he endeavors to oppose. Of all which unusual inconsistency in so
Acute a Man I can give no other Reason, then that his great Zeal against the
Unity of the Catholic Church by way of Papal Monarchy Transported him so far
as to make him forget that obligation to Unity and Communion that lies upon all
Churches under their several distinct Governments. But whatever was the ground
of his mistake, his reasons only concern us, and here to proceed Methodically,
I shall in the first place set down his Adversaries Arguments, and his Replies
upon them; and then his own Arguments, with my Answers to them. And first he
begins the dispute with an intimation of the want of perspicuity in his
Adversaries Writings, and this I know is a popular Objection, and very much in
the mouths of some Men, who will by no means allow him to be an intelligible
Writer, though for what reason I cannot imagine, unless that it is convenient
for themselves that he should not be understood; for if once Men were convinced
of the true Constitution of any one Church by Divine Authority, that would
forever destroy all indifferency, or pretended moderation, between the several
different Parties among us. And if the Church of England be constituted by
Divine Right, then all that separate from it are both Heretics and
Schismatiques; and all that join with it as the right Church, and not merely as
the Church in possession, are obliged to declare them so, and endeavor to have
them cast out of all Ecclesiastical Communion. If indeed the difference were
only about Rites and Ceremonies, there might be some room for good nature; but
when the contest is about the Essential Constitution of a Christian Church, as
it was Established by our Savior and his Apostles, those that separate from
it, nay that endeavor with all their might to destroy it, (as our present
Schismatiques do) cannot but incur the utmost displeasure and severity of all
honest Men that sincerely love it: In such cases as these, it is a
contradiction to talk of terms of Accommodation: And that is the reason why
some Men that would keep fair with all Parties, are so afraid of the Plea of
Divine Right for the Church of England; for if that be settled, they are thereby
obliged and determined positively to declare against the Schi^^ of all other
different Parties. And not to do it is to partake of their Sin, and in effect
to join with them in it, for not to be for the true Church is to be against it,
our Savior will accept of no such lukewarm and perfidious moderation. In
short, Men that Communicate with the Church of England not as founded upon
Divine Right, proceed upon no other ground then that it is the Church at
present in Possession, so that whatever Party has the luck to get uppermost,
that is the Church of England; and then be it Popery, Presbytery, or
Independendy we are Schismatiques if we separate from it: For if there be no
Ecclesiastical form of Government settled by Divine Law, then none of these can
be in themselves unlawful, because nothing can be so but as it is against the
Law of God, for where there is no Law there is no Sin, and therefore it is but
a very mean piece of Service to the Church of England, to assert the Lawfulness
of her Constitution; for if that be all, and if it be not necessary too as
established by Divine Right, so are all other forms, then all the difference is,
that the State has thought good to annex the Ecclesiastical preferments to this
way; but setting them aside, the Separatists are as much the Church of England
as our selves, and if the State should be pleased to settle all the Emoluments
of the Church upon Presbytery or Independency, yes or Popery it self, then all
that is pleaded for the Lawfulness of the present Church of England, will be as
pleadable against it for the Church Triumphant. So fatal and pernicious to the
Being of a Christian Church is this Principle that takes away all Divine Right,
it blows up the very Foundations of the Church, that can stand upon no other
bottom then the Authority of God, and lets Men loose from all other Obligations
to Communicate with any Church, then merely those of courtesy and civility;
for the only reason it can lay upon them, is to Communicate with the Church
they live in, is to do it for convenience and peace sake, rather then to be
troublesome, otherwise they are lef^ by the Law of God to be of what Church they
please, or if they please of none at all; for if there be none by Divine Law,
they cannot be obliged to Communicate with any. But of the ill Consequences of
this fatal Principle, I shall give a particular account in the Conclusion of
this Design; when after I have made good the true State of the Church, I shall
be able to convince all the different Parties of their Deviations from it, and
amongst the rest I doubt this Sect of Men will be found the most guilty of any,
of perfidiousness against the Catholic Church, for they disown any such thing
in all times and places; and that is an offense of a more heinous Nature, as
well as larger Extent, then when committed only against the particular Church
of England. Though the greatest aggravation of it is, That it is taken up
precariously without ground or shadow of Reason, in defiance to all the Records
of the Christian Church, and that all its Pleas pervert them with more folly
and grossness, then the Romanists pretenses for Papal Supremacy, as will be
shown in due place. In the mean time to return to our Learned Author, and his
complaint of Mr. Thorndike's obscurity, that was taken up by him from a vulgar
Opinion, and that was first started by others, chiefly to prevent the force of
his Arguments for the Divine Right of Ecclesiastical Power. It must be granted,
that there are some things in his Epilogue to the Church of England, that
cannot but create some difficulty to the less skilful Reader: As first, the
very careless and uncorrected Impression of it, whereby such a multitude of
faults have escaped, or rather passed through the Press, as cannot but very
much disturb and perplex the Sense, especially when the mistake is committed
(as it very frequently is) in the Particles of Argumentation, whereby the plain
coherence of the discourse is often lost and inverted; both which being added
to the obscurity of the style it self, which though it is intelligible enough
to an attending Reader, yet must be acknowledged somewhat dark and involved, as
usually happens to overthoughtful Men, and that seems to have been the case of
this Learned Man, his former Writings upon the very same Subject being much
more plain and perspicuous. But the thing that most of all puts the ordinary
Reader to a ^oss, is his frequent and large digressions, for being a complete
Master of Ecclesiastical Learning, he could not confine himself to his proper
Argument, but upon every turn runs out into other Subjects. And the method of
the connection not appearing, the common Reader loses the design of the whole.
To give an instance or two, his chief Arguments for the Unity of the Catholic
Church being taken from the Unity of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; beside
making out his Conclusion, he enters into large Discourses concerning the Use
and Necessity of Baptism against the Socinians, and the presence of Christ's
Body in the Eucharist, and the Sense of the Church about it in all Ages against
the Church of Rome, and by that time the less diligent Reader has traveled
through these long Digressive Controversies, he forgets the first Conclusion,
of the Unity of the Church from the Unity of right to these two Sacraments in
it.

But if the Reader would distinguish between the direct Course and Tenor of the
Discourse it self, and these occasional Salleys, the whole Method of proceeding
would appear plain and perspicuous enough to an ordinary understanding. And for
the proof of this I shall only refer him to his first Book upon this Argument,
which was the substance and groundwork of his other larger Treatises. And that
is his discourse of the Right of the Churches in a Christian state. In which
keeping close to his Argument, he has stated this and all other matters that he
t^eats of with that clearness and coherence of Reason, that whoever will be at
the pains to run through that little Book can never complain of any Obscurity
in his following Writings. Thus in his first Chapter, he lays the Foundations
of the one Catholic Church upon the right of holding public Assemblies for
the Worship of God by Divine Authority, upon which he infers the power of the
Keys, and from thence the power of granting Baptism, which suppose a settled
Authority of taking into or casting out of the Society of the Church, and
unless those that are taken in are taken into the whole Society, and those that
are cast out are cast out of the same, they are of no effect to the purpose to
which they are designed. For unless a Man that is baptized in a particular
Church have a right of Communicating with the whole Christian Church, if he
change his Habitation, he must leave his Christianity behind him, or his right
of holding public Assemblies in the Church. And unless a man that is
Excommunicate in a particular Church, be thereby cast out of Communion with all
other Churches, it is but changing his Habitation, and he that was cut off as a
corrupt Member from the Body of Christ, shall elude the just Sentence of the
Church, and not withstanding his Excommunication have as full a right to all
Christian Privileges as if he had never been proceeded against. This is the
main stress of his Argument upon this Subject, which he farther shows by the
power of inflicting and abating Penance, that is connected with the Authority
of Excommunication or inflicting Censures. And the force of this Argumentation
is so evident and unavoidable, that I must confess my self not a little
surprised how it was possible that our Learned Adversary could any way baulk or
shift the Evidence of its Conviction. Especially when himself saw so clearly
that an Ecclesiastical Unity of Government in the Church is absolutely
necessary to its preservation; for though he founds it only upon the
Confederation and consent of Churches and not any divine Command, yet he founds
that Consent upon its necessity to the Peace of the Church. This course (says
he) was very prudential P. 28.
and useful for preserving the truth of Religion and Unity of Faith, against
Heretical Devices springing up in that free age, for maintaining Concord and
good Correspondence among Christians, together with an Harmony in Manners and
Discipline, for that otherwise Christendom would have been shattered and
crumbled into numberless Parties, discordant in Opinion and Practice, and
consequently alienated in affection, which inevitably among most men does
follow difference of Opinion and Manners, so that in short time it would not
have appeared what Christianity was, and consequently the Religion, being
overgrown with differences and discords, must have perished. Now is not this a
very fair concession for one who is laboring only to prove that this Unity of
Government among several Churches is not necessary to the Church, when without
it Christianity must have certainly perish't. But this dropped from his own
natural sense and ingenuity, that could not but acknowledge the Evidence of so
clear a truth. But though it was an utter subversion of his whole design, yet
it seems he was so intent in the pursuit of the Argument, that he had
undertaken, that he overlook't even his own thoughts when they stood in his
way. And now after this it is so easy to overthrow every particular part of
his discourse, that were it not for his Authority, it would be needless. But
because by reason of that it must be done, I shall do it with all possible
brevity. First then, the name of Church is attributed to the whole body of
Christiaans, Arg. 1. p. 35.
which implies Unity. And this he confesses it does, but determines not the
kind or ground thereof, there being several kinds, any whereof may suffice to
ground that comprehensive Appellation. But this by his own Confession is most
apparently false, for it determines it self to that kind that consists in an
Unity of Government, and the ground of that determination of it is its
necessity to the Peace and Welfare of the Church, and therefore without this
kind of Unity, no other sort will suffice to ground the Appellation, because
without it there can be no other Unity, this is necessary to all other sorts,
and therefore without it they are not capable of that name. But to deal
plainly, the Argument is not here sairly represented, for Mr. Thorndike does
not argue merely from the name of the Church, but from the nature of the thing
to which the name is applied, the Church being a Society or Body Politic,
which is the first thing to be either proved or supposed in this dispute, and
that being made out, then upon that supposition the Argument is very clear,
that one Church is one Society. And therefore when the name Church is
frequently given in Scripture, not only to particular Churches, but to the
whole Catholic Church, that must be one Society united under one Government,
for without Government there is no Society, and therefore one Society founds
one Government. Now the Argument being thus laid, its force lies in the nature
of things, not an empty name, and it makes its own way by its own
reasonableness. Especially when we consider the Bond of this Society, viz. The
Communion in Divine Offices, to which every Member of the Catholic Church
having a right, the right of all must consist in that one Communion, and that
one Communion cannot subsist without one Government, so perspicuously does the
Unity of the Catholic Church infer and enforce an Unity of Government in it.

The next Argument and Answer are to the same purpose, viz. from our Belief of
the Holy Catholic Church, from whence Mr. Thorndike infers its Political
Unity but our Author: says, it may as well be understood of any other kind of
Unity. But to that it is easily answered, that as long as it is a Society (and
so must all multitudes of men, if they are not riots) it cannot be understood
without this Unity. And therefore it is not precariously assumed and obtruded
as is pretended, but warrants it self by the reason it brings along with it,
that determines it to this special kind of Unity. But he adds, the genuine
sense of the meaning of this Article may be, our profession to adhere to the
Body of Christians, and to maintain Charity and communicate in holy Offices
with them, and to be willing to observe the Laws and Orders Established by the
Authority or consent of Churches. This is very true, and very false, for if we
are under no Obligation to all this, then all this meaning is Nonsense, and
all these kinds of Unity are nothing; for if we make this profession of our own
free choice and accord, then we may choose whether we will do all this or no,
and it is all one whether we adhere to the body of Christians, in Charity,
Communion, and Obedience to the Laws of the Church, or whether we refuse it;
for if it be no duty by virtue of Obligation, then it may be left undone as
well as done. But if all Christians and all Churches are obliged to it, then
indeed, it is true but then are they United under one Common Government, and the
making and keeping of this Profession is not voluntary, but it is bound upon
them by the indispensable Laws of Christianity.

3. The Apostles delivered one Rule of faith to all Churches, the embracing of
which, was a necessary condition to admission into the Church, therefore
Christians are combined together in one political Body. But it is answered;

First, That from hence can only be inferred, That Christians should consent in
one Faith.

Yes, but an obligation to consent in one Faith makes them one Political Body,
for what if any Church forsake this Rule, are they not punishable for it by
other Churches? If they are, they are then combined together in one Political
Body: If they are not, then there is no remedy against Schisms and Heresies;
and beside that, there may be as many different Faiths as Churches, and
therefore if all Christians are obliged to an Unity of Faith, and if they
cannot be so without an Unity of Government, then the consequence is very
strong from the Unity of one to infer the Unity of the other.

But Secondly, By this reason all mankind must be United in one Political Body,
because they are all bound to observe the same Laws of Justice and Humanity.

To make short of it, so they are; all Kingdoms and Commonwealths are as much
bound to mutual Justice, as private Persons under one and the same Government.
And if any Prince violate this Law by Invading his Neighbors Rights, he is or
ought to be looked upon, by Gods natural Law, that equally provides for the
good of all, as an Enemy and Traitor to the Society of Mankind, and it is the
duty as well as interest of all other Princes not only to oppose his attempts,
but to the utmost of their power to proceed against him as an Enemy to Humane
Society, and endeavor his Extirpation out of it. This upon the supposition of
that one Law of Nature, that provides for the welfare and happiness of all
mankind, is an unavoidable consequence, and so is it upon supposition of Unity
ofFaith, that all that are bound to it, must be under one common Government.
But because the World is ill-Govern'd, it is an unhappy way of arguing to make
that a Precedent, that the Church should be so too. Arg. 4 God has granted to
the Church certain Powers as the Power of the Keys, a Power to Enact Laws, a
power to Excommunicate, a Power to hold Assemblies, and a power to ordain
Governors. But to all this it is answered, that these Powers are granted to
particular Churches, not to the whole as distinct from the parts. They are
granted to both, to every particular Church over its own Members, and to the
whole Church over every particular Church, and whether as such it be distinct
from all its parts, is a dispute too Metaphysical for me to undertake; but as
consisting of them all, it has a Power over every one, and if there were no
such Power common to all, it were in vain to grant any of these powers to each
particular Church, because without that these would be utterly defeated of
their Force and Efficacy; for example, supposing a power in a particular Church
to punish an Offender by Excommunication, unless the force of that
Excommunication reach to other Churches, it loses its effect, for
notwithstanding that, he has a Right to Church Membership in all the Churches
through the whole World beside. And then he is as much cast out of the Church
as any man would be out of England, that is driven from any one Village. So
that from the right of exercising Discipline in each particular Church, the
consequence is unavoidable, to infer the same common power in the Church
Catholic. And that by our Authors leave was St. Cyprian's Inference. Not
merely from these common Grants to infer this right in particular Churches, but
to infer the same power in every part over it self, and in the whole over every
part. And St. Cyprian is so perpetually beating upon this Argument, that I
cannot enough wonder how it is possible that this learned Man should here so
foully mistake him, as if he had confined the exercise of all Ecclesiastical
Discipline to each particular Church. But the falsehood of it I have
sufficiently showed above. And beside what I have already alleged, there is
one pregnant passage in his Epistle to Steven Bishop of Rome, against Marcian
Bishop of Arles to this Epist. 67.
purpose. Idcirco, frater charissime, oopiosum corpus est sacerdotum concordiae
mutuae glutino atque unitatis vinculo copulatum, ut si quis ex collegio nostro
haeresin facere, and gregem Christi lacerare and vastare tentaverit, subveniant
caeteri, and quasi pastores utiles and misericordes, oves dominicas in gregem
colligant. Therefore, most dear Brother, is the body of the Priesthood so large
combined together by the cement of concord and bond of Unity, that if any of
our Colleges shall attempt to raise Heresies and Schisms, the rest ought to
come in, and as watchful and tender Pastors reduce the Lords Sheep to his
Flock. Every Bishop was to watch over his own Flock, but the whole Body or
College of Bishops over every Bishop, and therefore the power lodged in them
all, was but one common power seated in the Catholic Church, so far was St.
Cyprian from dreaming of the consinement of its exercise to particular
Churches. As for the following Arguments and Answers, they are to the same
purpose with these I have already examined, and are for the most part
repetitions of the same, and run into the same principles, that all Unity is
nothing but either Unity of Faith, or voluntary Agreement, both which are
already so often proved to be no Unity without an Unity of Government, that to
avoid being tedious I shall say no more but proceed to examine our Learned
Author's own Arguments, and in them he is more unhappy then in his Answers, for
they are so many very good Arguments against himself.

First then, This being of so great weight would have been declared in Holy
Scripture.

And so it is, and nothing more so to any man of common sense. I will challenge
all the World to show me any one thing more earnestly enjoined and frequently
recommended then the preservation of Unity among Christians, and then if
without an Unity of Government, no other could be possibly preserved, as our
Author has proved from common sense and common experience, that must be the
thing principally commanded by all those injunctions. But such arguings as
these suppose all men very great Blockheads, as if they were not able to
understand any thing unless it were beaten into them, whereas the Scripture
supposes Mankind endued with common sense, that can apply general Laws to
particular cases, without being guided, like Beasts, every step they take. And
thus our Savior having instituted the Society of his Church, and established
Governors in it, when he enjoins them to be careful to preserve Unity, no Man
can be so dull as not to understand, that he thereby requires them to make use
of all means of obtaining it, but especially such as are necessary to its
preservation in all Societies. And therefore whether this Unity of Government
be enjoined in express words in Scripture, I will not concern my self to
enquire, because it is as clear there to all Men of common Sense, as if it were
so injoined, and that is enough.

But Secondly, There appears no such thing in the Apostolical practice.

What, did not the Apostles keep Unity among themselves? Did they not Govern
the Church, as much as they could, by common consent? Did not every particular
Apostle give an account of his own Churches to the whole College? Did they not
advise together upon Emergent Controversies? And was not every Man concluded by
the Vote of the whole Council? It is strange to me to see it affirmed, that
they observed no such Polity in founding Christian Societies, when there is no
one thing more observable in their whole History, then their great care to
maintain Peace, Love, and Unity among all Churches, and that is the very
establishment of this Polity; for a duty or obligation common to several
Societies, supposes one Government common to them all, to which every Society
is accountable for the discharge of its Duty. Every passage that recommends
Union among the Members of that Body, of which Christ is Head, is an express
Command to this Duty; for he is Head of the Catholic Church, and the
Catholic Church is his whole Body, and therefore particular Churches are only
Members of it; and therefore as such, they are obliged by such Precepts to keep
the Unity of the whole. If our Learned Author mean, that this Communion was not
established between all Churches in the Apostles time; I will grant it, because
it was impossible that it should, till the settlement of Christianity in the
World was brought to some perfection, and till then such a Confederation in
Discipline could not be established in all places. For some of them traveling
into remote Parts and Founding Churches there, such distant Churches could not
keep up any common Discipline among themselves, for want of convenient
Correspondence. But as far as this design could be put in practice, it was
pursued by the Apostles, keeping Peace and Unity among all Neighbor Churches.

But Thirdly, The Fathers make the Unity of the Church to consist only in the
Unions of Faith, Charity, Peace, not in this Political Union.

First, suppose they do, yet if a Political Union be necessary to preserve
those other Unions, that must be employed in them. But

Secondly, What Fathers make it to consist only in those Unions? Does any
Father affirm that there is no other Union in the Church, but only of Faith,
Charity and Peace? that were to the purpose; but because they sometime speak of
those Unions, to conclude that they affirm that there is no other, only shows a
miserable scantiness of proof, and yet beside this the chief Passages that he
alleges out of them refer to this Political Union. His first Instance of the
Church of Rome's refusing to receive Marcion to Communion, because he was
Excommunicated by his own Father the Bishop of Sinope, a small Diocese in
P^ntus, is the most remarkable Precedent of this Unity of Discipline that he
could have pitched upon in all the Records of the Ancient Church, for if they
were ^ bliged not to admit him into Communion in one Church, when he was
Excommunicate in another, then they were under some Law of Government common to
both; how else should the Church of Rome be obliged to put in execution a
censure of the little remote Church of Synope? And yet too without this
obligation the Discipline of the Church would be utterly defeated, for what had
become of that, if it had not been of force at Rome, and every where else, as
well as at home. And of the same nature is the known and famous case of
Synesius, who, when he had Excommunicated Andronicus and his Companions,
requires of all Bishops in the World not to receive them to Communion under
pain of Excommunication, as dividing that Unity of the Church which Christ has
appointed. Though this was only for the greater caution, for though he had not
given this notice, they were all obliged under the same penalty of
Excommunication not to admit them to Communion, without their Bishop's
Certificate or Communicatory Letters; and as long as that rule was observed,
which was till the time of the Usurpation, the Discipline of every particular
Church was without any trouble effectual in all Churches all the World over.
But to return to Marcion, the reason, says our Author, why the Roman Church
refused Communion to Mercion, when he was Excommunicated by his Father, was
because his Father and they were of one Faith, and one Mind. And let it be the
reason if he pleases, for what can follow thence, then that Unity of Faith
obliges to Unity of Discipline? And that too is expressly enough inferred in the
following words, which he has omitted, We cannot, i. e. we ought not to act
contrary to our fellow Minister. But after all we need only refer this whole
matter to our Learned Author's own decision, who has given his judgment of it
in these words: It is a rule grounded upon apparent Equity, Page 46.
and frequently declared by Ecclesiastical Canons, that no Church shall admit
into its Protection or Communion, any Persons who are Excommunicated by another
Church, or who do withdraw themselves from it. And this he proves by the Canon
of the African Fathers against Appeals to Rome, by the proceedings against
Marcion, by St. Cyprian's repulse of Maximus, and Novatian, and Cornelius of
^aelicissimus, by the punishment of Dioscorus, who was deposed for it, and by
the Mandate of Synesius to all Christian Churches against Andronicus! And what
can we desire more then this, That as this Rule was a standing Law of the
Christian Church, so it was grounded upon apparent Equity; and such Laws are
Obligatory all the World over, because their Violation is apparent Iniquity; in
short, it was no Arbitrary Rule, but such an one as was its own obligation by
its own intrinsic Goodness and Usefulness. As for our Authors Passages out of
Tertullian, they do him as little Service as this Precedent of Marcion: For
they expressly assert this Unity of Discipline in the Catholic Church. We are
one Body by our agreement in Religion, our Unity of Discipline, and our being
in the same Covenant of hope. What can be more evident then that he makes the
Unity of the Christian Body to consist in an Unity of Discipline as well as of
Faith? And to the same purpose are all his other Passages out of the Ancients,
that from the Unity of Faith in all Churches infer this Unity of Discipline, as
is obvious to any one that will but peruse them. The Fourth Argument is only a
Repetition of the two first, and therefore is already considered. And so is the
fifth, viz. That this Unity could not comport with the Apostolical State of the
Church, when Christian Churches were founded in such distant places, as could
not with convenience correspond. That is to say, it was not reduced to practice
till it was practicable, and that I must acknowledge it was not in all places
till after the Apostles, but as far as it could be obtained it was carefully
observed from the beginning. The Sixth Argument taken from the (...) or liberty
of particular Churches to govern themselves, I have answered in the foregoing
Discourse, by showing its Consistency with its Subjection to the Catholic
Church, because as our Learned Author here very well observes, The Page 30.
Peace of the Church was preserved by Communion of all parts together, not by
the subjection of the rest to one part. But the truth is, in prosecuting this
Argument, he has not only answered that but all the rest, by confessing the
absolute necessity of this Political Verity; so that without it Christianity
must have perished, by referring the judgment of the cause to St. Cyprian, and
by acknowledging a double relation or capacity in every Bishop, one toward his
own Flock, another toward the whole Church, and that is all the Political Union
we contend for.

But Seventhly, This Political Unity does not accord with the nature of the
Gospel, because it would bring too much Worldly State and Grandeur into the
Church, as appears by the Papal Monarch And that is true, a Monarchical Unity
would naturally bring in a Worldly Kingdom, but not such an Unity as consists
in the Communion of all Parts together, and not in the Subjection of the rest
to one part, as our Author expresses it, or as Mr. Thorndike often repeats it,
That not the infinite Power of one Church, but the Regular Power of all, is the
mean provided by the Apostles for attaining Unity in the Whole. This is the
state of the Question between us, and therefore all our Authors flourishes
about the Papal Tyranny are nothing but flourish, because it is so far from
being that Catholic Unity that we own, that it is the whole design of this
work to prove, that it is a most execrable and impudent subversion of it. The
8th and 9th Arguments proceed upon the same Supposition of a Papal Monarchy.
The tenth upon its no Necessity, against our Authors own confession. The 11th
and 12th because such an Unity was never in fact attained. If he means in full
perfection, no more was ever any Government, and therefore it is not to be
required in this World; but if he means that it was never put in practice, so
as in good measure to attain its end, the whole History of the Church, down to
the Papal Usurpation contradicts it, as appears by the whole Series of this
Discourse. This is all that this learned Man has alleged upon this Argument,
and from it the Reader I hope is sufficiently satisfied, how little that has to
allege for it self, for he was a person of that comprehensive mind that he
never omitted any thing pertinent to his design, was never in debt to any cause
that he undertook, nor ever failed that, but when that failed him, and
therefore when we see so great a man able to say so little in defense of this
uncatholick Assertion, that is the strongest proof that we can have, and
perhaps stronger then any we could have had without it, that it is utterly
indefensible.

PART II.
SECT. I.
HAving in the former Part of this Discourse set down the practice of the
Church, both as to the Exercise of its own Jurisdiction within it self, and its
entire subjection to the Civil Powers, whilst it subsisted merely upon its own
Charter, without any Assistance or Protection from them: We are now arrived at
a new state of things, as they stood under Christian Emperors. And here we
shall find that the Government, and the Constitution of the Church continued,
as it had ever been within it self; and that the Christians, when the Empire
was on their side, owned the same kind of Subjection, and that upon the same
Principles of Duty, to the Civil Government, that they had ever done in the
times of Persecution; and when I have made good both these, it will make up a
complete Demonstration both of the unalienable Power of the Church within it
self, and of the Sense of the Catholic Church, unanimously condemning all
resistance against the Civil Government in any case, but most of all in the
case of Religion. Under Constantine the Great it is not to be doubted but that
they were forward enough in their Loyalty and Obedience to his Government, for
all Men are for the Government, when the Government is for them; and therefore
this part of the Enquiry concerning the Peaceable behavior of Christians under
his Reign is wholly superseded, because if they did their Duty; they had no
motive or temptation not to do it, submission to his Government being no less
their Interest then their Duty, and therefore it was no matter of Praise or
Virtue in them, if they owned and honored that Power that was their peculiar
Deliverance and Protection. So that this side of the Controversy I shall
altogether wave in this place, and only consider the Ecclesiastical State of
things under his Government, where I once intended to have Exemplified the due
Exercise of Regal Supremacy in the Christian Church from his Example.

First, As a Sovereign Prince.

Secondly, As a Christian Sovereign. And that

First, In matters of Faith and Christian Doctrine.

Secondly, In matters of Discipline and Christian Government, and here
particularly,

First, Of his Power in Summoning Councils, as Supreme Governor of a N^tional
Church.

Secondly, Of that Obligation that he brings upon himself, by becoming a
Christian.

First, To abet the Power of the Church with his own Secular Authority.

Secondly, To endow it with a Revenue for the maintenance of the Service of
God, and those that attend upon it.

But upon more mature deliberation I thought it much more advisable to forbear
all such Reasonings and Discourses, till I had first set down the whole matter
of Fact, as things stood, not only under his Reign, but all the Succeeding
Emperors, where we shall find Precedents enough to make up a Demonstration of
all the forementioned Principles. But because this is the first Instance of
Uniting Church and State into one Body, and because this Wise and Prudent
Emperor seems to have exerted his Power in both exactly, according to the Rules
both of Religion and Government, I shall the more curiously consider the
management of Affairs under his Reign, whereby will be fully exemplified how
this Union may be reduced to practice, without any Diminution of either Power;
or Confusion of one with another, and that will plainly demonstrate wherein
consists the Original Rights of the Church in a Christian State, and the due
Exercise of the Supremacy of Christian Kings over all Ecclesiastical Persons,
Rights, and Powers. Now because the Supreme Power in all Government is the
Legislative Power, and is the thing most disputed in this Controversy, I shall
show that he was so far from annexing this Power in the Church to the Imperial
Crown, that he expressly asserted its inherent Right, and Protected it in its
Exercise within it self, with all his zeal and ability. In that whenever he had
a mind to have any Ecclesiastical Laws Enacted, he never presumed to do it by
his own Authority, which he ever declared would have been no less Crime then to
invade the Power of God himself, but always referred the matter to the Bishops
in Council, and by their Canons he framed his Ecclesiastical Laws, but never
made any without or against them. And that is a full and clear acknowledgement
of that antecedent Authority that they enjoyed by our Savior's appointment,
when he constituted the Apostles and their Successors, Supreme Governors of his
Church to the End of the World. So that in all Changes and Revolutions of
things, their Government must remain unalterable and indefeasible, and whatever
Assistance or Opposition it met with from the Powers of the World, it still
kept close to its own Original Jurisdiction. But then again, though this
Emperor permitted the Church the just Exercise of its inherent right of
Enacting Ecclesiastical Laws, yet he did it so as to preserve to himself his
own Imperial Prerogative of Supervising all their Acts and Proceedings, and
either to give their Decrees force of Law, or wholly to reject them, as seemed
good to his Royal Wisdom. The two great Controversies of the Church in his time
(and the greatest that ever were at any time) were the Schism of the Donatists,
and the Heresy of the Arians; one concerning a point of Doctrine, and another
of Discipline; both which he referred not to his Senate, his Privy Council, or
his Praefecti-Praetorio, but to the Judgment and Determination of
Ecclesiastics, to settle the Debates as they were directed by the Rules of
Faith, and the Laws and Customs of the Church, but so as to reserve to himself
Supreme Inspection of the whole matter, as far as it concerned the Peace of
Church and State: Which in all Christian Commonwealths is the same thing, for
there all Ecclesiastical Schisms are really so many breaches of the Civil Peace.

First, As for the Schism of the Donatists, it broke out about the beginning of
Constantine's Reign, most say the very same year 306, upon occasion of the Laws
concerning the Restitution of the Lapsi, by which any Clergyman that had
fallen in Persecution, or committed any other enormous Crime, was to be
punished by perpetual deposition, so that though upon Penance and Satisfaction
he might be received to Lay-Communion, yet he was never to be restored again to
his Office in the Church. Thus one of the three Italian Bishops, that had been
decoyed to the Consecration of Novatian in order to a Canonical pretense for
his Schism, was upon submission and confession of his fault, received by
Cornelius into Lay-Communion, as he declares in his Synodical Epistle to Fabian
of Antioch (...). Apud Eusebius. l. 6. cap. 43.
And so Trophimus a Bishop, that had promoted the same Schism in the Roman
Church, was upon his Repentance absolved, but yet only admitted to
Lay-Communion, as St Cyprian declares in his Epistle to Antonianus, Sic tamen
admissus est Trophimus ut Laicus communicet, non quasi locum Sacerdotis
Usurpet. Trophimus was so received, that he might communicate as a Laick, not
that he might Usurp the place of a Priest.

And so the same St. Cyprian with great Epist. 65.
indignation complains of the violation of the same Rule by Fortunatian Bishop
of Assure, Graviter and dolenter motus sum, fratres charissimi, quod cognoverim
Fortunatianum quondam apud vos Episcopum, post gravem lapsum ruinae suae, pro
integronunc agere velle, and Episcopatum sibi vindicare caepisse. I am
grievously troubled to hear that Fortunatian heretofore your Bishop, should
after so foul a fall, presume to take upon himself the Episcopal Office. And so
in the Case of Basilides and Martialis Spanish Bishops, that had sacrificed,
and yet challenged their Bishoprics, he sets it down as a judged Case. That it
is in vain for such men Frustra tales Episcopatum sibi usurpare conantur, cum
manifestum sit ejusmodi homines nececclesiae Christi posse praeesse, nec Deo
sacrificia offerre debere. Maxim cum jam pridem nobiscum and cum omnibus
omnino Episcopis in toto mundo constitutis, etiam Cornelius Collega noster
facerdos pacificus ac justus, and Martyrio quoque dignatione domini honoratus,
decreverit ejusmodi homines ad paenitentiam quidem agendam posse admitti; ab
ordinatione autem Cleri atque sacerdotali honor prohiberi.
to endeavor to hold their Episcopal Office, when it is evident that they are
neither fit to preside over the Church of God, not to offer sacrifice to him.
Especially when long since it was agreed by all the Bishops in the whole World,
and particularly Cornelius our Colleague, a good and peaceable Bishop, whom it
pleased our Lord to honor with the Crown of Martyrdom, that such Offenders
might be admitted to the Privilege of Penance, but never to the Order of the
Clergy and sacerdotal honor.

Now this being the received and settled Discipline of the Christian Church, it
happened that under the Persecution by Dioclesian and Maximinian, the
Christians were put to a new sort of Trial, for whereas the old way was to
bring them to sacrifice the Idol Gods, in this Rescript of these Emperors they
were required upon pain of death to deliver up their Bibles, whence they that
did so, had the name of Traditores, and were justly esteemed by the Church
Guilty of the same Crime of Apostasy as those that sacrificed, and therefore
liable to the same punishment. And this it was that gave occasion to the Schism
of the Donatists, viz. That Caecilian Bishop of Carthage was either himself a
Traditor, and so incapable of receiving holy Orders, or that he was ordained by
Faelix Bishop of Aptung a Traditor, and so incapable of giving them. And had
their pretense been true, and so judged by the Church, the Donatists had been
no Schismatics, because by the customary Laws of the Church, Caecilian must
have been excluded from any capacity of Office in it. And therefore this
controversy that created so much trouble to the Christian World, was not at
first about any difference of Opinion: for both parties were agreed that no
Traditor could be ordained to the Office of a Bishop, and that every Bishop
that was a Traditor, ought to be deposed from it. But the only dispute was
whether the Persons accused, were really guilty of the Crimes laid to their
Charge. If they were innocent, and so pronounced by the Judgment of the Church,
then after that the Accusers were apparent Schismatics, in dividing Communion
from their lawful Bishop. This was the only point at the first Rupture, but
when an open Schism was made the Schismatics soon run into all the
extravagancies of the Novatians, and there was then no pure Church in the World
but their own, and all Christians that were not of their Faction were no better
then Jews and Heathens, whilst all that came from other Churches into theirs,
thereby became the only true Children of God. And for that reason they admitted
Converts from the Catholics to their Communion upon the same terms that they
did the Heathens. If they were in Orders, they reordain'd them, if Laics, they
rebaptised them, because whatever was done in the Catholic Communion could be
of no Effect, as being done out of the Christian Church. These and a great many
more Enormities we shall find in their History, because as their Faction grew
in strength, so it emproved in Insolence, till it run it self into all manner
of rudeness and outrage, and at last perished in mere Rebellion. For that was
the Case of this Schism, that when there was once a formed party set up against
the Civil Government, all people of perverse tempers naturally flock't into it,
not for any love of Religion, put purely to rub and gratify the Scab of their
innate peevishness, especially when they were flattered into an Opinion of
higher Privileges and Prerogatives then their Neighbors, and thereby enjoyed
that drunken and transporting pleasure of looking down upon them with holy
scorn and disdainful Pity. And by this Artifice they drew almost all Africa
after them, the Africans being of all People most addicted to Innovation, and
though the People were outrageous in their zeal, yet for what they never
understood nor enquired. Insomuch that the Leaders and Writers themselves, that
followed after, were utterly ignorant of the Nature and the Rise of the
Quarrel, as Optatus plainly proves that Parmenian himself was, though he was
the Metropolitan of the Schism. And in the Conference at Carthage under
Honorius, when they were only put to it to show in what they differed from the
Catholics, and upon what grounds they divided, the Party was so amazed and
surprised with their own want of Pretense, that they were utterly vanquished
only because they could not tell what they would have.

But of the Progress of this Schism we shall account afterward, as for its
Birth, ^^ sprung from no better Original then Pride and Peevishness, supporting
it self with a bold and bottomless Lie. Some few persons had in pursuance of
their own private Piques and Passions, set up a Faction against their Bishop,
and then to justify themselves load him with all the foul Stories that they
could invent, no matter whether true or false, that is all one to the Rabble,
who easily run away with any thing that is Factious or ill-natured, and if they
can but once get in numbers enough to make up a Faction, all Factions are
Snow-Balls. The Story is this, upon the death of Mensurius Bishop of Carthage,
Caecilian was chosen by the Majority of Votes to succeed against the
competition of Botrus and Celesius, and received his Consecration from Faelix
Bishop of Aptung, and some of the Neighbor Bishops of the same Province, but
from none of Numidia, which Optatus says, was done by the contrivance of the
Competitors, presuming to carry the Plurality of Votes; but St. Austin says it
was done in compliance with an immemorial custom, that the Bishop of Carthage
was always ordained by the Bishops of his own Neighborhood; but because he
brings no proof of his Assertion, I am afraid it is one of his bold and lavish
sayings, when he is in have or distress; for next to St. Jerome, his loose and
fluent way of Writing, has occasioned more mistakes in the Records of the
Church, then any other of the Ancients, and men that are so voluminous and
write so quick, cannot avoid stumbling into multitudes of hasty and careless
slips. And therefore the Authority of Optatus is here rather to be followed,
that the disgust was taken by the Numidian Bishops because they were not called
to the Consecration, and this is made the more probable by the peculiar state
of the African Church, for though other Provinces were Governed by their own
Provincial Synods, by whom their own Metropolitans were ordained, yet this
Church, notwithstanding that it consisted of three Provinces, Africa properly
so called, Numidia and Mauritania, as they reckoned up in the Council under St.
Cyprian about rebaptizing Heretics, kept so close a Communion among
themselves, as if they had been but one Province. And we find them all along
not acting apart, but all together, as one Common Council. And that I guess to
be the Sense of the words in St. Cyprian's Epistle to Cornelius, Latius fusa
est nostra Provincia; habet etiam Numidiam and Mauritanias duas sibi
coherentes. Where the mention of the Mauritaniae duae is supposed by the
Learned to have crept into the Text out of some Marginal Notes, and so it must
have done, for there was no such division of that Province, that we ever read
of, till Constantine's new division of the Empire, and therefore the true
ancient reading must have been this, habet etiam Numidiam and Mauritaniam sibi
coherentes; but take which reading we will, St. Cyprian's plain meaning can be
no other then this, That beside his own peculiar Province of Africa properly so
called, of which Carthage was the Metropolis, he had two other Provinces,
Numidia and Mauritania, inseparably annex't to his Communion, by which means he
tells Cornelius that he was able to do him so great service in Africa. So that
the words are not to be understood, as they commonly are, as if he had been the
Metropolitan of those three Provinces, but that he was Metropolitan of that
Province, to which the two other were United in a particular Communion.

But to let pass these Critical Conjectures, Caecilian is no sooner entered
upon his See, but he demands of the Presbyters of his Church the Goods that he
found delivered to them in an Inventory left by his Predecessor Mensurius. But
they having embezell'd the whole Treasury of the Church, and finding themselves
in danger to be called to a severe reckoning* join Faction with his defeated
Competitors, and conspire to renounce Communion with him. To this Lucilla a
Rich, a Proud, and a Factious Lady joins her self, her Zeal, and her Money, out
of revenge to Caecilian, who whilst he was a Presbyter had reproved her for
some affectedness and singularity in devotion, and that sort of People if once
they are any way disobliged, are of all others the most implacable, and
therefore St. Jerome puts her in his Famous Catalogue of Female Heretics. Simon
Magus had Simon Magus Heresin Epist. ad Ct^siphoutem.
condidit, Helenae meretricis adjutus auxilio; Nicholaus Antiochenus omnium
immundiciarum repertor choros duxit faemineos. Marcion Romam praemisit
Mulierem, quae decipiendos sibi animos praepararet. Apelles Philomenem
suaru^habuit comite^ doctrinaru^. Montanus immundi spiritus praedicator per
Priscam and Maximillam nobiles and opulentas faeminas primum auro corrupit,
deinde haeresi polluit. Dimittam vetera, ad viciniora transcendam, Arius ut
Orbem deciperet sororem principis ante decepit, Donatus per Africam ut
infaelices quosque faetentibus pollueretaquis, Lucillae opibus adjutus est.
his Helena, Nicholas the Father of uncleanness a whole Regiment of Gossips,
Marcian sent a woman before him to Rome, to prepare the minds of the People for
receiving his Imposture. Apelles had his Philumine, Montanus by Prisca and
Maximilla debauches the Women first with Gold and then with Heresy. And to
come nearer our own time, Arius that he might deceive the World, inveagles the
Emperors Sister; and Donatus that he might gain Proselytes to his Schism in
Africa, is assisted by the wealth of Lucilla.

These were the Amazons and the Penthesileas of their several Sects, and by
them we may see, that it has ever been the Policy of all Impostors to put their
main strength in their Female Forces, knowing their Cause to be better
maintained by noise and talk, then sense and reason. I remember Livy somewhere
tells us, that the Romans in times of great Pestilence and Mortality, when they
burnt their dead bodies not in single Urns, but in vast Heaps and Piles, were
careful to intermix the women's bodies with the men, as being more unctuous and
combustible in themselves, and so more apt to conveigh the fire to the other
Corpses, that otherwise would have burnt but slowly without them. This is the
very practice of the Incendiaries of the Church in all Ages, when they would
inflame the men into a Combustion, they always first set fire on the women, and
when they would burn down the House, they thrust the Firebrand into the Thatch,
that both easily takes Fire it self, and certainly conveighs it to the solid
Timber. But to proceed in our History. The party being thus cemented together
by Ambition, Covetousness, and Revenge, they write to Secundus Primate of
Numidia, and to the otherBishops of that Province that were not invited to the
Election and Consecration of Caecilian, to depose him as having been ordained
by a Traditor. They met at Cirta afterward called Constantina, upon pretense
of Electing a new Bishop of that Diocese, and having chosen one Paulus a very
ill man, and a known Traditor, they proceed V. August. contra Crescon. lib. 3.
cap. 26, 27, 28.
to the deposition of Caecilian. But before they can pass sentence against him,
they were first obliged to clear themselves of the Crime. But upon Examination
of every particular Person, they all Convict one another of Guilt, and absolve
one another by mutual consent. This being done, they adjourn to Carthage,
summon Caecilian to appear before them, but he refuses, they being only a
Combination of his profess't Enemies, and upon it they immediately depose him
for his Obstinacy, and put Majorinus, who was Chaplain to Madam Lucilla, in his
place, and send their Encyclical Letters to all the Bishops in Africa, to
signify that they had renounced Communion with Caecilian and all his Adherents
as Traditors. And this being done, the people were told that Caecilian was no
Church Officer, that under him they could have no true Sacraments, nor enjoy
any means of Salvation, but were in the same forlorn condition with Pagans and
Idolaters. But with themselves were the pure Gospel Ordinances, and all that
were Members of their Church, were made Holy without spot or wrinkle. Amongst
them the most forward of the Faction was Donatus a Casa Nigra, who being the
first that set up a Conventicle, gave name to the Schism. And he having a
Natural Faculty of Canting and Insinuating into the Affections of the Rabble,
soon inveigled so great a number into his Party, that they forsook their
private Meetings, and built public Churches, and there inveighed openly
against the Idolatry of Caecilian and the Catholics (for that is the custom of
all Fanatics to improve every thing into Idolatry) bemean the miserable state
of all that would not leave that to join with them, and scare the People with
perpetual Alarms of certain ruin and destruction if they will not come out of
Babylon. By these Arts they prevail every where, and the Schism is on a sudden
spread all over Africa, so as not only to inflame the Church, but to endanger
the public Peace. About which time Constantine having vanquished Maxentius, he
thereby added Italy and Africa to his Government, and for the encouragement of
Christianity in Africa, he sends Caecilian large sums of Money to be
distributed by him among the Clergy of the three Provinces, and grants them
immunities from all public Burdens. And about the same time, the Donatists
finding themselves over power'd by the Catholics, present Anulinus the
Pro-Consul with a Petition of Appeal to the Emperor; and though afterward, when
they found themselves checked by the Civil Government, their great Clamor was,
Quid Christianis cum Regibus? Aut quid Episcopis cum Palatio? What have
Christians to do with Kings, or Bishops with the Court? Yet they were (as St.
Austin justly upbraids their dis-ingenuity) the first Christians that ever fled
from the Judgment of the Church, to the Civil Government. Though as for this
first Appeal, this is to be said for them, that they did not Appeal to the
Emperor's own Judgment, but only Petitioned him, That he would be pleased to
appoint them Judges of the Cause in the Church of France, because that Church
having wholly escaped the Persecution, the Bishops of it would be more
unconcerned, and impartial Judges of the Cause of the Traditors. Whereas
themselves were so divided and engaged at home, that it was not possible to
have any fair determination in Africa. And though the Request hitherto was not
very unreasonable, yet the Emperor was highly displeased at it, out of that
tender care and solicitude that he ever had for the Peace and Concord of the
Christian Church. But however for once he Commissions three French Bishops,
together with Melchiades Bishop of Rome, to hear the Cause, who calling fifteen
other Italian Bishops to their Assistance, undertake its judgment, in order to
which Ten Bishops of each Party are commanded from Africa to attend the Council
at Rome. Where three days are spent in Examination of Witnesses, but the
Donatists bringing no proof against Caecilian himself, the Council declare him
innocent. And whether Faelix, who Ordained him, were a Traditor or not, they
would not enter into the Enquiry, as altogether remote from the cause of
Caecilian, because though he were to be deposed by the Canons of the Church,
yet till those Canons were put in Execution by the Sentence of the Church, all
the Acts of his Office were good and valid. But on the other side, Caecilian
plied the Donatists so home with their own Weapon of Accusation, and their foul
dealings at Cirta, and the briberies of Madam Lucilla, that they were forced to
quit the Council. And yet that was so moderate in the Sentence against them,
that it Excommunicated none of them, but only Donatus a Casis Nigris, that was
found guilty of diverse other foul Crimes, and the Author of all this mischief.
But the rest were invited to return to the Unity of the Church, and offered the
continuance of of whatever preferments they had in it, though they had been
Ordained by Majorinus, or any others in a State of Schism.

. II.
But here happens such an unfortunate halt in the Story, as leaves Learned Men
at an utter loss what chase to follow, and every one takes his own way, so as
that by the great variety of Opinions they have run the whole matter into
confusion. All which is occasioned by a Chasm in Optatus his History, for here
it breaks off and skips over the whole Transaction of the great Council of
Arles, and hearing at Milan. Of which it is certain that Optatus could not be
ignorant, who has so accurately described all the less material parts of the
Story, and as Baronius argues very well, Tot tantaque Concio toto Orb a tam
celebri Ad annum 314. Number. 52.
Episcoporum conventu facta and ab Imperatore Edictis publicis definita in
Donatistas, nequaquam Optalum proeteriisse potuerunt. Things so many and so
great, done in so famous a Council of Bishops known all the World over, and
public Edicts made by the Emperor against the Donatists, could not possibly be
altogether unknown to Optatus. And therefore this part of the story must needs
have been lost, either through injury of time, or the fraud of the Donatists,
which is most likely, for there was not any one Ancient Book, whose Copies were
so corrupt and confused as this of Optatus, as Baldwin justly complains. But
which way soever it came to pass, this part of the story being lost, and so the
Transactions that happened some years after, as the Appeal of the Donatists from
the Council of Arles, to Constantine at Milan, and his detaining Caecilian at
Bress, immediately following in this place, they are supposed to have been done
at this time, though they happened not till after the Council of Arles. Thus
Baronius having procured from Petrus Pithaeus Constantine's Letter to the
Catholic Bishops upon the Donatists Appeal to himself, after the Sentence
against them at Arles, and diverse other Papers relating to that Council,
because in Optatus they immediately follow the Council of Rome, he has thrust
them in there, to the great confusion of the story, as if they had been done
immediately after that Council, when they ought to have been placed after the
Council of Arles. And this is evident enough from the words themselves, that
immediately follow the Sentence of Melchiades. Sufficit ergo and Donatum tot
Sententiis esse percussum, and Caecilianum tanto judicio esse purgatum, and
tamen Donatus appellandum esse ab Episcopis credidit. Ad quam Appellationem
Constantinus Imperator sic respondit, o rabida furoris audacia; sicut in causis
Gentilium fieri solet, Appellationem interposuerunt. Now beside that this
Answer of Constantine is certainly known to have been made upon their Appeal
from Arles, the Tot Sententiae against Donatus here mentioned, could not be
till after the judgment of that great Council; for before that, there was but
one Sentence against him, viz. by the small Council at Rome, and therefore
these Appeals from so many Judgments, and so great a Judicature (as Optatus
speaks of) must have been after the Council of Arles. And that puts an end to
the dispute among Learned Men, when the Donatists first Appealed to the Emperor
from the Episcopal Judgment, whether after the Council at Rome, or not till
after the Council at Arles. Baronius, Binius, Petavius, Labbe and others will
have the first Appeal to have been from the Council at Rome, because it
immediately follows so in Optatus. But this is confuted by Valesius (a Man
learned and curious) with many pregnant passages out of St. Austin, expressly
attesting that the Donatists only complained against the first Council at Rome,
but Appealed from the second at Arles. And their different behavior toward
these Councils is every where so carefully remarked by him, that the
Testimonies cannot be avoided. But then the Learned Man knows not how to bring
off Optatus, but by leaving him under an enormous mistake of Memory, applying
that which was done after the Council of Arles to the Council of Rome; or by
some defect and corruption in the Copies, which he only suspects without
assigning any ground or reason for his suspicion. But if he had only a little
considered that the whole Story of the Council of Arles is omitted in the Books
of Optatus; and that this Passage of the Appeal to Constantine relates to
diverse Sentences, which could not be till after the Sentence at Arles, he could
not but have easily seen where lay the defect of the Copies. To which might be
added, that this defect reaches not to the Council of Arles alone, but to some
part of the Council of Rome; for whereas that consisted of a double Sentence,
the Absolution of Caecilian, and the Condemnation of Donatus, the latter part
is wholly wanting in Optatus, and immediately after the Sentence of Absolution
follow the words Sufficit ergo Donatum tot Sententiis esse percussum, etc. From
all which it is put past all doubt where lies the breach of the Copies, and how
far it extends, viz. From the absolving Sentence of Caecilian at Rome to the
Appeal of the Schismatics from the Council at Arles. And this being observed,
the story runs smoth and clear, that has hitherto been so confused and
involved, as to be thought to report the same Appeal from both Councils, though
it is evident that it can agree but to the last. Now this one difficulty being
overcome, our Passage after it will be easy and pleasant, all the rest of the
story lying in its due and proper order.

And what effect the Sentence of the Council at Rome had upon the
Schismatiques, we have a distinct account in the Emperors own Letter to
AElasius, or rather AElianus, his Prefect of Africa. For whereas we might
reasonably have expected, that they should have acquiesced in the Authority of
so fair, so grave and so gentle a Sentence, they return home exasperated with
rage, and swollen with insolence, raise new Tumults, perpetually tease the
Emperor with fresh Tales, and Complaints against Caecilian, and represent him
as utterly unworthy of any Office in the Christian Church. And when the Emperor
replies that this was all in vain with him, because the whole business had been
so fairly determined, by fit and unexceptionable Judges; they cry out, That
their cause had not a legal Trial, that the Council was packt, that the
proceedings were clancular, and the Judgment partial. The Emperor, such was
the clemency of his Nature, and his tender care of the Peace of the Church,
condescends to their importunity, and Summons the famous Council at Arles, of a
much greater number of Bishops, and more unknown to each other, as coming out
of the distant parts of Christendom, to review the Decree of the Council at
Rome. This Council meets in the year 314, where the Schismatics repeat their
old Stories against Caecilian, but without any other proof then Popular Report
raised by themselves; and therefore were not only condemned by the Council, but
rejected with scorn and derision. And to prevent the like attempts of Forgery
for the time to come, they make Canons to suppress that general way of
Accusation, as Canon the 13th, they Ordain, That no Man shall be Convicted of
having been a Traditor by bare Testimony, but by public Acts and Records, and
if any Man from that time be so Convicted, that then he shall be degraded from
his Holy Orders; but if before his Conviction he have Ordained any, that his
Crime shall be no prejudice to the validity of his Ordination. And Canon the
14th they Decree, That whoever falsely Accuse their Brethren (as the
Schismatics had Caecilian and Faelix) should not be received into Communion
even at the hour of death, which was the severest Sentence in the Christian
Church. This shameful overthrow makes great numbers of the Schismatics quit
the Faction, and reconcile themselves to their Bishop: But the more stubborn
and Seditious are not ashamed to Appeal (as it is their first Appeal) in the
Council it self to the Emperor, and this is signified by the Council to him by
Letter, to know his farther will and pleasure. From whence it is evident that
the Emperor himself was not present in Council, as it is commonly supposed; and
Baronius, Binius, and most of the Roman Writers, are so civil to him as to
excuse his presence, though a Layman, because the controversy was not about
any matter of Faith, but a particular matter of Fact concerning Caecilian. And
it is agreed among them, that of all such matters Laymen are as competent
Judges as Bishops. But however that may be, and what Right Sovereign Princes
have of sitting in Council, whatever the matter of Debate may be, I shall
discourse in its proper place. It is certain here that the Emperor was not
present in Council, because they signified their proceedings to him by Letter,
which if he had been present, they could or need not have done. And beside
that, the thing is more then plain enough by the Appeal it self, for if
Constantine had been there present, to what purpose was it for the Donatists to
remove the Cause to him, that would have been only to Appeal from himself to
himself. But he being informed of the design by the Letter from the Council,
replies to it, with great detestation of the Schismatics Obstinacy and
Perverseness, and wonders how they dare to Appeal to his Judgment, when they
were already Condemned by the Judgment of God in the Votes of the Bishops, who
in these matters judged in God's stead, and by his appointment. And therefore
he esteems their Appeal as no less then Treason and Rebellion against God
himself. But however he advises them to patience, and to give the Schismatics
some time to consider, and if they persisted in their stubbornness, to give
themselves no farther trouble about them, but to repair to their several Homes.
And seeing the Schismatiques had been so profane as to make their Appeal to
him, he would take care to provide them Guards for their safe Conduct to his
Court, Ut ibi sibi mortem pervideant, which whatever it signifies, is a very
high threatening. So that after all, I do not find that Constantine ever in the
least accepted of their Appeal, looking upon it as no less sin then an affront
to God himself, but only resolved now to proceed against them, as a Sovereign
Prince, with all severity, as factious and seditious Persons in the Empire.

And about this time was the business of Faelix of Aptung examined by AElian
the Proconsul of Africa; for though it is generally supposed that this was done
before the Council of Arles, yet it is evident by the Acts of the Court, that
it was done the same year, and it is certain that there was no notice taken of
it in the Council, and therefore the first account of it, that was returned to
the Emperor, must have been after its dissolution. And this it was, The
Schismatics making such perpetual Clamours about Faelix his being a Traditor,
and though it was nothing to the Cause of Caecilian, yet the Emperor having
caught them in so many Factions and Stories, suspects every thing that they say
of falsehood, and therefore writes to his Proconsul, to enquire into the matter
of Fact upon the place where it was transacted. He accordingly Examines all the
Officers, that had belonged to the Court of Inquisition at Aptung under
Dioclesian, at which time and place the Fact was laid against Faelix, who all
acquit him from any such Crime. And whereas the main Accusation was taken from
some passages in a Letter of one Caecilian a Duumvir of the City of Aptung to
Faelix, Ingentius a public Notary confesses, That he was hired and suborned by
the Schismatiques to forge the Epistle, and foist it into the Records of the
Court. Upon which he is Committed to close Prison, and an account of the whole
matter returned to the Emperor, who now supposing that after so fowl a
discovery, if it were made public over the Christian World, it would so
shamefully expose the wickedness of the Schismatiques, that they could never
have the confidence to appear more in a Cause so foul and base. But what method
to take he could not suddenly resolve, one while he thinks of sending
Commissioners, but then considering the Obstinacy of the Schismatics, he fears
nothing will be effectually done, but by himself, and therefore resolves upon a
Journey into Africa, to settle the whole matter there, but upon what occasion I
know not, he changes his mind and summons the Parties concerned to appear
before himself at Rome, and writes to the present Proconsul Probianus to send
Ingentius thither with a good Guard, That he might publicly shame those
seditious and troublesome People, that have the confidence to make continual
Clamours, and raise false Stories against their Bishop, that so these
Animosities and Contentions being quelled, the People may be brought to attend
the Devotion of the Church, with due Reverence, and without brawls and
discords. They are the Emperor's own words; but for what cause it is not
Recorded: Caecilian appears not, and the Donatists that came, either finding
themselves discovered by the coming of Ingentius, or for some other reason,
endeavor to make their escape, but some of them are detained by force and sent
in close custody to Milan. But those that Recovered Egypt, raised such Tumults
there, as put the whole Country into an Uproar, of which the Emperor is
informed by Celsus the Governor, who orders him at present to take no notice of
their disorders, but to hasten Caecilian and his Accusers to Milan. And here I
have a strong fancy ought to have come in the mutilated Story of Caecilian's
consinement at Brixia in Optatus; for as it follows after the Chasm, in which
the whole Story of the Council of Arles is lost, so it agrees with
Constantine's account with the variety of his own Resosolutions, and the
Transactions at Milan. For Brixia or Bress lay not far from that City, so that
both of them might make up the Scene of this Affair. And therefore when the
Schismatiques gained leave to return home, and procured Caecilian to be
detained, it was probably upon their dismission, upon some change of the
Emperor's Resolutions. But when they came home, they betake themselves to the
constant Artifice of all Schismatics, to keep up their Faction by tricks and
lies. And therefore they raise mighty brags of their great Victory, and tell
the People that Caecilian was Condemned, and Imprisoned by the Emper^ur, and
when once they had raised this lie among the Party, it was easy to keep it up
for ever, insomuch that we find it confidently insisted upon, in the Conference
at Carthage, an hundred years after. Upon this Caecilian gets leave to return
home for undeceiving the People, by which means the Factions are raised, and
the Tumults enflamed, and that occasions two Letters from the Emperor, the
former to Celsus, to send Caecilian and his Accusers, the latter dated from
Brixia to the Donatist Bishops, commanding their immediate appearance, and
withal assuring them, that if they can but make good any one Article against
Caecilian, it should weigh as much with him, as if they had proved the whole
Charge, and this I suppose produced the Meeting at Milan, but whatever becomes
of this conjecture of mine, and fragment of Optatus; it is certain that there
they met, where all the foul dealings of the Donatists, especially the forgery
of Ingentius being openly exposed, it is needless to tell what was the event,
when it could be no other then that the Emperor should publicly declare the
innocence of Caecilian, and scour away the Schismatics as a combination of
incorrigible Knaves. But here St. Austin is concerned to excuse the Emperor
for judging an Ecclesiastical cause after the Episcopal Judicature, and a
thousand excuses are invented for him by the Roman Writers; as his being then
but a Novice in the Faith, and not sufficiently informed of the Discipline of
the Church; or his being tired out by the restless importunity of the
Donatists, so that he could enjoy no quiet till he yielded to it. These things
may be true, but they are needless, for though it may not be proper for a
Layman to judge in Ecclesiastical Causes, yet it may not be altogether
unlawful, especially when the Peace of the State depends upon them, and that
was the Emperor's case at this time, all Africa was in an Uproar, and in
danger to be lost by the Sedition; and therefore it highly concerned him to
exert his own Power, as he would secure so great a part of his Empire, and upon
that reason he might take the Judgment upon himself, thereby to restrain the
Donatists from raising Disturbances and Seditions in the State. Though when all
is done, it is certain that the Emperor never accepted the Appeal, nay that he
protested against it, as an affront to the Divine Authority, and setting up his
own Power above God's, appears not only from his Epistle to the Bishops at
Arles, but his perpetual Declarations of it. And therefore it is not to be
supposed that he would be prevailed with to take upon himself a Judgment that
he so solemnly disavowed. And therefore his design in hearing the Cause after
Judgment, was not to judge, but to expose the Schismatiques, or to suffer them
to expose themselves. For the cause was already so fully and clearly determined
at the Council, that it could not admit any Review, but because they were so
restless to have it re-heard before the Emperor himself, he at last seemed to
condescend to their importunity, when he knew it would prove their fatal
overthrow, for it is observable that he would not meddle with the business at
all, till he had the discovery of Ingentius his Forgery in his Pocket, with
which they were so surprised, that instead of following their Suit, it utterly
dispersed them. And for the very same reason, he gave them other Hearings after
his own Imperial Judgment, only to give them the greater scope to lay open
themselves and their dishonesty to the World, as will appear anon in the foul
discovery of Nundinarius the Deacon.

. III.
But after the Imperial Sentence against them, instead of submitting to so
great an Authority and such clear Conviction, they raise high clamours of
injustice and oppression, and when they return home put the People into Riots
and Tumults, and seize a Church in Numidia belonging to the Catholics, and of
the Emperors own Foundation. Of which when complaint was made to the Empeperor
by the Bishops of the Province; such was then the fury of the Schismatics, and
the disorder of the times, that at that time he could send them no other
relief, then by exhorting them to patience, and bestowing a new Church upon
them, not daring to inflict any punishment upon the Offenders for so long a
Train of Sedition, but leaving them (as himself speaks) to the Judgment of God.
And as he had not long before witten to his Lieutenant Celsus, that he should
forbear them a while, till himself could have leisure to visit Africa, s^re now
assures them, that when he comes, the Schismatics shall feel the Event of his
Abused Patience, and that he doubted not, when he came to convince them of such
manifest Villainy, that would utterly spoil all their Glory of Martyrdom. For
that they gave out to justify their stubborness against the Imperial Edicts,
that whatever punishments the Emperor decreed against them, they were ready to
undergo as Martyrs for the truth of God, and therefore that they were so far
from dreading any severity, that they desired the Execution of Penal Laws
against them. And so they persist railing at the Emperor for denying Justice,
and reviling the Catholics for inciting him to Persecution. Till at length he
is forced to Enact severe Laws against them, and first of all, all their
Meeting Houses are confiscated to the Crown, and accordingly seized on, and it
happened very luckily at that time that one Nundinarius a Deacon of the
Donatists, who was privy to the first contrivance of the Schism, at their
meeting at Cirta, discovers the whole Conspiracy to Zenophilus the Pro-Consul
of Numidia, and proves both by public Records, and a great number of
Witnesses, that Silvanus, whom they had made Bishop of Cirta, and the most
facti^^s man of the whole Party, was a Traditor, and that my Lady Lucilla had
given the Numidian Bishops a great sum of Money to depose Caecilian, and bestow
his Bishopric upon her Ladyships Chaplain. And this discovery being signified
by Zenophilus to the Emperor, together with a Catalogue of the Seditious
Practices of Silvanus, he condemns both Silvanus, and all the other
Ringleaders of the Faction, to perpetual Banishment, and that is the utmost
severity that he ever proceeded to, for though some of them were sentenced to
death, yet such was his natural Clemency, that he turned it into banishment and
thus by seizing their Conventicles and sending away their Leaders, he gave
himself ease and quiet for some time from their disturbances. But now behold
the constant ingenuity of all Schismatics, to be sure to beleager the State,
when ever they find it in any distress, and to gain their own ends out of the
public Necessities, and to make what demands they please, when the Government
is not in a condition to contend with them. And thus about this time the War
between Constantine, and Licinius breaking out, the Donatists presently accost
the Emperor with a bold Petition, both for granting liberty of Conscience, and
recalling Silvanus and his Colleagues from Banishment, are so confident as to
tell him in broad expression, that they would suffer a thousand deaths before
they would be reconciled to that Prelatical Knave of his, Caecilian. And yet so
involved were the Emperors Affairs at that time, that he was forced to grant
whatever they demanded, and orders Verinus his Viceroy in Africa to leave them
to their own Liberty. And that they used with all manner of Insolence, whilst
the Civil War lasted, neither now would they be satisfied with their own
Liberty at home, but endeavor to spread their Schism into all parts of the
Catholic Church, and poison all the Emperors Dominions with the Spirit of
Faction and Sedition. What Emissaries they sent into other Churches is not so
well known, but to Rome they send one Victor as Titular Bishop of that See, who
took upon himself all ^piscopal Authority over his Party, and had many
Successors in his Usurpation, but not having Liberty to keep their public
meetings in the City, they betook themselves to Field Conventicles, and
Assembled in the Roks and Mountains, and from thence were commonly called
Montenses, Campitae, and Rupitani. This is all that we have recorded of them in
this Emperors Reign; for he having overcome Licinius, and being Master of the
whole Empire, was big with a resolution to settle the Peace of the Church as
well as the State, and once more to quell the Obstinacy of the Shism by the
Authority of a General Council. But whilst he is designing this great and pious
work, news is brought him of a worse Flame broke out at Alexdria, by means of
the Heresy of Arrius, that had already engaged not only all Egypt, but was
blown over into Asia, and for the suppression of this dangerous Schism (for so
at first he looked upon it, and therefore only endeavored to reconcile the
Parties) he Summons the Great Council of Nice, to which among the other Famous
Bishops that were present at it, Caecilian was summoned, but no Bishops of the
Pars Donati, as supposing them out of the Communion of the Catholic Church.
But after this Council we hear little or no thing of the Donatists in this
Emperor's Reign, himself and the Christian Bishops being wholly employed, in
quenching that more fatal and pernicious Heresy, and how effectually and
speedily he rooted up the Heresy it self, by the Authority of the Church
abetted with the Imperial Power, we shall demonstrate in its proper place. For
though after the Heresy it self was vanquished by this Council, the Heretics
or rather their Friends, created him infinite trouble about it, by Oblique Arts
and for other ends; yet this I affirm, and shall prove, that they durst never
own the Heresy it self, not only in his time but in all the time of his Son
Constantius till the end of his Reign. And now here I ought to break off the
Story of the Donatists with this Emperors History, but their Progress in Schism
after his indulgence, is such a natural representation of the growth and
improvement of Peevishness, if once left to its own l^berty, that I cannot
forbear to represent their whola Story at one View, especially because it suits
a Parallel case that lies at our own doors, so exactly, that two Indentures
cannot be more like then these two Schisms. And the truth of it is, all Schisms
are but the same, for though they are raised about different matters, yet they
all move in the very same track of Sedition, till from mere peevishness they
advance to the height of Cruelty, and end in Rebellion; and it is nothing else
then the natural method of ill nature and passion, if but suffered to pursue
the bent of its own Inclinations. And therefore it is no wonder if all
Schismatics, howsoever distant in Time, Place, or Interest, follow one another
so accurately in the very same steps, when they are all acted by one and the
same Principle of Nature, then it is for Colts to be wild in all Parts of the
World, if never brought under the Whip and Bridle. And that is the greatest
benefit of Government, to be a curb to the ill-natured Passions of Mankind; for
without that Man would be the most unruly of all Beasts, especially the meaner
sort of the kind, the Rabble, that are ever drawn in, to be the chief Actors in
these Religious Tumults. And that is the reason, that these are more Cruel and
Barbarous then other Seditions, because they are carried on by the wildest part
of Mankind, that have heightened and enflamed their natural Salvageness, with
the heats of Enthusiasm, and Principles of false Religion. All which will
evidently appear, by comparing what our selves have seen and felt, with what
these wild Schismatiques acted Thirteen hundred years since. The actions of
both suiting so exactly to each other, that had they been the very same Men,
they could not have acted more like themselves. The Twins that were so like,
that their own Mother could not distinguish them, were not more so, then these
two Schisms though born at such a distance of Time and Place.

. IV.
The Donatists then having by the Emperors forced Indulgence, and the
Diversion given him by the Arians, gained so much ease and quiet, as not only
to increase their Schism at home, but to carry it into foreign Parts, it
happened that about the year 331, Donatus, Surnamed the Great, succeeded
Chaplain Majorinus; a Man of incredible Pride and Insolence, that pretended to
familiarity with God, and Inspiration from Heaven; that could Cant, could Lie,
could Bl^spheme, shift his Face and Pretenses, with all Turns of Affairs, when
the Government was in any Straight, threaten it with the Numbers of his Party;
but when his Party was low, could write Pleas for Peace and forbearance, from
the weakness of the Faction, and meekness of its Principles. And upon any great
occasion he had his new Lights and Discoveries from Heaven, and when ever he
pleased God appeared to him in Brightness, and showed him the horns in his
hands, to direct him for serving his Will in that Generation. But above all, he
had an implacable spite against a^l S^periours and Governors, but most
particularly he set himself (so accursed was the Envy of his Pride to all that
were above him) to revile and trample upon the Imperial Majesty it self; and to
say all the ill that can be said of one Man in one word, he was the very I. O.
of that Re^ellious and Schismatical Age.

Under him were spawned the C^rcumcellians, a sort of Levellers or Army Saints,
whom he styled the Captains of the Godly, and made them not only his own
Lifeguard, but an Army against the Power of the Empire. These wandered up and
down the Country in great Bodies, and pretended to reform the Government by
Plunder and Robbery, and wherever they came, set Apprentices free from their
Masters, and Debtors from their Creditors, if they would but join with them, to
pull down Idolatry and Arbitrary Government: And force poor Men to deliver up
their Bonds and Indentures to save their Lives. And yet all this while they
were a very praying People, and sought the Lord for direction in all their
Villainies. And now it is no wonder if Men of these desperate Principles, and
managed by such a Guide as Donatus, proceeded to the height both of folly and
outrage; insomuch that whilst they were in the heat of their Blood and Zeal,
they feared no danger, out of Ambition of being Martyrs for the cause of God,
and some of them were so wildly transported, as to hang drown, and stabb
themselves for the Glory of the Lord. And thus for many years they harassed
Africa with their Insolence and Cruelty, and made the habitable parts of the
Country more salvage then the Deserts themselves. No Man could dwell in his own
House, or Travel abroad about his business with any safety, but all was exposed
to the Rapine of these merciless Robbers. Till at length, after unspeakable
Patience, complaint being made by the Catholics to the Emperor Constans, of
their deplorable condition, he sent two Commissioners, Paulus and Macarius,
with a show of dividing the Emperors bounty among the poor and distressed, and
by that means to soften them from that fierceness, that they had contracted by
this wild Schism, to some sense of Duty toward their Superiors, and of
Humanity toward their Neighbors. The Commissioners coming into Africa consult
with the Bishops what course was fitest to be taken: But the Party of Donatus
Combine one and all to hinder all their endeavors of Concord, and dispatch
Letters and Messengers into all Parts aforehand, forbiding their People to
receive any thing of the Emperor's Bounty, it being a scandal to the People of
God to receive any Alms from Sinners. And beside this, the Rabble are frighted
with flying Reports and Stories, that the Commissioners brought along with them
the Emperors Images, that were to be placed upon the high Altar, at the time of
Celebrating the Eucharistical Sacrifice; that so the People might be drawn in,
to give Divine Worship to the Imperial Image, and so become guilty of Idolatry,
and from this time the words Pagan and Idolator were the two most common Titles
that they bestowed upon the Catholics. Nay farther then all this, when the
Commissioners acquaint the great Donatus with their Message, he replies with
his usual scorn and rage, Quid est Imperatori cum Ecclesia? reviles the Emperor
himself with saucy and taunting Language, and tells them, that they might give
themselves, if they pleased, the pleasure of traveling through the African
Provinces, but he had taken care to save their Masters Money. And another
Donatus Bishop of Bagaia, when the Commissioners came to his City, gathers
together Troops of Circumcellians from all Parts, perhaps into a Malthouse, to
Assassinate the Commissioners. But they to defend themselves, upon the
discovery of the Conspiracy, send for a Party of the Emperor's Forces, some few
whereof being upon the Guard, abused and affronted by the Fanatic Rabble, that
were Assembled in great Numbers, acquaint their Fellow Soldiers with the
Indignity, who, do what their Officers could, fall upon them with great fury,
kill some and disperse the rest. And now the Donatists had the beloved clamor
of all Schismatics to cry out Persecution, only because some of them perished
in a Tumult of their own raising. But it is no matter who began the fray, the
People are to be incensed against the Catholics with the Blood of their
Party. And therefore what Tragical Stories do we ever after, from this slight
Occasion, hear of the Macarian Times, as if this one Accident, by which they
punished themselves, had exceeded the Cruelty of the Ten Persecutions. But in
short, the Commissioners finding there was no Peace to be settled in Africa,
whilst Donatus and his Associates remained in it, they sent them all into
Banishment, and so they continued till the time of Julian the Apostate; but in
the mean time the Ringleaders being removed out of the way, the People were
soon at quiet, and betook themselves to to their Callings, and kept their
Parish-Churches. And upon this a Council was called by Gratus Archbishop of
the Catholic Communion at Carthage, to give God thanks for their Deliverance,
and to take care for the effectual settlement of the Peace of the Church, that
lasted till the Donatists broke loose under Julian. Who designing Quib.
succedens Julianus desertor Chrsti and inimicus, Supplicantibus vestris
R^gatiano and Pontio, libertatem parti Donati permisit; denique tunc reddidit
Basilicas Haereticis, quando Templa Daemoniis: eo modo putans Christianum nomen
posse perire de terris, si unitati Ecclesiae, de qua lapsus fuerat, invideret,
and Sacrilegas dissensiones liberas esse permitteret.
by all ways to destroy Christianity thought nothing so effectual to that end,
as to encourage Schisms and Divisions, and destroy the Discipline and Unity of
the Church; and therefore when this Schism was almost extinguished by the care
of Constantine and his Sons, he took as much care by granting liberty to the
Donatists to blow it up into a greater flame.

And yet they on the other side were forward enough to prevent the Apostates
Zeal, by presenting him with a flattering address, so that though the other day
under Christian Emperors, their word was, Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? now
under an Apostate, a mortal and avowed Enemy to Christianity, the whole
Discipline of the Church is to be submitted to his disposal, and sacrificed to
his malice; and he accordingly finding what eager Zeal they had to disturb the
Peace of the Church, gives them all the liberty that they can desire, and
permits them to r^build their Conventicles, at the same time that he opened the
Idol Temples, and (as Optatus upbraids them) let them and the Devil loose
together. And that is another ill quality of all Schismatics, that they care
not what becomes of the common Christianity, so the Faction thrives. This
Rescript of Julian to the Donatists is lost, but it seems it was so very
scandalous, that the Emperor Honorius many years after, when he was resolved
upon their Extirpation, caused it to be published in all places, to let the
People see the baseness and perverseness of the Faction. But they now finding
that they had got the upper hand of the Catholics, though by the malice of
this Apostate Emperor, are not satisfied with their own liberty, but fall soul
upon the Catholics, and treat them with all manner of outrage and cruelty,
pull down their Churches, murder their Priests at the Altar, overthrow the
Altars themselves, and cast their Idolatrous Eucharist (as they called it) to
the Dogs, dig the Catholics out of their Graves, with many more outrages,
that may be seen in Optatus his second and sixth Books. And so they go on to
keep up the Faction by Tumults and Stories, and making challenges of Disputes,
and then declining them, and the like methods of Schism till the death of
Donatus, about the year 368, and the fifth of Valentinian and Valens.

To Donatus succeeds Parmenianus, who publishes a vehement Book against the
Catholics, stuffed with the old Fables of Faelix, Caecilian, and the Macarian
Persecution; for as they first founded their Schism upon a Lie, so they
resolved to continue it to the last, and perhaps by this time they were in good
earnest, and had lied so long, till they at length believed themselves, or at
least (as Optatus tells him) they were utterly Ignorant of the History of the
Schism, and to that end he wrote his Books to rebuke all their wild Fictions by
public Records, and Imperial Rescripts. But to what purpose do you tell the
Common People of legal Proceedings? No Argument so prevalent with them, as a
blind Story in a Corner, tagg'd with dirty Reflections upon the Government. And
therefore notwithstanding all these checks, the Ringleaders of the Faction Lie
on, though we hear little of them till the tenth year of the same Reign, Anno
Domini 373, when Valentinian published a Rescript against their Re-baptising;
which was renewed by Gratian four years after, in the year Three hundred
Seventy seven.

. V.
The next news that we hear of them (and it is very strange, that we heard it
no sooner) is, That they fall out among themselves, divide and subdivide into
new Factions and Animosities. For upon the death of Parmenian they cannot agree
upon a Successor, some are for Maximianus, and some for Primianus, and so both
being chosen, they divide Communions, make Decrees, and throw out Anathema's
against each other, and which is most of all disingenuous, stir up the Civil
Magistrate to put the same Imperial Laws, that were made against themselves, in
Execution against their Brethren: And what but the other day was Tyranny and
Persecution in the Catholics, is in themselves Law and Justice. And so they go
on to load one another with all the foul Stories and ill Language, that they
were wont to bestow upon the Catholics, and their Sentences of
Excommunication are more fierce and heavy, than any that were ever denounced by
any other party of Christians. Some were fatal, cutting off all power of
Absolution: The most gentle were limited to a certain time, after which the
Decree was irrecoverably passed upon them, and so they proceeded cursing and
damming each other, till every Sect spawned a new Litter of Vipers to eat out
its own Bowels. And so they crumbled on, till they had made the Church no
bigger than it was at first, a small grain of Mustard Seed: For every Party
confined the Kingdom of Heaven to its Conventicle. This dividing humor of
theirs is very well described by St. Austin. The Faction of Donatus is crumbled
into very small Pars Donati in multa minutissima frusta conscissa est, quae
omnes minutae particulae hanc unam multo grandiorem, in qua Primianus est, de
recepto Maximianistarum Baptismo reprehendunt; and singulae conantur asserere,
apud se tantummodo verum baptismum remansisse, nec omnino esse alibi, neque in
toto Orb Terrarum, qua Ecclesia Catholica expanditur, nec in ipsa grandiore
part Donati, nec in caeteris, praeter se unam, in minutissimis partibus.
parcels, all which little particles condemn this much greater part of
Primianus for allowing the Baptism of the Maximianists. And every part eagerly
contends, that they alone retain the true Baptism, and that there is no other
any where, neither in all the World, over which the Catholic Church is spread,
nor in the larger nor the lesser parts of the Faction of Dcnatus, but in
themselves alone that are least of all.

But as fierce as they were against each other, they were always one united
Body against the Catholic Church, and upon all occasions of Disturbance or
Sedition in the State, they were a formed Body against the Government, as will
appear by numberless Instances in the next Reign of Arcadius and Honorius,
under whom they vented their utmost fury, and they on the other side, resolved
to quell and break them, and at last by strict Laws diligently executed, so
took down their stomach, and their stubbornness, that the Faction dwindled into
an inconsiderable rout, and was never able to attempt any disturbance either in
Church or State. They being under no greater restraint in the time of
Theodosius the Great, then the forfeiture of Ten Pounds, and the Execution of
that Law being either stifled or hampered by the Emperors Officers, (that
commonly divert such Mulcts to their own gain, and the damage of the
Prosecutor) grew so bold in their outrage against the Catholics, as to offer
violence to their Clergy at Divine Service, which insufferable Indignity the
young Emperors Arcadius and Honorius resented with that just indignation, as to
publish a Rescript in the year 398, to Theodorus Prefect of Africa, requiring
him to bring De Epist. and Ecclesi l. 31.
such Offenders to Capital Punishments, and if they at any time offered to make
any Tumultuary resistance, not to stand upon forms of Law, but to fall upon
them with the Military Power. And this Law, as severe as it may appear, was but
seasonable and indeed necessary, as St. Austin tells the Donatists, when they
complain of Severity. You have no De nobis ergo quod Epist. 68. ad Januar^
queramini, non habetis; etenim Ecclesiae Catholicae mansuetudo etiam ab his
Imperatorum jussionibus omnino conquieverat, nisi vestri Clerici and
Circumcelliones per suas immanissimas improbitates, furiosasque violentias
quietem nostram perturbantes atque vastantes, haec in vos recoli and moveri
coegissent. Nam priusquam recentiores leges istae, de quibus modo querimini,
venissent in Africam, insidias in itineribus nostris Episcopis tetenderunt,
conclericos nostros plagis immanissimis quassaverunt, Laicis quoque and plagas
gravissimas inflixerunt, and intulerunt eorum AEdificiis incendia, etc.
reason to complain of us; for the Gentleness of the Catholics had always
forborne the Execution of such Laws, had not your own Preachers with their
Circumcellians by their barbarous Cruelties and Outrages against us, made them
necessary for our own security. For before those bate Laws; of which you
complain, came into Africa, they waylaid our Bishops upon the Road, they beat
our Clergy most barbarously, put intolerable abuses upon the Laics, fired our
Houses and our Churches.

With great numbers more of particular Outrages, that he recites there, and up
and down his other Writings, as the murder of Restitutus and Innocentius
Presbyters of Hippo, putting out the Eyes of some, cutting off the hands, and
pulling out the Tongues of others. And as for St. Austin himself, they
continually watched for his life, and exhorted the People to kill him as they
would a Wolf, to preserve the Flock, and assure them that God would forgive all
their Sins, how great soever, for so good a piece of Service. And this they did
to him in requital of all his kindness toward them, who all along interceded
with the Governors to spare their lives, till at last being convinced by
Experience that they abused all mercy, and would be reduced by nothing but the
greatest Severity, he changed his mind, as he declares in his Epistle to
Vincentius, in which he excellently discourses the necessity of the Epist. 48.
thing, that the Civil Magistrate should restrain the stubborn with Penal Laws.

About this time happened the War with Gildo the African Rebel, a Man
infinitely Debauched, and barbarous in his Manners, and a bitter Enemy to
Christianity; with him the Donatists and Circumcellians join, and serve in his
Rebellion against the Emperor, according to the constant practice of all
Schismatics, whenever there is an opportunity to turn Rebels. And particularly
there was one Optatus a Bishop of the Party, so remarkable in the Army for
fighting and forwardness, that he was surnamed Gildonianus, and after ten years
Rebellion lost his life in the Service. But when Gildo was at length overcome,
the Donatists bated nothing of their wonted insolence, and the Emperor Honorius
(to whose particular Government Africa appertained) being incensed with
continual complaints of their disorders, resolves by any severity to break the
Faction. And first he exposes their knavery to all the Christian World, by
which he hoped at least to take down their confidence, and preserve the People
from being any more deluded by their fair pretenses. And therefore in the year
400 he sends forth the forementioned Decree to his Prefect in Africa, to be
published in all places concerning the Transactions of the Donatists with
Julian, and his Rescript on their behalf, that De H^reticis leg. 37.
thereby the World might see the constancy of the Catholics to their
Principles, and the falsehood and treachery of the Donatists to their Religion.
And this was done, either upon one or both of these Occasions, either as
Baronius most probably thinks, that the Donatists persisting in their old
Clamours, as Petilian had lately done, against the Catholics, For instigating
the Civil Magistrate Quid autem vobis est cum Regibus seculi, quos nunquam
Christianitas nisi invidos sensit.
against them, who had nothing to do with the Church or Religion. Upon which
pretense, the Emperor thought good to rebuke their Confidence, by exposing
their flatteries and foul tamperings with Julian, and joining with an Apostate
in his design to overthrow Christianity. Or else, as Gothofred conjectures,
Honorius enacting such severe Laws against the Donatists, they upbraided his
Cruelty with the Clemency of Julian as if they found more mercy from Julian,
though an Enemy, an Heathen, and an Apostate, than from a Christian and
Catholic Prince. And therefore Honorius lets the World know the Mystery of the
kindness between them and Julian, and by what base flattery, and dirty Arts,
and dishonest Treachery they had insinuated themselves into his favor.

And the Year following the Church seemed to imitate the Emperor's Design, of
convincing them by mere shame, and reducing them by the foulness of their own
Actions: for among diverse other Methods proposed for the settlement of the
Church, this Device is at last pitched upon, to fend to all the Judges and
Governors of Provinces, who had the command and keeping of all public Records,
Council. Afric. cap. 36.
that they would search out all the Acts, by which the prevailing Party of the
Donatists cut off the Maximinianists from their Communion, and after that
restored them to it again. After which they send A^bassadors to the several
Churches of the Donatists, to inform the People what a nothing it is that their
Leaders have to say against the Catholic Church; but chiefly to make it
evident by all the Records of Court, how they treated the Maximinianists in
their sub-separation, from whence, say they, will be pointed Ubi eis divinitus
demonstratur, si attendere velint, tam inique tunc illos ab Ecclesiae unitate
praecisos, quam inique nunc clamant a se Maximianistas schisma fecisse: ex
quorum tamen numero, quosjam plenarii Concilii sui Auctoritate damnaverant, in
suis honoribus denuo receperunt; et baptismum, vel quem damnati et exclusi
dederant, acceptaverunt. Ut videant quam stulto cord risistant paci Ecclesiae
toto orb diffusae, cum ista faciant pro part Donati; neque se istorum, quos
ita receperunt, communione propter intuitum pacis contaminari dicant: et nos
condemnent, id est, Ecclesiam Catholicam, etiam in extremis terrarum partibus
constitutam, per eorum communionem inquinatam, quos tun^ accusantes, convincere
nequiverunt.
out, as it were by an Hand from Heaven, that they first departed from the
Unity of the Church, upon as unreasonable Grounds, as* they now clamor that the
Maximinianists made a Schism from themselves. Of whom yet they have received
diverse to Communion without new Baptism. That so they may see how absurdly they
oppose the peace of the universal Church, when they do that for the Pars
Donati, without thinking themselves polluted by their Communion, for which they
condemn us and the whole Catholic Church, as polluted by the Communion of
those that they have for a long time accused; but could never yet convince of
any Crime.

And this was a choquing Argument, either that they ought not to have received
the Maximinianists for peace sake, or that for the same reason they ought to
enter into a Treaty of Peace with the whole Christian World. And accordingly in
a greater Council the year following, every Bishop is ordered to treat with the
Leaders of the Donatists in their own Diocese; But all in vain, for they teturn
them no other Answer, then Scorn and foul Language. Such was their Pride and
Petulancy, that it barred up their Minds against all Conviction: particularly
Possidius undertaking Crispinus a leading Man of the Faction, after all his
Pains is thrown off with this slight and haughty Answer. Hanc responsionem meam
patriarchali sermon definio: Recedant a me impii, vias eorum nosse nolo. This
is my peremptory Answer to all your Talk, that the People of God ought not to
have any Intercourse, or enter into any Conference with the Wicked. And in
stead of fair Proceedings, in a few days after they beset his House, break in
upon him, and beat him, the Riot is taken notice of by the Pro-consul, and the
Ringleader fined ten Pounds, that yet was remitted at the Intercession of
Possidius. But the Schismatic is so haughty, that he will not accept of the
Kindness, and so appeals to the Emporors, and is by them condemned, as falling
under the Law enacted by their Father Theodosius the Great, in the Year 392,
against all Heretics or Recusants De Haereti^is leg. 21.
of what Sect soever, that whoever of them gave or received Holy Orders, should
be fined ten Pounds toties quoties, and wherever they kept a Conventicle, the
house should be confiscated to the Emperor; but if the Owner of the House were
not privy to it, that then the Tenant should be fined the ten Pounds, and if he
were a Servant, or so poor that he could not pay it, he was to be Whipped and
Transported. This Law was applied by Honorius to the Donatists, which they
pleaded was not intended against them, because they were only accounted
Schismatics and not Heretics. No, says the Emperor, I and my Laws will allow
of no such Tricks and Distinctions, whoever is divided from the Catholic
Church, upon what Pretense soever, we are not concerned to inquire, he is to us
a Recusant and an Heretic, his Crime is not adhering to this or that Party,
but his division from us. And though the Fathers of the Affrican Council
interceded with the Emperor that the Law might be applied only to such
Donatists, as were convicted of any actual Violence or Sedition, and that
others, that were peacable, might not be punished merely for their Opinion. Yet
the Emperor looked upon the very siding with a seditious Party, to be Sedition
it self, and therefore Commands it to be strictly and universally put in
Execution. Especially having been incensed by their late disorders in diverse
other Places, driving Bishops from their Sees, and particularly the horrible
Murder of Maximian Bishop of Bagaia, and this says St. Austin made our
Intercession ineffectual. Jam enim lex fuerat promulgata ut tantae Immanitatis
Haeresis donatistaram, cui crudelius parci videbatur, quam ipsa saeviebat, non
tantum violenta esse, sed omnino esse, non sineretur impune. That is, because
he had now resolved upon this Law, that a Sect of so much Barbarity, whom to
tolerate were a greater cruelty then the worst that they themselves could
commit, should not only not be suffered in their Violence, but not be suffered
to be at all. But yet for all this, many of the Schismatics persist in their
Pride and Stubbornness, scorn to enter into any Conference with the wlcked, and
threaten the Catholics with their lives, if they ever offered to undeceive
their People. Recedite a plebibus nostris, si non vultis ut interficiamus vos.
Either leave our August. E^ist. 166.
People or your own Lives. But because they rebaptised all Converts to their
Party, the Emperor resolved to bar up that passage, and therefore Enacts a Law
against Rebaptising under so many and so severe Penalties, as soon broke the
whole Faction. viz. Forfeiture of Estate, Outlawry, Ne sanctum Baptisma
iteretur, leg. 4.
Banishment, Incapacity of making a Will, or receiving a Legacy. And strictly
commands his Governors and Officers every where to put it in severe Execution
under threatening of the severest Penalties upon themselves. This strong Physic
quickly purged away the ill humor, and restored the Church after all its
distractions to a great measure of Peace and Unity. Insomuch that great numbers
of the Circumoellians themselves (as St. Austin tells us) were reduced Epist.
48.
to Sobriety, and here it is that he professes that though hitherto he had been
an enemy to all Penal Laws in matters of Religion, yet now he was quite baffled
out of that Opinion, not so much by Arguments as Examples, and particularly of
his own City; that though it had been almost swallowed up with the Faction, yet
it was now so reduced to the Catholic Unity, by the fear of these Imperial
Laws, that in a short time it so universally detested the Schism, as if it had
never had any footing or entertainment there. How many (says he) that were
engaged in the Party by Education, and never considered upon what grounds they
separated from the Church, being awakened by these Laws to examine into the
Nature of the Schism, found nothing of moment enough in it, for which they
should expose themselves to so great Damages, these were without difficulty
made Catholics. How many that only followed the Authority of their Guides, and
understood not the difference between the Church and the Donatists: How many
that had been abused with Stories and false Reports of the Catholics; how many
that thought it indifferent with which Party they sided, give God and the
Emperor thanks for frighting them out of their sloth and stupidity? And that
(says he) is the most proper use of Penal Laws to awaken men to a sight of
their Error, in which they have been detained by mere carelessness or
wantonness, and in all Schisms an affected Petulancy is ever the strongest
Ingredient. And so things continued in a quiet posture till the death of
Stilicho in the year 408, but upon that the Heathens and Donatists (that were
all along one Party against the Catholics) raise a Report that the Laws
against them were made, and contrived, A^gust. Ep. 129 ad Olimpium Comitem, A
Courtier whom he informs of the whole Business.
purely by the design of Stilicho, without the Emperors consent, and therefore
as if their Authority had dyed together with their Author, they break out into
their old Outrages against the Catholics. Which coming to the Emperors
knowledge, he immediately dispaches a Rescript to Curtius the Prefect of Rome,
De Hareticis leg. 43.
declaring that it was his Imperial Will that all the Laws against the
Donatists, Heathens, and Heretics should continue in full force, strictly
requiring him and all his Officers, to put them in effectual Execution. And
this was followed by another Rescript to Donatus Prefect of Africa, who obeyed
it with that rigor, that St. Austin was forced out of his mere good nature to
write to him to spare their lives. Ex occasion terribilium Judi^um ac legum ne
aeterni judicii paenas Epist. 129.
incidant, corrigi eos cupimus non necari, nec disciplinam circa eos negligi
volumus, nec suppliciis, quibus digni sunt exerceri. Sic ergo eorum peccata
compesce, ut sint quos paeniteat peccavisse. Quaesumus igitur ut cum Ecclesiae
causas audis, quamlibet nefariis injuriis appetitam vel afflictam esse
cognoveris, potestatem occidendi te habere obliviscaris. Upon occasion of the
dreadful Laws and Executions against them, we cannot but desire, lest they
should fall into everlasting punishment, that they may be chastised but not
killed, that Discipline may be exercised upon them, but that they may not be
punished with the utmost Justice that they deserve, and therefore so correct
their sins, that they may not be past the State of Repentance. And we beseech
you that when you hear the causes of the Church, though you will find it
assaulted and oppressed with intolerable injuries, forget then that you have
the power of life and death. But still the Emperor De b^reticis legib. 45, 46.
proceeds with more vigor, and the year following injoins the strict Execution
of these Laws to his Officers, and Judges, under severe Penalties to themselves
of loss of Place, Fines, and Banishment, with a farther reserve of his
displeasure. And here he comes so close to the Schismatics, as not only to
banish their Preachers, but every one that shall but talk or dispute in behalf
of the Schism. And so by this means things continued quiet once more, till the
Invasion of the Empire, and sacking of Rome by the Goths, when Attalus sent an
Army against Heraclian the Prefect for the Conquest of Africa, and if he had
Succeeded in it, he had been complete Master of the Western Empire. In this
straight, either for fear that they should join with the Enemy, or because they
grew insolent in their demands, as they did to Constantine in the time of the
Licinian War, the Emperor grants them liberty of Conscience for some time. But
being quit of the danger by the speedy Overthrow of the Goths in Africa, he
immediately dispatches a Rescript at the Request of the African Fathers, who
were already highly sensible of the mischiefs of this Liberty, to the same
Proconsul to reverse De hereticis, l. 51.
his former Decree, that had been extorted from him by the necessity of the
times, and now probably being afresh incensed by their fawcy behavior in his
affliction, makes the Schism it self Capital, or to be punished paena and
proscriptionis and sanguinis. For before this time none were to be put to
death, but those that had deserved it by their Tumults, Disorders, and
Infurrections, but now the very frequenting their Meetings was forbidden under
no less Penalty.

. VI.
But being now resolved to put an end to the trouble that they had given him
from the beginning of his Reign, he resolved in the first place to try if it
were possible to do any good upon them, by a friendly Conference, which (as
himself says) he did by the persuasion of the African Bishops, and it was
chiefly devised by St. Austin to undeceive the People. For their Leaders still
persisted to abuse them with old Tales and Stories, notwithstanding that they
had been so shamefully exposed an hundred years since; but that was beyond the
memory, and by consequence the knowledge of the People, and therefore St.
Austin concluded that the most effectual way to reduce them, was to let the
People know what was done in Constantine's time, in the Synods of Rome, and
Arles, and before the Emperor himself at Milan, and the shameful discoveries
of their Forgeries about Caecilian and Faelix of Aptung, by Ingentius the
Notary, and Nundinarius the Deacon. And this he doubted not would make them see
through the whole Cheat, that had been put upon them from the beginning; and
forever expose the impudence and dishonesty of their Leaders. Quod vero ante
centum ferme A^gust. lib. 3, contra Julianum*
annos Majores nostri cum iis [Donatistis] egerant, jam populorum memoria non
tenebat; haec igitur necessitas compulit, at saltem Gestis nostra Collatione
confectis, eorum contunderemus inverecundiam, and reprimeremus Audaciam. Seeing
it was beyond the memory of the People, what was transacted almost an hundred
years since with the Schismatics; necessity compelled us, that producing the
matters of Fact at our Conference, we should rebuke their strange boldness and
immodesty. To this purpose Marcellinus, a Man eminent both for Wisdom,
Learning, and Piety, Non Divini magis quam humani juris peritus. v. more of his
Character in Baldwin's Hist. Collat. Carthag.
and the same to whom St. Austin dedicates his Books De Civitate Dei, though a
Secular Judge, is sent into Africa with a Commission to preside at the
Conference, and that he might do, by the Laws and Custom of the Church, because
the Controversy was not about either a matter of Faith, or rule of Discipline,
but only a matter of Fact. Neither had he the Office of a Judge about that, so
much as an Inquisitor; but was by his Commission only to Examine the public
Records, and that was all that he undertook and performed. In March in the year
411. he Summons both Parties to meet at Carthage in the June following, and
grants to all Donatists, that would obey his Summons, the free use of their
Churches, and provides all things necessary or useful for their Journey. The
whole number of Donatist Bishops, in all 159, enter Carthage in a full Body,
with all the shows of Pomp and Ostentation, and this being their full strength
at that time, it shows how their Party had shrivel'd away under this Emperor's
Laws against them. For in their Council at Bagaia, where the Maximinianists
were condemned by the other Donatists, were present four hundred and sixty
Bishops, and yet now all their Force cannot make a third part of that number.
But when they came to Carthage, they would not meet in the usual house of
Convocation, that they called the Synagogue of Satan, and therefore met in the
Gargilian Baths. And before they entered upon the Conference, the Catholics
endeavor to Court them with all manner of Civility and Condescension, if by
any means to prevail upon them, to have some sense of the Peace and Unity of
the Christian Church. But all in vain, they were resolved to persist in their
Peevishness, and therefore when they came together, instead of fair and
ingenuous Discourse, they only endeavored to spin out time with trifling and
pettifogging Tricks. For whereas the Catholics first propounded for quicker
dispatch, to separate the particular matter of Fact, concerning Caecilian's
being Ordained by a Traditor from the general matter of Right, concerning their
present Separation from the Church. Because that was only Personal, and carried
nothing in it that concerned the cause of the Church it self, at so great a
distance of time; and therefore they would freely grant, tho nothing could be
more false, that Caecilian and Faelix were guilty of all their Indictment: But
that being granted, they affirmed that it was no sufficient reason for them at
that time of the day, to separate themselves from the Catholic Church, though
it had so many years past Communicated with them. But the Donatists resolve to
insist upon the old Nags-head-story, and wholly baulk the matter of Right; for
here they knew that they could wrangle and amuse the People, and this was not
only their standing Artifice, but as Baldwin observes, it is the last shift of
all Schismatiques, when they are bafled, to throw dirt. So Petilian served St.
Austin; so the Pelagians; so the Manichees; but he would not be drawn from his
Cause by such foolish divertisements, and still answered them all, Quod ad
mores nostros Lib. 3. contra Julianum.
pertinet, quemadmodum vivamus in promptu est eis, cum quibus vivimus, nunc de
Catholico agitur Dogmate, etc. As for my Life and Conversation, it is known to
those with whom I live, but our business is about Christian Truth; that is the
cause, not I; if you have any thing against me, in God's Name Indict me
according to Law, but otherwise it is a base and helpless shift, when you are
Convicted by Argument, to betake your selves to idle Tales and Slanders, for
that is the last Machine of all Heretics. And therefore it is no wonder that
the Schismatics stuck so long at this point, for to Persons of that Kidney,
Calumny is much dearer then their Opinion. And it was a long while before
Marcellinus with all his Art and Temper, could bring them out of this Hold, but
being at last forced out of it, they in the next place wrangle about matters,
that they pleaded ought to be preliminary to the Conference: And first they
cavill'd and excepted against the time, viz. That the time limited by the
Emperor's Summons was past; to which cavil they are Answered, That the Meeting
was adjourned to the present time by their own Consent. Then they except
against Marcellinus, and the Form of proceeding, viz. That Ecclesiastical
matters ought not to be determined after the manner of the Secular Courts, but
by the Holy Scriptures. To this Marcellinus replies, both that he does not take
upon himself the Office of a Judge, and withal that things should be determined
by the Rule of Scripture as they desired. And beside this the Catholic Bishops
satisfy them by exhibiting the Injunctions, that they had given to those
Bishops, that were to manage the Conference, that they had taken sufficient
care of that matter. But then this the Donatists turned into a new Cavil, that
they would not trust their Cause to a few Men's management, but would be all
Speakers, which they knew could not be done in so great a Multitude, without
turning the whole business into Tumult and Confusion. And therefore it is with
much ado overruled, that Seven of each Party should manage the Conference, of
whom St. Austin and Petilian were the chief of each side. But in the next place
the Mandate of the Catholics to their Commissioners being signed by 286
Bishops, the Donatists object that there were not so many present, and pretend
that to increase the number they had set down false names, and therefore
require that every Bishop should answer to his own name. But all this trifling
being at last past through, Marcellinus with Hat in hand, desires the Company
that they would be pleased to take their Seats, but the Donatists insolently
refuse his Civility, grumbling out among themselves that of the Psalmist, Odi
Ecclesiam Malig^antium and cum impiis non se^^bo. Then the Instrument of the
Donatists to their Commissioners is read, which consists all of Accusation
against the Catholics, both as Traditors and Persecutors; and here they are
immediately snapt in their own ^nare, having subscribed many Names to it of Men
that were not in Being, and among the rest of one, that upon the discovery they
now pretended dyed on the way, though before they had declared, that it was
drawn up after they came to Carthage, and that was all the Event of the first
days Conference, that they ensnared themselves in two or three grand Falsehoods.
The second Conference was spent in the same trifles and cavils with the first,
and so came to nothing. But at the third Meeting Marcellinus keeps them close
to the point, and after long struggling and much patience with them, causes all
the Records relating to the whole matter to be read, especially concerning the
Cause of Caecilian and Faelix of Aptung. And here the Donatists were quite
undone at the first shock, and had no shift to escape, only to the Absolution
of Caecilian by Melckiades they have the Impudence now to say, that Melchiades
himself was a Traditor. Which as it was a new lie invented at so great a
distance of time, so was it utterly groundless, and without any pretense of
Authority then only their own Report, and therefore could not pass. In short,
the Schismatics having nothing to except against the unquestionable Evidence
of public Records, but repeating the same Cavils and Calumnies, the Verdict is
given against them, and themselves are brought to subscribe the truth of all
the Acts of the Conference, as we now have them, which otherwise they would
afterward have pleaded to be false, so that they had now no shif^ left but
their old one, to complain of the Partiality of Marcellinus. Unless it were to
Appeal from the Emperor (to whom themselves first appealed) to the Scriptures.
Thus upon this shameful overthrow Primianus a chief Man among them cries out,
Illi port ant muliorum Impera^orum Sacras, nos sola portamus Evangelid. And
they were then the two Tribes that continued Loyal to the true Religion, whilst
the Catholics, by whom they were so much over-voted, were the other Ten Tribes
that followed Jeroboam into his Idolatry. But so it was that things were
managed with that clearness of Conviction, that though the^ Ringleaders went
on in their old stubbornness, yet the greatest part of the People, hereby
understanding the true merits of the Cause, Contr^ gaudentium, l. 1. cap. 29.
forsook them forever; and as St. Austin says, great Numbers of the
Circumcellians returned to their Callings and Parish Churches, and as for the
Number of the more sober People of all States and Conditions that were reduced,
he says it was so great that it was not to be numbered. And to settle the
business more effectually St. Austin prevails with Marcellinus to publish the
Acts of the Conference, the truth whereof was subscribed by both Parties, that
all the World after that, might be satisfied of the foulness and disingenuity
of the Schismatics: And then the African Bishops agree among themselves for
keeping up the memory of the thing fresh against them, to have them publicly
read in all Churches on the last Sunday in Lent. And because the Acts
themselves were too long for the People, St. Austin drew up his Breviculum for
that use.

Upon this great overthrow the Emperor resolves to push on the Victory, and
immediately published such a severe Rescript against the Party, that soon broke
their Obstinacy and vanquished the Schism, strictly commanding them to return to
the Catholic Church, first under De Haeret. l. 52.
the Penalty of an high Fine according to every man's Estate and Quality;
Secondly, Inflicting the same punishments upon all Persons that should conceal
them; Thirdly, Requiring all diligence in all Officers to discover them;
Fourthly, If notwithstanding they continued stubborn, all their Goods were to
be seized and sold. Fifthly, All Landlords and Masters are to see that their
Servants and Tenants conform to the Catholic Church under the same Penalties.
Sixthly, All their Preachers are to be banished into distant places. Clerici
vero ministrique little ac perniciosissimi sacerdotales ablati de Africano solo,
quod ritu sacrilego polluerunt, in exilium viritim ad singulas quasque regiones
sub idonea prosecutione mittantur. And lastly, Their Churches and all Profits
and Revenues belonging to them, are to be delivered up to the Catholics. Here
are all the severities that can be inflicted except death it self, for though
the Emperor had threatened them with that immediately after his Conquest of the
Barbarians, upon some rude Provocation, that they had given him in his
distress, yet now in his cooler and more deliberate thoughts, he resolves to
spare their blood, but resolves to spare nothing else. And what milder course
could be taken with such men, that out of mere extravagance, and wantonness,
had put off all sense of their natural humanity. And so upon this, those few
that would not be reduced, betook themselves to the Fields and the Woods, and
wandered up and down the Country in Armed Troops, doing all manner of mischief
and violence in all places, usually having one of their Teachers for the
Captain of each Rout, such an one was Macrobius one of their Bishops, that St.
Austin says, roved up and down in his Neighborhood, Stipatus cuneis perditorum
utriusque sexus, guarded or followed with Troops of desperate People of both
Sexes.

But it happened that the year following, Heraclian the Emperor's Viceroy in
Africa that had done the good service to Conquer the Goths, breaks out into
Rebellion, and Invades Italy with the greatest Navy that perhaps ever was,
consisting of 3700 Ships, whereas Xerxes his so samed Navy had no more then
1200. But he being surprised and overthrown by Marinus at his first landing,
and by him pursued into Africa, the Donatists inform Marinus at his very first
coming, that Marcellinus was one of those that had sided with Heraclian in the
Rebellion, him therefore in his rage, or have, or upon some worse account he
puts to Quem Marinus, incertum an zelo stimulatus, an auro corruptus, occidit.
Oros. lib. 7.
death among the other Rebels, upon which instead of a Triumph for so great a
Victory, he is immediately commanded home, put out of all employment, banished
the Emperor's presence, and only not put to death because of his late great
service. Now the design of these wicked Donatists in murdering Marcellinus was
not only to be revenged of him for his acting in the Conference, but to kill
the credit of his Acts, because all the Acts of Rebels were by the Roman Law
null and void, and therefore as the Emperor had already nulled the Acts of
Heraclian upon his Rebellion, so they hoped that the Acts of Marcellinus who
was in the same case should undergo the same Fate. But the Emperor on the
contrary writes to Julianus his Pro-Consul, to lay them carefully De Haeret. l.
55.
up among the public Records, that they might be secure from being ever
imbezel'd, and not only so, but he renews his former severe Law with the
addition of some new Penalties, and, more then that, Ibid. l. 54.
though he had damned all the other Acts of Government under Heraclian, ^uch
was his just fury against these treacherous and bloody Saints, that he renews
the Rescript of punishing them with death, that he had sent in his rage to
Heraclian Ibid. l. 56.
in the year 311, and that is the reason why this Law bears Heraclian's name,
though it were not published till after his death. Though it was never put in
Execution, but the other of banishing the Preachers was vigorously prosecuted,
and the Emperor sent Dulcitius into Africa with a new Office for that very
purpose, viz. Of Executor of the Rescript against the Donatists, that was his
whole and sole Commission. And he pursued it so effectually, that about thirty
of their Leaders finding that there was no way left of being concealed, and
resolving neither to quit their Churches nor go into Banishment, agree to
murder themselves and so dye Martyrs, and some of them burnt themselves with
that mad resolution, as put Dulcitius to a stand, who therefore out of mere
tenderness writes to St. Austin to know what he would advise him to do with
such desperate people. And he though he had ever been importunate to save their
lives, now returns this frank Answer, That it is no great matter if the small
handful of Banditi, who put the whole Wo^ld into disorder, perish by their own
hands, and when they are gone, the World will be at quiet. And ^o ended this
boisterous Schism that had wasted the Church of Africa, for more then an
hundred years. For Baldwin and Baronius place the Ordination of Chaplain
Majorinus, from whence the Schism commences, in the year 306, but Vale^ius more
truly in the year 311, and it was in the year 414, in which they are rooted
out of Africa by Dulcitius. And though some small scatterings of it continued
many years after, even to the time of Gregory the Great, as we find by some of
his Epistles, which was near 200 year^ after this time, yet after this time it
was never considerable, and we hear very little of them, either in the Records
of the Church or the Imperial Laws. They are but once mentioned in a Law of
Theodosius the next Emperor, but then it is in a List of the whole Rout of
Heretics that ever were, in which the same Penalties are inflicted upon all,
that were Executed by Honorius against the Donatists. And it is observable that
the Imperial Laws ever after followed the same method, being convinced of its
necessity by the experience of the thing it self, so that though the Coercive
Power of the Prince in abetting the Church had been owned and used all along,
yet it seems not to have been thoroughly understood* till after this experiment
of Honorius upon the Donatists. And thus have I shown in this one Instance the
natural Progress of Schism, How little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, so that
a National Madness may be no more a^ bottom then a Malt-house Conspiracy,
thirty or forty ill-natured men put all Africa into a distraction for above one
hundred years, and when they were removed out of the way, those many thousands
that were drawn in to follow their Frenzy, were restored to their natural sense
and sobriety. So that if as small a number as those few, that were so desperate
as to destroy themselves a^ last, had been banished at first, all that trouble
that this Schism gave the Empire, had been certainly prevented, and that is all
that any Prince can ^ gain by his kindness to such men, tha^ if he will not
punish them at first, they themselves will force him to do it at last.

. VII.
As for the Arian Controversy, though it were at first but a private dispute
in the School of Alexandria (that was then the only Christian University in the
World) yet it soon overrun the whole body of the Christian Church, if we may
believe St. Jerome, who speaks thus of it, Arius in Alexandria una scintilla
fuit, sed quia non statim oppressa est, Ad Galat. 15.
totum Orbem ejus flamma populata est. And indeed it spread so suddenly* that
its motion was not so much like Fire as Lightning, all the World was all in a
flame in an instant, (...), L. 1. c. 6.
says Socrates, from which and the like passages Sandius Hist. Ecclis. l. 2. p.
7.
according to his usual dullness and ingenuity infers, that the whole World was
become Arian, and indeed St. Jerome gives some countenance to it, by his lavish
expression of totus orbis; but he is so full of his whole Worlds every where,
as proves nothing more then that he was very much taken with the Grandeur of
the Phrase, neither does he apply it to the Reign of Constantine (as this
ignorant pretender to History does) but of Constantius; what strength it then
had, we shall see when we come to that time, but under the Reign of
Constantine, as great Commotions as it occasioned in the Christian Church, it
spread not much farther then some few of the Clorgy beside Women, of the Church
of Alexandria, as will appear by the Progress of the Story, which runs in order
after this manner, Arius and his Accomplices were upon Conviction Canonically
proceeded against and cast out of the Church by their Metropolitan and
Provincial Synod, not only for the Heresy of their Opinion, but Ap^^ ^^^^ l.
1. c. 4.
the scandal and looseness of their lives, as himself informs us in his Epistle
to Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, and beside his Epistles to diverse
particular Bishops, he signified the Excommunication of the Arians by an
encyclical Epistle to all the Bishops of the Catholic Church, in the beginning
whereof he excellently describes that Unity of Discipline that was then
preserved in it. Whereas we are taught in the Holy Scriptures that the Body of
the Catholic Church is one, that thereby we may keep the bond of Peace and
Concord the more firmly, it is but agreeable to this that we should communicate
with one another by Letters, that all may know what is done by every one, that
so we may all suffer and rejoice together. By which last Phrase the Ancients
usually expressed the agreement of Discipline in all Churches, in allusion to
St. Paul's expression to the Church of Corinth in the Case of their incestuous
Offenders. This was the Custom of all Churches at that time, though that dull
Fanatique Arian Li^. 2. p. 14.
Sandi^s represents it as done out of mere, design and artifice to assuage the
known displeasure of diverse Bishops both against himself and his Opinion, and
not out of any regard to the Rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline, of which this
slovenly Historian seems to have had no sense or knowledge. But this being
done, Arius instead of submitting to his Ordinary, as he ought to have done by
the Laws of the Church, or appealing at least to a greater Council for relief
against abuse of Discipline, shelters himself under the Patronage of a Great
and Powerful Prelate at that time, E^sebius of Nicomedia, who contrary to all
the Laws of the Church, immediately receives him into Communion, which by no
means he ought to have done, though Arius had been wronged. For if that liberty
be once admitted in any Case, it breaks down the Bounds, of all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and therefore an Appeal from one Provincial Synod to another was
never allowed of in the Primitive Church, but in Cases of Grievance the only
Appeal that lay was to greater Synods composed out of several Provinces; so
that when Arius took Sanctuary under Eusebius, and he protected him against the
Censure of his own Metropolitan, and by his own Authority controlled and
cancelled the Acts of another Bishop against his own Presbyter, and endeavored
to engage the Approbation of the whole Church to his irregular actings, that
was apparently setting up an open Schism in the Christian Church. And so
Alexander represents it in his encyclical Apud Theod. l. c. 4.
Epistle, and loads Eusebius with the violation of the Apostolical Canon, viz.
the 33d, which injoyns that no Clergyman Excommunicate by his own Bishop, be
received to Communion by another. But Eusebius, being a man of a proud Spirit,
regards it not (neither was this his first breach of the Canons, having skipt
out of one Bishopric into another, which is there severely forbidden, and he
was the first man, that I know of, who was guilty of that boldness against that
Sacred Law of the Church) but instead of desisting from his Schismatical
proceedings, endeavors to spread the Schism as far as he could, and his
Letters fly abroad every where to engage the Bishops to his Faction, by which
means, he being then a great Man and a Favorite of the Emperor, the Court
then residing at Nicomedia, all the Bishops in the World were in a moment
engaged on one side or other (not upon the account of Arius but Eusebius whose
Pride and Ambition was the only cause of all this confusion) this so alarms
Constantine, that he dispatches away his great Favorite Osius of Corduba with
his Letters to Alexandria, if it were possible to allay the heats of both
Parties. Though Baronius is very earnest in it, that Osius was first sent by
Pope Silvester, as his Legate into the East, Ad ann. 318. N. 88. Ad an. 319 N.
22. 26.
to Constantine, by whom he was armed with Letters to Alexandria, where he
wrought great wonders by virtue of his Legantine Authority. And in this the
Cardinal is very vehement, and often repeats it with extraordinary assurance,
though there is not the least intimation of it in all the ancient Historians,
who make not any mention of the Pope in all this business, but impute the whole
transaction to Constantine's own care and management. Now the Scope of the
Emperors Letters was to persuade and exhort them wholly to lay aside the
Controversy as nice, and unnecessary, and not of weight enough to deserve a
determination. Though as Sandius tells the story, the Page 16.
Emperor lays the blame of all upon the Bishop, but this not only without any
Authority, but against the express words of the Letter, that equally blames
them both for their too much curiosity about a vain Question, as he calls it.
And as for the Letter it self I shrewdly suspect it to have been the
contrivance of Eusebius of Nicomedia, who was very intimate with the Emperor,
and imposed upon him all along in this whole Affair. I am sure the Scope of the
Letter is exactly agreeable with Eusebius his whole carriage in this
Controversy, which was not to have it determined either way, but only silenced
as an over curious speculation. I know indeed that he is on all hands
represented as a Ringleader of the Arian Faction, but it is a mistake that has
brought confusion upon the whole History, and made the Arian Heresy seem of a
much greater extent then it ever was, whereas Eusebius and his Party were no
less Enemies to the Arians then to the Orthodox, and yet it was they that all
along made the greatest show and noise in the Contest. And as for the Arian
Faction it was wholly suppressed by the Nicene Council, and all the Tumults that
were made after that, are owing to the Eusebians, who were as forward as the
Orthodox to anathematize the Arians, but then they must have the Decree of the
Nicene Council reverst, and what work they made about it we shall see when we
come to the Reign of Constantius, all whose Persecutions of the Catholics were
merely raised by these men's wise indiscretion, and had it not been for their
unseasonable tampering, prudence, and moderation, the Arian Heresy could never
have lift up its head more after the Nicene Council. But to return to
Constantine, who finding the Contest too hot at Alexandria to be allayed by the
mediation of Hosius, and withal the flame too far spread into other Churches to
be quenched by one man's industry, he resolves upon a General Council to compose
this and some other spreading Controversies, particularly that concerning the
time of Easter, which though it had slept ever since Pope Victor, began now to
raise new heats in several parts of Christendom.

The Council being met at the time and place appointed, he entertains them with
an Oration exhorting to Peace and Unity, but neither prescribes nor commands
any thing, only desires them to examine things impartially, and by their
Authoritative determination of the present Controversies, to settle the Peace
of the Church forever, as appears not only from the Tenor of the Speech it
self, and the Emperors behavior in the Council, but from the challenge of St.
Epist. 32. Ad Valent^
Ambrose to Valentinian, si conferendum de fide, sacerdo^um debet esse ista
c^ll^tio, sicut factum est sub Constantino augustae memoriae principe, qui
nullas leges ante praemisit, sed liberum dedit judicium Sacerdotibus. If there
be a consultation about the Faith, that is the work o^ the Priesthood as it was
managed under the Emperor Constantine of Glorious Memory, who prescribed no
Laws beforehand, but allowed freedom of judgment to the Bishops. And the
Council being fairly left to the free use of that Authority, that thev had
received from our Savior, they proceeded as fairly in the Exercise of it.

And in the first place, The Acts of the Council at Alexandria against Arius
are produced, and the interposition of Athanas. Apol. 2.
Eusebius in his behalf inquired into, whereby it appeared which side had act^d
according to the Laws of the Church, and the Arians are, after a fair hearing,
with very little Debate condemned by the Unanimous Vote of the Council, though
Sandiu^ affirms, from no Authority Athanas. Ep. contra Her. Arian.
but his own, that they would not so much as hear Arius his Arguments, much
less Examine them. But though the Council agreed in the Subscription to the
Orthodox Faith, yet the Eusebians for a time refused to subscribe to the So^.
l. 1. c. 14.
Anathema against the Arians, because they did not think them so bad as they
were represented. But here again our honest Arian Histori^grapher tells us from
Eutychius and other Oriental Monuments, Sand. l. 2. p. 20.
i. e. Modern and Barbarous Arabic Pamphlets, that there were above 2000
Bishops present at the Council, and that all exceptingonly 31^ (which was the
full number of the Council according to all the true Records) voted for Arius,
but that Constantine himself overruled the whole business by violence and
force of Arms. And then whereas the Emperor to abet the Decree of the Council,
commands the Arian Books to be burnt, and especially Arius his Thaleia, upon
pain of death; and banished some of the Arians into Illiricum; l. 2. p. 2^.
this Sandius is not ashamed to say was done by the Authority of the Council it
self and withal that the Bishops persuaded the Emperor, who but just now
overawed them by force of Arms, to resign his Empire (silly wretch as he was!)
into their hands, and lay down his Sword at their Feet, and that they returned
it back to him only upon condition to defend their Faith. The Council being
ended, the Emperor writes to several Churches, particularly that of
Alexandria, to submit to the determination of the Council, because the
unanimous Decree of so many Bishops, could be no less then the Judgment of God
himself, in that it cannot be doubted but that the Concord of so many Holy Men
was the immediate effect of Divine Inspiration, (...). Soc. l. 1. c. 9.
And thus had this profane Heresy been for ever quelled by the Authority of
this Council, had it not been supported by the pretended moderation of the
Eusebians, and their various carriage in the Debate is the most observable
thing in all the Transactions of this Council. The whole Controversy was
reduced to the word Consubstantial, which the Eusebians at first refused to
admit, as being no Scripture Word, but without its admission nothing else would
satisfy the Council, and good reason they had for it, because to part with
that Word after the Controversy was once raised, would have been to give up
the cause; for it was unavoidable, that if the Son were not of the same
Substance with the Father, he must have been made out of the same Common and
Created Substance with all other Creatures, and therefore when the Scriptues
give him a greater Dignity of Nature then to any created Being, they thereby
make him of the same uncreated Substance with the Father, so that they plainly
assert his Consubstantiality, though they use not the Word. But when the Truth
it self was denied by the Arian Heretics, and the Son of God thrust down into
the rank of created Beings, and defined to be a Creature made out of nothing,
(...), whence they were called (...), it was time for the Church to stop this
Heresy, by such a Test as would admit of no Prevarication, which was
effectually done by this word, and as cunning and shufling as the Arians were,
they were never able to swallow or chew it, and therefore it was but a weak
part of the Eusebians to show so much Zeal against the word, when they
professed to allow the thing; for if our Savior were not a mere Creature, he
must be of the same uncreated substance with the Father, because there is no
middle between created and uncreated Substance; so that whoever denied his
Consubstantiality could not avoid the Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus, which yet
the Arians themselves professed to defy, for if he were a mere Creature, it is
no matter how soon or how late he was created. And therefore Eusebius of
Caesarea, a wise and understanding Man soon discerned the folly of this
Scruple, for though he at first opposed the word Consubstantial in the Council,
and tendered a Creed without it, yet upon farther consideration he easily
embraced it, because as himself gives an account of it to his Diocese, it
signifies the same thing as to say, that he is of the Father, which the
Orthodox Doctrine teaches, (...). And therefore he declares that he freely
subscribed to it, not only for Peace sake, but that he might not incur the
scandal of Heresy. And as for the Anathema's against Arius, he says, that he
readily subscribed them, because they were but a just Sentence against his
Profane Novelties, without any Authority from the Scriptures, from whence
proceed all the disturbances of the Church, seeing therefore no Scripture uses
such expressions, as (...), and (...) (...), it is by no means allowable that
such expressions should be used or taught. And so concludes, I thought fit to
give you this account, that you might understand with what judgment I first
doubted, and then consented; for though I was at first offended at some words,
yet when I had impartially weighed their true meaning, I found that they agreed
exactly with those expressions that I used in my own Confession of Faith. This
is a rational and consistent account of his whole behavior; for when he had
once said in his Creed, That the Son was God of God, it is the same thing, as if
he had said, that he was of the same Substance with the Father. And yet
notwithstanding this fair and ingenuous Confession of Eusebius, and his more
full Declaration of his real sense and meaning in his Books against Marcellus,
with what an unanimous Vote, both of Ancients and Moderns, is he condemned as a
Ringleader of the Arian Heresy, as St. Jerome rashly styles him? But he can
spare no Man a good word, that had any kindness for Origin, and that was the
ground of his displeasure against Eusebius; I confess that he never could
heartily like the word (...), because it being a new word, and not found in
Scripture, it gave the Arians advantage of exception against the old Truth, yet
he always declared as expressly against the Arian Assertions, as Athanasius
himself. But of all Writers those of the Church of Rome are most implacable to
his Memory, for what reason I cannot imagine, unless it be that his plain
account of the true State and Polity of the Primitive Church is so
irreconcilable with the present Grandeur and Power of their Church. As for the
unkind usage he has met with from Baronius, Bellarmine, Binius, and such like
Writers, it is not to be wondered at, because they treat all other Authors and
Records after the same Rate, that do not suit their turn, so that they are more
offended with him as an Historian, then as an Heretic, and Baronius cannot
forbear blabbing out the true ground of his displeasure against him, in that he
too much betrayed that he bore no good Will to the Sea Apostolic. But as for
Petavius, a Man of a more free and impartial enquiry, who does not make it his
business, as they do, to force the Ancient Records of the Church to comply with
its present State, but takes things as he finds them; for him, I say, to handle
this great Man more roughly then the Italian Parasites, looks like an
unkindness without Provocation. He has De Trinitate lib. 1. c. 11, 12.
taken great pains to prove this by diverse looser Passages out of his Books
written before the Nicene Council, which is by no means ingenuous, because
himself has confessed, That he was not aware of the ill consequences of his own
Notions, till the Debates of the Council discovered them to him, and as for the
Passages that he has raked together out of the Books against Marcellus, I
cannot find that any of them reach his purpose, and if any look toward
Arianism, they are at worst but unwary expressions, when the whole design of
those Books is levelled against the Heresy; and it is very hard when he has
there so often declared against the great Arian Assertions, especially of the
(...), which is the Sum of all that Heresy, that he should be charged not only
for an Heretic, but a Prevaricator. Though the hardest piece of disingenuity
is his turning Eusebius his ingenuous confession into guile and falsehood, but
with what justice or candor I dare leave the Reader to judge from the words
themselves, as I have o^ted them above, that give, as far as I can discern, as
prudent and rational account of the true State of the Controversy, as any that
we have upon Record. But Petavius has met with his own Measure, for after all
the pains that he has taken against the Arian Heresy, he stands vehemently
suspected of Treachery to his own Undertaking. Sandius is very proud of his
company, and lays no small stress upon the assistance of his Authority. And
though this Rhapsodist, Hist. Eccles. l. 1. p. 217, 218. and l. 2. p. 19. He
braggs that Petavius in l. 1. c. 6.. 5. calls all the Fathers of this Councii
dunces and fools, tho there is no such thing in the place quoted.
whoever he was, was apparently a thing of no judgment, yet others that want
not understanding complain, That he has done the Doctrine of the Trinity no
great kindness by his defense of it, but has betrayed the constant Tradition of
the Church about it; and it is what I have often heard objected by some that
would be learned Men in common Discourse, though upon what ground I cannot
devise, unless it be that some Men pass their censures upon Books only by
skimming over Indexes and Contents of Chapters, instead of perusing the Books
themselves; for I am sure no Man that has Examined Petavius his performance
upon this Argument, can ever suspect him of a design to betray his cause, that
he has defended with so much Judgment, Learning, and Industry; but so it is,
that some Body turning over the heads of the Chapters, finds a Catalogue of
Fathers before the Council of N^ce, that held different Opinions from the
Catholic Rule, Saltem loquendi usu (as he speaks,) from thence it is shrewdly
insinuated that he leaves them under suspicion of Arianism, which is so far
from being true, that he had beforehand cleared them from all such suspicion as
to the substance of the Doctrine, and proved the constant Tradition of it
through all Ages of the Church from the Apostles. And sums up his Evidence of
the whole matter in this one positive Assertion. Omnes in eo Scriptores illi
Praefa^. c. 6.
convenient; esse unum Deum, unamque Deitatem: non autem plures Deos aut
Deitates. Deinde tres esse, qui Divinitatem illam habent; quique singula qua
nomen ipsum obtinent Dei, qua proprietates, and ut Groeci Philo^ophi nominant,
(...), quae nulli alteri, quam soli ac vere proprieque dicto Deo tribuuntur.
Sic in eo rurfus congruunt, ut unum de tribus fontem, and originem caeterorum
constituant; eumque patrem nuncupent illius, qui proxime ab hoc numeratur,
appellaturque filius, qui and genitus ab illo dicitur; ac tum Deus est, tum
homo pro Nativitate duplici: quarum una seculis est anterior omnibus ab solo
patre Deo: Altera in tempore, sola itidem ex Matre foemina. Haec fere de Deo ac
Trinitate profiteri sigillatim illos reperies: idque alios aliis clarius ac
disertius eloqui. Quae si sola considerentur, ex iis reliqua deinceps
necessario sequuntur, quae de hoc mysterio post Nicaenam Synodum in Ecclesia
sancita sunt, post vehementes ac diuturnos conflictus: and ad convincendos ac
refutandos Arianos aliosque religionis hosts idonea sunt ex sese. Now if all
the Fathers agreed (as he says they did) in this Confession of Faith, it is
impossible to charge them with the least suspicion of Arianism, only because
some of them Platonised too much in some Forms of Expression; and when he says
(as he does once) that they were of the same Opinion with Arius, it is when he
makes Arius not of the same Opinion with himself, and thinks him a Genuine
Platonist, but if he were, that was not his proper Heresy, the peculiar poison
whereof consisted in this, That the Son of God was created (...); which, as
Sozomen declares, and Petavius Soz. l. 1. c. 17. De Trinitate l. 1. c. 8.. 2.
too, no Man ever affirmed before Arius, so that if he were a Platonist, he
might be in another Error, but that was not Arianism; and if any of the
Ancients might seem to come too near him in some Platonic Expressions, yet
they are all clear by Petavius his account from all suspicion of Arianism. This
I thought good to interpose in behalf of Petavius, that so learned a Man might
not be loaded with such a disingenuous surmise, for no other reason that I can
see, then that he has deserved better of his Argument then any other Writer
whatsoever, excepting only the great Athanasius himself.

But to return to Constantine, and the Nicene Council, after the Condemnation
of Arius, the other Controversy concerning the time of Easter was easily
decided the very same day, and all Churches are commanded to observe the
Festival in the same form and time. And here the difference that St. Athanasius
De Synod. page 873.
has observed between these two Decrees of the Council is very observable, That
when they Enact concerning the Paschal Controversy, they say it seems good to
the Council, etc. And set down the day of the Month, and the year of the
Council in which it was Enacted, thereby intimating that the way of observing
Easter, became Obligatory by the Authority of their Decree. But when they set
down their Faith, they neither say it seems good, nor add any date, but express
it in this Form, that so and so the Catholic Church believes, thereby
declaring, That it is not a New but an Apostolical Faith, and therefore to be
received by all Christians. And this is seconded by a Rescript from the
Emperor, and recommended partly as a thing fit and decent, that the practice of
almost the whole Catholic Church should over rule the Customs of particular
Churches, and in pursuance of this general Decree, it was farther Enacted, That
on all Sundays in the year, and on all days from Easter to Whitsontide,
Christians should every where pray not kneeling but standing, a Custom that had
been practiced in the Church from the Beginning (and it is reckoned by the
Fathers among their immemorial Traditions) as a Symbol of our Savior's
Resurrect^on at that time, which being not observed by those Churches who kept
Easter after the manner of the Jews, thereby to distinguish themselves from
other Christians, the Custom therefore of standing is here enjoined to be
observed uniformly in all places, and so the Council expresses the intent of
their Decree (...), that all things may be performed with Uniformity in all
D^ocesses.

But the main thing that the Emperor enforces its Practice with, is the Divine
Authority of the Councils determination, (...). Socrat. ^^ 1. c. 9.
(...). Wherefore matters standing thus, it is requisite that you readily
receive this Order as a true divine Command, for whatever is agreed on in the
Holy Councils of Bishops, is to be taken as the Will of God. But then it is
remarkable that the Emperor only imposes this Decree of the Council by its own
Authority, and does not back it, as he does that against Arianism, with secular
Penalties, for what reasons himself best knew* it is enough that it was not
needful, for by the bare Authority of the Council the controversy was laid
asleep forever, nor do I remember that after that time we hear of any material
Contention about it. Now by the whole management of this business the
Conclusion is evident that the Emperor thought that Laws Ecclesiastic ought
to be made by the Ecclesiastic State, and when they were so, that they were
Valid and Obligatory by their own Authority, though himself had power to
enfor^e them with Civil Snactions, as he judged it serviceable to the
advancement of Religion and the Peace of Government.

. VIII.
And so the Great Council was dismissed as well as summoned by the Emperor with
that success he desired, in the unanimous Condemnation of the Arian Heresy,
insomuch that in that great number of Bishops, that were there present, there
were no more then two that refused to subscribe the Decrees of the Council,
Secundus and Theonas, as Eusebius himself informs us both in the life of
Constantine, and in his Epistle to l. 3. c. 13.
his Diocese, and it is from his Authority that Theodoret corrects the Error
both of Soorates and Zozomen, who set down l. 1. c. 12.
six Dissenters, that is, beside those two, Eusebius of Nicomedia, Theognis of
Nicaea, Maris of Calcedon, and Eusebius of Caesare^; but though it be true that
these were the great Sticklers at first against the admission of the word
(...), into the Faith, yet is it certain from Eusebius his own account of it,
that they all at last acquiesced in the determination of the Council, and
Athanasius is witness of D^ D^cret. ^^^^ Syn. l. 1. c. 8.
this not only for this Eusebius of Caesarea, but his Namesake of Nicomedia.
And here even Philostorgius himself who is miserably lost th^^^^ this whole
Story, and every where betrays his ignorance by his confusion of times, places,
and persons, as well as his imperfect and false Relations, yet here I say he
happens to report the matter accurately enough, though his Disciple Sandius
(who always takes great pains to be in the wrong) forsakes both him and all the
ancient Historians to follow the imperfect Story of Nicet^s; who sets down
twenty two Dissenters, and among them Eusebius of Caesarea. But on the other
hand St. Jerome I^ Dial^contra L^cif.
tells us, and that as he pretends from the very Acts of the Council, that not
only these Bishops, but Arius himself and his two Companions Euzoius and
Achillas (the last whereof though but a Presbyter, Sandius is so ignorant, as
to take him for the Bishop that was Predecessor to Alexander) were upon
submission received into the Churches favou^, but this I take to be one of St.
Jerome's hasty slips; for as all Authors beside agree that he was immediately
banished, so it is very unlikely that if he had recanted and been received into
the Church, that Constantine should at that time have published that severe
Rescript against him, that his Sect should be called Porphyrians i. e. Enemies
to the Christian Faith, and that his Books should be burnt upon pain of death.
But beside that, is there had been any signs of Repentance in Arius, we should
certainly have had an account of it in the Synodical Epistle of the Council to
the Church of Alexandria, whereas on the contrary they bemoan the Calamity into
which he had not only cast himself, but drawn after him Theonas and Secundus
(two Egyptian Bishops, and the only two Bishops that stuck to the Arian cause)
into the same Pit of Destruction. And that could be nothing else but
banishment, as appears from the words immediately following, in which they
congratulate to the Churches of Egypt, their deliverance from those wicked and
turbulent men, and accordingly the Historians Socrates and Sozomen tell us,
that Arius was recalled from banishment not long after the Council, and not
long after him Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Theognis of Nicaea, who had been
banished from their Sees by the Emperous, not at the time of the Council with
Arius, but some time after, as is evident from the Emperors own Epistle to the
Nicomedians, in which he declares the reasons of their banishment, viz. That
though they had subscribed the Nicene Faith, yet after their return home they
had received some Arians into Communion, that the Emperor had removed from
Alexandria for the security of the Peace of that Church, and that wasthefault
of the Eusebians in this whole affair, that though they were not Arians, they
thought that they might communicate with them, as it is evident from the
Synodof Alexandria in their excellent Synodical Epistle, who A^^ ^as. Apol. 2.
p. 738.
do not in the least accuse the Eusebians of Arianism, but only of holding
Communion with them. Not long after the just Banishment of these two trimming
Bishops, Arius is upon his submission restored into the bosom of the Church,
but with a peremptory command never to return to Alexandria, upon which the
banished Bishops are awakened and encou^aged to endeavor their own
Restitution, Soc. l 1. c. 14. Soz. l. 2. c. 16. Theod. l. ^. c. 19. 20.
in that (as they plead in their own behalf) when the person really guilty was
absolved, themselves who had never followed his Heresy, but embraced the
Decrees of the Council in all things and subscribed the Faith of
Con-Substantial, could not but be concerned at least to de^^ver themselves from
the very suspicion of that Here^^e that they never owned, and therefore as they
had before subscribed the ^^^th of the Council, with which they ^^y the Council
was then well satisfied without subscribing the Anathema, so now when they were
ready to give an entire assent and subscribe even that too as well as the Form
of Faith, they hope't it would not only give them complete satisfaction, but
move them to intercede with the Emperor for their Restitution. And that was
easily obtained from him, who was desirous of nothing more then the Peace and
Concord of the Church. But Eusebius being of an haughty and implacable Spirit,
Studies nothing but revenge against Athanasius, who was the chief man, though
in an inferior station, that had born down himself and his whole Party in the
Council. And beside his particular spite against the person of Athanasius, his
Party could not digest the word (...), as Socrates relates, and therefore
raised a new War about it, notwithstanding l. 1. 23.
that they agreed with the Catholics about the whole Doctrine of the Trinity;
When both affirmed (says he) one Godhead subsisting in Three Persons, yet I
know not how it came to pass they were always contending about it. And this we
shall find exactly true that after the Council of Nice they never in the least
appeared in behalf of the Arian Doctrine, but their whole fury was bent against
(...), and Athanasius, And knowing the invincible courage of the Man, they
first set upon him with Calumnies and Accusations, not doubting but that if
they could by any means remove him and some few of his Friends out of the way,
that they might easily overcome the Word. But this they durst not attempt
during the Reign of Constantine, who would never endure to hear of any the
least change of the Nicene Faith, l. 2. c. 32.
and therefore says Zozomen, though they were always heaving at the Nicene
Faith, they durst never openly reject the word (...), for they knew the
Emperors mind in that matter. (...). But after his death they grew strangely
impatient of it, and drew in Constantius (who had been otherwise a very great
Prince) to wast his wholeReign in a tedious War against it, insomuch that he
summoned no less then 14 Councils in less then twenty yearsfor its removal, in
all which the Arians were anathematised, and variety of Creeds composed
agreeing in allthings with that of Nice save only the word (...), as will
appear when we come to his Reign. But as for the Story of the Arian
Controversy under Constantine, after the time of the Nicene Council, it is
strangely perplexed by an unusual confusion among the Historians themselves;
for though they all agree in the substance of the Story, yet they all differ as
to time and order, but their mistakes are easily rectified by Athanasius his
own Account, who has in his Apology all along set down the exact order and
succession of things, and that is all, that is his own in the Apology; for he
was so modest that he would not have his Narrative trusted upon his own
Authority, but has justified every part of it by Testimonials from other men,
public Records, and the Letters of his Enemies under their own hands, so that
the whole Story being its own Evidence needs no other voucher though it be in
all its more materail passages attested by all other Historians. And therefore
I shall by his help set down the Progress of the whole Business with all the
accuracy that I can, because it is one of the foulest trains of Villainy upon
Record, and was the mere contrivance of that wicked men Eusebius of Nicomedia,
a man of great Power and Authority at that time, whence he acquired the Surname
of Great, which Sandius says, he acquired by his great power of working
Miracles; but this Collector is through his whole Rhapsody his own Author, for
though he is every where Prodigal of his Quotations, yet those few that are
truly alleged (and they are very few) or that are at all to the purpose (and
they are much fewer) relate only to the general Story, as it may be told by all
Parties, but his own particular remarks for his own cause are the Fables of his
own pure invention. Thus here it would have been a considerable advantage on
his own side, if Eusebius had been so highly favored of Heaven as to be endued
with a power of working Miracles, and therefore he tells his simple Reader so,
though no body ever told him so; but alas that Ambitious Prelate was so far
from being eminent for any good Qualities, that he was only a Prodigy of Vice
and Wickedness, neither was he in all this Contest acted by any zeal that he
had for Religion, but merely by an Atheistical spite and malice. And he seems
to be one of them, that after Constantine embraced Christianity, came into the
Church not for Religion butPreferment. And he invaded that so greedily, as not
to stick at the most scandalous and open violation of the Canons; neither was
he so much a Bishop as a Courtier, always insinuating himself into the favor
of Great Men, and fawning upon the Emperor himself, but especially courting
his Sisten Constanti^ by whose zeal, he was well awane, if he could gain her to
his side, he might compa^s his ends, And it was his great interest in
Constantine's Court that gave him the power and opportunity of doing so much
mischief in the Church. And we shall find that he was not wanting to improve it
to the utmost, where his Malice, and Revenge were concerned, especially against
Athanasius, whose affront he could never forgive, he having when but a young
Deacon in the public Council encountered and overcome so great a Prelate, and
all that Train of Dependent Bishops, that his Greatness drew after it. So
Powerful a Prelate to suffer all this Disgrace from so mean a Person as a poor
Deacon, and chiefly by his means to be brought upon his knees, and forced to
public Submission, was an indignity so intolerable to his Proud Spirit, that
neither the Deacons own Blood nor the Blood of all his Friends was sufficient
to satiate his unquenshable Revenge. And therefore all the forged Accusations
against him were of Crimes, the Punishment whereof was Capital, such as
Murder, Rapes, and Treason, as the Bishops of Egypt observe Apol. ^. p. 722.
in their Synodical Epistle, so that they impute it to the great Clemency of
Constantine, that when his Enemies sought nothing but his death, he appeased
and prevented their malice by his banishment. The wholeStory runs thus,
E^sebius. having regained the Emperor's favor after his return, writes to
Athanasius for the Restitution of Arius. To which he replies, That the
Ringleaders of Heresies are not so easily to be reconciled to the Church as
the deluded followers, and that the Church was always wont to punish them with
greater and longer severities, and withal that himself was not at all satisfied
of the sincerity of Arius his Repentance, and therefore would not as yet hear
of any motion for his Restitution. This Eusebius immediately seizes as a fit
Handle for his design, and away he goes to the Emperor, tells him that
Athanasius keeps up Discord in the Church for his own private Picques and
Animosities, so that though Arius desired his Absolution upon repentance, yet
he contrary to his duty and all the Laws of the Church refused it. Upon this
Constantine writes a very threatening Letter to Athanasius, commanding the
Restitution of Arius upon pain of deposition and banishment, to which
Athanasius returns such a satisfactory Answer as made the Emperor desist from
interposing any farther in it. Eusebius therefore finding himself defeated,
tampers with the Meletian Schismatics of Egypt to make a Plot against
Athanasius. They were a sort of People that lived in the Boggs and Marshes of
Mareotis, where one Priest served ten or more Parishes, much resembling our
wild Irish for dullness and stupidity; and they are thus described by the
Bishops of the Council of Alexandria, To be men void of faith, Schismatics and
Enemies to Apol. p. 731.
the Church, neither was this their first practice in this. Trade, but they
were old and experienced Plot-makers, they had conspired against their Holy
Bishop Peter the Martyr, and after him they Accused his Successor Achillas, and
then Alexander, whom they prosecuted even into the Emperor's Courts, and being
thus versed and practiced in Contriving Plots, they now hook in Athanasius,
doing nothing strange to their old wickedness, and though their Calumnies
against their former Bishops proved ineffectual, yet now at last they had their
end by the assistance of the Eusebians. With whom these Good Men (as Mr. Baxter
very prudently and feasonably for the Credit of his Party observes) joined
Interest, notwithanding that they knew them to be Arians, just as if the
Nonconformists at this time should seek by the favor of the Papists to be
delivered from the silencing and destroying Prelates upon condition of Common
Liberty, the cases are not much unlike. You may safely take his word for it,
and for the reality of the matter of Fact too, and it is one of the fairest
Confessions of Presbyterian Integrity that I have met with, though it is not
the only Knavish Plot against the Church of England, that Mr. B's indiscretion
has betrayed, as will appear in its due place little to the reputation of some
men's honesty, who have been very busy without any Authority from their
Superiors to Trim and Plot away every thing of the Church of England but its
Revenues. But the Plot, being laid against Athanasius, they first tell a blind
Story of a kind of Nags-Head Ordination, that he was privately ordein'd by no
more then six or seven Bishops against the Vote of the Provincial Synod and the
Suffrage of the People. But And yet Philostorgius has been so dull as to record
this Story for an undoubted truth, notwithstanding those many clear Testimonies
of its falsehood still extant, particularly the Synodical Epistle of the
Egyptian Bishops, written on purpose for its confutation, l. 3. c. 11.
this was right Mareotick dullness, and was soon contradicted by all the Bishops
of Egypt and all the Inhabitants of Alexandria, who were so far from opposing
his Election, that they had almost run themselves into Tumults to hasten his
Consecreation. Then Stories are told of his Arbitrary exactions of Money from
the People, but Macarius one of his Presbyters happening to be present at the
Tale, informs the Emperor that it was nothing but an usual Collection to repair
and adorn the Church. Upon this Macarius is not long after Accused of
Conspiring with Athanasius to send Money to Philumenus, that was to murder the
Emperor, but they both appear at Constantinople, and so satisfy him of their
Innocence, and the absurdity of the Accusation, in that they had never known
nor seen the Man (for in former times Men that were Strangers to each other
were not wont to enter into such Plots, that if discovered must certainly cost
them their lives) and therefore the Emperor being assured that they were no
familiar acquaintance with the Traitor, does not only acquit them but sends
them home with commendatory Letters.

But these defeats instead of abating the impudence of the Eusebians, do but
more exasperate their rage, and therefore they now resolve to stab home,
Eusebius having gotten a new Evidence fit for the purpose, one Ischiras a
debauched pretended Priest, that had fo^ged his Holy Orders, whom Athanasius in
his l^st Visitation had deposed, and forced to fly the Country; he repairs to
Eusebius, and offers him his Service as an Evidence, he receives him as a true
Presbyter into his protection, and gives him the promise of a Bishopric, if he
will swear home against Athanasius, he immediately Swears that Athanasius had
Assaulted his Church (though he never had any) in an Hostile manner, and that
either himself or his Presbyter M^cari^^ (for he would not be positive as to
Persons) had in their rage overturned the Communion Table, broke in pieces the
mystical Cup, (so they called it to make it appear more terrible) and burnt the
Bibles. But all this would proceed no farther then Deposition, and therefore he
adds, that Athanasius had with his own hands murdered Arsenius a Bishop, and
shows a Man's hand, that was cut off by Athanasius, when the Fact was done, and
Arsenius himself being of the Confederacy was to abscond by consent, till
Athanasius was dispatched out of the way. But so it happened very
unfortunately, that Ischyras his Conscience (it seems Perjury in that Age was
not grown to its full assurance) misgave him, so that he confessed the forgery
of the whole Plot in a Letter to Athanasius himself, subscribed in the presence
of a great number of Clergy; but the Caufe had been referred by the Emperor to
Dalmatius the Governor of Egypt; and before the Trial Athanasius had the good
luck to find out the murdered Arsenius, and had him forthcoming at the Trial;
and though at first he pleaded ignorance of himself, and denied himself to be
the Man, and would have sworn himself out of himself, yet being Convicted by a
cloud of Witnesses, he confessed the Conspiracy, and upon the shame of so clear
a Conviction (for modesty had not then quite left the Earth) both he and John a
Ring-leading Bishop among the Miletians confess all the Villainy, beg Athanasius
his Pardon, and the Communion of the Catholic Church. This the good Man could
not but think enough to secure his Innocence against the like attempts forever,
and therefore with all have he dispatches away his faithful Presbyter Macarius
to acquaint the Emperor with all that had passed, and upon the information
Constantine breaks up the Court, clears Athanasius, and by his Letters to
Alexandria declares the Villainy of the Meletians. And here the Plot slept for
near two years before Eusebius durst revive it, but having with great pains and
promises recovered his Evidence, he and his Party insinuate to the Emperor,
That Athanasius had taken off Bishop John by great sums of Money, and had so
threatened the poor Meletian Nonconformists (for so Mr. B. calls these plotting
Schismatics) that they durst not appear to give in their Evidence against him;
That the show of Arsenius was all a rank cheat, and that the Person that
appeared in his stead was hired by Athanasius, and attested only by a few of
his own Combination. The Emperor is both tired and amused with all this
intrigue, and therefore summons a Council at Tire to find out the bottom of
these Plots, and unravel the whole Information on both sides. Where Athanasius
accompanied with the Bishops of his Province, appears with that boldness and
security that became his Innocence; for though flying Stories may gain credit
among the multitude, whilst they are no more then Stories, yet when they are
brought to a public Examination before Judges, though themselves be Parties,
they so visibly ^^^^ their own folly, that few Men have confidence enough to
protect and support their falsehood. And so it happened here, for Dionysius, who
was appointed President to see that all things were fairly carried, was himself
of the Eusebian Faction, and the Bishops that sat were of Dionysius and
Eusebius his own packing, and yet for all that the Plot was lost in the
management, and came to nothing; and indeed so defective and unfortunate was it
in its Evidence, that no disingenuity in the Judges could piece it up. The
Counterfeit Priest Ischiras is re-produced, and in hopes of his Bishopric,
swears all over again that he had before forsworn, but it seems though he stood
not Convicted of Perjury, the Court was ashamed of his Evidence, for by the
Imperial Law a Man that swore manifest Contradictions was supposed to have
sworn himself a perjured Person without the formality of any other Conviction.
But after this they bring upon the Stage such a Plot, that if Athanasius had
not broken through it by a very lucky Counter-Comedy, must have ensnared him
beyond all relief. On the sudden comes in a beautiful Woman, a common Strumpet,
that had wit and impudence enough to act her part, and she with abundance of
Tears, and all the Solemnities of Grief declares, That when she had devoted her
self to Virginity, she was ravished by Athanasius. And now here you may think
that the Eusebians were confident they had him fast enough, but they were
strangely outwitted, for Athanasius stands careless, and like a Person
unconcerned, and Timotheus one of his Presbyters that stood next to him,
immediately takes the Accusation upon himself, and with great seriousness and
passion Expostulates with the Woman, where and when he had ever been in her
Company, at which she directing her discourse to him, and pointing directly at
him, answers, Yes Sir it was you, you I say, that offered me this dishonorable
violence and rudeness, with other foul form^ of Speech, that are usual with
such Persons in like cases. And yet though this dash't the Court somewhat out
of countenance, and Athanasius requested that the Woman might be secured for
farther Examination, yet was ^he dismissed so as never to be found more; and he
is told that there are much blacker Crimes still behind, of which he should be
convinced, not by his Ears but his Eyes, and so out comes the hand of Arsenius,
for they now supposed themselves secure of him; being fled for fear of his life
(for the Eusebians had threatened, that if ever they could reach him, they would
make him pay dear for his discovery.) But such was the diligence, and so great
the Correspondence of Athanasius, that he still had him in his Pocket, brings
him into Court, demands whether they knew the Man, and he being owned to be the
same, both by the Judges and the Evidence, he turns back first one side of his
Cloak and shows one hand, but they cry that it was the other hand that was Soc.
l. 1. c. 29.
cut off, and to give them encouragement he keeps them in some suspense; but
after a while, when they began to be confident, he turns back the other side
and brings out the other hand, saying, You see that Arsenius has his two hands,
and that is as many as God made him, but from whence the third hand was cut
off, I hope the Evidence will prove; and yet for all this his Enemies, though
(as Theodoret observes) they ought for mere shame to have wished the Earth to
swallow them up quick, finding themselves so woefully defeated, they send some
of the rankest Members of the Committee of Secrecy to Mareotis for new
Evidence; and in the mean while continue their Sessions Soc. l. 2. c. 25.
from time to time, where all things are carried with Tumult and Confusion, the
Evidence which were numerous, and the Rabble crying out and raving for his
blood, the Emperors Officers that were sent thither to secure the Peace,
fearing lest (as is usual in Seditions) the Rabble should take head, and tear
him in pieces before their faces, conveigh him out of the Council; and he being
tired with all these foul dealings, and finding that they were resolved upon
his ruin, conveighs himself from Tire, and repairs to the Emperor at
Constantinople, to complain of his hard usage, and implore his protection
against all that inhumanity that he had suffered in the Council; but the
Emperor was so prejudiced that he would neither see nor hear him, and withal so
guarded by the Eusebians that Athanasius could get no admittance into his
presence, and is forced to accost him in the Streets, but the Emperor regards
him not, scarce gives him any hearing but no answer; in the mean time the
Committee return from Ma^eotis with Cloak-bags full of fresh Evidence, not to
be Communicated any farther then the Committee of Secrecy, and though all
Accusations, whatever they were, were abundantly controuled, and overpowered
by several unexceptionable Certificates from the place, in behalf of
Athanasius, and though even Dionysius himself was at length ashamed of the
whole business, as he intimates in his Letter to the Eusebians, perhaps
frighted to it by the bold conclusion of In Council. Max. Tom. 2. p. 455.
a Letter from the Clergy of the Diocese of Alexandria, wherein they tell the
Council, That they had sent Copies of it to the Emperor himself, that so they
might not suppress it, as by all their unworthy and unjust actings they had too
much reason to suspect they would, but yet for all this, the Committee
pretending that they were satisfied of the whole matter, Athanasius is in his
absence Deposed and Excommunicated, the Meletians Absolved, and Ischiras made
Bishop of his own Village, and a Church built on purpose in it for his
Cathedral; and to complete the Extravagance of the Scene, Arsenius himself was
taken into the Council; and the Soc. l. 1. ^. 32.
Man that was slain by Athanasius, voted his Deposition, and subscribed it with
the very hand that was cut off.

. IX.
But Constantine considering with himself the modesty and reasonableness of
Athanasius his request, only that he would be pleased to hear him before the
Judges that had condemned him, it at length put him into some choler, and so
confident an Appeal made him suspect some foul dealing, and therefore he
Summons them in high terms, immediately to appear before himself, to give an
account of their proceedings. But they being conscious to themselves of the
foulness of their actions, send only a few of the Court-Bishops, who craftily
wave all their old and bafled Accusations at Tire, amuse and surprise the
Emperor with a new Story, That Athanasius should threaten to stop the
Victualling Ships from Alexandria, and boast that it was in his power to starve
the City of Constantinople: This was a very tender point with the Emperor, that
touched his own darling City, and this they very well knew, he having not long
before put ^unap. invita Sopat.
his great Favorite Sopa^er the Philosopher to death for the very same
Accusation. So that here (as Athanasius himself reports it) the Emperor's fury
Apol. p. 805.
took fire, he immediately fell into a rage, and without any hearing the cause,
or without any form of Judgment, commanded my speedy banishment into France.
And shortly after the Emperor dies, of whose intention his Eldest Son, that
best knew it, informs us, That his Father only removed Athanasius for a time,
to rescue him from the rage of blood-thirsty Men, that were resolved to have
his life, intending in a little time to restore him to his Bishopric, but was
prevented by death. And therefore the young Emperor declares, That it was in
pursuance of his Fathers Will, that he commanded his Restitution. And
Athanasius himself is so far from Accusing the Ep. ad Solit.
Emperor's rigor, that he imputes his banishment purely to his kindness, to
deliver him from the Rage and the Snares of the Eusebians; and therefore when
they importuned the Emperor to put another Bishop in his place, thereby to
prevent his Restitution, he was peremptory in his refusal, and would never hear
of it without great indignation. But however Athanasius being removed out of
the way, the next thing they endeavor is the restitution of Arius upon his
pretended Repentance; for it is all along suggested to the Emperor, that he had
renounced his Heresy, and the desired Communion of the Church, which was
denied him only by the peevishness of Athanasius, and that it was his single
wilfulness herein that was the cause of all these troubles. The Emperor at
their importunity recalls Arius and his Associate Euzoius; and for the security
of their Repentance, they humbly present him with their Confession of Faith, in
which they come up to the Nicene Creed in all things, but only the very word
(...), for though they baulk the word it self, they clearly assert the thing,
and instead of their profane Novelties, That the Son of God was made out of
nothing, and that there was a time when he was not, that are the two main
points of the Arian Heresy, they now affirm (...), the Son of God to be God,
begotten of his Father from Eternity; but if so, it is undeniable that he was
of the same uncreated Substance with the Father, and this is so easy and
intelligible in it self, that it was a most unaccountable kind of perverseness
in the Eusebians to make so much stir against the word (...), that did but more
plainly express the Notion that themselves profess't to maintain: But upon this
Arius is received and sent to Alexandria with commendatory Letters, not only
from the Council but the Emperor, in which (as Sandius adds of l. 2. p. 35.
his own pure good Will) he renounces the Nicene Determination, and rejecting
the word (...), recommends to them that of (...), and that Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria subscribed the Letter, and that a Reconciliation was then made
between him and the Arians, and this he proves with great gravity from Book and
Chapter of Socrates and Sozomen; but if you consult the places referred to,
there is nothing like this Story, and they happen to treat of quite different
matters, as particularly the Chapter of Sozomen, of the Conversion of the
Iberians. And as for the Story of Alexander's subscription, it is as foolish as
false, for that good Man dyed long before this time, viz. within five Months
after the Council of Nice, whereas this Letter was not sent till after the
banishment of Athanasius, that succeeded him; and yet after this time does this
injudicious Scribler make him to prevaricate his promise, and then again
Relapse to the Homousian Heresy. But this he is forced to do, to make
something of the inconsistent Tales of Philostorgius, who places all this Fable
immediately after the Nicene Council, but that being so apparently false, and
against all Records, this Historian would thrust it in at this more obscure
time, but so unfortunately, that the chief Actor that he brings upon the Stage,
was long since out of the World. And after the same rate is he confounded and
lost through the whole Series of this Story, so that at this time he places the
return of Eusebius and Theognis from banishment, and to it tacks a pleasant
Fable of his own pure devising, viz. That the Emperor after their return,
enquiring of them the reason of their dissent from the Decrees of the Council,
when they had subscribed them, ^^ey answered, That they subscribed not
willingly, but being afraid lest he being offended at the Quarrel should fall
off from the Christian Religion, as too uncertain and full of Controversy, and
then from an Apostate turn a Persecutor, with which the Emperor being
satisfied, resolves to call another Council to mend matters, but is prevented
by death. But a Man that can write thus confidently out of his own pure
invention, is a very fit second for Philostorgius, and a fit Patron to make out
the fair carriage of the Arians and Eusebians in this whole Story. But to
return to Arius, when he came to Alexandria, they shut their Gates against him,
and he is forced to turn back to Constantinople, where was met a Council of
Eusebians against Marcellus, then an eminent Defender of the Catholic Faith;
for having at last Conquered Athanasius they now resolve to rout the whole
Party. In this Council Arius presents himself to the Emperor, and complains of
the affront that was offered to him by the Alexandrians, but here he is again
Catechized concerning his Faith, and the Emperor to tie him fast is not content
with his bare Subscription, but makes him give in his Confession upon Oa^^ And
upon this security he comman^^ Alexander Bishop of Constantinople to receive
him into the Communion of the Church, which the good Man flatly refuses, and
hereupon the Eusebians agree to accompany him to the Church with extraordinary
Pomp and Triumph, but in the midst of the Procession Arius was snatched away
with that strange kind of death that is well known to have been his singular
Fate.

But here our faithful Arian Historians Philostorgius and Sandius, are so wise
and ingenuous as to say no more of the Stories of Ischiras, Arsenius, and all
the other parts of the Tyrian Plot, then that Athanasius was accused in Council
of all the Crimes charged against him, and by them found Guilty, and that when
the Commissioners from the Council appeared before the Emperor, they so
convinced Athanasius of all the Crimes laid to his charge, and so satisfied the
Emperor of his guilt, that he immediately sentenced him to banishment; these
are worthy Historians, and proper Advocates for the management of the Eusebian
Cause, that have the confidence to outface public and undeniable Records; the
foulness of all these proceedings was made evident by the Acts of Court yet
extant, and the Confessions of the Witnesses themselves, particularly Ischiras,
under Hand and Seal, and all this within short time after the Transactions
themselves, published to the whole World by Athanasius himself in the face of
his Enemies without any contradiction: And now when the whole forgery was thus
shamefully exposed in the face of the Sun, and stood so upon Record to all
Ages, are not these wise Men to think that they are able to slur so clear an
Evidence only by their trifling it? as if all the World were so blind or so
foolish as to read or believe nothing but their Fables. And yet this incredible
confidence is all the strength of these daring Historians.

This is the true State of the Arian Controversy, during the Reign of
Constantine, and by all the premises it is evident, that the Heresy it self
could never openly appear after the Nicene Council, and that all the stirs,
that were raised after that, were occasioned by the folly and malice of the
Eusebians, who profess't themselves Catholics; and that their contest with
Athanasius was not about points of Faith, but his own particular Crimes and
Misdemeanors, of which they falsely and wickedly accused him to the Emperor. So
that his actings against Athanasius, after the Nicene Council proceeded not
from any change of mind in him concerning the Faith (as some surmise) for it is
evident through his whole Reign that he was highly tender of that as it was
settled by the great Council, and only proceeded against Athanasius as a Person
of a Turbulent and unquiet Spirit, as he was represented to him by the
Calumnies of his Enemies. Though how he could be so long imposed upon after
such discoveries as were made of the Villar^ies of the Meletians appears
somewhat unaccountable. For what can be more so, then that men Convicted of
Forgery in open Court, should ever after be admitted as Witnesses in the same
Cause and the same Court? But yet if we observe the matter carefully, all this
was done without the Emperors knowledge, for after the first discovery that
was made to him by Athanasius, all the rest was transacted by his Officers, for
he knew nothing of the whole Comedy of the Council of Tire, in which the whole
business was managed, neither durst the Managers themselves acquaint him with
any thing of theStory, but when they appear before him at his angry Summons
that he sent only upon suspicion of their injustice, they on a sudden surprise
and divert his rage upon Athanasius by a new and unexpected Accusation, that
they very well knew by experience he could not bear, having for the same thing
destroyed the man he loved. And therefore as Constantine was not only not Privy
to the Plot himself, so neither was he guilty of that remisness in its
Examination, as is commonly supposed; for beside his ignorance of the
transactions in the Tyrian Council, the whole mystery of it lay in the secret
Confederacy between the Eusebians and the Meletians, that the Emperor could
have no ground to suspect in the Council, for the Meletians were an obscure and
contemptible handful of men in a remote and neglected part of the Empire, and
who could suspect a Conspiracy between these poor wretches, and Eusebius of
Nicomedia and some of his own Courtiers? And yet this one unsusspected piece of
Villainy was the bottom of all Athanasius his Calamities. Neither do I think the
Emperor alone innocent in this whole matter, but several of the Judges and
Prosecutors, that were imposed upon by the Forgery; for it is not every one
that Acts in a Plot that is privy to its Contrivance: that is kept within the
close Cabal; and National Plots in which vast variety of Persons unknown to one
another are engaged, are not to be found in every age, for it is but seldom
that mankind are so madly extravagant as to venture their lives at so cheap a
rate. At least in the days of Constantine men were somewhat more wary, and if
any man had sworn a Story of such a Plot, the very absurdity of his own Tale
would have Convicted him of Forgery. And therefore we may be sure that at that
time the secret was kept among a few, who till it was discovered and brought
into the Light, might draw in many others to act very enormous things with fair
and plausible Pretenses. This I take to be the peculiar Apology that wholly
clears Constantines innocence in this Matter, his utter ignorance of the Plot,
and the little ground he had to suspect it, though beside that, there are
diverse other Pleas that though they will not wholly justify, will very much
excuse his Actions. As first the great lenity and gentleness of his Nature,
that was abused and imposed upon by ill men, who insinuated themselves into his
favor by a counterfeit Zeal for Christianity, and by that means gained the
greatest places of Trust and Dignity in the Empire, and such men would be sure
to abuse their Power to the ruin and oppression of the People. This is
remarqued as the peculiar blot of his Reign by the Historians of all Parties,
Ammianus Marcellinus says, that it was the Emperor himself that opened the
devouring Jaws of his l. 1^.
Courtiers. And Aurelius Victor says, that under him the exaction of Taxes was
raised to the highest Oppression, and (though an Heathen) that his Reign was in
all other things like the Kingdom of Heaven, had not the Chief Offices of State
been given to unworthy Men, which Miscarriages though they are often committed,
yet in a Great Prince and Good Government, even small Vices appear a great
blemish. Eutropius observes the very same defect, and Eusebius himself has l.
4. c. 54.
left this Character of his whole Reign. The two great Calamities of his time
were the intolerable Oppression of wicked and covetous men, that devoured all
parts of the Empire, and the false and hypocritical pretense to Christianity,
to sweep away all the best preferments, and to this miscarriage the Emperors
own good nature and the assurance of his own integrity betrayed him, so that he
would trust any man that did but dissemble Christianity, or pretend any Zeal to
his own service, and by this means many shameful and dishonest things were
done, as if the Devil had out of mere envy to his Glory dashed this blot upon
his other Virtues and Praises. And the two remarkable instances of this defect
in his Reign are Ablavius in the State, and Eusebius of Nicomedia in the
Church, two as bad men as usually any age produces, and the great power and
wickedness of Eusebius, was the great infelicity of the Church under
Constantine, for as Baronius has very well observed, (and I will say that for
him he Adan. 336.
has been very just to this Great Princes Memory) his Court was filled with
Eusebians, by the favor of his Son Constantius, who from the time of his
having been created Caesar, though a younger Brother was the chief manager of
Affairs of State, in that he minded Business whilst his Elder Brother
Constantine followed his Pleasures. And therefore all the worship of the Court
was made to this active young Prince as the Rising Sun. So that he being
Governed by Eusebius of Nicomedia (as he always was) he carefully stopped and
guarded all passages of Complaint from the Catholics to the Emperor, as
appears by the Address of Athanasius, who could gain no admittance at Court,
but was forced to accost him as he rode through the Streets, and the Emperor
was possessed with so ill an Opinion of him, that he would neither then hear his
Complaint, nor order his attendance at Court, which was a very unusual severity
in his Government. And yet his love of Justice appears, in that when Athanasius
Petitioned for nothing else then that he might be heard by the Emperor before
his Tyrian Judges, he immediately summoned them at so just and modest an
Appeal. And then Athanasius might easily have cleared himself, had they not
surprised and overwhelmed him with a new Accusation attested by his own best
friends, for the Witnesses that they produced of his threatening to hinder the
Transportation of Corn to Constantinople were some of those, that had appeared
most eminently in his defense at the Tyrian Council. This was an Evidence that
could not be withstood, nor is it to be avoided but by one of these two ways.
Either that Athanasius being vexed out of all Patience by so long a Train of
base usage, and knowing his great and popular interest at Alexandria, might in
some sudden and extravagant Passion have bolted out some such threatening,
which though it were a very high Crime in the Emperors Esteem, no less then
Treason against his own Royal City, yet its Enormity consisted in its great
rashness and indiscretion; and this to me seems very probable, if we consider
his Great Spirit, his Choleric Constitution, and his Infinite Provocation: or
else that his Friends were since the Council taken off by the Briberies and
Flatteries of the Eusebians. But if it were so, the Emperor could have no
Evidence for it, neither indeed have we any ground to surmise it was so, and
therefore the thing being so fully attested by Athanasius his own Friends, it
was as fair a Testimony as could be given in any Case; no wonder then that it
raised the Emperors displeasure so high, that he would hear no more, when it
endangered the Peace of the Empire, and the ruin of his own City, that could
not possibly subsist without the constant supplies from Alexandria.

To all which we may add the Emperor's impatient desire of Peace and Concord
in the Christian Church, as it is visible through his whole Reign, and of this
Athanasius was all along represented to him as the only Obstacle and therefore
Sozomen leaves it doubtful whether the Emperor banished him because he believed
l. 2. c. 28.
the Accusations against him, or because it would be a means of settling Concord
among the other Bishops, the whole Quarrel being about him, and as his Enemies
represented it, merely raised and kept up by him; and therefore when Anthony
the Famous Monk of Egypt interceded for his Restitution, the Emperor returns
in Answer, that Athanasius was a proud and provoking man, and a Ringleader ib.
c. 31.
of Discord and Sedition, for these were the Crimes (says the Historian) that
his Adversaries chiefly objected against him, because the Emperor of all men
in the World most hated men of that temper. And therefore because John the
Meletian Bishop was the head of the other Faction, he sent him into banishment
too, supposing that when the Leaders were out of the way, the Schism would dye
of its own accord.

Now if we lay all these things together, we shall have no reason to lay any
hard usage or foul dealing to Constantine in this whole affair, and they that
best understood it, altogether acquit him, as we have seen from the Council of
Alexand^ia, from Athanasius himself, and from Constantine the younger. And
Theodoret pleads in his excuse, agreeable to what l. 1. c. 33.
we have observed above of his easiness to be imposed upon by men that
pretended well, That he was apparently circumvented in the whole transaction by
trusting to the honesty of some Bishops, that hid their Malice and Wickedness
under great shows of Piety And therefore it is but a rash conclusion of St.
Jerome and Lucifer Calaritanus, that Constantine before his Death turned Arian.
When his zeal for the Nicene Faith was so evident through all the Actions of
his life, when the Eusebians themselves, by whom he was deceived, were great
pretenders against the Arian Heresy, and when he would not be reconciled to
Arius till he had upon Oath professed the Catholic Faith, and when himself was
careful to tie on the Obligation of the Oath with all possible severity,
telling him, if your faith be right your Oath is good, but if Heretical and yet
you have sworn, know this that God will judge you from Heaven. All which is
very far from looking any thing like Arianism, but St. Jerome was an hasty man,
and abounds too much with these harsh and heedless censures, and Lucifer
Calaritanus though he were a Catholic was a very peevish man, and out of mere
peevishness turned Schismatic from the Catholics, and is the firstCatholick
Christian that I can find upon Record, that ever spoke rudely and indecently of
a Sovereign Prince as he did of Constantius, before his Apostasy from the
Church. For immediately after his Restitution he utterly forsook its Communion,
because the Catholics admitted the Arian Clergy into it upon Repentance, and
is so stubborn in his Schism, that to keep it up he forsakes his Bishopric in
Sardinia, flies into Africa, the Soil of Schisms as well as Monsters, and there
joins Faction though not Communion with the Donatists, for though they never
communicated with each other, yet they United Interests against the Catholics.
And therefore his rudeness to the Emperor Constantius, and his Calumny of
Constantine though done by him whilst a Catholic, proceeded from his Spirit of
Donatism, that was discovered by his after-Actions. And now having thus far set
down the true Story of the Arian Cont^oversie under this Emperor as to matter
of Fact, and from it exemplyfied both the Authority and Duty of Christian
Princes in the Government of the Church, I shall forbear making any remarks or
reflections upon it, till I have given an Historical account of the exercise of
the same power, by his Successors in the following Ages of the Church, whereby
we shall find that the example of this Great Prince was set up as the best
Standard of Government, and that those Princes that were most careful to
discharge their Conscience toward the Church, and most prudent in the exercise
of their power over it, propounded his example to themselves for the Pattern of
their Reign, and that those swerved more or less from the right Rule of
Government, who forsook his Method to set up new Politics of their own
devising; from whence we shall not only exemplify the right and wrong exercise
of Regal Supremacy in the Christian Church, but withal discover the several
Grounds and Reasons, upon which the power of Princes (though not
Ec^lesiastical) comes to be so far interessed in matters of the Church, as to
be superior to its own proper power, and that I hope is sufficient to settle
this Argument.

. X.
After the death of Constantine the Great, the Empire is divided between his
three Sons, and that, as it is most commonly supposed upon the Authority of
Eusebius, by his last Will and Testament, De Vita Constant. l. 4. c. 51.
though if we consult the passage it self, it is only a loose expression fitted
to a Panegyric rather then an History; and so are all his four Books of the
Life of Constantine, and amounts to no more then this, That he left the Empire
divided like a Patrimony between his three Sons, but that any division was
formally made by Will, is an Addition of his Translator Ruffinus, who indeed is
the first Founder of the Story, and for that reason we must pass it among his
other numberless Crudities. For though his Story is pretended to be nothing
else then a Translation of Eusebius, yet he has performed it after that bold
and careless rate, as almost to have turned the History into a Romance by
flourishing it with variety of circumstances of his own invention. And
therefore where he adds any thing to Eusebius, he is to be turned off, as an
Author of no Credit, for no worse reason then this, because he speaks without
Authority, for now he can have but that of Eusebius. So that whatever he has
given us over and above what Eusebius has given him, must pass for an
extravagant Dream and Vision of his own over hot Brain. And such is this
passage, that Constantine himself made by Will the Division of the Empire
between his three Sons, whereas Eusebius makes no mention of any Will, but only
affirms in general terms, and that in a Panegyrical Style, that he divided the
Empire, that is, left it divided to his Sons as it were a Paternal Inheritance,
which Ruffinus has boldlytranslated [liberis de successione Romani Orbis
Testamento haeredibus scriptis] And this bold rendering is all the ground of
this Conceit, for as for the Story of Constantines delivering his Will to an
Arian Presbyter, it looks so like an Arian Fiction, and is so utterly destitute
of any timely Authority, that as it can deserve no credit, so I cannot think it
worth any Examination. Especially when it is so evident that he was so far from
making the Dividend between his Sons before his death, that there was an
intrigue after it for three Months and an half, all which Idatius in Fastis.
times his Sons took not upon them the Imperial Authority, which was denoted by
the Title of Augustus, but kept that of the Caesar's, which they had before, and
is synonimous with that of Prince in other Empires and Kingdoms, till each man
took upon him the Government of his own share, so that it is not improbable
that the division was made among themselves, as it is expressly attested by
Zozimus and Victor, and shrewdly intimated by Julian Orat. 1. Ed. Petav. p. 60.
75.
himself in his Panegyric to Constantius, where he commends the Brothers for
agreeing so amicably among themselves in the Division of the Empire, in that
they had done as the Sons of Darius of old, who referred the like Controversy
to the Arbitration of Friends instead of deciding it by the Sword; now this
prudence and moderation had been very little commendable in Constantius and his
Brothers, if every man's lot had been beforehand legally settled and determined
by their Father, at least their reiterated Commendation for agreeing so fairly
among themselves in sharing the Empire, shows that it was their own Act and
Deed, and not their Fathers settlement. Though after all the most likely
conjecture is, that every man kept that part, of which he was in possession as
Viceroy at his Eathers death; for it is certain that at the time of his death
the Government of the Empire under him was shared among them after the same
manner, as it ever after continued, and therefore it was but a chance that the
eldest Brother succeeded in that part that came from the Grandfather, in that
he then happened to be the present Viceroy of it; and it is but a lavish
conceit that some would Collect from the Panegyric of Eusebius, that he
succeeded to it as Heir of the Family, whereas Eusebius affirms nothing more,
then that the eldest Son had that part that came from the Grandfather; but upon
what account it was allotted to him he says nothing, and therefore it is most
probable that as he succeeded not by right of Inheritance, (for there was no
such thing at that time in the Roman Empire, and if there had, he must have
inherited his Fathers Empire as well as his Grandfathers;) so neither by Will
or Testament, for then his Father had dealt very unkindly by his Eldest Son to
leave him but a younger Brothers Portion, viz. one half of the Western Empire,
and that the worst too, the Transalpine Provinces; but merely by the Casual
Title of Possession which he was forced to accept of, because his Younger
Brothers would part with none of their demeans, and therefore which way soever
the Lot was cast, he was so dissatified with his own division, that he invaded
his younger Brothers Dominions, Italy, and Africa, but perished in the attempt:
So that though he was a friend to the Orthodox Faith, yet he lived not long
enough to do it any considerable Service, only he recalled Athanasius from
banishment speedily after his Father's death, in that he subscribes his Letter
to the Alexandrians, commanding his reception, by the name of Caesar, which
must be within the three Months before the division, and that shows the
forwardness of his zeal in the cause. Though Sandius, the Arian that would be,
if he l. 2. p. 18.
knew what it meant, is here so impudent as to tell us, thut upon the death of
Constantine, Athanasius immediately returned to Alexandria without any Warrant
from Authority; and is so shameless, or rather stupid, as to cite for it those
very Chapters in Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret, where the Princes Letters,
by which he was recalled with all expressions of kindness, are Recorded, and
this is to prove that he returned to Alexandria in contempt of that Authority
by which he was banished, and the these Letters are so full of respect and
honor to Athanasius, yet this modest Man blushes not to set down the Prince
that sent them for a Patron of Arianism. I find strange dealing with the
Records of the Church by all Factions, that will not or dare not be honest; but
this Man's whole story is nothing better then a mere blot dashed upon them all,
and yet because his Tale, though it be as dull as false, is cross to the
received Opinion of the Church, from the Council of Nice to this very day, it
is embraced as a great and weighty discovery, and the silly Scribler Canonised
among the Wits and the Worthies of this discerning Age, and therefore though,
whoever he was, he be a very contemptible thing of himself, yet because he has
got the Authority of a fashionable Vogue, I am forced all along as I proceed in
this Story, to expose his want of common Sense as well as common Honesty, only
to let the unlearned Scepticks of the Age see by what woeful Dunces they are
cheated out of their Religion. And next to insorming them of the real Truth of
things, I take this way of checking their pride and folly to be the best method
to reduce them to Sobriety. But to leave this Pedant, and return to my Story:
Upon the death of Constantine the younger, the whole Western Empire falls to
his Brother Constans, and so came in that fatal division both of the Empire and
the Church, that at last proved the utter ruin and destruction of both. For
after this time we read of nothing so much as Wars and Dissentions between the
two States, and Schisms and Divisions between the two Churches (unless now and
then when the Empire happened to be united in one wise Prince, as in Valentinian,
Theodosius, and Marcian,) till at last the Empire was swallowed up by its own
divisions, and the incursions of the Barbarians, and the Church split asunder
by an irreconcilable Schism between the Greeks and Latins. The first
Foundation of which breach was laid by these two Brothers, who unhappily
divided the Clergy of the Empire as well as the Civil State: For Constantius
siding with the Eusebians in the East, and Constans with the Athanasians in the
West, which was now become the quarrel, the cause of Arius being wholly laid
aside by both Parties, and the only contest now was, Whether the word (...)
ought to be cashiered as offensive, because unscriptural, as the Eusebians
contended, or to be preserved as a necessary defense against the Arian Heresy,
as Athanasius and his friends truly maintained. Now each Party having the Power
of the Empire to abet and support its interest, and the Division being become a
kind of a State-Faction; this to be sure made the breach wider, and the quarrel
fiercer then a mere Ecclesiastical Schism could have come to, insomuch that it
sometime came very near to a Civil War between the two Brothers. All which was
chiefly occasioned by the folly of Constantius, who being the more zealous and
serious of the two (for Constans gave himself more up to his pleasure and
luxury) he was so much the more busy in the advancement of his Faction, and it
is an astonishing thing to observe how childishly he spent his whole Reign in
Metaphysical wranglings about Religion, as he is justly and too truly censured
by Ammianus Marcellinus. Christianam religionem absolutam l. 1. c. 16.
and simplicem anili superstitione confundens; in qua scrutanda perplexius,
quam componenda gravius, excitavit discidia plurima, quae progressa fusius
aluit concertatione verborum; ut catervis Antistitum jumentis publicis ultro
citroque discurrentibus per Synodos quas appellant, dum ritum omnem ad suum
trahere conatur arbitrium, rei vehiculariae succideret Nervos. He debauched the
Christian Religion, that was plain and easy in it self, into Old-wives
Superstition, and by being more nice then wise in his Enquiries and
Speculations about it, he so entangled it into endless Knots and Controversies
about mere words, that he wore away the public Highways, and his own Carriages
by conveighing Bishops backward and forward to Councils, when after all he took
upon himself to determine all controversies by his own Arbitrary resolution of
all things. And this Character is truer then the Pagan Soldier, who understood
not the particulars, could be aware of, for the word (...) was the only object
of his fury, and as St. Athanasius somewhere expresses it, he spent more pains
upon it, then in all his Persian War; what numbers of Councils, like so many
Armies, did he summon to encounter and cashiere it, and after what an Arbitrary
and unprincely manner did he behave himself in them to have his Will of it?
Instead of calling free Councils, and allowing free Conference in them, he
takes upon himself the Power of presiding and determining all by his own
imperious Commands, and at length tired out himself with vain struglings
against the Churches Authority, and after Five and Twenty years War against one
poor single Nazianz. in laudibus Athanas.
word, he repents his folly, and dies with the confession of it in his mouth.
But what if the word did not please his Palate, what need of all this rage and
indignation against it? And granting that it might have been spared at first as
those that Seduced him pleaded; yet when it was approved and settled by the
Authority of the great Council of Nice, it ought at least for the Peace of the
Church to have been submitted to. For to what purpose is it to call Councils
for the resolving of Doubts and ending of Controversies, if their
determinations have not Authority enough to Warrant and Oblige our Obedience?
This word therefore having been planted in their Creed by the great Council,
upon mature deliberation, it became all modest and peaceable Men, though they
had not at first approved it, after that to make no contention about it. And
that was the Schismatical humor of the Eusebians, that when it was once fixed
by the Authority of the Church, they should be so restless against its
admission, which was in effect to destroy and nullify all Government in the
Christian Church. For if the Decree of so venerable a Council be not of force
enough to ver-rule every particular Man's own conceit, it is but folly and
nonsense to talk of any such thing as Government in the Church, and this is
that which Athanasius in his Book De Synodis every where charges so home upon
them, that they troubled themselves to call so many Councils, and compose so
many Creeds to settle what was already done to their hands by the Nicene
Fathers. And they are gaul'd with the same objection by Julius Bishop of Rome
in his smart Letter to the Eusebians. (...). It is an affront (says he) to the
Synod, and all the Bishops that sat in it, if what they with so much Pains and
Piety, God himself as it were being present, resolved, should be slighted by us
as a thing of no Authority. And this to them was a cutting Argument, for they
all profess't great Reverence to the great Council, and therefore ought to have
acquiesced in it. And as it was in that case, so is it in all cases, when once
a Controversy is determined by the Church, it ought to conclude all Christians
within it. Not because the Church is infallible, or any Council how great
soever, but because its determinations are Authoritative, and bind by virtue of
a divine Commission in all cases that are are not against the clear, express,
and immediate Commands of God himself; so that if any Man dare presume to
gainsay or disobey any Law of the Church, he ought to have an extraordinary
assurance to warrant his dissent: But if he be refractory upon Surmises and
remote Inferences, or about matters of no great Weight, or little Evidence, he
plainly runs himself into the sin of Schism in this World, and the punishment
of it in the World to come. And that will fall upon him with so much the
heavier Load, because the Practice flowing from this Principle is of all things
most destructive of that which God of all things most loves, the Peace and
Tranquillity of his Church. For that cannot possibly be any other way preserved
than by a yielding and submissive Temper in all things, where himself has not
apparently determined us by an antecedent Countermand. And such cases can
rarely happen, whilst the Primitive Constitution of the Christian Church is any
where preserved, and at least it is clear, that this was the case of the
Eusebians, who raised so thick a dust against what was determined by the
Authority of the Church, only because they supposed the determination
unnecessary and imprudent; but what then? and granting it were so, it was not
unlawful, unless it had expressly contradicted something that was necessary. But
that themselves had not the confidence to pretend, and if they had not, then it
is plain that they ought not to have quarreled with it, but to have quietly
submitted to it, though not for its truth, yet for the Peace, and out of
respect to the Sacred Authority of the Christian Church. And that would have
saved and prevented all that Turmoil that they brought both upon it and the
Empire too for so many years, only to persist in a peevish and (at best) a
needless animosity against its Legal and Canonical determination.

. XI.
But to descend to particulars, Athanasius being arrived at Alexandria with all
expressions of joy from the People, and settled in the quiet possession of his
See, the Eusebians return to all their old Arts of undermining his Peace and
Settlement. And to this end they deal with all the three Emperors to have the
Sentence of the Tyrian Council Executed upon him. But all in vain, for both
Constantine and Constance are better informed of the Plot, and acquainted with
the whole Train of the Eusebian Villainies, though Constantius his Ears are
wholly possess't by his Women, Eunuchs and Courtiers; as his Character is too
truly and shrewdly set down by Ammianus Marcellinus, Uxoribus ac spadonum
gra^ilentis Vocibus, and Palatinis quibusdam l. 21. c. 16.
nimium quantum addictus, ad singula ejus verba plaudentibus, and quid ille
aiat vel neget, ut assentiri possint, observantibus. That he was too much
overruled by his Wives, his Courtiers, and the Effeminate Addresses of his
Eunuchs, that watch't to admire and flatter every thing he said, and whether it
were wise or foolish, applaud it. But these were only Tools and Instruments
placed about him by Eusebius of N. comedia, to be managed for his own ends,
though the first Opportunity that he could seize to compass his longed-for
design upon the Deposition of Athanasius, was given him by the Solemnity of
dedicating the great Church at Antioch, that was founded by the Emperor's
Father, and finished by himself, at which were present Ninety Bishops, which
Meeting Eusebius craftily turned into a Council, and in it deposed Athanasius.
And in truth it was but high time to seize the advantage, for the year before
they had as craftily referred the cause to Julius Bishop of Rome, to which
Judgment Athanasius had according to the constant simplicity and assurance of
his own Conscience, submitted himself. But the Eusebians finding that after
they had told their Story there, all their tricks were too well understood, and
that they could not avoid a very shameful bafle, move for a general Council of
Eastern and Western Bishops to be assembled at Rome. And now the Western were
accordingly met, where Athanasius attended in Person, and whither his Enemies
were summoned by virtue of their own Appeal, to appear to make good their
Charge against him; but Eusebius, the grand contriver of all, mistrusting the
cause, takes this advantage of the Meeting at Antioch, and puts an end to the
Appeal to Rome and the Western Bishops, by passing the final Sentence upon him
at home. But by what subtilty they got it to pass the Council is not easy to
discover, and it is, commonly apprehended from the supposed Authority of Julius
Bishop of Rome, that the intrigue was managed only by Thirty six of the whole
number, that was in all Ninety, but this mistake is founded merely upon a false
Translation of Julius his Words, viz. (...), which Baronius, and they that
follow him understand of the Votes of Thirty six Bishops only; whereas it
signifies Thirty six days Journey, as Valesius renders it, Quia viginti sex
mansionibus. And that is Julius his proper reproof of the Ordination of
Gregory, that it was not done at Alexandria, as the Canons required, but at
Antioch, which was Thirty six Mansions, or so many days Journey, or nights
Lodging from Alexandria. And of this use of the Phrase Valesius alleges many
Parallel Passages in the Writers of that time, and then the sense of the whole
Passage runs clearly thus, I pray you who acted most against the Canons? We
that upon such convincing information received the Man [Athanasius] to
Communion, or you that at Antioch, that is distant Thirty six days Journey from
Alexandria, choose a Stranger [Gregory] to be Bishop of that City, and place
him in his See by Military force? So that from this Passage rightly Translated
there is no ground of supposing any, either stealth or division of Votes in the
Council; neither is there any need of it, in that for any thing we know the
greatest part might either be Eusebians or Orthodox. But whatever they really
were, they all at least pretended to be Orthodox, for the Eusebians themselves
did not only quit but Anathematise the Arian Heresy, as it is evident from all
the four Creeds, that were framed in this Council, in which they detest and
Anathematise all the branches of it, particularly in the last, which they sent
as the result of all to the Emperor Constans, We Anathematise all those who say
that the Son existed out of nothing, or out of any other subsistence, and not
out of God himself, or that there was a time when he was not. And yet for all
this express declaration, modest Mr. Sandius boldly tells us, That this l. 2.
p. 67.
Council expressly denied the Eternal Generation of the Son of God. But beside
this Council of Antioch, all the Councils under Constantius that are commonly
accounted Arian, till the last that over-reach't him against his own Opinion,
have as fully and clearly condemned Arianism, as the Nicene Council it self. It
is true, they could not digest the word (...); but otherwise as for the whole
Scheme of Arianism they have in all their Creeds Anathematised it with all
clearness and fullness of Expression. And therefore it has been but a vain
dispute that has been so long agitated about the Authority of this Council in
particular. St. Chrysostom when he was kept out of his Bishopric by virtue of
a Canon made in it, pleads that they were Arians who made it. And for the same
reason, they are rejected by his Patron Pope Innocent the first Pope, but with
what design we shall see in its proper place, otherwise the Council has been
universally received in the Catholic Church; St. Hilary himself reckons it
among the Anti-Arian Councils, and the Canons of it were received into the Code
of the Canons that was collected before the Council of Calcedon, and have ever
since been received both by the Eastern and Western Churches, till Baronius and
the late Romanists endeavored to bring them into disgrace, for the Affront
that they had given to Pope Julius, in rating of him so severely for
intermedling with their Affairs. For tho that transaction is one of the main
passages that they insist upon, to make out the Authority of the Popes
Universal Pragmaticalness, yet there is scarce a fuller Testimony against it
extant in the Records of the Church. For when he takes upon him to act out of
his Province in giving Absolution to Athanasius, they charge him with a
violation of all the Laws of the Christian Church, and tell him that when
Novatus was condemned by his Predecessors, the Eastern Church would never
receive the Schismatic to Communion, and therefore challenge him how he dares
make so bold with the Discipline of the Christian Church, as to reverse any of
their Decrees, and they afterward proceed so high in the Quarrel, as to
Excommunicate his Holiness for his uncanonical Presumption, and to signify
their Sentence against him by an Encyclical Epistle to all the Bishops of the
Christian World, which no doubt is a very likely thing, if his universal
Supremacy had been then as well known and as much talked of, as these Men would
make us believe; when as it is not in the least challenged, or any way
intimated by Julius, so is it denied by the Eastern Bishops, as an utter
overthrow of the known Discipline of the Christian Church. And whereas he cited
them to appear before the Council at Rome, that was by virtue of their own
voluntary Appeal, when they had referred themselves and their Cause to that
Council, for it was summoned only at their Request and importunity. Now after
all this that was done purely to gratify themselves, first wholly to baulk and
decline the Council, and then whilst it was Sitting, and the Cause depending,
that they had put to reference, to pass Judgment upon it themselves, was such a
piece of foul dealing, as is not to be endured in common Conversation. And that
is the very thing that Julius himself charges upon them in Answer to their
objection against him for intermedling with their Affairs, not that they
affronted his Supremacy, but that when they had put him to the trouble of
summoning a Council, and while the matter was under Examination, they should
put such a slur upon it, as merely to steal away the cause that themselves had
seemed so much concerned, after so many Contests, to refer to its final
determination.

And in truth the whole business was so involved by the Craft of Eusebius from
the time of the Tyrian Council, that Athanasius, which way soever he turned to
clear his Innocence, found himself ensnared by the Canons themselves. For as he
was deposed in Council, so he could not be Canonically restored but by Council;
and that is it they press upon him notwithstanding the Emperor's Restitution,
in that though he had power to call him from banishment, yet he had none to
take off the Censure of the Church. And the Plea had held good if there had not
been so much and so exorbitant Villainy at the bottom, though by it we may see,
by laying one ill Action for a Foundation, what a vast Pile of Dishonesty may
be built upon it. For granting the Sentence of the Tyrian Council to be good
(as it would have been, had it not been so enormously base) Athanasius was,
which way soever he moved, caught in the Canons, and therefore in all his
Pleadings he is so wise as to refer his whole Cause to the Acts of that
Council, and that at last got him the Victory by making known their Villainy.
But granting them Valid, his Restitution by the Emperor was Canonically void,
as to any exercise of his Episcopal Function, and that was the point that they
urged to the Emperor Constantius in order to his Second banishment, but
fearing lest if he should make enquiry into the whole matter, all their
Forgeries should come to light, they carry their Cause a great way off, as far
as Rome, and that with a mighty show of fair dealing and ingenuity on their
part, that they were so far from desiring any partial Judgment, that they would
refer it to Judges utterly unconcerned, and therefore send it into the other
Empire. And now when this was done with so much plausibility, Eusebius all on
the sudden huddles up a Council at home, and dispatches the business before
the Council at Rome could publish their Sentence; and by that trick he very
artificially ensconst himself and his Cause in a new Quarrel, that would engage
one half of the Christian Church on his side. For now it was become the Quarrel
of the Eastern Church against the Western, because when they had sentenced a
Cause at Antioch, what power had they to reverse the Decree at Rome. This must
be an Invasion of the Liberties of the Oriental Church, and no less then an
Attempt to bring them into subjection to the Western Bishops, and thus were
they all drawn in by this Crafty Man to back his own Quarrel. And therefore it
is observable that this Cause was ever after managed by this very pretense, and
it was the very Complaint of the Eusebian Bishops, that parted from Sardica and
sat at Philippi, against the Sardican Council, that they endeavored to
introduce a new Law, that the Eastern Bishops should be subject to the judgment
of the Western. And thus by this Artifice did this subtle man remove his Tyrian
Villainy out of the sight, and then he might go forwardwithout fear or danger,
for nothing else but the discovery of that could ever expose himself, ruin his
Cause, and defeat his Malice.

But the most cunning Stratagem of all was that at the same time that they
proceeded with so much seeming Christian Severity against Athanasius, they
either Enacted or Ratified so many excellent Laws of Discipline, that yet were
but so many Snares to Athanasius and his Friends after his Tyrian deposition,
especially the fifth, eleventh, and twelfth. In the fifth it is decreed that if
a Presbyter refuse to Communicate with his Bishop, he shall after three
Admonitions be deposed forever, and be punished by the Civil Magistrate as a
Seditious Person, a very good Canon in it self, but at that juncture of time it
was only a Rod for the Orthodox Clergy of Alexandria, who the Eusebians too
well knew, would peremptorily refuse all Communion with their new Bishop
Gregory, that was thrust upon them by this Council and a Military Force in the
place of Athanasius their true and lawful Bishop. In the eleventh and twelfth
Canons all Appeals from Ecclesiastical Censures to the Emperor are strictly
forbidden under pain of Deposition, and it is farther provided that if any
Bishop be Synodically deposed, he is not to be restored but by a greater Synod
of Bishops. This reached Athanasius to the quick for his flying from the Tyrian
Council to Constantine, and withal cut off his Restitution by the Imperial
Mandate. Now these had been good Laws in ordinary Cases, but in the Case of
Athanasius they were nothing but Rods and Snares; And so it is always, when
injustice has got the upper hand, the Execution of Laws then becomes nothing
but Tyranny and Oppression. If the Proceedings against Athanasius at Tire had
been any way fair and legal, though he had been hardly used, yet his Appeal was
against the Ecclesiastical Rule, and it would have been more decent and
becoming Christian Modesty, to have sat down under an hard Sentence, then to
have made a breach upon the Order and Discipline of the Church. But when it was
all rank Villainy and open Forgery contrived on purpose to take away his life,
it was then proper for him to take Sanctuary in the justice of his Sovereign
Prince for a common Subjects Protection. And indeed wherever injustice is
become shameless and enormous, men are not bound to that punctual niceness of
Rule, that they are bound to observe in common and ordinary Cases. And so it
was here, their Proceedings at Tire were so prodigiously base and impudent,
that they exceeded the common Villainy of Mankind, and so were by their own
wickedness put out of the Protection of the Laws. I have the longer insisted
upon this Transaction because it is an extraordinary Case, and has nothing like
it in all the Records of the Church in the worst and most degenerate times, and
though there have been several of the later Popes both wicked and cunning
enough, yet none of them could ever match either the Malice or the Artifice of
Eusebius in the management of his Contest with Athanasius. But whilst he was
contriving and plotting his designs against him at Antioch, the Council at Rome
proceeds to a fair Trial, and after the Examination of the Acts of the Tyrian
Council, and of diverse Witnesses clearing Athanasius from the Calumnies
fast'ned on him, they pronounce him innocent, receive him to Communion, and
restore him to his Bishopric. And thus are they according to the Plot of
Eusebius engaged in a new War, that he knew would swallow up the old
Controversy, of which the two heads were the two great Bishops of the two
great Imperial Cities, Julius of Rome, and Eusebius of Constantinople, for
before this time he had violently thrust himself into that See, and these were
the first Seeds of that long War between these two ambitious Sees, that I have
described at large in a former Treatise. But Athanasius leaves them to manage
their own Fray between themselves, and makes all have to repair to his own
Church of Alexandria, where he arrives before Gregory could come from Antioch,
to the great joy of the City, but soon after comes Gregory, and what havoc he
made by the assistance of Philagrius the Prefect an Apostate Christian, may be
seen at large in Athanasius his encyclical Epistle to the Orthodox Bishops, and
as he describes it, it exceeds all the Heathen Persecutions in rudeness and
barbarity. But in short, Athanasius is forced to fly for his life, and takes
Sanctuary at Rome a second time, where he knew himself safe, as being out of
Constantius his Dominions. And about the same time the Popes Legates Elpidius
and Philoxenus, having been from time to time retained and delayed by the Craft
of Eusebius, return from the Council of Antioch, as with no satisfaction to
themselves, having been Eyewitnesses of so much foul dealing, so with an
huffing and scornful Letter of Defiance to their Master Pope Julius and all the
Bishops of the Western Church. And by that Character that Julius gives of it in
his answer to it (for the Letter it self is not now extant) it breaths the very
Spirit of Eusebius: but as taunting as it was, and as bad as their Actings
were, he is forced to return a milder Anfwer then indeed was fitting, because
he too well knew that they relied upon the power and assistance of the Emperor
to bear them out in their Enormities. But as civilly as he treats them, he
deals as plainly with them as they deserved, and unravels the whole Plot of
Lies, Perjuries, and Calumnies against Athanasius from the beginning to that
very day, and so plainly lays open to the Christian World the foulness of all
their Proceedings, as to demonstrate to all men, that notwithstanding they had
endeavored to get the Canons on their own side by shifts and juglings, they
had most scandalously broke all the most Sacred and inviolable Laws, not only
of Christian Discipline, but of common honesty. The Epistle it self is extant
in Athanasius his second Apology, and it is a perfect Narrative of his Cause
and defense of his Innocence, written with equal judgment and smartness. It is
large, but the main head of it is in Answer to their great complaint that they
should be cited to Rome. To which he replies, that in some cases it is
agreeable to the Canons, that what is determined by one Council, should be
reviewed in another; but however that was, he minds them that when they sent
their Agents, after they had been pleased to refer the Cause to him, to manage
the Evidence against Athanasius, they were so shamefully bafled in the whole
business, that they had no way left to escape a final overthrow, but by moving
for a general Council of Eastern and Western Bishops to be held at Rome; and
now when the Council was called at their motion to pretend offense at its being
called, as it argued very great Guilt in themselves, so it could not but raise
very odd suspicions in others. And whereas they plead it as an Universal Rule,
that what is determined in one Council ought not to be reverst by another, he
asks them how then dare you to alter the Faith of the Great Nicene Council,
that when the Bishops of the Christian World were so unanimously concerned to
root out the Arian Heresy, they should so far slight their Authority as to
reject those Provisions that they had made against it. And lastly (to pass by
their smaller Cavils) he lets them see the necessity of this review, by ripping
up all the Villainies of the Tyrian Plot, and so plainly discovers the gross
dishonesty of the whole matter, as must make them cautious of ever reviving it
for the time to come. And the Story is told so fully, so plainly, and so
reflectingly upon the Persons Guilty, that perhaps it was the dishonor of this
Conviction that broke Eusebius his proud heart, for he dyed lib. 2. c. 12.
soon after this, though Socrates says he dyed before, but this Historian is
all along miserably mistaken in the Chronology of the Athanasian Story, and his
Errors of that kind are so numerous, that Socratis Testimonium Vales. Observe.
Eccles. in Socrat. and Sozem. l. 1. c. 6.
in rebus Athanasii nullius ponderis est, quippe qui pugnantia inter se dixerit
atque contraria.
Learned Men are forced to reject his Testimony as of no Authority. All the
certain account that we have of the time of Eusebius his death is from
Athanasius himself, who only says that he dyed after the Council at Rome, and
before the Council at Sardica, and that agrees exactly with the time of Julius
his Letters, which could not but strike him to the heart. For by this Epistle
he saw all his wickedness brought to light, and his malice against Athanasius
after so much pains and so many deep contrivances, miserably defeated. And so
dyed one of the worst Bishops that ever lived in the Christian Church, and
Baronius his Character of him in comparing him to Ahab is very just and true,
though he saw not through half his wickedness, that there was none like him
before or since, who sold himself to the practice of all wickedness in the
sight of the Lord; though Valesius is of the mind that he dyed a good
Christian, and wonders at the Cardinals severity against him, when he dyed in
the Communion of the Roman Church. And that is too much the common sense of the
men of that Church, that whatever men are as to all other things, yet if they
are but good Roman Catholics they are good Christians too. But if he dyed in
its Communion, it was because he lived no longer in it, for if he had survived
till all his Train of Wickedness had been made public to the Christian World,
as they would have been in a little time, not only the Bishop of Rome, but all
the Bishops of the World must have denied all Communion to so great a Villain.

This is the exactest Narrative of all this Affair, that I can discover either
by tracing and comparing the Relations out of the Ancients of it, or the
Observations of the Moderns upon it. Valesius indeed has used great subtilty to
tell the Story another Observe. Eccles. in Soc. and Soz.
way. As if Athanasius had been but once at Rome, and that there had been but
one Council held there about his Business, and that both were after the return
of the Legates from the Council of Antioch, and that it was then that
Athanasius was first absolved. But in my poor Opinion this learned man might
very well have spared his pains, when it is so plain from Julius his Letter
that Athanasius had been absolved by him before he received the Letter from
Antioch, and that one of the main heads of the Antiochian Letter was to
complain of Julius his irregularity in restoring a man to Communion, that they
had Excommunicated. And yet Valesius says he can find no such thing in the
Letter, and thus it is a common thing when men are busy in searching after
small matters that are difficultly to be discerned, to stumble at such great
things as they could not but at another time have observed. For otherwise
nothing can be plainer then that Athanasius was Canonically absolved before the
Antiochian Letters, for when they complained that Julius had received him to
Communion, that is proof enough of his Absolution, for without that, having
been once excommunicate, he could not have been received to Communion. And
therefore it is but a poor shift of Valesius to help out his niceness, that
Pope Julius received him as he did the Eusebians de been esse till he could
enquire into the merits of the Cause. For the Eusebians were under no Sentence,
and therefore were to be received in course, but Athanasius being under
Censure, he could not be received till that was taken off. But this is still
more evident from the account that Julius gives of the reasons of his
Proceedings, viz. that having taken an exact Examination of all the particular
Accusations against Athanasius (and so reckons up the Calumnies and Perjuries
one by one) he asks them which was most agreeable to the Canons, to Condemn
him, as they had done, or absolve him as he had done. And if after all this,
admitting an Accused Person to Commun^on be not absolution upon legal Process,
I know not what is. And if it is, then the Story hitherto runs clear as I have
set it down, but by Valesius his over nice account it is so involved, that I
must confess that I cannot trace the Method of the History by it, nor reconcile
it with the Accounts of the Ancients.

. XII.
But Eusebius being dead, matters were very little altered or amended by his
fall, for his five Confederates, Theognis of Nice, Maris of Calcedon, Theodorus
of Heraclea, Ursacius and Valens succeeded him in the Emperors favor and the
management of all Affairs. And, if it were possible, these Commissioners Acted
with greater violence in deposing and banishing of Bishops then the old Tyrant
had ever done, insomuch that we immediately find several of the Eastern Bishops
in Exile, and particularly Paul of Constantinople, who, poor man! was all along
second to Athanasius in the Eusebian Per^ecution, and had suffered almost as
much from the Ambition of Eusebius, as Athanasius had from his malice. For Paul
having been Canonically chosen Bishop of Constantinople, Eusebius had a strong
fancy to his Bishopric, and therefore gets Macedonius one of Paul's
Presbyters, a man of a very factious and fiery temper, to bring in a general
Accusation against him for an ill liver, (...), upon which mere formality of a
general Charge without enquiring after any particular proofs, he is thrust out
of his See and Eusebius immediately leaps into it. Though, here the lying
Philostorgius says, that Eusebius immediately succeeded upon the death of
Alexander, l. 3. c. 10.
and suppresses the foul Story of Paul's expulsion; but Sandius though he takes
notice l. 2. p. 78.
of it, is either so foolish or so impudent as to make use of the Calumny as a
just Accusation against the good man at this very day, and brings no other
Authority for it, because he durst not build upon the Testimony of Macedonius,
but that of ut aiunt, i. e. as it is reported, which is much worse, especially
when all good men ever report him to have been a very Religious and Pious
Prelate; and even Macedonius himself at the very time that he Accused him, for
form-sake to oblige Eusebius, is well known to communicate with him, which he
ought not to have done, had he believed his own Accusation. By such little
shufflings as these we may see how dully and slightly these Arian Advocates
prevaricate with the Records of the Church. But to proceed, upon the death of
Eusebius, the Constantinopolitans fetch home Paul, against whom the Eusebian
Faction set up that Firebrand Macedonius, this brings the matter to high
Tumults, upon which Constantius being then at Antioch, sends Hermogenes Master
of his Horse to Constantinople to force Paul out of the City, but the Rabble
taking head, he is unfortunately murdered in a Tumult, to the great scandal
and dishonor of their Cause, for which Paul, as if he good man had been the
Author of the Sedition, is banished and imprisoned, and kept in Chains till
Constantius was forced to deliver him together with the other banished Bishops
for fear of his Brother Constans, who threatened War upon him if he did not
restore them, and so the good man quietly enjoyed his Bishopric all the Reign
of Co^stans, but upon his death, the Eusebians being backed with the great
power of the 5 Commissioners grew more furious then ever, and prevail with
Constantius to banish Paul again, neither would that content them, but he is
kept in close Prison at Cucusus in Cappadocia, to be starved to death, and at
last because after six days fasting, they find him alive, they strangle him.

Having laid the Story of this poor injured man together, I return back to our
new Commissioners, who finding that though they had framed four several Creeds,
in their first Council at Antioch, none of them would satisfy the Western
Bishops, they Summon a second Council to the same City in the Year 344, and
draw up a long new Creed, for the most part consisting of Anathema's against
all Branches of the Arian Heresy, and send it to the Western Bishops then
Assembled at Milan, but they unanimously reject it, for this very reason, that
they were resolved to acquiesce in the Decrees of the Nicene Council, and not
be so curious as after the Authority of their determination, to make any
farther enquiry; though learned Mr. Sandius says, they laid it l. 2. p. 83.
aside, because it being written in Greek, they understood it not; a wise
account of a Transaction of the Christian Church, that they corresponded in an
unknown Language, and understood not one another, though they answered each
others Papers and gave very good reasons for their disagreement, particularly
the offense of Innovation. And there all along stuck the Controversy with the
Orthodox Bishops, that they thought themselves bound to abide by the Decree of
that great Council, and out of Reverence to its Authority would never hear of
any Alteration. And that is the great Charge with which Athanasius perpetually
loads the Eusebians, that for that very reason they could not be in the right
in their belief, because they opposed themselves to the Faith of the Nicene
Fathers.

But Julius Bishop of Rome finding things grow worse, and the Schism between
the Eastern and Western Churches made daily wider, he Petitions the Emperor
Constans to move his Brother Constantius to join with him for a general
Council, to which Constantius agrees, and the most Convenient place pitched
upon for their Meeting was Sardica in Illyricum, being the Confines of both the
Empires, where in the year 347 met at the time appointed 280 Western, and 76
Eastern Bishops. But they are no sooner met, then they break in pieces; for the
Eastern Bishops refuse to sit unless Athanasius and the other Parties Accused
may be first removed out of the Council; whereas the Western will have them
treated (as they ought to be) as innocent Persons till they are Canonically
Convicted. Upon this, after diverse inter-messages the Easterns forsake the
City, and sit at Philippopolis; and it is more then likely that they never came
with any design of agreement, and picked this quarrel only to baulk the
Council. And this is roundly charged upon them by the Council it self, in their
Encyclical Epistle, extant in Athanasius his second Apology, as done by
Compact; the Passage is very remarkable, and because it is so, though it be
somewhat long, I shall give the Reader the sense of it, as briefly as I can: It
is not without cause that these Men, though often cited, would never appear,
but by their constant shifting a fair hearing through the guilt of their own
Conscience, confirmed both the suspicion of their own forgeries, and gave
ground to believe that the Accusations against themselves were but too true.
And therefore because beside this shuffling, they have not only restored but
advanced such as were Deposed for the Arian Heresy, in which design the chief
Men after Eusebius, Theodorus of Heraclea, Narcissus of Neronias in Cilicia,
Stephanus of Antioch, George of Laodicea, Acacius of Caesarea in Palestine,
Menaphantus of Ephesus, Ursacius of Singido in Mysia, and Valens of Mursa in
Panonia are now the chief Ringleaders. These Men therefore suffered not any of
those who came with them out of Asia to Communicate with the Church here, or so
much as to come to the Council, and in their journey called several Meetings in
the Form of Councils, in which they by their threat'nings forced the Company to
enter into a Solemn Covenant among themselves, that when they come to Sardica
they should peremptorily refuse the Authority of the Council, and never appear
before it, or sit in it; but as soon as they came thither, when they had made a
formal show of appearance; should immediately vanish. This Treachery is
attested by Macarius of Palestine, and Asterius of Arabia, who were all along
present at their proceedings, and who being offended at so much baseness,
discovered to the Council at their first coming, under what force they were
detained, and with what wickedness things were to be managed. Adding withal
that there were great numbers of Orthodox Bishops in their parts, but that
these Men kept them at home by force, and with the bloodiest threat'nings if
they should dare to appear; and for all possible Security of all that came,
they obliged them all to lodge in the same house, that so no Man might any way
be ticed and drawn away from the Conspiracy. So far the Council, and nothing
more evident all along then that the Eusebians dreaded nothing more then a fair
hearing of the Indictments of their own framing; and therefore by all the Arts
and Methods of disingenuity broke all Opportunities that were offered them for
it. So that though they were forced to make an Appearance at Sardica, by the
Emperor's Command, yet they came with this resolution, never to suffer the
matter to come to any Issue: And withal finding themselves so over numbered that
they could not obstruct it, they wisely take pet and quit the Council.

But the Western Bishops for all that proceed, and reduce the Debate to these
three Heads (as they have drawn it up in their Epistle to Pope Julius.) First,
The settlement of the Faith. Secondly, The Examination of Witnesses, that had
been illegally rejected in former Councils. 3dly, An enquiry after all those
various injuries, and violences that had been done to the Orthodox Clergy by
the Eusebians.

As to the first, It is unanimously Voted to frame no new Creed, but to
acquiesce in the sufficiency of the Nicene Faith.

As to the Second, They unravel all the Forgeries and Tergiversations of the
Eusebians in former Councils, and in an Encyclical Epistle certify all the
Bishops of the Christian World of the several Perjuries that had been made use
of, to raise an Accusation against Athanasius and other Orthodox Bishops; and
then of their several disingenuous and dishonest Methods, to shift the proof of
their own Indictment, particulary of their running away from their own Appeal
to Julius Bishop of Rome, but most of all of their awkerd behavior in this
Council, where they would not be prevailed with by any importunity or entreaty
to proceed to Trial, which the Council imputes not only to their knowledge of
the defect of their Accusations against others, but to the Conscience of their
own guilt. Seeing great numbers of Persons there present, that were ready to
testify of their various Cruelties, and tell sad Stories of their Imprisoning,
Banishing, Beating, Starving, Strangling Persons in Holy Orders, only for
refusing to Communicate with the Aria^ Heretics. And though the Criminals
refused to appear, the Witnesses were Examined, and they Deposed, and both the
Emperors written to, that their Majesty's would be pleased to set all such at
liberty, that were still under restraint, and to order their Officers for the
time to come, not to use any force or violence against the Clergy for their
Faith, but leave them first to be tried by the Ecclesiastical Judicature.

In the next place the whole Intrigue against Athanasius is re-examined, the
Stories of Arsenius and Ischiras farther proved by fresh Witnesses, and so both
himself and the rest of the Deposed and Banished Bishops are restored, and the
Intruders thrust not only out of their Sees, but out of the Communion of the
Christian Church. And then in the last place they enact some Rules of
Discipline useful and almost necessary for the Present State of the Church, as
against the practice of Eusebius and other Bishops of the Faction, that invade
other Men's Bishoprics, and though such Offenders were only sent back to their
own Sees by the Canon of the Nicene Council, this Council is so severe as not
only to Depose but Excommunicate them, so as not to be capable of being
admitted to Lay-Communion even at the hour of death. Another Canon they made
against the wandering of Bishops, and that reached Ursacius and Valens, who left
their own Diocesses to carry on the Eusebian Faction in other Provinces. A
third Canon was, That if a Bishop were oppress't by his Com-provincials, he
might have leave to make his complaint to the Bishop of Rome, who might judge
whether he ought to have a new hearing or not, and this (beside some secret
reasons) was to relieve the Eastern Bishops from the Oppression of the
Eusebians, who carried all before them by force and foul dealing. Though the
Romanists will have it to have been made particularly to justify Athanasius in
his Appeal to Rome; but beside that if it were true, it would do their Cause no
service; it is certain that Athanasius made not the Appeal himself, but that
his Cause was first referred thither by the Eusebians, and that too with no
other design then to remove it as far as they could from their own doors for
fear of discovery.

. XIII.
But as vigorously as the Western Bishops proceeded at Sardica, the Eastern
out-stript them at Philippopolis, they first take to themselves the Title of
the Council at Sardica, they draw up a new Confession of Faith, and call it the
Sardican Creed, in which they Anathematise all the Positions of Arius, and only
omit the word Consubstantial. And as for Athanasius they cunningly load him
with the Authority of the Tyrian Council, and the Sentence of Constantine upon
it, Qui omnia ejus flagitia recognoscens sua illum sententia in exilium
deportavit, Who examining into all his Crimes, banished him by his own
Sentence, as they blush not to aver, as if the abused Emperor had been
acquainted with all the juglings of that Council, when it was their only care
to keep their proceedings altogether in the dark from him. But from this they
proceed to infer that Athanasius being condemned by the Suffrage of so many
Bishops, and the Judgment of the Emperor, it was now but a trick to move for a
new Trial, when so many of the Judges, Accusers, and Witnesses were dead, and
therefore they must have the old Sentence allowed and ratified before they
would act, least (as they plead) They should bring in that profane Innovation,
Quam horret vetus consuetudo Ecclesiae, ut in concilio Orientales Episcopi
quicquid forte statuissent, ab Episcopis Occidentalibus refricaretur and vice
versa, That the Ancient Custom of the Church abhors, that the Decrees of the
Eastern Church should be reversed by the Western, and so on the contrary. That
was the point they would still be at, that whatever was done in the Eastern
Church should not be submitted to the Judgment of the Western Bishops, and then
that secured the Authority of the Tyrian Council, and as long as that stood
firm, so did their Cause too. But to make short work of it (for there are vast
numbers of odd casts of disingenuity in their Epistle) they Excommunicate
Athanasius, Paul of Constantinople, Julius of Rome, Osius, Marcellus, and all
that had any hand in the Absolution of Athanasius, and this they signify in an
Encyclical Epistle written in the Name of the Council of Sardica, to their
friends in all Parts of the World; and among many others it is directed to
Donatus the Schismatical Bishop of Carthage, Gratus the Catholic Bishop of
that City, with 36 other African Bishops being present at the Council of
Sardica, and joining with it against the Philippopolitans, who therefore think
to strengthen their Party, by courting the Schismatics to their side. And
among other sweet flowers flatter them with their own dear Expression, viz.
That they durst not join with the Sardican Council, Ne proditores fidei
Traditoresque Scripturarum dicamur; Lest we should be esteemed Traitors of the
Faith, and Traditors of the Scriptures; thereby insinuating an approbation of
their Schism from the Catholics upon that pretense. And this took so luckily,
that the Schismatiques pleaded it in the days of St. Austin, to prove that they
had ever been in Communion with the Eastern Church. But both parties having
done the business, that they came about, especially the Eusebians, whose only
project it was to shun the Council, and make the breach more general with the
whole Western Church, they break up their Assembly, and wherever they come put
to death all that refuse Communion with them, particularly they make a great
Massacre at Adrianople, where they cut off the Bishop's hands, and after that
his head, with innumerable other outrages recited by Athanasius in his Epistle
to the Monks. But as for the Sardican Council, having settled things as well as
they could, they acquaint both the Emperors with the Issue of their
Proceedings, and send three Bishops. Armed with Letters from the Emperor
Constans to his Brother Constantius to intercede for the restitution of the
banished Bishops. But whilst they attended the Emperor at Antioch, Stephen Note
that this soul Story is carefully omitted by Sandius, p. 85.
the Eusebian Bishop of that place by his Instruments, conveighs a common
Strumpet by night stark naked into the Chamber of Euphratas, that was the most
eminent Man of the Embassy, and famous for his great Virtue and Piety; but the
Woman who expected some debauched young Gallant for her Companion, as soon as
she saw the grave old Bishop asleep, and altogether ignorant of the matter,
being surprised, and withal confounded with his venerable look, cries out so
loud of the abuse, and force put upon her as made a disturbance in the Court,
and so the whole business came to light, and Stephen is found guilty of the
Contrivance, and is by the Emperor's own special Command thrust out of his
Bishopric. And this was the first thing that opened his Eyes, though they soon
closed again, for by this (says Athanasius) he was induced to suspect Epist. ad
Solit.
the like Villainies against my self, and the other abufed Bishops, and so
recalled us all from banifhment. Though the Historians say he was compelled to
it by his Brother Constans, who threatened War upon him at a time when his
Affairs were in a low condition, and his Empire in danger to be lost to the
Persians. This might and no doubt did quicken him, but the first thing that set
his thoughts awork was this discovery, if we may believe Athanasius, who was in
a little time restored to his favor and familiar Conversation, and had
opportunity to understand his mind. For Gregory that was thrust into the Sea of
Alexandria dying within Ten Months after the Sardican Council, Athanasius is
importuned by Letter upon Letter from Constantius, to come to Sandius is ^ilent
here too.
Court in order to his restitution, and it is a great while before he will
trust him, after the Experience of so many Treacheries; but having all the
Security that the Word or the Oath of a Prince could give him, he at length
repairs to Antioch, where the Emperor then lay in attendance upon his Persian
War, and where he is entertained by him with mighty kindness and friendship,
and at last dismissed with his own commendatory Letters to Alexandria, and
assured by the most Sacred and Solemn Promises, That for the time to come he
will never give Ear to any Tales and Stories against him. And at his parting
only makes this request, that of that vast number of Churches that were under
his Jurisdiction, he would be pleased to grant one for the use of those who
dissented from him; Athanasius replies, That he is ready to obey all his
Majesty's Commands, only he requests the same favor for the Dissenters at
Antioch, i. e. the Orthodox, who would rather set up a separate Communion, then
Communicate promiscuously with the Arians, as the Eusebians did This request
was so reasonable that the Emperor could not deny it; but the Eusebians
immediately stifle the motion, as well knowing that they should loose more by
this liberty to the Orthodox at Antioch, then they should gain to themselves or
their Cause by granting it to the Arians at Alexandria.

And so the banished Bishops are restored to to their several Sees, and they
quietly enjoy them till the unfortunate death of the Emperor Constans, who in
the year 350, was barbarously murdered by his Rebel slave Magnentius, who was
the first man pretending to Christianity, that ever thought of Rebelling
against his Sovereign Prince, though it is Evident, that he was at best but a
counterfeit Christian, in that as soon as he had got the Empire he endeavored
the Restitution of Idolatry, as appears from the Law of Constantius to abolish
the night sacrifices, that De Paganis. l. 5.
(as Theodoret informs us were made for the dead) that were allowed by
Magnentius, contrary to the Law of Constantine the Great, who had taken them
quite away. And Athanasius affirms, (that he In Apolog. ad Constantium.
was much addicted to Magicians and Enchantments, and for the same reason is he
commended by Libanius in his Funeral Oration upon Julian, that though he were
an Usurper of another Kingdom, he was a restorer of the Laws, by which the
Heathens understood the old Religion, that had been suppressed by the Christian
Emperors. But what do we talk of his being an Heathen, when he was V. Juliani
Orat. ad Constantium.
by the Character that all the Historians of all sides give of him, scarce a
Brute, cruel and bloody in all his Actions, sparing nothing in his rage, nor
scarce out of it, inhumane in his very luxury, and at last completing all the
Villainies of his life in the murder of his Family, and (perhaps to expiate all
the rest) in his own. But Athanasius having lost his Patron before he recovered
Alexandria, the Eusebians threaten him afresh, so that Constantius himself was
forced to write him Letters of encouragement and give him new assurances of
security. Upon which he goes forward and is in all places, received with all
the expressions of joy and triumph, and in a little time is saluted with
Communicatory Letters from above 400 Bishops, and his Enemies everywhere fall
upon their knees before him and implore his Pardon, particularly those two vile
wretches Valens and Ursacius confess themselves perjured Villains, do public
Penance in a Council at Milan and then before the Bishop of Rome, (...),
Ath^n^f. Apol. p. 67^.
Mentiti sumus, finximus, and omnia quae. Athanasio objecta fuere, calumnia
scatent.
and declare to all the World under Hand and Seal that all those foul
Accusations that were forged against Athanasius, were mere falsehoods of their
own contrivance to take away his life. but though all this be attested by such
clear and inevitable Records, yet our faithful Arian Historians are so true to
their own Story as wholly to overlook it. But this dishonorable submission
does but make the Party more outrageous and implacable, and they resolve that
though Athanasius had hitherto escaped all their Snares, that they will have
his blood at last, and therefore they only sit still a little while to hatch
new matter for Calumny. And that was soon done, for whereas the Rebel
Magnentius had sent Ambassadors to treat with Constantius, or rather if it
were possible mediate his Peace, two of them were French Bishops, with whom
Athanasius had contracted acquaintance at the Council of Sardica, and now he
treats his old friends in their passage at Alexandria, that is immediately made
High Treason, and he is Accused of keeping Correspondence with Magnentius
against the Emperor, though our Arian Historians are here so subtle too as to
take no notice of this passage, because the Calumny was afterward so shamefully
bafled by Athanasius, as we shall see in its due place. But however by this and
the like devices they once more enrage the Emperor against him, though he is
forced to dissemble his displeasure, till he sees the Event of the War. In the
mean time Julius Bishop of Rome dies, and Liberius succeeds, to whom Letters
are sent by the Eusebians in the East to join Communion with them against
Athanasius, and others from Athanasius and the African Bishops to enter into
Communion with them against the Easterns, Liberius at first, being ignorant of
his Case, denies Athanasius, but at length upon better Information, rejects the
Easterns and Communicates with the Africans. But this was such an affront to
their haughty Spirits, that they ever after studied and watch't for Revenge
against him as diligently as they ever did against Athanasius. And Liberius
foreseing that they would raise a Storm upon him; dispatches away his Legates
to the Emperor to Petition for a Council, but before they came the Emperor
was little better then mad, for though at the Battle with Magnentius he was so
far forsaken of all Courage, that he had not so much hardness as but to behold
the Fight but retired into a Vault with his worthy Confessor Valens Bishop of
the place, who had the craft to set his Spies to bring him the first News of
the event of the Battle, that so he might endear himself to the Emperor, by
being the Messenger of so good News, if things went right: But if wrong, that
then he might save himself in the first place either by flight or by betraying
his Master to the Rebel, for Men of his Principles can never boggle at any
Treachery. But so it happened that Magnentius his Army being put to an utter
Rout, that he had that timely intelligence of it, that he had laid by his
Spies. Whereas the Emperor and his Eunuchs a sort of Men that were his great
Favorites and inseparable Companions, not having the courage so much as to
look out of their hole, could suspect nothing of the Messengers Arrival; and
therefore Valens to add worship to himself, like a Villain as he was, pretends
that the Message was brought him by an Angel, and the poor Emperor in that sad
pickle in which he then lay, gladly and greedily believed any thing that was
for his own case, and imputed the Victory more to the merits of that
Atheistical wretch then to the Courage of his Army. All which Sandius, though
he carefully P. 94.
baulkt the Confession of his reiterated Perjuries, sets down with great
gravity for a serious truth, as if God had miraculously interposed his Power at
the Prayers of so great a Villain. But the Emperor being so suddenly
delivered from the horror of his own fears by his Information, he for his sake
grew much more fond of the Eusebian Faction then he had ever been, and withal
grew to that sottish insolence as to forget his own frailty, writing himself my
Eternity, and concluded that God Almighty approved all his past Actions by
blessing him with so much success as to make him Lord of the whole World, upon
which Lucifer Calaritanus writ his Book of the Apostate Kings of Israel, to
prove that worldly Pro^perity was not entailed on the Pious, but that the worst
of the Race met with as much Prosperity in this World as the good and the
religious. Upon this new increase of Insolence the Shops of Calumny (as Zosimus
expresses it) were opened anew, and though it had been a L. 2.
thriving commodity all his Reign, yet now it doubled its Price, and the
Eusebians by flattering him in the grosness of his folly, got the entire
management of him. So that when he understood that Liberius had denied
Communion with them and entered into League with Athanasius, he is all turned
into rage, and notwithstanding all his former Oaths and Promises, he sets out
an Edict requiring all Christian Bishops to Excommunicate Athanasius, (...).
Epist, ad Solit. p. 829.
upon pain of deposition. About which time Arrived the Popes Legates, and when
they came to treat with the Eusebians or Court Bishops, they refuse all manner
of dispute about the Faith, and the only point they stand upon, is the
Excommunication of Athanasius, and by the help of the Emperors threatenings
prevailed so far upon them, that at length they subscribed his Condemnation.
Upon which Liberius immediately dispatches away new Legates, of whom Lucifer
Calaritanus was chief, whose zealous temper he might safely trust, and they
prevail for a Council at Milan, but because of the death of Gallus and other
encumbrances of the Emperors Affairs, it was not summoned till the year
following, viz. An. Dom. 355. And when they met, Constantius being now resolved
to quell the Athanasians, carries all things by Force and Violence. So that the
Legates refused to sit, and so did Eusebius of Verselles who was joined with
them, but they are commanded into the Council by the Emperor, where Eusebius
at his first entrance throws down the Nicene Faith upon the Table, and tells
them that he will comply with all other things, if they will but secure that,
Dyonisius Bishop of Milan takes it up and offers to subscribe, but Valens (who
now with his Companion Ursacius were returned to their old Trade of open
Villainy) shatches it out of his hand, and cries out that it was none of the
business of their meeting. This comes to a scuffle and that to a kind of
Tumult, upon which the Eusebians according to their usual Craft leave the
Council and meet at Court, where the Emperor in effect takes upon himself the
determination of all things, commands the Bishops to subscribe the Condemnation
of Athanasius, banishes as many as refused, and when they pleaded in their own
behalf against the Credit of the Testimony of Valens and Ursacius, that were
then and there his only Accusers, he replies, what is that to them, it is
enough that himself was his Accuser, and therefore requires it of them at their
utmost Peril, by this means he gets 30 Subscriptions in all, then banishes two
of the Legates and whips the third (in which worthy Exploit those worthy men
Valens and Ursaicus were the chief Actors) endeavors to persuade Eusebius of
Versetles and Dionysius of Milan to subscribe, but they tell him that it is
against the Canons, to which he replies, (...). Epist. ad Solitar. p. 831.
That his Will shall be the Canon. For which rashness they boldly reprove him,
but he gives them no hearing, storms, rages, draws his Sword, swears and curses
them into Exile. This is the Story as it is told by the Ancients, but as
Sandius tells it, it l. 2. p. 113.
was no more then this, that Athanasius was Condemned by the Unanimous Vote of
the Bishops, Paulinus only excepted.

. XIV.
Things having been thus violently transacted in Council, the Emperor resolves
to follow his own will abroad with the same heat, and therefore sends his
Commissioners into Africa to take subscriptions against Athanasius, with
express Authority to banish all Ab^orrers, and sends one of his Eunuchs, (...).
Epist. ad Sol. p. 834.
by whom he was chiefly managed, and who were the grand instruments of all
these mischiefs, with bribes and threatenings to Liberius, to induce him to a
Subscription, but he peremptorily refusing, is sent for by force, and by the
discourse that past between them, which Theodoret has set down at large, we may
discover by what l. 2. c. 16.
tricks and forgeries the Eusebians had all along imposed upon him. The first
thing is, that Athanasius must without any farther process be condemned, the
Bishop replies, that cannot be done according to Ecclesiastical Discipline, and
therefore craves a Council. To this the Emperor rejoyns, that he already
stands under Condemnation by the Tyrian Council. That was their Post, which if
they quitted they lost all, and therefore when all other devices failed, it was
their last Borough. Though here a Courtier, whether through ignorance, or to
divert any farther discourse about the Tyrian Council, steps in and swears that
he was deposed by the Council of Nice. To which the grave Bishop could make no
other reply then a scornful smile, and so proceeds to represent the foul
dealings of the Tyrian Council, the Forgeries and Recantations of Valens and
Ursacius, but here he is again upon a dangerous point, and so is again
interrupted by the Courtiers with rude and impertinent reflections upon the
drift of his discourse, and there is an end of all the Conference upon that
point. The next great Jealousy that they had blown into the Emperors head
was, that Athanasius had so little Wit, Manners, and Religion as to have made
it a great part of his business to make bate between the Emperor and his
Brother, and carried it on so effectually, that if Constantius had not very
much restrained his own Passion, it had broken out into an open and Fatal War,
and he is so much possessed with this jealousy, that he professes that the
Victory over Magnentius (though he run mad for joy of it) was not more
acceptable to him, then one over Athanasius would be. But to this the Bishop
replies, That if it were true, it was most proper for the Emperor to punish
such an Offender at his own Tribunal, and not to force the Ecclesiastical
Judicature to condemn a Person of any Crime unheard. But when nothing will do,
he has his choice, either to subscribe the Condemnation or leave his
Bishopric. The first he peremptorily refuses, and so is banished to Beraea in
Thrace, and Faelix his Archdeacon put into his place. And here it is again
observable Theodoret l. 2. c. 17.
that Faelix was no Arian himself, but a Stickler for the Nicene Faith, only
allowing the Arians a capacity of Communion with the Church. And that is the
thing that I affirm all along to have been the Eusebian Cause, not to restore
Arianism, but to piece up the Peace of the Church by comprehending all in one
Communion or by mutual forbearance. So that notwithstanding that vehement
outcry that has been hitherto made of the Universal Predominancy of Arianism
under Constantius, especially at this very moment of time, I do not find it
hitherto so much as owned, nor any man preferred upon the account of his being
an Arian. Auxentius, that was at this very time thrust into the place of
Dionysius of Milan, has as bad a Character as any man of the time, yet St.
Hilary himself (though he were apt enough to make Arians by Consequences) says
of him, that he always openly disclaimed Arianism, though he suspects that it
was because he d^rst not own it, so that whatever was at bottom, it is evident
that the Arian Heresy it self in all this Controversy never appeared at top.
And those very Bishops that are represented as the most zealous Arians, were
rather Atheists then Heretics. The Head and Founder of the Party was Eusebius
of Nicomedia, and what a worthy Saint he was, already appears from the Tenor
of his whole life. But when by his unfortunate favor at Court, he had got the
Power of the Church into his own hands, especially the disposal of Bishoprics,
and made that the only qualification for Preferment, to join with him and his
malice against Athanasius; in this case it is no wonder if the vilest of Men
flockt in to his Party in as great sholes, as Irish Evidences to a Plot. And
such were Valens and Ursacius, Men Educated in Villainy, and so hardened in
their wickedness, that they were past shame at its very discovery, and when
they could not stand out a Perjury, they would impudently confess it, and then
^ace it out, and ask Pardon with as little remorse as modesty, and when they
had unsworn a Perjury, they would the next opportunity swear it all good again.
And such an one was Epictetus, as he is described by Athanasius, a Neophite,
Athanas. Ep. ^d Solit.
rash and daring, and therefore dear to Constantius, because he found him
prompt and dextrous at all manner of Wickedness, and so could by his help
ensnare what Bishops he pleased, for he would never stick at any thing, so it
were but acceptable to the Emperor. And it is the same Character that is given
of Cecropius and Auxentius, that they were Men of no worth, and preferred for no
other merit then merely their dexterity in wickedness to destroy good Men. And
such an one was George of Cappadocia, who was thrust into the place of
Athanasius, as he is described by Gregory Nazianzen his Countryman) the most
notorious Villain of the Age: ^^^^ laudibu^ Athanasii. See the same Character
in Epiphan. Har^s. 76. and Anmian. Marcel. l. 22. c. 11.
He was a Monster bred up in the Borders of our Country, of an ill-bred, but a
worse Temper, a Slave, and a waiter at other Men's Tables, and so of no value;
that he was sold for a Bushel of Corn, and by this baseness he was inured to do
or say any thing for Bread, till at length he crept into some public
Employment, though the vilest that could be, to be Hoggard to the Army, which
he discharged with so much cheating and knavery that he was forced to fly, and
so wandered up and down the World, till at length he settled at Alexandria, where
though he had made an end of his Travels, he did but begin his mischiefs, and
though he were contemptible in all points, of no Learning, no Wit, no
Conversation, not so much as pretending to a show of Piety, fit for nothing but
to make mischief and disturbance, he outed so great a Man as Athanasius, and as
vile a Wretch as he was, presumed to get himself placed in his Episcopal
Throne. And yet this very Wretch is vehemently recommended to the Alexandrians
by the Emperor's V. Athanas. Apol. p. 6^5. B. and Ep. ad solit. p. 859. D.
own Letter, as one of the best Divines in the World. So miserably did his
Eunuchs abuse the good meaning of this poor Emperor, as to put the vilest of
Men into the best of Preferments for Money; and as he got it, so he used it,
not like a Bishop, but a Publican, till his Oppressions cost him his life, for
which he had the good fortune in the barbarous Ages of the Church to be
Canonised among the Principal Saints and Martyrs: For in all the timely Records
of the Church, I can find no other St. George then this. And this was the
peculiar miscarriage of this Emperor's unhappy Reign, that the Preferments
were got into wicked hands, and then it is not to be doubted, but that wicked
Men would get into the Preferments, and things were so basely carried at last,
that nothing seemed to keep up the good old V. Athanas. Ep. ad Solit. p. 810.
D. etc.
Eusebian Cause, but the advantage that it gave ill Men for Ecclesiastical
Plunder and Sequestration.

But to return to the train of the Story, Liberius the Bishop of the great City
being dispatched, the last Enemy to be overcome was the great Hosius, that
Father of Councils, who by reason of that high Authority that he had acquired
in the Christian Church, both by his Age and Wisdom, was able by himself alone
to keep up the Orthodox Faith against all the Power of the Emperor. And
therefore he is Summoned to Court, and courted to join in the Condemnation of
Athanasius, but he satisfied the Emperor so well by his reasons to the
contrary, that he is dismissed with all Civility; but by the importunity of the
Eunuchs, who feared that this escape would make an ill Precedent, he is
immediately followed with a furious Epistle, commanding him to comply, or to
expect the fortune of his Companions; to which the good old Man, nothing
daunted, returns a bold but yet a civil Answer, lays before the Emperor at one
view the whole Train of Villainy against Athanasius, that had been so often
proved, and then leaves it to himself to consider, whether it became his
Majesty at that time of the day to suffer himself to be made a Tool by such
Perjured Wretches as Valens and Ursacius, and so in short he denies all
compliance, and defies his threatenings, and upon it he is immediately seized
and conveyed to Sirmium, and there kept in custody till the meeting of a
Council in that City the year following.

And though the fury of the Emperor's, or rather his Eunuchs Persecution in
these European Parts, is here somewhat interrupted by the Incursions of the
barbarous Nations into Gaul, yet he rages so much the more fiercely in Egypt,
especially at Alexandria, sending Syrianus with some Legions of Soldiers to
murder Athanasius, who besets his Church in the night, where the People were
then Assembled, and are commanded by Athanasius in the Name of God to depart
quietly, and himself by a kind of Miracle makes his escape through the body of
the Soldiers that had encompassed him at the Altar, but he being fled and lying
concealed in the Deserts, Constantius is prevailed with to put that Learned
Divine (as he calls him) George into his Room, but what a notorious Villain he
had ever been is already described; but now being got into Authority he commits
all manner of outrages in the City, makes diverse slaughters in the Churches
themselves, imprisons Virgins, Widows and Orphans, seizes on the Orthodox
Christians by night, and throws them into Goal; ejects all Bishops throughout
Egypt and Lybia, that refuse to subscribe the Condemnation of Athanasius, and
of these some he banishes, others he imprisons, in short, he sweeps all away
before him like a Landflood, and bears away all the Orthodox Clergy out of
their Possessions in the Church, Athanasius reckons up no less then Ninty
Bishops ejected in Egypt, whereof Sixteen were banished. But the worst of all
is still behind, their Bishoprics are sold to Heathens, Soldiers, or any
Chapmen that would bid most Money for them; and so all ill Men of what
Profession or Religion soever, or rather of none at all, crowded into the Party
for the purchase of a Bishopric; and so was the whole Church put into the
hands of wicked and debauched Men, who could do no service in it, but in the
way of outrage and cruelty; and in short, the sury of this Persecution through
all Africa is described by Athanasius, not only to have equaled, but exceeded
any of the Heathen Persecutions, both for rudeness and cruelty. But still
himself was the Man aimed at in it all, great rewards are promised by public
Edicts to the Man that shall slay him, and bloodhounds are sent out into all
Parts to scent out his Form, but by a great wonder of Providence he lies
undiscovered all the time of Constantius. And in this retirement he did himself
and the World that right, as to write those two excellent Discourses in his own
Vindication, viz. his Epistle to the Monks, and his first Apology to
Constantius; in both which he has with that clearness of Reason, and evidence
of Record laid open the wickedness of the Eusebians, in the contrivance of all
his Troubles from the time of the Council of Nice to that very day, that it is
not so properly an History as a Demonstration, for he has related nothing that
he has not proved by undeniable Records. And the truth of it is, he is the only
valuable Historian of his own Actions, for all the Historians are so confused
in their account of him, that as they are not to be at all trusted when they
differ from him, so are they very little to be relied upon in any Report, that
is not vouch't by his Authority.

. XV.
Thus far has this long Controversy been carried on between the Eusebians, and
the Ab^ttors of the Nicene Faith, but now the Arian Cause is again brought upon
the Stage in another guise by Photinus Bishop of Sirmium, who revives the old
exploded Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus, that differs from Arianism only in this
one Circumstance, That it affirms the Son of God not to have been Created till
the time of his Nativity; whereas Arius will have him to have been the
firstborn of all Creatures, yet they both agree in the main Poison of the
Heres^e, That he was a Being Created out of Nothing, and then it is not much
material in it self, how soon or how late it was brought to pass. But yet
however this new-vampt Hypothesis appearing more bold, and tending to bring
down the Son of God into the same rank with every ordinary Son of a Woman,
whereas Arius allowed him great share in the Creation of the Universe, and an
eminency of Power, and Dignity over all other Creatures. This therefore alarms
all Parties, Catholics and Eusebians, and a Council is called at Sirmium
Animad. Epiph. ad h^res. 73. and dissert. de Photini damnation^.
for its Condemnation. And here the Learned Petavius is as over-nice to disturb
the plain History of this Council, as I have shown Valesius to have been in
reforming the History of the Council at Rome, and the Absolution of Athanasius.
For as he there took a great deal of pains to make but one Council of two, so
has our Learned Jesuit here to make two of one. For though there is mention of
no more then one in all the Ancient Records of the Church, yet he has lately
found out another that (he says) has hitherto lain buried under the ruins of
St. Hilary's Fragments; but alas they are so imperfect and confused, that
nothing can with any assurance be built upon their single Testimony, much less
upon remote inferences from them, which yet is all the light that this Learned
Man is able to strike out of that Rubbish. Neither indeed is it tanti to spend
so much Learning upon such a lean and barren Enquiry, for whether there were
two or one Sirmian Councils, they were called upon the same Errand, and (as I
shall prove) were of the same mind, and what that is we sufficiently know by
the Records of that which he would have to be the second, whereas the most that
we can know of the first beside this, is only that there was such a Council,
and if that be all, I cannot see what Temptation the Learned Man could have, to
be so proud of his discovery, and to take so much pains to make out a nicety of
so little weight. I must confess with him and Father Labbe, That there is no
part of Ecclesiastical History more involved, then that which relates to the
Transactions of this Council, but then the difficulty arises not from any
confusion of the two Councils as they imagine, but upon the defect of some
Records, that they have not observed, though they are grounded upon an evident
mistake, as I shall show in the progress of the Story. In the first place, as
for the time of the sitting of this Council, it is become a great Controversy
among the Learned, Baronius places it in the year 357, Petavins, and after him
Valesius, in the year 351, though I cannot see any reason that they have for
it, then only to serve the Hypothesis of a double Council. And as for the
reasons that Baronius gives for his Chronology, they are evident from the very
Story, of that time, viz. that the Council of Sirmium was called after the
Council of Milan, the Banishment of Liberius, and the Confinement of Hosius at
Sirmium, and three years after the Council of Arles by St. Hilary, and the
Orthodox Bishops against Saturninus, all which fall in exactly with this time.
To which might have been added, that it was but a little time before the
Council of Ancyra, where the Bishops that had been present at this Council of
Sirmium, were surprised with the news of the bold proceedings of Valens and his
Companions, against their Decrees at Sirmium; and yet it is evident, and proved
by Petavius himself, that the Council of Ancyra met in the year 358, whereas by
his Hypothesis there must have been Seven years distance between the two
Councils, which is utterly inconsistent with the whole Train of the Story. And
as for the Arguments of Baronius, though they are rejected by Petavius, yet I
do not find that he has any way attempted either to answer or disprove them,
unless by opposing to them the Authority of Socrates and Sozomen, who place it
in the year after the Consulship of Sergius and Nigrinianus, and that is the
year 351. But to me it looks very strange, that these Learned Men should lay so
much stress upon the Authority of these Writers in a point of Chronology, when
themselves so well knew, and have so well proved too, that there is scarce a
Transaction in the whole History, that they have not Mis-timed, Ante-dating, or
Post-dating every thing And that they did so here, is evident from the whole
Series of the History, especially the time of the banishment of Hosius, after
the Council of Milan, in the first place, which could not be till some years
after the year 351, in that the Council of Milan it self was not held till the
year 355. And in the next place the meeting of the Convention at Ancyra in the
year 358, upon the first news of the disorderly proceedings of Valens and his
Faction against the Sirmian Council, which could scarce take up a years time,
but much less seven years, which it must have done if the first sitting of the
Council had been in the year 351. But beside both these evident Demonstrations,
there is another proof of as great force out of the Historians themselves, of
which Valesius Annot. in Socrat. hist. l. 2. c. 29.
has taken notice, but over-lookt the Consequence. i. e. That several Bishops
that they affirm to have been present at the Council, were not Bishops till
some years after the year 351, particularly George of Alexandria, and
Hypatianus of Heraclea, who came not to their Bishoprics till the year 356.
And then I hope no Man can doubt but that it was an evident mistake to make
them Bishops in the year 351.

Now the time being rightly stated against the overcurious amendment of these
Learned Men, the whole Series of the Story will run smooth and easy: For the
Emperor coming to Sirmium in his Wars against the Barbarians, as Ammianus l.
16. c. 10.
Marcellinus says he did that very year, where Photinus Bishop of the place had
divulged his Heresy, and by it (as Socrates affirms) raised Tumults among l.
2. 29.
the People; the Eusebian Bishops, that always followed the Court, persuade him
to call a Council for the Condemnation of this new Heresy, and that pack't out
of their own Faction: Partly to show their Zeal against the Profane Novelty,
and that was the great Principle that they pretended to be fond of, the
abhorrence of Innovation: Partly to vindicate themselves against that standing
objection of the Catholics, as it is set out by Ecce Photinus hominem tantum
profitetur Dei filium; dicit illum non fuisse ante beatam Mariam: tua quoque
haec est professio. Quod enim ante omnia quidem, hoc est ante Caelos, Terram,
Mare, and omnia quae in eis sunt, Filius Dei sit, sed quod extiterit ex nihilo,
sed quod sit creatura; De non parcend. in D^um delinq.
quid interesse Arbitraris inter te and Paulum Samosatenum, veleum, tum ejus
Discipulum tuum Conscotinum, nisi quia tu ante omnia dicis, ille vero post
omnia? Caeterum una vobis credulitatis and incredulitatis men's est, ut
diceretis non habere Deum verum silium.
Lucifer Calaritanus, that if they would allow Communion with the Arians, there
was no avoiding it, but that they must grant it too to the Samosatenians. This
being the Master objecti on against them, which they could never avoid, though
they would never submit to it; and now finding the Samosatenian Heresy brought
in upon them, they are more concerned then any other Party to appear against
it, both to clear themselves of the objection and to vindicate their own
Reputation: That the main Body of the Council consisted of Eusebians is evident
from the Subscriptions of the Council of Ancyra, whereof all were present at
this, and from the Presidency of Basilius, who was both an Eminent Eusebian,
and the Chairman and chief Actor in this Council. Neither is there the name of
any one Orthodox Bishop that was present at this Council upon Record, but only
Hosius, who was there by compulsion. Now to give a cast of their Zeal both
against the new and the old Heresy, they revive the fourth Creed of the
Council of Antioch, which that Council sent to the Emperor Constans to clear
themselves from all suspicion of the Arian Heresy; and wherein they
endeavored to express the sense of the Nicene Fathers, and make an effectual
bar against Arianism, without the word Homoousios. And then to their own
Declaration of Faith, in which they affirm, That the Son existed out of no
other Substance then God himself, they annex 27 Anathema's against every branch
both of the Arian and P^otinian Heresy. All which Anathema's are carefully
omitted by our saithful Historian Sandius, because he is resolved to make all
the Fathers of this Anti-Arian Council rank Arians. But this Creed was thought
so satisfactory in those days, that it is recommended by St. Hilary among the
Orthodox Creeds, subscribed by Liberius, and approved by Athanasius, Dt Synod.
Arim. and Seleuc.
who owned it as Orthodox, and found no other fault with it then that it wanted
the word (...). And this was all the Consession of Faith that was made in or by
this Council, though the Historians after their careless manner tell us of two
others, to the great confusion of the Story. For as to the second, it is
certain that it was made after the dissolution of the Council, or at least out
of it, upon this account, that the Council had vouch't the word (...), and
declared so frankly against the Arians. Which so disgusted Valens, Ursacius and
their Associates, that were more warping to Arianism then was suspected, and
indeed had been secret Arians all along, as will appear by the sequel of the
Story, that they draw up another Creed among themselves, and give it out to the
World under the name of the Sirmian Creed. In which they condemn and reject the
use of the words (...) and (...) in the Christian Church, both because not
warranted by Scripture, and because such Mysteries transcend the knowledge and
comprehension of humane Understandings. The consequence of which (as St. Hilary
truly observes) was, that by shutting out the word Homoousios, it must be
Decreed either that he was a Creature made out of nothing, or out of another
Substance uncreated, and distinct from the Divine Nature. And by the profession
of our ignorance of his Divine Generation, that we plainly declare, that we do
not certainly know that he is the Son of God, both which consequences being so
dangerous, and so evident, it could not but increase the Zeal not only of the
Orthodox Fathers, but the Eusebians, against such an undermining Creed. But the
Valentians having now discovered themselves, endeavor to make their Party as
strong as they can, and among other confiding friends send their Creed to
Eudoxius, a very ill Man that had by the Patronage of the Eunuchs seized the
great Bishopric of Antioch, as the sense of the Western Church, and with the
Title of the Sirmian Faith, and he being an eager admirer of Aetius, that had
outbid the Photinian Heresy in daring and boldness, embraces it with great
greediness, and calls a Council at Antioch to abet and ratify this Western
Faith, and writes back Letters of thanks to Valens and Ursacius for settling
the right Faith in those Parts. Of all which proceedings George Bishop of
Laodicea, an Eminent Eusebian, informs Basilius of Ancyra, and the Bishops that
were then Assembled with him upon occasion of Consecrating a new Church there
founded by him, and begs that they would give their assistance to deliver the
Church of Antioch, and indeed the whole Christian Church from a such malignant
Heresy. With all which they being surprised, supposing that all things had
been duly and fully settled in their late Council at Sirmium, but instead of
that they now find a forged and counterfeit Creed thrust upon The faithful
Sand. takes no notice of all this, but only says that they con^^^^ both (...)
and (...)
them, and therefore they immediately condemn it in Twelve smart Propositions,
draw up a new Creed, in which they restore the word (...), which the sorged
Creed of Valens had exploded, and affirm the Son to be like the Father both in
Substance and in all things; send it by Basilius and other Legates to the
Emperor, with a request that the determinations of the Sirmian Council might be
ratified by Imperial Edict, he receives both it and them with all possible
kindness, is in a great passion against Valens and his Conventicle, and damns
their forged Consession by public Edict. From all which it is more then
evident, That this Creed of Valens was not drawn up in the Sirmian Council, as
the Historians unanimously mistake; but after its dissolution by a rump Faction
that continued in the City, and that appears plain enough without all this
proof by the Preamble to it, viz. Seeing a Dispute about the Faith has been
thought convenient, all things have been diligently Examined and Discuss't at
Sirmium in the presence of Valens, Ursacius, Germinius and others. So that it
was not the Act of the Council, but of a few Bishops that protested against it,
who by it so netled the Eastern Bishops that had been present at the Council,
that they immediately meet again in Council to condemn the Imposture and
restore the true Sirmian Faith. And yet for all this it is unanimously agreed
by all Writers both Ancient and Modern, even those who acknowledge that this
Second Creed was not made till after the Council, that this was the very Creed
subscribed by the great Hosius in the Council. But methinks though we had
wanted this forcible exception against it, that he could subscribe no such
Creed in Council because none such there was to be subscribed, yet such an
enormous Apostasy should not be so easily believed of a Man so Great, so Good,
so Wise, the very Father of the Church in that Age, that had for so many years
managed all the great Affairs of Christendom, presided in all the great
Councils Eastern and Western, should at last quit the faith, that he had so
long contended for. And therefore Baronius bemoans his fall with Ad Annum. 357.
n. 17.
most sorrowful Accents to the Tune of, How are the Mighty fallen; and his
compassion had not been ill placed, had it been well grounded, for though all
Men from that very Age to this very day have run away with the truth of the
Story as a thing unquestionable, yet if we trace it up to its very beginning,
we shall find it not only destitute of any competent Authority, but grounded
upon an Information apparently false and inconsistent with the most evident
Records of the Church. And that is the Forgery of Valens and his Associates who
dispersed the Decree of their Conventicle into all parts of the Christian World,
as the Creed of the Sirmian Council and all that consented to it, and in all
probability with Hosius his name in particular annexed to it to give the
greater blow by his Authority to the Athanasian Party, of which he was the
great Oracle, and this they might do with more advantage then they had spread
their former Lies, in that he had after great struggling and resistance
complied with the Council, and they had published this Creed as the result of
it, and then it was but an easy and plausible addition to it that this was the
very thing that he had complied with. And this being blown abroad with so much
confidence must for some time pass without control, and gaining the belief of
some few honest Men upon the first surprise, has ever since supported it self
upon their Authority. This is all the Foundation that this Story has or can
have, though I very much suspect it has not so much, but relyes altogether upon
one man's mistake, I am sure it does upon his Authority, and that is St. Hilary,
at a time when he could have no competent Information of the matter, for he was
then in Banishment in a distant part of the World, and being there informed
that Hosius was present at the Council, and reconciled with the Eusebians upon
some compliance to the Council, and being withal informed of this Creed that
its Contrivers had given out as the very Creed of the Council, it was natural
and easy to conclude that the Subscription to this Creed was the Condition
upon which Hosius was reconciled. And this mistake was so easy to a man in his
Circumstances, that it was almost unavoidable, for as he was at a great
distance, so he writ this upon the Information that Valens and his Party had
sent themselves into the East, and therefore when this Creed was sent by them
as the Creed of the Council, and when Hosius was present at it and subscribed
something to the satisfaction of the Eusebian Party, it was natural to suppose
that it was upon his Subscription to this Creed. And this is all the Authority
upon which the Credit of a Story so incredible relyes, for all the following
Writers could have no Information but from him, and as he is the only Founder
of the Story, so he fell into the surmise upon crude and remote Information.
And that he was very ill informed about the Sirmian Creed is evident from the
account he gives of the Subscriptions to it, where among others he reckons up
Basilius, Silvanus In Fragm. Hill. p. 458.
and others who were so far from subscribing that Creed, that they were not
present when it was framed, and as soon as they heard of it, condemned it with
as much detestation as St. Hilary himself. Neither indeed could this drop from
St. Hilarie's own Pen, who very well knew and has given the most accurate
account of the Proceedings of Basilius, Silvanus and others at Ancyra against
the false Creed of Sirmium, and therefore could not possibly so far forget
himself as to set it down for their contrivance. So that this addition must
have been foisted in by some peevish and unskilful follower of Lucifer
Calaritanus, who was angry with the reconciliation of the divided Parties, and
equally offended both with the Orthodox and with the Eusebians that had United
against the Anomaeans, and I am very apt to suspect that most of the reflecting
passages in St. Hilary were foisted in by some such hand, and particularly the
Title prefixed to this Creed, Exemplum blasphemiae apud Sirmium per Osium and
Potamium conscriptae; for there is no such Title in any other Author, it is set
down b th by Athanasius and Socrates without any mention of the name of Hosius.
But however that is, it is evident from Athanasius himself, that the imposture
of the second Sirmian Creed was not then well understood, for he sets it down
in the second Creed made by the same Council that drew up the first, whereas it
was made by a Faction in defiance of it, and imposed upon the World under the
false Title of the Sirmian Creed, which it seems was swallowed by Athanasius in
Africa as it was by St. Hilary in Asia, but that it was the Creed of Hosius is
the singular Dream of St. Hilary or his forging Luciferian, for that it was not
St. Hilary's own Censure appears from a surly passage annexed to it. Sed de eo
[Hosio] nihil queror: qui idcirco est reservatus, ne judicio humano ignoraretur
qualis ante vixisset. But I shall not complain of him, seeing he was preserved,
to let the World know what a life he has lived. Which implies him to have been
a wicked and scandalous Person, which St. Hilary nor no man else unless a
railing Luciferian could ever say of Hosius, which one dirty reflection is
enough to spoil the Credit of the whole Story, in that it betrays the hand from
whence it dropped, and the same is to be said of his Book against Constantius,
where we find the same Calumny repeated. For how Learned Men came to let that
Book pass among St. Hilary's Genuine Works I cannot understand, when it so
plainly betrays its own Forgery, first in that the Author of it excuses himself
for having never appeared before in this Controversy, whereas St. Hilary had
written his 12 Books de Trinitate, his Book de Synodis, and two Apologies to
Constantius. Secondly, It is pretended to have been written after the death of
Constantius, and yet it speaks of things that were transacting at the time of
its writing At nunc pugnamus contra persequutorem, fallentem, contra hostem
blandientem, contra Constantia^ Antichristum.
as done in the time of his reign. Thirdly, a considerable part of it is stolen
out of Lucifer Calaritanus, viz. Where he justifies his rudeness to the
Emperor by the Example of the Maccabees. Fourthly, the Author of it has
filch't a passage out of St. Athanasius his own Apology, in which he tells the
Emperor that he had taken more pains against Athanasius then against the
Persians; and therefore it must have been written by some later Rhapsodist when
Athanasius his Books were grown common, whereas St. Hilary does not seem to
have been at all acquainted with them. Lastly Mandas tibi subscriptiones,
Afrorum, quibus blasphemia Ursacii et Valentis condemnaverant, reddi:
renitentibus comminaris, and postremum ad diripiendos mittis.
he charges Constantius with owning and abetting with all his power the Creed
of Valens and Ursacius, when it is so very well known that he used all his
power to oppose it. But beside all these reasons, though I am no Critic, yet I
cannot but discern that Treatise to be so utterly unlike the Spirit and Genius
of that Father, that if he would have set his own Wit to mock and burlesque his
own way of writing, he could not have writ so unlike himself. As will appear to
any one that will but compare it with the remaining fragments of his two other
Apologies. For beside the scabby imitation of his Style, the roughness of the
matter was utterly inconsistent with his smooth and gentle way of Address, and
perfectly betrays the rough hand of some Luciferian Esau. For all the
Schismatics of that Splenetick Sect kept up the rudeness of their Founder, and
so were very abusive in all their Writings, and particularly saucy in their
expressions to Sovereign Princes: but most of all addicted to forge and divulge
ill-natured Stories against all that they hated, but of all men they both owed
and paid their greatest spite to the Memory of Hosius, because he was the first
man that condescended to an accommodation with the Euselians, upon their
anathematising the Arian Heresy. Whereas Lucifer Calaritanus the Father of
their Sect, was so far from submitting to any terms of Reconciliation, that he
would not so much as accept them to Communion upon repentance, and upon this
account separated himself from the Catholic Communion, and made that ill
natured Schism, that his petulant followers were ferced to keep up by Stories
and Calumnies against the Catholics; but as for Hosius the head of their
Enemies, he must not only do wicked things, but he must be punished for them by
the immediate hand of God, and of this we have a remarkable Story still
remaining in Isidore Hispalensis, that after his Apostasy and Prevarication at
Sirmium, Gregory a Luciferian Bishop of El^beris refused Communion with him at
his return home, at which he falls into a Passion, resolves to procure his
Banishment, and in order to it goes about to Excommunicate him, but as he is
denouncing the Sentence, he is struck dead by Gregory's Prayers. But though the
Learned Annalist has left this great Man under the guilt of his Apostasy, Ad
Annum. 357. n. 30.
he has been so kind as to rescue him from its Punishment, because this
Testimony of Isidore is apparently too late, in that he lived at the distance
of above two hundred years from Hosius, whereas there is no mention of any such
Prodigy in all the Ancient or Co temporary Writers, but on the contrary they
all speak honorably of him after his death. Athanasius who has occasion often
to mention him when dead always does it with the same respect that he treated
him when alive, which he could never have done, had he perished by so remarkable
a Judgment, so that the first Authors of this Story were in all probability
Marcellinus and Faustinus, two Schismatical Luciferian Presbyters in the Reign
of Theodosius, that then threw out a Famous Libel stuff't with Dirt and
Calumny, not only against Hosius, but St. Hilary, and all the other Orthodox
Bishops, and from them Isidore picked up the Story. But to return to the
Council of Sirmium and conclude this Vindication of Hosius, as I have
sufficiently taken off the Testimony of St. Hilary, both from the uncertainty
of the Record and the incompetency of his Information, so I think I can destroy
it by the Testimony of one greater then he, and that is Athanasius, who as he
was the man most concerned in all this business, so he understood it best, and
has left the best and only accurate account of it to Posterity, and yet in the
Story of the Sirmian Council all that he relates of Hosius his compliance is
only this, that with long hard usage and great severity, the Emperor at last
with much difficulty brought him to this, that he should own Communion with
Valens and Ursacius, but so as not to subscribe against Athanasius; this is all
the Story that he tells of this foul matter, though he seems to suggest in his
Apology, as if he had for some time forsook him, through violence of torture,
but not one Syllable of his Subscription to any Creed, much less that of Valens
and his Party, which Hilary might take to be the Creed of the Council, because
they gave it out to be so, so that in the result of all there is so little
Evidence of his subscribing that Bastard-Creed, that there is plainly none of
his making any Subscription at all, all that is certainly known is that he was
present at the Council, by force reconciled to the Eusebians, and so dismissed
home. But though the Testimony of St. Hilary were clear and certain, and though
it were not controlled by the stronger Testimony of St. Athanasius, there is
one plain Argument that evidently demonstrates that whatever the Compliance or
Subscription of Hosius was, it had nothing to do with Valens his Creed because
whatever it was, he was forced to it, as all Writers agree by the Emperors
threatenings and torments, whereas the Emperor was so far from ever being so
zealously concerned for this Creed at the Council, that it was framed both out
of the Council and without his knowledge, and as soon as he understood any
thing of it by the Bishops that were present at the Council, he condemned it
with great Passion and Displeasure, and therefore setting aside all Evidences
from Testimony, this one Argument alone is an Eternal ba^le to the Story how
well soever attested. So that after this I need not trouble my self or the
Reader with discovering the mistakes of the Historians, because the thing it
self proves them so, as when Socrates and Sozomen say that he was brought by
force to subscribe the Creeds of the Council, the ground of their mistake is
apparent, in that they supposed the Council to have made three Forms of Faith,
when it made but one. As for Ruffinus and Sulpitius Severus, I regard them not
either in this or any ^ther part of the Arian History, especially the latter
who has committed as many faults through carelessness, as Philostorgius and his
Lacquey Sandius have through w^llful dishonesty. I have insisted the longer
upon this particular Subject because it grieved me to see the reputation of so
great a Man that had shined so long in the Christian Church to be thought at
last to set in so much dishonor, and that so great a blemish should so easily
pass upon him through all Ages merely through mistake and carelessness. But
having so fully cleared him of the foul Calumny laid to his Charge, I may now
proceed to do what Service I can of the same nature to Pope Liberius, who too
Poor Man! has had much harder usage upon this occasion then he really deserved,
and that from the same Fountain, viz. A blind Testimony of St. Hilary and a
bold Lie of Valens and his Faction, the first has let fly three Anathema's for
his Apostasy, to which Baronius replies, that they were none of his, but
foisted into him by some later hand: It may be so, and in truth very little
stress is to be laid upon those confused Fragments, but then he might have
pleaded the same thing in behalf of Hosius, whereas he has taken great pains to
condemn Hosius, and acquit Liberius by the Authority of St. Hilary, which is by
no means fair dealing, when by the same shift wherewith he eludes the Testimony
of Liberius, he might if he had pleased have taken off the Evidence against
Hosius, which yet he has urged with the utmost severity against him, though
with what candor and justice is evident from the Premises. And as their case
was the same as to the Testimony of St. Hilary, so was it as to the lies and
slanders of the Eusebians, who at the same time when they boasted of Hosius his
rejecting the Consubstantiality, if we may believe Sozomen, they make the very
same braggs of Liberius, l. 4. c. 15.
as if he too had made the same Declaration. But though they had Ten Thousand
Testimonies against him, and as many more flying Reports, his Innocence clears
it self by his own actings, for the true account of his whole compliance is
best stated and understood from his own Epistles, where it is as express as
words can make it, that he desired to be restored upon his Subscription to the
Faith of the Sirmian Council and yielding to the Condemnation of Athanasius:
And what is that to Valens his Faith forged in his own Conventicle after the
conclusion of the Council? But though it be an easy matter to clear him of all
suspicion of Heresy, yet we shall not be able to bring off his integrity with
that clearness that we have Hosius. For if Hosius had done what was laid to his
charge, it was all done by force and compulsion, whereas Liberius his
compliance was a Free-will-offering; he courted the E^sebians to be admitted
into their Association against his friend and fellow Sufferer Athanasius, he
boasted of his forwardness in it, he over and over tendered his Subscription
against him, and all this in humble and submissive Addresses, with this
Petition at the Tail of all, That he might be restored to his Bishopric; nay
he condescended so very low as to flatter and fawn upon such vile wretches as
Valens and Ursacius. All which was an utter forfeiture of all manner of
ingenuity, for what could be more dirty and dishonest then to join so frankly
with such perjured Villains in the ruin of an innocent Person, only that
himself might escape scot-free from their malice? So that whereas this Fact of
Liberius has been the subject of a long and fierce Contention between the
Friends and the Enemies of the present Church of Rome, those being much
concerned and puzzled to clear him from falling into Arianism, because that
would utterly spoil their modern Doctrine of Papal Infallibility, and these for
the same reason laboring as hard to bring him under the guilt of that foul and
scandalous Apostasy; in my poor Opinion one side might spare their fears, and
the other their pains, for there was nothing of the Arian Heresy in all this
Transaction: The Creed that he Subscribed could be no other then the first in
this Council against Photinus, which not only came up fully to the Sense of the
Nicene Creed, though it wanted the word (...), but declared much more expressly
against the Arian Heresy in its 27 Anathema's annexed to it, then which there
is not a fuller protestation against it upon Record, though the first would
have been sufficient alone, viz. If any Man say that the Son existed out of
nothing, or out of any other substance, and is not God of God, or that there
was a time when he was not, let him be banished the Catholic Church. But as
for his delivering up Athanasius into the hands of his Enemies, thereby to
purchase his own liberty, though it was a base and dishonorable action to
Sacrifice so brave a Man to his own private Convenience, yet that was all, it
was not disowning the truth, much less opposing it, he all along stood firm in
his defiance to the Arian Faction, and with it concludes his very Letter to
Valens and Ursacius, where after a Protestation of his Integrity in what he had
there declared, he adds, Praevaricatori Anathema una cum Arianis a me dictum.
And now having thus cleared the perplexed controversy concerning the Faith of
the Sirmian Council, and the Subscription of these two great Men to it, we may
proceed in the Series of our Story.

. XVI.
Valens and his Conventicle having put that impudent Sham upon the Council, as
to contrive a new Creed, that discarded all the bars against Artanism, and
publish it to the World under the Authority of the Council it self, this so
gauled Basi^ius and the old Eusebians, who flattered themselves with this
conceit, that after all their Travels they had now at last settled all things,
and united all Parties by asserting a likeness though not an Identity in
substance, against the new Sect of the Anomaeans, who were so far from owning
any thing like to equality between Father and Son, that they held a perfect
dissimilitude of Natures (^o endless a thing is Metaphysics, when Men have a
mind to be peevish or wanton) And here begins the new Controversy (as
Epiphanius observes) of Homousians and Homoiousians against the Anomaeans. And
indeed it H^rts. 73. n. 1.
is the first time that I know of, that we hear of the different Parties of the
Homousians and Homoiousians; and if we may rely upon the report of Socrates,
they never avowedly distinguished themselves l, 2. c. 45.
by those two words, till after the Council of Seleucia, though it is plain
that the first occasion of it was given by the Council of Antioch, that was
convened on purpose to contrive a Creed more comprehensive then that of Nice,
and therefore instead of asserting the Consubstantiality of Father and Son, for
the satisfaction of all Parties, it defines the Son to be (...).
The unchangeable Image of the Divinity and Substance of the Father. But from
the time of the Sirmian Council this new Controversy is carried on both by the
Homousians and Homoiousians against the Anomaeans, and it was but high time
when they began to out-bid the Arians, especially when Aetius had about this
time vented his new Heresy, viz. That the Son was so far from being either of
the same or the like Substance with the Father, that he was unlike him in all
things, in which the bold Mechanic went beyond all the former Anomaeans, that
held only a dissimilitude of Nature, but a likeness of Will, whereas this new
Heretic positively avers an unlikeness both of Nature and Will. He was by
Trade a Goldsmith in Antioch, but being a very pert and conceited Citizen, and
troubled as Photius expresses it in the description of him, with a certain
Disease called (...), an intemperance of prating, he would needs set up for a
thing of Learning, and having got a little smattering in Aristotle's Logique,
the next thing was to be an Heretic too, and so first declares for Arius, and
spends his time in running up and down to dispute with the Divines of the City,
and at length grew so troublesome and impertinent in all Company that the
Pedant was kicked out of Town. But having the honor of a public Affront,
instead of being out of countenance, he grows proud that he should be so
considerable as to be at all taken notice of, and so resolves to leave his
Master Arius, and set up a new Heresy of his own, and so became the very
Muggleton of the Age. His great Admirers Philostorgius and Sandius are so
foolish as to tell us strange Stories of his profound skill in Philosophy, and
all the Learned Languages; and yet in the same page tell us again, That after
he was driven and affronted out of Antioch, he fled to Anazarbus in Cilicia,
and there learnt his Grammar till his Schoolmaster kicked him again out of
doors for his saucy and malepert behavior toward him; after which he wanders
up and down to brawl and dispute with all Men of same for Learning, and having
the misfortune to be once overcome at disputation in the Isle of Sicily, he
resolved (to be short) to hang himself, had he not been warned by an Angel in a
Vision, that he should be endued with invincible Wisdom, and never more be
vanquished in disputation. Upon this he takes heart and repairs to Alexandria,
to encounter the great. Aphthonius, the then admired Man, both for Subtilty and
Eloquence, and at the very first Rencounter disputes him to death. And when the
mighty Hero had Conquered all the Giants of disputation, he grows so generous
as to turn Quack, and kill of tree-cost. And last of all he creeps into Deacons
Orders by the help of Eudoxius, who was lately made Bishop of Antioch by the
help of the Eunuchs, and being an ignorant and unlearned Man, had the
ill-fortune to admire this Mechanic Fop, but being got into Orders, he leaves
his own Country to reside at Alexandria, because it was necessary, forsooth,
that some body should be there, who was able to cope with the great Athanasius;
and after a while he is falsely accused to Gallus, by Basilius and Eustathius,
two great Bishops that he had bafled in disputation, but he acquitted himself so
well, that Gallus took him for his own Chaplain, after whose death these
spightful Bishops accuse him again to Constantius as privy to Gallus his
Conspiracy against him, and he being delivered by the Emperor into their hands,
they banish him to Pepuza in Phrygia. This Tale, as ridiculous as it is, is the
fairest Story that they could raise to the memory of this litt^e Heretic. Tho
the Truth of the whole matter is, that he was a mere Fanatique, for being
conscious to himself of his want of Education, and having a mind to be thought
something in the World, he pretends an immediate Revelation from God of all
things that he had kept secret from the Apostles, particularly a perfect
knowledge of the Divinity, viz. That the Son was so far from being of the same
or the like Substance with the Father (as the Church had taught from the time
of the Apostles) that he was unlike him in all things. Now Basilius and the old
Eusebians being alarmed partly with the spreading of this new Heresy by the
Patronage of Eudoxius Bishop of Antioch, and partly with the late prevarication
of Valens and his Companions, but most of all by that League that they were
making among themselves, they certify the Emperor of all these bold endeavors
to break in pieces his late settlement of Union, of which he was so fond, and
had endeavored so many years, at present he declares against them with all
possible keenness of Zeal, but in order to their final Extirpation resolves
once more upon a general Council, and first appoints it to meet at Antioch, but
before the set time of Meeting the City was destroyed by an Earthquake, which
(says Philostorgius according to his Partial and Fanatique way of writing)
befell them as a Judgment from Heaven, because most of the Inhabitants of the
City were Homousians. But upon its destruction several other places are
mentioned, though none could be agreed on, so that the very place for the
Council became a tedious matter of debate; and Basilius with the Eastern
Bishops, by whose motion it was resolved upon, are sent for by the Emperor to
Sirmium to advise about it, where they luckily meet with Valens and his Western
Associates, and falling into a Conference before the Emperor about the present
Controversies, after a long dispute till late at night, they at last by the
Emperors Motion agree upon a new accommodation to gratify all Parties among
themselves, i. e. Not to Germinii ^^p. in Hi^ar. frag. p. 455.
affirm the Son to be like the Father in Substance: And this was to please
Valens and his Party, who had exploded the word Substance out of their Creed,
but to be like him in all things; and this could not but satisfy Basibius and
his Party, for if he were like him in all things, he must be so in Substance,
and upon this they agree upon the Reconciling Creed, commonly called the third
Sirmian Creed, for which they were so much laughed at, and of which they were
so soon ashamed, for dating it according to the year of the Consuls, Eusebius
and Hypatius, whereas all former Councils were never wont to set any Date to
their Creeds, thereby implying their settlement from the Beginning. But these
piecings never hold firm, for when they came to subscribe their Creed, Valens
would have shuffled, writing only, that Epipha^. Here Is. 73. N. 22.
the Son was like the Father, but was forced by the Emperor to add in all
things, and Basilius suspecting the fraud that might lie under these general
words, subjoins to his own Subscription, When I say that the Son is like the
Father in all things, I mean not in Will only, but in Substance. But that was
no more then his own protestation, for Valens having gained a Creed without the
word Substance, he had gained his point, and so lays it up safe till he had
occasion to use it for his own purpose. After this they agree to divide the
Council into two parts, probably out of Jealousy one of another, one to sit at
Ariminum for the ease of the Western Bishops, and the other at Seleucia in
Isauria for the ease of the Eastern. At Ariminum meet above 400 Bishops, though
Sandius, like p. 121.
himself says above 1000, thus Men that accustom themselves to lying, will
often lie to no purpose. Of these there were not above 50 of Valens his Party,
as Athanasius affirms, or at most not above 80, as Severus; but being emboldned
by their late new Creed at Sirmium, whereby they had at length shaken off all
the Clogs, that had been hitherto fastened on them to hinder their return to
Arianism, and being assured that the Emperor would back their motion with all
his Zeal and Power, they step forth Soz. l. 4. c. 17.
and move for the Union and Satisfaction of all Parties, that all former Creeds
might be abolisht, and that their late Creed agreed upon at Sirmium, and
approved by his Imperial Majesty, might be established for ever, and that for
the time to come no such strict Inquisition should be made into Men's Opinions,
that does but breed Quarrels and Animosities in the Church. But the Fathers
being too well satisfied by so many experiments that had been made in this
Princes Reign, that nothing would ever be able to stop out the Arian Heresy,
but the Nicene Faith, and now seeing all those fences that had been raised
against it by so many Councils broke down and leapt over, and the Christian
Church like to be turned into a Common for the entertainment of all Heresies
without restraint or distinction, resolve to make short work of it, and
therefore tell them, that they came not there to make new forms of Faith, but
were satisfied with the Faith that they had received from their Forefathers,
and that their present business was to make enquiry whether any thing were
innovated against it, and remove it, and therefore demand of them for clearing
themselves of any such design to subscribe the Condemnation of the Arian
Heresy, which they refusing, the Synod proceeds, to have the Nicene Faith, and
that alone Established for ever, and Decree that for the time to come it should
never be called in question, it being an absurd thing to be always making new
Faiths, as if they were but now beginning to believe. Their Resolution, and the
Title prefixed to it being very remarkable, I shall set them down in their own
words. The Title runs thus, Incipit definitio Catholica Apud Frag. Hilarii, p.
488.
habita ab omnibus Catholicis Episcopis, priusquam per terrenam potestatem
territi, Haereticorum consortio sociarentur in Concilio Ariminensi. The Decree
thus,

Sic credimus placere omnibus posse Catholicis a Symbolo accepto nos recedere
non oportere, quod in collatione apud omnes integrum recognovimus: nec a fide
recessuros, quam per Prophetas a Deo Patre per Christum Dominum nostrum,
docente Spiritu Sancto, and in Evangeliis and in Apostolis omnibus suscepimus,
ut per traditionem Pa. trum secundum successionem Apostolorum usque ad
tractatum apud Nicaeam habitum, contra haeresin quae tunc temporis exurrexerat,
positum nunc usque permanet. Quibus omnibus nec addendum aliquid credimus nec
minui posse manifestum est. Placet ergo nihil novum fieri; substantiae quoque
nomen and rem a multis sanctis scripturis insinuatam mentibus nostris obtinere
debere sui firmitatem. Quam rem cum suo nomine Ecclesia Catholica cum doctrina
deifica semper confiteri and profiteri consuevit. This is a brave resolution,
and becoming the courage of such a Venerable Assembly, if they had stood to it.
To this Decree they demand Valens and his followers to submit themselves, but
they refuse and stand upon their late Imperial Faith, and so are all deposed.
Of all which they certify the Emperor in a Synodical Epistle, in which they
give him this reason of their resolution of sticking to the Nicene Faith. Quae
sola hostis and interfectrix Arianae Haereseos, in qua certe and addere aliquid
temerarium est, and auferre periculosum quorum si alterutrum fiat, erit
hostib^s quidlibet agendi libera facultas. Because that alone cut the Throat of
the Arian Heresy, so that to add any thing to it or diminish any thing from
it, would open a gap to the Enemies to break down all; and of the same Opinion
was St. Hilary at last, though he had been formerly for framing new Creeds to
way-lay new Heresies, Fides quae apud Nicaeam ordinata est, plena at que
perfecta est, and omnibus undique In Frag. Hill. p. 447.
quibus irrepere haeretici solent, aditibus obsetatis, inviolabili inter Patrem
and Filium aeternae unitatis soliditate connectitur. This was the result of
this Great Council, and yet though there are so many clear and undoubted
Records of it, Philostorgius and Sandius are so infatuated as to tell us that
the Fathers of this Council unanimously agreed in rejecting the Homoousian
Faith, and Sandius adds, that they condemned the Council of l. 2. p. 21.
Nice as diabolical. But immediately after this Vote of No Faith after the
Nicene, Valens and his Associates leave the Council, and before the Legates
could come to the Emperor, they inform him of the stubborness of the Council
in rejecting his own Imperial Creed, and to aggravate the affront setting up
against it his old Enemy Homoousios, so that after twenty years War that his
Majesty had waged against it, they had given it much greater Strength and
Authority then it ever had before, by Voting it perpotual and unchangeable.
Upon this finding his project that he had been so long in hatching, and as he
thought had brought to some life, so unexpectedly dash't to nothing, it swells
his Choler into Rage and Madness, and he now vows never more to be bafled, and
though he was always as Ammianus describes him, inexorabilis suae Authoritatis
vindex, an implacable exacter of Obedience, from this time forward his Reign
was nothing but Force and Tyranny. And in the first place he will neither admit
the Legates of the Council into his presence, nor dismiss the Council it self,
but writes a surly Letter, in which he only bids them to wait for an Answer
till his return from the War with the Barbarians, ^Theodor. l. 2. c. 19.
which was done by the advice and contrivance of Valens and his Associates to
tire out the poor old Bishops that desired to return home to their Charges, and
at length to demolish this new Sconce that they had raised against the Heresy.
But all in vain, for by this rough and careless answer they sufficiently
understood his meaning, and so Soc. l. 2. c. 29.
send a bold and peremptory Letter to assure him, that let him do what he would
they were resolved never to depart from their resolution, and therefore
Petition to be immediately dismissed. But for all that he leaves them in Council
all Winter to blow their Fingers, and cool their Resolutions till his return
from the War. In the mean time at the Request of Valens and his fifty Men he
commands themselves to Theod. l. 2. c. 21.
repair to the City of Nice in Thrace, namesake to that in Bithynia, and decoy
along with them as many Bishops as they could pick up through weakness or
Cowardice, and there Vote his own Form for the standing and unalterable rule of
Faith with the advantage of the Name of the Nicene Faith. All which is
accordingly done, only they put a new trick upon his Credulity, for whereas his
own Creed run thus, that the Son was like the Father in all things, they only
set it down in the words of Valens as he would have subscribed it before the
Emperor at Sirmium, that he was like the Father. This being done, they inform
the Emperor that In Frag. Hilar.
they had exactly obeyed his Commands that he laid upon them at his departure
to his Wars, ne quis usiae vel homousii nomina Eccles^e Dei ignota aliquando
nominet, quod Scandalum inter fratres facere solet. With this the poor abused
Emperor is fully satisfied, and as soon as he returns home, all that refuse to
subscribe this new curtailed Creed are banished out of hand, particularly
Liberius of Rome is sent to travel a Second time, but the Legates from the
Orthodox Bishops at Ariminum are forced to a subscription, and at length most
of the Bishops themselves are brought to a compliance, partly by the
persuasions of Valens and his Friends to yield to the Emperors Will as a
present expedient, and partly by their solemn and vehement Protestations
against the Arian Heresy. And this is the very moment of time in which St.
Jerome says, Ingemuit totus Orbis, and Arianum se esse miratus est, A passage
quite worn out by Adversus Lucifer.
our Innovators to prove an Apostasy of the Catholic Church from the true
Faith. Whereas St. Jerome is so far from intimating any such Apostasy, that he
only complains of it as a Cheat and Trapan, which as soon as the Bishops
understood, they did with infinite indignation disclaim their Subscriptions. So
that the whole World was so far from being Arian at that time, that it was
fallen out with it self for being so weakly over-reach't and outwitted by an
handful of Arians, who had drawn them in by their great Protestations and
Professions against Arianism to subscribe such a loose and ambiguous Form of
Faith as might let it in; otherwise as for the Creed it self himself pleads for
it, Nunquid hic insertum est, erat tempus quando non erat? vel de nullis
extantibus Creatura est filius dei? Perfecta fides est Deum de Deo credere. Et
natum aiebant unigenitum solum ex Deo Patre. Quid est natum? certe non factum:
Nativitas suspicionem auferebat Creaturae. In the next place he subjoyns
several Anathema's so frankly pronounced at the same time by Valens and his
Confederates against all parts of the Arian Heresy, that could not but prevent
all Jealousy of any design to introduce it. But the Council being dismissed,
Valens and his Party insult over the Orthodox Bishops, as if they had gained
their point against the Nicene Council, Dimisso Concilio caeperunt postea
Valens and Ursacius caeteriquenequitiae eorum socii palmas suas jactitare,
dicentes se filium non Creaturam negasse, sed similem caeteris creaturis, tum
Usiae nomen abolitum est. Tunc Nicaenae fidei damnatio conclamata est, Ingemuit
totus Orbis and Arianum se esse miratus est. The Council being dissolved,
Valens and Ursacius and the other Associates of their wickedness spread their
Plumes, boasting that they had not denied the Son of God to be a Creature, but
to be like the other Creatures, then was the Name of Substance abolish't, then
was the overthrow of the Nicene Faith proclaimed, then did the whole World
groan and admire to see it self become Arian. But were they so? No so far from
that, that as soon as the Cheat was discovered, they run about like so many mad
Men, tearing their hair and taking the Sacrament upon it, that by suspecting no
harm they were merely over-reacht by wicked men, and abhorred that ill use that
Valens and his Villains had madeof their Condescension, and begged pardon of
the World for their Folly and Easiness. Concurrebant Episcopi qui Ariminensibus
Hieron. ib.
dolis irretiti sine conscientia haeretici ferebantur, contestantes corpus
domini, and quicquid in Ecclesia sanctum est, se nihil mali in sua ^ide
suspicatos. Putavimus, diceba^t, sensum congruere cum verbis; nec in Ecclesia
Dei, ubi simplicitas, ubi pura confessio est, aliud in cord clausum esse,
aliud in labiis proferri timuimus. Decepit nos bona de malis existimatio, non
sumus arbitrati sacerdotes Christi adversus Christum pugnare. This is their
Protestation, and how well they made it good we shall see in the next Reign,
but however evident it is that St. Jerome never intended by this passage (as it
is vulgarly abused) that Arianism had really prevailed over the Orthodox World,
but on the contrary that the Orthodox World was astonsh't to see it self
over-reach't by it. And so ended this great Council of Ariminum in mere fraud
and violence. And that in the management of Church Affairs, as long as our
Savior's own settlement of it in the whole Body of Christian Bishops is
regarded, can never come to any lasting effect (though an Ecclesiastical
Monarchy is as liable to corruptions and abuses as any other State or
Government) and particularly with how much ease and no power, but that of the
Church it self, all these mighty Contrivances were brought to nothing, we shall
see in the Reign of Julian.

. XVII.
But as ill as the Council of Ariminum concluded, that of Seleucia ended worse,
and came to nothing but bawling, tumult, and confusion, for it consisted of two
Parties, that fearing one another Accusations they both endeavored to disturb
all Proceedings, till that point of enquiring into Men's lives was laid aside,
and that being obtained they proceed to enquire and determine of Faith, but as
the Council of Arminium consisted of Catholics and Arians, this was made up of
Acacians, that followed the Blasphemy of Aetius, and the old Eusebians that
approved all things in the Council of Nice, but the word Consubstantial,
whereas the Acacians defied the Council it self and all its Decrees, and must
have not only the word Consubstantial but that of Substance too abolisht. But
to prevent this the Eusebians at the motion of Silvanus set up the Antiochian
Creed for the Standard of Orthodoxy, and depose all that refuse subscription to
it, Acacius and his Party on the contrary give in a Libel in which they equally
condemn all unscriptural words, and anathematise their own Doctrine of
Dissimilitude, that they might the better condemn their Adversaries, for that
they knew would take with the Emperor to take away the discriminating words of
all Parties. But when this new Faith was read, Sophronius an Eusebian cries
out, if we must be making new Faiths every day, in a little time we shall have
none at all But to that it is replied by Acacius, If you laid aside the Nicene
Faith for yours at Antioch, why may not we lay aside yours for one more
unexceptionable? and thus were they caught in their own Snare for not
acquiescing in the first determination of the Church, and after the infinite
turmoil of so many Councils they are now convinced of their own folly. But
however they proceed on to wrangle so intemperately that Leonas, who was
appointed by the Emperor to see things fairly managed, was so out of all
patience, that he turned them out of doors, and bid them go trifle among
themselves. So both Parties had their ends, having escaped each others
Accusations, and established their own Doctrine with the formality of a Council.
This being done both post to Constantinople to tell their own Story, but the
Acacians coming first they so prepossess the Emperor with prejudice against
his old friends as to engage him on their side against himself and his own
opinion. They tell him that Basilius and the other Party were stiff and
inflexible in their own determinations, and would yield nothing for the
reconciling of Dissenting Parties, nor remove any of the Offensive Words that
were the cause of all these Dissentions, not so much as that of Dissimilitude;
now they knew the Design of reconciling to be the Emperor's Darling and the
Doctrine of Dissimilitude his particular aversation. Upon this he in great
haste and fury calls a Council at Constantinople of Fifty Bishops, where these
crafty men gain more ground for themselves by seeming to promote his great
reconciling project, in order to which they present him with a Creed wide
enough to take in all Parties, in which they banish not only the word,
Substance, and Consubstantial, but that of Hypostasis, and though they held a
Dissimilitude in Substance themselves, yet to blind him they now dissemble it,
and by leaving it undetermined they serve his design of comprehension, and
therefore instead of his own Sirmian Creed, That the Son was like the Father in
all things, they put him off with this general and ambiguous Form, That the Son
is like the Father in the sense of the Scriptures, i. e. as they believed, in
Will, but not in Substance. Now this Creed was a mere contrivance to let in
Aetianism, of which of all Heresies the Emperor had the greatest abhorrence,
yet such was his dotage and infatuation to compass his long looked for project,
that he embraces it with both his hands, and all his heart. And grows so fond
of the new Darling, that when his old Friends Basilius and Silvanus and the
rest came he refused to hear them, and when Basilius thought he might freely
discourse with him as he was wont to do, he commands him silence at his Peril
as a disturber of the Churches Peace. Upon this Eustathius takes the confidence
to inform the Emperor that those Men were not the Men that he took them to be,
but were Aetians, and held the Blasphemy of Dissimilitude, and this he proves
particularly upon Eudoxius of Antioch. This turns the Tide of his Fury, and
puts him into such a Storm that Eudoxius to appease it is forced to throw his
Friend Aetius into it, by laying the Book that Eustathius had laid to his own
Charge at Aetius his door. Upon this Aetius is immediately sent for to Court,
whither he repairs with all joy and speed, thinking of nothing but the praise
that the Emperor would give him for his subtle knack at disputing, and no
sooner comes into to the presence but upon the first question greedily owns
himself Father of the Brat, and upon it is immediately banished into Phrygia
Though Philostorgius is so weak as to tell us that the only thing that provoked
the Emperor to this severity, because Aetius had bafled his Friend Basilius.
. All his Adherents are required either to anathematise his Heresy or follow
his Fortune, but they chose to quit both their friend and their opinion rather
then their Bishoprics. But then they are soon quit with the Eusebians for
putting the Emperor upon this Test, by propounding another for them that they
knew would not pass, viz. to renounce the words Substance and (...), this
immediately takes the Emperor, and done it must be out of hand. To put this
off Silvanus propounds that the Acacians may be made to renounce all the Arian
Phrases, but they stick at nothing, and abjure them all. But then their
Adversaries must abhor too, which refusing stiffly to do are thrust into
banishment. But here the conclusion of all these Contests is very observable,
for the last words that were spoke by Silvanus in behalf of himself and his
Brethren, for not renouncing their own words, were these. If God the Son exist
neither from nothing, nor from any other substance, then he must be of the same
substance with the Father. And thus after all our tedious and long travel, are
we just where we were at the beginning, for this was the very Argument approved
by the Council of Nice for settling the word (...), and now after twenty years
contest against it, are those very Men that have all along made such stirs
about it, forced to take it up again, and are convinced by so long experience
that if they once quit the settled faith, there is no putting any stop to the
Progress of extravagant Opinions. And after this Athanasius notwithstanding D^
Synodis p. 915. D.
all the troubles that they had so unjustly given him, and all the ill Names
that he had so justly given them, owns friendship with them and gives them the
Title of Brethren, that he says differ from the Catholic Faith not in sense
but in words; for when they acknowledge the Son to be of the Substance of the
Father, and not of any other Substance, nor a Creature out of nothing, but the
true Natural and Eternal Son of the Father, they are at a very little distance
from owning the word consubstantial. But the Emperor is so in love with this
new Acacian Faith, and so eager in pursuit of his old Homoousian Enemy, that he
at last quits the Party that he had all his lifetime with so much vehemence
abetted, to join in with these very Men that he had always and even at this
very time detested. And they having got him into their possession, they resolve
to make their best bargain of him, and so fall to the old work of the
Eusebians, Plunder and Sequestration, tell the Emperor Tales and Stories of
their Enemies that had fat Bishoprics, and prevail with him to put his own
friends out and put themselves in. And in the first place they turn Macedonius
that Seditious Incendiary out of Constantinople, and place Eudoxius of Antioch,
the very Hugh Peter's of that age for profaneness, luxury and debauchery, in
his See. And after the same manner that the Eusebians had ejected the
Catholics, so did they displace Soz. l. 4. c. 24.
them, as Basilius of Ancyra, Eustathius of Sebasta, Eleusius of Cizicum,
Dracontius of Pergamus, Silvanus of Tarsus, Sophronius of Pompeiopolis, etc.
And for their Mal^ce they stood in l^ttle need of forger^es, the Eusebians
being generally ill men, that came into the Church only for ease and
preferment, no wonder then if they were so easily expelled by these new
Sycophants, when they were so obnoxious to the grossest imoralities, and such
were the crimescharged upon them, as they are set down by Sozomen in the place
above cited.

And thus after all these windings and turnings to get loose from the Nicene
Creed, is the cause run away by this upstart Sect, the very dreggs of Mankind,
the Acacians being only the Rump of the Eusebians, that had supplanted them, as
they had the Catholics by out-reaching them in their own craft and
wickedness, and that is the natural event of all sorts of Sedition, that the
first Authors of it are at last devoured by their own spawn. But these Wretches
having got the Power into their hands, as Philostorgius himself tells the
story, they fall out among themselves, and endeavor to destroy each other lib.
6.
by mutual Accusations. The great Triumvirate of the Party Eudoxius, Eunomius
and Acacius accuse one another, Eudoxius falls foul upon Eunomius, and Eumonius
upon him, and Acacius upon both, and slanders them to the Emperor, supposing
that only to accuse without proof wasenough with him, as it ever had been, to
procure their condemnation; but he happening in a grave fit to enquire into the
merits of the cause, and Acacius having no proof to back his tale was forced to
disappear. So that the Emperor still finding himself abused by a new pack of
Cheats, resolves after all his disappointments to try one Council more, but
whilst that was in consultation Julian rebels, and Constantius his heart
breaks. And thus by his unskilful tampering with the Church, he leaves it at
last buried and lost in its own confusions, for instead of making up the
breaches of the Church, by this comprehensive and indefinite Creed of the
Acacians, it was every where broke into tumult and civil War. In all Cities the
People siding some with the ejected Bishops and some with the Intruders,
andeach party esteeming the other Heretics, though for what neither knew, they
set up distinct Communions, and that soon fills all places with Noise, Dispute,
and Contention, and oftentimes with the fury and outrage of the Rabble. But the
Acacians having got the mastery, they put off all disguise, and now publicly
declare both for A^t^anism and A^ianism. For Meletius one of their own party,
whom they had made Bishop of Antioch for his zeal to the cause, turning
Orthodox as it were out of spite, and preaching up the Ni^ene Faith, they
assemble there in the year 360 in order to his deposition, and under that
pretense take the opportunity of drawing up a new form of Faith. In which they
not only dash out the likeness of the Son to the Father, as it was in their
former Creed, but expressly declare a dissimilitude both in substance and will,
this was the end of all this fatal Tragedy, and above thirty years contention
about one word against the Authoritative determination of the Christian Church,
and after all parties had tired themselves, A tius a pert and ignorant
Mechanic carrys away the ball. Thus far, says Athanasius, have they trifled
away D^ Synod. p. 9^7.
our Religion, and into what wild conceits they will wander no man can foresee,
for there is no stop to be set to their Extravagance, till they shall return to
themselves and say, let us return to our Fathers, Abhor the Arian Heresy and
embrace the Nicene Faith, for it is clear that all contention against this, let
Men pretend what they will at top, is for the sake of that at bottom, and if
men will not stick to the sacred determination, there is no way left to keep
out the Heresy. Nor indeed all the follys in the world, for when once the
Authority of the Church is despised, and this Itching humor of dispute broke
out among the People, though the Civil Government keep their nails never so
short, they will be always scratching and drawing blood of the Church. And thus
was it here, for though the definition of the Council against the Heresy would
have put an everlasting end to the Controversy, as it did during the reign of
Constantine, yet when it was once laid aside by Constantius, to oblige and
comprehend, (as he dreamed) the Dissenters by some abatement, what endless
factions did it create? Eusebians, Aetians, Photians, Eudoxians, Acacians,
Eunomians, Macedonians, Psatyrians, and Dulians, and that was the lowest folly
that men could sink into; for after all the divisions and subdivisions of one
from another, some of them came at last to affirm that Jesus Christ was so far
from being the Son of God, that he was only his Serving-man. And this
Philostorgius l. 6^. 2.
is not ashamed to tell us, was preached by his ^elebrated Eunomius, in the
Cathedral Church of Constantinople.

But beside these wild Opiniatours, the Church by this Liberty was ove^run with
Swarms of Enthusiasts, the most dangerous of all Vermin; and this broke out
chiefly among the Monks, and men of Devotion. In Egypt there was a Sect that
thought it unlawful to void their Excrements, from that Text in St. Matthew 15.
11. Not that which goes into the m^uth defiles a man, but that which comes
out of the mouth. So easy is it to defile and profane a sacred Text by
applying it to the wrong end, and against these Athanasius writ his Epistle to
Ammon the Monk. And others there were in Palestine, that beside many other
freaks had this peculiar to themselves, that it was not lawful to pray, unless
alone, from that passage of our Savior, Matthew. 6. 6. When thou prayest enter
into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is
in secret. But not to follow the whole swarm of Breezes, the two Magots of
great Note and Magnitude at that time were the Massalians in Mesopotamia, and
the Eustathians in Armenia. The Massalians first set up with this one
Principle, That they were obliged to pray always, and so do nothing else, from
that passage of our Lord in the Gospel of St. Luke. 18. 1. That Men ought
always to pray and not to faint. From this conceit naturally issued such a
swarm of absurdities, as eat up all other parts of Religion; for if this was
the only necessary thing (and so they applied that saying of our Savior to
Martha) the two Sacraments and all other Dutys became useless, and they grew so
drunk with self-conceit, that they pretended to see the Holy-Trinity with their
bodily Eyes, and to be equal with Christ himself; sometimes they would dance
upon the Devils, and sometimes they would shoot at them, and sometimes be taken
with sudden frantic fits, in which they converst with Angels, and foresaw
things to come, they dissolved all the bonds of humane Society, made perjury
lawful, cancelled all obligations between Husband and Wife, Parents and
Children, and lastly admitted none to their Society, but such as were marked
out by a visible descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, and they were so fond as
seriously to fancy that they familiarly saw such appearances. As for the
Eustathians or rather Eutachtans (for Baronius I think has very Ad. An. 361. n.
45. etc.
well proved that not Eustathius Bishop of Sebasta but one Eutactus was the
Father of the Sect) I have given some account of them above, that they were a
wild sort of Phanaticks that under pretense of a more refined Godliness
degenerated into perfect Ranters, and Levellers, and the Practice of all kinds
of Debauchery. But the fullest Description of them is best to be seen in the
Canons of the Council of Gangra, by which they were condemned, viz. that they
Abhorred Marriage as unlawful, and eating of flesh unless it were strangled or
offered to Idols: that they set loose all servants from subjection to their
Masters; that they refused to receive the Eucharist from a married Priest, that
they despised Churches and all Assemblies in them as Superstitious, that they
set up Meetings separate from the Bishop, that they refused to make the usual
Offerings, or to be present at the Love Feasts: That they distinguished
themselves from others by a peculiar Habit, and would not Communicate with any
that did not wear it: that they required women to shave their hair, and wear
Men's apparel, to forsake their Husbands, and neglect their Children, and
Children to take no notice or Care of their Parents: that they fast on the
Lords day, and despise the Festivals of the Church; in short, they seem to have
held nothing unlawful in humane life but marriage, nor decent in the worship
ofGod but contradiction to the practice of the Church. And thus when our schism
grows too strong for discipline, the Common People never leave wandering till
they have tired themselves with roving through all imaginable Exorbitances, for
these kind of doctrines are not peculiar to that time or place, but are the
flye-blows of disputacity and the natural effects of unbridled liberty all the
world ever.

XVIII.
This that I have described as accurately as I could by comparing the best
Records of those times, was the true state of the Christian Church under the
Reign of Constantius, and yet notwithstanding those perpetual Enormities
committed by him through his whole Government, the two great Articles that I am
proving, viz. the inherent right of determining Controversies within the Church
it self by its own Governors, and its entire submission to the Civil Powers
howsoever oppressed by them, were nicely and religiously observed by both
Governments. The first evidently appears from the Emperor's summoning so many
Councils to gratify his own Will. For his only design was to amend and reform
the Nicene Creed for the reconciling of all Parties, which if he had thought
that he might have done by his own Imperial Authority, to what purpose need he
have broke up all the Highways in Christendom by conveying Bishops to and from
Councils? He might have proclaimed down the word (...) by one Imperial
Rescript, if he had supposed that a proper Authority for it. So that when he
summoned such Variety of Councils, by the Countenance of their Authority to
compass his Will, that demonstrates it to be a fixed Principle with him, that
the Controversies of the Church ought to be decided by the Authority of the
Church. And therefore though it was scarce ever more oppressed or abused by any
Prince then himself, yet his very illegal Actions are the highest
acknowledgement, that is upon record of that religious reverence that is due to
that power, that was settled by our Savior upon his Apostles and the Bishops
their Successors forever. For though it so frequently crossed his own design,
yet he durst never directly invade or usurp it, but was forced from time to
time to solicit their compliance with his own wicked Will, or rather
misinformed judgment. And though he carried things with so rough a violence,
yet he would never attempt any thing against the Liberties of the Church,
unless he could bear himself out by the Authority of a Council.

But if he so much owned that, how comes it to pass that the Ancients charge
him so highly for usurping it, particularly Athanasius, Hosius, St. Hilary, and
Liberius, who freely and boldly reproved him for it to his own face? And so
they did, and that too upon very just grounds; for though he did not challenge
the Authority of the Church to himself, yet he endeavored to overrule it by
downright force and violence, which is in effect to destroy it.

And that is the ground of their complaints, that they were not allowed freedom
in Council, but that himself and his Prefects took upon them to forestall the
Judgment of the Church by Restraints and Threatenings. This is the standing
complaint of Athanasius and all the Orthodox Bishops in all their Writings. It
is the grievance insisted upon by the Synod of Alexandria in their Synodical
Epistle in behalf of Athanasius against the Apolog. p. 728.
Tyrian Council. With what forehead could they call that a Council, over which
a temporal Lord presided; and where Spies, and Notaries were placed where his
Lordship determined, and the Officers of the Church were silenced, or rather
lacquied to his Decree? Where what was voted by the Bishops, was overruled by
him? He carried all things by Power, we were governed by the Guards, or rather
the pleasure of the Eusebians, whose Tool and Instrument was the Secular
President. And a little after, These worthy Eusebians shelter Ibid. p. 730.
their forgeries (speaking of the Villainy of Arsenius) under the pretense of a
Council, where all things were carried by the Emperor's Will, where one of his
Lords presided, and the Bishops were under the custody of the guard, and
compelled to say whatever the Emperor commanded. The very same Complaint is
made by Athanasius himself against the Council of Antioch. p. 8. 16.
in his Epistle to the Monks of Egypt, That when upon the Appeal or rather
Reference made to Rome by the Eusebians, he had repaired thither, and the time
of hearing the cause was appointed, as soon as they heard they were likely to
meet with an Ecclesiastical judgment, where the Secular Governor was not to
be present, nor the Guards to keep the Council doors, nor all things to be
overul'd by the Commands of Caesar, by which methods and no other they had
hitherto born down the Bishops, and without which security they durst never
have made any appearance, were so astonished and surprised, that they had no way
of escape but to shift off their own Appeal. And this is the Account that he
gives of their lying off from the Synod of Sardica, That when they had p. 818.
brought the Emperors Officers along with them, and trusted to do what they
pleased by their Authority, but finding that all things were resolved to be
managed there fairly and freely according to the Ecclesiastical Rule, they
quite baulkt the Council.

And to transcribe no more, the same complaint is perpetually repeated by him
in all his Writings as the fundamental miscarriage, v. p. 833. 844. 845. 861.
862. This was the enormity of his Reign, though he fell not so grossly into it
till after the overthrow of Magnentius or the Murder of Gallus. They were the
Actions of that time that these good men particularly complain of, and no
wonder when he did all things more like a Madman then a Prince, and Governed
both the State and himself too as wildly as the Church. As his Extravagance at
that time is described by Ammianus Marcellinus, Quo ille Studio blanditiarum
exquisito l. 15. c. 1.
sublatus, immunemque se deinde fore ab Immortalitatis incommodo existimans,
confestim a justiti^ declinavit it a intemperanter, ut AEternitatem meam
aliquoties assereret ipse dictando, scribendoque propria manu Orbis totius se
Dominum appellare:. Upon the news of the death of Gallus, he was so bloated by
the flatteries of his Courtiers for his success against all his Enemies, that
he forgot himself and his own Mortality, and sunk after so prodigious a rate
from all sense of Justice, that he was often wont in dictating Letters to
subscribe himself, My Eternity, and Lord of the whole World. They, I say, were
the actions of this mad time, that these good Men particularly complain of, and
as for all the time before he gave the Church reasonable fair usage, and though
the Eusebians drew him in to pack Councils, yet he never proceeded so high
himself as to forestall or overruled their Decrees.

As for the Council of Antioch, that was the mere contrivance of the Nicomedian
Eusebius and his Eunuchs to prevent the Council at Rome in the cause of
Athanasius. In which it does not appear that the Emperor had any other
concernment, farther then to put their Sentence in Execution. And was in all
probability imposed upon, as the good Bishops of the Council were in the
Condemnation of Athanasius. For it was all grounded upon the Acts of the Tyrian
Council, and had they been legal his Deposition had been but just, so that
their validity being (as here it was) supposed, no wonder that the Bishops Vote
so freely against him, though for the most part neither Arians nor Eusebians.
The Council at Sardica was a full and free Council, and though the Eusebians
were forced to be cross and peevish in their own defense, yet all things were
managed in the Council it self fairly and heartily, without any appearance of
force or fraud in the Emperor, insomuch that when the banished Bishops were
restored to the Exercise of their Function by the Decree of the Council, he
restored them too to the possession of their Bishoprics, by his Imperial
Rescript. The first Synod at Milan was wholly Western, and under the
Jurisdiction of the Emperor Constans, where they had all free liberty both of
debating and determining as they pleased. So that hitherto all Powers,
Privileges, and Jurisdictions in the Church were preserved, as far as the
Emperors were concerned, but after the death of Constans, the overthrow of
Magnentius, and the murder of Gallus, when Constantius run mad either through
guilt or insolence, we read of nothing but Fury and Tyranny. For in the year
355, when Gallus was murdered, he summons, or rather musters a Council at
Arles for the Condemnation of Athanasius, commands the Bishops to subscribe it,
and banishes Paulinus of Trevers for refusing the Subscription. In the same
year meets the second Council at Milan, and that for the same purpose, in which
Eusebius of Verselles, Liberius of Rome, and at last Hosius of Corduba are sent
on the same Errand after Paulinus for the same Offense. In the year 357 follows
the Council of Sirmium, where, as we have seen, all things were carried by
Force. Then comes the Council of Ariminum in the year 359, where a Council of
near 400 Bishops are compelled to subscribe and submit to the pleasure of
Valens and his fifty Men. The Council of Seleucia came to the worst end of all,
being only a contest between the Eusebians and Acacians, who finding themselves
over-numbred, appeal to the Emperor, and are received by him, draw up a new
Creed, in which they not only cashiere the word (...), but (as they phrased
them) all other Exotic words. And this indefinite Faith is imposed upon all
Christian Bishops by an Imperial Rescript upon pain of banishment; by which the
Acacians outed the Eusebians, and so got themselves into the best and fattest
Preferments. In the year 360 comes the last Conventicle of Antioch, in which
Meletius Bishop of Antioch was deposed for asserting the Nicene Creed, and that
against the Public Faith of the Emperor, given him under Hand and Seal for
his Security. These were wild actings in the Church, but they all followed the
Magnentian and Gallian madness, and that is the excuse that is made for him by
Athanasius himself, that after Ep. ad Solit.
that he was not himself, but was entirely governed by other Men, that (as he
expresses it) had no more brains in their Skuls then in their Toes. But before
this time of outrage and distraction he kept up that reverence and regard that
is due to that Authority, that our Blessed Savior has committed to his Church.
Nay even after this loosing himself and his understanding by getting the whole
World, he kept up that respect to our Savior's Institution, as at least to
Warrant all his irregular Proceedings by a show of its Authority. For though he
endeavored to carry all things by force and violence, yet he never attempted
any thing without a pretended Council. This was the Interval of time, in which
the Ancients complain of his invading the Power of the Church, and as it were
by these wild Practices, thrusting himself into the Evangelical Priesthood.
Thus was it in the year 355, immediately after the mad Council at Milan, when
the Dialogue between the Emperor and Liberius Bishop of Rome passed, in which
Liberius insists upon that one Proposal, that the Emperor would be pleased to
call a free Council, and not over-aw it by his own Sovereign Power. Let
Athanas. Ep. ad Solit. p. 833. ^.
there be an Ecclesiastical Synod Summoned, but not to Court, where neither the
Emperor himself, nor any of his Lords, or Judges commands by threatening, but
where the fear of God alone determines all things. And for sticking to this
Proposition, and refusing to act in an Ecclesiastical Sentence, till it was
granted, he is sent into banishment. In the same year, and upon the same
occasion it was that the wise Hosius gave him that famous advice. Tibi Deus
Imperium commisit, nobis quae sunt Ecclesiae concredidit. Et quemadmodum qui
tuum Imperium malignis oculis carpit, contradicit ordinationi divinae: Ita and
tu cave, ne quae sunt Ecclesiae ad te trahens, magno crimini obnoxious fias;
neque enim fas est nobis in terris Imperium tenere, neque tu thymiatum and
sacrorum potestatem habes, Imperator. God has committed the Empire to you, the
Church to us, and as he would rebel against God, that should malign your
Authority, so take heed left by drawing the Affairs of the Church to your self,
you prove guilty of the same Rebellion: for as it is a sin in us to challenge
any temporal Authority; so know, O Emperor, that you have not the power of the
holy Function. This was plain dealing, and but necessary at that time, when he
had made so foul an inrode upon the Jurisdictions and Liberties of the Church,
and overborn all its Divine Authority by Military force and sury. So that his
meaning was not, as the Romanists would have it, to cut off the Emperor from
all interposing in Church Affairs, because he that had been so much employed in
them under Constantine, could not think it unlawful in it self. But though that
be no fault but a duty, yet to use his Authority with mere force and violence,
to destroy the Judgment of the Governors of the Church by compulsion in matters
of Faith, and to take upon himself the determination of them, as he had in
effect done, and that in contradiction to the Authority of a General Council,
was such a bold contempt of our Savior's Institution, and such an Invasion of
the rights of his Kingdom, that the good Bishop could do no less then threaten
it with the Terrors of the last day. About the same time St. Hilary address't
his Apology in behalf of the Catholics to the Emperor, where among diverse
other abuses, that he Petitions to be redress't, this is none of the least.
Provideat and decernat Clementia vestra, ut omnes ubique Judices, quibus
Provinciarum administrationes creditae sunt, ad quos sola cura and solicitudo
publicorum negotiorum pertinere debet, a religiosa se observantia abstineant:
neque posthac praesumant, atque usurpent, and putent se causas cognoscere
Clericorum and innocents homines variis afflictationibus, minis, violentia,
terroribus frangere atque vexare. That was the deplorable State of the Church
at that time, that the Emperor's Prefects and Officers took upon them a Power
of Summoning the Orthodox Clergy to their Tribunals to give an account of their
Faith, and to banish them if they refused compliance with the Emperor's Will,
and not only so, but to take the Accusations of their Enemies against them, and
right or wrong, and without any regard to Justice, or understanding the merit^
of the Cause, inflict upon them their own Arbitrary punishments. This just
complaint of St. Hilary, and the oppress't Catholics so wrought with the
Emperor, that notwithstanding his outrage against them, because his Affairs in
France were then embroiled by the Incursions of the Barbarous Nations, he
publishes that seemingly kind Rescript in Answer to their Request.
Mansuetudinis nostrae lege prohibemus in Judiciis De Episc. and Cle^. l. 12.
Episcopos accusari, etc. Commanding that the Accusations of Bishops should not
be brought before Secular Magistrates, lest it should give too much
encouragement to wicked Men to oppress them with slanders, and therefore if any
Man have a complaint against them, let it be Examined before the Bishops, that
so every cause might be determined by its proper Judicature. This is a singular
Law, and has scarce any other parallel with it in the whole Code, for though
there are diverse Laws of other Emperors, that refer all Controversies about
Religion to the Episcopal Audience, yet as for the Criminal causes of
Ecclesiastical Persons, I do not remember any beside this that wholly exempted
them from the cognizance of their own Courts. And therefore that this Emperor
should grant such an Universal exemption seems a courtesy more then ordinary,
and is thought to have been merely extorted by the importunity of the Catholic
Bishops, and the present difficulty of his own Affairs. And that they then
insisted upon the exemption of Ecclesiastical Persons as well as Causes, it was
for a reason peculiar to the State of the Controversy at that time, that was
then managed, not so much by Arguments as Accusations, though that weapon was
chiefly employed against the great Athanasius, into whose single Person the
Controversy was at last contracted, and the Parties were distinguished by
nothing but subscribing and refusing his Condemnation. For he being the great
Pillar of the Catholic Cause, the Eusebians knew well enough that if they
could but blow him up, the cause must fall with him, and for that reason is it
that they all along labored so hard to overwhelm him with Criminal
Accusations. And therefore the Catholics perceiving their fraud, interposed as
vehemently in defense of Athanasius as of their Faith because all the blows
that were levelled at him were supposed to aim at that, insomuch that to
subscribe his Condemnation was the same thing as to quit the Party, as we have
seen in the case of Pope Liberius. And for this reason chiefly it was necessary
at that time, that the Emperor if he would refer the Ecclesiastical
Controversy then on foot to the Bishops, he should do the same as to the
Criminal Causes of the Clergy, because they were then universally joined
together. And yet as kind as this Law might appear to be in relieving them from
the oppressions of the Imperial Courts, it was but a fraudulent favor, and
only designed to ensnare the Catholics. For this gracious Rescript was
published in the same year, in which he called the violent Council at Milan,
that was on purpose packt out of the fiercest Eusebians, to carry things
thorough with an high hand, and without any contradiction. So that when in this
Rescript he referred the Orthodox Bishops to an Ecclesiastical Judgment, he
designed nothing but their Oppression in this mad Council; and that it is
evident, was so far from any kindness, that it was the sharpest severity he
could have contrived against them: For if they had just ground of complaint
against the unjust actings of the Secular Courts, because they were not their
proper Judicatures, yet when they were so rudely outraged in Council, as it was
done in the proper Court, so was it at their own request; and that both took
away all ground of complaint, and left them without any means of relief.
Gothofred has a Conjecture, that this Rescript was Enacted not before but after
the Council, and that in favor of the Eusebians, who were overcome by the
Orthodox at their own weapon of Accusation; and yet by the partiality of the
Council were protected, whilst the Catholics were oppressed and denied the
very formalities of Justice; this, says the Learned Man, might provoke them to
make their Appeals to the Secular Courts, where they might at least hope to
meet with some humanity and regard to the Laws: And therefore the Emperor to
spoil this shift, brings them all back to the Ecclesiastical Judicature, that
if they would come thither, there they might be heard, but no where else. But
this contradicts the whole state of Affairs at that time, when the partiality
and oppression of the Secular Judges was the universal Groan of the Catholics,
and when this Rescript was enacted upon or at least after their reiterated
complaints against it, and therefore there is no ground to imagine that the
Catholics, how much soever oppressed in Council, would think of seeking relief
there. But whatever was the intent of the Rescript (and no doubt it was
malicious enough) it is certain that it was at least pretended to be granted
upon the complaint of the Catholics against the Secular Courts for taking to
themselves the Judgment of Controversies of Faith, whereas they ought to have
referred them to the Synods of Bishops, whom our Savior had appointed to be
the proper Guides and Judges in those matters. And that is the meaning of
Hosius and the rest in their reproofs of the Emperor, not that he used his
Authority in the Church, but that he abused it by opposing it to the
determination of a general Council, by whose advice he ought both as a wise Man
and a good Christian, to have been directed in the use of his Power in such
matters. And that was the grand miscarriage of his Reign, that he would not sit
down satisfied under the Auth^ntique and Sol^mn determination of so great a
Council; which if he had done as his Father did, he had escaped all that
tedious risk of trouble, which he created both to himself and to the Church
through his whole Reign. But however it is evident from all the Premises, that
how enormously soever he abused his own Power in the Church, he never attempted
to Usurp the Churches Power, and he never took upon him to make any Alterations
in the Faith, till they were first made and decreed in Council; and though he
destroyed the Use and Authority of Councils by denying freedom of Vote, yet
that was an abuse of his Power, not an usurpation of theirs. For that he ever
owned with a Religious regard in his most unwarrantable Oppressions. And as I
have observed at the beginning he showed greater respect to the Power of the
Church then any Emperor in the whole Succession, when he called such sholes of
Councils, only to have his Will of one Man, and one Word, which he durst not
control himself, because they had been owned and justified by the Churches
Authority. And if we carefully observe his motions, we shall find him a cordial
friend both to the Church and to Religion, and the end of all his mistaken Zeal
was the lasting settlement of Peace and Concord, that was the word that he had
always in his mouth; all the misfortune was, that he fell into ill hands, and
by their advice endeavored it the wrong way. His high Opinion of the honesty
of some ill Churchmen, was the Principle that exposed him to all that abuse
that was put upon him all his life time. It was his confidence in Eusebius and
his Partisans that did drive him into that unhappy course that he took for the
attainment of his desired Peace. All their advice was Oracle to him, and made
him both deaf and blind to all other information. But otherwise setting aside
this unhappy oversight of being overruled by ill Men, he seems to have been so
far from all thoughts of robbing the Church of its own inherent rights, that he
thought he could never show it kindness enough, by heaping continual favors of
his own upon it, he granted it more Privileges and greater Immunities then any
other Emperor; and whereas his Father Constantine only exempted Ecclesiastics
from all Personal burdens in the Commonwealth, he has in diverse Rescripts
freed them from all manner of Taxes and Impositions whatsoever; and a very
little time before his death he published an Edict to Establish the perpetual
security of all his former Grants, with this reason at the end of it, as it
were his dying words, Gaudere ^nim and gloriari ex De Episc. Eccl^s. and Cler.
l. 16.
side semper volumus: scientes, magis Religionibus quam Officiis and Labor
corporis, vel sudore nostram rempublicam contineri, i. e. as Gothofred
paraphrases it, We freely grant all these Immunities to the Ministers of
Religion, as knowing that the Public Weal will lose nothing by all their
exemptions from its service, but gain greater blessings from their Prayers and
Devotions, then they could have contributed to it by any other way of
Attendance. And this very thing is all along upbraided to him by the
counterfeit Hilary, in his Book against him, that whilst he pretended so much
kindness to the Christian Church and Clergy, he by his ill Government betrayed
the one and oppress't the other. Auro reipublicae Sanctum Dei honoras, and vel
detracta templis, page 3^6.
vel publicata Edictis, vel exacta paenis Deo ingeris. Osculo Sacerdotes
excipis, quo and Christus est proditus: Caput benedictioni summittis, ut fidem
calces: convivio dignaris, ex quo Judas ad proditionem egressus est: censum
capitum remittis, quem Christus, ne Scandalo esset, exolvit: Vectigalia Caesar
donas, ut ad negationem Christianos invites: quae tua sunt, relaxas, ^t quae
Dei sunt, amittantur. So that it is evident from his Story and the Confession
of his Enemies, that he was a true lover of the Christian Church, and a zealous
Promoter of Religion, and only miscarried by following the advice of the
Eusebians, which they gave him for their own ends, and with what grosness they
abused him all along we have seen through every Stage of his life. And this is
the ground of those high Commendations that are given him by Gregory Nazianzen,
because he was of himself a true lover of Religion, and designed nothing but
the Peace and settlement of the Church, though under that plausible pretense
his good nature and integrity were imposed upon by wicked Men, to compass their
own wicked designs against the true peace of the Catholic Church. And that was
the folly and misfortune that they drew him into, not to acquiesce in the
Authoritative determination of the Church, in so great a Council as that of
Nice, which had he done, it had continued in the same Peace, and Tranquillity,
in which his Father left it. But when instead of that he endeavored to remove
the settled Foundation, as it was laid by the true and proper Builders; it is no
wonder if the whole Fabric fell upon his own head, and buried his whole Reign
under its Ruins. And it is very likely that his impatience under so awkerd a
Burden, when he could not clear himself of it, put him at last upon those
angry courses, that he took to obtain his Will. And as at last it perplexed, so
it debaucht his Government, for till the Conquest of Magnentius he seemed to
have behaved himself like a wise and able Prince, but had not leisure to
attempt, much less perform any thing great, by reason of his perpetual
attendance upon this Controversy. And that may be a warning to all Princes,
That when a Controversy of Religion is once laid by a fair and legal decision,
to beware how they suffer it to rise again, lest it prove too strong and
stubborn to submit to a second Exorcism.

However by the different behavior of these two Princes in interposing in the
Controversies of the Church, and the different event of their actings in it, we
have before our Eyes clear examples of right and wrong methods of Government.
Constantine when he found a Faction in the Church, settles peace by the
Authority of the Church, without putting any restraints upon it; and what that
determined he first made a Law to himself, and then to his Subjects, and would
never after permit it to be called in question; and by this means he quelled a
dangerous Faction, and freed himself from any direct disturbance from it all
his own Reign. But his Son Constantius on the contrary not acquiescing in the
Canonical determination of the Church, broke down all the Banks of Government,
and let in that Inundation of Dispute that overwhelmed his whole Reign But
being sensible of the trouble that he had brought upon himself by having once
dismantled the Churches Authority, he thought to help himself out by retrieving
its force, but still the more he strugled the more he entangled himself,
because instead of settling things by fair and free Councils (and unless they
are so, they are no Councils of Christ's Officers, but mere Executioners of the
Princes Commands) himself ever endeavored to overruled all the Councils that
he called, either by fraud or violence. And then no wonder when they were so
hampered, if they were not able to attain the end of their Institution. And
that was the fatal miscarriage of his Reign, his garbling the Authority of
Councils, turning them into Courts of Guards, and abetting forty or fifty
Seditious Men against the whole Body of Catholic Bishops, otherwise if they
had been permitted the free exercise of their own proper Authority, all things
had been carried with that gravity and decency that became the Christian
Church, as we see by the great Councils of Sardica and Ariminum, that had
effectually settled the Nicene Faith, had not the Emperor cut asunder their
Decrees with his Sword, and set up an Eusebian Rump in defiance and opposition
to the whole Council. And therefore whereas some Men are pleased to upbraid the
Churches Authority with the miscarriages of these Councils under Constantius,
they might have been pleased too to consider, that the main Body of Christian
Bishops discharged their duty with entire faithfulness and integrity, and that
it was only the Emperor and his Court-parasites that were guilty of all the
Exorbitancies committed in the Church in his time, which he committed so
altogether without the Churches consent, that by them he oppressed it with all
the outrage and violence of Persecution. But from this clamor raised against
the Authority of the Church upon this account, and kept up at this very day
with so much confidence (for we find it among the dole^ul invectives of R. B.
against the ancient Bishops in his Book of Crudities,) we may see what a
pleasure and satisfaction it is to men of some tempers to be venting their ill
nature against the true old Christian Church.

But Secondly, as the Emperor in all his exorbitant actings owned and supposed
the power of the Church, so the Catholics submitted to all their sufferings
under him with the same patience and upon the same Principle that they did to
the Heathen Emperors. And this is most remarkable in the Case of Athanasius,
who though he was persecuted and provoked beyond all Patience for the
Established Religion of the Empire, but among infinite other slanders that were
loaded upon him, is charged with Treason and Disloyalty, yet for all this he is
nice and punctual in his Obedience to all the Emperors commands even against
himself, and does with the greatest indignation detest the least thought of
disrespect or disloyalty to his Sovereign Lord. Thus when his Enemies had
slandered him to the Emperor Constantius for having spoken ill things of him,
and done ill Offices between him and his Brother Constans, he defies the
Calumny a thousand times over Apol. (...), etc. p. 674.
as only sit to be laid upon a distracted Man, and calls God and his Holy
Angels to witness, how far it was from his thoughts and his Principles to speak
the least ill word of a Sovereign Prince. And when in the second place they
charged him for having held correspondence with the Rebel Magnentius, here he
professes himself amazed and consounded with the greatness of the Lie, and
wonders how any man should be so strangely beside himself, as to ^eign such an
incredible Calumny against him Apol (...), p. ^78. D.
. He be such a Beast as to be friend to such a Monster as had Rebelled against
and Murdered his Royal Master! No, he would rather dye Ten Thousand Deaths
then be guilty of one such Disloyal Though. ib. p. 681. C.
And beseeches the Emperor that he would never entertain such an hard opinion
of the Christian Church, as if it were possible for Christians, but much more
Bishops to entertain any thoughts like Disloyalty, and invokes the God of
Heaven and Earth, who gave the Empire to Constantius, and to whom alone he
could appeal from him as being his only Superior, to clear his innocence from
so foul a Calumny. And whereas in the third place they object, that when the
Emperor commanded his departure from Alexandria, he refused to obey it. To
this he answers (...) etc. p. 686. B.
God sorbid that I should be such a wretch as to slite any of his Majesty's
Commands. No, he made Conscience of refusing Obedience but to the Questor of a
City, much more to his Sovereign Lord the Emperor. Ib. 687. D.
Then discovers to him how the Eusebians had forged Letters in the Emperors
Name for his Banishment, and tells him that it was upon the assurance of the
Forgery that he refused compliance, but otherwise assures him that he is not so
mad as to disobey any of his own Commands whatsoever, so that if he had been
pleased to Command him from Alexandria, he would have been gone at the first
notice, and prevented the Command by the promptness of his Obedience. The sense
of all which is, that it is no less then downright madness for any man that
pretends to Christianity to make resistance to any Commands of his Sovereign
Prince, and this he writes whilst he was forced for the security of his life to
lie concealed in the Wilderness, after he had been persecuted by Constantius
with the utmost rancour, and a thousand times worse then a Midnight Robber for
above twenty years together, and in truth had suffered such things from his
hands, as never any other Subject did from any Prince. For his Case is singular
and has nothing like it in Story, Constantius his treating of him exceeded the
injustice and cruelty of all the Heathen Tyrants; and yet after all this
prodigious and unparalled Provocation, not only against the Laws of the
Empire but of all Humanity, how tender is this great spirited Man of making the
least abatement of respect and duty to his Prince? However he was pleased to
treat him, he was obliged by his Religion as he would acquit himself from
madness, not so much as to entertain a thought of the least resistance to any
of his Commands; in shortc, onsidering the strange usage he had met with from
the Emperor through his whole life, his Story is the greatest instance and
demonstration of a religious Sense of Loyalty, that is upon Record.

It is true that Lucifer Calaritanus bestowed his rude Language upon the
Emperor liberally enough, but he was a man of a prodigiously fierce and
implacable nature, as appears by the Schism that he made in the Church, leaving
its Communion rather then be reconciled to any of the Arian or Eusebian Clergy
upon their repentance and submission, which was such a piece of sowreness and
austerity, as could not but eat up all Sense of civility and good manners, and
therefore it is no wonder if a man of such a splenetick temper were so free of
his Contumelious Language without respect of Persons, especially when his
natural rudeness was heightened and emproved by that false Principle, that
Christian Bishops might treat Heretic Princes after the same rate, that the
Prophets in the Old Testament did Apostate Princes, and by that he answers
Constantius his complaint of rudeness and insolence against him. Dixisti passum
te De non parcendum and Deum Delinq. p. 1.
ac pati a nobis contra monita sacrarum scripturarum contumeliam, dicis nos
insolentes extitisse circa te, quem honorari decuerit, quasi quisquam dei
cultorum pepercit Apostatis: You complain that we have given you contumelious
language against the commands of the Holy Scriptures, you say that we behave
our selves after an insolent manner toward you, whom we ought to honor, as if
any Servant of God were to spare Apostates. And then proceeds to a Catalogue of
all the prophetic burdens against Apostate and Idolatrous Princes in the Old
Testament. But I am not at all concerned to excuse him when he quitted the
Catholic Communion and joined Faction with the Rebel Puritans the Donatists,
as we have seen above. Though this is to be said for him, that how far soever
he might proceed in foul Language, he was so far from making any invitation to
proceed to violent Actions, that he concludes his whole Book with a passionate
exhortation to Patience and Martyrdom. So that hitherto the Doctrine of
resistance to Sovereign Princes, in any circumstances whatsoever, or upon any
pretense whatsoever, but especially of Religion is an utter Stranger to the
Catholic Church.

. XIX.
And now are we Arrived at a strange and surprising Revolution of things under
the Reign of Julian, who no sooner came to the Crown, then he endeavored by
all the ways of fraud and force to destroy the Established Religion of the
Empire in order to the Reduction of the old Paganism and Idolatry. And
considering the shortness of his Reign, he was a fiercer and more outrageous
Enemy to the Christian Church, then any or indeed all the ancient Persecutors
put together. And yet notwithstanding all the wildness of his fury, they think
themselves obliged by the Fundamental Laws of their Religion to pay him the
same duty of Loyalty and Allegiance, that they paid to the Christian
Emperors. But the History of his Reign has of late been made the Subject even
of popular discourse, and that will in a great measure prevent me in this part
of my undertaking, the Trifle of Julian having received sufficient Correction,
and much more then it deserved, and I doubt the Jest is now spoiled, and the
jolly Doctrine prevented from being popular, by its unhappy Application. But
notwithstanding that I shall proceed in my old Method to show, first how the
Church took care to Govern and preserve it self by its own Authority against
all the Apostates Opposition, and by the right and effectual exercise of it,
was too hard for all his Politics against it. And Secondly what a tender and a
religious sense of Duty and Loyalty they professed and practiced toward him in
spite of his unparalled Provocations. Of which I shall endeavor so to
discourse, as not to repete or interfere with other Men's Observations.

As for the first, it is highly observable that when the Apostate came to the
Empire, he was all on fire for the destruction of Christianity out of it, for
though he had suppress't his Apostasy all the time of Constantius, yet his zeal
was perpetually boiling in his Breast, and impatient to burst into open
Liberty. And therefore the very first moment of Opportunity, that it had to
discover it self, it broke forth (as Gregory Nazianzen often compares it) like
fire from its confinement. He immediately commands all the Heathen Temples to
be opened, and the Sacrifices to be brought to the Altars, solemny renounces
his Christianity, and purges away his Baptism with the Blood of Sacrifices, is
immediately installed into the old and abrogated dignity of Pontifex Maximus,
and officiates at the Heathen Rites in his own Person. So that tho the former
Emperors took it to themselves only as a Title of Honor, he ridiculously
takes the Office too, and acts all the Fantastic Postures and Pageantries of
the Heathen Priests. And the fury of his zeal swelled so high, that nothing
less would serve his turn then to be created a Priest of the Eleusinian
Mysteries, because those were esteemed the most sacred and recondite part of
their Religion. And then he goes on every where to re-edifie and adorn the
Heathen Temples, and to place Heathen Priests in them. And having thus in the
first place taken all speedy care for the re-settlement of his own Religion,
his next thought is how to contrive the utter extirpation of the Galilaeans, as
he always styled the Christians in contempt and derision. The best and most
obvious Policy that he could pitch upon for that, was to bring confusion into
the Church. For which purpose he grants Liberty of Conscience to all Factions,
calls back all the banished Bishops, particularly Athanasius, Eusebius of
Verselles, and St. Hilary, restores all the Heretics, particularly Aetius,
whom he invites to Court, and returns all their Churches to the Novatian
Schismatics, and what mighty endearments there were between the Apostate and
the Donatists, we have seen above in their History. Now from an uncontrolled
licentiousness granted to such a vast variety of quarrelsome People, he doubted
not to make the Church contemptible to all the World by turning it into a
Counter-scuffle. For he looked upon the Christians as the most contentious Sect
in it, usually saying. Nullas infestas hominibus bestias, ut sunt sibi ferales
plerique Christia^orum. Am. Marcel. l. 22. c. 5.
that no wild Beasts were so fierce against men, as Christians were against one
another. And this Character of the contentiousness of Christians among
themselves he could not but take up from his Observation of the Cruelty and
merciless behavior of the Eusebians toward the Orthodox under his
Predecessor, that indeed exceeded the salvageness of all wild Beasts. But
supposing them never so tame, nothing less then everlasting confusion could be
expected from such an unbounded licentiousness. As Sozomen observes that it was
not done l. 5. c. 5.
out of any kindness, but that the Church might destroy it self by mutual
discord and Civil War. And yet alas so far was he from attaining his ends,
that his malice was utterly defeated by the wisdom of the good Bishops; for
they being now freed from that violence and oppression, that was put upon the
Discipline of the Church, by Constantius with his Prefects and Eunuchs; and so
being at liberty to exert that power, that was settled upon them by our blessed
Savior, they effectually restored that Peace and Concord to the Church, which
they could never compass under the oppressive Reign of Constantius, put an end
to the vexatious Arian Controversy, established the Nicene Faith over all the
Christian World, and prevented new Schisms and Factions, that were at that time
breaking out in the Christian Church.

For after the death of George the Saint (who was barbarously Murdered by the
Heathens for affronting their Religion, or rather robbing their Temples,) as
it is attested both by Ammianus Marcellinus, and all the Christian Historians,
but most expressly by Julians own Letter to the Alexandrians, where he bespeaks
the Actors as true Worshippers of the Gods, and blames them for having
committed Lib. 7. l. 2. p. 13^6.
so cruel a Riot out of an over warm zeal for their Religion, yet Philostorgius
and Sandius have the Grace to say, That the Fact was committed by the Followers
of Athanasius, and that they were set on by himself, (though he were then
absent out of the City.) After this Athanasius returns to Alexandria, where he
is no sooner come then he calls a Council for resettling the State of the
Catholic Church, that had been interrupted by Constantius his fierce and long
Oppression of it. And at this Council the Famous Eusebius of Verselles was
present, as he returned from his banishment in the higher Thebais, though the
Roman Writers will have it, that he came as the Popes Legate, without any
Authority for it but their own bold. Assertion, and on the contrary he was so
far from coming with any Commission from Rome, that he came from a quite
distant part of the World, and only took in Alexandria in his way.

And now here the first question is, as in all other Persecutions, concerning
the Lapsi, or those Bishops that had joined with the Arians or Eusebians in any
of Constantius his Councils, whether upon their return to the Catholic Church,
they should be received in their Episcopal Capacity, or only according to
rigor of Canon, be admitted to Lay-Communion. But here the Fathers incline to
the milder V. Atha. nas. Epist. ad Russin^a^um.
Sentence, following the Example of the Nicene Council, who received the
Novatian Bishops in their Episcopal Capacity to Communion. And thus they order
here that the Bishops that had joined with the Heretics either out of
ignorance, or by surprise, or through mere force should be received without
deprivation of dignity. And in this they rather showed Justice then Mercy, for
in all those Transactions, as we have seen above, there appeared nothing of
Arianism above board, and at the same time that they quitted Consubstantiality,
for Peace sake, they anathematised all the Points of the Arian Heresy. So that
their compliance, though it was a defect in prudence, it was no Apostasy from
the Orthodox Faith. And if the leading Eusebians had a design by removing that
word to supplant and undermine the true Faith, as it is plain by the last issue
of all that some of them had, i. e. Valens and his Party, yet that was kept
secret among themselves, and honest well meaning Men had no ground to suspect
it, because it was always protested against. And it is certain that the
greatest part of them had no such design, for Basilius and all his Party, who
so fiercely opposed the Acacians, when they turned Arians, had been all along
vehement Eusebians and Enemies to Consubstantiality. And therefore it is
evident that their zeal against that was not at all for any love of Arianism,
but only of the Peace of the Church, which they conceived to be obstructed by
that unscriptural and unwarrantable Word. And therefore it was no such kindness
to receive such Persons, as had innocently joined with them, upon such easy
terms, when by it they were not in the least tainted with the Heresy it self,
and so St. Jerome himself states it. Post reditum Confessorum Adv. Lucifer. Tom.
2.
in Alexandrina postea Synodo constitutum est, ut exceptis Auctoribus
Haereseos, quos Error excusare non poterat, poenitentes Ecclesiae sociarentur,
non quod Episcopi possint esse, qui Haeretici fuerant, sed quod constaret eos,
qui reciperentur, Haereticos non fuisse. After the Return of the Confessors
from banishment, it was decreed in a Synod at Alexandria, That excepting the
Authors of the Heresy, that no surprise can excuse, the Repenting Bishops
should be received, not that they could be Bishops, that had been Heretics,
but because it was evident that they that were received had not been Heretics.
And as for their depriving the Authors and Ringleaders of the Heresy forever,
so as never to be raised above Lay-Communion, that was no severity, but
agreeable to the standing discipline of the Church. And in the next place
whereas there had been lately started an unhappy Controversy between the
Greeks and Latins, concerning the Words Hypostasis and Persona, because the
word Hypostasis being Synonimous with (...), when the Greeks profess't the
belief of three Hypostases, they seemed to the Latins to own three distinct
Substances: And the Latins, who rejected that word, and in lieu of it used the
word Persona, seemed not to assert any thing real, but a mere relative
distinction, the word Persona being generally used to denote not the Man
himself, but his Office and Relation. This contest run very high, as Nazianzen
informs us, to the endangering a breach between the Churches, and therefore St.
Athanasius prudently proposes that both words should be promiscuously used in
both Churches, and that would effectually take away the Jealousy on both
sides, and so it did, for it silenced the controversy forever, and it
continues so settled to this very day. And lastly, whereas some Men cried up
the Confession of Faith presented by the Eusebian Party to the Council at
Sardica, as if the Council had approved of it, they declare that it was utterly
rejected by the Council, and that it refused to alter any thing of the Nicene
Faith. These Decrees, with some other, they draw up in an Encyclical Epistle to
the Bishops of the Christian World. And after the same manner that Athanasius
bestir'd himself for the settlement of the Church in Africa, St. Hilary labors
for the Restitution of the Church of France, where he procures frequent
Councils, particularly one at Paris, to condemn the proceedings at Ariminum,
and restore the Church to that Ancient State, that it enjoyed before
Constantius his Invasion upon its Liberties, and here they unanimously
declared, That when they subscribed the Creed of Ariminum, in which the word
(...) was omitted, they were merely over-reach't, and take the Sacrament upon
it, that they suspected no harm, and abhorred the consequences that were made
out of it by ill Men, and therefore desire pardon of the World for what they
had been surprised into by mere ignorance, and in this they were so unanimous,
that there was but one dissenting Bishop in all France, that is Saturninus of
Arles, whom they deposed, and thus Illud apud omnes constitit, unius Hilarii
beneficio Gallias nostras piaculo haeresis liberatas. Sulp. Sev. l. 2.
says the Historian, was all France purged of Heresy by the Authority of one
Man. And the same thing was done at the same time in the Eastern Church, as
appears by the Synodical Epistle of the French-Bishops to the Oriental Bishops,
which is nothing else then an answer to their Epistle, declaring their
concurrence with their Proceedings. And thus was this Evil Spirit of Arianism,
that had for so many years possess't and tormented the Christian Church, and
that Constantius had in vain taken so much pains to exorci^e by his own
Authority, thus I say it was at last easily cast out by the Power and Efficacy
of the Apostolical Rod.

But the Apostate finding the Peace of the Christian Church so well settled, he
grows into a rage to see both his wit and his malice so dexterously defeated,
and now can dissemble no longer, pulls off his Vizor of pretended Kindness, and
turns open Persecutor. And in the first place he flies upon Athanasius, who had
with wonderful success advanced Christianity in Alexandria, and therefore upon
pain of death he must immediately leave the City. This the Emperor with Juliani
Epist. 6. and 27.
great fierceness commands both the Citizens of Alexandria, and Ecdicius the
Prefect of Egypt, to put in Execution under the severest Penalties. And here he
brings off his former seeming Lenity to the Galilaean or Christian Bishops,
that he had restored from Banishment, with this slender sham, that he only gave
them leave to return to their own Countries, but never intended to restore them
to the Jurisdiction of their Churches. And therefore Athanasius, having
presumed to usurp his Episcopal Seat without the Imperial Grant, must once more
be gone. And accordingly he withdraws, with this comfort to his friends, that
were weeping at his departure, that it was but a flying shower, and would ^oon
be over. But if he had not made have, it had not only wet him to the skin, but
overwhelmed him forever, for now the Apostate becomes Treacherous and Cruel,
and privately sends his Assassinates to cut his Throat. Of this Athanasius
being informed, he immediately takes Boat for Thebais, but being close pursued
by the Murderers, instead of Landing and Sheltring himself in the Woods, as
his friends advised him, he according to his usual readiness of Wit, commands
the Boat-man to row back to Alexandria, and meeting with the other Boat that
pursued him, the Captain of the Cutthroats calls to them, to know whether they
met Athanasius, and how far off they might suppose him to be? Athanasius
himself answers, That he knew him very well, and that he was hard by, bids them
row hard, and then there could be no doubt but that they must overtake him, and
so for that time he escapes to Alexandria, and there lies hid till the Storm
was over. But the Prefects seeing the Emperor's mighty Zeal, and being
themselves great Pat^iots of the Superstition (he having displaced all
Constantius his Prefects, and put in Bigots of his own Religion) having so fair
an Example from their Master, resolve, as it always happens in such Cases, to
outrun his leading Zeal. And therefore in all places prosecute the Christians
with all kind of Cruelty and Oppression: And if they complained to the Emperor
himself, they had no redress, but were only flouted with that silly and
profane Sarcasm, That suffering was the duty of their Religion. And that was
his daily practice, and much becoming the gravity of an Emperor and a
Philosopher too, to play such childish and perverse Glosses upon our Savior's
Precepts. But he rested not here, but when he resolved upon his Persian
Expedition, he imposes a Tax upon all that refused to Sacrifice to the Gods,
according to the ability of the Person, for the maintenance of the War, and if
any complained of the Exactions of his Officers, then his standing Jest was,
That Poverty was not only their duty but their advantage. And when he robbed the
Church of its Treasury, he seasoned his Sacrilege with this abusive Sarcasm,
Se Christianos expeditiores face^e ad Regnum Caelorum, quia Galilaeus M^gister
ipsorum dixerit; beatos esse pauperes, quoniam talium est regnum Caelorum: That
he only did it, to conveigh the Christians with the more ease to Heaven,
because the Galilaean their Master declared, that blessed are the Poor, for of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven. But besides this, he disbands all Officers that
refuse to Sacrifice, and hereupon Valentinian and Valens, that were then great
Commanders, and afterward Emperors, peaceably laid down their Arms, declaring
themselves ready to suffer any thing, rather then wrong their Consciences or
betray their Religion. Whereas those who profess't it in the time of
Constantine and Constantius, only for Worldly Interest and Advantage, readily
complied with all his Impositions, and among these that famous Weathercock
Ecebolius the Sophist marched in the first rank: Before Julian's time he was a
Zealous Christian; under him a furious Pagan; after him a Christian again to
that sneaking degree, that he would lie bellowing upon the threshold of the
Church doors, begging all Christians, that passed over him, to trample upon him
as infatuated Salt. And thus in short (to pass by many more arts of Oppression)
he pursued the Christians with as vehement Outrage, but much more provoking
Contempt then any of the old Persecutors. Continually breaking Jests, not only
upon their Religion but their Miseries: which is not only to wound a Man, but
to rub Salt and pour Vinegar upon his Sores, a piece of Barbarity that was
peculiar to Julian alone. And no Man, but the greatest Pedant in the World (and
so was he) could have condescended to so mean a piece of malice and revenge.

And as he for his short Reign out Outraged all his Predecessors, in the V.
Soz. c. 5, 8, 9, 10. 11. Chrysostom de Juven. and Max. Greg. Na^. Ino. 1. p.
86. and.
fury and madness of his Persecution, so the Christians resolved to out do
their Ancestors in Patience and Passive Obedience under all his abusive
Tyranny. And though they had the strength and the Law of the Empire on their
side, yet being Christians they scorned to make use of any other Weapons in
defense of their Religion than Prayers and Tears. But though this is the
bravest Example of the Doctrine and Practice of the Passive Obedience of
Christians, that we have upon Record in all the Annals of the Church, yet the
World has been of late bless't with a new discovery of I know not what strange
undutiful, unchristian, inhumane, and disloyal behavior toward him, as
exceeding the salvageness of Cannibals and Barbarians in contempt and
insolence, treating him with more roughness then a Midnight Thief, or a
Highway Robber.

. XX.
But first, if it were true, it is a very poor and impertinent Precedent to
Warrant the new Christian-duty of our modern Apostates (for all
Rebel-Christians renounce Christianity with much more dishonor to it, then
Julian himself ever did) of Resistance and Rebellion to Sovereign Princes. For
what if the Christians at that time had been really guilty of any miscarriages
in that kind, what objection is that one miscarriage against the constant
Doctrine and Tradition of the Christian Church in all Ages? This is to be taken
from its general practice and sense, and not from the irregularities of a few
private Persons, for it is too hard to expect that all Men should live up to
their Principles, and that every one that profess't himself a Christian, should
be free from all misdemeanors against his own Profession. That is too great a
persection to be required in this life. There is no Church but that in Heaven
without some miscarriages and faulty Members, and therefore it is but a mean
and childish undertaking, that argues great malice, and little wit, though it
were true, to find out in all the Records of the Church one or two instances of
old, in which the Christians did not behave themselves with that decency, as
they ought and profess't to owe to their Governors. For what if it be true?
What does that prove, but that they were so much Men, as sometimes to have
fallen short both of their Duty and Profession? What is that against the
general and declared Sense of the Church? Upon the same terms the Primitive
Christians may be loaded with all the Crimes in the World, because some that
professed Christianity, some time or other fell into all but this. What then,
if it were true that the behavior of some Christians toward the Apostate, was
not such as became their duty toward their Sovereign, what is that to the
Sense of the Catholic Church in all Ages before, and for many after, to the
year 1073? Can it reasonably be expected that in so long a Tract of time there
should not be one instance of the miscarriage of Christians in this kind? and
yet this at the best is the case of this wonderful Precedent, to overthrow the
whole Catholic Doctrine of Passive Obedience. But Seditious Persons are fond
of any Pretense, and will rather forfeit their Understanding, then not gratify
their ill nature, how else could any Man be so transported out of his common
Sense from one miscarriage to warrant our imitation of it, against the constant
sense of the Church for so many Ages? And yet with what joy and greediness has
this poor trifle been embraced, as a new discovery dropped from Heaven; and how
confident are we that the Primitive Christians, were no such softly fools (as
they have been hitherto represented) as to preach and practice that Sheepish
Doctrine of Passive Obedience? Which only shows how ready some Parties of Men
among us are for seizing any pretenses for Resistance and Rebellion. Otherwise
certainly if Men would Judge impartially, and without Faction, of this mighty
work, the whole Mystery of it is no more then this, that an Industrious
Searcher into the Records of the Church has at last found out one instance, in
which some Christians failed of their Duty to their Prince. A great performance
this! worthy the applause and admiration of this learned Age; and therefore to
deal civilly with it, I care not though I grant the truth of the Assertion, but
then I must crave leave to let them know, that this is the only instance of
this kind that happened in Eleven hundred years. For that is the thing that I
have undertaken to maintain, That from the beginning of Christianity down to
the time of Pope Gregory the Seventh, who was the 159th Pope, and succeeded not
till the year 1073, no one Christian of the Western Church, no not a Pope, or
taught or put in practice the Doctrine of Resistance to Sovereign Princes, or
disowned the duty of Passive Obedience, under the worst of Persecutors, and
after this much good may this little Story of Julian do them. For they cannot
but see what a mean and foolish design it is to set up one single Tale as a
pro^f of the Sense of the Primitive Christians, when it stands all alone, and
is contrary to the declared Sense of the Catholic Church for so many Ages. So
that they gain so little advantage to their Cause by this admired Performance,
that it proves the most unlucky Argument, that could have been contrived
against it. For this is a demonstration to all the World, that there is in all
the Records of the Church but one Precedent of Christian disrespect or
disobedience to persecuting Princes. And that is but a single exception to its
universal practice, and if it be, it confesses its own Enormity from it. So
that methinks Men that designed to preach up Resistance and Rebellion from the
Precedents of the Primitive Christians, should rather have taken any other
method to abuse the People, then by telling them this single Story of Julian:
For hereby they are brought to understand that they have no more then one Tale
for their Cause, and that if it were true, it is controuled by the universal
practice of all Churches in all Ages, and that I think is as much as any
reasonable Man can desire to shame and bafle the Assertion.

Especially when it is so evident, that Christians before this time were become
in a great measure like other Men, because when Christianity became the
Religion of the Empire, and the darling of Princes, all Men would equally
embrace it for present Advantage and Preferment. And in these circumstances bad
Men will be sure to appear as forward in their Zeal as the best Christians, and
generally to outstrip them in outward Appearance. So that if at that time there
had been any Christians found guilty of disloyalty toward their Prince, what
wonder is it, when such Numbers came into the Church, not for any love of the
Religion, but for other ends and designs of their own? And such Men were as
effectually loose from all the Obligations of Christianity, as if they had
never owned it. And therefore the true Sense of Christians ought not to be
taken from their practice, after it had been the thriving Religion, for then it
was made a Trade, but from their Professions in such times, when they had no
other Motive to embrace it but it self, for then it is certain that all that
did so, were in good earnest. It being then so evident that the Christians
through all Ages down to Constantine profess't and practiced the duty of
Non-resistance, or Passive Obedience to all Princes, without reserves and
exceptions, as an indispensible Law of their Religion, that is a clear, full,
and unanswerable declaration of the Sense of the Primitive Church in this
matter, however any might fall into a contrary behavior in times of ease and
prosperity. For then it is impossible but that there would be many in the
Church, that were not of it, as we have shown above from the complaint of
Eusebius and others, how the Credulity of Constantine was abused by pretended
Converts, to the great dishonor of his Government, and Oppression of his
People. And yet I think no Man could think it reasonable to upbraid
Christianity with their Scandals, and if Julian found multitudes of such Men in
the Church, when he came to the Empire, what wonder would it be if Men that
were in reality no Christians, made any unchristian Attempts against him? So
that granting our Apostates the truth of their Plea, from the behavior of
Christians toward Julian, this one thing utterly bars their Conclusion, that
this was the avowed practice of Christians at that time, when at the time that
he came to the Empire, there were as many in the Church, that were not, as that
were Christians. But because it is to be supposed that the Counterfeits fell
off with the Apostate; I will allow the Plea, that if the Christians who
persevered in the Faith, committed any of those disloyal and Seditious pranks,
that the Apostates charge upon them, that then the blame shall lie at the
Church door. And yet so as not to make a Precedent for imitation, because it is
a single Enormity both from the plain Laws of the Religion, and the universal
Practice of all its Professors, and after that it is a very impertinent way of
arguing to draw any Conclusion from such an Example.

And yet secondly as impertinent as it is, it is much more false, for there is
not any one instance of any one Christian in all his Reign, that ever made any
resistance to any one of his Commands. And then whatever they did beside to
affront him, that is nothing to warrant the practice of Resistance, and shows,
that in whatsoever hatred and contempt they held his Person, yet
notwithstanding that, they thought themselves bound in duty to an entire
Submission to his Government. And therefore of their ill manners, and uncourtly
behavior toward him, I shall discourse by it self, because that concerns not
the Argument of Resistance, and shall at present only show that they were so
far from putting any such design in practice, that they all expressly disclaimed
and defied it, as utterly inconsistent with the Principles of their Religion;
and then I wonder what our new Apostates can gain by minding us of the Julian
Christians. And if their case was particular, in that they had the Laws on
their side (as it is falsely and ignorantly pretended) and yet for all that
taught the same Doctrine of Submission and Passive Obedience under him, and
that upon the same unalterable Principle, as they did under all their former
Persecutions, that will be the greatest demonstration of the universality of
their Doctrine, and set it above all manner of exception upon any pretense
whatsoever.

The Apostates first fury was vented among the military Men, Men that from the
very nature of their Profession are most apt to resent and revenge Injuries:
and though he provoked them more by the Contempt and Indignity of his
Persecution, then by its Severity, yet they would rather swallow and digest an
Affront, the hardest Point in the World to a Soldier, then repulse it with the
least rudeness, much less violence to their Sovereign Lord. And first he caused
the Images of the Heathen Deities to S^zom. l. 5. c. 17.
be engraven with his own, that were set, as the Emperors Statues were wont to
be, in public Places; that if the People showed the usual Honor to his Statue,
they might be supposed to worship the Idols; and if for the Idols sake they
should refuse to take notice of his Image, he might punish them for breach of
old Customs and Roman Laws in doing honor to the Imperial Majesty.

And that was another peculiar Enhancement of his Persecution, never to punish
the Christians as Christians, but as Criminals, and to the old Cruelties of
Persecution to add this new one of Calumny, first martyr their Innocence, and
then themselves. And though by this little device he deceived some into shows
of respect to his Deities, yet the wiser easily seeing through so slight a
design, refused to give any Signs of Honor, and so by their Example soon put an
end to the little Stratagem; and yet neither they that were cheated into the
Folly, nor they that were fraudulently punished for withstanding it, made any
other resistance to his Commands, or showed any other disrespect to his Person.
His next Stratagem was somewhat more fine then this: It was an old Custom among
the Romans, for the Emperors on their own Birth-days, or other Holy days, to
give Donatives to their Soldiers, and this Julian does, but so orders it, that
near his Throne where he sat, was placed a Fire with Incense, some of which the
simple Soldiers were told, as they came to receive their Donative, by some that
were set there for that purpose, they were bound by ancient Custom to sprinkle
into the Fire. And so, great numbers were ignorantly drawn in to offer his kind
of Sacrifice, but coming afterward to understand the Cheat, they run up and
down the Streets and Marketplaces crying out, That they are Christians and
ever were so, that they were over-reacht and merely drawn in it, and they had
sacrificed with their Hands, they had not with their Hearts, and so they
address to the Emperor in a Body, and request him to take his Gold again, and
if he pleased, to put them to death, for they were resolved never to renounce
their Religion, but were ready to lay down their Lives for it. To this Relation
Theodoret adds, That the Emperor immediately commanded them to be beheaded, and
they were conveyed out of the City to the place of Execution, whither they went
with extraordinary courage and cheerfulness, requesting the Heads-man to
dispatch the youngest first, lest by beholding the bloody Execution of others,
his courage might faint, and so one Romanus is first prepared, and his head
laid upon the Block, but just before the blow was to be given, a Messenger from
the Emperor cries out at a great distance to stop it; at which the young man
sighing says, Romanus was not thought worthy to be a Martyr of Christ. I
conceive this is as high an Example of Passive Obedience, as any we have upon
Record in all the former Persecutions, and indeed exceeds that of the Thebaean
Legion, for they were only decimated at first, and so the greatest part were
sure to escape, but here the whole Body submit themselves one and all to the Ax
of the Executioner, without speaking an angry or a reproachful word against the
Emperor. And for this very act of Christian Loyalty they are particularly
commended by St. Austin. And yet these very Men (one would scarce believe it)
are produced as one of the most remarkable instances of the ill-behaviour of
the Christians toward Julian.

His next attempt was at Constantinople, to reform his own Praetorian Bands,
where he Disbands all Officers that refuse to sacrifice in the Temple of
Fortune, upon which Valentinian and Valens two of his chief Commanders, and
diverse others peaceably laid down their Arms, declaring themselves not only
ready to part with their Swords, but their Lives for their Religion. And to
these Socrates adds Jovian, though I doubt Soz. l. 5. c. 4.
that is a mistake, he being his General in his Army against the Persians.

In the next place finding all the old Temples at Caesarea, the Metropolis of
Cappadocia, decayed and demolisht, and (...) disgraceful punishment (says
Palladius) he endured with all patience and returned thanks to the Emperor for
the honor, as he had it from his own mouth. But whatever his Persecution was
against their Persons, it was much more then all others against their Religion,
for beside those perpetual shams that he put upon it to make it ridiculous; he
dugg at the Foundations by rooting up the Clergy, that so the People having no
Public Assemblies for Divine Worship, they might in time grow barbarous and
lose their Religion. And his pretense against them was their raising Seditions.
And thus he banished Seleusius and his Clergy from Cyzicum, because the
Christ^ans were so numerous in the City, that it was in vain to attempt
reducing them any other way. And so he commanded the Magistrates of Bostra to
expel Titus their Bishop, and threatened, that if the People made any Sedition,
he would lay the blame and the punishment of it upon the Bishop and his Clergy;
upon this Titus presents him an humble Address, showing that though the
Christians were an overmatch for the Heathens, yet he need not fear any Tumult
from them, because he knew that they would follow his Exhortations to Peace and
Patience. Upon this the Apostate spitefully and childishly writes to the People
to instigate them against their Bishop for slandering their Loyalty, as if they
were not peaceable of their own accord, but were only wheedled into it by his
Wit and Eloquence. To such mean and dirty Arts did his malice stoop by any ways
to do mischief: but yet instead of provoking them to any disturbance by all his
abuses, we find nothing else preached even at this time then the old
superannuated and unseasonable Doctrine of Passive Obedience. The Apostate's
last pranks against the Christians were played at Antioch, the great Scene of
his shame and folly. Hither at his first coming Artemius an old Commander under
Constantine, and who for his good Services had obtained a good Theod. lib. 3.
c. 17.
Government in Egypt under Constantius, is sent for by the Emperor, under
pretense of serving in the Persian Expedition, but when he comes he is suddenly
put to death upon pretense of Treason* though the real Crime was, that he had
been the chief Agent under the Christian Emperors in the destruction of Idols.
Artemius is followed by the two famous Captains Juventinus and Maximus, who
bemoaning the Restitution of Idolatry, are by the Emperor cast into Prison upon
the sham of Treason, where diverse attempts are made upon them to betray their
Religion, but all in vain, their constant answer is, That they are always ready
to lay down their Lives but never their Religion, and so at length they are
privately beheaded. This is all the harm that we know of them, and yet they are
exhibited to the World among that Pack of Julian Christians, that pursued their
Prince, as if he were a midnight Thief, or an High-way-Robber. The next Set of
bloody Conspirators against the Apostate's life, were Abbass Publia and her
Quire of Virgins, that persisted to sing Anthems against Idolatry, at such
times as his Majesty passed by their Chapel, at which he was at last so
enraged, that he very honorably commanded one of his Soldiers to beat the old
Woman that was Mistress of the Quire, so that he made her nose bleed. Which
contumelious Usage (says the Historian) she received as the highest honor, as
the Apostles did, when they were beaten too, that they were accounted worthy to
suffer shame for Christ. And therefore the old Woman and her Maids were so far
from pursuing him as a Thief and a Robber, that they did not so much as return
him any warm Language. These are all the instances of Rebellion against the
Apostate that I know of, unless we may add that very credible Romance of an old
decrepit Bishop, threatening to kick the Emperor in the head of his Praetorian
Bands, at which the great Soldier that had fought so many Battles, was so
scared, that he was forced to betake himself to his Heels. These are all those
numberless Instances, in the great variety whereof a man may almost lose
himself, which may be given of the Christians hatred and contempt of Julian
when he was Emperor. How they reproached him and hi^ Religion to his very
beard; beat his Priests before his face, and had done him too, if he had not
got out of the way. But whatever becomes of all the other Outrages, there is no
other instance of the danger of his own being beaten, but by this old man that
had lost the use of his Limbs, who yet it seems would have kick't him before
his own Guards, had he not run away. Any Passive Obedience, how sneaking
soever, would have been much more Manly and Heroic, then to kick one that was
so great a Coward, that in the head of his Troops, had not courage enough to
stand the brunt against the impotent fury of Fourscore and Ten.

But what shall we say to the other objection, That if the old Bishops did not
beat him, yet the young Divines jear'd him, gave him Nicknames, and Lampoon'd
him to his beard? This I must confess is a great fault to offer any indignity
to the Person of a Sovereign Prince, and reflects scorn and contempt upon his
Government: But yet I hope there is some distance between breaking an
indiscreet jest, and breaking out into open Rebellion. For that is our design
to prove, that in the days of Julian, the Doctrine and Duty of Passive
Obedience was out of doors, and that the Christians, who would have quietly
submitted to the Laws under a Nero or a Dioclesian, pursued Julian as a
midnight Thief, or an Highway Robber. That is, plainly, that they thought it
Lawful to resist and pursue him by force, and that I think is Rebellion; though
indeed ther^ was no need of such broad Expressions, as of hunting a Thief or a
Robber; for if the obligation to Passive Obedience be once taken off, active
Resistance immediately takes place, and that again is actual Rebellion. Now
what a strange leap in arguing is this, from a jest upon a Princes Beard, to
raise an Army to cut his Throat? For that is the inference here, to prove that
the Christians in his time thought it Lawful to resist and rebel against his
Government, because they Lampoon'd his Whiskers. But certainly men must have a
very sharp stomach to Rebellion, that can encourage themselves to fall on upon
such slender Invitations.

But to state the matter aright between the Imperial Beard, and its saucy
Subjects; if it met with any rough and uncivil usage, it may thank its Owner
for it, who indeed brought that rude treatment into fashion by Lampooning all
his Predecessors. And if Princes will condescend so low as to write Libels
themselves, they must pardon the Poets if they give them as good as they bring,
for there is no King of Wit. And therefore this Pedantick Prince putting
himself upon such an equal Level with his Subjects, by vying Wit or rather
Buffoonry with them, which no Prince beside himself ever did, it can scarce
amount to an act of Treason if they made so bold with his Beard. And the truth
of it is, his Beard was so very singular and remarkable, that no Stoic could
well pass it by without a fling at it, for it was the very Comet of a Beard
upon a Boys face, and that alone was a very provoking and ridiculous sight. V.
Baron. Anno 362. N. 27.
And let but the Reader peruse his Coins, especially that in which his young
self is drawn with the old Goddess Serapis, and then I may challenge him to
forbear smiling if he can. And long before this Beard was assaulted by the
ill-bred Antiochian Citizens, it had been Canonised, when he was much younger,
in the Court of Constantius, Lib. 17. c. 11.
where, as Ammianus Marcellinus his Panegyrist informs us, he was Nicknamed
the Goat for his long Beard, and not only so, but a prattling Mole, a Monkey in
Purple, a Greek Pedant. All which the Historian imputes to their Envy of his
great Glory, and parallels his Case with Cimons, that Envy accused of Luxury,
and with Scipio's that it charged with too much love of Ease, and with
Pompey's, that was blamed for too much neatness. These are little defects
incident to great Men, that their spiteful Enemies might take advantage of to
Eclypse the Glory of their Virtue, with the Rabble, but as for these Pedantick
Affectations, for which Julian was so highly despised, they could not be
incident to any Man, that was not a remarkable Fopp.

But beside all this, we must consider to what sort of Men the Antiochian
Provocation was given, and that was to the Poets, by his discountenancing and
discouraging the Play Houses, by which they were undone, and they are a sort of
men, whose Wit ought to be allowed some indulgence of Revenge upon their
Enemies, especially when he sharpened the Provocation by keeping them hungry as
well as poor, having occasioned a great scarcity of Provisions in the City by
an imprudent Edict. Now laying all these things together, the Royal Beard had
no such great reason to complain, considering how much its Owner exposed both
it and himself, of so much hard usage, as if it had been pursued like a
midnight Thief, or an Highway Robber. But after all, it does not appear that
these Libellers were Christians, Julian indeed upbraids them, that their City
was overrun with the Galilaean Superstition, that had wrought too great an
indifferency for the Worship of the Gods, and that for the sake of Constantius
their great Benefactor and Patron, they had too much kindness for, or rather
too little zeal against the Religion. But that the Libellers were Heathens is
very probable from the cause of the quarrel; the chief ground whereof was his
discouraging of the Plays, of which the Christians of those times were so far
from being very fond, that it was accounted no less then Idolatry to frequent
them, because their Scenes were really nothing else then representations of the
old Heathen Impieties.

But yet beside the singularity of the Beard it self, it was made somewhat more
ridiculous, and contemptible by the humor of the man that wore it, who in a
word was the very Hudibras of his Age. And, as himself tells us, the
singularity of his humor was the thing that made him the common Laughing Stock
to the Antiochians. He was by nature (...), Misopog. ^. 69.
etc.
a great Pedant, wholly mastered by vanity and ostentation, that lay at the
bottom of all his designs and actions. And wherever that is it turns all other
perfections into ridicule and folly. And this vanity of mind was so very
visible in the features and motions of his Body, that Gregory Nazianzen Orat.
4ta, p. 122.
says he made a right guess what he would prove, when he saw him a young
Student at Athens: By his dancing Shoulders, his wild and wandering Eye, his
shufling and restless feet, his continual Grinning, and abusive Conversation,
the variety of his Looks, and sudden alterations of his Countenance, nodding
this way, and in the same moment that way, and that at nothing, asking
impertinent Questions without staying for any Answer: with a great number more
of indecencies of behavior, that plainly betrayed an odd Constitution of
Nature.

And this natural lightness was very well improved by a careful Education, he
was thoroughly instructed in all the Greek Pedantry, he had upon every occasion
a Verse out of Hesiod or Homer, he could not so much as muster his Soldiers
without dispersing amongst them some Apothegms out of Plato or Aristotle. But
the most apish Deformity in him, was his ill favored Imitation of great Men,
and therefore Ammianus Marcellinus, when he conjures up all the Lib. 16. c. 1.
Powers of his indifferent Wit (as he is pleased to complement with himself)
begins his Panegyric with as awkerd a Satyr, as a spiteful Enemy could well
have contrived, by comparing him to Titus, to Trajan, to the Antonines, but
especially to M. Aurelius, whom he chiefly endeavored to imitate in all his
Actions, and for the truth of that we may take Julian's own Word, for in an
Epistle to Themistius he declares himself Rival to Alexander the Great for
Courage, and to M. Aurelius for Virtue; so that by equalling both in their
several Perfections, he might exceed both in real Worth and Greatness. And he
was so apish in his imitation of Alexander, that he spent all his Nights in the
same hardship that the old Romantic Historians say he spent his, one third
part in Sleep, another in Business, and a third in Study, which continual
watchfulness added to the natural warmth of his Brain must unavoidably heat it
into ridiculous frenzies, and make every passage of his Life very fantastic
and affected. Now when such a Pigmee and Pedant as Julian was, would swell and
strut and look big, and really believe himself of equal Bulk to the greatest
Giants, and affect to make every Step he takes as large as theirs, it must be a
sight so comical and pleasant, as could not but work through the dullest Spleen
of the Spectators. And this, as Ammianus Marcellinus himself reports it, was
one thing that made the Antiochians merry. Ridebatur ut Circops, homo brevis,
humeros extentans angustos, and barbam prae se ferens ^ircinam, grandiaque
incedens tanquam Oti frater and Ephialtis, quo^um proceritatem Homerus in
immensum tollit. In short, his whole Life was nothing but Vanity and
Affectation, he imposed upon himself the hardships of the old Lawmakers, he eat
by the Laws of Lycurgus, and the Sayings of old Cato, he would never be induced
to a second Marriage out of fondness to a saying of Plato, nor cared to have
his Exchequer full, for mere love of that Sentence of Alexander, That he cared
for no other Treasury then what was laid up in the Bosom of his Friends. His
vices as they are set down by Ammianus Marcellinus Lib. 2^. cap. 4.
himself, are such odd and uncouth defects, as could not but pervert and spoil
the greatest virtues, viz. That he was of a light wit, and was so sensible of
it himself, that he desired his friends to watch him when he run into any
indecency; of a loose Tongue, and scarce ever silent; much addicted to
Prophesies, unmeasurably Superstitious, sacrificing Beasts without end or
number, greedy of the Applauses of the Rabble, an insatiable hunter of praise
from the smallest matters, and out of mere desire of Popularity, would make
himself cheap and familiar with the meanest of the People. After this
description of him, whatever good qualities he might have beside, must be
ridiculous. Thus whereas he admires him for his Clemency, his affectation of it
was so awkerd and preposterous, that he would let the most barbarous Crimes go
unpunished for the glory of it, in so much that when the Parents of a ravished
Maid complained to him of the injury, though by Law the punishment was death,
he dismissed the Offender without any Penalty; upon which the Parents
complaining of it as a dishonor to their Family, let the Laws (says he) find
fault with Clemency, it becomes a Courteous Emperor to be more civil then the
Laws. This foolish action is the only instance that the Historian gives of this
virtue in him. And whereas he was a great pretender to Philosophic patience,
there was never any Man so Extravagant and intemperate in his passion, as it is
described by Gregory Nazianzen. Is not this highly commendable in our
Philosopher, that he was Orat. 4 ta, page 121.
so free from passion, and so far above the Turbulent Motions of the Mind, like
those famous Princes of former times, who were renowned for the greatness of
their Temper, that whatever befell them, never changed their countenance, or
showed the least appearance of disturbance, that when he sat in Judgment, he
filled the Court with his own noise and clamor, and was outrageous in his
passion beyond all expression^ Who knows not that when even poor Peasants, that
publicly made their Addresses to him, to ask such things as Men are wont to
beg of the Emperor, that he was wont in a violent manner to fall upon them,
beat them with his fist, and kick them, and they were glad if they could escape
so?

But the greatest subject for contempt of him was his immense Superstition,
which in a Learned Philosopher we may suppose much more ridiculous then in an
old woman, the description of it in Ammianus Marcellinus is very pleasant, lib.
22. cap. 12. beside several other strange Stories of his Euthusiasms, to which
Gregory Nazianzen is so so kind as to impute all his madness, and it is certain
that he was so hotheaded as to pretend to Visions and Correspondence with the
Gods, and I doubt not but he believed himself. When he took upon him the Title
of Augustus, i. e. when he Rebelled Am. Marcel. lib. 20. cap. 5.
against Constantius, he had a Vision of the Public Genius, that Commanded him
to do it against his own Inclinations, Idem lib. 21. cap. 2.
and when he went with his Army toward Rome, he had at Vienna another Vision
from all his Puppet Gods to assure him of success. But to forbear the endless
Catalogue of his Follies, I shall only set down an Account of one of his Pious
Processions at Antioch, as it is described by St. Chrysostom, who was an
Eyewitness of it. He Published an Edict Orat. adversus Gentes.
through the whole Empire, that the Idol-Temples and Altars should be Rebuilt,
the ancient Worship given to the Demons, and great Revenues settled for its
maintenance, upon which Edict immediately the Magicians, the Inchanters, the
Augurs, the Diviners, the Conjurers, the Tavern Hocus-pocus Men repaired from
all parts of the World. And here might you behold the Court replenisht with the
most infamous, profligate, and vagabond Persons; for all that were ready to
starve for Bread, all that were Convicted of Villainy, all that were condemned
to the public Prisons, and the Mines, all the mean People that could not live
upon their Trades, immediately professed themselves Heathen Priests, and you
cannot imagine in what honor and esteem they were held by his Imperial
Majesty. He despised the great Commanders and Generals of his Army in
comparison of these poor juggling Cheats. He made solemn Processions through the
City with a rout of Bawds, and Carted Whores, and whilst his Royal Guard, and
Praetorian Bands kept their distance, this wretched rout of Infamous Cattle,
Pimps, Bawds, Harlots, Sodomites, encompass't his Majesty in his Passage
through the Forum, venting all the way such mirth and discourse, as became such
an Holy Rabble. A matter of Fact (says he) so absurd and ridiculous in it self,
that I know cannot but seem incredible to Posterity. Neither indeed is it
possible that any private Person, that was bound to any sense of shame or
modesty, could appear in public in such a foul and indecent action. And yet I
hope there is no need of appealing to the Testimony of this Age for the truth
of it, for there are many that were Spectators, who know, and can and will
attest the Truth of my Report, and for that reason I publish it to the
Witnesses that are yet alive, lest Posterity should suspect my fidelity in
telling such an Extravagant Story. And therefore I conjure all, both young and
old, that were Eyewitnesses of it as well as my self, that if I have made the
least addition to the foppery, they would publicly shame and convince me of
it, etc.

Now after all this Evidence and Demonstration of folly can any Man be so
hard-hearted as to impose such a rigid severity upon the pleasant Gentlemen of
Antioch, as not to enjoy some mirth from so much folly? Nay, though they were
Christians, that did not keep their Gravity as they were wont to do, they were
to be indulged in their sport, though it were for nothing else then the great
pleasure and satisfaction that they must take, in seeing the greatest Enemy to
their Religion, the greatest fool in the World. But however if they jear'd him
they did no more, and therefore from their breaking Jests upon himself, his
Beard, and his Superstition; to infer the Lawfulness of making assaults upon
his Government, only proves what an aching Tooth some Men have to be at their
own Conclusion, but I hope by this time it is drawn out: And now having thus
far brought down the contrary both Doctrine and Practice of the Christian
Church from its first beginning to the end of this Reign, through all Varieties
and Vicissitudes of condition, I shall at present here break off, because it is
enough for its own Demonstration. Though if it please God to send me life and
health, and if my Superiors think the Work worth encouragement and acceptance,
I shall trace it down through the following Ages.

FINIS.

