SATAN'S HARBINGER ENCOVNTERED, HIS FALSE NEWS OF A TRUMPET DETECTED, HIS
CROOKED WAYS IN THE WILDRNESSE

Laid open to the view of the Impartial and Judicious.

Being Something by way of Answer to DANIEL LEEDS his book, entitled, NEWS OF
A TRVMPET SOVNDING IN THE WILDERNESS etc.

Wherein is shown, How in several respects he has grievously wronged and
abused diverse eminent, worthy and painful Laborers in the work of the Gospel,
in many places by false Citations out of their books, and in many other places
by perverting their sayings and expressions; besides his otherways basely
reflecting upon several ancient Friends by name.

By C: P.

And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come up? Surely to
defy Israel is he come up:

1. Sam: 17. 25. Behold he travaileth with iniquity, and has conceived
mischief, and brought forth falsehood,

Psalms. 7. 14. Printed at Philadelphia By Reynier Jansen 1700.

THE PREFACE
Friendly Reader.
Although ^^ be true which Solomon says, Eccles. 12: 12, Of making many books
there is no end, and much study is a weariness to the flesh: Yet I hope none
can justly blame me for publishing this, when they seriously consider, that the
drift of it is only to clear the truth and those many good men grossly as
persed, from the envious insinuations cast against it and them, and the wrong
inferences pretendedly drawn from their writings by our present Adversary
Daniel Leeds, who has, hand over head, in a very palpable manner, to his own
shame, ventured to abuse our friends at a very shameful rate; not only by
wrong meanings put upon their words and doctrines, but also by false Citations
out of their books, thereby endeavoring to make them speak, what they never
spoke, nor (I believe) ever thought; in order to represent them to the people
greatly contradictory to one another. Of which false Citations I shall in this
place produce one, and but one, referring thee to the following book for a view
of many more of them; It is in Number 58, where he quotes William Penn his
Sandy Foundation p 20, saying; W. P. there calls the man Christ, The finite
impotent Creature: Whereas there is no such saying or irreverent expression in
the whole book: for where W. P. uses the words. Finite and impotent Creature,
The subject he was there treating of plainly shows, that he meant it of us
sinners that need forgiveness; but not of the Man Christ who never sinned. Than
which, what greater abuse could be put upon any man's writings?

Reader, The substance of this book was wrote near two years ago, but being
backward in my self to appear in print, a^ also the press being long expected
here before it came, and when come taken up with other important matters
intervening, occasioned the delay of its publication till now.

As for the Errors of the press, which are many, especially in the former part
of the book; and more especially in one place, which is very material to be
corrected, without which it will read so, as will make it look very gross, and
appear to be false doctrine; it is in p. 17: l. 9, where after, works sake the
Printer has omitted, but for his sake, which words are in the written copy by
which he printed it. I must desire thee (Reader) upon occasion to take the
trouble of ^urning to the Errata, where I hope thou will find the most material
collected. The chief occasion of there being so many errors, was, the Printer
being a man of another nation and language, as also not bred to that
employment, consequently something unexpert both in language and calling, and
the corrector's not being so frequently at hand as the case required, all which
I desire thou would favorably consider.

The Intent of publishing this, was chiefly to prevent any from being deceived,
and also to undeceive those that may have been already deceived by this unfair,
man's abusive book; for such it is, and as such, let it be added to the
Catalogue of those many envious and abusive writings, that have been sent forth
into the world, from time to time, to hinder the spreading of truth, and the
progress of Gods people in the way of it: all which will surely be accounted
for one day, and not witstanding all which, the truth remains the same, and I
am satisfied will more and more spread it self, and prevail, in and upon and
the hearts spirits of people, notwithstanding the various and restless attempts
of its Opposers, to hinder it. And as the way of its working, is to cleanse and
purify mankind in soul, body and spirit, and make them fi^^ temples for God to
dwell in, by virtue of his holyspirit in us and also entitle us effectually, to
partake of the great and unspeakable benefit, that accrues to mankind, by that
one offering of our Lord Jesus Christ, on the tree of the Cross: So it is
highly necessary that we more and more come to experience this cleansing work
to be wrought in us, in order to be entitled to those before said benefits. For
although our blessed Lord Jesus Christ then offered up himself for the sins of
the whole world, yet we read of none, wbo by that offering are for ever
perfected, but those who are sanctified. Heb. 10: 14.

Caleb Pusey.

SATAN'S HARBINGER ENCOUNTERED etc.
Before I come to the Book it self, I shall touch a little upon the Preface,
and begin with an expression of Daniel Leeds's, which runs thus. It is my real
belief, That the Quakers at first came forth in life and power, and made a good
beginning.

Answer. Did they so? How comes it then to pass, that the first Instruments of
that good beginning in life and power, as G. Fox, G. Whitehead, E. Bourough, R.
Hubberthorn, Is. Pennington etc. and their ancient works and Writings, must be
thus brought upon the stage, by this Daniel Leeds himself, even in this very
book, endeavoring thereby to prove their doctrine false, inconsistent, and
little less than a mere heap of confusion? Can such things be an effect of life
and power? And if he say, They lost that life and power again, before those
books were written: It may then be observed, how in the same Page he
insinuates, as if the loosing of it again, was through their contending with
one another about trifles and Ceremonies, instituting this and that order, and
getting into form etc. Whereas it is well known, that many of the above named
Friends Books were written before the Institution of those Orders, (as he calls
them). Besides, I find in a Paper entitulad A brief Admonition etc. (delivered
to Friends here at the yearly meeting in the year 1696. Which as I am credibly
informed) was written by Daniel Leeds, there being also the two letters of his
name, with two letters more subschribed to it) after having expressed what an
healthy flourishing Country this was about eight years before, this passage,
viz Doubtless it might have so continued, if the kernel of life and love had
not took wing etc. Now hence I observe, That (according to this aknoledgement
(for such it is implicitly at least) the kernel of life and love had ^ot
tookwing before the Year 1688: yet most of the ^ooks he quot^s were written
long before that time. But surely no orderly sensible man will imagine, that
order and form amongst God's People, will occasion the life ^^d power to
withdraw, whilst the power is not denied: Is not God a God of order? And does
not the Apostel say to the Corinthians? Let all things be done decently and in
order 1 Cor. 14: 40. Moreover if the life and love took Wings, but about or
since the jear 1688, how could those Orders which were established above twenty
years before be the occasion of it? Again, what Orders have We that they
disown? Have We Montly meetings? So have they. Have We Yearly meetings? So have
they? Have We Women's meetings? Daniel Leeds says, Those Meetings are certainly
of service in Deeds of Charity and Hospitality, page 66.

But to proceed, he concludes that page and begins the next with this passage
viz, When my intentions were first ^^t on this ensuing work, I had taken G.
K's. books in equally with the rest or else I should have been partial as ^aleb
Pusey has been [being blinded with prejudice, as his term is in only faulting
G. K's books, but not his Opposers; but as I proceeded on, at lenght I found G.
K. (according to the example of good men in all Ages) has publicly
acknowledged himself guilty of Errors in diverse of his former books, and
promised a correction of the same; and now of late we have his Retractation
come over in Print.

Answ. A mere flam: For among all the contradictions that we have charged and
proved upon him, he has been so far from retracting any part of them, though
they contradict his present doctrine, that he boasts in the very Retracting
book it self, That for the most part they are the soundest passages in all his
book, and that he can show a good consistency of them with his present faith,
See pa. 42: 43. And now, since Daniel Leeds in the close of his Preface asserts
his proceedings in his book to be honest and sincere; I appeal to all impartial
people Since G. K's doctrines as charged by us, do greatly contradict each
other; and yet he refuses to retract any ^a^^ of them, Whether I s^^^ ^. Ks.
(...) which probably D. L. had no thought about wh^^ he wrote his book, (...)
any argument in sincerity and truth, for his not taking in G. Ks. books, as well
as others, in this wra^gling piece of his.

As for his counting me Partial, because I have not fault^d G. K's. Opposers,
as well as G. K. I answer, ^ll by G. K's. oppose^s, he mean our Friends, I
never (...) cause to be so sc^utinous, as D. L. has been, in searching, either
into our Friends books or G. K's. either, till since that time any farther than
what related to the Controversy which G. K. had raised amongs^ us here; and
chiefly that about the universal neccessity of the knowledge of Christ in the
outward, in order to salvation^, without our acknowledging of which I found he
would not own the most upright amongst us, to ^e any better than Heathe^s. Now,
upon a time, looking into G. K's. Universal free Grace of the Gospel, in pa.
117 I found, that he there would not grant, That outward knowledge, or the
knowledge of Christ in the outward was universally (...) salvation; which I
presently showed to an honest Friend, and then a late Friend of his, at
Philadelphia; and when I came to town again, he told the, he had showed G. K.
the passage, and said his answer was to this purpose; That if he was in his
senses upon his death (...), ^e would leave (...) a^ his last testimony to his
Friends about him; That if they should find any thing in his former books,
contrary what he now held, they should scrach it out, where they met with it.
Now, had he not presently after this, and after his so uncharitably counting
honest Friends to be but Heathens, gone about to persuade his over credulous
followers; That he was not changed in his Principles, thereby deceiving and
deluding them, should have had no occasion on that account, to have put Pen to
Paper, as I did: But I suppose he wa^ily considered in time; That if he should
acknowledge a change in his principles, his New and raw disciples, who ^alued
themselves at that time much upon their being accounted Quakers, and that of a
primitive stamp too, would have forsaken him, and his notions also. Well, then
he finds out a way to gloss over this place, and would have us believe, That
when he denied, as aforesaid, the knowledge of Christ in the outward to be
universally necessary to salvation, his meaning was, that it was not so
necessary to salvation begun; as if that difference betwixt our Friends, whom
G. K. was then vindicating, and other people, was about salvation began only:
Yet least that would not do, We must also be told of a distinction, betwixt the
express, and the implicit knowledge of Christ, and that the express knowledge
was not universally necessary, yet the implicit knowledge was. Now these
things put me into a farther search, into both his former and latter books, and
in his former I still found, where he was concerned to treat of the subject, he
alvvais denied that knowledge to be essentially necessary to salvation,
particularly in his Universal free Grace etc., p. 117, and Light of truth
triumphant, p. 6. By his former books, I mean such as bear date before the
year. 1681. or thereabouts, Which is supposed to be about the time that he
wrote (as he acknowledged) 199 of the 200 queries concerning the Revolution of
humane souls etc. But by his latter books it appears, that he is clearly
changed in principle as to the point of doctrine; and I finding things thus,
and also how he was receded from his principles in some other matters, wherein
he differed with Friends, as About the sufficiency of the Light without
something else, and about Preachers being Magistrares, and of the confused work
he had made about his strange notions of the Resurrection, as in my said book
is shovvn: This I say, Was the occasion of my Writing that book, that thereby I
might show to them, especially to the most sincere amongst them, how he went
about to deceive them, by drilling them on, and persuading them, we could
never prove, he was chainged in his Principles, as his own words are, see,
Some Fundamental Truths p: 13. Printed about the year 1692, Wherein he further
says thus; I can prove a good consistency of my present doctrine with all
[mark all] my former and latter books. Behold now the man; for if this be true,
what need he now at a pinch have put out his book of Retraetations: why he was
driven to it, he must either do it, or else some of his followers might have
fallen out with him about it; for some of them were not satisfied with him in
that respect; Nay, if we can believe this D. L. he himself was one of the
dissatisfied persons else what makes him say, He had taken in G. K's. books
equally with the rest, but that be found G. K. had promised a Correction of
them, and that of late his Retraction was come over in prent, See D. L. 's.
Preface as before is shown. But there is one thing more, which I am sure he
ought not only to Retract, now his hand is in, but alse deeply to lament, and
that is; His so abusing his poor bigoted followers Cas I have already hinted)
in his thus deluding them, by so often persuading them, at the first, that he
was not changed in his Principles; and when he has done this, I know not, but
as to this point, he may pretty well pass, for such a kind of an honest man, as
is so with good looking to: But before he dos thus much, I do not see how he
can be afforded the appellation. And now to conclude, I do say; that suppose I
had seen, and took notice of some passages in our Friends books, which might
seem to me like inconsistencys, especially in relation to things not then in
controversy, I do not look upon my self equally obliged to expose them, as I
did his, which were so palpable, and done for the reason aforesaid.

The next thing I shall take noice of, is, Daniel Leeds s' pretenses in this
his Preface now be fore me; that His proceeding, here in to expose and publish
what follows [in his book] was by amotion heavenly. Yet I question not to prove
him in his thus doing not only an Accuser, but a very false Accuser of the
Brethren; which to be ^^re could not proceed from a motion heavenly, and scarce
think he can be so infatuated, as to think it did, unless his meaning be; That
he was influenced in this action, by the motion of the stars, that are placed
in that ^i^mament of haven, and yet if his meaning he such, it will by no means
deserve the credit, that was given to his Idle prediction, published in his
Almanac for the jear 1695, where he says; All lovers of truth are to take
notie, that from and after the 25. of January, no person shall find it safer
shrouding under the name and denomination of a Quaker, than under the name of
any other profession of Christianity what soever etc. For we have all along
known, that no person not only from and after the month he calls January, but
at no time else, has been; is, or will be any thing the safer, for their being
under the denomination of a Quaker, any more than that D. L.*s words be true,
were he says, his proceedings in this his book was from a motion heavenly and
that is not at all.

I come now to his book, which he begins under the title of an Introduction, in
p: 3. D. L. fearing that such lick seeming contradictions as he alleges
against our Friends books might be found in the scriptures, he strugles hard
before hand to guard against it, by telling us. They, themselves in their books
gave that reason why 't is so with the scriptures bringing reasons to prove
them not the same as given forth, but altered and corrupted. Now this cannot be
alleged of their books, decause we have the first impression of them, and
there fore they cannot be altered or corrupted.

Answ. Is he there At this rate then ^s abouts; if he should charge seeming
contradictions upun us, for saying this on the one hand, and that on the other,
and we can prove the both sides are according to scripture, yet it seems the
must not be allowed, because our Friends, have told, how some scriptures have
been altered and corrupted, which few professing Christianity I suppose will
deny to be true; ^ever the less, if for the reason the Quaker must not bring
scripture to prove what he has written, why may not any one else be denied
so, to do, in defense of any truth what soever, and so at this rate, any
Opposers of the ^learest truths, may deny any scripture that may be urged to
convince him of his Error. Well but do our Friends s^y that some scriptures
have been altered and corrupteds What does D. L.'s. friend G. K. say less in a
passage in one of his books, not yet reacted; where he has it thus viz I hope
it may be without offense not only queried but also concluded, that the
translations of the scripture have diverse additions, which men have added
without any pretense to divine inspiration: Nor are there wanting diverse, both
judicious and learned men, so accounted, of good repute, even among Protestants
who do acknowledge, that some particular words have dropped in to the Greek and
Hebrew text, since their first writing etc. All which being granted, yet do not
hinder but that the purity of the scripture is sufficiently preserved, viz, in
respect of the main and necessary things: See Truths Defense p: 59 and 60 etc.

And so we say too, see W. p 's Rejoinder q: 38: 39. Now if D. L. can make
appear, that any scripture that we have brought, or may bring, to prove any
truth, be altered or corrupted, he may do it, or else what he has said as to
this matter, affects us more than it does G. K. and others that profess
Christianity. I shall there fore proceed to put D. L. in mind that at this rate
all Protestants may be deprived of what proofs they usually bring against
Popish Innovations. And suppose a Friend, upon any occasion, should exhort
people to serve the Lord with fear etc. and upon another occasion should tell
them, they might serve him without fear all the days of their lives, and
should bring Psalm. 2: 11. for the one, and Luke 1. 74 for the other: Now I
would know of D. L., whether he would dare to call this a contradiction:
Likewise in John 16. 24 is said, Ask and ye shall receive; but in James 4: 3 Ye
ask, and receive not. Christ says in one place, I f^ll bear witness of my
self, my witnest is not true, and in an other place he says, Though I bear
record of my self, yet my record is true, see John 5. 31 and 8: 14. Again,
says Christ to his discipels, I go to my Father, and ye s^e me no more John.
16. 10. yet John says, When he shall appear, (...) shall see him as he is 1
John. 3: 2. Many more instances might be brought, but these I have menttioned I
scarce think D. L. will dare to call contradictions, notwithstanding some
scriptures may have been corrupted and altered. I remember what ado they made
of late, because a Friend had said The wicked Jews never saw the Worlds
savior; Though the scripture says expressly, Whosoever sins has not seen
him 1 John. 3. 6. and surely the wicked Jews were sinners: Now by his rule, it
is but saying, This scripture may be altered and corrupted, and thus this proof
will be rendered invalid. And likewise, suppose the Jews should bring such an
argument against any Christan, endeavoring to prove to them out of the old
testament, that Jesus must needs be the promised Messiah; or an Atheist against
us, when we prove out of the scriptures that there is a God, at this rate
because our Friends, as well as GK and other Professors do say; some
scriptures have been altered, therefore our proofs out of them aganst Jews and
Atheists yea and Papists too, will be of no Authority, and but as a mere nose
of wax.

Besides, this suppositious excuse of D. L's. suggested in the name of some
preachers of late, with his paraphrases therein, will not cover his dishonesty,
nor cloak his gross perversions and corrupt citatiens. Do the Quakers say that
the scriptures in some places are alterred and corupted? What then? Will it
therefore follow, that they must excuse D. L's. alteration and corruption of
their writings? No such matter. Is the scripture in English a translation out
of other language, consequently but a copy, liable to mistakes in transcribing
and translating, as well as printing; And the Quakers books the original
impression? Will it therefore follow, that D. L. may mangle and misrepresent
the Quakers writings, at his pleasure, without control? I know no reason for
it and therefore shall take liberty to tell him of his faults whether it please
him o^ no And this further I dare undertake to prove, if any ^easonable man,
after perusal of what I have here offered to his view, can doubt it; that,
should I suppose the scrrptures to be wholly clear of any errors, either of
Transcriber, Translator or Printer, and D. L. bad the confidence, to make as
bold with them, as he has done with our Friends writings, he might make a far
bigger News book, than that which he trumpeted out in the Wilderness against us.

I come now to his quotations out of our Friends books, which he has placed in
two columns, under the notion of contradictions, which, how far he proves them
so to be, or how far he falls short of proof, as also how honestly or how
dishonestly he deals with them, will appear in the following examination of
them (or at least of so many of them as may give the Reader a sufficient taste
of the rest; I not having all the friends books quoted on both sides by me) and
my remarks thereon, by way of answer thereunto.

I begin first which page 7 (it should be 6) where he quotes W P*s Sandy
Foundation p. 22. thus. Since Christ could not pay what was not his own [Debt]
it follows, that in the payment of his own, the case still remains equally
grievous, since the debt is not hereby absolved or forgiven, but transferred
only. Now to this D. L. opposes G. W's Divinity of Christ in answer to Tho
Danson p. 16 thus; How false and blasphemous this charge is against Christ, I
appeal to all sober Professors of Christianity, viz. That when God required
satisfaction of Christ, it was due from Christ. Upon which D. L. makes this
observation, viz That as before (Says he) W. P. renders Geo. Whitehead's
head's doctrine ridiculous and shameful, so here G. W. renders W Penn's
doctrine blasphemous, for holding, that Christ had a debt of his own to satisfy
to God etc.

Answer, It were well if D. L. would be ashamed as he ought to be, of his thus
ridiculously and shamefully abusing W. P, by his so basely adding in crotchets
the word, [Debt] to W. P.'s. words, which is neither W. P's. word nor so much
as deducible from his doctrine or argument: So this is but a mere crotchet of
D. L's. envious brain, to render G. W. and W. P. inconsistent with each other,
and also to misrepresent W. P, as if he believed, that Christ was guilty of
sin, when he suffered for our sins; which, as that pass^ge of W. P's. shows no
such thing; so the same page proves the contrary; for the whole Page is chiefly
to show the ridiculous consequences that attend the rigid Presbyterian
doctrine, of it is being impossible for God to pardon sins upon repentance,
without a plenary satisfaction made by another, which consequences W. P. calls
Irreligious and Irrational in 9. respects, the 3d. of which is That it was
unworthy of God to pardon but not to inflict punishment on the innocent, or
require a satisfaction where there was nothing due.

Now mark, These words plainly imply that W. P. counted Christ innocent, and
that there was nothing of debt due from him, which spoils D. L's. pretended
contradict^on. Besides, was it likely that W. P. must needs, by his own, mean
Christ's own debt, and so render Christ a sinner? A very idle construction; for
suppose Christ had a debt to pay, according to the Presbyterian strict rigid
sense, must it needs follow from thence, that the debt was his own, and so paid
it as being due from him? Nothing less: For is it not common among men, for a
man to pay a debt for his Friend, which though he pay with his own, yet the
debt was not due from him; Even so, Christ laid down his live for our sins, but
yet not to pay any debt of his own, for as W. P. there says there was no such
thing due from him; no, he laid down his live it is true, but it was for us; he
was wounded but it was for our transgressions, and Christ him self faith,
Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends John. 15. 13. Nay though it had been to pay a debt in the Presbyterian,
strict and rigid sense (which as I said was what W. P. there discussed) yet it
was not his own debt, though it was his own life he paid it with, as he himself
said, I lay down my life for the sheep John 10. 15. and if for the sheep, then
not to pay a debt of his own, and that that is W. P's. genuine sense in that
place, I suppose no unprejudiced man will deny; and I charge D. L. with most
base forgery in this place, for his adding the word [debt] to W. P's. words,
thereby quite altering the true and real intent of them.

But again, He has as basely rendered, as well as falsely quoted VV. P. p. 5.
where he has it thus Sandy Foundation p. 14. VV. Penn. says, If the only God
is the Father and Christ be the only God, then is Christ the Father; which is
ridiculous and shameful. Now here again I flatly charge him with most grossly
perverting VV. P's. words sense and meaning, for though VV. P. says If that
the only God is the Father and Christ be that only God, then is Christ the
Father: yet that he there called this ridiculous and shameful I absolutely
deny, and it lies upon D. L. to prove, for the place proves it not, and if D.
L* write again about it, I would advise him, to insert the whole paragraph,
that it may be seen, whether any such thing be so much as deducible from what
VV. P. there says. And now let me tell him, there needs no carious wire
drawing mincing nor mangling as he in p, 43. insinuates we should be forced to
in our answer to him, to manifest his abuse to W. P. in this matter.

Neither was there any occasion for D. L. to talk of our agreeing upon a
consistent Creed, but if he write again, let it be what is agreeable with
honesty, and consistent with truth, that honest men may stand by him in it.

In p: 4 (it should be 7) DL says v In Dirinity of Christ "by G. W. and G.
Fox, they begin in the Epistle with commanding and charging Professors to
bring express scripture for their Doctrine saying, Whether do the scriptures
speak of three persons in the Godhead, in these express words? And where does
the scripture speak of a humane nature of Christ in heaven? etc. A little lower
D. L. says Now may not the Professors say, Come G. W. Come Quakers where does
the scripture say, the distinction of Father and Son is not only nominal, but
real. He having in p. 4. cited these as G. W 's words.

Answ. We know that those Professors would have tied our friends up to those
very terms of three persons, and also human nature of Christ in heaven etc. And
yet at the same time, blamed them for not calling the scriptures the only rule
of faith. So that since they would needs tie our Friends up to those very
words, 'twas but reasonable they should be held to their Rule to prove them by.
But as for G. VV.'s saying, the distinction of the Father and Son is not only
nominal but real; I question not, if the Father Word and Spirit be owned to be
one God, but G. VV. will rest satisfied, without disiring to impose the words
nominal and real on any man, though he might use them to satisfy the enquirer.
But since D. L. would make us believe he is impartial in relation to G. K, why
must the Quakers be thus struck at, and G. K. passed by in this matter: For
does not he in his book called Presbyterian and Independent, visible Churches
etc. p 87, say of the scripture; That it is not safe to leave the scripture
words, and go to words of man's wisdom, and thereby declare our faith of
Christian doctrine. And yet does not the same G. K, make abundant use of other
words in managing of Controversy, and plead for it too, as in his book called
Antichrists and Sadducees detected etc. in p. 19, Where he says, I see not why
I should be so confined to exspres scripture words 'in things that I require no
man to own or believe as Articles of faith, but leave them to their liberty
etc. And now I dare say G. VV. and all sensible Friends will say as much.

The next quotation of D. L.'s I take notice of is out of G. F's Great Mystery
p: 264 etc. cited by him in his p: 10 thus; Priest says, A man by his own
power cannot get into regeneration, for they are dead in sins and trespasses G.
F. replies, some are sanctified from the womb, and some children are holy; so
all are not dead in sins and trespasses etc. Now to this he opposes G VV.'s
Divinity of Christ in answer to T. D. p: 20: thus; G. VV. says, Condemnation
^ame upon all men -- Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned p: 24:
Again, Christ died for all, so all were dead in sins and trespasses etc. Answ:
That some are sanctified from the womb according to G: F: is but according to
scripture, see Jerem: 1: 5: Luke 1: 15: and 1 Cor: 7: 15: And also that
condemnation and death came upon all men according to G: VV: is also according
to scripture, see Rom: 12: 18, and so according to D: L. may not the scripture
be charged with contradiction in that respect, as well as G: F: and G: VV:
Then, whereas G: F: said, all are not (mark [are not] which is in the present
tense) dead in sins and trespasses, it does not at all contradict what D. L*
produces as G. VV's, that all were dead in sins and trespasses [were, being
the time past] (tho by the way, let the Reader take notice, that I can find no
such words, in the place cited by D. L, as G. VV's, though I have searched for
them) For those words of scripture being taken in the strictest sense viz, If
one died for all then [were] all dead 2 Cor. 5: 14 yet it does not follow that
those which were sanctified from their Mothers womb, nor those which were
passed from death to life [are] still dead: For as G: F's following words are,
hwich D. L. has left out, and hwich, had he inserted them, would have better
explained G: F.'s; meaning They that are so are but unbeleivers. And where as
it is said, death passed upon all men, it this be to be understood strictly,
and without any (...), how is it said of Enoch, That he was translated tha^
(...) not see death Hebr. 11: 5.

(...). 12 he quotes W: P.'s Christian Quaker, thus, Now nothing can bruise the
head of the Serpent but something that is also internal, as the Serpent is; but
if the body o^ Christ were the seed, then could he not bruise the serpents head
in all, because the body of Christ is not so much as in any one etc Whom he
would make T. Ellwood to oppose in Foundation of Tithes etc p. 2^8. 240, thus,
Nor do the Quakers ascribe salvation to the following the light within, but to
Christ Jesus, to whom the light leads -- If any one expect Remission of sins by
any other way than by the death of Christ renders the death of Christ useless.

Answ. I do affirm if D: L, or any other, comes to know the serpents head
bruised in any measure, it must be by some thing internal, neither does what T:
E. has said as above, any ways contradict it: For though we ascribe not our
salvation [to our own following of Christ] who is the ^^ght of the world,
according to: Tho. Ellwood, yet that follows not, but thath Christ the Light of
the world is he thath bruises the Serpents head, and to ascribe our salvation
to Christ the light of the world, who appears internally, in order there to, is
one thing, and to ascribe it to our works, which Tho. Ellwood and all sound
Friends deny, is another thing. For allthough the Apostle know nothing by him
self (which is a large degree of growth) yet there by he was not justified 1
Cor: 4: 4. Nevertheless the same Apostle says, By grace ye are saved and thath
not of Your selves it is the gift of God Ephesians: 2: 8. Yet this is no
contradiction. And though the Apostle says We are reconciled by his death, yet
he also says, we are saved by his life Rom: 5: 10, which life is internal: For
in him was life and the life was the light of men John. 1: 4. Neither do we
read of any whom Christ has forever pefected, but those who are sanctified Heb
10: 14. Now thath this doctrine of Christ the seed's bruising the head of the
serpent inwardly, is owned by D. L's great Friend G: K, as well as by W: P, is
clear from his Way cast up p: 99. not yet retracted, thus expessed, Though the
outward coming of the man Christ, was deferred according to his outward birth
in the flesh, for many years, yet from the beginning, this heavenly man, the
promised seed, did inwardly [mark inwardly] come in to the heart, and bruise
the head of the serpent. Come now D: L, if thou art impartial, as thou
pretendest, and art not blinded with partiality and prejudice, lay this which
thou idly call a contradiction in VV: P. and T: E, at G: K's door also: For
here he owns the seed which bruises the serpents head to be inward, as well as
VV: P; and that he owns the very same passage of T: E, may appear, by his
bringing those two very quotations, to prove his doctine consistent with
Friends doctrine, in his book called Heresy and Hatred p: 9.

His necxt lash is upon the matter answered by the foregoing: For as Christ the
light is the salvation of all that believe, according to G: F; so we ascribe
our salvation to him alone, according to T: E, and this is no contradiction,
Alas poor Daniel! How far is he gone in to prejudice and blindness, to
represent these things as unreconcilable: For upon this, he calls and cry's out
Come, let us see if T: Ellwood with all his sophistry and false glosses can
reconcile these two assertions. Alas poor man! does he want to h^ve Sophistry
and false glosses reconcile sound assertions, while he with his pretended
motion heavenly counts them contradictions. But for the sake of some, I shall a
little illustrate this matter, with this comparison: Suppose a subject were
sentenced by his Prince, to be cast in to prison, for some great misdemeanor
committed against. his person, yet the Prince commiserating his poo^ condition,
Finds out a way to save him, but upon this condition, that he humbly and
thankfully receive the same, and no more live in disobedience to him. Now is
not his Prince, in this case, by saving him from his deserved punishment, his
Savior, though he live for the future in all obedience to his Prince's
commands; Yet he can not ascribe his being saved from the punishment incurred,
to any thing but his Princes clemencey and goodness. Eve^ so, We Who Were
once dead in our sins and trespasses, and had in curred the displeasur of God,
ascribe our being saved out of that state, and from the punishment due thereto,
to the mercy of God alone through Jesus Christ, but not to any of our own
works. And now I must needs say, all this is more than D: L's. cevill deserved,
and is indeed more in respect to others, than from any hopes I have of it is
working much effect upon him.

I now follow him to his p: 14, were he cites Chr; Quaker by G: VV: p. 212, The
man's mistaken if he suppose that we plead for the Righteousness of a creature,
[i: e: Christ as man] or man's own Righteousess, which he himself is enabled to
perform, as the cause of our justification etc: To which D: L: opposes VV: P
's: Serious Apology p: 148. Death came by actual sin, not imputative, therefore
justifcation unto life came by actual Righteousness, not imputative: Upon which
D: L: makes this Note, whether is the error of both these, ^^ the
contradiction greater:

Answer, Whether in this matter, the palpable Forgery or ignorance of D: L: be
the greater, is not hard to demonstrate, for my part, I cannot think he can be
so ignorant, and therefore can count him no less rhan a base Forger, thus to
foist in words of his own, thereby to misrepresent the words of G: VV; as if
when he Speaks of the Righteousness of a creature, he meant the Righteousness
of Christ as man, Which words [Christ as man] D, L, has added; for as they are
not G: VV's words, So neither are they coherent with the rest of the matter:
Now what is this less than forgery? and a contrivance to render G: W,
erroneous, as well as inconsistent with VV: P: But to show that he is
neither, I shall transcribe the passage as it is laid down in the book it
self, that thereby it may be seen, Whether G, W's error or D. L's forgery be
the greater: G: W's words are thus, 4thly The man's mistaken if he suppose
that we plead either-the Righteousness of a creature, or man's own
Righteousness, which he himself is enabled to perform, as the cause of our
justification: for Christ that strengthens us or enables us, by his power and
spirit dwelling in us, to do the Fathers will, he is the ground and cause of
our justification, and in him who is the beloved are we accepted, not merely
for our own works or obedience, but for his sake, who works in us, and
enables us to do those things which are well pleasing in his sight, Now is
it not strange* that D, L, should be so infatuated, as to abuse and find fault
with such sound doctrine; and so at present I shall leave it as such, but the
forgery at Daniel Leeds's door, and come next to examine, whether it
contradicts W: P: or not; for as he has not shevvn us wherein, so I cannot
see how he can find out his pretended contadiction, For as G: W: ovvns not
man's own Righteousness which he is able to perform of himself, to be the
cause of our Justification; so neither does W: P. say or own that a man of
himself is able to perform that actual Righteousness, which is necessary to
justification, therefore no contradiction: But is it not as sound doctrine, to
say justification comes by actual richteousness, as it is to say, that Abraham
our Father was justified by works, when he offered up Isaac his Son James 2:
21. Now was not this his offering up his Son, an actual work, and is not Faith
without works dead, v: 26? And surely a man is not justified by a dead faith:
Now although a man is said, and that in a schriptural sense, to be justified by
works, yet it is not for his works sake who works all our good works in us,
and for us.

I now must again call upon D: L. to be impartial, for if W: P. be guilty of
error here, how can his Friend G: K. be sound? For it is one of the false
doctrins he charges the New England Professors with; That justification is
only by Christ's righteousness without us, imputed to us, and received by faith
alone, and not by any righteousness of god and Christ infused into us, or
wrought in us, see Presbyterian and Independent etc. p: 204, not yet retracted
and in his Looking glass to the Protestants p: 31, he says this is our faith,
that we are justified by an inward righteousness wrought by the Spirit of God
in our hearts. What Say thou now Daniel? Can W: P. be heterodox in this
matter, and G: K. orthodox? Be impartial; for this of G: K's. is so far from
being retracted, that it is by him implicitly justified in the Retractation
book it self; For there he denies, that he has retracted or renounced any one
assertion in any one of his former books, that was judged by him an Article of
faith, of which this about justification is one; for says he: this is our
faith, that we are justified by an inward Righteousness etc.

His next flingh is grounded chiefly upon his abusing G: W's. words and
meaning, as well as that he there in abuses his Reader, by his forging words
in G. W.*s name which are not G. W's. words; but his own as before is shown,
and so I shall leave both these misrepresentations of G. W. charged to D. L's.
account under the one head of Forgery.

In the same 14th. page he cites W. P's Rejoinder p: 287, thus, No present
work, how good soever, can justify any man from the condemnation which is due
for the guilt of sin, that is past; To which he opposes Sandy Foundation p: 16,
thus, God's remission is grounded on our repentance.

Answer, Though W: P. says in the one book, No present work how good soever,
can justify any man from the condemnation which is due for the guilt of sin
that is past. Yet there is nothing in the other book, that (so much as
consequentially) does say it can: For though it is there said, That Gods
remission is grounded on our repentance; yet yet is to be observed, that it is
called Gods remission, and so no present work how good soever, of ours can
either remit or justify us; for it is Gods remission, and so called by W: P.
And although W: P. says, it is grounded upon our repentance, yet it is to be
understood in a scriptural sense, and one of the scriptures which VV: P.
brought to prove what he asserted was 2 Chr. 30: 9. For if ye turn again unto
the Lord, the Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away
his face from you. Where (says W: P.) how natural is it to observe that Gods
remission is grounded on their repentance; and not that it is impossible to
pardon, without a plenary satisfaction which was his then Antagonist's
doctrine; and the several scriptures brought by W: P. prove clearly, that it
was upon the wicked's returning again to the Lord, that he remitted them, had
mercy on them, and abundantly pardonned them.

Again p. 15 he quotes G. F's. Catechism p: 2 The light that shows to every man
his evil deeds, is Christ. In opposition to which he produced W. P's Christian
Quaker p: 91 We do not say that the light in every man is Christ, but of Christ.

Answer: Tho G: F. says, The light that shows to every man his evil deeds is
Christ, yet W. P. says nothing to the contrary, so no cnotradiction. And this
is certainly true, that the great Light that shows to every man his evil deeds
is Christ, according to G: F., tho the measure that is contained in every man,
W: P. chooses here rather to call the light of Christ, than Christ in fullness.
And G: K. himself in a late book entitled Heresy and Hatred p: 14. says The
light within being God and Christ; and yet in the same page he calls it A real
measure or the eternal word Christ Jesus. No question but this is sound enough
in G: K. though it would scarce be so in us.

He adds a citation out of G: F's Great mystery p: 185 viz The Devil teaches
them, in whom he fows his seed, not to have the light within them, the seed
Christ, the Root of God. Upon which D: L. notes, Who must we believe, G: F. or
G: W. and W: P.? For here G: F. holds the light within to be not only Christ,
but even the Root of God.

Answer, This is partly answered by the foregoing: And whereas G: F. calls the
light, the seed Christ, it is according to Scripture, which says Christ is the
Light of the world John 8: 12, and also it is said Gal: 3: 16 that the Seed is
Christ; and whereas G: F. says so of the light within, it is no more than to
say, and that in a scriptural sense, Christ within the hope of glory Coll. 1:
27. and yet in Ephe. 4: 7. it is said But unto every one of us is given grace
according to the measure of the gift of Christ; and surely D: L. will not say
this is a contradiction. Besides, I remember that G: K. in a letter to John
Delaval, which I have by me in G. K's hand writing, in the year 1692, says; To
say the man Christ is in us, or the light in us is the man Christ, I do not
contradict it in a true scripture sense, as he is called the hidden man of the
heart, and the new man, but this is a figurative expression, and that in a
twofold respect: First by a Metaphor, or Allagory, as he is called a Lamb, a
Lion. 2dly By a Sydechdoche of the giving the name of the whole to the measure.
Now I say, if G. K. be thus allowed to distinguish, why may not G: F., G: W.
and VV: P. and as for G* F's. using this expression The ROOT of God? I ask Does
not Paul also use this expression? viz The Foundation of God? 2 Timothy 2: 19, and
as Christ is Gods Foundation for us to build upon; so also he is according to
Rom: 11: 16: 17: 18 the root for us to grow upon. And G: K. in his Way cast up
p: 114 sais, That Christ is the Root and vine into which the Saints are grafted.

As to the next clash, It is also partly answered by the foregoing; it relates
to something G: F. said in answer to a Priest, who commonly in those days
denied God and Christ to be in men according to scripture: Though in this case,
I do confess the Priest's words were true in a sense, viz That whole Christ,
God and Man is not in men; yet that God is in men is clear according to
Scripture, and that Christ is in men is clear according to Scripture, and that
Christ is in men, not only as he is God, but also as man, is clear according to
D: L's. great Friend G. K. who in his Way cast up p. 123 says That Christ is
really present in and among us, not only as he is God, but also as he is man.
Now since Christ as he is God dweller in us according to Scripture, and as he
is man he dwells in us according to G* K. as he is God and man is he not the
whole Christ. Yet that he does so dwell in us, as that the whole fullness of the
Godhead and manhood, is contained in men; I believe, neither G. F. nor G. K.
did own, any more than W* P. Besides, G. F. answer to the Priest was but by way
of query, which does not always conclude a judgment: For when Christ asked
the Pharisees, what think ye of Christ? whose son is he? they said unto him,
The son of David; Christ answered by way of query, How then does David in
spirit call him Lord Matt. 22. 42: 43. Now by this his answer, Christ did not
deny himself to be the Son of David; for that would have contradicted the
scripture, which calls him the son of David etc. Matt. 1: 1. And so G. F's.
asking a question, cannot be said to be a denial of W. P's. assertion,
therefore no contradiction.

I come now to his p: 17: 18, to what he cites from G. F about the soul. To
which I say, 1st. It has been often answered by our Friends, particularly G.
W. and W. P. 2dly Though D. L. slights their answers, counting them fallacious
etc. Yet his peculiar Friend G. K. has but in the year 1692 vindicated, both
G. F. doctrine about the soul, and also W. P's. answers to the Professors,
about the very same subject of G. F.'s., which D. L. cites; see his Serious
appeal p: 60, not yet retracted, where it may be seen, that what D. L. calls in
G. W. and W. P. Fallacious equivocation, his Friend G. K. calls a Sufficient
vindication. Now what curious wire drawing will D, L. use here, to clear
himself from contradicting his great Friend G. K. But since among so many
learned and Wise men, there have been so many opinions about the Soul, unless
he could define better than other folks what the Soul is, and what the Breath
of life is which God breathed into man, by which he became a living Soul, his
raking up seeming contradictions about it tends to no bodies profit that I know
of. As fot what he tells us of the Raniers saying, The Soul is a part of God;
therefore to talk of going to hell is an idle story; is very idle in D. L. to
cite. For I do believe, as man continued a living soul to God, by virtue of
that life which God breathed into him, and as he is restored thereto again by
Christ, in that state Hell is not his portion: Yet till then the Soul is not
living to God, but death and hell is it is po^tion; for the Soul simply is one
thing, and its being a living soul to God, is surely another thing.

In p: 18: 19 he cites G, F, again thus, Great Mystery, p, 205 and p. 63. The
Saints came to se the end of Sabbaths and New Mons, and witnessed the body,
Christ, before the day was made -- for the body is the light of the world, the
body is the life given for the life of the World, in whom there is rest --
Christ gave himself, his body, for the life of the World; he was the offering
for sin. Now D. L., to make W. P. contradict G F* quotes out his Serious
Apology p. 146 as follows, But that the outward person that suffered was
properly the Son of God, We utterly deny -- A Body best thou prepared me, said
the Son; sot he Son was not the Body, though the body was the Son's Upon which
says D* L. Let W P. reconcile these, and also tell us who is the Father of
that outward person.

Answ Easily reconciled: For as W: P. denies the outward person to be properly
the son of God; so G: F's* words, as here laid down by D: L, do import the
same: For he being there answering a Priest, who was mightily crying up the
outward Sabbath, which according to scripture, was a shadow of things to come
Coll 2. 16: 17 derected him to Christ the substance, or body of that shadow,
and said, the body is the life of the world, and the light of the world etc.

Now what is this to W: P's saying, The outward person is not properly the son
of God: For surely, the body, which is the substance of the shadowy things
under the law, is Christ indefinitely, which G: F. calls the light of the world
etc. But what W: P. meant, was restricted to his outwatd visible person only;
which surely none will say, that that of its self was properly the light and
life of the world: so that what W: P. and G. F. both do say is true, and
therefore no contradiction. And does not D. L. know, that the words [body of
Christ] have various significations in scripture? As, first his Church is
called his body Coll 1. 18. The bread of the passover is called his body by
Christ him self Matt 26 26. And that which suffered on the cross was also his
body. Again the substance of shadowy ordinances (which is Christ is called the
body, which was the body in G. F's. sense, in this place mentioned by D. L.

And where as D. L. would know of VV. P, who is the Father of that outward
person? I presuming that VV. P has matters of more weight to exercise him self
in, than to answer such sort of cavilling folks, shall therefore undertake to
tell him, and that according to scripture, He was the son of. David Matthew. 1. 1
and as Paul said to the Romans 1: 3 He was made of the seed of David according
to the flesh; which was the outward person VV. P. meant Well! but how was he
the son of God: why the next verss show, viz And dedared to be the son of God,
with power according to the spirit of holiness etc. And now I cannot but often
observe, how D. L. by his striking thus against the Quakers, does often hit his
Friend G. K. a grievous box on the ear; for in The Way cast up p. 104. G. K.
says, He was the son of Mary, David and Ahraham according to the flesh; but
according to his heavenly nature, even as man, he was the son of God. And in p.
102 he says, It is not the outward flesh and blood, that is the man -- but it
is the sold or inward man, that dwells in the outward flesh and blood, that
is the man most properly, such as Christ was from the beginng. Surly now if D
L. be impartial, he must take in in G. F's. errors in his next anniversary
book.

D. L. falls upon VV. P. again p. 19. quoting his Reason against Railing p. 91
as follows Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our Debtors, were, (says he)
nothing can be more obvious, than that which is forgiven, is not paid; and if
it is our duty so forgive without a satisfaction received, and that God is to
forgive us, as we forgive them, then is a satisfaction totally excluded. Now to
make as if he contradicts him self he cites Rejoinder p. 284. where says D. L.
VV. P. cites and defends, We believe that Christ in us does offer up a living
sacrifice to God for us, by which the wrath of God is appeased to us. Where
upon says D. L. Note a self contradiction, for in the one he totally excludes
a satisfaction, and in the other he grants it Answer.

Can D. L. be impartial here in? Does he not know, that where VV. P: denies it
as a payment of a debt, it is in the Presbyterian, rigid sense, to wit That man
having transgressed the righteous law of God, and so exposed to the penalty of
eternal wrath, it is altogether impossible for God to remitt or forgive without
a plenary satisfaction; and that there was no other way by which God could
obtain satisfaction, or save men, than by inflicting the penalty of infinite
wrath and vengeance on Jeuss Christ the second person of the Trinity, who for
sins past, present and to come, has wholly born and paid it, to the offended
infinite justice of his Father: see W. P 's: very words Sandy Foundation p. 16,
of which I shall speak more when I come to his Numb: 30: But as to Christ
offering up in us, by which the wrath of God is appeased to us, VV, P, expleans
in the next paragraph, to wit that Christ offers himself in his children in the
nature of a Me*diatory Sacrifice; And further says Christ as a Mediator can
atone in the consciences of his People at what time they fall under any
miscarriage if they unseignedly repent according to 1 John 2, 1, 2. etc. Now it
is one thing to appease the wrath of God or man in a Mediatory way, and quite
another thing to pay the debt that is due in such a strict sense as aforesaid.
So that though W, P, denied such a satisfaction to be made in one book; yet he
did neither expressly nor consequently own it in the other; therefore no
contradiction.

Now whereas D, L. asks How many thousand offerings this new Scripture makes
of Christ; as many Saints, so many times Christ offers himself up a Sacrifice,
For this I shall refer him to his great Friend G, K, for satisfaction, if any
thing besides abusing the Quakers will satisfy him, see G, K's Way Cast up
not yet retracted where in p, 157, 158, he holds that Christ is a Mediator in
the Saints, and that his Spirit as man, prays and makes intercession on to
God in the Saints, and cites Rom, 8 for it, Now dare D, L. say, that the
praying of Christ is not an offering and living Sacrifice to God; and G, K.
says Christ has done so from the beginning, by whom the children of God in
all ages have received grace from God, And in p, 109 G, K. tells how Paul
Preached Christ to the Galatians, in the time of their Heathenism, cruicified in
them, and cites Gal, 3 5 6 Now let G. K. tell D, L. how many crucifyings of
Christ there is, so many heathen, so many times Christ crucified, But I say
again, prejudice blinds man,

Well now to make G, F, contradict W, P, in this matter, in his Numb, 30, he
quotes Great Mystery p 63, thus Christ gave himself, his body for de life of
the world, he was the offering for the sins of the Whole world, and paid the
debt, and made satisfaction, To which he implicitly opposes W, P. as before,
to wit, that a satisfaction is totally excluded, and what is forgiven is not
paid.

Answ. What G: F. said was in answer to a Priest that said, Every man should
not have his sins pardonned; Which G. F. did not deny, but told, how Christ
gave himself an offering for the sins of the World, and that he had enligthned
every man coming into the World, that all through him might believe and (which
was enough to show, that though all man had not their sins pardonned, yet all
were put into such a capacity, as that they might have their sins pardonned, in
as much as) Christ had offered himself for all (which many of the Professors at
that time dinyed) and which offering the Father was well pleased with, and
satisfied in, and so in that sense he made satisfaction, according to G. F.,
and which W: P. in that very book viz Sandy Foundation p: 32 did really own viz
That Christ in life, doctrine and death, fulfilled his Fathers will, and
offered up a most satisfactory Sacrifice, but not (said he) to pay God, or help
him, as being otherwise unable to save men. So that here we find W: P. owns
Christ's satisfaction, as well as G: F., therefore still their faces look not
contrary (rightly understood) as D: L. would, and does represent them.

Well but G: F. says, Christ paid the debt, and W: P. says, what is forgiven
is not paid. Now to this I say, That Christ paid the debt, so far as that in a
scriptural sense, the Father for his sake was satisfied, and well pleased whit
it on our account, is true; For he gave himself a ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2: 6.
this is Scripture: But, that God could not pardon, except he was fully paid the
debt, by a plenary satisfaction made by another; and which was what W. P. did
deny, is unscriptural. For it is said Micha 7: 18 Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and in Exody 34. 6: 7. The Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long suffering and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity' transgressions and sin. So that it is not
rational, to say, that a Transgressor is pardohned, and yet the transgression
fully satisfied for by another, who the Presbiterians said, was the second
Person in he Trinity: For then mankind would be obliged only to the second
person, because the first was fully paid, and it was only against this Notion
that W. P's. struck, and I do not see that he contradicts G. F. in it, unless
the scripture contradicts it self; for the scripture abundantly speaks of Gods
forgiving us and ^ardoning our sins, according to W. P. and the scripture says
also in plain words, that Christ bath redeemed us and given him self a ransom
for all, and in this sense it is according to G. F. viz made satisfaction. His
Numb: 55 being to the like effect which the foregoing, I account sufficiently
answered by what I have already said upon this subject: I shall now take notice,
how in many places of his book, he idly and sillily slants at G. W. about these
words of his viz. I may see cause otherways to word the matter, and yet our
intentions be the same; for which he cites Counterfeit Convert p: 72, and then
he cries out in p. 21 Is this like the ancient simplicity of a Quakers Pray who
knows when such a man is sincere, or how to ^eleive him in what he says, that
thus hides his meanings says one thing, an means another?

Answ. Truly I think D. L. has not been enviously poring all this while in our
Friends books for nothing. Pray, who but a man m^dled in his senses would make
such a palpably ridiculous use of G: P's: innocent words? As if to say, I may
se ecause other wise to word the matter, and yet intend the same thing, be
equivalent which D: L's, application, viz, to say one thing and mean another:
For since he (G: W) intends the same thing, how does he mean another thing? But
what a doltish man is this? Is it not common for men (yea have not the best of
men done it) to word a matter other wise, and yet intend the very same, as they
did at first wording? Let him see how Luke words the matter, in giving account
of some of Christ's, last words to his diciples, where he says thus, And
behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of
Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power sromon high Luke 24: 49. Now compare
this with the account he gives of the same thing Acts. 14, and see if he do not
otherwise word the matter, and yet intend the same thing, for there he has it
thus, And being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should
not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father which, says
he, ye have beard of me. And many such like instances may be sound in
scripture; but least D. L. should dislike scripture instances under pretense of
their being corrupted, I will give him one out of his Friends G. K's. late book
of Explanations and Retractations, not again retracted as I hear of yet, let
him Look in p. 5. where G. K. says Though I cite scripture and make use of
them in arguing this point, yet I can truly say I have not my knowledge from
them. Note, this he cites out of his book entitled Immediate Revelation p. 54.
which he here explains, by other wise wording the m^tter, thus Here note, I say
from them, as being the efficient cause etc. Now though he here otherwise word
the matter, yet his intention are still the same; For he says himself in the
same place, What I then hold; meaning, what he held in 1668, he held in 1697,
though he have other wise worded the matter. But what Author shall I fetch to
convince D. L. better than him self: For in this very book of his, p. 33, he
finding fault with and ridiculing G: W, about his charging a contradiction upon
John Newman, says D: L, Pray judge if this (meaning Newman's assertions) ^e
any more then to say four pence in one place, and a gro at in another:
Importing, that to be one and the same thing, and so indeed it is: Therefore,
wether to say four pence in one place, be not one way, and agroat in another
place, be not another way of wording the matter, and yet intend the same thing?
We see D. L. has resolved in the affirmative.

I come next to his p. 25. where he cites G. W. again Divinity of Christ p. 82.
in these words while we were sinners. Christ, died for us, it was Christ that
dyed. To which he sopposes John Whitehead*s Refuge Fixed p. 38. thus Nothing
that was mortal was called Christ.

Answ. What John W^^e head wrote, he declares tw^^ as being eclxasive of the
soul and spirit of Christ, and we know, exclusive from the sold and spirit,
his flesh was called the body of Jesus, as it is said Joseph of Arimathea
begged [the body] of Jesus; and this was mortal and dyed: But as whilst living,
his Godhead soul and spirit was united to that body, so when that body dyed, it
was called the death of Christ, though his Godhead soul and spirit dyed not. so
that if exclusive there from his body was properly and entirely the Christ,
then Christ was not from the beginning: But we believe according to scripture,
that Christ was from the beginning, and that the Rock that followed Israel in
the Wilderniss, was Christ 1 Cor 10: 4. and yet also, according to scripture,
he took on him the body that was mortal, and that which he suffered in that
body, was also called the sufferings of Christ; For as much (says the Apostle)
then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh etc. 1 Pet 4: 1. And though
the scripture calls it is suffering, the death of Christ; yet it also implies,
that Christ was that day in Paradise Luke 23 43, though that which was mortal
was in the grave till three days after.

As to his comparing our Friends writings to those Priests, whom Samuel Fisher
in his Rusticus p: 773. for their inconsistent arguments against our Friends,
twits with his rounds of No: so: so: no etc.

I shall only say thus much, that I hope I have showed, and yet shall show here
in that there is no comparison to be made between them: For the occasion of
Samuel Fisher's so treating the priests, was the so different terms they at
times gave to the light (which D: L. may disprove if he can) whereupon (says
S: F. One while he calls it meaphorical not proper, another while proper not
metaphorical, one while natural as opposite to civil and not moral, spiritual
not supernatural, another while, and in other respects he makes it civil, moral
and spiritual, one while common to all, universal, but then not saving, other
while sufficient and saving, but then particular only, and particular to a few.
This with much more was what S. F. grounded his No. so. so. No. etc. upon,
which D: L. should not have concealed from his Reader; But it is no wonder a
man should do so, who strives for victory more than truth.

Again, in p 30. 31. he cites G. F's Great Mystery p 289. thus God was in
Christ, and they are one, the Creator; the father in the son and the Son in the
father, and Christ in you, and God in Christ, the Creator. And Quakers
Plainness p. 24. by G* W, The son is co -- worker with the Father. To these he
opposes G. W's Light and Life p 47 as follows viz What nonsense is this to tell
of God being co -- Creator with the Father? Where upon D. L. makes this, Note
Does not G. W. here accuse both G. F. and himself also, with Non sense? for
what is the difference between Co -- worker and Co -- Creator?

Answ. As blind as D: L. renders me in his p: 45. about the Resurrection, yet I
shall show him, that I can see a great deae of difference may be betwixt a Co --
worker and a Co -- Creator. For the saints were Co -- workers together with
Christ; but surely they cannot be said to be Co -- Creators with him; And
though Christ being man as well as God may be said to be Co-worker with the
Father; yet to tell of God being Co*Creator with the Father does (as G. W.
says) imply two Gods. And what G. F. said of Gods being in Christ, and they
are one, the Creator; the Father in the son and the Son in the Father etc. is
true and scriptural and it brings him no ways under accusation of G. W. as
this quarrel* picker would render him.

In his p: 37. he quotes R. B.'s Apology p: 95. in these words viz Wherefore as
we believe he (Christ) was a true and real man; so we also believe that he
continues so to be glorified in the heavens in soul and body. Upon which D. L.
notes W. P. says, Christ as man was finite, viz. came to an end. But here R.
B. says, he continues a real man in soul and body and so is not finite. And
then D. L. says Choose which of these you will believe.

Answ. Not D. L. to be sure That Christ continues a real man etc. is true
according to scripture, as well as according to Robert Barclay: But that
therefore he as man is not finite, it follows not. For D. L. continues to be a
real man for ought I hear, yet he is finite; But to be sure R. B's. meaning was
that Christ as man was to continue without end: Well the same is believed
likewise concerning the Saints, yet are they finite for all that: But whereas
D. L. tells us that W. P. says, Christ was finite viz came to an end, it is a
great abuse upon W: P and great untruth in D: L, for W: P, has no such words,
vis came to an end, as D: L, wickedly renders it to insense the world, as ^^ W:
P, believed that the man Christ was come to an end, An Abominable Forgery I
come In The last paragraph I conviected D L of a great forgery, and now in this
I am about to convict him of another, as great. In his Number 58 he cites G
VV's, Divinity of Christ p: 27 thus, The God whom we serve and believe in, is
infinite, the only wi^e God, and nothing relating to him, or his being, finite.
Against which he brings VV, P thus Sandy Foundation p: 20 VV. P, there calls
the man Christ The finite impotent creature.

Answ I must needs desire the Reader to take notice of the great heat D. L.
has imposed upon him, and the great abuse he has put upon VV. P, here in, in
saying that he calls the man Christ, The finite and impotent creature, and
there upon in diverse places bestowing his discanting sort of vaunts and taunts
upon W. P. after such a rate, as if he had a sicence to abuse men at pleasure.
As first, in the same page he says, Here I cannot but take notice, that though
VV: P. blasphemously calls the Man Christ, the finite impotent creature etc.
And in p. 39 he speaks again of VV: P's calling Christ's whole man, the finite
impotent creature. And in p. 39. he speaks again of W: P's calling Christ's
whole man, the finite impotent creature And a little lower, he ironically has
it thus The man Christ must be called, The finite impotent creature* by this
high and elevated dust and as his W. Penn. Nay he is so fond of the lie, that
when he comes to p. 24. he has it again, thus, I cannot but mind VV: P's
devised distinction, and unscriptural expression [if it were no worse] in
calling the man Christ The finite and impotent creature etc. Now Reader do but
behold how this D: L. has made a man of straw, and then fights with it: For I
do affirm there is no such saying, or irreverent expression, in the whose book,
as that the man Christ is a finite and impotent creature, No, neither
expressly, nor implicitly, nor so much as consequentially. By which it may be
clearly enough see^, that D L. was not influenced to this work by a Mo^ion
heaven^y; and well would it have been for him, if he said no more in the case,
than what by a little otherwise wording matter, he could have made out to have
been (in the main at least) the truth: But Alas poor Daniel! The case is
otherwise with him; for no otherwise wording the matter will do here, he can do
no less in justice, than according to the example of his friend G: K. (who has
retracted will out cause) to openly and freely retract it (he having so much
cause so to do) or else it will assuredly lie hard at his door, and likewise
prove as hard to make good his assertion in the close of his preface that his
proceeding here in (viz in his book) were good and sincere.

Well in p: 140 he again cites G: F's Great Mystery p: 222 thus Priest sais,
Christ is without the saints, in respect of his bodily presence G: F. answers,
How then are they of his flesh and bone. And the D: L. brings in VV: P. thus,
Christian Quaker p 9^ The body of Christ is not so much as in any one. Upon
which D: L. notes, That VV: P. is still clashing against G: F, al most on every
hand.

Answ. It is clear that the body meant by VV: P. was the visible body of flesh
and blood etc. (in which sense I can hardly believe D: L. thinks that G: F,
meant that that visible body is in us* however G F's following words show that
purport of this passage, to wit, And eat his flesh and drink his blood, and how
have saints his mind and spirit, and he with them, and they with him, and sit
with him in heavenly places, and he is the head of the Church: How then is he
absent? etc. Thus G*F* by which it appears to me, that the reason of this his
answer was, because the Priest would not allow that Christ was in us, by reason
his bodily outward presence is absent from us Besides, G*F, did but query, and
G* K, says in his Truth Defense p* 59* That to query a thing will not conclude
the Questionist does positively affirm or deny.

In the same page he offers a quotation out of W*P* s* Rejoinder p* 13* viz*
That [Christ] his coming was but [mark but] to bring the World to a more
improved knowledge and large enjoyment of that divine power, wisdom, life and
righteousness which former ages had, comparatively, but an obscure sight and
imperfect sense of* To oppose which he cites Truth's Principles by I Crook; If
Christ had not dyed* man must have perished in sin this being the way, found
out by God, to recover him. Upon which D*L, notes Here Is one Christian he
grants the merit of Christ's coming and death: But W. P, makes the benefit of
his coming, to be no more but ^o show man more plain what he savv before as
through a glass etc.

Answ. O strange! How soon has D*L, forgot himself? For in his quoting W*P, he
makes him to own and assert, that Christ's coming was as well to bring the
World to a more large enjoyment of life [mark enjoyment of life] as well as
power and Rightousness; But in his Note she says, W, P* makes the benefit of
his coming to be no more [mark no more] but to show man more plain what he saw
before etc. As if there were no difference betvveen seeing and enjoying. I
think what W. P, said in the matter is very comprehensive, as to the end of
Christ's coming, to wit, to give the World a more clear knowledge of him, and
to cause us to enjoy life by him, For I am come [saith Christ] that they might
have life, and that they might have it more abundantly John. 10. 1^

And surely Christ did not intent by this, that we should have life without
respect to his dying for us, and rising again etc. Neither did W. P. So D. L.
is here again pinched ^oo hard, to squeeze out a Contradiction.

Again in p 41. he cites W. P's Address to Protestants p: 119 Let us (says he)
but soberly consider what Christ is, and we shall the better know whether moral
men are to be reckoned Christians: What is Christ but meekness, justice, mercy
patience, charity and virtue in perfection? Upon which D. L. makes this note
viz Tho; W. P. allegorizes Christ, and makes him nothing but virtues, yet his
Brother G. W. tells W* Harwoth (as above) that Christ is something else, viz, a
man, consisting of spirit soul and body, the same body as dyed etc.

Answ. The more wickedly done then of D. L. in his p 23. very falsely to accuse
G. W. of saying, Christ has not the body of man, yet now rather than he will
want any thing that may make up his pretended contradiction to W. P* he now
freely assents, that G: W. owned Christ to have both spirit soul and body,
which surely make up a complete man. And W: P's enumerating what Christ is as
to virtues, and that he has all those virtues in perfection, does no ways deny
him to be a man, consisting of body, soul and spirit, according to G. W: No, it
was only to show, that those who are in measure thus Christ like qualified, are
not to be denied all share in Christianity, as the book plainly shows, And
though he says What is Christ out meekness, justice etc. denies him not to be
a man consisting of spirit soul and body, any more than Paul's saying, Who then
is Paul? and who is Apollo? but ministers [mark, but ministers] by whom ye
believed, Cor. ^: 5, denies him self to be a Tent maker Acts 18. 3 But D* L*s
design is for mischief, and he ve^^ures to act it, at what ^ate he pleases.

In p. 44 he q^otes The Christi^n Quaker by G* W* p 375. as follows, viz, That
this th^^^ tends to (...), and to make men Atheists, viz other men's self
confidence in asserting things contrary to reason and manifest experience, and
in particular, in their affirming that these self same terrestrial bodies of
flesh and bones shall be made spiritual, immortal and incorruptible.

It Is true (says G: W) Hen: More had finer and more excellent notions about the
Resurrection, than many other learned men, and aimed at the truth and
spirituality there of, from the vision of the holy men recorded in the
scriptures.

And then in order to make G: W. oppose him self, as he would seem to suppose,
he offers a quotation out of p. 372 of the same book viz this manner, viz G: W.
cites H: More about the Resurrection, saying, Flesh and blood can not in herit
the kingdom of God; and I think (says he) there is the same reason of flesh
and bones, viz.

I understand natural flesh and bones, not glorified. Thus he cites G: W. and
then adds this Note, G: W. commends this notion of H: More, as savouring of
truth and spirituality, and yet renders those Atheists that believe the same;
for H: More does not here deny the Resurrection of the same body that dies,
only understands it must be glorified.

Answ. Here he has abused G: VV. by leaving out the last part of his words; for
after the words immortal and incorruptible G: VV. adds, and yet the same for
matter and substance, which words he has skipt over I suppose because they did
not suit his purpose.

Then he says in his note G: W. commends this notion of H: More as savouring
of truth and spirituality; Whereas G: VV. says no such thing of him, as appears
by Daniel Leeds own quotation before produced. It is true, he said, he had
siner and more excellent notions, and aimed at the truth etc.

Which much differs from savouring of it; a man may aim at a thing, which he
may never come so near to, as to ^i^e of or savor. And where as he says, H
More does not deny the Resurrection of the same body that dies. Neither does
he show that G. VV. does so; it*s true, G. VV. seems to oppose the notion of
the self same terrestrial body of flesh and bones being made spiritual,
immortal and incorruptible, and yet he the same for matter and supstance ^ as
now they are (which last words [and yet be the same for matter and substance]
D: L. has very unfairly left out, to pervert G: W's real intentions* Besides,
how does it appear, that Henry More does not deny the Resurrection or the same
body that dies; Hear what G: W. has cited out of his works in p. 373 of the
Christian Quaker viz I dare challenge him to produce any place of scripture,
out of which he can make it appear, that the mystery of the Resurrection
implies a Resuscitation of the same numerical body. The most pregnant of all
is, Job 19 which later Interpreters are now so wise as not to understand at all
of the Resurrection: The 1 Cor. 15, that chapter is so far from asserting this
curiosity, that it plainly says* it is not the same body; but that as God gives
to the bl^des of corn grains quite distinct from that which was sown, so at the
Resurrection he will give the soul a body quite different from that which was
buried, as different as a spiritual body is from a natural body, or an heavenly
from an earthly. Thus far* Henry More as cited by G: W. in the said Christian
Quaker. Now how far H: M. does own or deny the Resurrection of the same body
that dies, may be easily guess^d at, not witstanding D: L's confident
assertion that he does not deny it.

And now having traced and detected this dis ingenious, unfair envious and
conceited man through the diverse quotations before specified, wherein he would
charge our Friends with contradictions, I think this sufficient with any
reasonable man to invalidate the credit of the res^. Neither, in deed, have I
all the books he offers his pretendedly contradictory quotations out of to
examine, and he having justly forfeited his credit, in diverse passages before
mentioned, I think it not worth my while to set pen to paper, to enervate those
suppositions citations, wherein his stained reputation must be relied upon, for
the faithful quoting thereof: I shall therefore only further take notice of
three very obvious abuses put upon G: W. and W: P, as a corrobocrating proof of
my above charge, and then leave this chapter of pretended contradictions, and
proceed to the next.

The st. in his ^3d. page, and is this G: VV's. Nature of Christianity p. 29
Christ has not the body of man.

Answ. Now, as there is no such word, so neither can any such thing be justly
deduced from what G: VV. there wrote: that subject of which he treated in that
place being not at all wether Christ had the body of man or not, but about the
manner of his saving and justfying men, which G: VV. would not have R. Gordon
to expect, should be as he imagined in his book p: 30, viz, That Christ as the
Son of Mary should outwardly appear, in a bodily existence, to save: But here is
not one word of denying Christ to have the body of man, as D: L. falsely cites
him, and sure it is one thing for Christ to appear to save men by his ingrafted
word, which is able to save the Soul, James. 1. 21, which the Quakers press
people to come to witness; and an other thing to say, Christ has the body of
man, outwardly to come on the last day, to reward every man according to his
works, which the Quakers also believe.

Then 2 dly in the same page D: L. cites the same book in p. 41; thus,
paraphrasing upon it. And in p. 41. he denies Christ's bodily existence without
us.

Answ. There is no such word neither; But G: VV. speaking of R: G*s pretended
adoration, and claim of salvation, being to Christ, only as the son of Mary,
existing outwardly and bodily without us: There upon G: VV. says I ask him if
he have so considered. God the savior, or the Son from the substance of the
Father; and then he asks him What scripture proof he has for Christ's existing
outwardly ^odily without us at Gods right hand. By all which it plainly
appears, that G. W. only opposed those terms (viz) Christ existing outwardly
bodily without us, because, that would seem to exclude his being as he is God,
and as he is in men; and therefore says to R. G. And is Christ the savior as
an outward bodily existence or person without us distinct from God, and upon
that consideration to be worshipped as God, yea or nay. etc. Now though G. W.
opposes R. G's. doctrine of Christ's being or existence to be outwardly and
bodily without us; yet it does not at all follow from thence, that he believes,
Christ has not a body, that has a being or existence without us. It is one
thing to maintain, that Christ the Savior of the World has a body existing
whithout us which G. W. denied not; and another thing to hold or maintain, that
that bodily existence it self is Christ the savior of the world, which (and no
less) R. G 's. words seem to import. The outward bodily existence of a man
cannot be said strictly to be the man, for them when it dies, and the bodily
existence is put off, the man would, cease to be. And where it is said of
Christ, that he bare oursins in his own body on the three 1 Pet. 2. 24; It
might as well be said, that the body bare our sins on his own body on the tree.
So that to conclude, I say it is a manifest falsehood in D. L, to say that G.
W. denies Christ's bodily existence without us. Christ's body does exist
without us: Yet that bodily outwardly existence is not the Christ, without his
soul spirit and God head.

And 3 dly D: L. in p. 25 falsely charges VV: P. in these words; And says VV:
P. We deny that person that dyed at Jerusalem to be our Redeemer: Referring to
VV: P*s Apology p: 146. Answ. These are not the words of W P, but of his
Adversary Jenner cited by W. ^. in the aforesaid book. Jenner having thrown it
upon the Quakers as their principle, W. P. in answer thereto calls it a ho^r^d
imp^tation, and then acknowledges in these express words: That he who laid down
his life, and suffered his body to be crucified by the Jews, without the gates
of Jerusalem, is Christ the only begotten son of the most high God. and though
he there denies the outward person that suffered properly to be the son of God,
yet the stress o^ the m^tte^ (...) only upon the word [outward] by which W. P.
meant his outward body; as is clear from his following words viz A body have
thou prepared me, said the son, then said W. P. The son was not the body though
the body was the sons. And if D. L. should say The body was the son the^ this
absurdity will follow viz Christ bare our sins in his own son (instead of his
own body on the tree. And if D. L. say, the outward person was properly the son
of God, and yet will be impar^tial, then let him fall upon G. K. for asserting;
That it is not the outward Flesh and Blood that is the man -- but it is the
soul or inward man that dwells in the outward flesh or body that is the man
most properly such as Christ had from the beginning: As his express words are
in his Way Cast up p. 102. not yet retracted. But whether he will believe his
peculiar friend G. K. or not, to be sure he has belyed W. P, as above is shown,
and it is not his pleading ^ little failure in Syntax, a thing he banteringly
accuses G. W. within his book; no, nor otherwise wording the matter neither,
will do, without an open and free Retraction of these his abuses.

Furthermore; having (after I had proceeded a good way in this work) met with
the book called, The Quakers Plainness I have therein found fresh cause to take
a little further notice of D. L's. perfidiousness, which I purpose a little
more to detect before I proceed to any other matter; see News of a Trumpet Numb
5. where he has it thus; S^ndy Founda. p: 15 W. P. says In the fullness of
time [God] sent his son, who so many hundred years since in person restified
the virtue etc. Now to make G. W. co^tradict this, he quotes Quakers Plainess
p. 24. (affirming that G. W. says The title person is too low and unscriptural
to give to the Christ of God.

Now Reader, that thou may see how unfairly* D. L. has laid down G. W. words,
taken them as laid down by himself, thus That Christ is not a person without ^s
p: 21. is our doctrine or phrase that I know of or remember; only that the
title is thought too low and unscriptural, to give to the Christ of God, many
men having gross apprehensions about the phrase [Person without] But Christ is
confessed us, both as without us, and within us. Well! Where is the contradiction
in all this? Why here; W. P, says, That God sent his son so many hundred years
ago in person; and G. W, says The title [person without] is thought too, low
and unscriptural to give to the Christ of God. Mark, person without us, was
what was thought too low to be spoken concerning the son of God, it was not
thought too low for it to be said of him, that so many hundred year since he
appeared in person: For it is one thing to say, That the son so many hundred
years ago appeared in person, and another thing to say, That the son, or Christ
of God is a person without us, especially when it is spoken in opposition to
those who deny him to be within us. For though we sincerely believe Christ to
be in heaven without us, yet we also believe, according to scripture, that he
is within us the hope of glory and that if Christ be not in us we are
Reprobates.

Now whether D. L, will reckon the title [person without us] too low to give to
the Christ of God or not yet to be sure it is unscriptural; For though it is
clear the scripture speaks of Christ in us in more express words than it does
of Christ without us, yet we believe him to be without us also; But to sum up
the matter, two omishons of D L's, in this quotation out of G W*s book manifest
his baseness as any intelligent Re^da^ may observe, the rectifying of which by
inserting them very much alters the case, as ^^ he leaves out the woras
[without us] and 2 dly He makes G. W, to say

The title person is too low, where as his words are, The title person is
thought too low, so that that qualifying word [thought] being here omitted it is
unfarily done of D. L.

I come now to his secon^ Chapterent it used Opposition ^^ Unity, and having
(as I hinted before) since I finished my answer to what he calls Contradictions
met with G W*s, ^ook (...) The Quakers Plainness I shall examine the use he
makes of some of it in the said Chapter. In p: ^7. 48. he brings in G. W,
laying down some o^ the M^ggletonians false doctrines and then endeavors to
show that G W, holds the same, my present business therefore is to show D L's,
folly in so doing.

The first of Muggletons doctrines that he brings out is That death took
Christ's soul into it, and that Christ's soul dyed when the body dyed. Now to
show that we hold the same he turns us to his Numb, 37. 38, 39, Where (says
he) they deny the body to be Christ, and that it was Christ that dyed -- And
that both body and soul was sacrifized. see Numb. 42.

Answ. First, If the body was properly the Christ how was it said, That by
Christ God made the Worlds, Heb. 1: ^ since it was many thousand years after
the world was made ere Christ took up that body. 2dly If the body was properly
the Christ how is it that Christ said to the Thief on the Cros^ To day shall
thou be with me in paradise Luke 23. 43: Since Joseph begged his body and laid
it in a Sepulcher v. 52: 53: from whence it rose not until the third day chapter
24, v. 6, And as for their saying, it was Christ that dyed, it is no more than
the Apostle says in express, words How that Christ dyed for our esins 1. Cor:
15: 3: So that D L is as really quarrelling with the scriptures as with us. And
what if G W declares, That Christ's soul was sacrifized? does not Isaiah speak
of God's making his soul an offering for sin see chapter 53. v, 10? What can be a
plainer proof? Yet it does not follow that his soul dyed; But if D L say
otherwise, then it is he and not we that holds those Muggletonian doctrines;
however I am sure we do not And so having done with this, I shall pass the rest
of this chapter all is it being pretty much of a sort, and it being not my
intention to answer every paragraph in the book, as I have already told my
Reader, and given him a very good reason too, viz because I have not many of
the books by me out of which he produces his quotations to examine them by;
neither would it be necessary if I had, since with any unbyassrd persons I must
^eeds have spoiled his credit, in laying open the unfairness and forgeries he
is guilty of in the beforegoing.

I shall now proceed to his third Chapter, which I find much like his former,
it being grounded upon his not being willing to distinguish, in ascriptural
sense, between Christ as he was from the beginning, and as he came in the body
in the fullness of time.

As for what he here says of John Whitehead, I refer the Reader to Tho.
Ellwood's book, Called Truth Defended etc. p. 124.

As for his saying, That The true Chrstians believe that the true Christ has a
body of flesh and bones etc. To this I answer, That how, or after what manner,
Christ's body is now in heaven I shall by no means undertake to determine' it
being (I believe) a bove the capacity of us Mortals so to do: But I shall tell
D. L. that he hereby brings his great friend G. K. under his censure of not
being a true Christian; for G: K. expressly says of Christ's body, that, It is
no more a body of flesh blood and bone, but a pure Ethereal heavenly body, see
Way cast up p. 131 not retracted.

Then, for his bantering W: P. about his calling Christ's body holy: saying Can
this be other than hypocrisy? "for as is noted at Numb 49 50, he holds the body
to be earthly and perishing. I would have the Reader note, it proceeds from W:
P's vindicating this saying so Jsaac "Peningtons' That which Christ took upon
him was but the garment of our nature, which is of an earthly and perishing
nature.

To which I answer, That Christ's body was a holy body according to W. P.
Surely D. L. will not deny; Yet that it was the garment of our nature is not
(me thinks) hard to make out: For it is said Heb: 2: 14 For as much then as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part
of the same [Mark of the same] Now how it is the same, if not of the same
nature, for my part I know not; though Christ defiled not his nature by sin, as
we have done ours, is Certain; and there fore a holy body according to W* P:
Yet in as much as he took on him the seed of Abraham, he surely took on him our
nature, unless the seed of Abraham be not of our nature, and that this is the
garment which Is. P meant, I suppose D. L. will not deny: Nay the scripture
says expressly v. 17. In all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethern Yet though Christ was in all things made like unto his brethren,
though he took should of the seed of Abraham, and took part of the same flesh
and blood with us, which flesh and blood of ours is surely of an arthly and
perishing nature; Yet I utterly deny D: L's inference, that W: P. renders
Christ's body earthly and perishing: For though he took part of the same flesh
and blood with us which flesh and blood of ours (as I said) is of an earthly
and perishing nature; yet by the mighty power of God, Christ's body was raised
from the dead, and saw no corruption, and so he dies no more; death has no
more dominion over him, but he ever lives to make intercession for us, in his
soul and spirit and glorious and heavenly body.

I come next to touch upon one passage in his Chap. 4, where he thinks he has
gotten I know not what advantage against W: P, He cites VV: P's. Reason against
Railing p. 165. where D. L. says W. P. justifies and declares that he abides
by there ill names given by E. Borough, p. 30. etc. to wit, Thou Jesuit, thou
Sot, thou Sorcerer, thou art a Serpent etc. And yet (says D L) in Address to
Protestants p. 242, he at once unchristians himself and all his Brethren, for
so doing, for says he, Men that call names for Religion, may tell us they are
Chistians, if they will, but no body would know them to be such by their
fruits, to be sure they are no Christians of Christ's making. Upon which D. L.
cries out Good Reader take notice of it; Alas. how has the man forgot him self!

Answ. Alas! how has D: L. abused VV: P. and his Reader too; For VV: P. does
not declare, that he abides by any ill names given by Edward Borough: for the
word [ill] is not Will. Penn's, but added by D: L, which was ill done of him:
VV: P's. words in the page quoted by D: L. being these, viz, But let it suffice
that Edward Burrouge gave no harder names than the scriptures by Rule allows We
read o^ dogs, bears, wosves, s^^ine, serpents, ^^pers, foxes, childeren of the
Devil and such like: And as that nature to whom they were then given, thought
them hard, so does Thomas Hicks now; But the same power that then give them,
has now used them to the same end and purpose, and I abide by it. Thus far W:
P; where observe W: P: does not declare that he abides by any ill names, for he
uses not the word [ill] but hard names. 2dly He shows how such like names
have been given of o^d ^y good men (yea it was by the best of men) and says,
that E: B. doing it to the same end and purpose, he abides by it, and since D:
L. finds fault with it, we may easily guess at his reason for so doing, viz, t
was W* P. that wrote it; For of all the hard names his friend G: K. has given
his opposers, I cannot, if it were for my life, find that he blames him for one
of them, and to show, that not only the scriptures and our friends, as above,
but that also G: K. has given hard names to his opposers, I shall instance
(for brevity sake) but one place out of but one of his books entitled, The
true Christ owned, see p. 104. 105 thus His false accusations; his beast with
seven heads, that he has coniured out of the sea of his trobled imagination;
his Atheistical and blasphemous creed; I have proved him man i^estly guilty of
S^^inianisim, Arrianisoum, Anthropomorphitism, Muggletonism, Antichristianism,
and fast of all gross Atheirsm. Now where will D: L's sincerity and
impartiality be, if he deal not with G: K, as he has dealt with us in this
matter.

Then as to what he offers to prove that W: P. unchristians him self and
Brethren at once, because he says (as D: L. quotes him) Men that call names
for religion may tell they are Christians if they will etc.

I answer Here he has very unfairly left out that part of VV: P's. words which
would unquestionably have shown such men he there discreyd to be no Christians;
For VV: P. being there treating concerning and speaking against persecutors, he
has it thus, viz, Men that call names for religion and fling stones and
persecute for faith, may tell us they are Christians, if they will, but no body
would know them to be such, by their fruits.

Now these words [and fling stones and persecute for faith] D: L. has
concealed from his Reader, and I am sure, that is a worse error than a little
failure in Syntax. But by inserting them, my Reader may see what sort of men
they were, whom VV: P. rejected, as unworthy of that honorable name, viz
Perjecutors for faith, flingers of stones as well as callers of names for
religon; And it is well known, that such persecutors, in formers and others,
would not only fling stones, but throw di^t too, and also call such names as
these; You Quaking Curr, You Anabaptist Rogue, You Fanatic Dog, and the like;
Now it is clear, that this was the calling names for Religion which W. P.
meant, and not the calling of names after the manner as the Prophet did, when
he called a sort of men, Greedy Dogs etc. nor after the manner as E: B. did,
when he called such like men, Sot Sorcerer etc.

But perhaps D: L. will say in vindication of G. K, that he has retracted the
hard names by him given to his Opposers.

Answ. That Retractation is but a mere flam like some of the rest: For how far
has he retracted this? Why his words are of so large an extent, that is that I
know no Professor of Christianity but both might and would say as much and yet
retract just nothing at all, neither would there be any service in it in order
to give the least satisfaction to any concerned who might suppose themselves
abused by hard names published; for his retractation is only in general terms
(viz He retracts in general all the hard names that he has given to such as
did nor deserve them) without discharding any particular person or society from
the scandal of those hard names. For instance G. K. in his Antichrists and
Saducees detected has bestowed many hard names upon me, as Antichrist, Saducee
or rather Atheist, Bold Ignorant, Miller Philosopher etc. Now since there is
great probability that he does not mean me to be one of those upon whose
account he has retracted the hard names given; So also any of his former
Opponents to whom he has given hard names may say I know not that he means me
to be one of them who have not (in his Judgment) deserved them, and now
although he seems to make an acknowledgment and blame himself for bestowing
hard names on diverse, yet since he names none of those diverse what satisfaction
to me is his pretended retraction in this more than his charging them on me in
his former, and what sincerity does he manifest in it? For those diverse he
hints at either did occur to his memory at the writing of his book or thy did
not: If they did, and he sincere in his pretension he should have named them;
but if they did not then it is a sign he put down what he published by mere
rote and in short, he had as good have said nothing about it since every
particular person concerned in those hard names may say they are never the more
satisfied there by and so all of them still lie at G: K's door.

Upon pruisal of his 5th. Chapter about prophesies I find not above one that he
has mentioned which has failed: For those he speaks of who have of late
prophesied against several towns and places, I never heard that any prefixed a
time, nor otherways than upon condition, viz unless they did repent, which
whether there was not so much repentance in so many of them as might move the
Lord to a farther compassion on them is surely more than this D: L: knows.

(As for D: L's ridiculing G: VV. about his prophecy concetning G: K. viz And
thus says the Lord, because thou have poured out contempt, scorn and reproach
upon my servants and people, I will assuredly pour out and bring great contempt
and scorn upon thee.

I answer, What farther scorn and contempt may yet come upon him, than what is
already come and manifest to the world, even since those words were written by
G: VV. let time show, and days to come make yet more manifest: For scorn and
contempt is certainly come upon him, even beyond the conceit which D. L. speaks
of. And although he may slight what G. W. said of G. K, because as he says,
it is The fate of all men, less or more; yet that is no more than those might
have said, whom the Apostle compared to Jannes and Jambres, and of whom he
said, Their solloy should be manifest to all men 2 Timothy 3: 9.

In his 6. Chapter he flings out his scoffs and taunts about Infallible
discerning, and in particular reflects upon our Friends about Delaware, thar
they want this spirit of discerning, and to prove it instances the case of
Robert Ewer* i^.

Now to this I say, Though G: F. (as quoted by him) speaks of a Minister of
Christ's having an infallible discerning of a man's state and condition, Yet he
does not say it is without any respect had to the fruit he brings forth: And
(Christ says Matt. 7: 16* By their fruits ye shall know them. So that I do
believe, to know any man's condition without this token must be an extraordinary
and particular gift of God; But by the fruits brought forth, I do believe,
according to the words of Christ, people may be known, and that infallibly too,
for what is short of that, is not properly knowledge, but barely conjecture.
And as for Robert Ewer There was not so near an unity bewixt him and our
Friends, a considerable time before that business of that Woman at
Philadelphia, was talked of, as D: L. may possibly imagine; But it is not the
Churches place to disown any Member, before proof be made, of some evil done by
him or her, and to prove what I say, I hope* I have an Author very sufficient
in D: L's eye, for it is no less person than his great friend G: K. who in his
late book of Retractations etc. (not yet retracted again that I hear of) has
it thus in p. 3; We find no warrant from scripture to receive an accusation
against any, far less a positive judgment, without plain evidence of matter of
fact against them, by credible witnesses etc. Well then; so far as matter of
fact was thus made appear against Robert Ewer, he was dealt with according to
Gospel order too. B^t for D: L's telling us, of Late ill example of diverse of
our Preachers, especially of their being unlawfully con^erned with women: He
should either have let us know who they were, or else have been silent about
it; for for my part I know them not, but do believe it is a great slander.

In his p. 64. he banters W: P. for saying, We ascribe not in fallibility to
men, but to the grace of God, and to men so far as they are led by it: Here
upon he makes this resiection, viz Behold Reader, and note this Rhetoric
well! For are not other Professors, yea, all men in the world so far
infallible, as well as Quakers.

Answ: Yes. But does not D: L. know, that there are multitudes of men in the
world, who are so far from being led by the infallible grace, or spirit of God,
that they make a mock at, and deride it, and surely, such are very far from
being infallibly led by it. But what need was there for D: L. to say [as well
as Quakers] since W: P. according to D: L's own citation, does not restrict
infallibility only to the Quakers, but to men indefinitely, for says he [and
to men so far as they are led by it].

As for his telling, how friends admit none to travel upon Truth's acount
without certificates, I think it is very commendable; but passing by his
mocking, viz, his saying, it is to help our spirit of discerning; I take notice
of what he says of G: W. quoting him out of Quakers pla^nness, thus We have a
Record in Peoples conscience; as if there fore there was no need of a
Certificate, which he Ishmael like, calls a Pocket Record.

Answ. Though he so tauntingly, yet groundleslyt, represents us to be a sort of
people, who think great things o^ our selves, as to our spiritual attainm; ants
yet, I do believe, our Friends do not think they have attained to a greater
degree of discerning spirits, than the primitive Christians had, and the
Apostle Paul intimates, their approving by their letters, such as went to
Jerusalem about the Churches service, see 1 Cor. 16. 3. And the same Apostle,
speaking to the Corinthians, as though he and Timothy needed nor epistles of
commendation to that Church, as some others 2 Cor. 3: 1 there by intimated,
that though such very eminent laborers needed not such commendations, yet
others did. And let D. L. observe, that though G: K. in his late book of
Retractations p: 3 etc, says, To know men by their fruits is a gift of the
spirit and proceeds from a true spirit of discerning, that is given
universally in some measure to all the faithful: Yet it seems, he himself must
have that, which D: L. calls A pocket Recerd, with him to England, and that
signed not only by his own faction, but also by -- perhaps D: L. knows who
besides.

In p. 66 D: L. tells us My old friends often bless them selves thus, viz We are
redeemed from a vain life and conversation, more than any society in
Christendom; We are the only Professors of truth etc. And says D: L. so says
the Pharisees, We are not as other men etc.

Answ. What then? though the proud Pharisees were boasters, and cried, They
were not as other men, etc. Yet I hope he will not say; The saints of old were
Pharisees, who said, We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in
wickedness 1 John 5. 19; Yet there were some amongst them, who appeared to be
very scandalous in their lives and conversations. Neither do we bless our
selves, as D: L. falsely alleges, because we are in measure redeemed from a
vain life and conversation; but it is our very principle, which D: L. cannot be
ignorant of to abase self for ever, and only to bless and priase the Lord, who
through his Son Jesus Christ, enables the faithful, to perform what is
acceptable in his sight.

The next thing I shall touch at, is to make some small reflection upon what he
urges against us in his 7th. Chapter, under the head Of the Scriptures, though
the substance has been often answered by our friends; and that very fully, in
these books amongst many others, viz, The Christian Quaker; W. P *s.
Invalidity, Reason against Raling etc. so that I shall need to say the less
about it, yet I cannot wholly pass it by, because I have therein an opportunity
offered of discovering his folly, as well as great envy, manifested in his so
ridiculously bantering that faithful labourer in the Lords vineyard, G. F. who
I believe is now at peace with the Lord, where the wicked cease from troubling:
and the weary be at rest; Whom he puts his profane joques upon in P. 74, as if,
because G. F. said Dust is the serpents meat, the Serpent feeds upon dust;
therefore G. F. meant, the Serpent was literally to feed upon lime and stone
houses, called Churches, and thereupon scoffingly queries; "Had not the Devil
need to have strong teeth, to gnaw upon steeple houses?

Answ. O gross perverter? I remember he tells me in p. 45. that about the
Resurrection I carnally apprehend G. K. Now I appeal to every judicious Reader,
whether I have not more reason to say, that D. L. carnally apprehends G. F. For
though G. F. tells the world; Their church is dust, a heap of lime and stone
gathered together; it is what is true, and obvious to every one that has eyes:
And though G. F. says; The serpent seeds upon dust, and that is also true, and
according to Scripture, which says, Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy
life Genesis 3. 14. Yet that the consequence is, that these two expressions,
according to G. F. must be fulfilled in a literal sense, viz, that the Devil is
to feed on the dust of those sort of walls; D. L. may indeed insinuate, but I
know not who will be so weak as to believe him.

And now I shall desire the Reader to excuse my stepping back to p. 70, where I
find D. L. falsely accusing Tho. Ellwood of belying the Common Creed, quoting
his Truth Defended p. 70, on this wise, viz, The common Creed (says he) called
the Apostles, Creed, says Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, Though born
of the Virgin: where upon D: L. says Now pray search the Common Creed, and
see if the word [though] be there to be found.

Answer. These words [though born of the Virgin] which D: L. quarrels with, are
not laid down by T: E, as the express words of the Creed, but rather as
explanatory in order to show the import thereof, which was; That though Christ
was born of the Virgin, yet he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and that
therefore, his Generation was not by coagulation, of, and from the properties
of man in Mary (as had been suggested) since Mary had not known man, but the
holy child Jesus, though born of her, was conceived by the holy Ghost. And I am
sure D: L. will be hard put to it, to prove T: E. a liar in this case; he may
as well prove the Apostle a liar, in a passage Heb: 4: 3 where he has relation
to an expression of the Psalmists, Psalm. 95. 11: viz, As he said, As I have
sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: although the works were
finished from the foundation of the World. Now these words [although the works
were finished etc.] are not the Psalmist's words, but the Apostles, explanatory
of what he had before said in the same verse, viz, For we which have believed
do enter into rest: And T: E's words were much after the same manner and way of
speaking, therefore how poor, mean and pitiful must it be in D: L, to employ
himself, in prying into, and poring upon our books in order to find matter
against us, whilst, when he has done all he is able, he can produce nothing,
but such weak and silly stuff.

As wretchedly fordid and base is he in p. 71; in abusing G: W. whom he quotes
thus; Counter Convert p. 26 We prefer the holy Scriptures (says he) before all
the Books extant in the world. Whereupon D: L. infers thus. Now observe here
how G: W. carries a double face to deceive his Reader, for he does not say,
that he prefers the book called the Bible, before all books extemt etc.

Answer. This is a most wicked and base insinuation, as if, when G: W. mentions
our preferring the Scripture, he did not thereby intend the Bible. I am
persuaded, it is not only contrary to D: L's belief, but also to his very
knowledge: Besides, though other books are, and may be written, by the
assistance, and from the dictates of the Spirit of God; yet that does not
hinder the book called the Bible, from having the preference, all things
considered. Gold and Silver money are both stamped with the Kings Image and
superscription, and both are allowed by him to be current Coin, yet the one is
preferible to the other. And, whereas our Friends, amongst many other, have
said, that some Scriptures are corrupted, yet that hinders not, but in the
main, they are preferible to all other books: Gold may have some tincture of a
meaner metal in it, yet in the main it is preferible to all other metals.

Again, what a gross inference has he drawn, from the words he quotes as Sam:
Fisher's viz That were their transcriptions and translations never so certain
and entire, by answering to the first original Copies, yet are not capable to
be to all men any other than a Lesbian Rule or nose of wax; Whereupon D: L.
says, Mark how he affirms, That if the Scripures were never so true, yet they
are capable of being no other than a nose of wax.

Answ. Mark how D: L. belies his own quotation, i^ his pretendedly marking S:
F's words; for the quotation himself offers, says of the Scriptures, That they
are not capable to be to all men any other than a Lesbian Rule or nose of wax:
But in his mark, to render S: F. odious, he makes him affirm, ^hey where
capable of being no other than a nose of wax. Oh Infincere man! Can he be so
ignorant, as not to know the difference betwixt saying, The Scriptures can not
be to all men of service (which was S: F's meaning, in as much as multitudes of
mankind never had heard one word of them) and his own saying; That they are
capable of being no other (indefinitely) than a nose of Wax.

Well! upon this perversion of the above quotation D: L. comments, saying; Now
I dare affirm, there is no sort of people else in Cristendom, except Papists,
will speak thus of the Scriptures. But experience tells me, That all sensible
Christians who protest against this Popish principle, cannot but have an
evidence in themselves to the worth and purity of the Scriptures etc.

Answ. And what of all this? The question is not about what evidence sensible
Chistians have of the Scriptures; nor whether they are to them as a nose of
wax; But chiefly, about what they are to half the world, which have them not.
And what service they can be of unto such, D: L. were best to inform us, if he
can.

In p. 75 D: L. says; But before we conclude this head, take one verdict more
from W: P's Spirit of Truth p. 38, The Scripture (says he) is much like the
shadow of the true Rule. Now all men know, That the shadow is a vain empty
uncertain thing etc.

Answ. That Is D: L's great mistake; For Paul, who said Heb. 10. 1 The law
having a shadow of good things to come, surely did not count the law, a vain,
empty and uncertain thing. And in chap. 8. 5, speaking of the Priests who
offered gifts according to the law, says, That they served unto the example
and shadow of heavenly things; ^h^n surely, those things, which by Gods own
appointment, served to the example and shadow of heavenly things, were not
vain, empty or uncertain; consequently, it may be easily seen, that this
observation of D: L's is both vain and empty.

I am now come to his 8th Chapter, entitled Of Magistracy and Government; to
which I shall give a little touch, and begin where he begins, with a passage he
quotes out of Samuel Jenings's State of the case p. 73. viz Magistracy and
Government we always owned to be the Ordinance of God. To which he objects in
p. 78. thus Now observe here S: Jenings deals deceitfully and dishonestly in
pretending to be what they really are not.

Answ. A high charge indeed! and that too to be founded upon such an honest and
innocent expression; For what though (as D: L: quotes him) W. S. says, We own
Government and Magistracy that stands in the power of God, and executes true
Judgment within the gates, casting down sin and evil doers, and setting up
Righteousness, and those that walk therein? Yet it does no ways follow, that
therefore we own no Government to be such (so as to be subject to them in all
things, by yielding either active or passive obedience to their commands) out
the Government of those who witness Christ to rule and reign in them, as D. L.
asserts: For both William Smith's, and the rest of our friends practice, in
general from the beginning, has proved the contrary; they having therein
followed Scripture precepts, and the examples of the Saints of old, in owning
Government and Magistracy to be appointed of God, and that to them subjection
was due, as aforesaid. Yet surely none will think; that they so owned them,
as to own that in them which was corrupt: No, they were so far from that,
as they did not spare to tell them of it; Isaiah says, Thy Princes are
rebellious, and companions of thieves, etc. see chapter 1: 23, and Ezekiel says
chapter 21: 27. Her Princes in the midst Thereof are like wolves ravening the prey,
to shed blood etc. But to sum up the matter; if D. L. own such a Government as
W: S: speaks of, it is so far well; hovvever, whether he do or no, it is such
an one as the God of Israel, the Rock of Israel instituted, 2. Sam. 23: 3.
when he spoke by his Servant David on this wise; He that rules over men must
be just, ruling in the fear of God. And if D. L. do own such a Government, then
I would ask, whether he cannot say also with S: I: That he owns Magistracy and
Government to be an ordinance of God, and yet justify the aforementioned
Prophets, in so smartly reproving the Princes of their People? and next,
whether in so doing, he would, or ought to be accounted one that pretends to be
what he really is not? Let him well consider this.

As to what D: L. produces against G: F, out of a book entitled, Papers given
forth to the heads etc; wherein, amongst other expressions, D: L. makes G: F.
to say; They are out of the Life and Power that make such work for an Earthly
King, and Earthly Powers.

I Answer. Though I know not that ever I saw the book he refers to; yet it
really seems to me, to be written upon the occasion of so much contending,
fighting, killing and destroying one another, in striving who should ^e
uppermost, in and about the time of the civil Wars. But that this contradicts
W: P, or that W: P. contradicts this, by his peaceably obtaining a grant from
the King, of the Government here, as D: L. seems to insinuate in these words,
viz; Come mark that W. Penn, with they industry, in getting Grant after Grant
for Kingly and Earthly power Is quite wide or the mark; they being no ways
parallel; For W. P. made no such work to obtain his Grant. (As G: F. condamnes
in the above cited passage) Then pray observe how false he is, in thus telling
W. P. of his getting Grant after Grant for Kingly power; where, as if he had
Kingly power, surely he would be a King, at least his power would not be
subordinate to the Kings, which it is well known W. P's. is.

It is from the like ignorance or worse, that he makes such an use as he does,
or W. P's. words, quoted by him out of Address to Protestants p. 334. thus, If
we will give ancient story credit, we shall find, the wordly weapons were never
employed by the Christian Church, till she became Worldly, and so ceased to be
truly Christian etc. Upon which D. L. says: I Confess, had not ancient story
informed me, that all Christian Societies have apostatized, when they grew
numerous, I should have admired at this Passage, that the same W. P. should in
so few years after he Wrote it; not only fall into that Apostasy himself, but
also draw many more with him.

Answer: But pray What is the Apostasy, vvhioh D. L. accounts, that W. P. and
those many more drawn in by him, are fallen into? Why the most I can make of it
is, That People are so sar degenerated from Christ's commands given to his
followers, viz to let the Tares grow up with the Wheat, etc. that they who now
pretend to be his, do not make use of worldly weapons, so much to pluck up the
tares, as the good wheat, as the diverse Persecutions of late years can
testify. And that this was it that W. P. meant, by their making use of worldly
weapons, is clear, from the very subject matter he was upon, and treating about
in that place. Now if W. P. has never done so, as I believe he never did, then
to be sure, in that respect he is clear from being an Apostate.

And since D. L. is so well informed, that all Christian Societies have
Apostatized as they grew numerous; surely, the Church of England having grown
very numerous, they must needs according to D. L. be apostatized also: and yet
in his Almanac for the year 169: he prays, that she may be a blessing upon
Philadelphia; As if an Apostate Church could be a blessing upon any place.

Then whereas he observes, that Ancient story has informed him, that all
Christian Societies have apostatized, when they grew numerous: I shall now
observe likewise, and put him in mind too, how the scene is altered; and that
modern story can now inform him of a Society of People lately founded in
Pensilvania, and his great Friends who (like those that ancient story informs
us of, though they were apostatized from the light, life and spirit of Christ;
yet would still retain to themselves the honorable name of Christians; so
those of this new Society) though they were gone from the unity and socjety of
the people called Quakers, at the first, would by all means value themselves
much, upon their retaining that name, and that forsooth of the most pure and
most primitive sort too, and therefore must be distinguished by the name of
Christian Quakers. That these are so apostatized, within the space of about
seven years, notwithstanding their not growing numerous, that scarce any of
them will own the name; But like Babels Builders are strangely divided amongst
themselves; and truly look upon it as a judgment befallen them for their lofty
tower building: some being gone to the water, viz some to dipping one another;
and some to sprinkling with the old popish Ceremony of Godfathers and
God*Mothers: some staying at home, and leaving all Christian Societies: others
running into strange notions, as that there are two Gods, and that one of them
dyed etc. Some (though very few) now and then keeping a meeting, possibly
pretty near the manner of their primitive practice. And Thus is the Language of
these Babel Builders confounded, and themselves scattered abroad, so that they
have already almost left off to build the City and the Tower. God grant they
may be a warning to all others, for the future.

But to wave any farther digression, I come again to the point, and do say,
That as it is clear, that what W. P. wrote there, was intended against those
who used such like worldly weapons, in the carrying on of Religious matters: So
it is also clear, that he never thereby meant to insinuate, as if Christ upon
his coming into the world, or offering up himself, had put an end, or commanded
an end to be put to all outward Government in matters Civil: For in the same
page, W. P. intimates; That Christ came to reform the lives of men, and to make
them better subjects to obey Caesar etc, So that if subjects be owned, Princes,
etc. must be owned likewise; And seeing W. P owned, that Christ came to make
men better subjects to obey Caesar, by consequence he must needs have owned,
that Christ did allow of a Caesar to command such obedience; And I dare say,
Whosoever shall read that, or any other of W. P's, books, shall find nothing to
the contrary: But for him to charge W: P: with Apostasy, because of his being
concerned in civil Government, is preposterous; and I further say, for Friends
to be concerned in the civil Government, is no ways inconsistent with their
ancient principles, or practice either, when they have been called to it by
Authority, without an oath: therefore D: L's. insinuation against W: P: and us,
as if we were ceased to be Christian, because concerned therein, is groundless,
and a mere begging of the Question.

Another fling D. L. has in this 81st pa. against W: P, as follows, viz But
some think W: P: has wit enough to make out to all that see with his eyes, that
the sword of the Magistrate viz Constable's staves, Sheriff's weapons, Stocks,
Prisons and Gallows are not worldly weapons, out spiritual weapons, when used
by Quakers.

Answ. An idle story: One would think he were violently seized with the itch of
scribbling, For where did W: P: ever take upon him to prove or make out to any
man any such thing? Besides, I never urderstood, that a Constable's staff was
counted a weapon, he being but a Civil Officer, and his place to keep the
peace; but rather that it is a mark or badge of his office, whence it is common
with people, when a Constable comes to serve a Warrant upon any person, and
brings not his Staff with him to ask him, where it is? And I my self was once a
Sheriff, but neither before, then, nor since, did I ever understand, that such
a thing as a weapon, peculiarly belonged to, or was essentially needful in, the
due execution of that Office. Then as for Stocks, Prison and Gallows, he may
call them weapons if he please, but for my part I do not think them so; much
less that they come under the Apostle's denomination of carnal, when he says 2
Cor. 10: 4, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty trough God to
the pulling down of strong holds etc. For the weapons which the Apostle here
opposes to carnal, being such wherewith they pulled down strong holds, seems to
me to allude to such outward weapons, with which the warriors of old did
sight, and pull down outward strong holds; Consequently, did not allude to the
strong holds themselves, which (in a sense) Stocks and Prisons are. So then,
where the Apostle speaks of the weapons of their warfare not being carnal, he
cannot thereby be supposed to intend or allude to stocks, prisons, or the like,
but rather to those weapons, with which they of old used to pull them down. As
for his sly insinuation about W: P's making out to the people, that Stocks,
Constable's staves, Prisons, Gallows etc. are spiritual weapons, when used by
the Quakers; I shall only say thus much, I can not think, but that he knows
better, than he writes, in this Case, as well as in many other matters; and
surely the greater will be his condemnation in the great day of Account, which
they (though falsely) so much accuse us of denying.

In his 9th. Chapter, entitled Of Persecution, and Prosecution, the first
thing I shall take notice of, is the great Ado he makes, about some of his
Friends in Pensilvania, being called to account for belying and abusing the
Magistrates, and Authority of the place, pretending it was for matters purely
Religious, and therefore being only a Religious difference (as they falsely
alleged) they ought not to have been troubled for it, and the like; which I
have partly answered in Modest Account, from p: 39 to p: 43. Yet when G: K: got
into England, and into the Bishop of Londons favor, how quickly did he himself
there fall to that work really, which but a little before, he had falsely
objected against others in Pensilvania, by instigating, stirring up and
endeavoring to prevail with Authority in England, to give order, not only to
enter into our Meeting houses; but also to search for our Books, and when
found, to have them diligently searched and examined by the most pious and
judicious etc; and if found guilty of vile and gross errors of which, no
question, but fle and the Clergy must be judges) to suppress them by public
Authority; and that for no other reason, but pretended errors in doctrine
contained in them? And now if this do not arise from a Spirit of Persecution: I
know not what does; for pretended errors in Doctrine, have been the chief
arguments alleged, for stirring up all the persecutions, which have insested
Cristendom, for about these 100 Years. Let us also consider, what may be the
effect of such a work, if G. K. could but obtain his end, in having his
proposal effected; Why then, it would be but getting some such persons, as
perhaps himself, and chief friends shall call pious and judicious to fall to
the work, and the business might soon go on briskly: And then our peaceable
Meetings, and by consequence the Nations peace in some measure, would be
disturbed again; our Shops and Houses might with violence be entered into, and
the Booksellers might possibly have many hundred pounds worth of books seized
at once, without any evil committed by them, as well as without trial, before
either Judge or Jury, except G: K: and such as he shall call pious and
judicious. So that this Suffering proposed by him, would not be on a like
ground with their pretended suffering he complains of here, viz, for calling a
Governor Impudent man, telling him, He was not fit to be Governor; for
belying Magistrates (as they did here) in print, about their proceedings in the
administration of Justice, also for falsely insinuating against Magistrates,
that one was so drunk, that he was fain to be carried to bed; and that another
was so drunk, that he could scarce ge^^ over the ships side he was in, with
such like stuff, which G: K: and his company here (in their impetuous heat to
vent their malice on some then in authority in this place, and to render them
as odious, as well they could) did not stick to publish, to their great abuse.
But alas! the case (on such an occasion as aforesaid) would be far otherwise
with the Quakers in England: For having no such like things as these, justly to
lay to their charge there, their suffering would be only on the score of
pretended errors in Doctrine, which (as I said) is the common pretense of most
Persecutors. Yet since D: L: and G: K: flout so much at infallible descerning,
I would ask them, Upon what pretense they would undertake to pass judgment upon
our books? If they say, by the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, Who then (say
I) must be Judge of the Comment? For it is about that, that Persecutors
generally differ with the Persecuted. Therefore were D: L: sincere and
impartial as he pretends to be; since he takes upon him to inveigh so much,
against the pretended persecution of those here, why should he be so mute, as
not to rebuke, or so much as take one word of notice, of G: K's real endeavors
to stir up those in Authority in England, to a real persecution there: Since
(although the book wherein those passages are contained, was published before
the Retractation book came forth, yet) he has not (there in) retracted them:
And yet D: L: pretends, he would have taken in G: K's books, together with
ours, if he had not rertracted hi errors: but his Cloak is too short, and his
covering too narrow, to hide his exceeding great partiality under, as in
several places of this book I have shown, particularly in this e^se.

The next thing I shall take notice of, is his mentioning our Friends ancient
Testimony concerning bearing injuries, so as being rev^led not to revile again;
and also their crying against those who caused people to be put in prison, and
took away their goods upon a religious account, and the like, comparing it with
George Keith, Thomas Budd, John Mc Comb, William Bradford and Peter Boss their
being called to account for their abuses to the Government, see p: 81 to 86.
Now this is fallacious, for they hold no parallel, and therein at most he does
but merely beg the Question, they being not called to account about any
Religious Difference, as I have already shown.

For I do believe, had any other Persons (though they had been such as had
never in the least differed with us about Religious matters) done as G: K: and
his Company did, they would not have escaped the notice of the Government, any
more than G: K: etc. I would therefore have them, and all others, duly, and in
sincerity and truth, weigh this matter in the right balance; for although our
Friends have testified, That we ought to bear injuries etc. and accordingly
have born the injurious Revilings, Imprisonments and Spoiling of Goods,
acknowledging it our Principle so to do, when inflicted on any of us for
Conscience sake; Yet on the other hand, we always owned Magistracy to be an
Ordinance of God, and that it was for the punishment of evil doers, and to
preserve men's Lives, Liberties and Properties; see Edward Burroughs's Works p:
784: 785. And likewise it has been the practice of our Friends from the
beginning, to endeavor to recover their just Rights, by due course of Law from
those who were not under the regulation of our Church discipline, nor would
otherwise be persuaded to do the thing that was just and right, notwithstanding
D* L's undue and strained construction of our words relating to bearing
Jnjuries etc.

And whereas in his p: 82 he gives us a quotation, said to be taken out of Sam.
Jennings his State of the Case, p. I know not what, which he makes to speak to
this purpose viz That they could do no less than prosecute, and fine G: K: and
T: B: without the violation of their Trust to the King.

I answer, Since he has not mentioned the page, I cannot tell wether or no he
has laid down S. J's words fairly; he is not a man fit to be trusted in such
cases, for reasons already shown: But be it as it will, it appears from D. L's
citation it self; that it was not self revenge they sought, but to prevent the
violation of their Trust.

And therefore D. L. had no manner of ground, to caution our Preachers to keep
their Hearers from reading that part of Robert Barclay's Apology, which he has
quoted in his p: 89; For R. B. is not there treating at all of Civil
Government, but of Revenge and War, as his express words are, and therefore he
complains that The Christian world is fallen in to contempt of Christ's Law,
not only as to oaths, cursings, blasphemous prophanations and horrid perjuries;
but also, how the world is filled with violence, oppression, murders,
ravishing of Women and Virgins, spoilings, depredations, burnings, vastations
and all manner of lasciviousness and cruelty. But not one word has he against
the Civil Magistrates appointing the just Laws to be executed upon Evil doers;
nor that it is unlawful for men to recover there just Rights, by due process,
according to the just and equal laws of the Government, under which they live.
And as I could produce several instances out of our ancient Friends writings,
to prove, that from the beginning, it was against our Principles to be
concerned in outward Wars and Fightings; So I could also produce diverse
instances, that from the beginning it was not against our principles to be
concerned in outward Government. I shall at present only mention two.

First, Edward Buroughs, in his book entitled A just and righteous Plea,
presented to the King of England etc. declares to the King and Council, in the
name of the Quakers, as may be seen in p. 784. 785 of his Collection (hinted at
above) that, We do acknowledge Government and Rule and Magistracy to be an
Ordinance of God, ordained and instituted of him, to be exercised among the
children of men. And we believe there ought to be Rule and Government and
Authority, exercized and executed in every Kingdom, Nation, City and Country,
for the end aforesaid; to wit, that Evil doers may be made afraid and
corrected, limited, restrained and subdued, that sin and transgression may be
suppressed, and truth and righteousness promoted, and them that do well
praised, and strengthened. And this is the very end of outward government of
Kings, Princes, or other amongst men upon the Earth; even that the outward man
may be kept in good order and subjection, in his conversation in the world, and
may be limited and restrained, from all wrong doing or speaking, against his
Neighbors Person or Estate; and if he do, he is punishable by such just
Authority. 2dly. The exercise and execution of this just Government over the
outward man, as before described, ought to be committed into the hands of
saithful, just and upright Men, such as fear the Lord, and hate covetousness,
and every evil way, and not to drunkards, liars, covetous or evil minded
persons, ambitious or vain glorious persons, in any Nation etc. And in p. 751.
he has it thus viz I have before mentioned, what kind of Rulers and Governors
we would have; even such as are just men, and men of Truth and Righteousness,
that hate covetousness and every evil way, and such are of us etc. [Mark such
are of us].

The second is Richard Hubberthorn, who was also an ancient Preacher and Writer
amongst the Quakers, and who (as did also Edward Borough) dyed so long ago, as
in the year 1662. In his discourse with King Charles the second, the King asked
him thus, as may be seen in the: printed account p. King. How do you own
Magistrates and Magistracy? R. H. Thus we do own Magistrates. Whosoever is set
up by God, whether King as Supreme, or any set in Authority by him, who are for
the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, such we
shall submit unto, and assist in righteous and civil things, both by body and
estate; And if any Magistrate do that which is unrighteous, we must declare
against it, only submitting under it, by a patient suffering, and not rebel
against any, by insurrections, plots or contrivances. King: Then the King said,
That is enough. Now in this discource there are two things observable; First,
That we owned Magistracy etc. and Secondly, We then declared, We should submit
to them, and assist them in righteous and civil things [Mark assist] both by
body and estate. So that here we see he declared, we could assist the
Government in righteous and civil things, not only with our Estates; but also
with our Bodies: therefore, so to do is not contrary to our ancient Friends
Testimonies.

In p. 85. mentioning Peter Boss's trial, he has a fling at David Lloyd; on
this wise In the trial of which (says he) D. Lloyd, being Attorney, pleaded
for S. J. and read a case out of an old Law book, to this effect, That though
^t Bishop was seen to be drunk, yet he was not to be reproved. In answer
thereto, David Lloyd denies, that he brought any such instance, or that he so
much as knows of any such case in any Law-book whatsoever.

In p. 86. he gives us a pretended speech of Arthur Cook's on this wise, viz;
Well, seeing Friends that you are not like to agree, you are absolved from your
Test (or Oath) and are discharged; and we will have another Jury that shall
agree, and find the bill. To this, Arthur Cook and others then concerned, whom
I have discoursed with, say, that No such expression dropped from him, so far as
they can recollect; But that he did deliver his opinion; That seeing the Jury
could not agree, another inquest should be awarded, as the law in that case
directs. So that I have sufficient reason to conclude, that this great noise,
is no other than a false, as well as base insinuation, against both the Court
and Arthur Cook, in order to represent them all, to be such manner of persons,
as were resolved to have the bill found in that case, right or wrong.

In p. 87. mentioning a law made in England; That no Quaker or reputed Quaker
shall serve on any Juries, or bear any Office or Place of profit in the
Government; he makes this reflection, They may see what their ill manners in
Pennsilvania has brought on them etc. To which I answer, This I take to be as
idle an insinuation, as any one in his whole book; As if the clause, in that
Law made in England were added, because of G. K. Peter Boss etc. their being
prosecuted here, a very silly groundless story.

In p. 88. he publishes a letter (or at least part of one) in the name of G.
F. relating to a book of Tho. Budd's. Now that letter I know not that ever I
have seen, therefore, for diverse reasons before given, I shall not credit his
quotation, so much as to take any farther notice of it.

In p. 90. he produces a quotation, said to be taken out of Richard.
Hubberthorn's. Works, wherein the said R. H. blaming a Priest, says, Thou do
allow of going to Law which the apostle did not etc. Now to what end should he
produce this against us? The most probable sense and intent of Richard
Hubberthorns words, being, to set the Apostle's doctrine over the Priest's
head, in reproof of the common practice of rheir Church Members going to law
with each others, allowed by the Priest, and that before those, who in the
Apostle's sense, might be termed unjust; the Apostle's drift, being to prevent
Brother's going law with Brother, and to reprove therefore: A practice, which
the Quakers allow no more of now, than they did in the beginning.

I am now come to his Chapter 10th. entitled; Friends suffering, to be
recorded by London Meeting; Which mostly concerns those of West farsey side to
speak to, which they may do, if they see any need for it, and if they do, it
may be added in a Postscript, where also I intend to publish John Wood's
vindication of himself from the aspersions cast upon him in this chapter,
testefied both by himself and Neighbors. Only something of what he says about
Ralph Ward, I shall take notice of in the next plase which take as follows. In
his p. 92. 93 he has it thus. In the years 1694 and 95 Ralph Ward, a poor
friend at Philadelphia, was several times fined for conscientiously refusing to
serve on Iuries, and had goods taken from him to the value of 4. L. 6 of which
he complained to the Governor and Council, but had no releif. The Members of
Counsel present were S. Carpenter, S. Richardson, Amortis, C. Pusey, D. LLoyd,
all Quakers.

Answer. This is very silly, like the rest of his stuff: For first, Though
those members were present at Council, yet if they would, they could have
granted him no releif, without the consent of the Governor, who was no Quaker.
2dly. Whether the Governor, and all the Members of Council, had been Quakers
or no Quakers, yet they could not have releived him; because, the Laws of this
Government impose a fine on all that shall refuse to serve on a Jury, which
laws (according to the orginal frame of Government, and Constitution of this
place) the Governor and Council are to take care that they be all duty and
diligently executed; therefore consequently are not to be violated by them.
3dly. Though there might be so much goods taken from him, as might amount to
the value D. L. mentions, yet so far as it did appear to us the Sheriff was
always very ready to deliver him the overplus of his fine. However, me thinks
any man, though never so conscientious, should in no wise object scruple of
conscience, in relation to serving upon a Jury, thiir chief office, being, to
find out the truth ar faelsehood of any matter brought before them, or what any
of their own Members may inform them of.

For as to what any man may suffer, either in Cases Criminal, or Civil after
the Jury have found aainst him, it is the business of the Law to direct, and of
the Judge or Justice, to pronounce the Judgment of the Court.

His 11 Chapter Of Swearing he begins thus, viz In W. Penn'^ book called,
Reason against Railing, p. 41. the question is put thus, How could you know
that swearing in any case were unlawful, if it had not been written, Swear not
at all? Is not then the Scripture your Rule in this Case? W. Penn there
answers, This shows the ignorance of Tho: Hicks in the writings of the best
Gentiles, and his acknowledgment of the lights sufficiency, in case we are able
to prove swearing disallowable before Christ came in the flesh. The seven wise
men, (says he) famous among the Greek^ 500 years before Christ came in the
flesh esteemed swearing but a remedy against corruption. Upon all which D: L:
Comments thus Now observe, does not this plainly show, that they held swearing
not only allowable, but also good to be used etc.

Answ. No it does not, For though they esteemed it as a remedy against
corruption, yet it follows not from thence, that they esteemed it good to be
used. For, to make a law to massaere all the Jews, Papist, Maggletonians etc.
in the Kings dominions, who spread up and down their corrupt doctrines therein,
would be of as tendincy to remedy that corruxtion; yet it would not be good to
be used: To hang men for telling lies against their honest Neighbors, or
others would (doubtless) remedy that corruption, as much as wearing would he a
remedy giving against in false evidence; yet that would not he good to be used,
and indeed I know not whatis better to be used, to prevent false speaking, than
to keep close to him who is the truth it self, and who has commanded us not to
swear at all.

D: L: proceeds in his p: 98 asking Was not W: P: dotish when he brought this
instance to prove the light in sufficient etc.

Answ. Why Dotish? Does it not prove clearly enough, that the light showed
them, that to falsify their words was corruption? Why not sufficient then, to
show them, that unless they kept to their words without any oath whatsoewer, it
was corruption also?

He queries farther thus, viz, Was it likely that the light or law in the best
Gentiles would forbid all swearing at the same time when the law (outward) was
in force, that allowed and commanded swearing?

Answ. Why not? For the outward law, under that dispensation, allowed of hating
enemies Matt. 5. 43. and of wars and fightings; but it is evident, some of the
best Gentiles at the same time did not; but were taught more evangelical
precepts, to wit of loving enemies, and ceasing from wars and fightings; of
which I shall give one or two instances,, cited in G. K's Universal free grace
of the Gospel; see in p. 126 the advice of Dindimus King of the Brachmans to
Alexander the great, viz To cease warring against men without: and engage
himself in another warfare, against then, nemies within himself; his lusts, his
affection, his desires if he desired to be rich: indeed and to be a true
Victor-assuring him that all his power, all his hosts, all his riches, all his
pomp, would at last not avail him any thing; But (says he) if thou will
hearken to my words, thou shall possess of my goods, who have God to my
friends, and whose inspiration I enjoy within me. Thus thou shall overcome lust
the mother of penury, which never obtains what it seeks. Thus thou shall, with
us, honor thy self, by becoming such as God had Created Then next as to loving
enemies, which the law allowed to hate see p. 133. how Lycurgus that famous
Spartan Legislator, who, for making wholesome laws to reduce his people to good
manners was hated and stoned, and among many other insolences sustained, had
one of his eyes smote out, with acudgel, by a certain young man called
Alexander, for which he being appreherded, and comdemned to dye, Lycurgus
redeemed him, took him as a friend into his own house, and there taught him to
live well, so that it is said he became a good man. Much more might be
mentioned, which though the outward law, under the legal dispensation, allowed
and commanded other (...) to the Jews; Yet G. K: himself says p. 124 of the
same book That that in them (the Gentiles;) which taught and enabled them to
obey the truth in these things, was supernatural and Evangelical.

Well in p. 99 he alleges, that To say, Isolemnly promise to declare in the
presence of Almighty God etc. is a calling upon God to be a witness to the
truth of the testimony given etc.

Answ. Whether it be so or not, yet it is not swearing by God, or by any other
thing. Neither is the practice of our Friends in America, in Courts or
otherwise, contrary to the primitive principles of our Friends, as mentioned in
their writings; which since D. L. is so good at searching, let him satisfy
himself, if he please; where he may find sufficient to clear us, from his false
charge of Apostasy, objected against us.

In p. 99. 100 he says In their Courts about Delawire I have seen Quakers give
and command the Englesh normal oath to be given to those that were not Quakers.
And mentioned Dev. L Loyd as a person gulty of the charge.

Answ. It is admitable, how a man who pretends to write by a motion heavenly,
can have the face thus to bely^ men However Let him see to the proof of the
truth of this accusation, lea^, it he should happen to be called to an account
for it in time to come, he might happen to fall under the temtation, of adding
another ^^ve to all the rest, by miscalling such a prosecution, by the name of
persecution. B^t to sum up the matter, the law is good, and was made for Liars,
as well as for perjured persons, see 1 Timothy 1. 10 and David L Loy^ ^^t^rly
denies his change.

His 12 th Chapter entitled Of (...), Swearing and ^aying Tithes, n^ begins
with a notorious falsehood, in telling of which, he is ^ain to beg the question
too, on this wise viz The Quakers having denied Jesus or Nazareth to be the
Savior of the world, and to be in heaven glorified in the true nature of man
both in their ancient books, as is before showed (this is false; for our books
sufficiently show the contrary) and now being charged with the same, and one
persons so accusing or charging them having pro^ered to prove the same upon
them at any public meeting they shall think sit to apoint, yet they refuse to
hear with in t^ear etc.

Answ. And why a public meeting? Has not late expenence shown the little
service there is in that? Therefore, since they have of late, by their numerous
prints, end avoured to the utmost of their power, to prove this upon us,
although to no purpose, as by our friends answers from time to time it may be
seen; and seeing they are so uncharitably hardened against us, as that nothing
of our explanations of such passages as they have round fault with, nor our
solemn conse^^on to the Lord Jesus Christ, both within us and without us will
suffice: What hopes can we have, that public meetings should have better
sucess. Neither would the most public meeting that could be gathered, e^^ear
so effectual a way for us to clear the th^^th we profess and our selves, from
the false charges published in print, by them against us, and disp^^sed abroad
into so many places of the world, as our public answers, also in point, are,
or may be.

But that it may be seen, now wicked this D. L. is, in thus (...) us; himself
in the mean time knowing (...) contrary, I shall now transcri^e a passage or
two, (...) he himself has cited, out of the writings of G. Whitehead. and T.
Ellwood. who are known to be Authors approved amongst us. D. L. in his p. 22
and Numb. 33 has it thus; Answ. to Dr. Lancaster, by G: W: and six other, We
sincerely believe in Jesus Christ, both as he is true God and perfect man; our
Immanuel and Mediator; and as in the fullness of time he was conceived by the
holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, and was crucified and put to death, was
buried, rose again, and visibly ascended into heaven -- And that this same
Jesus Christ that was crucified, shall so in like manner come (as he was seen
to go in to heaven) at the last and great day of Judgment The next I shall
puoduce is a passage of Tho, Ellwood's, in his Further Discovery, in answer to
G: K, p: 72, G: K: alleging, that This gross and vile error, that Christ is
not to come without us, in his glorified body to judge all mankind, I find too
many in England guilty of T: E: says, I esteem as a vile slander, if, by many
he intend many of the people called Quakers:

And now, since I know they are apt to tell us, that these kind of confessions
we had never come to had not G. K. driven us to it; and that we now preach
Christ but of envy to G: K, because we would render him a false accuser etc. I
do say, as this is very uncharitable, so I shall make it appear to be very
false, by D: L's own Citations. For 2. 1st in p. 23 he cites G: W's answer to
W. Haworth, p. 23 (wrote I suppose above 20 years ago, thus) Christ did rise in
that body where in he suffered, and in the same assended in to the heavens --
and it is so far circumscribed in the heavens as it is capable of and as is
proper to it; and though it be spiritual and glorious, yet a body, and
therefore not in every place where God is. Likewise in sin p 12 he cites
Foundat. of Tithes p 238 240 by T. Ellwood thus, viz Nor do the Quakers ascribe
salvation to the following the light within, but to Christ Jesus, to whom the
light leads -- If any one expect remission of sins by any other way than by the
death of Christ useless tenders the death of Christ Thus far out of this very
book of D: L's, as quoted by himself, out of our friends former Books.

Likewise G: F, one of the most ancient as well as most ominent of the Quakers,
in his Iournal, p 358, has it thus We do own and believe in Jesus Christ, his
beloved and only begotten Son, in whom he is well pleased; who was conceived by
the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, in whom we have redemption, through
his blood, even the forgiveness of sins -- And we do own and believe, that he
was made a sacrifice for sin; who knew no sin neither was guile found in his
mouth. And that he was crucified for us in the flesh, without the gates of
Jerusalem; and that he was buried, and rose again the third day by the Power of
his father, for our justifiation: And we do believe, that he ascended up into
heaven, and now sits at the Right hand of God etc. This have I produced here
(omitting a great number more of testimonies which might be offered to the same
effect) to show, first, D. L's unreasonable perridiousness, in his thus
knowingly accusing us falsely. 2dly. To manifest over his head, that we do not
deny, but really own Jesus of Nazareth to be the Savior of the World, and that
he is true God, and perfect man.

And now I am speaking of these things, I think it not amiss, to clear our
Friends from alate false accusation brought by G. K. and his company against
them, which is; That we own no other resurrection, but what is witnessed in
this life, or the new birth; or that we get the resurrection fully immediately
after death etc. But to show the contrary of this I shall bring, 1st. Tho.
Ellwood's Further Discovery p. 72. in answer to G. K. thus, viz He says, Many
hold, to my certain knowledge, That the Resurrection is the new birth, and
nothing else: Others say, Immediately after death we get the Resurrection
fully. If many by ^ that hold thus, he means many of the People called Qua^ers,
I neither own nor know any that hold such doct^ines. 2dly. Likewise in the book
called the Christian Doctrines etc. by G. W. and others, it is thus expressed
viz, We sincerely own, not only a Resurrection in Christ^ from the fallen,
sinful state nere; but a rising and ascending into glory with him hereafter,
that when he at last appears, we may appear with him in glory Coll. 3. 4. etc.
-- at the last trump of God, and voice of the Archangel, the dead shall be
raised incorruptible. The dead in Christ shall rise first 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. etc.
Thus far G. W.

And now again, least they should (as lately they have done) still tell us, we
have learned this out of late, or that we have been of late forced to it by G.
K. I shall therefore show one or two plain proofs to the contrary. First from
Edward Borough who died in the year 1662. who in his Works p. 440. speaking
concerning the Resurrection, expresses himself thus viz And we believe, even
that he that was dead, is alive, and lives for evermore; and that he comes,
and shall come, to judge the world with righieousness, and all people with
equity, and shall give every man according to his deeds, at the day of
judgment, when all shall rise to condemnation, or justification, he that has
done good, shall receive life, and he that has done evil, to everlasting
condemnation. In the next place I shall produce a quotation out of an ancient
book of Stephen Crisp's, entitled, A plain path way opened to the simple
hearted, for the answering all doubts and objections, etc. where in his p. 12.
he speaks thus concerning the Resurrection, viz, For he that knovvs a death and
Resurrection after this manner; to be dead to sin, and to be risen with Christ
Jesus in the new life, even while they are in this earthly tabernacle: before
it is dissolved, such will never question their appearing at the Judgment seat
of God, after it is dissolved; but do believe it with joy and gladness, and
have a fervent hope concerning the Resurrection of the dead, and have their
expectation unto God in that matter, that he will according to his promise
raise them up at the last day, and will give unto every Seed his own body, even
as pleases Him, and the creature is not careful then about such foolish
questions and doubts, as to inquire about what manner of body God will give
them; but leave it to the Lord, in full Faith, that he will raise them up
according to the Scriptures. Thus far S. C. And now lastly, what Authors shall
I bring, to convince these our new opposers, that we do not deny, but own the
Resurrection, according to the Scripture? Surely, none more fit, than their
great, original Sect Master G. K, who in Presbyterian and Independent visible
Churches etc. not yet retracted, which was written but in the year 1689, p. 3.
4, in answer to Sam. Norton's charging us with denying the Resurrection of the
dead, says thus, viz, That they deny the Resurrection of the dead, this is
also a most false charge, which they can never prove; but because we deny their
carnal conceptions of the Resurrection, and hold us to scripure words, which is
most safe, therefore they have so belyed us. And for the more satisfaction of
the Reader (says he) I refer him to a little book, called Truth's Principles
published by some noted men of the Quakers. In which book, it is expressly
affirmed, That we, to wit, the Quakers, believe that the same body which is
laid down shall be raised up at the Resurrection of the dead, as much as a
natural body can be the same with a spiritual body, or an earthly body can be
the same with a havenly body, according to the Scripure testimony; It is sown
natural but raised spiritual: And the glory of the heavenly is one, and the
glory of the earthly is another. And this may satisfy any sober enquirer etc.
Thus far G. K. To all which I say though this was so lately cited by G: K, out
of a former book of our Friends, and laid down by him, as one of our
principles, which he courts might satisfy any that inquires in sobriety; Yet,
it seems, it will not satisfy him now, for which I fear the chief reason is,
for that he himself is gone into Apostasy and bitter enmity.

Having a little digressed upon this occasion, I now return to D: L's 12 th.
Chapter, where I find him in his p. 103, a Hedging against ^. Dickenson and S.
Jenings, in particular, as follows (...). Where fore some preachers
particularly ^. Dickenson and S. Jenings have now found out a new argment to
prove to their he nearers that they are indeed balyed (viz in being accoused
for denying Jesus of Nazareth etc. as before mentioned) and that is, That their
refusing to pay Tithes, to fight and to swear, are three proofs that they own
Jesus to be Christ, and therefore they are falsely accused:

Answ. Though hereupon he vaunts at no small rate, yet all proceeds from a
grand mistake, at best: For neither they nor we do say, that our refusing to
pay Tithes: to fight and to swear, are proofs of our owning Jesus to be Christ,
but the reason for which we refuse to pay Tithes to fight and to swear, and our
suffering so deeply on those accounts, is, because weilest Christ was in the
flesh, he for^ade, and at his offering up himself, he put an end to these
things; and yet our thus refusing to comply with, those things, because of his
commands and prohibitions then given, is a good proof, that we own Jesus to be
Christ: Did not Paul bring such manner of reasoning, to prove his hope and
expectation of the resurrection of the, dead? see 1 Cor. 15. 32, where he said,
If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what
advantageth (...), if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we
die. Even so may we say; If Jesus be not the Christ, that offered himself up,
and put an end to the ceremonial law of Twthes etc; Let us pay Tithes and keep
our selves out of prisons, and our goods from being spoiled. Oh! but this we
can not do, because our souls are satisfied, that Jesus is the Christ, and has
put an end to these things.

In the next place, he falls ^oul upon us about Government matters. He begins
first with West Iersey, the Province he lives in; but with what truth he
relutes things as done there I refer to them selves to answer, if they think it
worth their while.

But since in his p. 104. 105 he pretends to give a relation, with reflections,
upon some affairs relating to our Government of Pennsilvania, I shall not pass
over that, but detect his abuses of us therein. He has it thus, viz, Next, let
us step over into the Government of Pensilvania, where in the year 1695 we find
Coll. Benjamin Fletcher. then Governor of that Province, pressing upon the
Assembly to raise a fund for his Majesty's service to wards securing the
Province from the French and Indians, but this they could not do, No, it was
against their tender consciences, contrary to their ancient testimony and
principle; and so no fund was raised.

Answer. This is not so, for Governor Fletcher's power here, expired before
any Assembly sat, or was so much a chosen in the year 1695. Neither did he in
1694 press the Assembly, to raise a fund, toward the securing the Province
from the French and Indians: So that allowing his one years mistake, as to
time; yet his charge in the main is utterly false. Neither was the reason why
no money was ^eised then, because we pladed (as be falsely incinuates) it was
against our tender consciences; for at that time the Assembly was satisfied,
they had a very reasonable and sufficient plea, for their not complying with
his desires, without alleging matter of Conscience in the Case.

He goes on saying, But the next year W: Penn got the Government into his hands
again, and then the Assembly meets again, and now they must do something
toward maintaining the Frontiers at Albany, or lose their beloved honor of
having the Government: for the Queen had commanded it and W: P: had engaged to
comply therewith.

Answ. A very idle story; for though the Queens commands to all the
Neighboring Colo^ies, as to maintaining in part the frontiers at Albany,
affected us amongst the re^^; and though, for Conscience sake, the Assemblies
here could not performall things therein mentioned: Yet it does not all follow
from thence, that the Assembly must therefore lose their share in the
Government. Had they not the same power of Government under Governor Fletcher,
as now, they have? Yes surely; Neither was the maintaining any thing of the
frontiers at Albany, a condition of our Proprietary^s original grant, or his
restoration either. However I shall venture to say (as knowing these matters
better than D. L.) That the Assembly's here, during the war, were very
respectuall at all times to the Queens commands, and so for as their Religious
persuasions would admit thereof were ready to perform them. But what ashame is
it for this D: L: to insinuate as it we so much loved the [honour] of having
the government in our hands, as that for he saker thereof, and to keep that up,
we would not stick to act against our principles. Whereas I would have him to
know, we were never so fond of it, as, I am credibly informed, he is Who,
notwithstanding his parties exclaiming against us for these 5 or 6 years past,
as not living up (...) the Gospel dipen^tion, because we were concerned in
Worldly Government, yet when an opportunity or a place in the Government; of
West Jersey lately presented (whether for the sake of honor, or revenge, or
both I know not) he presently falls in with it, embraces it, and becomes a
Justice of the peace; and then who but he for being concerned in Worldly
Government, and it is beloved honor too, such as it is; hough, how far his
accepting of a Commission at that time, tended to the subversion of the
oirginal rights and privileges of the people of that Province (I suppose) he
could no ways be ignorant. Besides me thinks it looks poorly, meanly and
pitifully in him, to accept of a Commission, especially upon such a foor as he
did, so soon after his, Keithian company had so much exclaimed against others,
and given caution to all professing the truth, and who were in scorn called
Quakers etc. That they should not be concerned in Worldly Government; They were
not to be Iudices, Sheriffs nor Constables; nay nor Iury-men neither, in any
criminal cases, see their book entiruled, A Testimony and Caution etc, p 1 and
2, which was given forth from their Monthly Meeting at Phillip James his house
in Philadelphia in the year 1692. I say that he should accept of, and embrace a
Commission, especially upon such a foot, as he did, after their having thus
exclaimed against others, for acting in the like capacity, tho upon a basis
that is just and right, and upon a foot that is firm and honorable, is a great
argument to me, of his insincerity and perfidiousness.

He further says Well, to work they went, and soon ^ound a new name for their
Act, and then courageously raise three hundred pounds for the Indians at
Albany, and (...) Da. L Loy^ is sent to New York with it, to pay it to
Governor Fetcher, for the use aforesaid; for now it was not against their
tender consciences, why so? because they had Otherways worded the Act, yet
intended it for the (...),

Answ. This is also false; for, first, It was not the next year that any was
raised. 2 dly What was done afterward, was to relieve the Indians, in habiting
beyond Albany, who where at peace with the Crown of England, and having been
rob^ed by the French etc. and o^^ed to desert their dwellings, were lest in
great distress. And it is well known to some here, that if the Assembly at that
time, had not agread to have raised money for them, by law there was an Essay
intended to have been made, to have raised a sum for their relief, by
charitable subscriptions, after such a like manner, as there was some raised
here; for the relief of the distressed English in New England, and who were
under almost the like circumstances, as the Indians were, and which I suppose
D: L: was not ignorant of; therefore hi^ flout of Otherwise wording the Act,
and yet intending it for the same use, is ^^tterly false; neither has he so
much as attempted to produce any proof of it, but unfairly imposes upon his
Reader, without it. As he also does, in what he aim concerning W* P's
engagement. Then, as for what he says about David L Loyd, whom he (Ishmael
like) calls St^rcht Da: L Loyd that he was sent to New York with it, is also
false: So that there is little else in this whole paragraph but lies and false
hoods. I shall further add before I leave this head: that either D: L: had seen
the proceedings, Resolves and Acts of these Assemblies, before he wrote his
book, or he had not seen them. It he had seen them, the more base man he, thus,
contrary to his own knowledge, to misrepresent them. If he had not seen them,
then may the Reader easily observe, at what a sandom rare, he ventures to
bespatter us; as also it may be perceived, that as his proceedings therein
could not he honest and sincere, as he says they were, so neither could they
proceed from a motion heavenly, as in his preface he pretends to.

But this mischief maker does not end his envious lying here, for in the same
page, speaking of one Babit and his company's stealing a sloop from
Philadelphia, says thus; Upon notice of which the Quakers very speedily got a
company of men together, searched the Town for arms, supplied them with gunns,
swords, powder and lead and gave them a Commission, and hired them for 100 L.
to recover the sloop from said Privateers, which they did, and Sam. Carpeter
paid down the 100 pound to the men, and the Assembly has since voted it to be a
debt of the Province.

Answ. Possibly some may think this to be a very strait story, and as certainly
true, as he is cofidently false in it. As first, his affirming that the Quakers
searched the Town for arms, this I am credibly informed is false, and that it
was not the Quakers who did so, but others. 2. dly Supplied them with guns,
swords etc. This was not likely to be true; for, though perhaps, there might be
here and there one, that had a fowling piece (not that I have cause to suspect,
that any person furnished them with so much as one) yet, I question whether
they had any swords at all, to furnish them with. The 3 dly is a third lie; For
he says, they gave them a Commission, which was not so, but a Warrant, to
bring them back to justice in their own way, they being nor Friends that went
by virtue of that Warrant after them.

Then he adds and hi^ed them for 100, pound Where^^ this was not to neither; it
is true, after the men that followed them were, agreed to go, and in order
thereto were got into the boat; Sam. Carpenter, to encourage them, called to
them, and promised to give them 100 pound, if they would bring back the sloop
and men. And if Sam. Carpenter was to blame in it, why did not G. K. instead of
commending him and other's, for what they did (...) deal of with Samuel about
it, and say his evil actions (i^ they were (...)) before him, in order to have
recovered him? (...) not a word of that then, it was Den Samuel with him man
months after that, after till he began to differ with, separate from Friends;
and then Samuel not joining with him, he spared him no more than others.
Moreover, whereas D: L said, Sam: Carpenter paid down the 100 pound, and that
the Assembly have since voted it a debt of the Province; Now this is not so
neither, for there was no such sum voted; but the man will be meddling with
things he knows nothing of. Then, as for his saying, that it was those whom the
Quakers got to gether, and furnished with guns and swords and who had
Commission, and were nired for 100 pound to do it, that recovered the sloop;
here in it as worth one's observation, how prettily he contradicts his friend
G. K. in the matter; who says, It was Peter Boss and one or two more with
him, that retook the sloop, having neither gun, svvords nor spear, see
Antichrists and Sad^cees detected p. 7. Yet in their Appeal to the Yearly
Meeting in 1692, G: K: among others, says as ^. L. here says, as to those
who took the sloop. Thus though they ^oth be^n false vvitness, yet their
witness agrees not together.

I shall next take notice of a passage of his relating to Tithes, which may be
seen in his p 107 thus I know none in Christ na^^, no, not the Priests
themselves but they will deny that they take Tithes as Tithes, but only as
ma^re (...) to preaching, and not as any other part or the (...).

Answ. It may be so; For what other part of the Cerimonial Law did Tiths belong
to, except to give part to the Stranger, the Fatherless and the widow; tho that
part our Priests do not care to perform, to be Sure. But ^^ee D. L. says, he
knows none that say, they take Ti^^s as Tiths, I shall take Leave to tell him,
That he seems to have pored so long on G. ^'s. Great Mystery etc. as to have
bemudl'd himself, or dulled his sight, else he might have there seen, and so
have known, That the Priests take Tyths as Thyths; for which I referr him to
the following Passages. First in page 87. G. F. quotes the expression of a
Priest thus, The Lord has given Tyths for the maintenance of the Ministry of
this Nation. And a littte lower he says. The Priesthood is Changed, but not
the Tyths abolished by the coming of any Substance. Secondly in Page 245. he
quotes Gawin Eaglesheld Thus The Law is not changed that gave Tyths etc. Now I
hope from henceforth D. L. may be satisfied, That the Priests did not deny
their taking Tyths as Tyths; Besides, to talk of not taking Tyths as Tyths, is
Just as good sense, as to say, D. L. dos not tell Lies as Lies. But it is yet
further observable, That D. L. ackowledged That Tyhts for the Maintenance for
Preaching, being part of the Ceremonial Law, and consequently put an end to by
Jesus Christ's. Offering up himself; And that being the chief Cause why our
Friends refuse to pay them, must needs be an Argument to any sensible Man:s
understanding, That we own Jesus to be the Christ And we know the Apostle
says, The Priesthood being changed there is made of necessity a Change also of
the Law Heb: 7: 2.

I shall now proceed to his 13. th Chap: about Miracles, wherein he seems
resolved to Act the part of one that would be Retrogade to any thing acted or
done by a Quaker, especially if he thinks he has found out a way to redicule
it; thereof I think I shall not need to say much to it only some passages I
shall hint at as follows. He begins his Cavills against some passages in G.
F's Iournall to which I need say no more than thus; That I am satisfied, That
where at any time G. F. in his Journal has mentioned any Miracle, which God
had wrought by him; the Intent was not to set up of applaud the Creature, nor
to boast of the work, but to give the praise and honor to God the Worker, to
whom it belongs.

As for what he says in page 110; about G. F's. being called The Father of
many Nations etc. I answer, thus has been Answered so often already,
particularly by W. P. in Judas and the Jews etc. and in Invalidity etc. and
that to my satisfaction above twenty years ago, that I shall say no more of it
in this place, than to re^er the Reader to the Books, for his satisfaction also.

A little lower in the Same page, he Insinuates, that G. F. should pretend to
the Gift of Tongues, to Interpret all Languages: which I am persuaded he shall
never be able to make appear; But if he can, let him.

In page 111. He pretends to object something worse against G. F. which, take
as follows. But which is yet worse, if true, I have seen a sheet, called, An
Essay, etc. lately put out by one T. C. wherein he shows that G. F. in
answering Priests and Professor's Books, falsely quoted their Words and
perverted them, etc. Which he would have W. P. to appear and clear G. F. from
etc.

Answ. If there be such a Book written by T. C. so accusing G. F. I question
not but it is, or will be Answered; in the mean time, I will assent to D. L's.
saying, if true it must needs be judged wicked etc. But I shall likewise add,
if it be false, the reporting it must needs be wicked, in his Author T. C., and
Idle and wicked in himself also, thus to repeat it, only upon the uncertain
report, of such an open and unwearied Enemy of G. F. as T. C. has been known
to be for many years.

In page 112. 113. he raises a mean Argument out of a quotation he produces out
of G: W's book, Intitul'd Quakers Plainness. page 14. on this wise It seems --
they have how lost this [visible miracles] and other Evidences of the Spirit,
if ever they had them; ^or he there says, and what if God will not bestow such
Gifts and Signs now, must we therefore be no Christians? etc.

Answ. D: L's conclusion will not hold; first, G: W: did not in the least
grant, that God would not bestow such Gifts now, but only asks, what if He
will not? secondly, but if he had granted it, it does not therefore follow,
that the Quakers had lost other Evidences of the Spirit; for surely the Spirit
of God witnessing with our Spirits, that We are the Children of God, may be
known now, as well as of old; and this can never be without such suitable
works, as may be sufficient Evidence (to the People of God at least) that they
are the Children of God, whether the Lord be pleased to bestow such Gifts, as
were allways perculiar to few, or not. And to such as had such Gifts bestowed
on them, Christ Said. In this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto
you: but rather rejoice, because Your names are written in Heaven Luke. 10. 20.

His 14. Chapt. Entitled, Of Life and Doctrine, he begins with a Base
Insinuation (viz) Much more than formerly do my old Friends the Quakers cry
out, This Life is the Only thing that is our all in all; it is no matter for
Doctrine or Knowledge in this or that Principle; away with Creeds and points of
Faith, so that we feel Life in our Bosoms, and flowing from Vessel to Vessel.

Answer. Herein D. L. shows himself to be a more than Ordinary Scoffer, a Mere
Ishmaelite, and a false Insinuator, as if we opos'd Doctrine relaing to, and
knowledge in the things of God, to the Life that we feel many times in our
Bosoms. O ungodly man! Let him prove if he can, that ever one owned amongst us,
thus expressed himself. But by his thus flouting at us, about the feeling of
Life among us; it is to be feared (if ever he knew what it was) that he is now
much degenerated, and far gone into the state of those, of whom the Apostle
speaks, who were Alienated from the Life as God and past feeling Ephesians. 4: 18,
19. And tho in his page: 115, he Compares (in some sense) our Friends
Testimonies, with an affecting sermon of a Debauched Priest, which caused
weeping eyes on every hand: yet his Comparison will prove but lame; for since
we read, that Satan himself is transformed in to an Angel of Light 2. Cor: 11:
14. is it therefore a great wonder, that his ministers should be sometimes
transformed, in to the Likeness of ministers of Righteousness. But does not
this as much reflect upon Peter's preaching, mentioned in ^^^s 2; where so many
were pricked in their heart, in so much that they said unto Peter and the Rest,
What shall we do? And might not such as D. L. with this kind of Arguing, as
well have Incensed the minds of the People, against what the Apostle delivers,
when, speaking of the powerful effect their Ministry had upon the people, He
says, But if all Prophecy, and there come in one that believes not or one
unlearned [mark unleaned] he is Convinced of all, he is Judged of all: and thus
are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he
will worship God and report that God is in you of a Truth. 1. Cor. 14. 24, 25.
And doubtless were those hearers now alive D. L. would say of them, as he does
to us; Even such is the Devotion of all Zealous (but Ignorant) people. Yet of
this we are well assured. That though God gives the Increase upon the Labors of
his Ministers, and that Paul may plant; yet there are also Apollo's that water,
as truly now, as of Old.

As for what he says of Thomas M^sgroves Preaching at many Meetings about
Delaware, That the flesh of Christ was a Constant enduring Paitence, and his
blood a Lively operating Spirit of Life, or Divine operating Living Love I
Answ; I have been at many Meetings with him, but never heard any such thing as
D. L. expresses (as I remember) from him, nor of him before, neither can I
hear, upon Inquiry, of any one that ever heard him speak so.

I am now come to his 15 th. Chap. 1. (...), Sabbath day wheel turned round;
where, speaking of some Quakers formerly having opened their shops, and
followed their usual employments, on the first Day, both in Old England and
elsewhere, he Cries out: But behold how the wheel is now turned! for the Quakers
at Delaware being the Commanding Party of the Assemblies, have lately made Law
to prefer the first Day before others, calling it the Lord's Day etc.

Answ. We never preferred the first day above others, for any holiness in it
self, as a day: Nor do we commonly call it the Lords Day, though in the Law, he
mentions, we used that Word as the most proper of those that are generally
given to it, to explain more clearly to all what was meant by the preceding
word the first day, But if D: L: will have the Instance of two or three, who in
the Beginning opened their Shops on a first day, to be a proof of our
Degeneracy, because none do so now: we may, certainly, much more reasonably
allege the Practice of all our Friends from the beginning, except those two or
three, in keeping their Shops always shut on that day, till this very time, as
a stronger Argument to prove, we are not degenerated in that point. The
occasion of making that Law, he hints at, amongst us will be best spoken in its
own words as follows To the end that Looseness, Irreligion and Atheism may not
creep in, under pretense of Conscience in this Province: Be it enacted -- That
according to the Example of the Primitive Christians, and for the Ease of the
Creation, Every First day of the week (called the Lords day) People shall
abstain from their usual and common Toil and Labor, that whether Masters,
Parents, Children on Servants, they may the better dispose themselves to read
the Scriptures of Truth at home, or frequent such Meetings of Religious worship
abroad, as may best suit their respective Persuasions. And truly
notwithstanding the Clamor D. L. makesabout it now, I love Clamor so little,
that I should not have been vvilling to have ventured, made anexchange with
him, for the Clamors he would have made, if there had been no Law at all made
here about it: For, I see, there is such a Spirit entered him, and others of
them, that we must never expect to tread such such stepps, as will prevent
their finding fault with us.

In page 119. he brings in G: W: querying thus, where do thou read in the
Scrpitures, that men must do no work on the first day of the week? Now to this
I shall say, That G: W: proposed this Querie, to one who accounted the first
Day, the Sabbath day, and that it was a sin in it self to work thereon, which
we say it is not, there being no Command of God to be produced, requiring it so
to be kept. But, as it is no sin to work on that day; so it is no sin to
abstain from work on that day: for if it had, surely, the Primitive Christians
would many times have sinned, in meeting to gether on that Day. It is no sin in
it self, for the free People of West Jersie, to Choose their Magistrates and
Officers, on another Day; and in another manner, than by their Laws and
Constitutions is appointed: Yet, inasmuch as it is no sin, to Choose them on
that Day, and in that manner, and it being according to their Law, and the
Peoples Rights and Privileges, it ought to be kept (Let D. L. take notice of
that) and so it is in the Case of abstaining from Labor on the First Day of
the week.

In page 120, he produces a Prophecy of W: P: against J: H, which he would
have to be false; but not withstanding his pretending, he always believed
plainness and honest simple hearted dealing to be best; Yet, rather than he
will loose the Advantage, of making W: P: look like a false Prophet, he has
Crastily, as well as knavishly left out those words, which would have showed,
that the Prophecy was but Conditional, although (as laid down by D. L.) it is
absolute. For proof whereof I shall transcribe it, first, as cited by D. L. and
then as published by W. P. -- D. L. bath it thus; So sure as God Lives -- the
Lord will make thee an example of his sury, and thy head shall not go down to
the Grave in peace and by this shall thou know (says he) that not a Lyning nor
Delusive, but a true and Infallible spirit has spoke by me: See Reason against
Railing page 181. Now whether W. P. did not there belly the spirit of God? For
I do understand that P. H. died at Peace in his bed, and with great
satisfaction. Thus far D. L. Now hear the passage as it comes from W. P. As
sure as God lives, Grear will be the Wrath that shall follow Thee! Yea, God
will visit for these unrighteous dealings, and I testify to thee from God's
living spirit, if thou desist not, and come to deep Repentance, the Lord will
make thee an example of his fury etc. Now observe these words [if thou desist
not and come to deep Repentance] D. L. has (far unlike to a man that loves
honest simple hearted dealing best) very dishonestly left out, because it
rendered the Prophecy but Conditional, which Conditions, if performed, render
also the Prophecy nevertheless true, though the Judgment did not come upon him.
Now desist, I do believe, he did; and whereas D: L: says, he understands he
died at Peace in his bed, and with great satisfaction: I may possibly as truly
say, he repented of his so Grievously abusing our Friends, before he Died; for
I have been told so, by full as credible an Author [I suppose] as D. L 's was:
but to say he died with great satisfaction, if D. L. mean without Repentance, I
am satisfied his state could be never the better for that: For although he might
reckon us no Christians (as Indeed he did) and so without the Pale of the
Church; yet he ought to have walked honestly toward them that are without 1 Thessalonians. 4. 12. which T. H. did not do by the Quakers, but by his misrepresenting
them to the world, in his Dialogues, he did certainly do very dishonestly by
them, in giving those for the Quakers Answers, and saying, they were no other
but what the Quakers give both in words and practice; see Dialogue page 163,
which he could never prove to be such; But (to my knowledge) when called upon
for his proofs, used pitiful shirts to evade them, and at last wholely absented
himself from the Meeting appointed for trial thereof. And that the Reader may
see I do not misrepresent T. H. now he is Dead. I shall recite a few of his
questions, and also what he gives for the Quakers Answers, and says it is no
other than what they give forth etc. see his page: 72.

Question. Are you then as perfectly happy, as ever you expect to be?

Answ. We Witness Perfection.

Q. What proof is that to another man?

A. We say we witness it; is not that proof Sufficient?

Q. But what if I believe otherwise?

A. We shall not spare to Stigmatize, and Comdemn that person, that questions
the truth of our sayings.

Q: Will this Convince me, or any other of your Perfection?

A: Though it do not; yet thereby we shall render you so odious to our Friends,
that they will believe nothing that is spooken by You against us?

Q. Then may I not conclude, that the Reason whey you so freely rail against,
and reproach your Opposers, is only to secure your Credit with your own
Procesytes?

A. I cannot deny but that there may be something of that in it.

Q. Will you be so liberal of your Revilings whether your Adversaries give
Occasion or no?

A: It concerns us to render them as ridiculous as we can etc:

Q. But does not this Signefie a very dishonest and malicious mind in you?

A. We care not what you think, provided our Friends think not so.

This, with a great deal more that might be mentioned, was contained in the
Book, which, as he was never able to prove, to be as he wroet; so let every
Impartial man Judge, whether these were like to be the Quakers Answers, or no,
and if notwithstanding all these Grievous abuses of us by Th. H, he could lay
down his head in peace with the Lord (which doubtless was the Peace intended by
W. P.) without repentance; I think people need not much mind that Command of
our Savor, As you would that men should do to you, do you also to them
likewise Luke 6. 31. Which I would have D: L: to mind.

As for D: L's Appendix, I see little need to speak to it, the most of it being
very much like his other rambling stuff, up and down throughout his whole Book;
yet not willing wholely to pass it by, I shall make some few Observations, as
follows:

In his page: 129: under the head Of infallibility, He quotes a passage out of
G: W's Voice of Wisdom page: 33. That they, that want Infallibility, are not
true Ministers: Now, several of the Books he quotes I want, and this among the
rest: Therefore, whether this be fairly quoted or not, I know not; Yet I
believe the thing to be true (viz) That where any Minister, is not Infallibly
assured, that what he ministers to the People, is from the movings, and
guidings of the holy Spirit of God, so far he is not a true Minister; If any
man speak, (says the Apostle) let him speak as the Oracles of God 1: Pet: 4:
11: then to be sure, it must be from the Spirit of God, which is Infallible:
And as God's Spirit is Infallible, so are it is teachings and guidings:

Now, that G: K: (as well as G: W: etc:) has wrote in defense of Infallibility
is clear; for in his Book, Inti^^led Divine immediate Revelation etc: p: 13:
[not retracted] we have it thus, We place not an absolute Infallibility upon
any person or persons whatsoever, but we say, the spirit of God in all it is
Leadings, Teachings, and Motions, is Infallible, and men only Conditionally,
so far as they receive, and are in unity with those Leadings, Teachings, and
Motions, are Infallible: We say further, that every True Christian has an
Infallible Knowledge and Faith, of all such things as are absolutely necessary
to salvation; But as to other things he may Err, if he be not watchful to
follow the Infallible Guidance of God's holy Spirit: But if this Author
thinks, he has no Infallible Faith or knowledge of any point of Doctrine, he
is a mere sceptick and unbeliever: for all true Faith is Infallible; That which
is allible is but mere Opinion; and Conjectural: Likewise in his Help in time
of Need he says Are not ye as bad, (meaning as had as the Papists) who openly
affirm, that ye are hot led by the Infallible Spirit, and consequently not by
the spirit of God: Now here we see, that G: K: ownes Infallibilias well as
Friends, viz. So for as they are led by the spirit of God, and no Farther. And
if D. L. be as I^p^rtiall as he pretends to be, since he has in his p. 62. and
64. so much ridiculed W. P. about this very matter, which is exactly according
to G. K's. own sentiments in the point, how can he let G. K. escape his
censure, or else send to him to retract it; But doubtless he had better let it
alone, least by undertaking to mend one hole, he make two; For, in the
Retractation Book it self, G. K. says He is no sceptick in Religion, but that
he, and all sincere Christians, has an Infallible Faith and persuasion, in
things, Relating to the Fundamental and Essential Doctrines of Christianity.

In his foresaid p. 129. He offers a quotation, out of Win P's. Rebuke to
twenty one Divines p. 22. thus We are horribly abused in saying, We pretend all
our Ministers to be Infalible. Now I am sure D. L. has horribly abused W. P.
in this matter; for he has left out the explanatory part, which is this We
ascribe not an Infallibility to men, but to the Grace of God; and to men, so
far as they are Led by it.

Tho I want several of the Books, quoted by him, in that part under the Head
of Temporizing; Yet I shall speak a little to it, to show what a meddling Man he
is.

He begins it with a Passage, he says to be Geo. F's. taken out of a paper
Entitled, To the Parliament of the Common Weal etc. Thus, Let all those Abey
Lands that are given to the Priests, be given to the Poor of the Nation. To
which he opposes a Passage, out of W. P's. Preface to his Persuasive to
Moderation Thus Far be it from me to solictit any thing in diminution of the
Just rights of the Church of England; Let her Rest protected where she is.

Answer. I cannot see, how G. F's. Advice to the Parliament, about bestowing
abbey Lands upon the Poor of the Nation, of W. P's. moderation, in not
soliciting, for any Dimin^tion of the Church of Englands Just Rights; can he
said to be either (...) or Contradictory. For unless he can prove all those
Abbey Lunds, that were given to the Priests, either in the year 1659. the time
of the Date of that Book or before to be, it that time, the just Rights of the
Church of England, it will not do any of his business at all. For the Church of
England has her Rights, in such suspects derived from the Authority of the
Nation^ And so, that which may be termed her Rights under one Authority, may
not under another; for I suppose they are not n^red any to (...) as Alterable
as the then present Authority still pleased, Else how should they be now
Imagined to be one Church of England's Rights, and not Rather the Church of
Romes? Besides, how comes W. P's. moderation toward the Church of England to be
Constru^d Temporizing under the Reign of a Popish Prince.

He proceeds to Cavil against W. P. and offers a Quotation out of England's
Interest Page 36. in these words, We say Holy Writ is the Declared Fundamental
Law of Heaven. whereupon D. L. says Note, how W. P. Con^ounds himself or
deceives his Readers, or both, for in his Rejoinder (as aforesaid) he takes up
several pages ^^ prove the Scripture Corrupt and uncertain, so much slighting,
it that he terms it J. Laldo's uncertain Word of God, page 39. and yet here
calls it, The Declared Fundamental Law of Heaven.

Answer. What W. P. says in Englands present Interest; as here cited by D. L.
is either true of false, if D. L. will say it is false; he Contradicts the
Protestant part of the Christian World; who hold and have declared holy Writ
to be the outward Rule both of faith and Life, and if D. L. says it is true,
then he says as W. P. says: besides W. P. did not lay it down as his own
Judgment only, but as the belief of the Protestants in General whom he was
then personating, in opposition to the Popish Arrogance of Assuming a Power, to
impose upon People in points of Religion, though Contrary to Scripture and
Reason. And whereas W. P. says, some scriptures are Corrupted, Let D. L. deny
that, if he can, his friend G. K. ownes it, as I have already shown: but who
unless a prejudiced Adversary would find fault with two such Expressions, which
he himself cannot deny to be true, and almost all Christendom do own, and yet
surely they do not mean that corrupt part, to be either holy Writ, or the
Fundamental Law of Heaven. But how D. L. comes to be so senseless, as to bring
in this, under the head of Temporizing, I must Confess he is wiser than I, or I
beheve himself either, that can tell.

Next in his page 131. he cites an Epistle of E. Buroughs, bearing date 1661.
as follows. Keep close to the Lord, and to the measure of himself, made
manifest in your own hearts; for unto that you are directed, in the beginning,
and in it is your safety and preservation to the end, but says, D: L:
afterward, W: P: controules this plea of E. B. in his Brief examination page
11. saying, The Enemy Is at work to scatter the minds of Friends, by that loose
plea, viz. what have thou to do with me? leave me to my freedom, and to the
Grace of God in my self etc.

Answer. To keep Close to the Lord, and to the measure of himself in our hearts
according to E. B. is too good Counse to be disputed against. But now here we
may see, what need there is of having the Books on both sides, to examine D.
L's. quotations by: for who not knowing the occasion of W. P's. Writing thus,
(as D. L. has Cited him) but would have thought he had thwarted E. B. Now, though
I have not the Book by me, yet I pretty well remember the Subject of it which
was to show, what was real spiritual Liberty, and what was then only pretended
as such, and was Chiefly levelled against a Faction, stirred an at that time,
by John Story and John Wilkinson; who did not only oppose the Women, in their
Meetings of Service (which D. L. says are certainly of service p. 66.) in
deeds of Charity and Hospitality; but also, to escape sufferings, would Drop
the Testimony that they came forth with, in the beginning (which as D. L. says
was in Life and Power) Now as some of old ^urned the Grace of God into
La^civiousness, Jude. 4. so these turned from that grace which had called them,
and brought them forth in life and power in the beginning and (...) the liberty
of the spirit (...) liberti^^ (...) in the flesh, of shunning the cross, and
(...) which they came forth in, when they came forth in life and power, much
like those with whom Paul was excercised, when he thus expostulated with the
Galathians viz. Are ye so foolish? having (...) made perfect by the flesh? Have
ye^ (...) in vain? Gal. 3. 3. 4. And although Pau^ commended the beleivers to
God and the word of his grace, Acts 20. 23 telling them; it was able to build
them up, and to give them on inheritance among all them which are (...): Yet he
did not think that inconsistent with his telling this Church who seemed to lean
to circumcision, on the account of avoiding persecution, see chapter 5. v. 11. If
ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing v: 2. For he was so Zealous
in the case, as to say; I would they were evencut off which trouble, you v: 12.
Now, might they not have said to Paul, Thou have commended us to the grace of
God; James has sold us, The engrasted word is able to save our souls, James 1.
21, and John says, The anointing which ye have received of him, abides in
you: and ye need not that any man teach you: But as the same anointieg teaches
you of all things 1 John 2. 27. Can not thou therefore leave us to our
freedom therein? It may be we think it best to be circumcised etc. But can any
think, that such a kind of a plea, would have recommended them any thing the
more to the Apostles, as men of truth, and of a found mind? Surely no It is
true, Paul told them, ^e have been called unto liberty; but he also added
further, Use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh Gal. 5: 13. And that has
been our Friends care with those people for which they have made so much a do.

In p. 135 he finds fault with some Quakers for praying for King James, with is
so far from being condemnable, that it is very agreeable to the Apostles
exhortation 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2 That inpplications, prayers, invercessions and
giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings, and for all that are in
Authority. But (no doubt in his fancy) to hit the Quakers home, he says; As
affectionate as they were to King James, they could not by their prayers mark
how he scoffs at prayers) help him in those troubles that followed, nor did
they by their spirit of discerning tell him of it before hand etc.

Answ. A very foolish observation, and a sort of an Athelstical taunt! I do
tell him, that as the Quakers are no unseemly bo^ssers of what they can effect
by their prayers; neither is it my design to compare them with the Apostles:
Yet this scoffing re^^ction, may (if he dare make so bold with them as well
affect the Apostes, as the Quakers, who prayed for Kings, and all that were in
Authority, and exho^^^d the beleivers so to do, and yet how many troubles did
the ^^ings and Governors in their days undergo, and perhaps, many ^im^s it
might be for their good too. Then, ^s for a spirit of discering, I deny that
ever it was the Quakers principle, or indeed that they are so conceited, as to
Imagine, much less to declare, that they can always discern, beforehand, what
particular troubles, Kings and Princes, or any others shall mere with in this
world. To pray for them is but our Christian duty; but as for what troubles
they may here after meet with, God who only is omni -- scie^t knows and none
else, unless, at any time he is pleased to reveal it to any particular person
or persons. But to bring the matter a little the more home upon D. L. I shall
produce an example of one of his great friends applicable to this case, which
take as follows; I remember when a paper was published by Authority at
Philadelphia, to show among other things, that G: K: had traduced the
Magi^^racy and Authority of this place, we were told, that G: K: went on the
same day to the Barbados house, where amongst a mixed Auditory, he read an
answer pulickly to the said paper, and when he had done (possibly that he might
be thought not to disown Authority) went to prayer, wherein he prayed for King
William and Queen Mary. Now what would he or others have said, if we had
flouted at him as D: L: does at us, and told him, that by all his prayers he
could not help the King and Queen out of the great troubles which they were
then, and continued many years after to be involved in nor could he tell before
hand of the Queens death etc. But thanks be to God, he has tought us better
ways to answer those who oppose the truth, than such sorroy ones as this our
Adversary makes use or against us.

He proceeds thus, But rather that he was secure and got through all his
troubles.

Answ. By what D. L. himself has cited of their words, it pleanly appears,
that it was only such troubles as he had then already met with, particularly in
Scotland. And though they might use the words [all his troubles [that does not
always conclude past, present and to come, neither did it at all in this case,
any more than Paul's saying (after he had mentioned the troubles he had met
with at Antioch, ^conium and Lystra thus) But out of them all the Lord
delevered me does imply, that he should meet with more. Furthermore, the
Apostle speaking of the troubles he met within Asia, says, For we would not,
Brethren, have you ignorant of our, trouble which came to us in Asia that we
were pressed our of measure, above strength, in so much that we despaired even
of life: Bu^ we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not
trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead. Who delivered as from
so great a death, and does deliver: in whom we must this he will yet delive us,
2. Cor. 1. 8. 9. 10. Yet at last he was put to death at Rome.

In the next place I shall take some notice of D. L. ^. (...). In his p. 137.
138. he asks, Why this following doctrine, so frequently preached formerly by
ancient friends, is how let fall, and nor preached by any of you, viz I the
Light will overturn nations, Kingdom and Gathered Churches etc. and citing
many books as News out of the North etc: p: 15. I am the same door that ever
was (says G: F: the same Christ, to day, yesterday and forrver etc.

Answ: This is but a mere begging the question: For as he has not proved, so I
deny, that the doctrine of the fight was frequently preached by ancient friends
in those terms: And as for those words in the above cited News out of the
North; with several others cited ^y him, I cannot sufficiently speak to them
^auing not the books, and by what is before written, it is easy to see, that he
ought not to be trusted in his quotations, he is so exceedingly perfidious in
them: As a farther confirmation of this charge, I shall produce another proof
as follows.

I happening to have one of the books he cites in the abovesaid page, viz G.
F's Great Mystery, out of which he pretend to produce a quotation, thus, And
tho that same spirit that raised Jesus from the dead, is equal with God viz.
the holy Ghost, see Great Mystery p 66: 127 I dilligently searched both those
places, and do affirm, there are no such words to be found in either of them:
But I find in p. 127 that a Priest charged G: F: with professing equality with
God, whereupon G: F: tells us that the Assembly of Divines in their Catechisia,
say, The holy Ghost is equal in power and glory with the Father. Now (says G:
F:) every one that comes to witness the son of God, and the holy ghost, etc: by
your account they witiness that which is equal in power and glory with God, and
that his words were spoken beyond all creatures and out of all creatures, that
he did not say G: Fox: Now is it not as clear as the sun, that D: L: has
again grieviously abused both G: F: and also his Reader: For it is one thing to
witness the holy Ghost which is equal in power and glory with the Father to be
in us (according to G: F: even beyond unterance; and another thing to profess
our selves equal with the Father Son or holy Ghost either, as this abusive D:
L: would render us.

In p: 138: 139: he asserts this falsehood, viz, It Is the faith or belief of all
your preachers in general* That when you preach or pray, it is not you, but
Christ in you that prays: I prove this to be your belief by these two reasons:
First, You do never in your meetings pray for pardon or forgiviness of sin (Not
that I have heard in twenty years due attendance) for seeing it is Christ in you
that prays, there is no need of it, he being without* sin.

Answ: He may as well charge all those holy men of old, who have prayed to God,
and yet heave not in all their prayers asked pardon for sin, with the same as
he falsely charges us with here, viz, with believing, that it is Christ in us
that prays: And in order to prove, that what he objects against us, was not the
common practice of the primitive Church, I shall produce an example, which at
this time occurs to my mind, as it is related Acts. 4. 24. to 31. where we find
that the Church then assembled together, lift up theie voices with one accord
in prayer to God; in which prayer there is not one word of confession of, or
begging pardon for sin: And if D: L: be so blind, as that he can perceive no
difference or distinction to be made, between Christ by his spirit helping our
infirmitie's, in our prayers, which we say he does, and without which we cannot
pray as we ought see Rom: 8: 26: and saying, that it is Christ in us that prays,
which we say not; we cannot help it: Then what, or how due his attendance has
been, for twenty years, I know not, but sure I am, I have heard earnest cries
and servent supplications put up to God in our public meetings, for pardon and
remission of sins, many times in less than ten years.

His second reason is this You do not pray to Christ* becaiuse it being Christ
in you that prays, it is absurd for Christ to pray to himself.

Answ. This is again a mere begging of the question* for we say no such thing,
as that when we pray, it is Christ prays in us; but as above it is Christ by his
spirit that assists his children in their prayers, who said, Without me ye can
do nothing John 15* 5.

He continues in his p. 139. to cast many unjust reflections, upon us, in
relation to these two heads, of not praying for* pardon of sins, and not
praying to Christ at all; which is partly answered already, but in order to the
more full clearing the latter objection, I shall take notice of one passage
more in the same page. After he has opposed the Apostles, Saints and Martyrs
to us, he concludes that paragraph thus, viz, Both Apostles and other
Christians frequently prayed to Jesus Christ, as well as to God the Father.

Answ. This affects not us at all, as to what he infinuates, that we do not
pray to Christ, because it is neither against our principle nor practice, and
if he will not believe us in relation to this assertion, yet methinks he might
credit his Friend G. K. in the matter, who in p. 121. 122. of his Way cast up
says; He has not only himself done so; but also has heard others expressly
naming the words Jesus Christ: Although (says he) when we express not these
words, yet if we pray by the movings of his li^e and Spirit, we pray in the
name of Jesus etc. And he farther says; I have heard expressly such petitions
put up in our prayers at our meetings unto Christ, as, Jesus son of David have
mercy upon us. O! thou blessed Jesus that were crucified and dyed for our sins,
and shed thy precious blood for us, be gracious unto us -- O! thou our
merciful High Priest, whose tender bowels of compassion, are not more
straightened, since thy ascension, but rather more enlarged -- Thou art our
Advocate and Mediator in heaven with the Father, our merciful* High Priess --
Thou blessed Jesus, thou know^st our most secret desires and breathings, which
we offer up, into thee, in the inab^ngs of thy blessed ^ife and spirit, that
thou may present them unto thy Father* and our Father, that in thee we may be
accepted, and our services also; and for thy sake, our defects and short
comings, our sins and transgressions, that we have committed may be forgiven
us. These and such like expressions, frequently used by us in prayer, both in
secret and also in public, in our assembly's, plainly demonstrate, that we
worship and pray unto the Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

Thus far G. K. All which affords us matter sufficient against D. L. in
relation to his false charges, and unjust insinuations against us. As first,
Whereas in p. 102: he says, we deny Jesus of Nazareth to be in heaven
glorified in the true nature or man: Here G. K. says: He has heard expressly
such expressions to Jesus, and that they are frequently used by us in prayer,
as, Thou art our Advocate and Mediator in heaven with the Father, Our merciful
High Priest, and which (says he) plainly demonstrates, that we worship and
pray unto the Mediatos betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

dly 2 That twhen we pray, we do not pray to Christ, as D. L: charges us in his
p. 139: Whereas here G. K. confesses, that we frequently pray to Jesus
expressly, and that as he is in heaven our Advocate and Mediator, the man Christ
Jesus etc.

And 3dly. That we frequently pray, that our sins and transgressions may be
forgiven us; expressly contrary to what ^ L. falsely alleges against us in the
aforesaid page Now either it is true that G. K. has heard these expressions,
and that they have been frequently put up by our Friends in prayer; or it is
not true. If it be true; then is D. L. by G. K's own free confession concerning
our practice a false accuser of us. If ir is not true; then will it fall
heavily upon G. K. not as a thing that he has been mistaken about in point of
opinion; but as a thing he has published against his own knowledge and
conscience, in pretending that he heard such expressions, and that not now and
then only; but that they have been frequently used in our prayers. Neither do I
know how G. K. can retract these testimonies concerning our friends when they
pray, without giving the down right lie to himself For it is not a little
otherways wording the matter; nor pleading a little failure in syntax; nor any
curious wire drawing neither, that will help either of them out at this dead
lift.

As to his charge upon G. W. in p: 140. That of late years -- in answering
books -- he has not taken* notice of scarce a twentieth part of a book, but
only sends out something, and to please -- people and that they may have
something to say, when people cry, where is the answer to such or such a book.

I Answer, First, he should have told us what book that is which G. W. has
given as a full answer to a Book, and yet scarce that twentieth part of the
book taken notice of, or else to be sure he does nothing to the purpose. 2dly.
There may be the same reason showed by G. W, why he took no notice of many
particular pass ages in some certain books, which he has answered, as G. K.
showed, why he did not answer to many things in Cotton Mather's book, see his
Serious Appeal p. 8: thus, Because Cotton Mather had not distinctly answered my
former book against him: As also that the said Mather's book was filled with
manifest falsehoods, perversions and abuses, sufficiently replied unto, partly
by others, and partly by me (sath he). Which may serve for an answer to D. L.
in relation to G. W's. late answers to Opposers (especially Backsliders and
Apostates) books.

At the latter end of the book D. L. publishes a letter, said to be sent to him
by a person of note. Now whoever this person of note be, as I know not; so I
matter not; but however, A person of note I will grant him to be, in that he so
abominably abuses both the Quakers and his Reader, and like a man infatuated,
imposes such palpable falsehoods upon them, or which I shall take some notes
though he has deprived me of the opportunity of taking a note of his name.

First. That the thoughts of the sudden stop the Philadelphia Quakers met
with, when they were so not it persecuting G. K. and his friends, may in some
degree check them, and hinder them from doing what otherways they would p.
142. 143.

Answ. 1st. That which they call persecution was not so, but only a calling
them to account for their abuses to Authority here, as may be seen in the book
called A Modest account etc. And 2dly. It is false, that they met with a
sudden stop when they were doing of it. For our friends were in the Government
move four months after the trial and fining of G. K. etc. In all which time, I
do not remember that any of them were so much as examined upon any account
whatsoever by the Authority of the Place* and possibly if they had not given
fresh occasion, there might have no more ^e^n said about it to this day* For
that business was not so delightful to those then in Authority as he and
others may imagine.

2dly. He imposes upon his Reader a kind of a miracle* in these words Since I
was with thee at Burlington in 1692. I have thought that God Almighty was then
fitting thee for some purpose, because of the sudden and miraculous recovery*
in great Part, of thy speech, from the extreme impediment of stammering, which
thou had when I was with thee two years before; and I remember I heard thee
then say, thou had it from a Child etc.

Answ. In this observation of this person of note, I note two things observable
1st. Though I know not that I ever saw D: L: yet by what I have heard, it seems
to be the greatest miracle of the two, that he should be thus recovered of his
flammering tongue, and yet his Neighbors and others who often converse with
him, know nothing of is 2dly. After this person had told D: L: that in this
book, he had discovered and laid open the Mystery of iniquit^ more clearly than
he had seen it done by any other: for which he prayed God of his bounty to
reward him etc: he tells him as above, that Since he was with him at Burlington
in 1692. he had thought that God Almighty was fitting him for some purpose,
because of the sudden and miraculous recovery of his speech etc. As if God had
intended him for some great work to be performed with his tongue; Wereas the
great work that has appealed (whether it ^e the work of God or the Devil, let
the Reader judge) has been the writing of a (...) and ^ous and reproachful
books, all which might have been done, if his speech had been so totally taken
^om him, as that he could not have spoken one word.

2dly. He falsely as well as without proof asserts these falsehoods Such things
as are indeed fundamentals of the Christian Religion* they account ni^iries,
circumstantials, and smaller matters, and care not how confusedly they preach
them. But what are really circumstantials or smaller matters, as Tithes, Mint
etc: (and not of necessity for a Christians practice) they make the
Fundamentals of their Religion. All which suggestions I deny as f^lle, and had
he but a name, I should require him to prove them.

4thly As groundless as well as proofless is his insinuation, That it seems
People may sing the Quakers writings, but not David's, by their allowance. For
we allow the singing of David's Psalms, full as much, to say no more, and in as
true a sense, as the singing of Quakers writings* but we see no service in
either, to be sung in that formal way, as is commonly and customarily used
amongst people.

5thly His flurt about bowing the body, to which he joins, that of the Quakers
in England, that live in great Towns and cities, Causing their apprentices to
stand bare headed before them etc. I shall take no farther notice of than to
tell him, If he had named them, and proved his charge, perhaps he might have
received a farther answer to it*

6thly His story about Walter Clark, Walter Clark denies* as stated by him; so
that I cannot but esteem him false and abusive in this also. To which I may
add, as all of a piece, his envious reflection surmised after this manner, viz.
I question whether ever they (...) be able to wrestle down the wordly
Governors with only little guns, till they get great ones. Scoffingly
infinuating, as if we were for throwing down wordly Governors with guns. A
notorious sl^ander.

7thly He taxes W. P. with Boeing turned Painter and seems to charge him, with
denying, that G. F. was a shomaker; because in his preface to G. F's Iournal,
he declares his outward vocation to be a shepherd. As i^ it were impossible for
him to have been a Shepherd and a Shomaker both; which if this scribler
imagines, I would query, how his esteemed Friend D. L. came to be a Surveyor
and Planter, as well as a Justice of the Peace and Almanackmaker, which are
four vocations to the others two.

8thly His story of G. F's having the midwife so long attending on his wife,
expecting her delivery of some child of wonder (she being near 59 years of age)
bu^ at last brought forth no child, and the midwife dis-mist. And the reason he
pretends to give why this was not put in the Journal, viz, It would be enough
to give the lie to his pretended spirit of discerning. I believe I have, heard
the ^ruin of, from as credible an Author, and from one that know the businese,
perhaps better than this person of note, or any that informed him; who told me,
that G: F. never did believe that his wife was with child, and consequently did
not expectea child of wonder. Neither would the inserting the thing in the
Journal, as it really was, have given the lie to the spirit of discerning, G:
F: was endued with.

9thly As to his saying, I dare engage the Quakers will never print a
Collection, of them [G: F's] He had books best have a care what he ingages upon
it, least if he live a few years longer he lose his engagement.

10thly. What he produces out or Edward Burrough's Works about the sufferings
of Christ, as to the substance of it, has been answered by our Friends
already, particularly by G: W: in his book called A Sober Exposti^l^ (...) etc.
p. 65.

11thly. He says, Their books of controversy are so stuit with gross lies,
grand forgeries, wicked perversto^^, false insinuations, and shameful
calumnies, as are the the late books of S. Jenings, T. Ellwood, the
Penington's, G. Whitehead; C: Pusey and others etc. To which I shall only say,
These are very high charges; but the proofs not made to appear, and therefore
refer the Reader to the books of the Friends mentioned by him, both their
answers to G: K: and Reply's to G: K's: answers to theirs.

12thly. As to his saying, They thrust in the Revolution of souls into the
present controversy, though it be no part of the Controversy. I answer. If G:
K: will limpose such doctrines upon us, and controvert such points with us, as
he cannot (at least toour understandings) make our without introducing this
notion of the Revolution of souls; This very practice makes the said notion
become a part of the Controversy. But that G: K: has so done, is made appear,
in the book styled* A Modest Account etc. therefore the Revolutions is part of
Controversy.

And now being about to conclude, I shall take notice of an expression of D:
L's: in his p. 140, which is this, Now I sincerely profess, that I have done
nothing herein but with an honest design, not having wilfully or knowingly
wronged either books or Authors, in any one passage.

Answ. Therefore I having detected him, and hereby given him to know, that he
has wronged both books and Authors, and that in many passages, he ought now to
acknowledge it: For i^ we could believe his design to be honest and sincere;
yet we must needs conclude, that he has woefully misi it in the management; and
to make it the more observable to the Reader, as well as to himself, I shall
here present to his immediate view a summary collection of a few of the many
which might be produced out of this book, he is chargable with*

1st. false it is which ^e ^ites cut of p. 66. and say of G. F's Great Mislery
in his p. 138. viz. He that has the same spirit that raised Jesus from the
dead is equal with God etc. For there is no such thing to be found in either
page.

2dly. False it is which he objects against G: W: in his p* 30* where he
affirms, that G: W: quarrels with the word God*man For according to the place
he refers to as cited by himself, G: W: speaks thus As for those expressions
God-man being born of Mary, we do not find them in the scriptures, nor do we
read that Mary was the Mother of God, but in the Popes Canons etc. So that the
word God-man is not what G: W: objects against, but God-man born of Mary; which
much alters the case, for to say, God as well as man was born of Mary, was too
like the Pope's calling Mary the Mother of God* For that which was conceived in
her was of the Holy ghost but not the Holy Ghost. Matt. 1: 20.

3dly. False it is which he quotes in the same page out of G: W*s book styled
Quakers Plainness, viz, That Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, That he is God
man, etc. Whereas there is no such thing said there for G: W: in that place
giving some account of our says, says, Which is that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, and that he is God*man the son of God; yea and God manifest in the
flesh etc. But not one word of his being God-man. No, it only looks like a
trick of D: L: to render G: W: opposite to himself in relation to the former
passage, possibly thinking we were so ignorant, that we could not find out
these his unfair and unjust dealings. For that which G: W: makes two words of,
with a right distinguishing, stop D: L: makes but one with a dash between,
thus, God-man, without any distinguishing stop as G: W: has it thus, God-man.

4thly. False it is that W: P: (as he affirms P: 5:) says* Sandy Foundation p:
14. If the only God is the Father* and Christ be the only God, then is Christ
the Father which is ridiculous and shameful.

5thly False it is that W: P: says (according to his quotation p. 6. out of
Sandy Foundation p. 22) that Christ could not pay what was not his own [debt].

6thly False is his assertion in the same page that W: P* holds, that Christ
had a debt of his own to satisfy to God.

7thly False it is which In p. 14. he pretends to cite out of G: W*s Christian
Quaker p. 212, That we plead for the Righteousness of a creature [i. e. Christ
as man] or man's own righteousness. For there is no such word as [Christ as man]
as I have a fore shown.

8thly False it is which he produces p. 23. as an expression of G: W's in his
Nature of Christianity p* 29, viz, Christ has not the body of man.

9thly False it is which in the same page he alleges against G: W, viz that He
denies Christ's bodily existence without us.

10thly False it is which he offers in p. 37. as W: P's Sandy Foundation p: 21.
Christ as man was finite, viz* came to an end. For these words, viz: came to an
end, are not W: P's.

11thly An abominable falsehood it is, that in Sandy Foundation p. 20. W: P:
calls Christ, The finite and impotent creature, see p. 38. and many other
places of his book.

12thly False it is which in p. 40. he says of W: P, viz But VV: P: makes the
benefit of his coming to be no more but to show man more plain what he saw
before as through a glass. It being also contrary to what he himself has cited
as his words in the same page.

13thly False it is which he asserts in p. 102, viz, That the Quakers* have
denied Jesus of Naeareth*

14thly False it is which he affirms in p* 139, That we do not pray to Christ*
and as false; That we never in our meetings pray for pardon or forgiveness or
sin. His Friend G: K's acknowledgment concerning us, as a fore cited, shows the
contrary in both respects.

Thus have I collected some of the p^lpable lies and fla^^ hoods he is guilty
of, as by the books which I have by me cited by him may appear; what more there
might be found especially if we had all the books he mentions to inspect and
examine, can only be guessed at at present, by what I have (...) in those books
which I have examined.

As for what untruths and falsehoods he has in p 94 and 95 told of John Wood,
the said John Wood's own vindication with certi^^^tes under his neighbors
hands, as also his abuses put upon some others of his Neighbors in his own
Province of West Jersey in relation to the mi^^ating of some public affairs;
may be made to appear in their appear colors in their Postscript.

And now Reader, Is it not strange that alter all this D: L: should be so
confident, as to call upon Sam. Jeninges John Simcoc^, John R^d (...) etc. to
come forth and appoint a public meeting, to prove our charges in the face* of
the world, of their abusing us and our books in falsely citing passages but of
the same, and wronging their sense. Whereas in this very book of his he is
guilty of such abundance of it*

But D. L. rests not here; for in p 141 he manifests, his impudence yet farther
in these expressions, Therefore I*LL give the world a sign, by which they may
know that you do not only abuse, belly and charge us falsely in this case* But
also, that your own consciences tells you that you are, guilty of so doing. The
sign is this; If you know and are conscious to your selves that you have and do
so belly us, etc. then you will not come forth, according to this proposition; But
if you find you can get the least advantage of us, by out witting or otherways
wording the matter (th^^ with never so much falsity) then you will come forth,
and ^e glad I give you this opportunity. And by this sign shall you be proved.

Answ. it is easier to prove, this his sign to be a sign of his guilt
confidence and impudence, than a sign of what he wo^ld pretend to make out by
it* for this sign fails in* all it*s marks, as thus; ^^ we were guilty of
abusing them, it does not at all follow, that therefore we would not come forth
according to his proposition: For the same spirit which leads men to wrong and
abuse their neighbors, may make them so confident, as to come forth with open
face, to endeavor the justification thereof, especially when called upon, and
when the case is as this is, viz, that no corporal or peculiary punishment is
like to ensue. This pl^inly appeared in the case of Tho. Hicks, who though he
had so abused the Quakers, as is before shown, yet had the confidence to come
forth at the first meeting to justi^e it. 2 dly It like wise appears as plainly
in this very case of D: L's; who not withstanding his many abuses put upon us
in this his book, yet in the same he has the confidence to challenge a meeting
with us, to put us upon proof of what is so plainly made appear above.
Therefore this is no infallible sign of our being guilty of his charge, that we
came not forth according to his proposition. And then the other part of his
sign, relating to a supposition of our coming forth, is as evidently fallible;
for we have got, not only a little, but a great deal of advantage against him,
and that very simply too; not only without any falsity, but also without
straining matters beyond what they will naturally bear, and yet he may see we
do not come forth according to this proposition; and therefore both his signs
are fallible, and not to be needed, unless it be from them to make an
observation* how strangely men are infatuated, who draw back from, and rise up
against the truth.

Well, now I shall give D: L: and the world a plain and argumentative sign,
whereby he and they may know, that he himself* has abused both the Quakers and
their books; which is this. If D. L. have given that for the Quakers words in
their books, etc. in order to render them and their books odious thereby to the
world, which is not in their he books, then he has abused the Quakers and
their books: But so has D* L. done, as I have herein plainly manifested,
particularly in the summary collection of his falsehoods; Therefore he has
abused the Quakers and their books. The first proposition I suppose he will not
deny, and the second he may see (if he be not blind) as plain as his face in a
glass, The conclusion then must needs be that D. L. has abused the Quaker^ and
their books. The evil of which (I can sincerely say) I heartly desire he may
come to a sense o^ and true repentance for, before it be too late.

And now, if not withstanding what has been here so plainly manifested, of D:
L*s abusing our ^riend^ and their writings, any shall yet be so exceedingly
prejudiced against us, as not only to continue to vindicate him in such an evil
work, but also to bestow such large encomiums on him, as some have done, both
by word of mouth and writing, as well in verse as prose; We can then do less
but conclude that i^ proceeds not from any Christian like desire to stand in
defense o^ the truth* but that it is mere envy and pre^^di^^ ag^in^t the
doctrine, way and practice which we pro^ess and are found in, as well as
against us their honest and peaceable neighbors, which own and profess them,
that has done, and does animate them to such proceeding. Which if they shall
yet continue to do, as sure as truth is Truth, and falsehood is falsehood, i^ so
^oing they can never please God who is just, nor obtain credit with any
impartial man of right understanding* Therefore if after all they do or shall
continue to vindicate him as aforesaid, we can then do no less than look upon
them to be such as are here described; and so as I sai^ ne^r the conclusion of
my other book, with the same expre^^ion I shall conclude this, viz; We must
leave our cause with God who judges righteously*

POSTSCRIPT.
John Woods Vindication of himself from the abuses put upon him by Daniel Leeds.

It is not because I delight in controve^^y, or disire to be see^ in print that
I have put pen to paper, but for the clearing of truth and my self, from those
lies and false aspersions published against me Daniel Leeds, in a book called
News of ^ Trumpet s^anding in the Wilderness.

In the 91 page of his book, he seems to write to London meeting, with pretense
that my actions with others may b^ Recorded, and in the 94 page. he pretends to
give account of my actions, and thus he says.

John Wood, one of your Brethren, a Preacher in Gloucester County in
West-Jersy, being Sheriff of that County* came with men armed to take goods
from John Roberts at Pensoaken, and sent two men before, who pretended they had
lost their way of which the said John Roberts and his wife took pity and gave
them meat to eat. Soon after they espied VVood coming with his company,
wherefore Roberts made fast the door, but VVood told him, he had those within
that would do his* business; they seeing him so treacherous, opened the door;
this VVood when come in offered his hand Roberts said* if he came as a friend
it was well. But said Wood I come not as John Wood the Preacher, but a^ the
Sheriff of Gloucester* [Now by the way observe, that in the (...) between G: K:
and the Magi^trates at Philadelphia, those Magistrates could not fin^ how to
distinguish between Magistrates and Quakers or Preachers, but here you see
their Brother J. W. had the art to do it]

But this I Wood proceeded* and took of several sorts goods use in the house,
among which was a warming pan, which the Woman earnestly desired him to leave,
by reason of the great ^se themselves and the Neighbors had of it, in case of
sickness o^ Child-^ed (there being none there about except that) But she could
not prevail with this Wood* but away he carried it, and soon after this Roberts
^ell sick, and beginning to recover again, the fate up one day; but at night
going to his cold bed for want of the pan to warm it (being winter) the cold
bed made such impression on him, that his speech was soon taken away, which he
did not recover again, but dyed in a few days* and what trouble this was to
the Widow, the Neighbors can tell how much she imputed the death of her
husband to the want of the pan, which she could not persuade this Wood* to
leave, though she offered him to take any other thing instead of it.

Note, the occasion of this distress was only, for not answering a Summons to
Gloucester Court, when the Court at Burlington required the same, the place
having been some years in contest between the two Counties about the bounds,
not decided which County it belonged to (which I suppose is two).

Now Reader be pleased to peruse the following Certificates, and then thou will
be informed how he has abused me.

This may certify whom it concerns that ^ ^he under written, being deputed as
Sa^-Sheriff, by John Wood (High Sheriff for the County of Gloucester) for the
executing of a Warrant of distress, granted per order of Court at Gloucester
^he 1 st of September Anno 1694, and signed by 3 Justices of the Peace, upon
the goods and ch^^^els of John Roberts one of the Inhabitants of Pensoaken
claimed to be within the jurisdiction of Gloucester Court aforesaid, and in
order thereunto I accordingly went and me^ with the said Roberts near his
dwelling house, who understanding my business; hastily went into his house and
put to the door against me, pulling in the latch, and denied me entrance; So
that by reason hereof I was prevented of executing that Warrant above said. ^
also offered that if he would pay the fine in money I would forbear making any
distress, which he also refused; so I returned the Warrant back un executed to
the High Sheriff again. To the truth of all which I subscribe my name this ^6
th. of May Anno Domini School.

Thomas Bull*

Now upon return of the Warrant as before, I applied my ^ell to the
Magistrates, who commanded me to have the Warrants executed, that thereby the
Opposers might ^ring the Controversy to a trial, that it might be decided to
which County they did belong, and in order these to I deputed Joseph Tomlinson
to execute the Warrant at John Roberts's: Therefore hear him.

Whereas John Roberts of Pensoaken was fined at a Court (...) at Gloucester on
the first day of September 1694, and VVarrant issued out of the Court for
levying the^ sa^d (...) John Wood High Sheriff deputed me, and by virtue of
the, said VVarran^ I and Edward Eglington did q^^etly enter the* ^ouse of the
said Roberts, without any ar^s, so much as ^^ ^^^se rod, and (...) without any,
advice from or (...) contrived by John Wood, and ^e staid an hear at least*
until word was brought by a boy that the Sheriff was at a Neighbors house* and
desired John Roberts to go thi^her; The^ Robert wents ou^ and shut ^her do^^
and us on the inside* ^s soon as that w^^ done, his children c^rried the ^^st
of ^he ^ goods thy se^ the most (...) by some (as the^ said) in to the (...),
and some other where ^ and afte^ a wh^ ca^^e Io^^ ^^berts and John Wood,
William Cheste^ and William Dicki^son, and ^^on d^scourse between John Wood the
Sher^ff and John Roberts and his wife, I he^^d John Wood say; ^ As John VV^^d,
^ would (...) pay the fin^ than distrain, b^t as I am the Sheriff, I cannot
(...) tray^^g my trust to ^he (...) ^y that John W^^d* should say; I come not
as John VVood the Preacher* (...) as the Sheriff of Glouce^^er ^ is false. But
when John Wood could not prevail then ^ d^strained a warrning (...) and a
little brass ^ettle* two pew^er di^hes and one pew^er pla^e, all which I did
without the advice of John Wood, only I asked hi^, ^^ be thought that ^
distress would satisfy the Court and I would give them my fe^s, ^^ and he too
me, he thought they would And farther I heard John Wood desire John Roberts to
lay down the ^^ne in money* in ^y Place of the horse, and I should make distress
of* that a^ on other goods and would not take it as p^^d to hurt their cause*
and said ^he would freely g^^e their his ^rouble; which the said Roberts
refused and ^^ last John Wood ^old them, If they could use any means ^^th the
next Court to remit their ^ine, ^e ^ould send the goods b^ok again ^^ his ^^n
charge* and then* I took the aforesaid (...) them to Glo^ce^^er, and delivered
then to ^^tthew (...), where they remained ^ll the first of I ^^cember next
(...) then ^ made the return ^n the Chur^^, and no ^ John Wood, and I do hereby
furthe^ certify, that ^ohn Wood, William Che^^er and William Dickinson when
they came from home, and also when they came thither, had no ^^ me at all, and
though I am no Quaker, yet ^nowing him to he abused in the relation of what was
d^ne concerning the said distress, was willing to certify the truth of my
knowledge* ^n testimony whereof I here unto (...) my name.

^o ^eph Tomlinson

Having seen a book, called News of a Trampet, wherein I ^ind John Wood ^^ be
falsely accused, though I am no Quaker, can in good conscience do no less than
certify whom ^ may concern; Th^^ I was with Joseph Tomlinson, when he (being
deputed by Jonhn Wood then Sherif of Gloucester in West Jersey) made distless at
John Roberts of Pensoaken. By virtue of a Warrant, Joseph Tomlinson and I
(without arms or any advice or contrivance of John Wood's) did quietly enter
the house of John Roberts, and there stayed at least one hour, then a boy
bringing word that the Sheriff was at their house and disired John Roberts to
go there, and he went forth, and shut the door after him, and his children
carried out a ^an and several other goods they set most store by, and after
some time came John Roberts, the Sheriff John Wood, William Chester and William
Dickinson, without any arms a^ all, and after some time of discourse, John Wood
desired John Roberts to lay down the fine in money, in some place where his
Deputy might distrain on it, and he would give them his trouble; and take it as
paid, to hurt cause; but they might come to a trial, and it would be their
least loss. The Deputy I. Tomlinson said, he would give them his due; but I.
Roberts re^fused* then J: T: said, I must distrain, and I would do you as
little ^urt as I can, will you tell me what you can-best spare; and laying his
hand on a warming part said, Can you spare this, They ^^ first said; as well as
any thing* he took it and other goods, afterward they desired him to (...) the
pa^^; (...) the Sheriff and Deputy said; If they would ^ay down ^he money as
beforesaid he would; But they refusing (and brought again none of the goods
they had carried away) we brought the goods to Glou^ester, and there left them,
but John Wood did not ^medule with them. Given forth by me an eye witness.

Edward Elington

Now Reader, If thou truly comparest these Certificates with his charge, thou will find, that his contains several lies. First, In saying, I came with men
armed. Also, In charging me with treachery in sending men before. Also, In
saying* I proceeded and took several sorts of goods, in use in the house. Also,
in saying, A way I carried it. Also, In saying, she offered me to take any
other thing instead of the Pan. Also, In charging me with saying I come not as
John Wood the Preacher* but as the Sheriff of Gloucester. Now It plainly
appears, that in this charge there are six untruth^ But if he or any other (to
cover his baseness) do say; Because my Deputy did it I did it: They may as well
say, The Magistrates did it, because they granted the Warrant by which it was
done If the Deputy exceeded the Warrant, I am ready to answer it; If not then
Daniel Leeds has manifested his envy against me, in laboring by falsehood to
rende^ me ridiculous. For in obedience to Warrants under the hand of a Justices
or the peace I came into those parts* But, it appears, D. L. takes little
notice of Government I know* no fairer, or more easy way than I offered, for
John Roberts to have come to a Trial in which of the two Counties he dwelt.

In the 95th. page of his book he has this expression; And what trouble this
was to the Widow, the Neighbors can tell how much she imputed the death of her
Husband to the want of the pan etc. Therefore be pleased to hear her Neighbors.

Soon after death of John Roberts, we whose names are underwritten, being with
Sarah Roberts the Widow, asked her, If she had said, That she did lay the death
of her husband to the want of the warming pan? She answered; She never had. One
of us asked her* If she did lay it to the wa^ of the P^n^ She said. No, Nor
durst not for all the World*

Thomas Thackery

Thomas TShackl^ his mark* Esther Spicer

In the same 95 th page of his book he says thus Come you Londen Friends [to
say no more of the inhumanity of this action of a Preaching Quaker] can you
parallel this in the whole world* that ever a pretended Gospel Minister took the
Office of Sheriff before etc.

Now, I hope, both London Friends and all other Impar^^al Readers, by what is
before said, will say, there was no inhumanity used; but that D. L. has
manifested his envy* Then as to the acceptance of the Office of a Sheriff, I
ask, Whether it be more inconsistent with Christianity, to execu^e the laws
made, or to make laws to be executed?

Reader Thou may observe by one o^ the a^ore going Certificates, that I said,
If they could use any means with, the next Court to remit their fine, I would
send the goods* back again at my own charge. But they used no means, Yet
sometime after I engaged the fine to the Magistrates, and got the goods, and
sent them as a free gift to the Widow and her Children. And this was near two
years before D. L's book came forth; But he is silent as to that* Its like it
suited not his envy.

Thus having said open some of his lies, I think it not worth my time to
enlarge, being that what is done is suff^cient to invalidate his Charge.

John Wood

ADVERTISEMENT
Whereas in several places (at least two) o^ this book, an e^pectation is
given, that in the Post Script, the West-Jersey Friends would add something in
vindication of themselves, against the false suggestions and misrepresentations
of some public proceedings in that Province as are contained in D. L's
Preface* as also in his Chapters 10. 11. and 15. Now the reason why it is not
done at this time, is* because diverse being concerned in the transactions there
reflected on (though by conference, as well as by his abusive treatment of
others, I am ready to conclude, they are much wronged, yet) they have hitherto
neglected to draw up any thing to clear themselves, and the book having been
long in the press, it is judged not fit to forbear the publishing of it any
longer Therefore shall leave them (if they think fit to do any thing o^ that
nature) to publish some thing by themselves, when an opportunity presents that
may suit with their inclinations, to im^race.

FAREWELL
ERRATA
P. Line P^r read 1. 16 power power 28 subsc^ribed subscribed 33 aknoledgement
acknowledgment 2. 7 Apostel. Apostle 9 jear. year 12 montly monthly 2^ ^enght
length 27 reetractation retractation 3. ^ I said the said 10 retractatons
retractations 14 neccessity necessity ^7 contrary to what ^8 scrach search ^3 I
should 4* ^ the difference 15 and 16 that subject 24 that point 34 and 35
chainged changed 5. 4 Retraetations Retractations 11 Retraction Retractation 12
Prent Print 14 alse also 20 dos does 21 that appellation 37 haven heaven 6* 3
jear year 4 ^^ ^5 th* 16 lick like 20 give the reason 23 ^^^use because ^6
(...) ^hereabo^ts then? (...) 27 upon upon ^^ (...) both ^^ (...) (...) must 34
that reason 35 scrip^^re scripture 7. 2 after corrupted del^ ^ 17 ^ 38 p 38 3
less less 21 no more 22 and 2^ eroceed proceed 32 it is said 33 If I 34 my
witness 8. 3 menttioned mentioned 2^ therein thereon 24 Citatiens Citations 25
alterred altered 28 languages 9. 26 after Whiteheads* ^* head's 28 his own to
10. 20 live life 11. 14 carious c^^^ous 16 abufe abuse ^1 after says. d. v.
12. 5 di^iring desiring 18 exspres express 13. 13 hwhich which 1^ hwic^^r.
which 14. 1 thath that 2 thath that 6 know knew 9 thath that 1^ thath that 19
expessed expressed ^4 (...) next clash 15. 20 clemencey cl^mency ^1 and 22
displeasure 26 cevill cavil ^9 were where 16. 20 which which 17. 2
richteousness righteousness ^ 8. schriptu^^ scriptural 9 after works sake,
adde^, but for his s^ke 1^ found sound 31 ^^ingh sting 18. 1^ (...) it ^5
enotradiction contradiction 19* ^0 ^llagory Allegory 3^ Sydechdo^h^ Synechdoche
20. 16 dwellet dwells 22 G* F's 21. 1 G* ^'s 1^ breathed 14 for for 31 out of
34 sot he so the 22. 6 derected directed 18 ^arions various 33 verss verse ib*
de^ared declared 32 hethe he the 23. 5 ^ould soul 7 beginng beginning ib surly
surely 8 G* F*s G* K's 12 were where 14 for to 24. 2 expl^^ns explai^^ 21 onto
unto 27 Poul Paul 29 Gal 3*56 Gal 3. 5. 31 man men 34 de the 25. 11 dinyed
denied 25 satisfied satisfied ib whit with ^0 Micha Micah 32 Exody Exodus 36
satisfied s^^^^fied ^6 3 after W* P. dele. ^ ^1 already already 17 Quakers
Quake^ 20 ^n and 24 G* P's G* W's 25 seecause see cause 3^ fromon from on 27* 9
Friends Friend 13 knowledge knowledge 1 Acts 14 Acts ^. 4. 18 intention
intentions 19 then held I still hold 27 gro at groat 28 therefore whether 2^
agroat a groat 33 again cites G* W. 36 s^pposes opposes 28. 2 White head
Whitehead 3 ^^lxusive exclusive 4 sold soul 14 Wilderniss Wilderness 33 and 34
meaphotical metaphorical 29. 21 deae deal ^0. 12 a great 13 vis viz 16 d. I
come ib conviected convicted 25 great heat great cheat 35. 36 and 37 from And
to creature de^^ 42. 31. 2 as his ashes 3 ^4 9 assirm affirm 21 will out without
25 proceeding proceedings 27 140. 40 30 the D L then D L 32. 2 that purport the
purport 15 knowledge knowledge 30 Rightousness Righteousness ib note she notes
he 33. 2 intent intend 13 Harwoth Harworth 32 Cor 3 5 1 Cor 3 5 34. 13 viz this
manner in this manner 15 thekingdom the kingdom 32 Leeds Leeds's ^5. 5
supstance substance 27 not withstanding notwithstanding 36. 4 and 5
corrobocrating corroborating 8 st in 1st is in 13 wether whether 14 justfying
justifying 37. 18 them then 20 three tree ^8. 20 within with in 39. 4 and 5
confessed by us 12 and 13 since appeared 29 as* st as* is it. 30 woras words 31
personis person is ib where ashis whereas his 32 personis person is 33
beinghere being here ib un farily unfairly 34 secon chapterent ituled second
chapter entitled 36 my answer^o my answer to 40. 21 Chtist Christ 22 our esins
our sins 2^ seech see chapter 30 all is it all of it* 41. 25 fo of 42. 7 Brethern
Brethren 11 arthly earthly 43. 5 Burrouge Borough ib scriptures scripture 7
childeren children 28 trobled troubled ^9 and 30 Arriani^oum Arrianism 44. 3
discreyd discr^ed 30 that is that as that 38 discharding discharging 45. 2*
Antich^ists Antichrists 24 priusal^ perus^^^ 46. 10 folloy folly 31 posfibly
possibly 36 hear hear 47. 15 Behold Behold 29 pasfing passing* 3^ conscienee
consciences 35 groundlesly^ groundlesly 36 great great 37 attainm; ants
attainment^ 48. 35 priase praise ^9. 29 shall shall 50. 17 in Heb 51. 1 extemt
extant 1^ preferible preferrable 1^ preferible preferrable 17 preferible
preferra^le 17 and 18 metals mettalls ^ scripures scriptures 25 Cristendom
Christendom 36 o^ to 54 20 and 21 condamnes condemns 29 the worldly that
worldly ^^ Ch^istian Christian 5^. 4 truly ^ook 57. 16 u^derstood unde^stood 30
trough through 59. 1 Cristendom Christendom ib about above 61. 21 wether
whether 22 ^ but this I can tell, he is 62 19 ^here there Memorandum p 63 by
mistake is placed before p. 62. 63. 23 discource discourse 64. 34 Tho^ Thou 65.
11 suffering sufferings 16 testefied testified 18 plase place 23 4 L 6 4 L 6d
29 co^ld could 66. 7 thiir their ib arfaelsehood or falsehood 3^ massaere
massacre ib Paplst Papists 34 as tendincy a tendency 35 corruxtion corruption
67. 1 wearing swearing ib giving against against giving 3 wh^tis what is ^
insufficient sufficient 1^ and 13 whatsoewer whatsoever 17 and 28* thennemies
the enemies ib affection affections 29* ^ich: indeed rich* indeed 33 friends
friend 68. 1 Then next thee. Next 18 ^o or 29 Englesh English 31 and 3^
mentioned mentions ib the this 3^ troth truth 69. 1 temtation temptation ^^
unterly ut^erly 16 apoint appoint ^1 end avoured endeavored 31 thruth truth
33 pudlick public 70. 26 For ^^ st For i^st 33 sin his 37 and 38* renders the
death of Christ useless 71. 14 justifiatio^ justification ^5 alate a late ib a
ccusation accusation 34 many by by many 72. 1 doct^ines doctrine 3 nere here 10
righieousness. righteousness 26 answeringall answering all 73. 17 and 18
thesefore therefore 26 havenly heavenly 74. 4 argment argument ib balyed belyed
5 accou^ed accused 16* weilest whilst 75. 13 a as 14 hein he in 18 reised
raised 19 pladed pleaded ib incinuates insinuates 29 thesewith therewith 34
performall perform all 35 thatthe that the 76. 8 for far 9 aeshame a shame 18
Worldlyt Governmement Worldly Government 26 oirginal original 77. 6 honorable
honorable 18 in habiting inhabiting 19 where were 24 agread agreed 31 coording
wording 32 u^terly utterly 78. 9 houest honest 21 Carpeter Carpenter 25
cofidently confidently 79. 8 after deal. d. of 12 after till, and till 13 and
separate 15 said says 21 nired hired 80. 1 and 2 Cerimonial Ceremonial 10
thiths tithes 22 tihts titlres 26 f^iends friends 30 Heb 7 2 Heb 7 12 31 13.
th. 13 th. ^4 redicule ridicule 35 thereof therefore 81. 34 enemy of G F enemy
of G F's 82. 18 perculiar peculiar 24 This *It Is 31 relaing relating 83. 7 in
toan into an 18 prophecy prophecy 19 unleaned unlearned 31 paicence patience
84. ^ party* parts 9 the first 10 call lit call it 12 prove proper 13 to expl^in
15 three, who in 18 he practice the practice 20 they this 22 after making d.
the 23 incits in it*s 26 examele example 27 after first add day of the week
(called the Lord's day) people 29 childer children ib servant servants ib htey
they 30 frepuent frequent 31 word ship worship 34 Inow this I ^^ 85. ^ prodaced
produced 12 I H. T H 87. 7 comdemn condemn 12 spooken spoken 14 your your 15
Procesytes Pro^elites 2^ signefie signify 26 (...) the said book 2^ wroet wrote
88. ^7 or as 89 ^2 soliccit solicit 90. 24 slighring slighting it 91. 12
B^rruughs Buroughs 15 are were 1^ (...) directed to 22 Auswer Answer 24 Counse
Counsel 92. 14 Acts 20. 23. Acts 20. 32. 21 evencut even cut 27 and 28
anointieg anointing 9^ 10 tought taught 11 sorroy sorry 16 pl^^nly plainly 18
though though 23 delevered delivered 24 no more ^^ Ftrthermore Furthermore 32
delive deliver 95. 5 forrver forever 19 tho that he that has the 24 peofessing
professing 29 witiness witness 31 ceratures creatures ^^ and that 32 clear
clear 33 g^ieviously grievously 37 unte^^nce utterance ^^ prosess pro^ess 96. 3
you^ your ^7 forgiviness forgiveness 12 heave have 20 theie their ^4 beca^^se
because 97. 14 and ^5 insinutates insinu- 34 into unto ^^ inab^ngs inablings ^5
iife life 98* 19 dly 2 2d^y ^^ twhen when 99. 9 and to please to please 14 that
twentie^h part of the the twentieth part of that 10^. 2 parpose purpose 25
sevice service 102. 2^ truih truth 2^ know knew 26 expactea expect a 30 He had
books books.] He 103. 23 limpose impose had 15 toour to our 16 ont out 20 the
Controversy 114* 8 God -- man 10 God -- man 13 God -- man 14 God -- man 21 God
-- man 25 God, man 26 God -- man 32 God -- man 33 and 34 God, man 106. 10 Nigh
bo^rsin Neighbors 11 Provinceof Province of in 29 ns us 107. 7 peculiary
pecuniary 18 snpposition supposition 108. 18 neighbors neighbors 19 proceeding
proceedings 31 ^^onhim upon him 32 disire desire 35 by Daniel Leeds 109. 22 of
several sorts several in use sorts of 2^ 110. 5*6 and 7. woe Counties (which I
suppose is two) about the 1^ Sebtember September 22 that the 111. 18 By the But
that ^^ Woo Wood 25 too told 26 Woo Wood 112. 10 whom it 12 Ionhn John 26 and
not take ^^ hurt their cause 30 kurt hurt 33. n it 113. 28 Neighbors neighbors
31 Neighbors Neighbors 114. 8 Londen London

Note, in many places comma's etc. are misplaced, and sometimes not inserted at
all, of which, had I taken notice, it would have much swelled this* Errata,
already too big, therefore the understanding Reader is desired to supply by his
^udgment, what is de^^cient here.


