A DEFENSE AND CONTINUATION OF THE Ecclesiastical Polity: By way of LETTER TO
A Friend in LONDON. TOGETHER WITH A Letter from the Author OF THE Friendly
Debate.

LONDON: Printed by A. Clark for I. Martyn, at the Bell in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and without Temple Bar, MDCLXXI.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
TO be Ingenuous, I can give thee no Encouragement to spend either thy Time or
thy Money upon this ensuing Treatise. Though could I devise any Account of its
Usefulness to the Public, I am not guilty of so much counterfeit and
hypocritical Humility, as seemingly to disparage what I really value. But the
truth is, I know no other use of these Controversial Rencounters and
Rejoinders, than to raise his Majesty's Customs and imposts upon Paper, or
(what is somewhat less important: to gratify the humor of Talking People.
Neither can I satisfy to whom I write; if to sober and peaceable men, they
neither need nor desire farther Satisfaction; if to the dissenting Herd, that
were to spend Ammunition upon Mud-walls: they either want ears to hear, or
brains to understand. Beside, if the Original Discourse be rational, it needs
no Defense; if not, it deserves none. Reason will defend it self against all
the Clamours and Disputings of talkative men; it easily surmounts the weak
Attempts of Prejudice and Ignorance, and scatters all their little mists by its
own native Light and Energy. If men will outface the Sun, the Sun it self must
convince them. And it is to as much purpose to suppress every mote that flies in
the Air, as to attend to the Cavils and Impertinencies of every wrangling
Pretender to Disputation. It Is hugely worth the while to let the World know,
that there is a certain confident man in it, that has neither so much Wit as
himself presumes, nor so much Sincerity as his Friends imagine. So strange and
so important a Discovery must no doubt lay an unrequitable Obligation upon the
Public; and my Friends can never thank me enough for putting them to the
penance of reading five or six hundred Pages, to no other purpose then to
inform themselves that one J. O. is none of the greatest Clerks, or the wisest
men. Had it been my Fate to have fallen into the hands of an Adversary, that had
either Ability or Patience to write Reason, it might have afforded good
Occasions for useful and material Remarks, and I should not have blushed either
at his or my own Victory. But this man is not at leisure to write Sense, nor
takes time to weigh whether what he dictates be pertinent either to his own or
to my purpose. His whole Book is nothing but Cavil and vulgar Talk. And
therefore if this Reply be not altogether so useful and full of Edification as
I could wish, and the Reader may expect, let him only consider, that I am not
altogether at Liberty to pursue and improve the Results of my own Thoughts, but
am confined to trace my Adversaries wanderings, and break his Bubbles, and it is
none of my fault if they are so silly and senseless, that they are not capable
of a more significant and substantial Confutation.

For seriously, he has managed the whole Dispute with so much Weakness and so
much Perverseness, that it is hard to determine whether he has betrayed more of
his insufficiency or insincerity: If he be in good earnest, he has a strange
Understanding; if he be not, he has a much stranger Conscience: Though he has
contrived the whole Performance so ill, that it is neither suited to persuade
the wise, nor to deceive the simple; it is so far from Reasoning, that it is not
Sophistry; and I can find in it neither snares nor colors, nothing but Wrath
and Darkness. His Falsifications are so open and barefaced, that had an Enemy
designed to expose the folly of their Pretenses, and the feebleness of their
Disputings, he could not have fathered upon them more unlucky Instances of
Boldness and Disingenuity. Never did I dream, that any man could be so
extravagant, as to bear me down, that the only scope and design of my whole
Discourse is to assert, Page 3.
(as he speaks) that the Law of the Magistrate is the sole Rule of Obedience in
Religious Worship. It is impossible any man should venture upon such enormous
and palpable Calumnies, that were not utterly forsaken of all sense both of
Modesty and Integrity, and given up to the dishonor of a shameless Brow and
steeled Conscience. My hum^ur is neither Fierce nor Abusive; I love not to
treat an Adversary with rough Language and unkind Words, and know how to
discover his Ignorance without upbraiding it: but no Expressions can be too
sharp to reprove Inveterate malice and insolence. And when men are grown old in
this implacable Spirit, when they study all the black Arts of Calumny, and
persist in hardness and impenitence after so many severe and shameful Rebukes,
and encounter all the Authors, they are pleased to assault with dirt and
slander; What milder Correction can you suppose them to deserve, than that
Scorn and Dishonor that is due to bold and shameless Scriblers? What reward
shall be given or done unto thee, thou false Tongue? even mighty and sharp
Arrows with hot burning Coals. It is an hard Case to deal with men that afford
neither materials for Charity, nor Opportunities for Civility; and such has
been the Provocation, the Malice, the Rashness, and the Disingenuity of this
man, that barely to represent him in his own Colors is enough to hazard the
Reputation of a man's good humor and good Nature; and so unhappily has he mixed
his Vices with his Follies, that it is impossible to discover one without
exposing both. We have indeed to do with other Adversaries unreasonable enough,
but yet however among them we sometimes meet with Parts and Learning, though
nothing else: Whereas this Cause is upheld by nothing but boldness and
ignorance, and driven on by no other Interest, and defended with no other
weapons then Popular Zeal in the Body, and something worse in the Heads of the
Party.

This may suffice to prevent or mitigate the Readers Censure, but that will not
satisfy my Bookseller, unless I bribe and bespeak his favor too. And
therefore not to injure him by discouraging his Customers, though I cannot
commend my Book, yet this I can say in its behalf without Blushing, that I have
all along endeavored so to contrive my Answer, that it might be as useful to
the Reader, as if I had not been confined to the Pursuit of another man's
Impertinencies. And therefore I have for his sake as well as my own, neglected
innumerable Instances of his more silly mistakes and less important
Infirmities, because they were of no other concernment to our present
Controversy, then barely to discover his own personal Follies. And had I
displayed and prosecuted all the little Enormities, of which this man of
Confidence stands guilty in this bold Adventure, this Volume would have swollen
to that monstrous Bulk, as must for ever have scared and discouraged all
Readers from venturing upon its perusal: For this man never stands guilty of
single Errors, every Period he dictates is pregnant with Absurdities, He
defiles every truth he handles, and though it be not in his Power to make it
false, yet he will be sure to manage it in such an awkerd and uncouth way, as
shall make it appear absurd and ridiculous; But I have studiously over-lookt
his little Indecencies, and have been careful not to nauseate the Reader with
too tedious a Pursuit of his mere Impertinencies; and though I have not
altogether spared to expose the Triflingness of his Cavils, yet I have not so
severely tied my self to their Examination, as not to take frequent Occasion to
cast in some more useful Discourses, then the matter of such starved Pretenses
would afford.

I understand by the Information of my Friends and Acquaintance, that this
Rejoinder was sooner expected; but to spare excuses, the plain and undisguised
Truth is, it is finished, (excepting only some little disappointment of the
Press) as soon as it was designed, and designed, I think, as soon as it was
seasonable. And methinks once a year, supposing a man has leisure, is often
enough, if People will be reasonable, to find public Talk; but if be has not,
it is too often for one that is willing to enjoy the Innocent Comforts as well
as to endure the Common Drudgeries of humane life. However I am not able (as my
Adversary is) to write Books at Idle Hours and Spare Minutes, and though I
were, I have them not. And had I as many Talents of Dispatch, as he thinks
himself Master of, I should think it my wisdom, if not my Duty (that I may
borrow a Phrase of J. O.) to Napkin them for some Season. For I have not
observed any thing that has so much spoiled and debauched the Style of our
English Writers, as this hasty and preposterous way of writing, and had I not
exceeded the number of my Pages, and should I not involve some Authors, that
deserve as much Admiration for writing well on the sudden, as most do
Correction for writing ill, I should be tempted to digress into Satirical
Remarks upon this Vanity; because from that alone have issued those prodigious
Swarms of dull Books of Fanatic and bombast Divinity. Beside all which, I
might represent under what mighty disadvantages and distractions this discourse
was written; but that smells somewhat of my Adversaries bragging Humor, and
therefore I had rather confess the downright Troth, that though I believe I
could have dispatched it somewhat sooner, yet I was easily inclined to allow my
self as large a Compass of time for its Publication, as I thought I could
reasonably Excuse; partly because I was not much enamored either of the Glory
or the Pleasure of my Undertaking, and took all Occasions to truant from such
an Irksom Task; partly because I stand in no little awe of my Adversary; for
though I have given him Rebuke enough, to satisfy any modest man, yet one may
as soon put a Statue of Brass out of Countenance as convince or silence People
of some Complexions: And some men have the Face to bragg and insult most where
they are most foiled, and to erect their Trophies where their Misadventures are
most Remarkable; so that nothing more inclines me to suspect this man's
Readiness to Reply, then the notorious badness of his Cause and shamefulness of
his Baffle. But if he should be so ill-advised, what will become of me? for he
is gifted with such a fluent Impertinency, that nothing can ever stop the
Career of his Pen, but the want of Ink and Paper, and Confidence in the World:
And I doubt not but he is able to pour forth more pages of empty words in six
days, than I can hope to compose of coherent Sense in so many weeks. Beside,
that he has the Advantage both of practice and inclination: wrangling is the
humor and genius of the man, and he has been all his days up to the Elbows in
Controversial Adventures: and as much Reluctance as he counterfeits to this
Heroic Trade, it had be^n as easy to cure the Knight of the M^ncha of his
Errantry, as it is him of his scribbling folly; and he cannot encounter counter
(...) honest man upon the high way, but his (...) transforms him into a (...);
though for no other Reason than that he may have some show of pretense to
excuse or justify the rudeness and incivility of his pragmatical Assaults; and
therefore se^ing he is so incurably quarrelsom, no man can justly blame me, if
I am so very desirous to rid my hands of him. But to conclude, if this be the
Penance I must undergo for the wantonness of my Pen, to answer the impertinent
and slender Exceptions of every peevish, and disingenuous Caviller; Reader, I
am reformed from my incontinency of scribbling, and do here heartily bid thee an
eternal Farewell.

CHAP. I.
The Contents.
AN Account of the Fanatique Stubbornness. Spiritual Pride an Impregnable
humor. A description of its Nature and Properties. It Is the refuge of dull
People. No vice so incident to humane nature as Pride; Nor any Pride as that of
Religion. Men discern not its most obvious symptoms in themselves, and why.
It Is the greatest hindrance of Reformation. Till it is mortified all reproofs do
but exasperate men's Passions. A Character of the Fanatique deportment toward
all Adversaries. Their first reply to all Books is, to slander and revile their
Authors. A description of their way of breeding and propagating stories. An
account of the baseness of this humor. It Is the most spiteful sort of
persecution. The malignity of the fanatique Spirit. It drives away all good
humor and good manners. A character of the Fanatique behavior toward
Clergymen, particularly of the Pride and Insolence of professing Gossips. A
difference made between modest Dissenters and pragmatical Zealots. It Is this
proud and petulant humor that is the only Cause of all our Divisions, and
humility that must be the only Cure. This would make them ashamed of their
brawling and contentious Humor. Their second Reply to all Books is, to pervert
and falsify their meaning. The horrid Rudeness and Disingenuity of their
wilful falsifications. A notorious instance of it from that advantage they have
taken to abuse my discourse of Trade. By which no Trade is endangered but that
of Conventicles. An account of the design of my discourse upon that subject.
Its true intent vindicated against the bold and shameless Cavils of our Author.
The factious Partiality of the N. C. in behalf of their own Writers. Our
Authors careless way of Writing. At his very entrance, he defeats the design of
his whole performance. He confesses that all who plead for Liberty of
Conscience dissemble. The most effectual Argument in the world against
Toleration, is the fundamental Principle of the Non-Conformists. How their
Language alters when they speak out. The mystery of the Independents being for
Indulgence. A further account of our Authors rude and hasty way of scribbling.
He every where leaves the main drift of my discourse to pursue occasional
Remarks. The impertinency and tediousness of his complaints against the
tartness of my expressions. Hypocrisy is to be treated more roughly then naked
Vice. The Non-Conformists have two Names for all things, a black one for us,
and a white one for themselves. They are not to be suffered to debauch
Christianity with their own follys. Their way of loading Adversaries with
odious Consequences. An instance of this in the writings of J. O. Our Authors
shreds of Latin and superannuated Pedantry. Another little stratagem he makes
use of to abuse the Common People.

SIR,
1. WHat you foretold, and I expected, is come to pass; our zealous Brethren
are angry at me. A sad disappointment this! When it is so obvious, I designed to
court and flatter their Holiness. But it seems it is no less difficult to oblige
than to convince them: They are proof against soft and friendly Counsels, as
well as rough and impartial Satyrs. They are (like the great Fabricius) neither
to be caress't, nor to be vanquished: Their Resolutions are invincible. Nor
force nor flattery can make impression upon such constant and unyielding
Tempers. They are all Anvil and Adamant. Their minds are not so sheepish as to
be wheedled, or so fickle as to be argued out of their Eternal Principles.
Attempt fugitive and unsettled Spirits; but their constancy is impregnable. It Is
not an humane Enterprise to shake the Vigor of their minds. Their hearts are
of a true Roman Composition, neither to be broke, nor to be softened.

So stubborn a thing is holy Zeal when blended with spiritual Pride, it quickly
eats out all sense of common Modesty and Ingenuity, it hardens every prejudice
into flat presumption, and steels the Understanding against all the force and
power of Conviction; so that you can neither soften it into any pliable temper
by gentle Reproofs, or hammer it to an ingenuous attention by hard Arguments.
It Is shameless and impudent, and can outface all the confidence of Truth, and
all the evidence of Demonstration. It was this that seared the Consciences of
the Scribes and Pharisees of old, against the force of Miracles, and the feats
of Omnipotence, and made their Errors incurable, and their Reformation
desperate; they would rather choose to defy and blaspheme the most undeniable
Effects of Almighty Power, than be prevailed upon so much as to suspect their
own Hypocrisy.

And this is the bloated Complexion of our Modern Pharisees, they are puffed up
with windy conceits of their own dear Sanctity, their fancies are enamored of
themselves, and ravished with gay reflections upon their own beauty and bravery,
and Saintship; and are satisfied with a fair opinion of their own way and
Party, and admire them as the most splendid and gorgeous sect of Professors,
and appropriate to them all the titles of a more choice and illustrious
Godliness. And whilst they stroke and applaud themselves as the peculiar
darlings of Heaven, and keep their habitation in the Clouds; with what contempt
do they look down upon the residue of Mankind, and disdain all out of their own
Herd as Carnal Gospellers, and Formal Professors? and if they will allow us the
titles of Civil and Moral men, they will not endure that any but themselves
should pretend acquaintance with the great and spiritual Mysteries of the
Gospel. This affords them that pleasing satisfaction of saucy and ill-natured
Comparisons; this raises them to some advantage and pre-eminence above their
Betters; every mean Fellow may be enabled, through Mercy, to fancy himself a
better man than his Governors; and a Beggar that has Grace, may think within,
that he ought to take the wall of a Gentleman that is unregenerate; and how
luscious is it to Clowns and rude Mechanics to look upon their Superiors with
pity and disdain? For no passion is either so natural or so pleasing to
Mankind, as Pride and Self-conceitedness; and every man would have something to
swell himself up in his own Opinion, and to enable him to scorn and trample
upon his Neighbors. And therefore those People that can never pretend to any
other Abilities to ^eed this Humor, can easily support it by Singularities and
Affectations in Religion: And he that neither is nor can be honorable, nor
beautiful, nor witty, nor learned, can easily be Religious; and when he
pretends to be so, with what Confidence may he despise all those other
Accomplishments that he can never have? With what a scornful state shall some
supercilious Saints trample upon all the great and all the learned men in the
World? And with what Disdain shall they look down from aloft (as they conceit,
like Lazarus from Abraham's Bosom) upon these reprobate and unregenerate
Wretches?

. 2. And now when haughty men are thus bravely perch't and plumed in their own
Conceits, is it (think you) an easy task to strip them of so fair a disguise,
and to take them down to the pitch of ordinary Mortals? For suppose it your own
case, that you sat at ease in a fair Opinion of your own high Seize in
the ways of Godliness, and had long lulled your self up in a pleasant security
of your special Interest in the love and favor of God: would you take it well
to be rudely awakened out of this transporting dream? Would it much edify with
you to be roundly told, that you befool your self? How would you stomach a
smart reproof? How would it sting and inrage, and grate upon your soul? And
with what Impatience would you swagger at the Man that should dare to impeach
you of Hypocrisy? You would infinitely disdain his Presumption, and hardly
ever after vouchsafe him good look or kind thought. What greater displeasure
can you possibly do a man, then to rob him of his self-complacency? Or what
complacency so delightful as that which springs from spiritual Pride? No
sensual delight so charming as its gratifications, it is the strongest and the
most impetuous appetite of humane nature: so that to be defeated of such an
infinite satisfaction, is a disappointment neither to be pardoned nor to be
endured. And therefore wonder not to see some men so tender and impatient of
Reproof, because there is no reproach so upbraiding to Pride as Correction, nor
any Pride so incorrigible as that of Religion. This Vice has been the bane and
dishonor of all Institutions in the World, and is the only essential
Ingredient of the Hypocrisy of all Ages.

And the truth is, if we consider how incident and delightful this vanity is to
humane nature, how difficult for a wise man to escape its smooth and pleasant
temptations, how secret and undiscernable its workings, how incurious most men
are of the inward thoughts of their minds, and how unacquainted with the first
springs and motives of their Actions: If, I say, we consider all this, it is no
wonder they should be so easily intoxicated with this sweet and luscious
poison; and when it has conveyed it self into all the Recesses of their Souls,
seized on all their Powers, infected their best and purest Thoughts, and swollen
up even their Zeal into vanity and ostentation, it is a less wonder they should
be so insensible of their distemper; when this Vice works like other poisons,
it stupifies whilst it infects; and what in Nature so difficult, as to convince
a man of this inward Leprosy? It Is not like common diseases that discover
themselves by outward spots and blemishes, but it is a Plague that lodges in the
heart and vital Powers, and sooner destroys than it appears. The proudest man
on Earth is insensible of this Illusion, and though he is ready to burst with
his own inward swellings, yet he defies and disclaims this hated vice with as
much confidence as the meekest Saint in Heaven; and all the world knows his
folly, except himself.

But above all Pride, Spiritual Pride is the most dangerous and incurable, it is
an Apoplexy that dazzles the Judgment, infatuates the Mind, and intercepts all
the passages of light and conviction, and confounds all pure and impartial
Reasonings, and disables men from making any ingenuous Reflections upon their
own Actions; it makes them confident in their own Impostures and
self-illusions, and bears them up against all Reproofs by Zeal, and Conscience,
and Religion. Their Faith, their Zeal, their Prayers, their Fastings, their
constant Communion with God, their diligent Attendance upon Ordinances, their
Love of the Lord Jesus, their hatred of Antichrist, or their spleen against the
Pope, are impregnable Fences against all Assaults, and Answers to all
Arguments. They are so dotingly enamoured of themselves for these signs of
Grace, and characters of God's People, that you may more easily induce them to
suspect the Truth of all things, than their own Godliness. And nothing in
Nature so impossible, as that such strict and serious Professors, such humble
melting and brokenhearted Christians should in the issue prove no better than
Proud and Pharisaick Hypocrites.

And though their Pride discover it self in their opinionative Confidence, in
their bitter Censoriousness, in their impatience of Affronts and Reproofs, in
their Rage and Revenge against all that undervalue them, in their haughty and
disdainful Comparisons, and in their inflexible Waywardness, especially to the
Will of Superiors, and Commands of Authority. And though these are the most
natural Results, and most obvious Symptoms of this inward Plague; yet are they
not able to discern such certain appearances of them in themselves, because
they are aforehand from other accounts so abundantly satisfied in their own
Humility and Broken-heartedness; and the strength of this conceit so blinds
their minds, that they cannot see the clearest and most palpable Indications of
this Vice. But they are all adorned with soft and gentle Titles; and those
excesses and irregularities that in an unregenerate man must have been
accounted Eruptions of Pride and Passion, are now to be ascribed to the
warmness and vehemence of holy Zeal.

3. In brief, sad is the condition of those men that abuse themselves with this
naughty Godliness; it is this, and not moral Goodness, that is the greatest let
to Conversion; not only because it seals men up in impenitence by false
prejudices, and bars up their minds against all thoughts of Reformation, by
persuading them they are good enough already: But besides that it prevents the
efficacy of the means of Grace, it does withal (what is more mischievous)
directly oppose and contradict them. It rots and putrifies the soul in its
whole constitution, it gangrenes all its faculties, it breeds a base and
caitive temper of mind, it introduces a direct contrariety to all worthy and
ingenuous inclinations, and delivers the man over to the power and possession
of the blackest and most accursed sins; it is detraction, it is spite, it is
rancour, it is a malicious contempt to all wise and honest Counsels, it is a
wilful frowardness to all sober and rational convictions, and in a word, it is
all spiritual wickedness.

And for this Reason it was that I profess't to despair of any success upon
this sort of men; I was assured that as long as Pride overruled their
Consciences, all Reproofs would certainly exasperate, but could never correct
the Fanatique humor; and therefore what hopes could I conceive to make any
breach upon their prejudices, whilst they were guarded by such a sturdy and
unyielding Principle? For if it be so difficult either to convince men of this
Vice, or whilst this remains, of any other; it were a vain thing to expect that
all the Reasonings and Attempts of conviction in the world should ever make any
impressions upon such unapproachable minds. And as long as Professors will
continue regardless and insensible of this leading sin, I shall never hope to
see them reformed to a more calm and more governable temper. But if instead of
amusing themselves with experiences and fantastic observations about the
unaccountable workings of the Spirit of Grace; about the difference between the
Convictions of the Spirit, and those of natural Conscience; about the degrees
and due measures of Humiliation, with innumerable other wise conceits of their
modern Theology; if, I say, instead of attending to these dreams and crazy
fancies, they would be at leisure to observe the risings and workings of this
deceitful vice, to study its symptoms and indications, and to keep a constant
and habitual restraint upon its motions and attempts; we should quickly see the
lovely fruits and effects of true Religion in the world, instead of the unruly
blusters and juglings of Enthusiasm. But till men will be induced in good
earnest to set themselves with a parcicular concern against the Inclinations of
this Lust, and till they will be careful to lay humility at the bottom of all
their goodness; instead of their yielding to the power of truth, conviction
shall only enrage their malice; and all the requital they shall give you for
disabusing them, shall be to abuse you with incivility and foul language. And
here, Sir, give me leave to present you with a short account of their
deportment toward my self and all that ever yet opposed or endeavored to
undeceive them, which you may peruse, as a further Character of their modesty
and good humor.

4. (I.) Reproach and contumely is their first reply to all Arguments; and to
revile the Author, the first Confutation of his Book; whoever dares to despise
or discover their wretched delusions, is immediately answered with volleys of
slanders and Calumnies, and utterly oppressed with multitude of lies and
detracting stories. Their dissolute and unruly tongues are let loose to tear in
pieces his good name; What abusive Tales, and Legends do they invent? With what
bold and audacious slanders do they assail his Innocence, and with what crafty
and oblique ways of detraction do they undermine his Reputation? with what
eagerness do they listen to any spiteful and mischievous report? With what zeal
do they spread and propagate and improve it? With what partiality will they add
or detract circumstances, as shall be most conducive to enhanse the ugliness of
the slander? They attend to nothing with a more transporting satisfaction then
to defaming stories; it is their choicest Luxury, and what so luscious in their
esteem as a smooth and specious Lie? Ah! it is marrow and fatness.

There is not any Affair so trifling upon which these People cannot erect a
stately Lie; nor any Authority so slight, by which they cannot warrant its
Truth and Credibility; it is but foisting in two or three ugly Circumstances,
and they can improve a facetious story to a private Friend into a public
Calumny, and aggravate a pleasant passage in familiar conversation into a
blasting and dishonorable scandal: Every report they touch, they immediately
turn into slander, they make but an easy havoc of the Good name of us
Philistines, heaps upon heaps with the Iaw-bone of every Ass.

They have their Spys and Emissarys in all corners to fetch in Informations;
they have their Agents in all parts to communicate Reports; they have their
Factors in all places to traffic for News, and to carry on the important Trade
of Tales between City and Country; and they have amongst them a pedling sort of
idle People that are always ranging up and down streets in quest of fresh
Intelligence, and, as Beggars do, importune every man they meet to contribute
something to their stock, and compose their countenance into serious posture to
beg News: If you are empty of Intelligence, they shake hands, and will not wast
time in such barren and unprofitable Company, but hasten to ply the next comer.
Every man makes good his post, and every man picks up something to contribute
to the common stock. And if they chance to meet any of their associates upon
the Frontiers of their respective Walks, they frankly impart what they have
gained to each other, as Beggars do their Fragments. However, they have some
common place of Rendezvous, where every particular Member partakes of the joint
Collections of the whole Society; and that is the Staple of News* and then it is
no wonder if all Reports fly abroad with such winged speed, when it is every
man's business to blazon them into all quarters. And if they get a story by the
end, that is not in it self full enough of remark and wonder, they will vamp it
with new Circumstances of their own, alter, improve, and refine it till they
have made it plausible and big enough for the public view: They will vouch it
with grave Nod, and solemn Face; they will look earnestly, talk shrewdly, and
descant upon it with a thousand pretty Conjectures: They will whisper in your
ear some subtle and notable observation of Circumstances; and with wise and
politic forehead, will suspect impossible Plots, foresee unthought-of Designs,
and foretell strange and prodigious Events; and by these and the like arts, they
will spread and divulge any Tale, till it grows up into a Vulgar Report, (and
it is but whispering it in an Authentic Coffee-house, or at a Meeting of the
Gossips, and that makes it so) and then it shall maintain it self upon its own
Credit and Reputation, and the public voice shall justify the story. How can
you doubt or suspect its truth, when it is the talk of all the Town? every one
knows it, and every one believes it; all Parties agree in the Report, and none
so strangely diffident as to dispute, much less to deny its certainty: No, no,
assure your self, Sir, it is too true, and out of all possibility of falsehood;
you must not, nay for shame you cannot be so uncivil to the judgment and
discretion of Mankind, as to demur upon the Credibility of such an universal
and acknowledged Report. And thus do Lies first beget Public Reports, and then
do Public Reports maintain Lies. And from hence issue all those numberless
swarms of Tales, that are perpetually flying and buzzing about this City: their
beginning is unknown and unobserved; they breed in corners and obscure places,
but if they once get wing, all places are immediately filled with their noise
and murmur, and all men annoyed with their importunate buzze and tumult.

. 5. In brief, it is not unpleasant to observe the spring and the progress of
these Vulgar Tales: for as you have seen small Streams raised into large and
beautiful Rivers, by the accession of Brooks, and Showers, and Land-floods; so
does it happen in these Reports, which, though they arise from weak and
inconsiderable Beginnings, yet quickly swell into mighty Torrents, from those
additional Descants they receive as they roll along through the mouths of the
holy Brotherhood, (for they are the Common-sewer of all unclean Reports) and by
this means they in a little time grow so formidable, and rise into such an
irresistible Confidence, as to bear down all before them. And yet would you
trace this Stream to its Fountain, you do but seek the head of the River Nile;
which though it falls into Egypt with such a vehement and impetuous Flood, and
over-runs the Country with its swelling streams; yet if you would seek for the
rise of all these mighty Waters, after you had tired your self in the discovery
of infinite Brooks and Rivulets, and little Additions, at last you would be
forced to derive the main Stream (as some of the Ancients did) from the
Mountains in the Moon. And thus (as the Bishop of Derry speaks concerning the
Fable of the Nags-head Ordination) If a man should search for the Author of
these fabulous Relations, he shall be sure to have them fathered upon some very
credible Persons without Names, who had them from Iohn-an-Oaks, who had them
from Iohn-a-Stiles, who had them from Nobody. And if you will but observe and
examine all Reports that bear the Fanatique stamp, (as Chrysippus did the
Oracular Lies of Apollo) you will find, as Chrysippus did, not one in five
hundred that is not apparently forged and counterfeit; and yet to search out
their first spreaders, is the same difficulty as to discover the Coiners of
false Money. In the mean time you may observe what tender and upright
Consciences those men have, that mint such bold and shameless Lies; and what
honest and good natured People those are, that are willing to take them for
current Coin, and to pass them to others for Authentic Truths, only because
they gratify their own malice, and blast their Neighbors innocence. This is
the spite of Witches, who, so they may vent their revenge, care not though they
do it upon harmless Infants. This is the Character of the worst of Reprobates,
Without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, Rev. 22.5.
and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a Lie. And
lastly, This is the Trade and Employment of Fiends, that are always busied in
spiteful Offices, and in making or spreading Lies and false Accusations.

And now (Sir) must not these meek-natured Men, that are so thoroughly possessed
by the Spirit of Slander, needs be out of all danger of the Spirit of
Persecution? They that are so impatient of an Adversary, and pursue him with
all the rage and malice of a revengeful Tongue, would no doubt, were their
Power proportioned to their Fury, indulge this dissenting Person in his
Endeavors to obstruct the glorious Attempts and Purposes of a more thorough
Reformation. They that rail and persecute with foul slanders, and false
aspersions, when they can no more, would not persecute with Fire, and Sword,
and Sequestration when they can. Is there not as much malice in the false
Accusations of a virulent Tongue, as in the Proscriptions of an outrageous
Tyrant? They arise from the same temper of mind, agree in the same purposes,
and differ only in their Abilities. When Malice wants strength and interest,
and is not able to oppress Innocence with real Injuries, then its only refuge
is to load it with false and infamous Aspersions. Calumny is the sanctuary and
support of weak Revenge. And when this cannot wreak its fury in rude and
churlish Actions, it is forced to vent it self in spiteful and malicious
Reports; and never spits its poison, but when it wants teeth to bite. Men
slander only for want of opportunity of doing worse; and if ever they gain the
advantage, they will strike to more effectual purposes. They will change their
Weapons with the change of Affairs, and their Adversaries shall quickly feel
sharper strokes then those of a malicious Tongue.

. 6. And here (that I may dispatch this unpleasant Theme at once) we may
observe the Venom of Pharisaick Principles, and what a mighty force and
efficacy they have to embitter and enrage the Minds of Men. So fatal and
irresistible is their Poison, that there is nothing in Nature of force enough
to damp or defeat their Malignity. It strikes them with Pride, Malice and Envy,
and all manner of dark and corroding Passions: It eats out all sense of Honor
and Civility, and lays waste all principles of Good Nature and Good Manners.
And for this, what more convictive Evidence can I give you, then the Experience
of our own Conversation? There is no City in Europe can boast such a number of
Worthy and Generous Inhabitants, as that You live in: You may know a Citizen of
London, if he have had the Good Fortune to escape the Fanatique Infection, by
the Obligingness and Decency of his Deportment, by the Sobriety and Discretion
of his Behavior, by the Calmness and Modesty of his Discourse, and by the
Ingenuity and Pleasantness of his Humor. All his Conversation bears the
Characters of Honor and Integrity. His Conscience is tender of a rude and
uncivil Action; he avoids all appearances of an ungentile Humor, and dreads an
Affront as bad as Scandal. This is the Humor and Genius of your City; it is the
seat of Gallantry, and place of Education: there may we learn Philosophy, and
the Science of Conversation, as well as Merchandise, and the Arts of Traffic.
Your Shops and your Warehouses are Schools of Wit and Good Manners. You are
not a Race of raw Citizens, and illiterate Mechanics; your Designs are not
confined to your Profit and your Trade; your Humor is pleasant, and your
Conversation graceful; and you may vie with Athens and old Rome for Ingenuity
and Politeness of Manners. These are your Virtues, and this your Character.

But though the Air you breathe be so sweet and wholesome, yet it is not able
either to vanquish or correct the Influences of the Fanatique Spirit: It Is too
powerful for the Genius of the Place, its Poison is too strong for the soundest
Complexions; and into whomsoever it enters, it is portentous if it drive not
away his good Humor, and distemper his Mind with a salvage and phrenetick
Zeal. The Man immediately loses all sense of the gracefulness of Courtesy and
Good Manners, withdraws himself from his Neighbourly Conversation, affects a
stern passionate and untutored Humor, becomes churlish to his own Domestics,
and pragmatical to his Neighbors. He vents his sullen fits in malapert
Censures of the innocent Mirth and Cheerfulness of his former Acquaintance, and
in unneighbourly Inquisitions (according to the Geneva Discipline) into the
Disorders of private Families. It Is strange how he delights in spiteful and
malicious Stories, and what secret pleasure he takes in the mischiefs of the
World. He feeds upon other men's Misfortunes, and is inwardly satisfied with
their Disgraces and Disasters. He is ever sighing and complaining for the
badness and degeneracy of the present Age; and perhaps believes himself a
Person of extraordinary Good Will and Tenderness to Mankind, because he is so
very apt to be concerned in their Evils and Calamities: though his querulous
humor arise from nothing else but an odd baseness and churlishness of spirit,
that naturally delights in malicious Censures and Reports; and takes a supreme
content in displaying other men's deformities, and making ill-natured and
unhandsome Reflections. And hence their Breath, like Infection, never spares to
taint and traduce the soundest Reputations: they live, and are supported by
slanders and ill accidents; and with them the badness of a Report is the
strongest evidence of its Truth; and a sad story, especially if it reflect upon
the wisdom and sufficiency of their Superiors, needs no proof, for it is its
own; and every seditious Report is as heartily embraced, as if it were a first
Principle of Reason, or a Fundamental Article of Faith.

. 7. But the greatest vent of their spite and rancour, is to belch out filthy
slanders and reproaches against the Conforming Clergy; they are set up by them
as the common Mark for the hatred and malice of all Parties to shoot at. To
censure and reform them, is the most plausible vent of peevishness and
ill nature; and to abuse them, is the only evidence of some men's Godliness, as
it is of other men's Wit. With what transport of Attention will these Godly
People listen to a foul story of an Ungodly Parson? And with what indefatigable
Industry will they spread and improve the Tale? You cannot endear them more
then by supplying them with scandalous Reports; and a Zealous Brother will even
abate you something of the Price of his Commodities for your Good News. It puts
him into a pleasant and jolly Humor, and the Demure Man grows Witty and
Satirical, and glosses upon the story with notable Essays of Sanctified Wit and
Raillery. Though if you take these meek Christians in their more serious Moods,
and preciser Humors, then their Mirth degenerates into Railing, and downright
Contumely; Baals Priests, and the Locusts of the Bottomless Pit, are the
civillest Titles of Honor they can bestow upon Clergymen, and nothing more
vulgar then to affront and revile them as they walk the Streets; a rudeness
never yet known in any Civilized, no nor Barbarous Nation in the World: And
some of their Children are not so soon instructed in their Catechism, as they
are taught to revile a Cassock.

But the Tongues of these Dove-like Innocents are never so virulent as when
they are inveighing against the Church-Revenues; they are strangely fluent upon
this Theme, and it is their Everlasting Argument. For here their Envy settles
upon its proper Object; nothing dazzles them more then Riches, because they
value nothing more: and they can endure any thing in a Clergyman with some
patience, rather then a fair Revenue; and they scarce account any true
Ministers of the Gospel but Lecturers, and such other Mercenary Preachers, as
subsist entirely upon the Benevolence and arbitrary Pensions of the Good
People. With them it is the most glorious piece of Reformation to make the
Priesthood vile and sordid; and to disrobe them of all secular Privileges and
Dignities, is to bring them to the Pattern of Christ and his Apostles. And it is
the Duty of Christian Princes to keep the Clergy in as mean and despised a
Condition, as they were reduced to by the Persecution of Heathen Emperors; and
to suffer themselves to be abused, is the indispensable Duty of the Ministers
of the Gospel; and Contempt and Poverty are the peculiar Ornaments of a
Ministerial Spirit. All Ecclesiastical Grandeur is Popish and Antichristian;
but in all Protestant Churches their Godly Ministers are content with a Poor
and Beggarly Competence. In brief, they deem Contempt and Penury as good
Qualifications for the Priestly Office, as some not long since thought
Ignorance and Ill-Manners; and to allow them a just and honorable Maintenance,
is to make them Hirelings and Loyterers. But though this be their hard
Reckoning with the whole Profession, yet their own Minister (poor Man!) is sure
to pay the Shot, and they seldom fail to wreak their Zeal and Indignation upon
him: It Is a shame to observe how industrious some of them are to thwart and
affront him upon all occasions, and how studious of all opportunities to
provoke him with open Insolences and Indignities. With what Malapertness will
they censure his Sermons, carp at his Expressions, and condemn his Doctrines?
With what Insolence will they pity his Ignorance and Insufficiency? And when
they vouchsafe him their Company, it is not so much to be instructed in their
Duty, as to pick Quarrels, and make Exceptions to his Discourses. Though, the
truth is, in this piece of modesty they are out-stript by the She-Professours.
Every conceited Dame that drives a Trade of Gossipping from House to House, to
tattle of Religion, though for no other design then to gratify her Itch of
Talking; and to this purpose has always at her Tongues end (and her Religion
seldom lies deeper) Melancholy Complaints of the Hypocrisy of her Heart, her
Deadness in Duties, her Wanderings in Prayer, and her Unprofitableness under the
Means of Grace, and other sad Stories that she has learned by roat: Yet after
all this puling and seeming Humility, it is neither unusual nor altogether
unpleasant to observe with what arrogance this supercilious Gossip shall shake
her head at the Ignorance of her Spiritual Guide, and pity his unacquaintedness
with the Workings of the Spirit of God in the Hearts of Believers; and caution
her Family, and her unbelieving Husband, (for so he must be, if not listed into
her own Gang) against his dangerous Errors, and lamentable Mistakes; which,
poor Man! he often Preaches, though not out of any bad Design, but out of mere
Ignorance. The poor Wretch (she tells them) I think is an honest Man, and I
believe means well; but it is a weak and a shallow Divine, and an utter
stranger to the more inward Mysteries of the Covenant of Grace. And now under
the Appearance of this Christian Tenderness and Compassion to the poor Soul,
how insolently will she despise his Person? how Magisterially will she censure
his Sermons? how confidently will she cavil at his Doctrines? and how
indecently will she laugh at his uncouth and ridiculous Mistakes?

. 8. Do not think (Sir) I fancy things Imaginary, and merely possible, and
create to my self Artificial Men to suit them to my own extravagant Characters.
I speak mine and your own familiar Experience, and you meet with these things
and these persons in every days Conversation. Neither mistake me, as if I
charged this Churlish Humor upon every individual Professor; it is enough if
it be the Character of the Generality, and it is all I intend. For I know there
are some that dissent from us, of a more modest and submissive temper; that are
not so restive and inflexible to Authority, so headstrong and confident in
their own Folly, nor so abusive and pragmatical in their Demands. But then the
Dissent of these Men is silent and peaceable, they make no noise and tumult in
the Church; they are not hasty to censure, slander and backbite their
Neighbors, but study to win their love by courtesy and fair deportment. These
Good Men are as sensible of the Zealous Insolences of their Brethren as I can
be: But then they neither lead the Faction, nor contribute much to support it,
and follow purely the blind guidance of Prejudice and Education: And as for
such, I pity their Weakness, and love and honor their Integrity. And others
there are, whose Veins are filled with such brisk and generous Blood, that
there is no Leaven sour enough utterly to pervert the natural sweetness of
their Humors, but they will in the Entercourses of Humane Life, keep up in
spite of the most Malignant Principles, the Urbanity of common Conversation;
and yet in the affairs and discourses of Religion, you cannot dissent from
their Opinions without inflaming their Passions; and if you persist to
contradict them, you blow up their heat and anger to an open Impatience; their
Zeal cannot be civil to a Friend of a different Persuasion: they will silence
all your Arguments with rude and reviling Language; oppress you with Noise and
Clamor, and impertinent Talk, and force you to yield to their intolerable
Folly. And you know (Sir) some of our Acquaintance, that (and it is a sober
Truth) have no fault but their Religion; and who, were it not for that, might
have proved good Men and good Christians: But so powerful is this sour Humor,
as to vanquish that Candor and Ingenuity that is natural to the People of the
English Nation; and so contagious, as to poison the purest and most untainted
Constitutions, and to pervert the soundest Minds, and the sweetest
Dispositions. It is Leaven in both its Properties, as well in that it sowres,
as in that it swells the Minds of Men. In brief, setting aside those three
excellent Graces, of Spiritual Pride, Ill Nature and Ill-manners, I can
perceive no great matter these Saints and Gracious People have to brag of,
above us Moral Men, and Graceless Professors.

. 9. And it is this sullen Humor lies at the bottom of all our Disturbances:
They quarrel the Constitutions of our Church, not so much because they cannot
be satisfied, as because they affect Dissatisfaction. The Common People have no
understanding of the Grounds of their Exceptions, and they talk their Scruples
by roat. The most zealous and the most clamorous of the Herd, are not able to
give the least tolerable Account of their Zeal and Displeasure, but run away
with any pitiful and unintelligible Pretenses, and resolve to make good the
Cause at all adventure by heat, and noise, and passion. How do they dread the
Superstition of a Symbolical Ceremony? though they as little understand the
true signification of that word, as they do the Orthodox Notion of a
Procatarctick Cause. And therefore it is not this hard word that scares them
from the Churches Communion, but it is their own conceited and pragmatical
Humor, that affects and triumphs in Contradiction. They think it a gallant
thing to make a Noise in the World, and to correct the Wisdom and Discretion of
Public Authority; and that is a fine thing indeed! This extravagant Pride is
strangely agreeable to the Original Itch and Vanity of Humane Nature, and is
more natural to Mankind then the Follies of Lust and Wantonness; and there is
no Inclination that is so difficult either to govern or to vanquish, as this
petulancy of spirit. And men had need to be very watchful and very serious to
get the mastery of so fierce and impetuous an Instinct. And therefore if we
consider how insensible the People are of the Enticements of this Spiritual
Lewdness, and how unconcerned to resist the Importunity of its desires, or to
subdue the force and vigor of its Inclinations; it is no wonder if so vehement
a Passion gain without their own express Allowance, so entire and absolute a
Power over all their Thoughts and Actions: So easy (you see) it is for
well-meaning Men to mistake Humor for Conscience, though not out of deliberate
Malice, yet through Ignorance and Inadvertency. And therefore think not (Sir)
that it is the scope of my Design to scoff at their Faults, and upbraid their
Follies; it is nothing but a Cordial Love to Virtue and Themselves that put me
upon these free, open and ingenuous Reprehensions. For could we but affect the
Minds of Men with a serious sense of their Spiritual Wickednesses, and prevail
with them to make use of all the ordinary methods of Reason and Christian
Prudence for the Mortification of their Original Pride and Sullenness; and
could we but reduce them to the softness and gentleness of a Christian Temper,
how ashamed would they be of this brawling and contentious Humor? And they
would then scarce think it decent to be bold and malapert to their Superiors
for any cause of Religion: nor would they think it worth the while to sacrifice
the indispensable Duties of the Gospel for every scruple and weak Proposition,
nor disturb the Public Peace, nor affront the Public Laws for Impertinencies
and trifling Opinions. They would then live quietly in their own Families and
Neighbourhoods, and pursue the Interest and Employment of their Callings,
instead of carrying Tales, and sowing Dissentions. And the precious time they
now wast in quarrelling for Opinions, and in arguings and disputings for
Trifles and impotent Fancies, they would then improve in Offices of Love and
Charity among their Neighbors, in relieving the Necessitous, in reconciling
Differences, in stifling Slanders, and in clearing injured Reputations. To
conclude, so far would Tenderness of Conscience be from pleading Scruple and
Nicety in Opposition to the Commands of Public Authority, that it would not be
more tender and curious of any Duty then Obedience and Humility. The serious
sense of its own Weakness, its Reverence to the Persons and Authority of
Superiors, its love of Modesty, Meekness, Humility, Peace and Ingenuity, would
easily prevail with it to offer up all its private Conceits and uncertain
Opinions, to so many Advantages of Peace, and so many Virtues of Obedience.

. 10. (II.) They are not content to run down the Author with Lies and
Calumnies, but to make sure work, they will slander his Reasonings, and raise
false witness against his Arguments. They will alter and pervert his smartest
and most convictive Proofs, till they have made them as weak and trifling as
their own Pretenses. With whatsoever plainness and perspicuity he express his
Thoughts, it is all one for that, they are a People of an undaunted and
shameless Brow, they will look Truth and Reason out of Countenance, they will
insult over his Modesty, will triumph in their own Insolence, and silence all
the Reason in the World with Affronts and rude Behavior. They are resolved to
join Throats to Vote him down; and if they do, to what purpose is it to
Complain or Remonstrate? all he shall gain by it, is to be laugh't at for the
vanity of his Attempt. They blush not to commit a public Rape upon the
Understandings of Mankind; and will impose upon us with that boisterous
Rudeness, as if they conspired to force all the World out of their common
senses. No Author must challenge the liberty of being his own Interpreter; the
Power of Expounding Assertions, is the Privilege of the Subject, and the
Prerogative of the Multitude; and if they please, they can enforce any Writer
to accept a sense that contradicts his words. And if they do, there is neither
Remedy nor Appeal; their Judgment is final and arbitrary, and what they will
have, they will have. No Caution is sufficient to prevent their Clamours; their
Leaders can easily descry a foul Design under the fairest Disguise; and it is
but setting themselves to contrive some dull and malicious Mistakes, and
obtruding them upon their blind and sturdy Proselytes, and then they are
confident and impatient against his whole Discourse, and the poor Man without
any more ado is knocked down with grievous and dead-doing Objections. If Mas
John do but whisper some ugly and ill-contrived suggestion, away it is carried
with Clamor and Tragical Declamation, the Noise propagates like Thunder, and
spreads like Lightning, and the whole City is filled with Tumult and Uproar.
And now after all this, it is no less impossible to persuade them not to rail at
my Book, then it is to read it: No! it is profane, it is stuffed with wicked and
ungodly Opinions, it strikes at the whole Power of Godliness, and the very
Foundations of Religion; and then let me affirm and deny, say and prove what I
can, the People must and will persist in their Anger and their Clamor; they
will refuse to be satisfied, affront their own Consciences, and turn Recusants
to their own Convictions, only that they may not want pretenses and
opportunities to rail at me.

Now what shall a Man do in this case? You will say there is no Remedy but
Patience; that is the only Antidote against the Venom of malicious Tongues,
and let your own Innocence be your Defense and Apology. But, alas! this
Morality is too high a Cordial for my present exigence; my Spirits are not so
fainting as to stand in need of Philosophy to relieve and support them. I am
too proud (you know) to be affected with all the assaults of Noise and Clamor;
nothing but Reason can ever move or humble me; and what am I concerned if
impertinent People fret and rail? or why should it offend me if Clowns want
Breeding and Good Manners? Would you not think it a fine piece of Pedantry,
should you see a Philosopher comfort himself with Grave Maxims, and Stoical
Paradoxes, against the Affronts of those Creatures, whose Nature it is to grin
and snarl. However, it is in vain to reason with boisterous and ill-bred
People, and to discourse the Multitude to patience and calm enquiry; and when
they are resolved to be rude and uncivil, better give way to their Folly, then
contend with their Madness: And as they snuff in their Prejudices like wild
Asses, so it is but natural they should bray and be impatient at all Opposition.

. 11. But yet one pleasant Scene of their Ingenuity in this kind, I cannot
forbear to represent, and that is the advantage they have taken from my
Discourse of Trade, to expose me to Popular Hatred, and to raise an uproar
among the People: for though the plain meaning and design of that Discourse is
neither more nor less, then to intimate that the Improvement of Trade is not of
equal Importance to the Commonwealth, with the security of Public Peace and
Setlement. And yet upon this innocent Suggestion, how have they bestirred
themselves to inflame and enrage the Multitude, by representing to them, as if
under pretense of Writing against Liberty of Conscience, my main design had
been to Write against Liberty of Trade: How (say they) does this young
Rabshakeh blaspheme, beyond the Precedent and Example of all former Ages? He
pours forth his Blasphemies both against your Gain and your Godliness too; he
would raise a Persecution upon your Purses as well as your Consciences, and
bring Trade and Grace to the stake together. What can the Prelatists design by
such Discourses as these, but to persuade his Majesty to reduce you to Beggary,
that he may the better reduce you to Obedience? To sack the City, to burn your
Houses, nay to blow up the Thames, would not bring upon you such a fatal and
irreparable desolation, Surveigh. Page 80.
as that which the pursuit of this Counsel must inevitably produce. Such is the
talk of these Crafts-men, to expose me to the rage and violence of the
Rascality, that are always most forward in Zeal, and Mutiny, and Reformation,
as if I had Preached expressly against their great Goddess Diana. And they have
so bestirred themselves to keep up this Outcry, as if they had seriously
designed to draw down their Myrmidons to the Palace-Gates, (according to the
Pattern of Modern Reformers) to make Uproars, and tear their Throats in crying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. And yet after all this Noise, there is no
T^^de endangered but that of Conventicles, by which Craft, Demetrius and his
Accomplices get their Wealth. I have indeed told the People, that the Image
they worship never fell down from Jupiter, but that the Shrine-men abuse them
with a Puppet of their own framing, and then call it the Image of Diana. That
it is not the Cause of God, (as is pretended) but the Interest of a few
seditious Men that first raised, and still keeps up the Tumults in the Church;
and that the Doctrines, on whose behalf they have made so many Uproars, are no
Gospel Truths, but their own fond and novel Inventions; by all which, there is
no Trade or Occupation jeoparded, but theirs who live by making Schisms and
Factions. But where their Interest lies at stake, all Asia shall be concerned,
and their Cause shall be made the Quarrel of Mankind. Otherwise, how could
every young Prentice be taught to rail at me, as an Enemy to his Preferment?
For what can be more apparent then that I have affirmed nothing positively,
either for or against it, but have flatly waved it as an impertinent Enquiry to
my present Design? Let them discover one Syllable that may tend to persuade its
Discouragement, and I will be content (and I think it is but a just Penance) to
pay a double Price for all the Commodities I buy. But though Malice and Popular
Rage will not be tied to the strictness of Reason and Logical Discourse, and
may be allowed its Privilege to find any Conclusions in any Premises; yet
methinks Writers of Books should be more severe and cautious, because their
Integrity may be exposed, if they prevaricate, though the Multitude cannot. And
in this instance of Ingenuity, I find my Great Surveyor as faulty as the rudest
He of them all; and He rails as lavishly at me, as if I had Fired the City, or
the Ships at Chatham. Page 80.
But what is it that has moved so much Zeal and Choler? Nothing but that I have
been so presumptuous as to affirm in Print, That the Setlement of Public Peace
in the Nation, is a more comfortable thing then the Improvement of Trade.
Profane Counsel this! and if pursued, must prove more fatal to the City of
London, then the late horrid Conflagration. But to be brief and serious, The
scope and plain design of all that Discourse, was to represent, That Liberty of
Conscience could not be supposed to be conducive to the Improvement of Trade,
because it was destructive of Peace and Public Security; it being a certain
and a granted Truth, That Peaceable Times are doubtless the best Seasons of
Traffic; and that it cannot be expected honest and peaceable Industry should
thrive so well in the Dangers and Confusions of a Civil War, when no Trade goes
forward but that of the Saints, Plunder and Sacrilege; and therefore men that
design to enrich themselves only by employments of Peace, will not seek their
Gain in any ways that tend to its dissolution: So that if this Supposition be
true, That Liberty of Conscience is one of the most Fatal Hindrances of the
Security of Government, and Setlement of Society, the Consequence is
infallible, That for that reason only it was not to be endured in the
Commonwealth, though it were supposed otherwise never so much serviceable to
the Advancement of Trade. And therefore had our Author designed to reply at all
to the purpose, he must have made out either the Vanity of my Supposal, viz.
That Liberty of Conscience naturally tends to the subversion of the Public
Peace; or the Absurdity of my Inference, That though it were really serviceable
to the Interest of Trade, yet it was not to be endured, if it were as really
destructive of the Interests of Government. But this Logical Severity concerns
not him, it is his custom to balk Premises, and fall foul upon Conclusions; and
therefore without regard either to the truth of my Supposition, or my
Inference, he in his crude way of declaming, inveighs against me as an Enemy to
Trade and Industry, though the next time he writes he may with as great a show
of Reason impeach me of Sorcery and Witchcraft.

Page 80.
. 12. For is this to Discountenance Trade, to say, that Liberty of Conscience
is but an ill way to improve it? Page 79.
Is this to persuade the King to draw out the Vital Spirits and Blood of his
Kingdom, to say, it is but an Impolitick Trick to sacrifice the Security of his
Crown to the Wealth of a few Fanatic and ungovernable Subjects? Is this to
suspend all thoughts of the Encouragement of Trade, Page 81.
till all Men are brought to an Uniformity of Religion, to say, it more imports
Governors to stifle Fanatic Factions and Animosities, then to enrich
Tradesmen? And may they not at the same time project the Improvement of Trade,
and the Establishment of Uniformity, and Enact Laws to suppress Schisms, whilst
they Establish Privileges to encourage Manufactures? Is this to discourage
industrious Men in a peaceful way of improving their own Interests, Page 77.
to prevent and restrain them from doing it in unpeaceable ways? The Persons I
discours't of, were not Tradesmen, but Fanatics, that are greater Enemies to
Peace, then Friends to Industry; People of such peevish and restless
Dispositions, that no Government can satisfy them; of such furious and
ungovernable Spirits, that no Indulgence can appease them; of such proud and
arrogant Tempers, that no Courtesy can oblige them: it is these fantastic and
supercilious Mushromes to whom I would not have Liberty granted, because as it
is pregnant with many other Mischiefs, so if it improve their Interest, it does
but pamper their Insolence, embolden their Presumption, and tempt them to raise
Rebellions out of Pride and Wantonness. And the time is well known when this
Capricious Humor involved a flourishing Kingdom in woeful Wars and Desolations,
for no other reason, then because it was blessed with more Peace and Plenty
then it ever before or since enjoyed. But as for Men of peaceable Spirits, and
sober Principles, they neither need nor desire Liberty of Conscience for the
Advancement of Trade; nay, nothing can more discourage their Industry then
Factions of Zeal, and Animosities of Religion, that keep the Minds of Men in a
perpetual posture of War and mutual Hatred, and that break out upon every
occasion into open Ruptures and Embroilments; and if a few factious Priests
will but sound an Alarm to Reformation, the Multitude are immediately all in
Arms; and whenever the Rabble take a Toy against Antichrist and Superstition,
( i. e. any thing against which their Preachers are wont to inveigh) the whole
Kingdom must be embroiled for an idle word, and an extravagant humor. Now what
wise Man will care to appear abroad in such broken and uncertain Times? or to
lanch forth among such Fanatic Herricano's? No, he will rather choose not to
improve, then to endanger his Fortune; and thinks it better Husbandry to bury,
then to drown his Wealth. And therefore you may observe, that none are more
Zealous then the more Gentile and Intelligent sort of Merchants for the
setlement of Uniformity in order to the security of Trade; for their experience
of the horrid Mischiefs and Desolations brought to pass in other parts and
other Religions of the World, by the Follies and Frenzies of Fanatic Spirits,
makes them sadly apprehensive of the danger of this hot and giddy Humor, and
fearful of venturing too far among such wild and unconstant Cannibals. And as
for wise and peaceable Persons, that sit warm in their own Fortunes, they are
as little enamored of Factions in the Church, as of Disturbances in the State;
and therefore if our Author speak only concerning such Issachars as these, he
speaks neither to my Purpose, nor to their Approbation.

But to dispatch this Head, To what purpose does he Catechize me, Page 78.
Whether I have really considered what the meaning of that word [Trade] is,
unless he could prove it signifies more then that word [ Peace?] To what
purpose does he represent, that if Trade decay, Page 79.
Noblemen and Gentlemen must be content to eat their own Beef and Mutton at
home, unless he could prove it more comfortable to be forced to beg their Beef
and Mutton abroad, as they were not long since by the scrupulous and holy
Brethren, whilst themselves kept house for them at home, and made merry with
Songs upon This hard word will be explained in the sequel of this discourse.
Sigionoth? With what Honesty does he upbraid me for professing to smile at
those who labor with mighty projects for the Improvement of Trade, when it is
so notorious I only smiled at the Pedantry of those Men, that are so
wonderfully eager upon petty Designs, without any regard to the great Concerns
of a Nation? such as is the Erecting little Manufactures in Villages and
Buroughs, when compared with the Advantages of Public Peace and Setlement;
and at such half-witted People all the World will laugh as well as I. With what
Ingenuity does he represent, as if I had scoff't at his Majesty's Council
appointed for the Improvement of Trade, unless it must be taken for granted,
that the Commissioners have no more wit then to oppose or neglect the Public
Peace and Setlement, for the Interest of that Project? And if he will be so
rude as to suppose it, I will be so bold as to make a wry mouth at such
preposterous Follies. With what Conscience does he tell the People, that I have
represented all Tradesmen as Seditious, when it is so notorious I only suppose
that some of them may be tainted with Seditious Principles? and upon that
Supposition I have concluded Seditious Tradesmen to be more dangerous then
Seditious Farmers. And is it the same thing to affirm all Tradesmen to be
Seditious, as to say, that when they are so, they have more advantage of doing
mischief then Countrey-folk? If I should affirm, That when the Nobility or
Clergy are possessed with Principles that incline to Rebellion, and Disloyal
Practices, they are of all Rebels the most dangerous, should I be thought to
Impeach them of Treason and Disloyalty? In brief, it is not the Rich Citizen,
but the Wealthy Fanatic that I have branded for an Ungovernable Beast; and
that not as Wealthy, but as Fanatic: Remove the Fanatic, and neither the Man
nor his Wealth will do any harm. And now if after all this, Men will still be
Clamorous, and say I have persuaded the Discouragement of Trade, there is no
Remedy for me, and no Cure for them; I cannot vanquish their Rudeness, and by
strength of Reason force them to be Ingenuous; and if they are resolved to
abuse their own Understandings, that they may abuse me, let them take their
Course, and enjoy their Humor. But yet let them not please themselves with the
conceit of their having spited and disappointed my design, by their being
boisterous and uncivil, when it was no more then what I expected, and what (as
they know) I foretold: I was not unacquainted with those base and mean
Artifices, wherewith the Ringleaders are wont to inveigle their credulous and
besotted Drove. I knew beforehand with whatsoever clearness and caution I
expressed my Thoughts, they could fasten what sense they pleased upon my Words;
and that all their Followers would passionately embrace their violent and
distorted Interpretations; and when they have imposed upon themselves, they
grow zealous and impatient, they are deaf to all Remonstrances, incurious of
all Rational Pleas and Defenses, and you cannot prevail with them, no not to
attend to the Persuasions of their own Understandings; and in defiance to all
Syntax and Propriety of Speech, this shall be your meaning, and be it enacted
and decreed, That all the Godly Party embrace this and no other: And then it is
a Law of the Medes and Persians, and your Sentence is as irreversible, as the
decree of absolute and irrespective Reprobation. But to conclude, You already
see what work I am like to have with this Man, not so much to vindicate the
honest Truth, as the sense and Grammar of my Assertions. They have sufficiently
upbraided my presumption for the boldness of my Conclusion, viz. What I have
written, I have written; and now I am convinced I was too confident, for I see
that is the only thing in all my Book I shall be put to prove. But my
Resentments of his shameless Rudeness and Dis-ingenuity, have carried me beyond
my design, and beside my method, into this particular Skirmish, to let you see
his Weapons, his Wiles, and his way of Fighting, before I closed and engaged
with the main Battle: to which I now proceed, as it follows under the next Head.

. 13. (III.) The Multitude having by the forementioned ways of Incivility and
foul Language performed their part, and discharged their Duty, their last
method of defense is to engage particular Champions, that are known to be
mighty in dispute, to enter the Lists against all Adversaries: And then they
are secure of Triumph, though not of Victory. Every reply shall be voted
unanswerable, obscure words shall pass for depth of Reason, and huge Confidence
for strength of Demonstration; Popular Noise shall make good the Performance,
and the Vogue of the Party shall justify all their Arguments, and baffle all
our Answers. The Cattle they stear are hood-winkt, and as long as they drive,
will never boggle at any thing. And therefore they never stand upon regular
Proofs and Reasonings, but their Weapon is their Confidence, and bold
Affirmations are self-evident, because their boldness is their only proof.
They presume upon the Understandings, and are secure of the Suffrages of their
own Herd: To them all their Empty Talk is infallible as Oracle and Inspiration;
every slight Presumption is a mighty Proof, and every shadow of Proof bright
and forcible as Demonstration.

And to this purpose have I been assaulted by three puissant Aggressours; the
first whereof I conjecture by his Latin, his Wit and his Manners, to have been
either Pupil or Apprentice to the Renowned Cobbler of Gloucester. And the truth
is, from the days of Newman down to our own, the Men of that Trade and
Profession have been the greatest Instruments and the best Workmen at a
Thorough Godly Reformation. My second Adversary seems more modest, and better
bred; and is, I am confident, an upright and well-meaning Man: But how desirous
soever he has been of a Reply, I shall not vouchsafe to do him so much right,
or rather so much wrong, not only because he has scarce ventured to attaque
any thing in my Book beside the Contents, but chiefly because I shall have
occasion to examine all his more material Impertinencies in my third Assailant.
And therefore I shall dismiss these two yelping Pamphleters, as hurried on to
this Enterprise by nothing but their own hot heads and busy humors; and
address my self entirely to my sage Surveyor, as being not only a man of known
puissance and experience in Dispute, and of mighty bruit and renown in
Controversial Encounters; but also as a Champion sent forth, if not by the
Choice, yet at least by the Approbation of the whole Party, that have testified
their esteem of his Courage, and their assurance of his Success, by a general
shout and applause: and nothing less is expected from this Man of Gath, then
that he should give the Flesh of his Adversary unto the Fowls of the Air, and
to the Beasts of the Field. But as he stalks about to view his helpless prey,
V. page 84, ^78.
his bowels begin to melt into tenderness and compassion, and he looks down
upon the unfortunate Youth with equal pity and disdain. It is a pretty and an
hopeful Stripling, and it is pity to nip him in his youthful Bloom; and
therefore in stead of crushing him to death and nothing, as men kill Snails, he
will only chastize the rash and forward Boy, and by the smartness of his
Correction, make him repent the folly and unadvisedness of his Undertaking. And
I doubt not but the People insult over the severity of my Rebuke, and think I
have done sufficient Penance for my presumption.

They turn over the Leaves, and tell the number of his Pages, and that is
enough to justify their flattest and most peremptory Censures; it is no matter
for an attentive and deliberate perusal, they always pass their definitive
sentence, not according to the evidence of Reason, but according to the
inclinations of Prejudice, an^ the interests of a Party: so that the Book, be
it what it will, is secure of their Applauses and Acclamations. Never did Man
write a more coherent and unanswerable piece of Reason; never were Arguments
more smartly urged, nor Objections more dexterously assoil'd: verily it is a
wonderful precious Man! And yet bating a few Cavils foreign to the main matters
in debate, they understand not either what he drives at, or what he opposes,
and are not able to give the least tolerable account by what Engines and
particular Reasonings he has undermined (as he words it) the principal parts
and seeming pillars of my whole Fabric: and excepting that it is known by
vulgar hearsay, that he writes for Liberty of Conscience, and I against it,
they know nothing of the Grounds and Principles of our difference. But he
braves it confidently in general Terms, insults over this Argument, despises
that; tells of lamentable Misadventures in one place, and palpable
Inconsistencies in another; accuses this Proposition as a new and unheard of
Heresy, slights that as an old and cashir'd Error: vaunts every where of his
own Feats and Performances, and upon every occasion drops Censures and
Challenges, and bears up through the whole against all that either has been, or
ever shall be objected with Gallantry of Mind, and assurance of Success: And
this is at once both Triumph and Victory. Their Confidence is the most
effectual and persuasive Argument with their Followers, that have no ground for
their dislike but the Warrant and Prescription of their Example; they have
boar'd their Ears to their Dictates, and subjected their Reasons and
Consciences to their Authority; and therefore the Assent of the one is ever
proportioned to the Confidence of the other; and if these will be peremptory in
their Assertions, they will be inflexible in their Belief; it is in vain to
attempt their Constancy, they are (as a Poet speaks of the old Romans)
immovable as the Capitol; and you may sooner remove Mountains, then shake
their Confidence.

But is it not prodigious to see people so jocundly satisfied with a Book,
written with so much looseness, as if its Author had either utterly forgot what
I had uttered, or cared not what himself was to prove: a Book wherein it is hard
to find a passage that is not coarsly false or impertinent, and very few that
are not apparently both: a Book in which you shall meet with nothing singular
and remarkable, but horrid Untruths and Falsifications.

. 14. But however, a Book he resolved to write, without regard to Truth or
Falsehood; and though he were not so lamentably costive as a late Brother of the
scribbling humor, that was so far to seek for an Exordium, that he was forced
to take his rise at the day of the Month, and the year of our Lord; yet he was
much more unhappy to make his entrance with such an awkerd acknowledgement, as
must for ever defeat and discredit the design of his whole performance, by
confessing, that all his Pleas, how solemn and serious soever he may appear,
are but dissembled and hypocritical Pretenses: When he tells us, that it is none
of the least disadvantages of his Cause, Page 1.
that he is enforced to admit a Supposition, that those whom he pleads for are
indeed really mistaken in their apprehensions. But though this may seem a rash
and unadvised Concession, yet if you examine it, you will find it a notable
wily and cunning device. For unless he will give place to such a Supposition,
or if he will rigidly contend, that what he pleads in the behalf of, is
absolutely the Truth, and that Obedience thereunto is the direct Will and
Command of God, there remains no proper Field for the Debate about Indulgence
to be managed in: For things acknowledged to be such, are not capable of an
Indulgence properly so called, because the utmost Liberty that is necessary
unto them, is their right and due in strict Justice and Law. And yet the whole
scope of his Apology, and the only Fundamental Principle upon which he builds,
is that they are obliged to do what they do out of Obedience to the Will and
Command of God; and by consequence the things they contend for, are not capable
of any Indulgence, but are matters of indispensable duty and Divine right: so
that were the Government of Church Affairs at their disposal, they must
establish the things that they desire to be indulged in, as duties of strict
Justice and Law, and restrain all other different forms and practices out of
regard to the Divine Command; and then to tolerate ours, or any other way of
Worship distinct from their own, would be to permit men to live in open
defiance to the direct Will and Command of God, that has precisely enjoined a
different Form of Worship. So that it seems all pretenses for Liberty of
Conscience, are but artificial Disguises for the advantage of farther Designs;
and when they gain it, then the Mask falls off, and the Scene is shifted, and
Petitions for Indulgence immediately swell up into Demands of Reformation. So
unfortunate is this Man in his whole performance, that by all the Principles he
has made use of to plead for Indulgence, he is obliged to plead against it. And
there is not a more effectual Argument against Toleration of different Forms of
Worship, then their Fundamental Conceit, that nothing ought to be practiced or
established in the Worship of God, but what is precisely warranted and
authorized in the Word of God: For this restrains and disavows all Forms but
one, and ties all the Christian World to a nice and exact Conformity to that
complete and adequate Rule of Worship.

But suppose he were to speak to the Nature of the things themselves, and not
to the Apprehensions of them with whom he has to do: Then farewell all soft and
gentle Language, and you shall hear nothing but Thundrings against
Superstition, Will Worship, Episcopal Tyranny, Popish Corruptions, Rags of the
Whore, and the Dregs of the Romish Beast. Sermon before Parl. October 24. 1651.
Page 12. By J. O.
Then what is Prelacy but a mere Antichristian Encroachment upon the
Inheritance of Christ? And he that thinks Babylon is confined to Rome, and its
open Idolatry, knows nothing of Babylon, nor of the New Jerusalem: the depth of
a subtle mystery does not lie in gross visible folly; it has been insinuating
it self into all the Nations for 1600 years, and to most of them is now become
as the marrow in their bones; before it be wholly shaken out, these Heavens
must be dissolved, and the Earth shaken, (i. e. as he expounds both himself and
the Text, the settled and established Government of the West must be subverted:)
Their Tall Trees (i. e. Kings and Princes) hewed down and set a howling, and
the residue of them transplanted from one end of the Earth to the other. Or as
the same Author expresses himself upon another occasion, Sermon before Parl.
April 19. 1649. Page 25.
The Heavens and the Earth of the Nations must be shaken, because in their
present Constitution they are directly framed to the Interest of Antichrist,
which by notable advantages at their first moulding, and continued insinuations
ever since, has so rivetted it self into the very Fundamentals of them, that
no digging or mining with an Earthquake will cast up the Foundation-stones
thereof. And therefore the Lord Jesus having promised the service of the
Nations to his Church, will so far open their whole frame to the roots, as to
pluck out all the cursed seeds of the Mystery of Iniquity, which by the craft
of Satan, and exigences of State, or methods of advancing the pride and power
of some Sons of Blood, have been sown amongst them. And then abundance of
Scripture and dark Prophecy is poured forth, to make good these mild and
peaceable Doctrines: It is the great day of the wrath of the Lamb. The Land
shall be soked with blood, and the dust made fat with fatness; for it is the
day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompense for the Controversy of
Zion. Ibid. Page 21.
All the Kings of the earth have given their power to Antichrist, endeavoring
to the utmost to keep the Kingdom of Christ out of the World. What I pray has
been their main business for 700 years and upward, even almost ever since the
Man of Sin was enthroned? How have they earned the Titles, Eldest Son of the
Church, The Catholic and most Christian King, Defender of the Faith? Has it
not been by the blood of the Saints? And now will not the Lord avenge his Elect
that cry unto him day and night? will he not do it speedily? Will he not call
the Fowls of Heaven to eat the Flesh of Kings, and Captains, and great Men of
the Earth? Rev. 19.18. All this must be done, Sermon of October. 24. 1651. page
27.
to cast down all opposition to the Kingdom of the Lord Christ, and to advance
it to its Glory and Power. That consists mainly of these three things, that he
there reckons. 1. Purity and Beauty of Ordinances and Gospel Worship. 2. The
full casting out and rejecting of all Will Worship, and their attendant
Abominations. 3. A most glorious and dreadful breaking of all that rise in
Opposition unto him: never such Desolations. So that we see nothing will ever
satisfy their desires and demands, Sermon April 19. 1641. p. ^.
unless all Gospel Ordinances be reformed to their primitive power and purity,
according to the appointment, and unto the acceptance of the Lord Jesus. Or as
the same Author expresses himself more fully in his Sermon of April 29. 1646.
p. 29. The darling Errors of late years (of the Bishops) were all of them
stones of the old Babel, closing and coupling with that tremendous Fabric,
which the Man of Sin had erected to dethrone Jesus Christ; came out of the
belly of that Trojan Horse, that fatal Engine, which was framed to betray the
City of God. They were Popish Errors, such as whereof that Apostasy did
consist, which only is to be looked upon as the great adverse State to the
Kingdom of the Lord Christ. Heedless and headless Errors may breed disturbance
enough unto the people of God; but such as tend to a peace and association ^um
Ecclesia malignantium, tending to a total subversion of the sacred State, are
far more dangerous. Now such were the Innovations of the late Hierarchists; in
Worship, their Paintings, Crossings, Crucifixes, Bowings, Cringings, Altars,
Tapers, Wafers, Organs, Anthems, Litany, Rails, Images, Copes, Vestments; what
were they but Roman Varnish, an Italian Dress for our Devotion, to draw on
Conformity with that Enemy of the Lord Jesus? In Doctrine, the Divinity of
Episcopacy, (a notable piece of Popery that) Auricular Confession, Free Will,
Predestination on Faith, yea Works foreseen, (what Antichristian Doctrine is
that too?) Limbus Patrum, Justification by Works, falling from Grace, Authority
of a Church, which none knew what it was, Canonical Obedience, Holiness of
Churches, and the like innumerable, what were they but helps to Sancta Clara,
to make all our Articles of Religion speak good Roman-Catholique? How did their
old Father of Rome refresh his spirit, to see such Chariots as those provided
to bring England again unto him? This closing with Popery was the sting in the
Errors of those days, which caused pining, if not death in the Episcopal Pot.

. 15. Here is no shuffling, nor any shifting pretenses, it is plain dealing, and
plain English. Antichrist and all its Adherents must be destroyed by Wars and
horrid Desolations: This is the way that the Lord Christ has chalkt out to his
people, both by his Promises and his Providence, to introduce the purity and
beauty of his Ordinances. The Prelatists are Members of the Whore and the
Beast, and imitate the Antichristian Apostasy both from the Worship and the
Doctrine of the Gospel; Ibid. Page 3^*
nay, the Vial of Popery is poured out upon the very Throne it self, as it was
when Charles the First sat in it. And now what is the result of all this
Gibberish, but that the Saints, whenever Providence alarms, or (as he manageth
the business) opportunity invites them to the great and glorious Work of a more
Thorough Godly Reformation, may and ought to shake and subvert the established
Government of the Nation, that is combined with the Interest of Antichrist, to
set up their way of Gospel Worship, or the purity and beauty of Christ's
Ordinances? which is the only thing urged and pleaded for by our Author. You
see, Sir, (to bate him some worse Inferences) what stout Patrons these Men are
of the Indulgence they plead for, when every Opinion that they judge erroneous,
must be branded for a Popish and Antichristian Error; when every slight
Difference shall be resolved into Atheism and Blasphemy; when a Scholastic
Nicety about the unaccountable workings of Eternal Providence, shall be made an
eminent instance of Antichristian Apostasy; and when to dissent from him in a
thing of no greater importance then a Metaphysical Speculation, shall amount to
no less Charge then of betraying the Gospel of Christ, and hewing at the very
root of Christianity, as he speaks of some Systematick Niceties, that he is
pleased to call Arminian Heterodoxes, Display of Armin. Ep. dedic.
and whose Abettors he denounces with the Confidence of an Apostolical
Authority, incapable of our Church Communion. Nay, The duties of Pastors and
People distinguished, Page 52.
his Zeal against them did not confine it self to his own Native Country, but
extended its fervours (as himself informs us) to a Foreign Commonwealth, and
vented its heats against their Indulgence, and plea for Toleration, and a
Liberty of prophesying beyond the Seas. To what party of Dissenters is it that
this tenderhearted Man would extend the favor of his Indulgence, that
resolves every petty dissent into an inexpiable Apostasy from the Gospel; and
has branded all parties with such foul names as render them unworthy the
Compassion of the State, and incapable of the Communion of the Church? It Is
true, many Pamphlets he has published in behalf of Toleration and Liberty of
Conscience; but yet he still so orders the matter, as to exclude all Men
whatsoever from claiming any benefit or advantage from that pretense, excepting
only the salvage and the frantic Sectaries of the Army: And that is the whole
mystery of his Goodnature. The Independents had vanquished the Royalists, and
supplanted the Presbyterians, and were perkt up into a Supremacy of Power and
Interest: But being unable either to secure or to support their Tyranny, unless
by the assistance of those Religious Miscreants, who were the only faithful
Adherents to their Godly Interest, they must sooth and treat them with all
brotherly love and tenderness; and all their Fanatic Frekes and horrid
Blasphemies must be winkt at as pitiable Mistakes and Miscarriages of weak
Brethren. For if we exasperate them by giving check to their Exorbitances, we
lose our Friends and Confederates, abate our Power, and endanger our Interest;
and it is more eligible for humble and self-denying Men to bear with all the
wild and Fanatic Enormities in the World, rather then part with the delicious
sweets of Government and Sovereign Authority. What other imaginable account can
be given of this Man's Zeal for Toleration, when he has so peremptorily stripped
all Parties of their right to it, excepting only those Sons of Anarchy and
Confusion? For not only the Papists, the Prelatists, and the Arminians, but
even their dear Brethren of the Presbytery were transformed into Limbs of the
Antichristian L^viathan: so that (not to pursue this advantage too far) you see
the naked and undisguised Truth of these Men's Persuasions, maugre all their
demure Concessions and juggling Pretensions. All the World are fallen short of
the Truth of God but themselves; and out of the Churches of their Pale, there
is none Orthodox, no not one. We have all revolted from the Kingdom of the Lord
Christ, to the Corruptions and Superstitious Idolatries of Antichrist; and
therefore we are all to be accounted and treated as Members of that Whore, whom
the Saints hate, and shall make desolate and naked, and shall eat her Flesh,
and suck her Blood. This is the true state of the Controversy between us. But
Affairs, it seems, are not yet ripe enough for the discovery of such bold and
dangerous Truths; and therefore our Author, as the present posture of things
stands, thinks it more prudence to stifle and dissemble such thoughts. The New
Lights and Doctrines of 49. are not seasonable in 69. Then I. O. in a Sermon
preached before his Masters of the Rump, (the scope whereof is to prove that
the Lord Jesus Christ is resolved to embroil all the ancient Kingdoms, and
subvert all the settled Governments of the West, to restore the purity of his
Gospel Worship: i.e. in plainer and less Canting English, to carry on the great
work of a Thorough Reformation by Civil Wars and Rebellions) among many other
rare Notions, wonderfully tending to the peace of Christendom, he informs the
World, Page 35.
Every Age has its peculiar Work, has its peculiar Light; now what is the Light
which God manifestly gives in in our days? Plainly, the peculiar Light of this
Generation, is that discovery which the Lord has made to his People of the
Mystery of Civil and Ecclesiastical Tyranny. This Light was fit to be hanged
out to the People, when they had murdered their Sovereign Prince, banished the
undoubted Heir to the Crown, and proclaimed him a Traitor to his own Subjects.
But, alas! those happy days are gone, and those attempts of Liberty defeated,
and the Nation is once more relaps't into its Civil and Ecclesiastical Slavery;
and that is no proper season for the Revelation of his Mysteries. And therefore
he is not unwilling to forego the mighty advantages of these New Lights, and is
content his Party should pretend to grant this false Supposition, that by so
much seeming Modesty they might win upon their Superiors to requite them with
a real Indulgence: Though methinks it is neither wisely nor kindly done of him,
in this public manner to betray their secret thoughts and purposes to their
most implacable Adversaries. However, I am sure it is far from being
artificially contrived, that when he designed to act in a disguise, he should
at the first entrance upon the Stage unmask himself to all the Spectators,
only that they might know him not to be in good earnest, nor the Person he
appears to be.

. 16. But however, from these thoughts he starts his Discourse; and though he
stumble into his Career, that is no hindrance to the swiftness of his Course,
but away he flies like Lightning, and is not able to curb his Pen, till it
comes to the end of 410 Pages. For by heating his Brains with this
Introduction, he quickly fills his Fancy with an innumerable swarm of vagrant
fortuitous and heedless Imaginations, that come fluttering forth in such a
preposterous and impetuous stream of Words, that he could scarce gain leisure
to range them into Grammatical Syntax. Every conceit that thrusts its self into
his thoughts, he pours out into his Book: His Work must be finished in a few
hasty minutes, and at idle hours, how then can you reasonably expect he should
have time to weigh the strength and pertinency of his Arguments, or digest his
Notions into method or propriety of Speech? And had I either so much Patience,
or so little Employment as to represent to your view the short Contents of his
whole Book, how would you bless your self at such an undigested heap of
Rubbish, and such an immethodical Rhapsody of Words? Take a short taste, and
supply the rest with your own Observation. Page 2. Those who plead for Liberty
of Conscience, are forced to dissemble in their Pretenses. Page 3. The design
of the Ecclesiastical Polity is to prove that the Law of the Civil Magistrate,
is the sole Rule of Religious Worship. Page 4. The Principles of that Book are
new and uncouth. Page 5, 6. Neither Church nor State is concerned in them. Page
7. There is no love lost between us, as being no Acquaintance. Page 8, 9. Young
Men are confident, Old Men cautious. Page 10. I am more a Philosopher then a
Christian. Page 11. Rails at me for railing at them. Page 12. Engages to be
civil; and for a taste of his Civility, Page 13. charges me with the height of
pride and boasting. Page 14. Many are displeased with my scoffings and
revilings. Page 15. The Nonconformists will not be jear'd out of the Profession
of the Gospel. Page 16. Challenges all our Learned Men to a Disputation. Page
17. Demands a personal Conference between W. B. and the Author of The Friendly
Debate. Page 18. Cites my Description of the Nonconformists Preaching. Page 19,
20. What if I am deceived. Page 21. Another Challenge to all Men of Learning.
Page 22. There are Fools of all Parties. Should I proceed after this manner to
show you by what Tautologies, from what Topics, and with what Materials he has
made up his full Tale of 400 Pages, you would (so endless, and yet withal so
trifling are its follies) pity that Man that is condemned to squander away his
Time and Parts in winnowing such an heap of Chaff, and such a Mass of
Impertinencies. In short, in stead of spending a few hours to examine the
principal Parts and seeming Pillars of my whole Fabric, he has only hid and
buried them under Loads of Rubbish; and to clear that, will be the Work and
Drudgery of my Reply, rather then to strengthen my own Foundations. And to that
purpose I will give you a general Account of the way of his Writing, and main
Heads of his Arguing: which being dispatched, there will remain but a very
small pittance of pertinent Matter for my Review.

. 17. 1. In stead of following the plain and evident drift of my Discourses, he
starts some Collateral Reflection, that was occasionally intimated upon
supposition of the Truth and Evidence of my main Principles and direct
Assertions; and this Chase he pursues with Noise and deep-mouthed Cries through
two or three Pages, till he chance to stumble upon some fresh Proposition of
the same nature, and then that is his Game, and that he follows with the same
empty Noise and Clamor, till some new Theme divert him to a new pursuit; and
if he can run it down with a few idle Descants, impertinent Queries, insipid
Exclamations, abused Texts, and threadbare Apophthegms, the day is his own; if
not, it escapes his fury; he must not lose his variety of sport, by wasting too
much of his time and spirits in the over-eager pursuit of a single prey. And
when he flies out into these unruly Digressions, his Fancy is pregnant, his Pen
is brisk and spritely, and he is lavish of his Ink and Paper: But when he
returns toward the Track of my Discourse, his Career checks, his Confidence
abates, it is not altogether so pert and Dogmatical; its Censures are not so
full of scorn and neglect, nor his Determinations so Magisterial and
presumptuous, but the Man condescends sometimes to the modesty of a Perhaps,
and a May-be, I fear, and It seems. And he usually stops his Course before he
comes to the main issue of the business; and like a discreet and reserved Man,
seems to keep back the main thing that he could say; the whole Secret is not to
be unriddled at once. No! the Reader must content himself with a transient taste
at first, and then feed his expectation with the gracious Promise of future
Discoveries and Revelations never to be revealed. But he has his Magazine of
unanswerable Arguments and Objections, that I am confident we shall never
Answer, though for no other reason then because we shall never hear them.

You have read the Memoirs of Tom Coriat, whose custom it is to enlarge upon
Toys and Trifles; He is circumstantial in his Remarks upon his Hosts Beard, and
in his Description of his Sign-post, but scarce takes notice of any thing great
and glorious, and passes by Princes Palaces, Forts and Citadels, and all the
greatest Strengths and Ornaments of Kingdoms. And to the same purpose has this
Man spent his Travels through my Book; where he lights upon any passage that is
less important in it self, and more remote from my main design, he dwells and
expatiates upon it with double diligence. And so industrious is he to collect
the smallest and least considerable passages, as if he were resolved nothing in
my Book should escape his Correction. And how bravely does he amplify upon
Words and little Trifles! as if he had determined not to spare the nicest
Error to expose my Ignorance, but had engaged to sift me with such an exact
and merciless disquisition, that rather then any thing should escape him, he
would measure Atoms, and weigh Grains. But when he approaches my main design,
how slightly does he balk the weightiest Reasonings? how nimbly does he frisk
over the greatest Difficulties? and how dexterously does he beat beside the
main Questions? and if he now and then stay to glance at any more enforcing
proof, it is extraordinary: But some Arguments he winks at, and some he
out-faces; those he confutes with a Pish, and these with a Vapor, and heaps up
every where I know not what general Censures and Exceptions, but nothing is
either proved or specified; and he is so admirably accomplished in all the arts
of tediousness and impertinency, that he can waste a whole Page of Words to no
other purpose, Vide Page 19, 20, 72, 73, 74, 75, 83, 84.
and with no more sense then to deny a Proposition, or slight an Argument, and
yet not allow a Line to confute it. He is fluent, and runs over in Expressions
where there is no need; but where there is, he immediately becomes dry in his
Discourse, and thrifty of his Words; and has consumed more Pages in loose and
precarious Censures, then he has in making Premises and Conclusions: And if
such Talk may pass for pertinent Replys, he may undertake the Defense of any
Cause, and it is indifferent which side he abets; his Answers will serve equally
at all turns, and to all purposes; he may turn the same Declamations upon his
own Castles in the Air, and then they are all beaten down about his ears: but
if he would have allotted all that time, and all those Pages to confute my
Arguments, that he has spent to rail and declaim against them, his Book would
not have been so much less, as it must have been better. Instances of this sort
are innumerable, and therefore I shall not here be so tedious as to accumulate
particulars, because it would be endless; only let me request you to reflect
upon this suggestion as you travel through his dry and barren Pages, and then
your own Observation will too pregnantly confirm and justify mine: And
therefore quitting this more general Consideration, that is only forcible upon
impartial and ingenuous Minds, I shall address my self to some more particular
and convictive Remarks.

. 18. 2. One of his choicest Helps to swell up the Bulk of his Answer, is to
break out at every turn into Tragical Complaints against the tartness of my
Invectives and Satirical Expressions: and this Topic he seems to keep for a
reserve upon all occasions; and whenever he runs himself out of breath, and out
of Argument, here he recovers his wind, and recruits his forces; at this Post
his Pen always both starts and stops his Career. And he sallies forth so often
into this Complaint, that by Computation I judge it fills up above the fifth
part of his Reply. But all this is no more then Rubbish, and serves to no
Nobler use then to fill up void spaces, and amounts to no higher purpose then
impertinent Talk. For whether I have incurred this Censure, is not to be
determined by any smartness of Expressions, but by the Truth and Evidence of
things: for some tempers and principles there are, that can never be exposed
with too much sharpness and severity of style; and therefore if the tender Man,
in stead of declaiming against the unmerciful Carriage of my Pen, had been at
leisure to write pertinently, he should have proved it was undeserved: But if
Evidence of Proof, and Notoriety of Fact, do justify my utmost Charge, my
Expression must have come short of my Theme, had I arraigned such hateful
Crimes in softer Language. A Man may without offense represent Vice in its
blackest Colors, and expose the ugliness of Pride and Insolence with the
roughest and most Satirical Characters; and for this no style can be too
churlish and vehement; and it is no Cruelty to lash a naked Crime with Scorpions
and Whips of Steel: yet when it puts on the Mask of Religion, and gains its
opportunities under the protection of a tender Conscience, then we must court
it with gentle and respectful Language; to discover the Imposture, is to expose
Religion; to inveigh against the foulness of the abuse, is to rail at the power
of Godliness; to uncase the Hypocrite, and to wash off his Varnish and false
Colors, is to lay open the Nakedness of Piety to the scorn of Atheists and
Worldlings: and therefore we must be tame and patient, and suffer them to
debauch Religion and disturb Government, to affront Authority and trample upon
Laws, to spread their Infection, and broach their seditious Doctrines, to raise
violent Schisms and Factions in the Church, and mislead the People into a
Rebellious Reformation: and lastly, toss us up and down in Eternal
Dissetlements, because they Pray and Fast often, and enjoy Communion with God,
and attend upon his Ordinances, and love the Lord Jesus, and hate Antichrist.
So that though a Man may declaim against naked Villainy with the severest
Invectives, yet it seems we must flatter Hypocrisy, though it enhanse the
foulness of the Crime, by the falsehood of its Pretenses. And because it is bold
and shameless, we must suffer it to look Truth out of Countenance. It Is an holy
and a precise Man, and it looks demurely, and then what if he be saucy to his
Superiors? what if he scorn and trample upon his Betters? what if he be
peevish and impatient of Contradiction? what if every Affront transport him
into all the Disorders of Passion and Revenge? and what if he shroud Pride and
Insolence under the covering of a sheepish Humility? We must not presume to
discern the clearest Symptoms and most palpable Indications of these Vices in
such an eminent Professor, but must wipe off all his blemishes with a few soft
and gentle Words: alas, Good Man! they are but the Infirmities and
Indiscretions of his Zeal, and the spots of the best of Gods People. Nay, what
if we should observe melting, humble, brokenhearted Christians to affect a
demure and sanctimonious Niceness, thereby to gain advantage and reputation to
their black Designs? What if they have abused the most sacred Oaths and
Protestations, to cheat the Simple, and betray the Innocent? What if they
pretend the instigation of the Spirit of God, to Authorize the foulness of
their Enterprises? What if they make show of higher seize of
Mortification, to gain the handsomer opportunities of wallowing in the most
beastly and dishonorable Impurities? What if in their practices they bid open
defiance to all the Principles of Justice and Conscience; and under pretenses
of holy Zeal, dare to act those Villainies at which a Wicked Man would startle
and recoil? We must needs suppose these Infirmities to be easily incident to
Good Men; and when they break Oaths, rob Temples, and murder Kings, it is but
an oversight of Zeal; and what sweet and precious Communion may they enjoy with
God in the midst of Murders, Treasons and Massacres? And to describe their
Wickedness, and to call them Villainies, is reviling and intemperate Language.
And thus can they do their business, as they please, by an ugly Word. Their
Followers understand nothing of the Truth and Nature of things, but are acted
purely by the Power of Words; and judge of the good or evil of Actions by the
Titles that their Masters give them. And if they will but call a true
Accusation a foul Slander, it is no matter for clearing their own Innocence,
that is enough to wash off any aspersions whatsoever; and all the Evidence and
Demonstration of Proof, is too little to bear out the Truth of the Indictment
against the Authority of their Not Guilty.

. 19. The Truth is, all things have two Names as well as two Handles, a Black
one that they always fasten upon us, and a White one that they ever appropriate
to themselves; and thus what in them is Godly Zeal, is in us Malice and
Persecution; what in them is sanctified Wit, is in us Profaneness and
Scurrility; and what in them is Tenderness of Conscience, is in us
Superstition. When they are peevish and censorious, they are only offended and
scandalized; and when they are cruel and unmerciful to dissenting Brethren,
they are then zealous for God and his Truth. But do we expose the Follies of
their Divinity with any briskness of Reason? that is Arrogance. Do we upbraid
the Impostures of their Superstition with any sharpness of Wit? that is
Profaneness. Do we demonstrate any of their Notions of Practical Godliness to
be giddy and unwarrantable Conceits? that is to blaspheme the Influences of the
Divine Spirit. Do we but press People to an Imitation of the Life of Christ?
that is enough to brand us for Socinians. Do we urge the absolute necessity of
Good Works, or an Holy Life, (for that is the same thing) as an indispensable
Condition of our acceptance with God? what can we be but Papists? And do we
assert the practice of Morality to be the great and most essential Design of
Religion? we are Heathen Philosophers, and preach Plato and Seneca, and our
selves, but not Jesus Christ. And thus can they with ease countermine all our
Endeavors, to disabuse the People by a few odious Names, and blast and deform
the most rational Discourses, only by crying out Railings, Revilings,
Scoffings, despightful Reproaches, Sarcasms, scornful contemptuous Expressions,
false Criminations. But if to rail be to assault with foul Language and
reproachful Nicknames, in stead of true Wit and Reason, what think they of
themselves, who when they are demanded to give a Rational Account of their
Outrage against the Government, and Discipline of our Church, only inveigh
against it in rude and unmannerly Phrases, and manage the Quarrel by calling
Names? and in stead of propounding modest Exceptions, stuff their Pamphlets
with boisterous Words and unclean Invectives, and familiarly salute us with the
cleanly Titles of Locusts of the Bottomless Pit, The Limbs of Antichrist,
Baal's Priests, Romish Wolves and Foxes, Beelzebub of Canterbury, Antichristian
Beasts, Bishops of the Devil; with innumerable others of the same generous
strain. In this sort of Eloquence our Adversaries have ever been the most able
and most accomplished Orators in the World. How infinitely have they excelled
all the Wits of former Ages in this Noble, but neglected Art? and with what
success have they improved and cultivated this Field from the good days of
Queen Elizabeth down to our own? No Age nor Nation in the World can vie with
ours for these Beauties of Style and Embellishments of Speech. And I could name
a Friend of his and mine that abounds as much with these Flowers as the bravest
Orator of the Party: but I suppose I need not recall to his memory some Sermons
as plentifully adorned with these foul-mouthed Flourishes, as any Pamphlets of
the rudest Zealot in the pack. Let them discover any such uncleanness in my
Book, and then let them impose any Penance, and I will promise to undergo it,
though it were to write a Panegyric in praise of the Good Nature of the
Presbyterians, and the Sincerity of the Independents. But, alas! they will
never descry any thing there like foul Language, unless cleanly words may be
defiled by expressing foul things. It Is not any bitterness of expression that
afflicts them, but the sharpness of Truth, and that is a biting thing indeed.
They are gaul'd with the Evidence of Conviction, and whilst I rub their sore
(and therefore tender) Consciences, that and only that makes them fret with
such impatience at the Liberty of my Reproof.

But to dispatch: You (Sir) are privy to the secrets of my Soul, and can bear
testimony to the integrity of my Intentions: How often have I discoursed to you,
that as deeply as I adore our blessed Savior upon the score both of his being
the Son of God, and the Redeemer of the World, yet methinks my Devotion is
never more passionate and transporting, then when it muses upon the Goodness of
his Laws: Laws so excellent, that their own Goodness might be their own Eternal
Obligation: Laws becoming the Wisdom of God, and agreeable to the Reason of
Man: that purify our Minds, refine our Natures, and perfect our
Understandings: Laws that bind us to the Heavenly Pleasures of Love, Innocence
and Charity; that restrain every thing that disturbs the quiet of the World,
and the peace of Society, and that command nothing but what is useful and
rational, and conducive to the happiness of Mankind: Laws of Meekness and
Justice, Mercy and Patience, Contentedness and Pity, Kindness, Obedience and
Humility. And now if the Gospel be an Institution so pregnant with Virtue, and
Wisdom and Holiness, how can any Man that is tender of his Saviors Reputation,
tamely suffer these brainsick People to debauch the Divine Wisdom of his
Religion with childish and trifling Follies? And to represent the design of
Christianity in so odd a guise, as to suit it chiefly to the Conceptions of
Children, and inclinations of old Women, and make it most agreeable to weak
Reasons, soft Spirits, and little Understandings? And how can any Man that is
enamored of the Beauty of real Goodness, think any Satyrs too rough for such
bold Impostors, as make it a Mask for Pharisaick Hypocrisy, and stave off
their Proselytes from the practice of real Righteousness, by amusing their
little Understandings with trifling and unprofitable Gayeties? That employ a
seeming Godliness to supplant all that is real, and oppose all the great ends
and designs of Religion, under more gorgeous Pretenses to advance them; and are
not only content to exchange the Reality and Substance of true Goodness for
its Varnish and Colors, but have been so untoward as to contrive a seeming and
hypocritical Sanctity, that does not more counterfeit then oppose true
Holiness: in brief, choking all the most beautiful Graces of Christianity, by
overrunning them with rank and noisome Impostures. Now if these things are so,
who can charge the utmost severity of Expression with intemperance of Speech?
And that they are so, if I have not sufficiently proved it already, I shall
have occasion to enforce its Evidence by some too clear and convictive Proofs
in the sequel of this Discourse. And therefore it is but a vain thing to make
loud and tragical Complaints of railing and intemperate Speeches, unless they
had first discovered that there is not truth enough in my Accusations to
warrant the sharpest and most vehement Expressions. I have not thrown out hard
words at all adventure, nor confuted the Cause by giving bad Language, (as it is
some Men's custom to stick an Odious Name upon an Adversary, and then he is
baffled:) No, I first endeavored to convict them by Evidence of Reason, and
after that to reprove their Error; and if they resolved to continue obstinate,
to upbraid their peevishness with some sharpness of Expression. And if Men will
not distinguish between Railing and sharp Reproofs, there is no remedy but the
best and wisest Persons of all Ages must pass for the greatest Railers. And so
far am I from recanting my severity toward them, that I am rather tempted to
applaud it by the glorious Examples of the greatest Wits of our Nation, King
James, Archbishop Whitgift, Archbishop Bancroft, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Bilson,
Bishop Mountagne, Bishop Bramhall, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Lord Bacon, etc. And
what can you imagine more hateful to such wise Men as these, then to see mean
People borrow the Face of Religion to make them bold and impudent against
Government? In short, I could name some Persons so vile and abominable, that
it is not in the power of Slander to abuse them; and there is a Faction of
Saints in the World, whose Villainies and Falsehoods and Perjuries are so utterly
destitute of excuse or palliation, that no History of any Age or Nation can
afford us the like impudent and execrable Examples of Baseness and Hypocrisy.
And therefore let not the living man complain, etc.

. 20. 3. Another pregnant and serviceable Topic of Argumentation, is to load
his Adversary with Consequences of Atheism, Popery, and Mahumetanism; though,
for any Reason I have given him, he might as plausibly have charged me of
Magic or Necromancy, or (what perhaps may seem more monstrous) of Fanaticism.
But this is one of the most elegant Idiotisms of their Language, and most
powerful Figures of their Logic; whatsoever they touch is immediately turned
into Atheism; they can wring this Conclusion out of all Premises, as they can
draw some Doctrines out of all Texts. It Is an odious Inference, and then it is
no matter for its Truth and Coherence; a wide Mouth and a bold Face shall make
good the Charge; and what they want of Rational Deduction, is easily supplied
by Noise and Confidence. Their Followers (they know) never examine things by
the Rules of Reason and Discourse; put but an ugly Consequence into their
Mouths, and they swallow it with a glibber satisfaction then the purest and
most refined Reasonings, and peremptorily conclude you guilty of all the horrid
Tenets and Assertions that their Leaders will throw upon you. And there lies
all their strength, in the Ignorance and Credulity of the Multitude: Instances
of this nature are innumerable, their great Anak of Disputation I. O. (to
mention no more) never commenced a Dispute against any Persuasion, but he
immediately brought the Controversy to this issue. He cannot Arraign the Lords
Prayer it self, but Atheism and Blasphemy must into the Indictment, The
asserting that Form of Words (says he) confirms many in their Atheistical
Blaspheming of the Holy Spirit of God, and his Grace, in the Prayers of his
People. And when some Learned Men of the Church of England published the Biblia
Polyglotta, the chief Contriver of that Noble Work writes some Prolegomena
suitable to the nature and design of the Undertaking; especially to defend and
assert the Certainty, Integrity and Divine Authority of the Original Texts: but
among other Discourses, (he happens to assert the Novelty of the Hebrew
Punctation, (an Opinion owned by the concurrent suffrage of almost all the best
skilled in the Hebrew and Oriental Learning) and to acknowledge various
Readings in the Original Text; and lastly, to prove that to be no way
prejudicial to their Purity and Integrity. Now with what outrageous
Declamations does I. O. set upon these harmless Assertions? and with what
foul-mouthed Cries and Consequences does he pursue them? and what an horrid
Noise do we hear of Atheism, Atheism, Atheism? We are told of a new Plot or
design amongst Protestants after they are come out of Rome, V. Doctor Walton 's
Considerator con^id. page 1.
a design which they dare not publicly own, p. 329. The Leprosy of Papists
crying down the Original Texts, is broken forth among Protestants, with what
design, to what end or purpose, he knows not, God knows, and the day will
manifest, Epist. p. 14. That this design is owned in the Prolegomena to the
Bible, and in the Appendix; that they Print the Original and defame it,
gathering up Translations of all sorts, and setting them up in competition with
it, Epist. p. 9. That they take away all certainty in and about sacred Truth,
Epist. p. 25. That there is nothing left unto men, but to choose whether they
will turn Papists or Atheists, Epist. p. 9. That there are gross Corruptions
befaln the Originals, which by the help of Old Translations, and by
Conjectures, may be found out and corrected, p. 205. As pernicious a Principle
as ever was fixed upon since the Foundation of the Church of Christ, Epist. p.
21. That it is the Foundation of Mahumetanism, the chiefest and principal prop
of Popery, the only pretense of Fanatical Antiscripturists, and the root of
much hidden Atheism in the World, p. 147. That he fears, The pretended
infallible Judge, or the depth of Atheism lies at the door of these
Considerations, p. 161. That they are enough to frighten unstable Souls into
the arms of an infallible Guide, p. 169. That (setting aside two Theses) there
is no Opinion ventilated among Christians, tending to the depression of the
Worth, and impairing the Esteem of the Hebrew Copies, which is not directly, or
by just consequence owned in these Prolegomena, p. 205. All these black Charges
must be set off with Shrieks and Tragical Exclamations of dreadful distemper
which may well prove mortal to the truth of the Scripture, p. 314. Of horrible
and outrageous Violence offered to the sacred Verity, p. 315. That men take
upon them to correct the Scripture, p. 344. To correct the Word of God, p. 180.
And all these prodigious and unparalled Reproaches he is not ashamed to pour
forth with a profession of all Christian candor and moderation of spirit, p.
151. It Is a wide and frightful Gulf that lies between his Adversaries Premises
and his own Conclusions; but yet, so well is his Confidence mounted, that
cannot scare him from often leaping it: It Is the way and spirit of the Man, and
he does it by custom and by instinct: Nothing more frequent and more familiar
in all his Writings, then these horrid Consequences in behalf of Papists,
Atheists, Antiscripturists and Mahumetans. And I could produce out of a certain
Author, (that may be guessed at) a large Catalogue of the same odious
Inferences charged upon any Man that can be so blind or so profane as but to
doubt whether the success of the Rump Parliament, the Murder of the late King,
the defeat of his present Majesty at Worcester, were not special and
extraordinary Projects of Divine Providence for carrying on the Kingdom of the
Lord Christ. But I will not be too unmerciful, though such dirty and dishonest
Arts can never be exposed with too much severity. However, provided for the
future they will take warning to forbear such black practices, from me they
shall hear no more of them: but if they will not, let them thank themselves for
what may follow; for we must not suffer them to abuse the people with such
coarse and wretched Juglings.

. 21. 4. Another way of trifling, is upon every occasion to drop in some
Learned Shreds of Latin, and Scholarlike Sayings of ancient Poets and
Philosophers. And had they been collected out of their Original Authors, what a
notable Proof had he given the World of his Encyclopediacal Reading? However,
methinks it is pretty to observe with what neatness of fancy he sets off his own
confused and indigested Rubbish, by besprinkling it with these little Fragments
of Wit and Poetry, as in some places you have seen them adorn their Mud-walls
with bits of any thing that shines and glisters. But though this trifling
Artifice might have passed for Wit and Learning in the days of Queen Elizabeth,
and may now perhaps dazzle and amuse unlearned People; yet to Men of Learning,
Reading and Ingenuity, (to whom our Author writes) their Vulgar Use has sullied
their Luster, and abated their Value: so common are they in Modern
Controversies to the same or the like purposes of Wit; and so few do I meet
with in our Author, that are not scattered up and down in the Polemick
Rancounters of I. O. (and indeed he seems wonderfully conversant in the
Writings of that Learned Man, not only by his See-saws, but his Style, his
Phrases, and his Arguments:) so that whatsoever show of Learning these
pedantick Impertinences may make among the Dames and the Prentices, yet (I say)
to his Men of Reading that can trace him, they will bring him under suspicion
of filching other Men's Wit; so little will they add to the Reputation of his
own. Nay, such a Magazine is there of these Weapons in the Polyanthea, that
they will not so much as tempt the wonder of Schoolboys, that are familiarly
furnished with choice and variety of them out of the Original and Classical
Books themselves; and therefore to them and to our Author I shall leave these
Learned Trifles, and yield the Victory at these Childish Follies. And whereas
page 8, 9. he bobs my Confidence with a Trite and Reverend Apophthegm out of
old Aristotle, That Bearded Men are cautious, but Beardless Boys are confident,
should I nick him with a Repartee of as grave a Saying out of as grave an
Author, (...), Thucydid.
(...) Ignorance is bold and peremptory, whilst Knowledge is modest and
distrustful; and then gloss and expatiate upon my Theme as solemnly as he has
done upon his, would not this (think you) wonderfully edify the Reader, and
determine the Controversy? And to conclude, can you forbear to smile when you
hear a Grave Divine, and one that writes himself D. D. defy all Men of
Learning, Reading and Ingenuity, to cap Verses? for in truth this pelting
Sentences is scarce a more manly or a more Scholastic Exercise, then that
Olympic Sport of Country-Schools.

. 25. Another little Stratagem he often suggests to defeat Arguments and delude
the People, is to ascribe all the Appearances of Reason that seem to sparkle in
my Discourse, to the Elegance of its Style and its Composure: for he is willing
to allow it all the Perfections of Beauty, so it may but want strength and
sinews, and let it be any thing, if it be not rational; and then how smoothly
does this Censure pass among the People, who make the same Judgment of Reason
as they do of Gospel-Preaching, and value it by its dullness and want of Fancy?
So that if we set off the severest Reasonings with any gloss and Ornament of
Speech, they are taught to call it Juvenile Rhetoric and Declamation; and we
can never make them understand or (what is more difficult) acknowledge the
reasonableness of any Discourse, if we set down our Thoughts in any other
Scheme of Expression beside Syllogisms in Barbara; otherwise if we write with
all the Power and Demonstration of Reason, it is but calling it a Rhetorical
Declamation, and then it is cashiered and slighted. But as for my own way of
Writing, I confess Men of greater Fancies would have discoursed of my subject
with more quickness of Wit, and Men of better Judgments with more closeness of
Reason: but I have followed the humor of my own Genius; and have so
endeavored to be rational, as not to be flat; and so to be fanciful, as not to
be impertinent; not leaving the Coherence of my Matter to run after a witty
Conceit, nor so stubbornly avoiding all Ornament of Speech, as not to cloth my
Matter in some Elegancy of Expression: And as I have not used Resemblances in
stead of Arguments, (though I know who has) so neither have I refused to set
off Arguments with Allusions; but have ventured sometimes to express them by
borrowed and allusive terms, where it might be done without hazarding the
strength or the perspicuity of the Discourse. I have no where played with
Phrases, nor argued from Metaphors and Similitudes; and if any of my Words may
happen to be fine, they are none of them empty; and the most pompous and lofty
Expressions contain under them Notion, and Thing enough to fill out their
Sense, and warrant their Truth. A multitude of Evil Touches, and less important
Intimations, I must both forgive and omit, as well to avoid the suspicion of
being too unmerciful, as the inconvenience of being too tedious: Nay, to what a
Voluminous Bulk must I swell, should I specify all the more weighty and
unexcusable Miscarriages, and reckon up all his palpable Untruths, affected
Calumnies, labored Falsifications, studied Mis-understandings, shameless
Impertinencies, ridiculous Evasions, numberless Tautologies, and infinite
Repetitions? together with his frequent Challenges, Appeals to Heaven and the
Day of Judgment, denouncing Woes, and letting fly Threatenings of the Divine
Wrath and Vengeance, with innumerable other Tricks of shuffling and bold
impertinency. In short, when I first perused this Reply, (if I may give it so
fair a Name) I ran it over with equal Wonder and Satisfaction; with Wonder at
the boldness of the Man, that blush't not to impose upon the Public, as well
as upon my self, with such an heap of foul and notorious Falsifications: With
Satisfaction, when I considered whoever undertakes to contradict the evidence
of that Truth I had pleaded for, must first do violence both to his Reason and
to his Conscience, (for you will meet with some Forgeries so palpable, that
Inadvertency can never excuse them:) And it confirmed me in the Reasonableness
of my Opinion, when I saw Men were forced to pervert and falsify its plain
meaning, before they could pretend its Confutation. Prodigious Instances of
this kind you will meet with in the sequel of this Discourse, when I proceed to
more particular Remarks; to which Work it is high time to address my self. And I
shall first begin with his Review of my Preface.

CHAP. II.
The Contents.
THe Vanity of our Authors Pretense of the Reluctance of his Writing. The
Arrogance of his Boast of making Books at Idle Hours. The Vanity of their Way
of Preaching. Our Author challenged to justify the Sermons of J. O. His
Seditious Way of Preaching. A Character of the Pedling Theologues and Preachers
among the Nonconformists. Their main Artifice lies in tampering with the Female
Sex. The Learning of the Episcopal Clergy vindicated from the insolent Censure
of J. O. The silliness of his own solid and profound Divinity. The Divines of
the Church of England vindicated from our Authors malicious Suggestions. The
unjust Grounds of his and his Brethrens Slanders and Calumnies discovered.
Their Way of blasting their Adversaries with oblique and ugly Insinuations. Our
Authors Disingenuity in attempting to defame me upon occasion of my Satyr
against Atheism. My Remark upon our Saviors behavior in the Temple,
vindicated against his Charge of Irreverence. And proved, That it was out of
the Court of the Gentiles, not of the Jews, that he whipped the Buyers and
Sellers. Our Authors shift to discharge themselves of the Friendly Debate. His
confident way of trifling in answering Arguments with May-be's. What mischief
those Men do to Religion, by feeding People with their Nonsense and empty
Phrases. The Cowardice of their Demands of Personal Conferences. The Insolence
and Impertinency of our Authors Suggestion against the Immorality of our
Clergy. The only Crimes we charge them with, are such as they esteem
Gospel-Mysteries. The Vanity of our Authors Comparison between the Friendly
Debate, and the Comedies of Aristophanes. Socrates no Independent. The Pride
and Hypocrisy of the Nonconformists Confessions in their Prayers. This
discovered by their appropriating to themselves all the Titles of Godliness,
upon the score of this counterfeit Humility. Their Arrogance particularly
proved out of the Writings of J. O. I reproach them not with the deep sense of
their sins, but with their irksom dissimulation. Our Authors excuse, that their
Confessions have chiefly a respect to the pravity of their Natures, exploded.
The Precedents of St. Paul, Ezra, Daniel and David, unduly alleged by our
Author. The utter unacquaintance with the deceitfulness of my own Heart,
confessed. It Is presumption for an habitual sinner to expect the pardon of his
sins. The pretense of Ministers being the Mouths of the Congregation,
cashiered. The sad Influence that their Prodigal Confessions have upon the
Lives of their Followers.

. 1. THe first considerable passage we meet with, after his first unfortunate
sally, (of which you have heard already) is the Account he gives us of his
Humor and his Undertaking, how he prevailed with himself, Page 4.
much against his Inclinations, to spend a few hours in the Examination of the
principal parts and seeming Pillars of my whole Fabric. I shall not mind him
of the uncouthness of his Language, (though if it were considered, it will be
found that to examine a Pillar, is scarce more proper English then to explicate
a Post) but shall only observe, that some Men are so accustomed to Hypocrisy,
that they dissemble when they least design it; and this trifling Pretense is
now grown so familiar with this trifling Man, that it thrusts its self in of
course, and challenges a place in all his Writings by the right and title of
Prescription; and though he has served himself so often of it in all his former
Squabbles, yet he can no more forbear to mention this Apology, then he can to
need it. But methinks it is strange this cold and watery Elf should survive thus
long out of its proper Element; and had it been a Salamander born, it could not
have better endured the heats of Contention: And yet methinks it is more
prodigious still, that a Man should do perpetual violence to the most puissant
bent of his own Inclinations, and for ever doom himself to irksom and
unpleasant Employments. Had he been possessed by the Spirit of Scribbling and
Contention, he could not have been more pragmatical in his medlings with other
Men's Writings, then he has ever been, without any other provocation then that
of his own petulant Humor. And is it not pleasant to see him excuse himself of
unkindness to his own temper, by forcing it to such unagreeable Undertakings,
when he is the known and common Barreter of the Age he lives in? He falls foul
upon every Book he meets with; and there is scarce an Author that can escape
the disgrace of his public Censure and Correction; and what Motto could have
better suited him, then that wherewith he has flourish't and adorned his Title
Page, Sed sumpsimus Arma? It Is pity he should have borrowed a Bush so proper to
his purpose from another Man's Door. But had this Mighty Hero sought
opportunities of Chivalry abroad, and ranged the World in quest of Adventures,
(though all places were still as full of Giants and Enchantments as they were
in the Age of Barbarism and Romances) he could not have encountered more
Difficulties and Exploits then he has engaged upon at home. And if he have
forced himself upon this trouble with reluctance and violence to his Humor,
what havoc had he made, had his Stars destined him to this Heroic Employment?
How might he have scowr'd the World, as once Theseus did? How might his
Immortal Pen have cleared the Age of the pest of Writers, as Herc' les Club did
Greece of Thieves and Robbers? He might ere this time have ransackt and
confuted all the Libraries in Europe, and outdone the Goths and Vandals in the
Destruction of Books. But length of time and continual use have worn this
counterfeit pretense so lamentably thin, that in stead of shrowding his Vanity,
it only serves to betray and discover it; and therefore hereafter I would
advise him, either to write less, or to write with less regret, and not to
imagine the World so silly, as to be persuaded that a Man, that has such an
Antipathy to Writing as he pretends, should be so prodigal of his Ink as he is.
But the truth is, Men that have the Itch, as they are ashamed to own it, so
they cannot forbear upon all occasions to discover it.

But however, this Book, as he informs us, was finished and dictated at a few
Idle Hours. I beseech you, Good Sir, will this Man's bashfulness never leave
him? Will he suffer his youthful shamefacedness to overwhelm him in his old
Age? Did you ever read a greater strain of Modesty and Humility? What a mean
Opinion has this Weak Nothing of his Parts and Learning, that can think the
rash and immature Products of his Idle Hours, fit to present, if not to oblige
the Public? With what want of Confidence does he presume upon the World, to
expect its acceptance of all his crude and undigested Thoughts? And it is no
boldness in him to thrust upon the Public View every rash and precipitate
Conceit that thrusts it self upon his wandering Fancy. But this Man does not
always consider what he says; he has contracted acquaintance with certain
Schemes of Speech, that stand always ready at his service, and he brags and
dissembles by rote; and this Vaunt of the Vigor and Pregnancy of his Wit, is
as familiar with him in all his Writings, as the excuse of his Reluctance; and
he scarce ever Penned or Published any thing, but with mighty speed and mighty
remorse. But this Information he might well enough have spared; his imperfect
and unlick't Notions are themselves evidence enough of their own overhasty
Birth and Conception; and all he gains by this pedantick Boast, is to give in
clear proof of his Pride, but none at all of his Sufficiency: for no Man that
is not fooled with a darling Opinion of his own Abilities, could ever have
abused himself with so dear and fond a Conceit of his own hasty and fortuitous
thoughts. And perhaps his bold Attempt upon the Biblia Polyglottae, was scarce
a stronger Essay of Confidence, when he takes upon him to chastise Persons that
had given such a public and unparalled proof of a thorough Insight into that
kind of Learning, Page 150.
with a brisk Confession of his own superficial Skill and Knowledge. Tell me a
more becoming Instance of Modesty, then for a smattering Sciolist to censure
and provoke even Rabbis of the greatest fame and deepest skill. And therefore
you have no reason hereafter to wonder at such fulsom Intimations of
self-conceitedness; especially if you consider, that when Confidence grows old,
it is changed into something more Monstrous, and the Serpent becomes a Dragon.

. 2. But to leave him to his own darling Self, and proceed to his Book, where
you shall find my Account of their way of Preaching to be the first Object of
his Indignation. Page 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
Upon this they principally value themselves, and for this he is desirous they
should be principally maligned by others; though it must needs be a pitiful low
and creeping Envy that fastens upon an Object so mean and despicable: And for
my own part, I could name some Popular Orators, that are as often as the most
eloquent Clack of the Party, surrounded with crowding and numerous
Congregations, the dexterity of whose Talk would sooner tempt my Envy, then
their loose and ranging Preachments; the main knackishness whereof, as far as I
could ever observe in their printed Sermons, consists in their surprising
Extravagance and Impertinency: A thousand Instances of this nature might be
produced out of a Treatise published by I. O. concerning the Saints distinct
Communion with the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost: i. e. as he
accurately explains himself, Chap. 2. Sect. 1.
Distinctly with the Father, distinctly with the Son, and distinctly with the
Holy Ghost: though by the way, this doubty Explication can do no great service
toward the unfolding of this great Mystery: for to enjoy Communion distinctly
with each Person of the blessed Trinity, is not much more intelligible then to
enjoy distinct Communion with them; and (by reason of its Resemblance to it)
calls to my mind a Direction prescribed elsewhere by the same Author for
carrying on the Work of Watching, viz. To be always awake; it being a certain
and undoubted Truth, Of Tempt. p. 134.
That no Man can watch whilst he is asleep: But little absurdities start up so
thick in my way, that they divert me from my main quest; and therefore let me
only desire you to consult the forementioned Treatise, and then tell me
whether some of them have not acquired a notable knack at spoiling the
Scriptures, and fooling with the Divine Oracles. And what else can be expected
from the design and nature of the Discourse it self, that endeavors to make
out such a nice and Metaphysical Devotion? But here his Zeal burns and kindles,
and vents its self in an unusual heat and vehemence of Declamation, though all
the Noise of three or four Pages amounts to no more, then barely to tell the
Reader that I am not able to prove the Charge, and to Challenge me and all my
Associates to make it good before any equal, competent, and impartial Tribunal
under Heaven. But the passage he inveighs against, is transposed out of the
second Chapter of my Book, and therefore shall in its proper place be justified
to purpose: for there you shall meet with all the same stuff again, according
to his method, though (as himself professes) contrary to his design, Page 117.
in haste oftentimes speaking the same things over and over. But in the mean
while to give some check to this boldness, I accept his Challenge, and defy
him to a defense of the printed Sermons of I. O. which if he dares undertake, I
will engage to give in such an Evidence against them, as shall infinitely make
out and exceed the particulars of my Charge. And though he think not himself
obliged to justify every individual Person, yet perhaps by reason of his
Relation to, and Concernment for that Author, this Challenge may bring him
under an absolute Engagement to that Performance. Is it not strange to see Men
that are so obnoxious, to be so confident? But if by their importunity they
will force and provoke us to expose their shame and folly, they have reason to
charge the blame upon nothing but their own rashness and presumption. And yet
so far is this or any of his other Brags from being any real Transports of
Courage and Resolution, that nothing could more palpably have betrayed his
Vanity and his Cowardice. It Is, you know, the Humor and the true Character of
a Coward, when there is no Danger or Enemy near, then he insults, he threatens,
he defies, he triumphs, he is all rage and fierceness, he breathes nothing but
Slaughter and Destruction, and talks not under the rate of his Thousands and
his Ten Thousands: But if an Enemy approach, and an Engagement be offered, it is
not then so utterly impossible to persuade the Man, you need not use violence
to make him attend to calm and sober Counsel, he is not deaf to all advice, but
can hear Reason and his Friends; and then if you press upon him, and upbraid
him with his own Vaunts, his Rage immediately begins to cool and vanish, his
Heart melts and dissolves, his Spirits retire, his Color alters, and all the
Coward can do, is to look pale and tremble. And such is the defiance of our
Author; he looks big, and he threatens high; he will not endure our Affronts
and Insolences, but is resolved to redress those Wrongs, and avenge those
Indignities we have offered to the Nonconformists, and nothing will appease his
Rage, but Blood and Destruction: Come forth you and all your Associates, and if
you dare be so hardy, prove your force against me before any Tribunal under
Heaven; for I am resolved to chastise your Insolences, and make you see the
folly and the danger of your Undertakings. Now who (think you) can withstand
all this Rage and Fury? We must fly and disperse as the defenseless Flock of
Sheep did before the Zeal and the Sword of the Phrenetick Knight: for who dares
to resist so steeled a Courage? and that so whet with Provocation, and so eager
upon Revenge? And yet if you will bear up a little bravely to him, and with a
brisk and undaunted look accept his Challenge, and dare him to stand to his own
defiance, the Man will quickly begin to treat and consider, he will bridle his
Rage, and appease his Fierceness; for his part he means no harm, he is a
good-natured Man, and is willing to live peaceably; Page 178.
he neither desires nor designs Serram reciprocare, (as our Author Classically
expresses himself) or to engage in any Controversial Discourse with you: And do
but press and pursue him to stand to his own Challenge, he slinks out of the
Field, and is vanquished without danger and expense of Blood. This, assure your
self, will be the undoubted Event of my closing in with his own motion; and
though I once more upbraid him with his own Summons, and dare him to his own
Defense, be confident you shall never hear more of him: for as stout as he is,
he will never be so rash as to expose himself at so great a disadvantage. I say
no more, he knows my meaning.

Page 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60.
. 3. And whereas, that he may for ever dash this Reproach of mine out of
Countenance, he gives in a large Catalogue of harmless and useful Arguments,
upon which they are wont to treat in their Sermons, that concerns not our
Charge; though as they order their Theology, we tax them for defeating the
efficacy of their own Doctrines, by their own unwarrantable Additions, and
mixing such Propositions with the Precepts of the Gospel, as sadly enervate, or
utterly evacuate all their Obligation to a holy and a virtuous Life. But this
Controversy is not to be managed in Prefaces, and as well requires as it
deserves a Volume: And therefore in answer to all that lurry of words, I shall
at present only mind him, that his Systeme of Preaching Divinity, is vastly
more lame and imperfect then my Scheme of Religion, and that he has suppressed at
least one entire Table of their Decalogue: for easy it were to recount as long
a roll of Matters, that they insist on with as much zeal and lowdness, as upon
any Theme that he has reckoned in his Catalogue, that are as little
Countenanced in Holy Writ, as they are by Supreme Authority. Let our Author
only reflect upon some Discourses (that he knows of) concerning Divine
Providence, and that will satisfy his Curiosity. What thinks he of Songs upon
Sigionoth? What thinks he of a Vision (seen by himself) of Gods unchangeable
Free Mercy, and uncontrollable Eternal Purpose in sending and continuing the
Gospel unto this Nation, maugre all the Opposition of King and Bishops? What
thinks he of accounting for the Equity of Gods Judgments, in recompencing the
Sins of the King upon the People, because they that set him up may justly be
called to answer for his Miscarriages, if by virtue of their retained
Sovereignty, they do not restrain him in his provoking ways? What thinks he of
the Lord Christ's shaking and translating the Political Heights and Governments
of the Western Nations, in order to the bringing in of his own peaceable
Kingdom? What thinks he of ensuring Success to Cromwell's Army against their
Sovereign, by dark passages out of the old Prophets? What thinks he of Good
Principles becoming wicked and abominable, when taken up against the Providence
of God? What thinks he of Monarchic Governments being a Jewish Ceremony, a part
of their Pedagogy and Bondage, and abolish't by the coming of the Messiah? What
thinks he of the Kings being a Son of Tabeal, i. e. one that would have usurpt
the Crown without Right or Title? What thinks he of Gods hardening the late
Kings Heart, to carry on the Mighty Work of a Thorough Reformation; and of
laying stubbornness and obdurateness upon his Spirit, to preserve us from ruin
and final destruction? In brief, What thinks he of the Advantage of the Kingdom
of Christ, in the shaking of the Kingdoms of the World? or Providential
Alterations in their subserviency to Christ's Exaltation, applied to his
Majesty's Defeat at Worcester? If such harmless Propositions as these were
searched into, and displayed to the view of the World, it would soon be
satisfied whether we have not just Reason to complain of their Doctrine. And
yet so civil was I as to wink at such black Discourses; and it was upon the
account of less odious Miscarriages that I taxt their Sermons, for corrupting
and embasing Divinity, not for infecting his Majesty's Subjects with Doctrines
of Treason, and Principles of Rebellion: But if they will grow sullen under
mild and more gentle Chastisements, they do but force us to take down their
stomachs and their stubbornness by severer and more smarting Corrections.

. 4. But as deeply as he resents my contemptuous account of their Preachings,
yet he stomachs nothing more then that scorn I have reflected upon their
Preachers. And this is a warm Provocation indeed, Touch the Mountains and they
will smoke. Thus whereas Page 253. I charged the Guilt of all our Schismatical
Ruptures upon the perverseness of about an hundred proud, ignorant, and
seditious Preachers: he snaps me up with an hasty Inference, as if I had
affirmed there were not above an hundred Preaching Ministers among the
Nonconformists. But by his leave, are there not in this, as in all other
Factions, some busy and pragmatical Incendiaries, that animate their
Companions to seditious Attempts and Practices, that widen our Differences by
their Frantic and outrageous Zeal, that make Separation an indispensable Duty,
and lead the People into an open Defection from the Church, and make all our
Distractions incurable, by their sturdy and insolent Humor? The number of
these hot Spirits is not great, and it is these only to whom I ascribe the
continuance of our Schisms and Subdivisions, and it is these only against whom
I would have the Laws particularly levelled; Severity upon them would quickly
make the rest more cool and tractable; and it is well known how by the
punishment of a few Ringleaders under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the whole
Faction was awed into a milder and more peaceable Deportment. The very face of
Discipline is enough to dash those that are not so utterly Frantic, out of
their Confidence; and but to shake the Public Rods over them, will quickly
scare them into better Obedience.

And what I have spoken contemptuously of their Preachers, as to their
Ignorance and their Duncery, is applicable only to these pert and busy
Promoters of the Schism: Men of more Learning are more modest and peaceable;
and though their Consciences and Mis-apprehensions of Things divest them of
their Public Employment, they do not immediately run themselves into open
Separation, but submit to that Conformity that is requisite in private
Christians; there being nothing required by our Church of such Persons, that
can drive People of any Wit and Sobriety from our Public Congregations; and
therefore these Men quietly submit to their own Fate and the Laws, and are not
such Wretches as to Fire an House to Roast their own Eggs, and embroil a
Kingdom for their own petty Ends and Envies; and as for these, I love and
honor their Integrity, and pity their unhappy Fate, in that they have brought
themselves into such a straight, as makes their private Interest inconsistent
with Public Peace. But besides these, there is a sort of Pedling Theologues,
whose Ignorance only makes them able Divines, who might have wanted Grace as
well as their Contemporaries, had they not wanted Parts and Learning. It was
Duncery and defect of Wit that qualified them with Ministerial Abilities; the
Pulpit was their Refuge from the University, and they flee to the Altar only
to take Sanctuary against Scorn and Contempt. And it is pleasant to observe upon
what shifts and artifices these empty Puffs are put to uphold the credit of
their Sufficiency; and they never discover any thing of Wit and Ingenuity, but
in their slights and stratagems to cover their Ignorance. None better skilled
in the management of Looks, or more dexterous in the command of solemn Face and
judicious Forehead: They can so improve their defect of Knowledge, as to make
it pass for depth of Judgment; and whatsoever part of Learning they understand
not, they either despise as notional and unprofitable, or seem grave and
reserved; and with Learned Shrug intimate something they can, but will not
communicate; or give a sturdy and peremptory Determination of the matter in
debate, and then the Decree is past, it is not to be disputed; they will carry
the Ball away by Clamor and Confidence, and stand amazed if you will not admit
what they know not how to prove. But if neither these, nor any of their other
Tricks will relieve them, but that they are pursued so close, that they cannot
escape your discovery, the last Refuge of their Folly is Scripture and
Religion; they put on serious Brow, and fall into a fit of Preaching; and what
Text so suitable to be abused to their purpose, as St. Paul's, I desire to know
nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified? Like the Fox in the Fable, who
having no Tail of his own, preached against all Tails as deformed and
burthensom Excrescencies. And thus do these Men become acquainted with the
Workings of the Spirit, because they are not capable of understanding the
Methods of Reason, and Laws of Argumentation; and they scorn to defend their
Doctrine by Humane Learning; and but to oppose their Fables and ridiculous
Falsities about the Mechanical Process of Regeneration, is to blaspheme the
Spirit of Grace. And they will Rebuke all your Rational Arguments and
Demonstrations with saucy and pragmatical Reproofs; and in stead of replying to
your Objections, will shake their Heads, and pity your Ignorance in the
Mysteries of the Gospel; and then malapertly exhort you to beware of Pride and
Carnal Reason, and preach the great danger of leaning too much on your own
Understanding. And thus these bold Fellows, when they cannot out-argue, will
outface you: a thwacking Contradiction shall neither stagger nor astonish
them; they will firmly stand their ground against all the dint of Argument; and
by the assistance of the Spirit of God, maintain Conclusions in defiance to
their Premises: Say what you will, prove what you can, demonstrate the
incoherence of their Notions, and the wildness of their Conceits, they will
foil all your Wit and Carnal Reason with a caution against vain Philosophy and
Humane Learning, and a disdainful reflection upon the Natural Man's Ignorance in
the things of the Spirit. And thus shall the Spirit of God be forced to vouch
and patronize their Folly, the Divine Oracles shall be heapt together to cover
their Ignorance, and they will guard their fantastic Impertinencies with
abundance of Chapter and Verse; and if you offer to assault their Truth, they
will beat you off with Volleys of Texts, and pour them so thick upon you, that
you shall never be able to storm their Ignorance. But if you will not be
out-pelted at Scripture, the next Specimen of their Learning is to refer you to
some of their own Authors, (that have written to as wise purpose as themselves
talk) and if at that Weapon you prove too hard for them, their last refuge is
still Reverend Dullness, they look demurely, turn up the White, and shake the
Head at your Profaneness and Blasphemy. And then if you have any Grace or
Modesty, you are obliged to blush and be silent. And if there be any Female
Proselyte in company, (for such are the usual Associates of their Zeal and
Conversation) she must outwardly pity, and inwardly scorn you: Alas, poor Man!
this it is to be a stranger to the Workings of the Spirit of God, and to be
ignorant of the Mysteries of the Covenant of Grace. What a vain thing is this
Humane Learning without Grace, and the Teachings of the Spirit? How is this Man
puffed up with a conceit of his own Knowledge? and yet what a silly Wretch is it
in the Mysteries of Religion? What strange Conceptions has the poor Soul of
Regeneration, of the Spirit of Bondage, and the method of Conversion? Alas,
poor Thing! he understands it no more then I do his Arabic or Algebra. What a
comfortable Light have I, that am but an unlearned Idiot, in the most inward
and experimental parts of the Mysteries of Godliness, by the Teachings of the
Spirit, and precious Mr. -- whilst a Vail of Darkness hides these gracious
Comforts and Privileges from the Eyes of this Natural Man. And thus they
prostitute the Dignity of Religion to the Impertinencies of every Gossip, and
uphold the Noise and seeming Interest of the Party, by the Zeal and Clamor of
that Sex. Nothing so resolute as they at holding fast Conclusions; they will
die Martyrs to their Truth, before they know their Premises; and if they once
chance to fasten upon a Proposition, they will never quit their Hold while they
have either Teeth or Tongue.

. 5. And therefore it has in all Ages been the peculiar Artifice of such
creeping Impostors, to tamper with the warmth and the weakness of that Sex. Woe
unto you, ye Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye devour Widows houses,
and for a pretense make long Prayers. Why Widows Houses more then any others?
Why! because they had the management of their Estates at their own disposal,
and so were more liable and likely to be cheated: but chiefly, because their
sorrowful Spirits were more prone to Superstition and Melancholy Devotions, and
so more apt to give good Entertainment to these demure and white-eyed
Comforters. And St. Paul giving a personal Character of some Religious Juglers
in his days, describes them to be such as creep into houses, and lead captive
silly women, i. e. such as under great shows and pretenses of Holiness,
insinuate themselves into Wealthy Families; and by their plausible Arts and
demure Pretensions, seduce the weaker Sex, that by reason of the feebleness of
their Minds, and timorousness of their Consciences, are most apt to credit
their sad and sorrowful Stories, and suffer themselves to be abused and led any
way by these precise and Saint-like Pretenders, and (which is the main) to
reward their pains with good Fees and good Meals. Neither are the foolish Women
so easily taken by these holy Cheats, modest, sober and virtuous, but they are
wicked as well as silly, laden with many lusts and vices, such as are willing
to reconcile their passions and lustful desires with a state of Religion, and
under its vizor to maintain their pride, their peevishness and their
wantonness. And the more handsomely to delude such silly Wretches, these
Gospel-Pharisees are ever canting to them in empty and senseless forms of
Speech, and stuff their Memories with a set of insignificant and unintelligible
Phrases, that they may know how to prate perpetually of Religion, without
knowing any thing of its true Nature and Efficacy; and all the fruit of their
much Hearing, is much Talking; and (as I once heard it observed in the Pulpit)
it is their highest emprovement to be able to gossip in the Language of St.
Paul. By these and such like little Arts, they decoy in Female Proselytes to
their Party; and it is their only Masterpiece to inveigle their hot and eager
Spirits: An Artifice that any Sot may manage, that can but whine and flatter.
It Is such Mountebanks as these, that are the great Apostles of the Cause, and
whom I branded with the Marks of Pride, Ignorance and Sedition. How my
Character suits with their Humor, I must leave to your own Experience and
Observation; though I could give you in a sufficient Catalogue of some of their
most famous Preachers, and choicest Wits, that you would deem better qualified
to plant Tobacco, then to propagate the Gospel. The greatest Idols of the
People would have a mighty Resemblance to that hated one of Bell, that as the
Story tells us, was Brass without, and Lead within, were it not that they want
no assistance to devour their own Sacrifices. And now who can endure not only
to hear such Idiots to talk, as if they were infallible, but to set up their
Standard, and display their Colors in defiance to all the Wisdom of
Government, and the Authority of Laws? You see I never upbraided them with
their mere Ignorance, it was their Pride and their Insolence that I laid open
to Public Severity; would they learn to be humble and submissive, and be
sensible of their own Folly and Ignorance, and would not every Mas John set up
for a Patriarch, we would never expose them for their weakness and simplicity:
but when they will combat Government, affront the Decrees of Princes, trample
upon all Public Constitutions, and oppose their own singular Conceits to the
Prescription of Ages, and the Consent of People; when they will not yield up so
much as a Metaphysical Speculation to the will of their Prince, and peace of
their Country; and when all the Laws and Fundamental Rules of Government must
be subverted, rather then the least of their Sentiments shall be reversed: in
brief, when their Folly must prescribe to the Wisdom of Mankind, is it not
time, think you, to take down their Stomachs, and to expose their Ignorance to
the Public Scorn, and their Insolence to the Public Rods?

. 6. But suppose my Censure of their Ignorance and defect of Learning, had
aimed at their chiefest Rabbis, and their deepest Clerks, I could have
justified my self by some great Examples of his own Fraternity, (where a Man
can scarce ever want Authentic Presidents for any sort of Rudeness and
Ill-manners.) Particularly what thinks he of his Friend I. O. who giving a
Character of the Episcopal Clergy, beside Tyranny, Persecution, and a rank
hatred of all Godliness, adds, Sermon to the Parl. April 29. 1646. page 30.
A false Repute of Learning, I say, A false Repute for the greater part,
especially of the Greatest; and yet taking Advantages of Vulgar Esteem, they
bear out as though they had engrossed a Monopoly of it; though I presume the
World was never deceived by more empty Pretenders, especially in respect of any
solid Knowledge in Divinity or Antiquity? Goodly! How does this Modest Censure
of the greatest Prelates that ever flourish't in the Church of England, become
the State and Grandeur of the Vicar of Coggeshal? What empty and shallow
Pretenders to Knowledge were Archbishop Laud, and all his Favorites, if
compared to this unfledged Curate? And to what an height of Confidence was the
young Sizer perk't with the success of his Rumford-Performances? But who so
presumptuous as those Smatterers, that have only Learning enough to prefer
them to the Pillory? And what less Disgrace can that Caitiff deserve, that
shall dare to Arraign the Ghosts, and invade the Reputations of the greatest
Worthies and Ornaments of the English Nation? Whitgift, and Bancroft, and Laud,
empty Pretenders! Know, Wretch, their Works shall live to remote and distant
Ages, Monuments of their own Glories and the Churches Triumphs: when thy
Spiritual Bombast shall never survive to be devoured by Famine, or the Teeth of
Time, but shall in a few days be reduced to the shameful and dishonorable
condition of Waste-paper; and when thy wretched Pamphlets shall be expelled
Libraries, and banished the Company of Learned Authors, and be entertained no
where but in the Corners of old Women's Closets, and Cooks Shops. But the
Rashness of this bold and busy Man has since been justly, and (I think)
sufficiently chastised by some of these Empty Pretenders; whom he would
continue to affront and challenge, till he forced them to expose him to the
scorn and pity of all Learned Men: For certainly there is not a more bafled
Person upon Record then the Considerator upon the Biblia Polyglotta. Sir, you
may think this blunt Work; but what other way have we to check and take down
the Confidence of such bold and abusive Scriblers, then to discover them to
themselves and to the World? However, such Insolences against the most
Reverend Fathers of the Church, are not to be endured from every pert and
conceited Fellow; and proud Men must not be suffered to raise their own petty
Names upon the Ruins of the greatest Reputations. Indeed, as for the Ignorance
of the Bishops, and the Episcopal Clergy in Ecclesiastical Antiquities, it is so
notorious to all the Christian World, that I confess I should think him a very
strange Man that should undertake their defense. And how piteously have they in
their Treatises against the Church of Rome, exposed both their Cause and
themselves to the scorn of Papists, and (what is more shameful) to the grief of
Puritans? It Is evident, no doubt, by Archbishop Laud's Book against Fisher, he
had never so much as looked into any of the Fathers, or Primitive Writers; yet
however, methinks it is not manners for every Vicar in his Province to upbraid
his Grace with Ignorance and want of Letters. But suppose this dishonorable
Brand should have been clapped upon the Memory of that great and immortal
Prelate, by one that was then so far from having any thorough insight into
Church-Antiquities, that after that he was forced to put himself upon no small
pains in the first Rudiments of Literature, to enable him to deal with the Boys
at Westminster-School; would you not have set up this Man for a Pillar of
Modesty and Bashfulness to all future Ages? But whatever sort of Learning we
may pretend to, yet as for skill in solid Divinity, they are the only able
Men. And in this lies the difference between your empty Pretender, and your
true substantial Divine. But what is this Dainty Thing they value at so dear a
Rate? Why! it is a sort of Opinionative Knowledge, or rather Learned Ignorance
that makes Men confident and talkative; it is a skill in Schemes and Systemes of
New Opinions, and a power in Talk and Disputation. And to wrangle for a
Scholastic Hypothesis, is to contend for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints; and to rend their Throats in Scolding for the Calvinian Rigours, is to
spend themselves for the Lord Jesus Christ. They are a sort of Men, that first
submit their Understandings to the Opinions of some haughty and imperious
Dictator, and stuff themselves with uncertain and vulgar Prejudices, before
they attain the very first Rudiments of Knowledge, and so never arrive at
freedom of Judgment enough to examine the folly of their Proleptick
Absurdities; and but to question their undoubted Truth, is an Injection of
Satan, and a Temptation to Infidelity. And therefore ever after this, they
expound all Articles of Faith by Analogy to their own Prejudices and fond
Persuasions; and they either wrack or suborn the Holy Scriptures, till they
force them, in spite of their plainest and most unquestionable Intendment, to
give in their suffrage to their own wild and unwarrantable Tenets; and here
they set bounds to their Zeal and to their Knowledge, and all their
after-industry is swallowed up in vain Endeavors to make out the
Reasonableness and Divine Authority of their own Dreams and Subtilties. And
what indefatigable Pains will they take to distinguish rank Blasphemy into
Orthodox Divinity? With what Zeal will they justify the Equity and Goodnature
of a fatal and irrespective Decree of Reprobation? With what assurance will
they excuse its seeming Horror and Cruelty, with a more horrid Injustice, when
they plead in behalf of the Almighty, that at the same time he devoted so many
Myriads of his Creatures to Eternal Anguish, he also resolved to take care they
should commit those Sins that might deserve it, that so he might not want a
fair and plausible pretense to wreak his Indignation upon them? With what
Evidence of Demonstration will they make out from the Tenor of the Covenant of
Grace, the Believers Title to Heaven and Everlasting Happiness, by a naked
Faith in Gods absolute Promises, without any Conditional Obligations to an Holy
Life? This is the Employment of their Wit, and these the Objects of their
Studies: And now when such gross Errors lie at the bottom of all their
Endeavors, I leave it to you to judge, whether all that Knowledge that is
built upon such Principles, be not a more laborious and improved Duncery, i. e.
a greater Confidence and Ability to Talk Nonsense. This is that profound
Theology, in which these Gospellers so much excel the Regular Clergy; and they
never make their People more gaze and admire, then when they discourse to them
of the Order of Gods Eternal Decrees, of the Conditional Obligation of Absolute
Promises, and of the Fatal Determination of Free Will. These are their
Abilities in the Schools; but in the Pulpit their Subtilty improves into
downright Impertinency. And it were not unpleasant (did not the Cause of
Religion suffer by their folly) to observe in their Practical Discourses what
Mysteries they will descry, and what Oracles they will extract out of every
obscure Text. With what Curiosity will they strain for knackish and extravagant
Applications of Holy Writ? With what labor will they beat about into the most
secret corners of the old Prophets, for Articles of Faith, and find them out
among their Rods, and Pots, and Trees, and Wheels, and Lamps, and Axes, and
Vessels, and Rams, and Goats? And with what dexterity will they fetch about a
Prophetic Parable, and draw the Fundamentals of Christianity out of Ezekiel's
Wheels? So that if the sense of Scripture were as clancular and Mystical, as
it is made by their uncouth way of applying it, the Spirit of God has left us
rather Hieroglyphics then Articles of Religion, and our Faith is locked up in
Cabalistick Schemes, and no Man is able to unriddle the Secret, but by the
Helps and Rules of Mythology; and the Scripture is written with the same
design, as (they say) Aristotle writ some of his Books, only to be understood
by the Sons of Art and Mystery. However, by this Artifice they inveigle the
silly and unwary People both to follow and admire them; for when they are
persuaded the outward Element of the Text is but the Cabinet to the Jewel, and
the precious Mystery, they so manage the business, as to possess them with an
apprehension, that no Key can open it, but what is made at their own Forges.
And if any of us attempt to explain a Text by the Coherence of the Discourse,
by the Propriety of the Phrase, and by the Idiom of the Language, we are Moral
Men, and dull Literalists, and utter strangers to the inwardness of the Spirit:
but it is they that are the practical and experimental Preachers, and that see
into the depths of the Mystery of the Covenant of Grace. And by this means do
they gain the advantage to obtrude upon the People, whatever can neither be
proved nor understood, as Profound Divinity.

. 7. But whatsoever Truth, Candor and Ingenuity, there is in my Character of
these Men of the Flock, he knows how to revenge their wrongs by bold and
confident Recriminations: if Reproaches be the Weapon, he understands his
advantage; and when Controversies come to be managed by mutual Accusations,
there they never want for Ammunition, their Magazine is inexhaustible. Thus our
Author stands amazed that Heresy should complain of Schism, Page 34.
Quis tulerit Gracchos, etc. Shall the Pot call the Pan Burnt --? And is it not
strange, that whilst one writes against Original Sin, another preaches up
Justification by Works, and scoffs at the imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ to them that believe? Yea, whilst some can openly dispute against the
Doctrine of the Trinity, the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost? Whilst
Instances may be collected of some Men's impeaching all the Articles almost
throughout, there should be no reflection in the least on these things? Some
Men's guilt in this nature might rather mind them of pulling out the beam out of
their own eyes, then to act with such fury to pull out the eyes of others, for
the motes which they think they espy in them, etc. What a strain of Flattery is
here? There is questionless no Poison nor Calumny in these leering Suggestions;
it is an harmless Character, and strikes at no Man's Reputation: no doubt he
never intended to relieve himself and his Party from my foul Reproaches, by
false or fierce Recriminations, Page 37.
nor to write any thing that might disadvantage me in my Reputation or Esteem.
Page 12.
But some Men's Tongues traduce by instinct, and are so venomous, that they
cannot touch but they will poison your Reputation: Their Throats are open
Sepulchers, and the poison of Asps is under their Lips, and they cannot open
their Mouths but out fly stings and blasting vapors. So that I am now forced
to confess my self a dull and trifling Satyrist, that have charged them with
nothing but their own avowed Principles and notorious Practices, and never use
tart Language but to express vile Things; and go far about to convict them of
their Guilt, before I dare venture to lash and chastise them for their Folly;
and all my Satirical Reflections are the natural Results and Inferences of some
foregoing Reasonings. But this Man strikes with more sure and deadly Blows, he
can stab with a doubtful Intimation, and dispatch with an oblique Look: it is no
matter for evidence of Argument, and certainty of Fact; this fending and
proving is a tedious course; it is but dropping a Train of sly and malicious
suspicions, and that is enough to blow up your Reputation. He knows all Men
have a touch of Ill Nature, and are apt enough to make the hardest surmises
upon these ugly suggestions. Nothing sets an handsomer Gloss upon a Lie, then
to show it by these dark Lights; and indirect Insinuations, are the most
artificial Schemes of Slandering; they heighten and enrage Men's Curiosity, and
then leave it to their ill Humor to finish the Story, and then it shall never
be spoiled for want of spiteful and ill contrived Suspicions. And every Man has
Wit enough to pick out the Categorical meaning of these oblique Reproaches; and
had he in direct terms charged me for impeaching the most Fundamental Articles
of Christianity, it had not been more familiar and intelligible English. But as
for my own part, I am no more moved with the Charge, then I am concerned in the
Crime: I know none in the Church of England that publish any such false and
Heretical Doctrines; or if there be any that vent them in Corners and
Conventicles, I can only say, as one did that was treated as I am, Let him be
Anathema. But the Ingenuity of these Men can dispose of other Men's Faith and
Religion at their pleasure, and they can with as much ease make Heretics, as
they once could Witches and Malignants: if a Neighbor incur their displeasure,
that is enough to make the Indictment; and to be charged, is enough to make it
good. Thus, you know, they dealt with the Ghost of the great Hugo Grotius, one
would needs have him a rank Socinian, and another a thorough Papist; though how
he could be both, can never be unriddled, unless Hugo were one, and Grotius the
other; though the evident reason why he might be either, is no other then that
he was no Calvinian, and then he might be any thing what they pleased. This way
of aspersing has ever been the offensive Weapon of peevish and angry Disputers,
though never did any Man weild it with more Dexterity then our Author: he never
encountered Adversary, that he did not transform either into Atheist, or Papist,
or Socinian. But it seems the Charge of Socinianism is become the (...) of our
Age, and many Men suffer under its imputation, though (as it always happens in
Cases of Slander) I know none more clear from the Infection then those that
have been most suspected and avoided for it. Of which Injustice I can conceive
no other imaginable account then some Men's proud and imperious Confidence, that
have adopted their own unlearned Wranglings into the Articles of Religion, and
put as great a weight upon their own novel Doctrines, as upon the plain and
easy Propositions of Scripture. Now if a sober Man discard their wild and
unwarrantable additions, it is all one as if he renounced the Article it self.
They will not endure a contradiction, nor suffer you to suspect the infallible
certainty of their Resolutions; and if you doubt or dispute the Ius Divinum of
a Systematick Subtilty, you make them impatient, and they make you an Heretic.
If we are not confident that our blessed Savior suffered the extremity of
Hell Torments at the hour of his Passion, even to the Horrors of Despair, it is
with some positive people the same thing as if we called in question the Merits
of his Death and Sufferings. If we smile at the Vanity of his Attempt, who
would demonstrate out of the Canticles, that the Saints enjoy distinct
Communion with the three Persons of the Trinity; it exasperates some bold and
confident Men, that are fond of their own thin and crazy Conceits, as much as
if we should pervert the first Chapter of St. John's Gospel. And we scoff at
Justification by Faith, if we despise a Thousand vain and empty Speculations
wherewith they have involved that Article. As whether Faith justifies from any
peculiar Excellency of its own nature, or barely from the Divine Appointment;
whether it be an instrumental Cause of Justification, or only a Procatarctick
Cause; if instrumental, whether an active or a passive Instrument; if
Procatarctick, whether Procatarctick formal, or Procatarctick objective; with a
multitude more of the like wise and important Enquiries, that could never have
entered into the most curious and whimsical Understanding, had not some idle
people loved to amuse themselves with inventing profound and curious Nothings;
and had not one Keckerman, and some other dull Fellows, been at leisure to
write foolish Books of Logic and Metaphysics; whose Theorems must be blended
with the Doctrines and Propositions of St. Paul, and then Men's little Quarrels
about this Motley-Divinity, must make new Sects and Opinions in Religion, and
they must measure the Orthodoxy of their Faith by their subtilty in wrangling,
and their power in disputing, by their skill and dexterity in Terms of Art, and
by their being able to understand the precise and Orthodox Notion of a
Procatarctick Cause. These are the useful and wonderful Profundities to which
the disputing Men of this Age are such zealous Votaries: they value their
Learning by their skill in these dry and sapless Enquiries, and their Agility
in the Combats of Disputation; and a Disputant with them signifies the same
thing as a great Scholar. To this purpose they furnish their Memories with
abundance of notional Querks and Subtilties, to keep up their pert and
talkative Humor, and spend all their time in learning Distinctions that may
maintain and reconcile palpable Contradictions. With what fetches of Wit will
they distinguish themselves round about, till they come at last to affirm what
at first they denied? And with what severity of Judgment will they spin out a
long train of wary Aphorisms, and subtle Propositions, to prove that it is
Faith alone that justifies? and yet so explain the Notion of justifying Faith,
as to make it imply and include in it all other parts of the Condition of the
New Covenant, i. e. Good Works; and those that are able Divines, can write
whole Volumes of Problems and Disputations to make out this important Mystery,
That Faith alone justifies, i. e. as it is not alone. And now if you compare the
vanity of the Opinions with the talkative Humor of the Opiniators, you will
cease to wonder at their rude Carriage toward persons that profess to pursue
more useful and less difficult Studies: they are brim-full of talk; and no Man
that pretends to Learning can come in their way, but they immediately engage
him in Disputation; and if he with some Railery expose their learned and
studied Ignorance, and confute the silliness of their Systematick Notions, it is
a bold affront to the Orthodox Faith, and he drolls upon the most Fundamental
Articles of Divinity: for they lay no less weight upon their own Subtilties and
singular Conceits, then on the plain and practical Precepts of the Gospel; so
that you cannot sweep away their Cobwebs, but down drops the whole Fabric of
Religion. Neither does this pragmatical Humor run only among the Pretenders
to Learning, but the Infection spreads among the People; every sage Tradesman
sets up for a deep and an able Divine, and talks as confidently of
Predestination, as if he had served his Apprenticeship to a Dutch Professor:
Every zealous Shopkeeper understands the management of Ecclesiastical
Discipline as well as the Nicene Fathers; and a Jury of Button-sellers shall
determine a Controversy of Faith with more assurance then a General Council.
These of all others are the fiercest and most implacable Assertors, because
their Zeal is proportioned to their Ignorance; and therefore you cannot make
your self pleasant with their pert and conceited Pedantry, (and it is a piece of
Railery that is hardly to be forborne) but you draw upon your self whole Volleys
of Anathema's and hard Names, they can endure any Indignity rather then an
affront to their Clerkship; and you may with more safety play with a Spaniard's
Beard, then sport with their grave Ignorance. That is an Insolence that can
never pass unrevenged, but your Reputation is immediately stabbed with some
ugly word, or poisoned with some malicious Report; and it becomes the great
business of their Zeal, to brand you with foul imputations; and in all places,
and upon all occasions to blazon abroad your gross Errors, and your horrid
Blasphemies. This short Character of their Humor, may serve for a satisfactory
account of their dirty and disingenuous Demeanor toward such persons as
pretend to so much knowledge as to despise the Ignorance of their Learning. I
design it not for an Apology, either for my self or any of my Friends: I know
none so poor-spirited as to stand in awe of such petty Arts: the most pertinent
Reply to such a poor and beggarly Malice, is Neglect and Disdain; though in
truth such Wretches as stick not upon every slight occasion to sacrifice not
only our Good-Names, but our Livelyhoods (for that is our Case) to their own
Childish Picks, deserve to be answered by the Pillory and the Whipping-Post.

. 8. Many other ugly Insinuations he has, as if I were prompted to this
Undertaking by lewd and naughty Intentions; or as if he knew some Stories that
he can, but out of Tenderness and Civility to my Reputation, will not vent. I
will not so much assist his Malice, as to transcribe all his white-liver'd
Suggestions to this purpose; but whether in this way of proceeding he has
discovered more Boldness, or more Imprudence, is hard to determine, when he
knows himself to lie under such vast disadvantages at this Weapon, by lying
open to so many stabbing and inevitable Hits: But this is one of their Topics,
and comes in by the Rules of their Method and Ingenuity; and all the Defenders
and Champions of the Church of England, have ever been thus accosted by their
civil and unpassionate Adversaries. And never did any Man give them a smart and
severe Blow, but immediately they threatened to tell Tales. And where Men have
not the advantage of Truth, Calumny is their best and surest Weapon: For though
its Wounds do not always fester, yet they usually leave a scar behind them: at
least he gains the Advantage of his Enemy, that gives him the diversion to wipe
off Reproaches; and all Apologies in defense of a Man's own Innocence, leave
behind them (through the common Ill Nature of Mankind) some ill-contrived
suspicion of Guilt in the Minds of Men. And therefore I will not so far submit
my self to the power of his Malice, as to make Protestations to the World, or
Appeals to Heaven, as some tender Constitutions would have done. But I defy
all the weak Attempts of malevolent Tongues: False Slanders as they spread, so
they vanish like Lightning; and to Men wise and honest, the flash appears and
dis-appears at once; and he that is concerned for the good Opinion of such as
are neither, puts himself upon an harder Game then I am willing to play, or
able to manage. And though in three Lines I could not only answer, but shame
his base and proofless Surmises of the Unworthiness of my Aims, by making it
appear that so far I was from having any ill design, that I was not in a
Capacity of having any at all: yet I will rather choose utterly to neglect this,
and all his other mean and unworthy Arts of Malice, as being satisfied, that
when Men would discredit their Adversaries by such unhandsom Reflections upon
their Persons and private Affairs, as are altogether impertinent to the Matters
in debate, they prove nothing but the strength of their Malice, and weakness of
their Cause. Nay, so outrageous is our Author, Page 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70.
that when he comes to reflect upon my Satyr against Atheism, he blows upon it
with as much scorn and rancour, as upon the sharpest and most pointed
Invectives against themselves. As if no Man could write against their Party,
but he must immediately be stricken with a Spirit of Infatuation, and forfeit
all use of his Reason and his Understanding, and were not able to discourse
pertinently upon the most pregnant and most noble Argument in the World. But so
it is, though you speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels, and though you
understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; yet if you have not Charity for
them, you are no better then sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal. And yet had
he only slighted and scorned my weak Essay upon this Theme, it would have been
none of the most remarkable Instances of his Incivility; but to spit his
rankest Venom at it, is unexemplified Candor and Ingenuity. And among all the
ugly Suggestions he has darted at me, he has not aimed any with more malice and
bitterness of spirit, then those he has bolted upon this occasion: but
whatsoever foul Language I may deserve upon other accounts, I appeal to the
hottest Zealot of his own Dispensation, whether it were discreetly or civilly
done to cast Reproaches at me, whilst I was exposing Profaneness and
Irreligion to public shame. A man that had not been utterly transported with
Rage and Envy, would have had the discretion to have vented his Choler upon
more seasonable opportunities: for now, alas, he effectually defeats his own
Malice, by treating me with the same rudeness when I deserve well, as when I
deserve ill: from which way of procedure, what else can the World conclude, but
that the Man raves, and cares not what he says, so he may abuse and defame me?

But upon this occasion he has intimated a considerable Truth, viz. That there
is less danger in this kind of Atheism that vents its self in little Efforts of
Wit and Drollery, then in those Attempts, that under Pretenses of sober Reason,
propagate such Opinions and Principles as have a direct Tendency to the
Subversion of the Grounds of Religion. It is well advised, and they would do
well to consider it, that invalidate the Rational Accounts of the Christian
Faith, and destroy all sober Grounds of the Divine Authority of the holy
Scriptures, that undermine the Evidence of Miracles, and Universal Tradition,
and resolve the Motives of its Credibility into vain and frivolous Pretenses.
What greater Advantage can any Man give to the Enemies of Religion, O^ig of the
Script. page 105.
then to inform them, That the Alcoran may vie Miracles and Traditions with the
Scripture? and then in their stead produce no other proof of its Divine
Authority, then what the Alcoran may as well plead, without their concurrence;
and such is the Testimony of the Spirit, if it convince not in a rational way,
and by the use of Motives and Arguments: for remove their Evidence, and then
all pretenses to Inspiration become uncertain and unaccountable, and there
remains no (...) to distinguish between a true and a false Testimony. And what
greater disservice can any man do to the Interest of Religion, then to draw
bold and horrid Consequences in behalf of Atheists, Papists, and
Antiscripturists, from every petty Controversy? Does not he effectually invite
Men to a neglect of the holy Scriptures, that tells them, they can have neither
Truth nor Certainty, if there be various Readings in the Original Texts? and
yet confesses, that Ocular Inspection makes it manifest, ^. Consid. consid. p.
13.
that there are various Readings both in the Old Testament and the New; and
it is confessed there have been failings in the Transcribers, who have often
mistaken; and that it is impossible it should be otherwise. I must acknowledge
my self a little surprised to hear our Author question whether there be such a
thing as speculative Atheism in the World, and yet himself can discover a wide
door to it in every Proposition, even in the Lords Prayer it self: It is
somewhat prodigious, that when so many Men in all Ages have made so many
Attempts to enter at this Door, they should never be able to light upon such an
easy and such an open passage.

Page 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
. 9. Another passage that he chides and cavils at, is the account I gave, why I
instilled so much tartness and severity into some Expressions, from the Example
of our Saviors behavior in the Temple; where I observed, that there was but
one single instance, in which Zeal or an high Indignation might be just and
warrantable; and that is, when it vents its self against the Arrogance of
haughty, peevish, and sullen Religionists. The Rashness of this Assertion he
checks and controuls with authentic Precedents and Examples out of the old
Testament, though every illiterate Peasant could have informed him of the vast
difference between the Jewish and the Christian Economy: theirs was a more
harsh and severe institution, the temper of their Zeal was more fierce and
warlike; and in some Cases to kill a Brother out of hatred to Idolatry, was a
commendable Action; and at some times Swords and Daggers were the means of
Grace, as they lately were of Reformation. Their Zealots were privileged to
execute any more notorious Offender without the Forms and Solemnities of Legal
Process. But their Examples are no warrantable Precedents for our Practice; and
our Author might as pertinently have prescribed to my imitation the Act of
Elias for a blameless and a justifiable instance of Zeal, as that of Phinehas.
And as for the Example of our blessed Savior, Page 38.
he pretends grievous Resentments for the Irreverence of my Expressions toward
him, such as hot fit of Zeal, seeming Fury, and transport of Passion: though I
know not how I could have expressed my self in more abating Words: for if it
were but a seeming Transport, that directly implies it was no real or criminal
excess; and this word seeming has such a soft and qualified signification, that
it evacuates the malignity of the hardest Expressions: for it is properly of a
Negative Import, and serves only to supplant and remove the Affirmation to
which it is prefixed; so that a seeming fury is in propriety of Speech no fury
at all: and therefore I cannot see how I could have described this Action in
more tender and cautious words, for I think a kind of Fury (as Doctor Hammond
phraseth it, that is not wont to speak irreverently of his Savior) is not near
so soft Language as seeming Fury. But the true Reason why I used these
Expressions, was, because our blessed Savior did in that Action take upon him
the Person and the Privilege of the Jewish Zealots; a sort of Men that professed
to be transported by some extraordinary impulse, beyond the ordinary Rules of
Law and Decency, and by consequence must be acted with a greater heat and
vehemence of spirit; and therefore when our Savior imitated their way of
proceeding, it must needs carry in it a great appearance of their passionate
and extatick Zeal. And I think the reflection of the Disciples themselves upon
this Fact, has more seeming harshness in it then my Remark; for upon this
occasion they call to mind that passage in the Psalms, The Zeal of thy House
has eaten me up, or has fed and gnawed upon me, and that is an angry and
fretting thing. Page 41.
But (says our Author) this Attempt could not be performed with a seeming
transport of passion, because it was a Miracle, and done with the evidence of
the Divine Presence upon him; as if he could not exert an Act of Omnipotence
with an appearance of passion, when it is inseparable from all Actions of
Justice and Severity. You see how upon all turns I am forced to invalidate weak
and slender Cavils, because they are urged for mighty and vehement
Informations: it is their method to astonish the People with frightful words,
and every Objection must be pursued as high as Atheism and Blasphemy. Their
wide Mouths scorn to indict for petty Crimes, and therefore they are resolved
to charge every misprision and little miscarriage of High Treason. But the main
design of his Assault upon this passage, is not so much to beat down my Fences,
as to let us see his deep Stores of Ammunition in Jewish Learning: for some Men
are mighty Rabbis at the second hand, and can furnish great Volumes with a
power of Hebrew, as Brokers do their Shops with old Clothes. And I have read a
famous Writer (though he shall be nameless) that abounds with Rabbinical
Quotations, all which if you would trace them, are trivial in Modern Authors.
But though Men by such borrowed Gays may make the Vulgar gaze and admire them,
yet they do but expose their Ignorance and Vainglory to the Learned World. And
what a flourish does our Author make here with his description of the Temple,
and its several Courts and Apartments, though it is known to every Schoolboy
that has read Godwin's Antiquities? And therefore he might have supposed (as I
did) the known difference between the inward Court of the Jews, and the outward
Court of the Gentiles, as distinct from the Court of the Priests and Levites;
and not have lavish't away two whole Pages to describe them, before he made his
approach toward the purpose, viz. To prove that it was not the Gentiles Court
out of which our Savior whipped the Buyers and Sellers, (as I affirmed) but the
other that is proper and peculiar to the Jews. And here what a gaudy show of
Learning might I make? what Sholes of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Quotations might
I heap up, in my own defense? there being so great a multitude of late Writers,
that have collected Variety of Proofs out of the Ancients in defense of my
Opinion. But I shall rather choose to leave this superannuated Pedantry to those
who more affect it, and perhaps more need it; and shall content my self with
the Reasons of one plain English Author, more then in the bare Authority of
twenty Latin ones; and that is Mr. Mede, in his first Book and second
Discourse, where the Reader may peruse an excellent Account of the Truth and
Reasonableness of my Opinion. I shall only transcribe two passages that are
most material to my purpose; the first to prove it could not be the Court of
the Jews; and the second, that it must of necessity be that of the Gentiles.

1. Those who were so chary that no uncircumcised or unclean Person should come
into their place of Worship, who trod the Pavement thereof with so much
Religious Observance and Curiosity, Antiq. l. 20. c. 7.
who would not suffer (as Josephus relates) any other Building, no not the
Palace of Agrippa their King, to have any prospect into it, lest it should be
polluted by a profane Look; how unlikely is it they would endure it to be made
a place of Buying, Selling, and Bartering, yea, a Market for Sheep and Oxen, as
John 2.14. it is expressly said to have been? Neither will it serve the turn to
excuse it, by saying, It was to furnish such as came thither with Offerings;
for the Sheep and Oxen whilst they were yet to be bought to that purpose, were
not sacred, but profane, and so not to come within the sacred limits.

2. The place alleged to avow the Fact, speaks expressly of
Gentile-Worshippers; not in the words (...) only, but in the whole Body of the
Context. Hear the Prophet speak, Esaias Chap. 56. Verse. 6, 7. and then judge: The
sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the Lord to serve him, and to
love the Name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keeps the
Sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold of my Covenant, (namely, that I
alone shall be his God) even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make
them joyful in my house of Prayer; their Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices
accepted upon mine Altar. Then follow the words of my Text, For my house shall
be called (i. e. shall be; it is an Hebraism) a house of Prayer for all people.
What is this but a Description of the (...), or Gentile-Worshippers? And this
place alone makes good all that I have said before, viz. That this Vindication
was of the Gentiles Court: otherwise the Allegation of this Scripture had been
impertinent; for the Gentiles (of whom the Prophet speaks) Worshipped in no
place but this. You see the prodigious trifling of this Man, that runs after
such wild and straggling Impertinencies to so little purpose. One would have
thought that when he insisted so severely on a matter so remote from my main
Design, he would have been secure of mighty Advantages on his own side, and not
have blunder'd so horribly in such far-fetcht Digressions.

. 10. Page 16.
His next great Assault (and it is a furious one too) is upon the Author of the
Friendly Debate. And here he flings down his Glove, bids defiance to the
stoutest He of us all, and sends a bold Challenge to all Men of Learning,
Reading, and Ingenuity. To what purpose does this Author press his Wit and
Parts to write Dialogues, and endeavor to make the Nonconformists ridiculous
by his Comical Representations? Let him come forth, if he be a Man of Skill and
Confidence: Leave off his Dramatick Railery, and encounter me in Scholastic
and Logical Disputation. What a Flower of Chivalry is this? Is there nothing to
take down his Stomach, and assuage his Courage? Still courting Dangers, and
still swaggering after so many Foils and Disgraces? Will not Age slake the
Heats of his flaming Blood? It Is time to enjoy his Glories and his Laurels, and
not to hazard his Renown with future Adventures. This Fortune is a fickle
thing, and the World full of Tartars. And yet methinks after all this Bravery,
this Challenge savours not a little of Cowardice, and betrays some Qualms and
frosty Apprehensions. It Is a mere shift to discharge themselves of their
Engagements, to do Reason to the Friendly Debate, by beginning his Controve^sie
afresh upon other Grounds and in other Methods; and it is a certain sign of a
baffled person, when he Challenges at a new Weapon, that is sufficient
Confession of his being mastered at the old. And thus because they are not able
to stand against the Wit and Reason of that Author, they except against his way
of Procedure, and refuse to hear any thing we can urge against them, unless we
will fling up all we have gained by his smart Discourses, and yield to Treat
and Dispute with them in the Language of the Budge Doctors of the Schools. As
if we could not discourse as coherently in Dialogues, as in Syllogisms: Reason
is equally certain, with what dress soever it be clothed, and in what method
soever it is deduced: if the Train of Consequences be aptly connected to
Premises, it is pertinent, and according to the Arts of Logic, and the Laws of
Reasoning: but if there be any flaw or incoherence between Principles and
Conclusions, the Chain of the Discourse ceases, and it is easy to discover
where the Break begins. And therefore if there be any Non-consequences and
Impertinences in the Friendly Debate, let them specify the Particulars; but
till then, it is ridiculous to tell the People it is no Rational Discourse,
because composed in a Dramatick, not a Logical method: for if it is true and
pertinent, it is Logical; if not, it is not Dramatick; the Rules of Reasoning
are the same in both: so much do they shuffle by these general Exceptions, till
they can discover particular Defects and Impertinences; and to so little
purpose does our Author challenge that Gentleman to argue according to Rules of
Method and Art: for if that be to state the matters in difference between them,
to confirm his own Judgment, and to confute theirs with substantial Reasons
and Arguments, that is it he has undertaken; and if he have not performed, they
are able to show it; if he has, there wants nothing of the exactness of Logical
and Scholastic procedure, but the dull formality of Ob. and Sol. and videtur
quod non.

But it is unmanly to carp at Phrases, Page 16, 17.
Expressions, Manners of the Declaration of Men's Conceptions collected from, or
falsely fathered upon particular Persons, the greatest guilt of some whereof it
may be, is only their too near approach to the Expressions used in the
Scripture to the same purpose. Behold the confident Arts of these Men! When an
Author has collected so many pregnant Instances of their Folly, and has
warranted the Truth of his Testimonies by particular References to the Original
Authors, they can defeat a thousand Authorities with a May-be, and a Perhaps:
it is but saying those absurd passages he produces out of the Writings of the
Nonconformists, may be falsely fathered upon them, and then all is well. What a
strange Man is this Author of the Friendly Debate, to amass together so many
Quotations out of W. B? may they not be falsely fathered upon him? And what
though he has justified the faithfulness of his Collections, by the most exact
and scrupulous References? Let him not think I am bound to examine the
sincerity of his Relations. If a Man of my Confidence tell him at all adventure
that perhaps he has abused them and the World too by his own Forgeries, that is
enough for ever to abate their Certainty, and evacuate their Authority. Nay
farther, The greatest guilt of some of the Phrases carpt at, it may be, is
only their too near approach to the Expressions used in Scripture to the same
purpose. And it may be their guilt is, that they abuse the words of Scripture
to set off their own wild and unwarrantable Fancies; and it may be the Sky will
fall to morrow; and it may be Saint Paul's Steeple, as soon as it is rebuilt,
will remove it self to the East Indies. To what purpose is it for us to write
Books, if they can invalidate all our Evidences, and arrest all our
Demonstrations with these pitiful May-be's? Or rather, what a confident Man is
this, to expect his groundless Supposals should have credit enough in the World
to put a Baffle upon clear and undeniable Proofs? But it is time, for shame, to
leave off this intolerable trifling; they have been sufficiently teased for it
already by the Author of the Friendly Debate, and yet they cannot support their
desperate Cause but by words that may salve any thing.

But is it not a mean design for a Man to press his Wits and Parts to carp at
other Men's Expressions? No: for if Men place Mystery and Spirituality in
uncouth and affected Phrases; if they trifle away the most weighty Arguments in
Religion with childish Fancies, and feed the People with nothing but empty
Words, and insignificant Phrases; they may deserve to be exposed, though not to
be confuted, because they have not sense enough to be capable either of Truth
or Falsehood; and therefore though they can never be proved false, yet they may
and ought to bemade ridiculous. And what other course can be taken with such
Triflers as T. W. and R. V. that have labored to burlesque the Gospel, and to
turn the Holy Scriptures into clinch and quibble? Would it become a serious Man
to confute Jingles with grave and Scholastic Arguments? to encounter a
wretched Fancy with a Rational Discourse? and baffle a Schoolboys Phrase out
of the Word of God? And when the poor People are ravished with the chiming of
empty words, and hug such fantastic Triflings for Gospel-Mysteries, what
other way is there to undeceive them, then by letting them see, that they are
not suited to the spiritual Condition of any Professors, that are not still
under the Dispensation of Rattles. But though to expose the silliness of their
Expressions, be a part of his design, and that an useful one too, yet so far is
it from being the main drift (much less the only one, as our Author intimates)
of those Composures, that it is least of any thing pursued: and the Bulk of
those Treatises is taken up with discovering (as I before observed) the
feebleness of their beloved Notions, the wildness of their Practices, the
unwarrantableness of their Schism, the prevarication of their Pretenses, and
the inconsistency of their Principles. This was his Theme; and had it been his
Title, his Performance would not only have justified, but exceeded his
Undertaking. But all this is obstinately overlook't, and the whole business is
every where represented by our Author, as if all that Ink and Paper had been
wasted only to carp at uncouth Phrases and Expressions. With such Confidence
and Dexterity can these Men slight what they cannot answer. But upon this
occasion you may observe the Reasonableness of a Motion I made, That Preachers
might be obliged to speak Sense as well as Truth: Because these Men cajole and
amaze the simple Multitude with palpable Nonsense; and when they pour forth a
senseless Jargon of Kitchen-Metaphors, and Rascal Similitudes, the People
admire the preciousness of the Mystery, and they talk like Men encircled with
Glories, and dictate their Cant with the Raptures of an Angel, and the
Authority of an Apostle; and it is they only that understand the secrets of the
Gospel, and the spirituality of the Covenant of Grace; and this betrays them
unavoidably into a Fanatic Enthusiasm, fills their little Heads with wild
Frenzies, and infatuating Conceits, and the whole business of Religion is
transacted in their Imaginations. And they take it for a special work of
Conversion to be affected with precious Mr. Such-an-one's Doctrine, and to
profit under his Ministry, i. e. to sigh at his Sermons, and look demurely half
an hour after. And what can be more obvious to any Man's Observation, then that
all the Change that appears in most of their Converts, is, That their
Tongues-ends are tipped with a new set of Phrases, that they talk by roat and by
chance; and under this demureness of Language they shelter their old Vices of
Envy, Peevishness, Arrogance, Spite, Hatred, Malice and Covetousness? These
Infirmities are not any where so gross and visible as among Professors, they
are the surest Marks, and most distinctive Characters of the Godly Party; and
it is hugely rare to meet with any of these newfangled Saints that does not
discover the clearest and most irksom appearances of some or all these Vices.
Their natural sense of Religion is not only appeased, but abundantly satisfied
with this fantastic Godliness; and this staves them off from all farther
Thoughts of a Thorough and Effectual Reformation. And now upon this account it
is that I proposed to have Preachers obliged to speak Sense as well as Truth:
but is not this an uncouth Motion? (says our Author) seeing hitherto it has
been supposed that every Proposition that is either true or false, Page 21.
has a proper determinate Sense; and if Sense it have not, it can be neither.
And is not this Eristically spoken, and as becomes a Man puissant in Polemick
Squabble? Who could have nickt me with such a subtilty, but one that knows all
his Advantages, and is thoroughly experienced in all the shifts of Cavil? But
yet by his leave, because every Proposition, that is either true or false, must
have a determinate Sense, is it therefore necessary, that what has no
determinate Sense, must be either true or false? If it be not, then Men may
speak Nonsense, and yet speak neither, and then what becomes of this pert and
doubty Exception? And when these Men do as much dis-service to Religion by
Nonsense as by false Doctrine, what can be more seasonably proposed, then that
they should be as well obliged to speak Sense, as they are to speak Truth; and
as well punished for Canting, as for Heresy? seeing (as they manage it) it is
as pernicious to the Peace of the Church, and the Interest of Religion.

Page 17.
. 11. But our Author proceeds: Some of the Things reflected on, and carped at,
are such as those, who have used or asserted them, dare modestly challenge him
in their defense, to make good his Charge in a Personal Conference. This is
somewhat pitiful, and methinks his high Spirit stoops below it self: for there
is no such submissive Confession of a public Overthrow, as to demand private
Conferences; it is the Refuge of all baffled People, and all the Triflers in the
World may shelter themselves in this Sanctuary, though they can never recover
it unless by flight. And I doubt not but Philagathus himself can brag among his
Neighbors and Acquaintance, that the Author of the Friendly Debate dares not
accept this Challenge; and that if he could but talk with him, he could easily
revenge himself to purpose, aye that he could. And though never was poor Man
more piteously bruised and havock't, yet by this lamentable Cordial he makes
shift to assuage the pain of his Disaster, and to support the spruntness of his
Humor. But, alas! this is plain crossing the Cudgels, when they perceive
themselves overmatch't: they are ashamed to confess a baffle, and yet not able
to bear up against the briskness of their Assailant; and therefore to abate the
publickness of the disgrace, they desire to finish the Combat in a private
Corner; and then though they are beaten, they can boast the Victory, and can
crow and strut and triumph when they fly the Pit. But Men that can speak
Reason, can certainly pen what they speak; and therefore if they cannot defend
themselves by Writing, they can never be able to do it by Talking. And if W. B.
can prove by word of mouth his Hoops, and his Wall^ps, and his Vermin, to be
Gospel-Mysteries, it is no great pains to dictate the same words to a
Brachygrapher.

But our Author tells us, Page 51.
That the wisest man living, when he is gagged with a Quill is not able to
speak; and yet he may write for all that, for Gaggs tie not Men's hands; and
therefore I see not how it is possible W. B. should better clear himself by word
of mouth, then by Ink and Paper. There is no way imaginable, but by eating his
Gagg, and recanting what he has written. However, the Author of the Debate is
not at leisure to attend to the Impertinencies of every Talking Man. His design
was to discover their lamentable Follies and Impostures to the World; let them
clear themselves to the Public, and he is satisfied: but upon his own account
he neither needs nor desires satisfaction. So that in short, these Demands of
Personal Conferences, are but a more cleanly way of yielding the Cause: for no
Men will ever sit down under a public baffle, that know how to help themselves.

Page 17, 52.
But if nothing will stop our Mouths, our Author thinks he can easily threaten
us into better manners. For if they would retort upon us, and give in a Charge
against the cursed Oaths, Debaucheries, Profaneness, various Immoralities, and
sottish Ignorance, that are openly and notoriously among those whom we
countenance and secure, what havoc might an ordinary Ingenuity make among the
Conforming Clergy? But he is merciful. How does this Man both vanquish and
oblige us by his Civility? And though he proclaim us to the World a pack of
Sots, Dunces, Drunkards, Atheists, yet he is resolved to spare our Reputation:
if this be his kindness when he forgives, what would it be when he retaliates?
What enraged Malice could have struck with a more angry sting? White's
Centuries, and the Cobbler of Glocester's Tales, are civil and cleanly Stories,
if compared to the baseness and insolence of this Suggestion. But suppose it
carried with it as much Truth as it does Rancour, yet it would be but an
impertinent Calumny, and no material Recrimination to our Charge. We pry not
into their Conversations, nor set Spies upon their secret Practices; nor do we
upbraid them with any Wickedness, from which they may be recovered by their own
Convictions. But the Follies we endeavor to expose, are such as they esteem
Gospel-Mysteries; and the Vices we correct, are such as they adopt among their
choicest Virtues, and by which they rate and value themselves. If they can
discover any such pestilent and destructive Impostures among us, let them
reprove them with the roughness of Satyrs, and the severity of Zealots. But as
for these Miscarriages he pretends to load us withal, they are such as no Man
will justify; and if any be obnoxious to his Charge, who will plead their
Innocence? And they stand condemned not only in the Opinion of the World, but
their own Judgments too. Whereas the only things we lay to their Charge, are
such pretenses whereby they not only elude, but satisfy their Consciences.
And we discover the sottishness of such Delusions, not out of any design to
expose their Persons to Contempt, but barely to disabuse the deluded multitude.
It Is not the personal Faults of W. B. the Friendly Debate aims at, but those of
his Schismatical Way and Spirit. He has by his ridiculous abuse of the Holy
Scriptures, perverted the whole design of the Gospel, and adulterated almost
all the Articles of the Christian Religion. And if so, it is great Charity in us
to deliver the People from the danger of such pernicious Impostures; whereas it
can be nothing but Malice in them, should they attempt to revenge themselves by
personal Disgraces and Reflections.

. 12. But our Authors Apology is not yet at an end, Page 47.
he proceeds: Though Learned Men, such as Plato and Cicero, may argue heartily
and perspicuously in Dialogues; yet it cannot be denied that advantages may be
taken from this way of Writing, to represent both Persons, Opinions and
Practices, invidiously and contemptuously, above any other way: so that by this
means brave and worthy Personages may be rendered ridiculous, as Socrates was by
Aristophanes. By which his Enemies gained the advantage of exposing him to
public Contempt, and thereby prepared a way for the management of an open
Accusation against him, and his Charge was Nonconformity to the Established
Superstition of the Church of Athens. Did ever any Man make such wretched
Apologies? It Is a sad symptom when such positive People are driven to such
skeptical and doubtful Pretenses, and are still forced to take Sanctuary in a
naked May-be. Socrates was abused, and so may any good Man; what then? what is
this to the Friendly Debate, and the Nonconformists? Must they be acquitted,
because Socrates was not guilty? Because some honest Men are maliciously
traduced, shall that discharge all others of just Accusations? They may be
justly charged by the Friendly Debate, though the honest Philosopher was foully
and durtily slandered by Aristophanes. Verily, Sir, this is no better (to say
no worse) then popular Stuff, and Shop-Logick. But it is his great Weapon of
Defense, and thus he tells us elsewhere, Page 15.
St. Paul was accused of Canting as well as W. B. and the Nonconformists: he
was so, and that very unjustly; but what necessity is there that they should be
as wise or as honest as that great Apostle? There is no imaginable Connection
that I know of between his and their Actions; to what purpose then is it to
defend themselves with his Innocence? St. Paul was able to account for the
Truth and Reasonableness of that Doctrine, which they called Canting: If they
are able to do as much for their Phrases, let them do it, and that will silence
all our Clamours and Cavils, and we will no more endeavor to shame them out of
the Profession of the Gospel, by crying out Canting, Phrases, Silly, Nonsense,
Metaphors. But otherwise we will pursue the Cry till we shame them out of their
Folly and Confidence; and assure your self, we will not suffer them to obtrude
their own affected Nonsense upon the People, as the choicest and most
important Mysteries of Religion. But to return to the case of Socrates; his
Virtue is abundantly cleared to all Posterity by his Apology; and when they
have given as satisfactory an Answer to the Friendly Debate, as Socrates did to
his Accusers, they shall not be treated as Socrates was; but till then, they
are never the wiser for his Philosophy, nor the better for his Innocence.

But however, no Man will affirm that Aristophanes Dialogues were absurd and
inartificial, and yet they are sufficiently abusive; and therefore in that way
of Writing, a witty Man may, if he have no regard to Truth or Falsehood, make
any thing look uncouth, and any Person appear ridiculous. If our Author had
instanced in Ben Iohnson's Alchymist, or his Bartholomew-Fair, in stead of the
(...) of Aristophanes, the People would have been able to discover the wide
impertinency of this Exception, (though it is in my Opinion one of the most
plausible Hits in his whole Book:) for they might then have known, there is no
Analogy between the Friendly Debate, and those waggish Comedies: he does not
represent W. B. as the Poet did Ananias; nor confute him in a Disputation with
a silly Puppet, as he did Brother Buisy. He does not personate him with Antic
Postures and Actions, nor fasten upon him Roguish and unlucky Stories, nor put
into his Mouth ridiculous Words of his own unhappy Invention. That way indeed a
witty Man may expose the best and the wisest to public scorn; but then the
Artificial Contrivance of such Dialogues consists not in any regard to Truth
and Reason, but in the unhappiness of the abuse. Whereas the Genius of the
Friendly Debate is as remote from this Comical Waggery, as the Dialogues of
Plato and Cicero, that are sometimes facetious, but never abusive and
disingenuous. The body of his Discourse is Rational and Argumentative; and
though it may be sometimes set off with pleasantness of Humor, and picquancy
of Wit, yet he never seeks advantage by counterfeit Follies, and Comical
Abuses: And if they can charge him with any thing of this nature, I will
undertake in his behalf he shall make them public satisfaction. But when
Aristophanes is exemplified to make good the surmise, that is plausible and
taking with the Common People; for they imagine all who write Greek and Latin
to be grave and serious Men; and therefore if Aristophanes could by the
smartness of his Drolling and Satirical Wit, cast Contempt upon the brightest
Example of Virtue, that ever appeared in the Heathen World; why may not the
Author of the Friendly Debate by the same Arts and Advantages expose
Nonconformists and the Profession of the Gospel, (for they are always ventured
in the same Bottom) to the same popular Scorn and Abuse? But any one that is
acquainted with the Genius of the Grecian Comedy in general, and with the
Humor of Aristophanes in particular, will be ashamed to compare such wild
Satyrs and extravagant Farces with the Friendly Debate. That Poet never
defign'd any appearance of Truth; he represents not Socrates his Opinions, nor
confutes them by sober and Philosophic Reasonings; he intended nothing but
only to abuse him by Buffoonry and Apish Tricks; and the most taking piece of
Wit in the whole Farce, was to bring the grave Philosopher upon the Stage,
dancing in a Sieve. But as for the Friendly Debate, if it has represented any
of them ridiculous, it has only painted them in their own real Colors: There
is no Poetic Invention, nor Comical Extravagance; and it takes no advantage
but from Truth and Reason: so that if he make any of their Opinions appear
ridiculous, he does it not by the unluckiness of his Wit, as Aristophanes did,
but by the strength of his Arguments. Our Author adds indeed, to strengthen
this faint Exception, Page 51.
That it is a facile thing to take the wisest Man living, after he is
lime-twigged with Ink and Paper, and gagged with a Quill, so that he can
neither move nor speak, to clap a Fools Coat on his back, and turn him out to
be laughed at in the streets. This is lofty and Comical, but yet neither true
nor witty. For the wisest Men will never be lime-twigged with Ink and Paper,
nor gagg themselves with Quills; or if they should be so rash and unadvised,
yet I see not how the strong Metaphor can restrain them either from opening
their Mouths, or moving their Hands. For the plain English of all this lofty
rumbling of Lime-twigs and Gaggs, is no more then to be in Print; and how can
that hinder any Man from justifying his own Writings? For if Men Publish Sense,
all the World can never make them ridiculous; if Nonsense, they make
themselves so. And no Gaggs nor Lime-twigs can disable them from defending
their Books against any Adversary, but either a bad Cause, or an ill
Management, or (what is their case) both: so that if they are lime-twigged with
Ink and Paper, it is with Rods of their own laying; and if they are exposed in a
Fools Coat, it is with one of their own making.

. 13. His last Remark upon the case of Socrates is extraordinary; when he
insinuates as if the Crime for which he suffered was Nonconformity to, and
Separation from the National Church of Athens; as if he were the Proto-Martyr
of Independency. And the People are wonderfully taken with these sly and
oblique Strokes; and as woefully impertinent as this is, they admire it for a
notable Essay of Wit. And yet if this trifling were of any importance, the
advantage would run vastly on our side: so easy is it to make it appear, that
Socrates suffered not so much as a Nonconformist, as an Enemy to Fanatics; and
that his Offense was no other then an Endeavor to persuade the Men of Athens
that Grace and Virtue were the same thing. The Story is briefly this: All the
former Ages of Greece were led rather by a giddy and ignorant Enthusiasm, then
the sober Dictates of a wary and well-advised Reason. And though some of the
more ancient Vertuosi, seemed to have made some handsome use of their
intellectual Faculties in Physiological Enquiries, yet as for matters of
Religion, they either altogether neglected their Speculations, or treated of
them with as much wildness and vanity as their Poets, who pretended to derive
their Theological Theories from Enthusiasm and Prophetic Frenzies; imagining
Reason and Devotion to be things incompetent, and that Religion consisted
barely in Enthusiastic Raptures, and Prophetic Heats; and therefore they
depended more upon the Information of their Dreams and Fancies, then their
consistent and waking Faculties; and the best Visionist was the ablest Divine.
Their most celebrated Professors of Divinity, who pretended to the more inward,
practical and experimental Mysteries of Religion, were a sort of silly fanatic
and illiterate Poets, who being Men of giddy and overheated Imaginations,
pretended to derive all their Knowledge (as others do their Ignorance) from
Inspirations and Divine Illapses; and thereby so entirely engross't the
Profession of Divinity, that they gained an absolute Sovereignty over the
Faith, not only of the rude and Vulgar sort of Mankind, but also of the Sages
and Professors of Wisdom; the Philosophers themselves, howsoever otherwise Men
of eminent Parts and Ingenuity, resigning up their own Reasons to the Authority
of these Fellows Whimsies and Inspirations. Then comes Socrates and preaches
down all their pretended Mysteries, for raw and lamentable Impostures, and
endeavors to draw them off from the Pageantry of their Superstition, to the
habitual Practice of Virtuous Actions: And to this purpose he teaches his
Fellow-Citizens, that they must gain an Interest in the favor of the Gods, not
by their diligent Attendance upon the Eleusinian Ordinances, but by a Life of
Virtue and Goodness; and that Love, Humility, Meekness, Obedience, Chastity and
Temperance, are more acceptable to the Eternal Deity, then all their Mysterious
Solemnities in honor of the Mother of the Gods. This alarms the Zealots and
hot Spirits of the City, and the Good Man is immediately cited before the
Consistory of the Areopagitical Elders, and is by them condemned as an Heretic
to their Orthodox Faith, for setting up Carnal Reason against the Spirit of
God, and for presuming to fathom the sacred Depths of their Eleusinian
Mysteries, with the Line of his short and shallow Understanding: for how
exorbitant soever they might appear to his Fleshly Reasonings, they were
derived from the Offspring of the Gods, and owned by the most Practical and
Spiritual Preachers of their Religion. And though his private and depraved
Reason might judge them the brutishest and most licentious Practices in the
World, (for so they really were) yet in spite of all their seeming
Beastliness, they were the highest strains of Godliness and Spiritual Devotion.
This was represented to the zealous and giddy Multitude, and then the Cry is,
Crucify him, crucify him. And thus fell this great Man a Sacrifice to the
Zeal and Fury of a Fanatic Rabble.

You see with what vain and succesless Attempts they fasten upon those
Discourses; and the truth is, in so foul and thick a Cause, the more they
struggle, the faster they stick; and therefore they would be well advised not
to dally too much with that Author: for though I know him to be far from an
angry or a Cynical Humor, yet I am able to discern such an hatred and
antipathy to Hypocrisy from the Genius of his Writings, that if they will
tempt him to unrip all their Folly and Knavery, he is apt enough to discover
such thick Blasphemies against Divine Providence, and such unparalled Abuses
of Religion in their most sumptuous Pretenses, and most plausible Practices, as
shall represent the Men of greatest Reputation amongst them for Wisdom and
Learning, in as ridiculous a Guise as T. W. and the Men of greatest Vogue for
Conscience and Integrity, under as seditious a Character as W. B. and no Man
more obnoxious upon both accounts, then I. O. And who can endure to see Men,
that are so horribly bemired, bear up with so much State and Confidence?

. 14. But the great Nuissance of my Preface, is some unkind and unhappy
Reflections, that I chanced, I know not by what Misfortune, to cast out upon
their Gift of Prayer: This is the dear Palladium of their Pulpits, and they
will as soon fling up the whole Cause, as forego this Privilege of Talking:
It Is the Ephod and the Teraphim of the House of Micah, and nothing shall ever
wrest it from them but Fine, Force, and Invincible Resolution; and therefore
where this is endangered or invaded, our Author (you may be sure) will lay
about him with all the power of Words and vehemence of Zeal; so that here I
must struggle to purpose to carry off this Darling of the Cause. In the first
place then the Man is Wonder-strucken, Page 23.
that I should design all along to charge my Adversaries with Pharisaism, and
yet should instance in their Confession of Sin, when it is the Characteristical
Note of the Pharisees, that they made no Confession of Sin at all. But to
awaken him out of his amazement, he may know that the Pharisaick Hypocrisy
consists neither in long Prayers, nor short Confessions, no more then it does
in long Robes, or short Cloaks: Spiritual Pride is its only Essential
Character, and it is of no Concernment which way, and in what Expressions it
vents and discovers its self. There is a creeping as well as a vaunting
Arrogance, and this Vice is never so confident as when it appears in the Garbs
and Postures of Humility. And thus when Men dissemble with the Almighty, when
they know that they belie themselves with false Accusations; when they mourn
for Sins, of which they think they stand clear and innocent; and pretend to be
humbled for those Offenses, of which they are not seriously convinced; Tell me
a greater instance of Pride and Insolence in the World, then this juggling and
counterfeit Humility: for what else can these Men think within, but that they
oblige and complement the Almighty, by being content to be thought viler
Wretches then they think themselves, only to advance the Interest of Gods
Glory, and set off the greatness of his Free Grace? And what an obliging Favor
is this, when they will sacrifice their own Reputation to the Glory and Renown
of his Attributes? So that it is apparently a coarser piece of vanity to confess
those Sins of which we are not guilty, then not to acknowledge those of which
we are. And that there is something of this Leven lurking at the bottom of all
this Humiliation, is notoriously evident; for as much as howsoever humble and
complemental they are in their Talk to God, yet in their Conversation with Men,
the Scene immediately alters; then they return to the old Pharisaick Vomit; and
then, Publicans, keep your distance; and then they censure and despise their
Neighbors as Carnal Gospellers, and applaud themselves that they are not as
the Men of the World. Then we bless the Lord for humbling our proud Hearts, and
for emptying us of all our Self-righteousness; thereby to bring us effectually
to an experimental sense of the deep and more spiritual Mysteries of the
Gospel; to an heavenly taste and relish of the sweetness and preciousness of
the Lord Jesus, and of that Soul-ravishing delight wherewith his People are
affected in their spiritual Closings with him; and lastly, to an inward feeling
of the glorious Discoveries, Manifestations and Comings in of his Spirit upon
the Hearts of Believers in all his Ordinances. This is the inward, practical
and experimental part of the Mystery of Godliness; whereas your Formalists and
mere Moral Professors make a great Noise about their dry Devotions, and
Self-wrought-out-Mortifications. But, alas, poor deluded Wretches! they never
viewed the Ugliness of their Nature in the Glass of the Law; they never lay
under the Horrors of the Spirit of Bondage; they never had a humbling sight
and thorough sense of their Sins, and were never perfectly emptied of their own
Self-righteousness; and though they can do good Actions, yet they cannot deny
them, and make woeful Complaints to Almighty God, that all the Duties they
perform, though they know them to be agreeable to his Laws, are wicked and
abominable. Ah! this Corrupt Nature is a proud Thing, and hardly driven out of
its Trust and Confidence in its own Righteousness; nothing but an absolute and
thorough Conviction of its own Self-emptiness, Self-abhorrency, and
Self-despair, can ever bring it to a full and absolute Close with the Lord
Christ. This is the Block at which Millions of poor Souls stumble
everlastingly; and it is the Lords distinguishing Mercy that has taken the Veil
from off our Eyes, and enabled us to see the danger of a Self-righteousness. So
that this Pageantry is the main ground of all their Spiritual Pride and
Arrogance; upon this they build the lofty Conceits of their own peculiar
Godliness, and their insolent Contempt of all others, that have more Wit or
less Vanity then to be as fond and fantastic as themselves; and in the result
of all, this formal and counterfeit Humility, is made the specific difference
between the People of God, and the Men of the World.

But here his Pen takes occasion to fly out (for it is very unruly) upon a
Censure of mine, against an Insolence of theirs; for confining the Elect and
the Godly to their own Party, and esteeming of us as no better then the Wicked
and the Reprobate of the Earth. Page 24.
Wherein (says he) I am satisfied, that he unduly charge those, whom he
intends to reflect upon: However, I am none of them; I confine not Holiness to
a Party, not to the Church of England, or to those that dissent from it. This
his Confidence dares affirm, though it is so notorious that never any Party of
Men in the World (no not the Jews) did with greater assurance appropriate to
themselves all the Titles and Characters of the People of God: For what else
mean their Accounts and Descriptions of the Power of Godliness, by the
Singularities of their own Superstition? What mean those Flatteries and
Congratulations wherewith they besprinkle their Followers, as if they were the
only People that are acquainted with the Mysteries and Spiritualities of the
Gospel? What means their Confinement of the Preaching of the Covenant of Grace
to their own Doctrines, and their own Congregations? What means their boasting
of themselves as the only powerful, Soul-searching, experimental and spiritual
Preachers? In brief, what means their bestowing nothing but fair Words upon
themselves, and nothing but foul Language upon us? Sure he cannot forget the
Words of their own Party, and who they were, that were The Godly, Professors,
Sion, God's Jacobs, the Israel of God, God's Inheritance; when we were Egypt
and Babylon, Enemies of the Power of Godliness, scoffing Edomites, Men of the
World, Antichristian Apostates, Idolaters, and Followers of the Whore. He
certainly must needs be a very young Professor that is unacquainted with this
Language. But however, what is all this to our Author? He (you may take his
word) is none of them. But what is that to me? Did I ever accuse him? My design
was to describe the Genius of the Party, and not the Humor of every individual
Professor. But it is the misfortune of indiscreet People to betray themselves
by their own unnecessary Apologies, and to cry Not guilty, before they are
indicted, when their own Consciences Arraign and Convict them. For our Author
(I perceive by sundry Passages and Notions in his Book) is a Brother of the
Independent Communion; and therefore let him (seeing he has put himself upon
it) produce me but one Writer of that Fraternity, that is not notoriously
guilty of this piece of Pride and Partiality. I confess I am not very
conversant in their Writings, yet I have by chance read one (of whom I am
confident he has no very small Opinion) that exceeds all the Scriblers I ever
had the fortune to meet with, or the leisure to peruse, in these foul and
malapert Censures; and that is I. O. one of the great Patriarchs of the
Congregational Churches: All whose Pamphlets are little better then so many
Libels against the Church of England; and had we been downright Miscreants, or
the most wretched Ap^states in the World, he could scarce have given us more
unfriendly Language: It Is hard to dip into a Page of his Writings, that is not
embellish't with some or other of these decent and beautiful Expressions. It
was the peculiar way of his Sermons and Discourses to magnify the
Parliament-Reformation for a wonderful and providential Recovery of the
departed Gospel to these Nations; and to represent the design of that Holy War
as begun and carried on by the Power and Procurement of the Lord Christ, in
order to the final Overthrow of the Episcopal Antichrist, and the Restoration
and Establishment of his own Kingdom. He has published many excellent Sermons
to this purpose; such is that entitled, A Vision of unchangeable Free Mercy,
in sending the Means of Grace to undeserving Sinners: wherein Gods
uncontrollable eternal Purpose, in sending and continuing the Gospel (by which
they all along intend nothing else but their sweaty way of Preaching) unto this
Nation, in the midst of Oppositions and Contingencies, is discovered, etc.
preached before the Honorable House of Commons, April 29. 1646. Where, beside
the apparent scope of the Sermon it self, he reckons up three Departures of the
Gospel from England: Page 27.
That by the Saxon Conquest, that by the Roman Harlot, and that in our days by
an almost universal treacherous Apostasy from the Purity of Worship, from which
the Free Grace and good Pleasure of God has made a great Progress again toward
a Recovery. So that the Episcopal way of Worship is a perfect Apostasy from the
Purity of the Gospel; and had it been universal, it had been total. And again,
such is his Sermon Of the Branch of the Lord, or the Beauty of Sion, preached
at Edinburgh 1650. where compiling a Catalogue of the Enemies of the House of
God in all Ages, he reckons up Pharaoh, Page 10, 11.
Nebuchadnezzar, Dioclesian, Julian, and the late Prelates, whose Rochets (he
adds) were for that Reason, together with other Garments of their Adherents,
and the Imperial Robes of the forementioned Emperors, rolled up in Blood by
the Divine Vengeance, and hung up in Gods House, as the Spoils of Gods Enemies;
And it is, no doubt, no unpleasant reflection to his People, to consider how
willing and prodigal their gracious Father is to sacrifice Crowns and Mitres,
Kingdoms and Churches to the Interest and Plunder of his secret ones: Preface
to Cromwell.
For so our Author styles them; I suppose because no body knows or suspects
them to be Gods People beside themselves. And in his Dedication to the Supreme
Authority of the Nation, the Commons Assembled in Parliament, prefixed to his
Sermon preached October. 24. 1651. being a Solemn Day of Thanksgiving for the
Destruction of the Scots Army at Worcester, with sundry other Mercies, he tells
his Patrons, That as whatever there has been of Beauty, Glory, or Advantage
unto the People of God in the late Transactions, (at Worcester) has been
eminently of undeserved Grace; so the dreadful Vengeance, which the Lord has
executed against the Men of his Enmity and Warfare, has been most righteously
procured by their clothing cursed designs of Revenge, Persecution, Bondage in
Soul and Body, Spoil and Rapine, with the most glorious Pretenses of Zeal,
Covenant and Reformation, and such like things, which never came into their
Hearts. Here the dear Brethren of the Presbytery, as well as the Reprobate
Cavaliers, were Listed among the Enemies of the Cause, and of the Church of
God; and now all People and all Parties in the three Kingdoms, except only the
Army-Saints and their Adherents, were become perfect Egyptians: And so they
were upon this Account, that the People of God had gained a certain Right to
Rob and Plunder them by Divine Commission. And here also you may observe, that
I.O. (bold Man!) and God Almighty were always of the same side and the same
Communion; and whatever he was for, was doubtless the Cause of God. They were
for Presbytery, and Independency, and Democracy together, and never parted
Counsels and Designs, till the Lord grew weary of these right Godly Men, and so
was at length pleased to turn Cavalier. And that upon good grounds, for by this
time his old Friends were become as bad or worse then his old Enemies. For so
the same Author informs us, (to mention but one place more, though I omit as
many as would make a Volume) in a little Treatise of Temptation, page 65, 66.
where, giving an Account of the Temptations, which in those days had even cast
down the People of God from their Excellency, and had cut their Locks, and made
them become like other Men, he reckons in the first place the specious Pretense
of Christian Liberty and Freedom from a Bondage-frame, at which door sundry had
gone out into Sensuality and Apostasy, into a neglect of Sabbaths, Public and
Private Duties, Dissoluteness and Profaneness. In the next place he adds, The
pretense of leaving Public things to Providence, under which Professors had
disputed themselves into wretched Carnal Complyances, and the utter ruin of
all Zeal for God, the Interest of Christ, or his People in the World. He
subjoins in the last place, These and the like Considerations, joined with the
Ease and Plenty, the Greatness and Promotion of Professors, have so brought
things about, that whereas we have by Providence shifted Places with the Men of
the World, we have by Sin shifted Spirits with them also. We are like a
Plantation of Men carried into a Foreign Country; in a short space they
degenerate from the Manners of the People from whence they came, and fall into
that of the Country, whereinto they are brought; as if there were something in
the soil and Air that transformed them. Give me leave a little to follow my
similitude; he that should see the prevailing Party of these Nations, many of
those in Rule, Power, Favor, with all their Adherents, and remember that they
were a Colony of Puritans, whose Habitation was in a low place, as the Prophet
speaks of the City of God, translated by an high hand to the Mountains they now
possess, cannot but wonder how soon they have forgot the Customs, Manners, ways
of their own old People, and are cast into the m^uld of them that went before
them, in the places whereunto they are translated -- What were those before us
that we are not? What did they we do not? Here is pregnant Doctrine for many
excellent Inferences, but time will not permit; and therefore from hence I
shall only observe, that though they were grown as lewd and wicked to all
intents and purposes, as in their great Charity they could ever suppose us to
have been, yet notwithstanding that they still were the people of God, and we
the men of the world, which you remember is somewhat more than I undertook to
prove against them. You may from hence see how this Man's Rashness provokes us
even in our own defense to lay open his Friends follies, and perhaps you (that
are a suspicious Man) will be apt to make this farther conclusion, that Lying
as well as some other little sins may put in for a place among the Infirmities
of Gods people. So little Conscience do some men make of what they say, that
they will not stick to say contradictions for their present turn; and yet so
obnoxious are they, that contradictions cannot relieve them: however it is
hugely unadvised for men notoriously guilty to boast their own innocence,
before they are challenged, for that is to upbraid us to an Impeachment. And
whatever shame and disgrace may follow, it is purely extorted by their own
confidence. But I must return.

. 15. And therefore in the next place, our Author might have spared his flat
and tedious Invective against me for reproaching of poor sinners with the
deepest acknowledgment of their sin before the holy God. Page 23.
For there is not any virtue that I value at an higher rate than true Humility,
it is the beauty and the ornament of all Goodness and all Religion: But I hate
these sneaking and beggarly tricks of Hypocrisy, and nothing irks me more than
to see such a bloated Pride creep up and down in the Garbs and Postures of
Humility. I cannot endure to hear men pretend so loudly to loath themselves in
the presence of Almighty God, and yet to favor nothing but themselves; to make
such vehement Invectives against their own Baseness, and yet at the same time
to brave and plume it with inward Conceits of their own singular Godliness; and
under the deepest shows of Self-abhorrency, commit Wantonness with their own
Thoughts, by the most arrogant and vainglorious Reflections. There is not in
the World a more shameless and a more irksome instance of Hypocrisy, than for
men under the demurest looks, and most prostrate behavior, to shroud and
cherish the rankest and most hateful Insolence, soothing themselves with proud
and flattering Comparisons, entertaining their thoughts with Admiration of
their own Worth, and Contempt of other men's, and making their own Fancies the
Stages where they display their own Virtues and Perfections. And to prove that
this is the Mythology of all their deep and prostrate Humblings, what more
pregnant Evidence can we have, than that they will not endure to be charged and
upbraided with their own Confessions? In other men's mouths they immediately
turn into Slanders and impious Reproaches; and whoever should dare to represent
them half so vile to their own Faces, as they represent themselves to the
Almighty, would be thought to have a Mouth as black as Rabshakeh or Lucian; and
but to suggest a suspicion of their Pride and Vanity, is an Unpardonable
Affront, and raises all their Zeal and Choler: though there is not a more
infallible symptom of a man's being proud, than to be angry for being rounded in
the Ear that he is so. Now how is it possible Men should be serious in these
black Indictments of themselves, when they think them no better then foul
Aspersions, and unjust Reproaches to their Innocence; and shall be so highly
displeased with any Man, that shall be so credulous as to take them at their
word? And you need not question but they would take it with wonderful kindness
and patience if we should turn their own familiar Confessions into serious
Accusations. If they would accept the Charge, they are lewd People still; if
they would not, they are proud Hypocrites, and there is my old Dilemma, and it
will return upon them, though they drive it away with a Fork: so transparent is
this Vanity through all its demure and grave disguises! Many other evident
Proofs there are of this folly, as that they are most sparing in the Confession
of those Sins, of which they stand most guilty; and that the Crimes they bemoan
most largely, are such as they suppose peculiar to Gods People: but what I have
already remarked, is more than enough to lay open the palpable coarseness of
this Delusion.

Page 27.
But in these Confessions, (he tells us) they have more respect to the Pravity
of their Natures, then the outward Perpetrations of Sin. But this is an idle
pretense, and is so far from justifying, that it will not blanch the Matter.
For in the method of their Prayers, Original and Actual Sin are enumerated as
distinct Heads of Confession. They first expatiate at large upon all the parts
and branches of Original Corruption, as it diffuses and spreads it self over
all the Faculties both of the inward and the outward Man; and after that, they
proceed to the distinct Enumeration and Aggravation of their Actual Sins, where
they reproach themselves with a long Catalogue of the blackest Impieties, and
then exaggerate their Impieties with the lewdest and most emphatical
Circumstances; so that all that baseness they stand indicted of by their own
Confessions, cannot relate to the pravity of their Natures, but only to the
wickedness of their Lives. Beside, it is a loud mistake to fasten any guilt at
all upon the depraved Tendency of Nature, for there are but two Parts of
Original Sin, viz. either the imputation of Adam's particular Offense, of which
we stand guilty as parties of the Covenant; and this is all the guilt we are
chargeable with upon the account of the first Transgression: for it is certain,
Adam could derive no more guilt to his Posterity, than what himself contracted;
and therefore no other instance of disobedience can be imputed to us, than that
in which he prevaricated: Or real Communication of a decayed and ill-addicted
Nature; and this is not a Crime, but an Infelicity that was inflicted by God
himself upon Mankind, as a Punishment of Adam's Sin; and what is an Act of his
Will, can be no fault of ours. We may indeed thank our first Father's Apostasy
for this Disaster, because it was justly inflicted upon himself and his
Posterity for that Offense: but what was intended merely as a Punishment, to
impute to our selves as a Crime, is, I think, new, I am sure crude Divinity.
But however, suppose all the unhappy Inclinations of our Natures may be charged
with actual guilt; yet what is that to outward Transgressions? Can any Man be
so oddly absurd, as to affirm that the bare Tendency of his Nature to sin, has
prevaricated such and such particular Commandments in Thought, Word and Deed?
And yet it was only these, and the like circumstantiated Confessions, that are
not capable of being applied to any thing but Actual Sin, that were the matters
of my Reproof.

. 16. Page 28.
But this cursed Dilemma has not such short Horns, but that it will gore St.
Paul as well as the Nonconformists, that acknowledges the former sins of his
life, when he was injurious, a Blasphemer and a Persecutor, (which sins I pray
God deliver others from.) As for the uncivil censure suggested in this
Parenthesis, I accept it as an eminent Issue of his Charity and Good Nature.
But as for St. Paul's acknowledgment, that stands far enough out of harms way
from the reach of my Dilemma; for there is no possible way to acquit that
blessed Apostle of the guilt of those enormous Impieties, unless he would be so
bold as to give the Lie to St. Luke as well as to himself. Ibid.
But (he adds) when an Apostle, he professes himself the chiefest of sinners.
But it is apparent that this Confession refers not to his present Condition, but
to the time of his being Injurious, a Blasphemer and a Persecutor; when no Man
reviled the Son of God with fiercer Zeal and Confidence, or persecuted the
Church of Christ with more barbarous Outrage and Inhumanity: which being so
great a Crime in its own Nature, and so bold an Affront to the Divine Will, had
he not reason (think you) to mark himself for one of the greatest Sinners that
ever obtained pardon? For as for such as had affronted the Holy Ghost, and
blasphemed the Name of Christ against the Convictions of their own Conscience,
they came not into this account of pardonable Offenders, as being fatally
consigned up to a state of Impenitence and Unbelief: but among all Sinners that
were within a capacity of Mercy, he knew not a greater Wretch than himself.
Though this Confession relates to the Malignity of the Crime, not to the Malice
of the Criminal: for he is so far from affecting to make a sad Story worse,
that he abates the guilt of his sin by the most excusing and allaying
Circumstances, in that he did it in Ignorance and Unbelief; and it was this
that so greatly assuaged the horror of the Crime, and (as himself reports) so
greatly disposed him for Pardon and Repentance. But how will this plain dealing
justify such Professors, as pour forth daily Confessions of the blackest and
most presumptuous Sins? of despising the Riches of Gods Goodness, and
Forbearance, and Long-suffering; of treasuring up wrath against the day of
wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God; of treading under foot
the Son of God, and counting the Blood of the Covenant wherewith they are
sanctified, an unholy thing, and doing despite unto the Spirit of Grace. All
this and much more, set off with all the Circumstances of Aggravation; not
only in the days of darkness and unregeneracy, but since the glorious Gospel
has shined into their Hearts; since they have rested in it, and made their
boast of Christ, and known his will, and approved the things that are more
excellent. Is not this wild work for choice Believers to talk such extravagant
Contradictions, when the former passages, and innumerable others common in
their Mouths, do apparently signify nothing less than either an incorrigible
Infidelity, or a total Apostasy from the Gospel?

But what do I think of the Confessions of Ezra, Ibid.
of Daniel, and others, in the Name of the whole People of God? I think they
were as full of Truth as Horror; and the People of God he here speaks of, were
such goodly Saints as had revolted from the Worship of the true God, to all
manner of Idolatry and Moral Wickedness. If the Congregations of the
Nonconformists are such redoubted People of God as these, I have nothing to
oppose to the largest and blackest Confessions of their sins. If they worship
Idols, as they did, let them with their wonted familiarity make bold with the
Expression of the Prophet Jeremy to that purpose: We have committed two evils,
we have forsaken thee the Fountain of living waters, and hewn out Cisterns,
broken Cisterns that can hold no water. And if they can vie Lewdness and
Hypocrisy with that holy Nation, let them continue to foist into their Prayers
those dark Characters wherewith the Prophets described the unparalled
Wickedness of that People: nay, far be it from me to abridge them the Liberty
of helping out their stiff Fancies, by purloining lofty Expressions out of the
Prophetic Writings. If the Israel of God be not endued with more Grace at
present than it was twenty years since, as I. O. describes them before the
Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons Assembled in Parliament, April 19.
1649. page 39. We have called World Christ, and Lust Christ, and Self Christ,
working indeed for them, when we pretended all for Christ. Now this Doctrine
was either true or false; if false, what a bold and ungodly Slander was this to
brand these Darlings of Providence, these precious Servants of the Lord Christ,
these Patriots of their Country, these Fathers of the public Liberty, (our
Author may remember who flattered them with these special Titles) with such a a
monstrous and profligate Hypocrisy? If true, then what Anointed Saints were
those, who under color of setting up the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, and
rescuing the People of England from the dismal Oppressions both of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Tyranny, (he may understand this Language too) had imbroil'd the
Nation in a Bloody War, had sacrificed so many thousand Lives, and had
butchered the best of Kings, only to carry on the puny Concernments of their
own narrow and accursed Interest?

But we must proceed, Ibid.
and in the last place I am catechized to give an account of my Thoughts of
David's self-abasements, that far exceed any thing that Nonconformists are able
to express. Truly I think the passionateness of his Repentance was but
proportioned to the horror of his Sin; he lay under the fresh Convictions of
the most horrid Villainies of Murder, Adultery and Drunkenness, and his guilt
was enhansed with the most shameful and dishonorable Circumstances; and whilst
he continued in this dismal Condition, what Cries and Accents could be too
doleful to express the Bitterness of his Grief and Horror? If they are in the
same plight and condemnation, I will not then upbraid them for clothing their
acknowledgments with the blackest of his Expressions; for they will then have
sad occasion to sing their penitential Psalm elsewhere: if they are not, then
to use such mournful Ditties in their familiar Addresses to Heaven, falls under
my former censure of trifling and fooling with the Almighty.

Page 25.
But to despise Men for the deepest humblings of their Souls before God, can
arise from no other Principle but an utter unacquaintance with the holiness of
God, the accuracy of the Law, and the deceitfulness of my own Heart. As for the
deceitfulness of my own Heart, I confess my self a stranger to it, and am not
at all desirous of its acquaintance, for I hate nothing more then a false
Bosom-Friend: But however, my Heart and my Self are of the same Church, and the
same Religion; there is no Schism between us, that I know of, nor do I remember
when we parted Communion: And I think we ever had the same Thoughts, Designs
and Resolutions; and therefore as long as I am careful to preserve my own
Integrity, let my Heart prove false and treacherous if it can: the Hearts
indeed of all Hypocrites and wicked Men are deceitful, because they themselves
are so; but we shall never understand how an upright Man should keep an
hypocritical Heart, unless we can divide himself from himself. So that when the
People of God make frequent and piteous moans of the hypocrisy of their own
Hearts, unless still they fool and trifle, there is no remedy but the People of
God must pass by their own Confessions for rank and self-convicted Hypocrites:
for it was never known that any Man was better than his own Heart, or that a
perfidious Heart was found in the breast of an honest Man.

As for the Purity and Holiness of God, I am affected with such reverential
apprehensions of it, that I would have Men approach his presence with an awful
and religious distance, and not always present themselves before him in such a
foul and unclean pickle, and so full of Vermin; I know not a bolder affront to
his Purity, than to presume he will vouchsafe Communion with such polluted
Souls. It Is high Presumption for an habitual Sinner, continuing such, to expect
the forgiveness of his sins; nothing can reconcile us to the favor of God, but
an effectual and a persevering Repentance; this is an absolute and
indispensable condition of every acceptable Prayer: and therefore Men that
acknowledge any habitual disobedience to the Laws of Christ, put in a bar
against their own Petitions; and do not only stave off the Divine Pity by
being unfit Objects for it, but provoke the Divine Displeasure by presuming of
his Favor to such unworthy Wretches. And when Men tell the Almighty in good
earnest, (for otherwise they do but trifle with him still) Lord, we offend
daily against all thy Commandments in Thought, Word and Deed, sinning against
thee with an high hand, and a bold forehead, against Knowledge, and against
Conviction; all the Thoughts of our Hearts are evil, only evil, and that
continually; working all uncleanness with greediness; drawing Iniquity with
Cords of Vanity, and Sin as it were with Cart-ropes, etc. What other Answer to
their Prayers can such debauched Wretches expect, but the utmost Severity of
Wrath and Indignation, and the Doom of the worst of Hypocrites and Unbelievers?

. 17. But Ministers, Page 27.
who are the Mouths of the Congregation to God, may and ought to acknowledge
not only the Sins whereof themselves are personally guilty, but those also
which they judge may be upon any of the Congregation. I shall not urge him with
the rash examples of some of their godly Ministers of greatest Fame and
Reputation for Piety, that have proclaimed themselves not only to the present
Age, but to all Posterity, proud, and selfish, and hypocritical, and
desperately and mortally wicked. Certainly these must of necessity be either
very naughty Saints, or most horrible Dissemblers: However, I am sure such
rattling Confessions cannot but have a sad and woeful Influence upon the Lives of
their popular Admirers. For what can they more naturally conclude from thence,
that if precious Mr. -- that eminent Servant of Jesus Christ in the work of the
Gospel, be so full of sin and wickedness; in how many more and greater
Infirmities may I be indulged, that am but a private and an ordinary Professor?
But to let this pass. What unclean Congregations are those that have such foul
Mouths? Methinks it becomes not such pure People to have their Mouths always
full of such uncleanly Confessions. And whether it be true or false what I. O.
informs us, Sermon at Margarets Westminster. Feb. 28. 1649. page 10.
That it is the Duty and Privilege of sincere Believers to unlade their
Unbelief in the bosom of their God, I know not; but this I know, that it is an
unmannerly and horrid profaneness, whenever they make their Addresses to the
Almighty, to disgorge themselves of the most filthy and abominable Loads of Sin
in his Presence. The Prayers of wicked Men, or habitual Sinners, (as I told you
before) are an abomination to the Lord, and he loathes nothing more then the
boldness and presumption of their Addresses: And therefore if they can suppose
any in their Congregations guilty of those heinous Enormities, they are wont so
familiarly to confess, yet they ought not to suppose them to have any share in
the Public Worship: For when Men meet together to join in the Duties of
Devotion, none ought to be supposed Members of the Society, but what are
qualified for the performance of the Duty; because all that others can
contribute, is not to be reckoned a part of Divine Worship; and therefore
Ministers ought only to represent such Persons as are supposed capable of the
Duty; and all that are not so, to disclaim their company, and refuse their
assistance, as much as if they stood excommunicate from the Congregation; for
so they are as to all the real designs and purposes of Religious Worship.

However, Public Offices ought to be so contrived as to suit Public Ends, and
to serve the Needs of the whole Body; and therefore is the Confession of our
Public Liturgy expressed in such general Terms, as may comprehend the Concerns
and Consent of all Members of the Assembly: For the peculiar end and usefulness
of this part of Religion, is no other than that Men should agree and join
together in the Worship of God; so that it is not so properly the Office of
particular Persons, as of the whole Communion; and therefore ought so to be
managed, as to take in the joint Devotion of the whole Society. And when it
descends to the particular Regards of private Persons, it is then no Office of
public Worship, but private Prayer; a Duty that is not proper for open
Congregations, but for Closets, and private Retirements; where, if any Person
have any blacker and more enormous Crimes in his Calendar, he may be more
particular in his Confessions without shame and scandal. But it is an odd and
preposterous course, when Men associate themselves together to join in an
Office of Devotion, that they should divide into so many separate and distinct
Parties or Congregations, and every individual Member should pick and cull his
share of the Duty, and lie at catch for some particular passage to which he may
be able to bob in his Amen. But without this slight, they could never be able
to keep up their affected Singularity of Pharisaick Length and Lowdness.

To conclude: This is a New Light newly discovered by this Man of Revelations:
for I am confident it was never before heard of in the Christian World, that
when Men assemble together for the joint performance of Public Worship, every
individual Person has his Oratory apart, and joins not with the Community, but
casts in a distinct Symbol of his own, in which the residue are not more
concerned then in the private Devotions of his own Closet. However, this faint
Evasion (were it to any purpose, as I have shown it is to none) is a secret to
the common People; they are not wont to weigh and examine every Confession
before they assent and seal to its Truth, but swallow all that the Minister
pours out with an implicit Confidence: they will confess any thing that he
puts into their Mouths; and those that are serious and most in good earnest,
make the rufullest faces at the ugliest Crimes, and groan most powerfully at
the lowdest and most thwacking Confessions.

Now when the People are accustomed to such large and foul Catalogues of sin,
and when they hear such sad Stories from their own Mouths, and when it is
confessed in their Name, that they have broken every Commandment of both
Tables, to which are reduced all the kinds and instances of Wickedness; and
when this vast heap of vile things is exaggerated with the heinousest and most
emphatical circumstances of Baseness; in brief, when they are grown familiar
with the Confessions of such lewd Offenses, as are not fit to be named any
where but in an Indictment; what will they more probably conclude with
themselves, but that it is common for Gods People to fall into these foul
Miscarriages, and yet never fall from Grace? Especially when these Confessions
are generally clogged with some unlucky words that appropriate their guilt to
the best and most holy Professors; and when it is the most vulgar Scheme of
their Eloquence to enhanse the heinousness of the Offenses, in that they were
committed in the days of Regeneracy and Profession. And if the Lives of the
Regenerate be stained with so many faults, and such foul blemishes, what is the
Conclusion, but that the difference is not so wide between them and the wicked
as is imagined? Alas! the righteousness of the holiest Men is as filthy rags;
it is not for the Sons of Adam to think of performing a good Action, and we
deserve Eternal Wrath for the most Virtuous Work we were ever guilty of
attempting. What is Man, that he should be clean? or he that is born of a
Woman, that he should be righteous? And now what remarkable difference remains
there between the Infirmities of the Children of God, and the Impieties of the
Wicked and Unregenerate? when it is the unavoidable fate of Humane Nature, to
be enslaved to a necessity as well as to a body of Sin: and after we are
brought into a state of Grace, there remains a Law in our Members rebelling
against the Law of our Minds, bringing us into captivity to the Law of Sin: so
that even the Children of God are Slaves to their Lusts and Passions; and by
reason of the invincible power of indwelling Sin, are as vehemently inclined,
and as frequently betrayed into actual and outward Transgressions, as lewd and
graceless Persons, only with this difference, that they enter upon the
commission of their Sins with more regret and reluctance, in that they do what
they would not: i. e. they act more boisterously against the Light of Reason,
and do greater violence to the Convictions of their own Conscience. And now
upon this Principle, what plausible reason and title have Men to pretend to
Grace and Saintship, though they sin habitually, frequently, and easily, upon
every opportunity, and every temptation? It Is but crying out against the
weakness of Nature, the body of Death, and the invincibleness of indwelling
Sin, and to be sensible of that, is the Character of Saints and true Believers.

CHAP. III.
The Contents.
VArious Instances of our Authors pitiful and disingenuous way of Cavilling.
His Arts of darkning and perplexing the plain design of my Discourse, in sundry
notorious particulars. A brief and plain Account of the Parts, Coherence and
Design of the former Treatise, to prevent all future Mistakes and Pervertings.
My state of the Controversy provides against the Inconveniences of both
Extremes, an unlimited Power on one hand, and an unbounded License on the
other. The bounds it sets to the Power of the Civil Magistrate, are easy to be
observed, and unnecessary to be transgrest, viz. That Governors take care not
to impose things apparently evil, and that Subjects be not allowed to plead
Conscience for disobedience in any other case. The Duty of Obedience surmounts
the Obligation of Doubts and Scruples, and in doubtful cases obliges to Action.
It Is impossible to prevent all manner of Inconveniences that may follow upon
any Hypothesis of Government. My middle way liable to the fewest, and therefore
most eligible. The bare pretense of a tender Conscience against the Commands of
Authority, is an impregnable Principle of Sedition. A cluster of our Author's
shameless Falsifications. His forgery of my ascribing to the Civil Magistrate
an universal and immediate Power over Conscience. His impudent shuffling in
applying what was affirmed of a doubtful Conscience in particular, to
Conscience in general. Another instance of this in applying what was affirmed
of the Rituals and External Circumstances of Worship, to the Principles of
Faith, and Fundamentals of Religion. His change of the state of the Question,
viz. Not whether Magistrates have any Power over Conscience, but whether I have
asserted it to be absolute and immediate. Some short Glances upon some lesser
Impertinencies.

. 1. HEre his first Attempt is, to spit his Gloom, and cast darkness and
ambiguity over the design of my Discourse: How has he bestirred himself to
raise Mists upon my clearest and most perspicuous Expressions? And what Clouds
of Words has he poured forth to involve the Evidence of my Arguments, and the
plainness of my Method? How dexterously does he cull out a single Proposition
to oppose to the scope and plain meaning of the coherent Discourse? And when he
has got the poor, naked and defenseless Thing alone, how unmercifully does he
turn and tease it into a thousand postures? and how wantonly does he tire
himself with insulting over the feebleness of its supposed Escapes and
Subterfuges? But to give you some particular Instances of this woeful way of
trifling.

In the first place, he quarrels my first Paragraph as obscure and ambiguous.
Page 88.
Why! because it gives not any Definition of the Nature of Conscience, nor any
Account of the Bounds of its Liberty, nor determines diverse other great and
weighty Difficulties relating to the present Enquiry. What a monstrous fault is
this! Not to couch the sense of three hundred Pages in one single Section; and
what a fatal Misadventure, not to decide a perplexed Controversy before it is
fairly proposed? Pray, Sir, by what Rules of Art am I bound to determine the
Right of the Cause, when I only undertake to represent the Pleas and Pretenses
of the different Parties? If I have not accurately enough described the
Competition between the Liberties of Conscience, and the Prerogatives of
Princes, (which is the only thing I pretended to attempt in that Paragraph)
let him cavil at that: but if I have, it seems but an untoward humor to
quarrel me for not crowding the Discourse of my whole Book into the compass of
the Contents of one Chapter. But Men, resolved to be peevish, are never to seek
for Grounds of Contention. Of the same nature, and to as wise purpose is his
Cavil at my first Proposition, viz. That it is absolutely necessary to the Peace
and Government of the World, that the Supreme Magistrate of every Commonwealth
should be vested with a Power to Govern and Conduct the Consciences of Subjects
in Affairs of Religion. And though I have at large proved this Assertion from
that Powerful Influence that Religion has upon the Peace of Kingdoms, and the
Interests of Government; yet as for Proofs, he always scorns them, as neither
pertinent to his purpose, nor worthy his Cognizance: It Is below his State to
answer Arguments, he can bear them down with scorn and confidence; it is the
Work of his Generation to establish final Determinations of Controversies, and
he was born to put an everlasting Period to all Disputes and Scholastic
Brawls. And therefore having first poured forth above two Pages full of
positive and rambling talk upon this occasion, Page 92, 93
with what severity does he afterward school me for so crude and unlearned an
Assertion? Page 9^.
For who (says he) understands what are the Affairs of Religion here intended,
all or some? What are the Consciences of Men? what it is to govern and conduct
them? etc. What a strangely nice and delicate Confessor have I, that will not
allow me the Liberty to use any known and vulgar Word, till I have first
defined it with solid and Scholastic exactness? Methinks it is somewhat too
severe this, a Man had better hold his peace than be put to this penance for
every word he speaks. But the plain truth is, I thought (simple as I am) every
Swain that understands but Country English, could not be ignorant of the
literal meaning of those terms, Affairs of Religion, Conscience, Government,
etc. and therefore I did not dream it was necessary for avoiding ambiguity, to
guard every common Expression with rigorous and Logical Definitions. But yet
what if after all this, I have distinctly accounted for these things, and set
restraints upon their signification, as far as it might concern the matters of
my Enquiry? What if I have expressly declared what affairs of Religion they are
that are subject to the Government of the Supreme Magistrate, viz. not all, but
some, i. e. matters of outward Worship, and that are not in themselves
apparently or essentially evil? What then can be the importance of this mighty
Cavil? Nothing but this, that I am a crude and unskilful Writer, because I have
not been so happy as to couch the whole state of an intricate Controversy, nor
to clear off all Difficulties and Objections relating to it, in the compass of
five Lines. And if this be a Miscarrriage, yet my Adversary has not stuff't his
Words so full with Sense and Notion, that he should object it as a defect to
any Man for not being able to reduce the sense of an ordinary Volume into one
single Proposition: other Men have more Cry then Wool, as well as my self. And
yet he is so unmerciful and unreasonable as to expose my Title Page for not
expressing my particular Determinations of the whole Matter in Debate; Page 85.
and often produces that as a shameful instance of my loose way of stating
Controversies. But this Man would snarl at the Title of the New Testament,
because it contains not every particular Story recorded in the four Gospels; I
am sure he might do it with as just reason, as urge the Title of my Book for
proof that I have not distinctly enough represented my particular Thoughts and
Conceptions of the whole matter under debate. Did ever Man burden the Press
with such slender stuff, or present the World with such pitiful entertainment?
And yet he has vast stores of this Ammunition; and he never charges upon me
with more fierceness then when he shoots these Paper-Pellets.

. 2. Thus you find him in the same Page rattling my carelessness for calling
Conscience sometimes every Man's Opinion, sometimes an Imperious Faculty, which
surely are not the same. Though I might with warrant from good Authorities have
styled it a Domestic God, a Guardian Angel, the Mirror of the Divinity, the
Law of the Mind, the Practical Understanding, the Repository of Moral
Principles, a Book and a Table, with innumerable other Appellations, given to
it as it bears Analogy and Resemblance to other Beings; all which Names may
agree to Conscience as vastly as they disagree among themselves; and it is a
very little proportion of likeness that you will find between a God and a Book,
and yet Conscience is both. But however, I discoursed not of this important
matter in such fanciful and allusive Expressions, and kept my self close to the
rigor and propriety of Scholastic Terms; and so I might warrantably call it
both an Opinion and a Faculty, upon the account of its several Acceptations:
For every Novice (that has seen but a Dutch Systeme of Divinity) knows, that
it is sometime taken for the Faculty of the Practical Understanding, sometime
for an habitual Recourse to its Practical Principles, and sometime for a single
Action and Exercise of Conscience; from which variety of Apprehension, it is
not only capable, but necessary to be clothed with as great variety of
Expression; and though a Faculty and an Opinion are not the same thing, yet
Conscience is both: And therefore I doubt not but I may often have
promiscuously signed it with these and other different Titles, without any
uncertainty of signification, according as the design of my Discourse might
demand, and its Coherence may justify; though where I have, as I am not able
to remember, so neither is our Author pleased to direct us. But his custom is
to except against any thing, upon what account soever it is spoken, as if it
were intended for a scrupulous and exact Definition. Whereas there are
innumerable other Reasons and occasions of Speech, that must be expressed in as
different Schemes and Contextures of Language; though had I undertaken to
define the signification of Conscience, I might safely have called it either an
Act or an Habit, or a Faculty; and yet he will never discover any such
uncertain Expressions in any thing that pretends to the Office of a Definition.
And I remember when I call Conscience an Imperious Faculty, it is by way of
Irony, when Subjects make bold to infringe the Rights of Sovereign Princes
under its pretense and protection.

The next following words are not so near in their Neighborhood to these, as
in their Kindred; it is a Cavil of the same Breed and Family, Page 85.
viz. That I sometimes plead for the uncontrollable Power of Magistrates over
Religion and the Consciences of Men, sometimes assert their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction as the same thing; whereas (he supposes) no Man ever yet defined
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to be an uncontrollable Power over Religion and the
Consciences of Men. Neither yet do I: What! Can I not use the Terms of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and uncontrollable Power, but one must immediately
be thought a Definition of the other? Though Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction may be
an uncontrollable Power, yet it may not so properly be defined by it, because
it may have more necessary and more material Attributes, whereby its Nature may
be more distinctly understood. Our Author often tells us, that my way of
Discourse agrees not with that way of Logic in which he has been instructed: I
would advise him therefore to acquaint himself with the Philosophy of the five
Predicables, that will quickly inform him, that all the ways of Predication are
not primary and essential, and consequently that it is not impossible but that
one thing may (as they word it) be affirmed of another, without being an
inseparable Ingredient of its specific Constitution. Did I ever dream (dull
Beast as I am) that when I asserted and proved the Power of the Supreme
Magistrate over Affairs of Religion to be uncontrollable, as exclusive of an
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, distinct from the Civil, (for those words were
spoken particularly upon that occasion, Vid. c. 1. S^ct. 10.
and to that purpose) that I should be called to so hard an account for crude
and ill-contrived Definitions? I presumed a Man might assert an Orthodox
Proposition without being thought to define the precise Notion of the thing
asserted. Alas! I did but vindicate his Majesty's Supremacy against the
Encroachments of the Pope and the Presbytery, that would usurp a Dominion over
Princes, by instating themselves in an Ecclesiastical Sovereignty. If I have
not made good my Argument, let him not spare it; if I have, I hope it is no
disparagement to a good Argument that it is no good Definition. I have sometimes
at Idle Hours (the time when this Man writes Books) recreated my self with
observing the Impertinencies of trifling Scriblers, but cannot remember that
ever I met with such slight and horrid stuff as this. And seriously these
Exceptions are so frivolous and unconceiveably thin, that I cannot fancy any
thing either in Art or Nature that more approaches the Notion of Superficies
disjoined from Body. And yet we are not arrived at the end of these poor and
beggarly stratagems, we have diverse others as miserable and slender shifts to
impose upon the ignorance and credulity of the Multitude. And to this purpose
are distant and remote Propositions hudled together, and represented as if they
related to the same matter, and had been spoken upon the same occasion. Nay, he
spares not to accuse me of contradictory Assertions, because some of my Answers
deny what was affirmed in some of my Objections. Thus out of my first Section
he picks this Sentence, Page 89.
Conscience is subject and accountable to God alone, and it owns no Superior
but the Lord of Consciences. And then this he matches with another, culled out
of my second Section, That those who make it accountable to none but God alone,
do in effect usurp their Princes Crown, defy his Authority, and acknowledge no
Governor but themselves. This last Assertion I there made good by clear and
undeniable evidence: but Arguments are too hot for our Authors Fingers, and
therefore in stead of handling them, he only blows upon Assertions; and in
lieu of discrediting the truth of this Proposition, by defeating the evidence
of its proof, he only attempts to expose its silliness, by representing its
gross inconsistency with the words immediately foregoing. And is it not a
shameful Incongruity, that my Reply should contradict my Objection? And yet
that is the plain state of the Case: for if you look no farther than the bare
Contents of the Chapter, you will find that the scope of the first Paragraph is
to represent the Competition between the Power of Princes, and the Consciences
of Subjects; where I more particularly aimed to set off its Pleas and Pretenses
for its Exemption from Sovereign Authority; and then in the next Paragraph, I
endeavored in answer to the former Plea, to display the horrid Mischiefs that
must unavoidably follow upon the admittance of these Pretenses for the absolute
Exemption of Conscience from the Jurisdiction of the Supreme Power. And now
what a prodigious inconsistency is this, that my Answers should grapple with my
Objections, and that Ob. and Sol. should run a tilt at one another? And when I
had shown the danger of what had been urged in the Exception, by its direct
tendency to the Dissolution of Government, what a strange Affront must it be to
my own Teeth, to retort upon my supposed Adversary with an Inference
contradictory to his Objection? Certainly never was any Man before me upbraided
with this sort of Contradictions. And if this be to speak Daggers, how heavy
will the Charge fall upon all the Professors of Controversial skill?

. 3. Another Impeachment near akin to this, you may meet with Page 86. where
it is charged upon me as a notorious Barbarism, that I should affirm the Supreme
Magistrate may oblige his Subjects Consciences under Penalties, and yet
punishes none for their Crime, but for the Example of others. A grave and
profound Nothing this! For where lies the Inconsistency between these two
Propositions? Are not all Penalties both threatened and inflicted purely as
Inducements to Obedience? and are they not indifferently serviceable to that
end, whether they are designed to deter the Person himself by his own
Experience, or any other by his Example from the like Practices? Temporal
Inflictions are but accessional strengths to the Obligations of Conscience,
that Men may be concerned to avoid the Punishment as well as the Crime; and
therefore though it be punishable to affright others from the same Enormities,
what hinders but that Men may be obliged in Conscience to forbear them under
the Sanction of an higher Penalty? The pure Reason of all Humane Punishments,
is nothing but the Public Interest; and therefore their measure is ever
proportioned to the influence that the Crimes have upon the Concerns of the
Community: and Malefactors are executed, not to revenge their Injuries, but to
prevent those Mischiefs the Public would sustain by their Impunity. And if
this be any reason why Humane Laws should not pass any Obligation upon the
Conscience, because their Penalties are inflicted for* the sake of others, then
no Capital Laws can ever bind the Conscience, because all Capital Inflictions
neither have nor can have any other end but what relates to others. What else
can this Man design by such crude and blundring Cavils, but merely to amuse, or
(what is the same with them) satisfy the People? They run over these Lines;
and because they cannot find where the Crisis of the Exception lies, they pass
it by for a deep and Scholastic Subtilty: Though all the Mystery lies in the
palpable folly; and the only difficulty that amazes the common Reader, is its
having none at all.

This was an Essay of his Skill, but his next attempt is a proof of his
Courage: for it is no doubt an Heroic Act of Boldness, to dare to impose upon
the Public with mere and ungrounded Forgeries; and such is that Assertion he
would fasten upon me, as a further proof of the inconsistency of my Thoughts,
viz. Page 85
That I confine the whole Work and Duty of Conscience to the inward Thoughts
and Persuasions of the Mind. This in downright English is a shameless Lie.
Sir, you must pardon my rudeness; for I will assure you, after long meditation,
I could not devise a more pertinent Answer to so bold an one as this: I confess
it is no extraordinary conceit, but it is the best Repartee my barren Fancy was
able to suggest to me upon so rude an occasion. Suppose it were your own case,
that you could be so ill-advised as to print Books, should any Person be so
bold and disingenuous as not only to pervert your meaning, and disturb your
method, but (what is base without allay) fasten upon you Assertions equally
false and wicked, without any reference to Page or Section, and without any
imaginable foundation of his mistake; what other return would you vouchsafe to
make to such an unmannerly attempt, than what I have made? Mere Calumny as it
deserves no more serious Resentment than utter neglect, so it is capable of no
more civil Confutation than flat denial. I could take occasion from this
falsehood to add some Reflections of another Nature; but it is so utterly
groundless that it needs, and so grossly disingenuous that it deserves, no other
Baffle but pure disdain. Perhaps a Scotch-man would only have told him, (as the
Bishop of Derry tells a Man of as lavish a Pen as my Author) that he is very
good Company; but I am a blunt Englishman, and hate a Lie as I do Idolatry or
Witchcraft; and therefore you must pardon my plainness if I call a Fable a
Fable. Now beside this Argument drawn from a Topic so vile, that you see I am
almost ashamed to name it, the sum of all the other Exceptions amounts to this;
That I do not define when I argue, nor distinctly state my own Determinations
when I remonstrate to other Men's: That I do not propound and solve Difficulties
in the same Words, and that my Answers contradict my Objections: That every
Paragraph does not discharge the Undertaking of my whole Book: That the
Reasonings of each Chapter are not fully and distinctly expressed in its short
and general Contents; and that all the particular Notions and Determinations of
the Discourse, are not comprised in the Title Page: In brief, that I have
failed of the Glory to dispatch all Difficulties and decide all Controversies
in one breath. Woeful Misadventures these! It were easy to present you with
vast heaps of Instances to the same purpose; but I have neither leisure nor
patience to reckon up more particularities (to spare harder Expressions) of his
folly. It Is enough that his whole Book is nothing but a Treasury of Cavils; and
that he draws his Arguments not from any Principles of sincere Reason, but from
the Topics of prating and vulgar Talk. You cannot dip into a Page, but you
will light upon some such lank and windy Exceptions, as I have above recited;
and yet I must not stay to glance at them, they are so innumerable: these that
I have already represented, lay first in my way, and in the very entrance, and
upon the very threshold of his Book, and they may suffice for a short Specimen
of that singular Logic he pretends to. And if the Reader will be at the pains
(as I fear he will not) to compare his Cavils with my Replys, that will
infinitely satisfy him of the impertinency of this Man's way of scribbling: but
if he will not, I shall be ashamed of entertaining him so long with such poor
and unedifying Remarks. And therefore I shall not waste more time in pursuing
such slender Trifles, but shall rather, to prevent him hereafter from abusing
the People with these and the like mean Artifices, set down a short Model of
the Parts, the Coherence and the Design of my former Treatise: for few vulgar
Readers (I perceive) have either Patience or Ability to carry along with them
the Method and Connection of a large Discourse.

. 4. In the first place then, I begun with a more general account of the
absolute necessity of investing Sovereign Princes with an Ecclesiastical Power
and Jurisdiction over the Consciences of Men in Matters of Religion; and this I
proved at large, by representing what mighty and powerful influence it casts
upon all the most important Ends and Interests of Government; so that to exempt
its due Conduct and Management from the Authority of the Supreme Civil Power,
is apparently to strip it of its greatest security, to disable it from a right
discharge of its Office and Jurisdiction, and to expose the Public Setlement
to the Whimsies and Exorbitances of every crazy Zealot. And having laid this
large Foundation upon the firmest Principles of Reason, and the most undeniable
Experience of Mankind; I proceeded in the next place to erect a more particular
Hypothesis of the Nature and Extent of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: where I run
a Parallel between the Affairs immediately relating to Religious Worship, and
the Duties and Offices of Morality; proving Moral Virtues to be more material
Parts of Religion than any outward Expressions of Worship whatsoever. And from
hence I thought it but a very modest and reasonable Demand, That Men would but
yield to allow to Supreme Power the same Authority and Dominion over the Means
and subordinate Instruments of Religion, as they are ready enough to ascribe to
it over its more important Ends and Designs; and so agree to set the same
Bounds and Measures to both Jurisdictions. And now having reduced them to this
Equality of Power, I advanced to a more particular state of the whole
Controversy, by showing to what Affairs in both kinds the Exercise of all
Humane Authority is extended, where it is limited, and in what cases it is
restrained. And here I first exempted all the inward Actions of the Mind, from
the Cognizance and Jurisdiction of all Humane Authority; and withal, showed how
the substantial part of Religious Worship is performed within, and so is in its
own Nature beyond the reach of the Civil Magistrate; and how all Expressions of
External Worship, as such, are no Essential Parts of Religion, and therefore
that he is not in any capacity of doing direct and immediate Violence to
Religion it self. The Controversy being thus stated, as to the inward Actions
of the Mind, the next Enquiry is concerning outward Practices; and they are of
two sorts, either such as are apparently and antecedently evil, and these are
above the reach, and beyond the Obligation of all Humane Laws; their Morality
is already so determined, that no Humane Power can alter their Nature, or
rescind their Obligation; but every thing forbidden becomes an intrinsecal and
unalterable Sin, and every thing commanded an eternal and unchangeable Duty. Or
else they are such as still remain in the state of indifferency, and are left
undetermined as to their Morality, either by any certain Law of Nature, or any
clear positive Law of God; and these are liable to the Commands and
Determinations of Supreme Authority, and are the proper Objects of Humane Laws,
in that there is no other restraint set to the extent of their Jurisdiction,
but the Countermand of a Superior Power; and therefore whatsoever Matters are
left at Liberty by the Divine Law, must be supposed determinable either way by
the Commands of Sovereign Authority. These are the most distinct Rules of
Conscience in this Enquiry, in reference to the Nature of the Actions
themselves: But besides these, there are other accessional Reasons of Good and
Evil, that arise from the apprehensions of the Minds of Men concerning them;
and they also are of two sorts; either such as relate to the Conceptions of
other Men, which may in some cases lay a restraint upon our Practices, as in
cases of mere scandal, and this by some is pretended to excuse their
disobedience to the Churches Constitutions; and therefore I have distinctly
examined the Nature and the Reasonableness of this Pretense, and shown how the
Commands of Authority abolish all the Pretenses, and supersede all the
Obligations of scandal. Or else they are such as relate to a Man's own
apprehensions, and this takes in the pretense of a doubtful and unsatisfied
Conscience, which is so zealously pleaded by most of our Separatists in
justification of their Schism; and therefore because I deemed it was of more
close and immediate Concernment to our present Affairs, I have with greater
exactness examined and stated the Obligatory Power of a weak and a tender
Conscience, and have largely proved the manifest absurdity of pleading Doubts
and Scruples in opposition to the Commands of Authority; and shown that nothing
can or ought to check with our Obligations to Obedience, unless it cross with
Matters of certain and apparent Duty; and that all cases capable of Doubt and
Uncertainty, cannot be supposed of importance enough to weigh against the great
Sin and Mischief of Disobedience: So that the Result of my whole Discourse will
at last run it self into this plain and easy Proposition, That Obedience is
indispensably due to all the Commands of Supreme Authority that are not
certainly and apparently sinful.

And now tell me how I could have drawn up the state of this Controversy in a
plainer or more familiar Method? For the Propositions, you see, are distinct
and comprehensive, they take in all the particular Actions and Affairs of
Humane Life; and I cannot think of any imaginable Difficulty or Objection
relating to the present matter in debate, that does not apparently fall in
under one of the forementioned Heads of Action. Or how I could better have
avoided the Inconveniences of both extremes, and which way else I might have
determined the matter by such easy and moderate Principles, as may fairly
satisfy all Men's Consciences that are ingenuous, and condemn all that are not.

. 5. For (1.) to vest the Supreme Magistrate in an unlimited and unaccountable
Power, is clearly to defeat the Efficacy and Obligatory Force of all his Laws,
that cannot possibly have any binding Virtue upon the Minds of Men, when they
have no other inducement to Obedience than barely to avoid the Penalty. But if
the Supreme Power be absolute and unlimited, it does for that very Reason
remove and evacuate all other Obligations; for otherwise it is restrained and
conditional; and if Men lie under no other Impulsive than that of the Law it
self, they lie under no Obligation than that of Prudence and Self-interest; and
it remains entirely at the choice of their own discretion, whether they shall
or shall not obey, and then there is neither Government nor Obligation to
Obedience; and the Principle of Men's Compliance with the Mind of Superiors, is
not the Declaration of their will and pleasure, but purely the Determination of
their own Judgments. And therefore it is necessary for the security of
Government, (though for nothing else) to set bounds to its Jurisdiction;
otherwise like the Roman Empire it sinks and dissolves by its own weight, no
Humane Power is able to support it self, and the Thrones of Princes are
established upon the Dominion of God; remove his Authority, and the force
derived upon their Laws by virtue of his Commands, and you untie all the Bands
of Government, and set Men at Liberty from all Obligations to the Duty of
Obedience.

Or else (2.) to grant Subjects a lawless and uncontrollable Liberty in all
matters and pretenses of Religion, is to dissolve one half of the Government
into to perfect Anarchy, and yield up the Constitution of all Public Affairs
to the Humor and the Insolence of every wild Enthusiast; and every pert Fellow
that can abuse either himself or others with Fanatic Whimsies, has it always
in his own power to expose the settled frame of Government to the zealous folly
of the Multitude. If he have but a warm Brain and a bold Face, with what ease
may he fire the Rabble into Tumults and Godly Seditions? It Is but pouring forth
dark Prophesies, and Scripture-Allegories, and declaiming against the
Oppression of Earthly Powers, and then with what eagerness will the Capricious
People flow into Cabals of Zeal, and Musters of Reformation? What Maxim in
Policy is so fully ratified by the Histories of all Nations, as that there is
nothing equally dangerous to the Public Tranquillity with the Zeal of the
Multitude? and it is not easy to determine, whether Mankind have smarted more
deeply by the Ambition of Tyrants, or the Impostures of Religion. However, it is
sufficiently verified by the experience of Ages, that there is not any Passion
so incident to Humane Nature as Popular Zeal, nor any Madness so ungovernable
as that of Religion; and therefore what can more become or import the Wisdom of
Governors, than to keep a watchful eye upon all its designs and pretenses. But
these things I have already represented in smarter and more elaborate Periods,
and therefore I will forbear to abate their evidence by these crude and hasty
Suggestions. But only supposing it is not impossible (what our Author has not
gainsaid, nor indeed can, without out-facing the experience of Mankind) but
that the Factions and Hypocrisies of Religion may create Public Disturbances,
the deduction is easy and natural, that to grant it a total exemption from the
Sovereign Authority, is at all times to expose the Commonwealth to great
Disorders, and oftentimes to unavoidable Dissolution.

And therefore seeing an unbounded License on one hand, and an unlimited Power
on the other, are so pregnant with Mischiefs and intolerable Inconveniences,
the only proper Determination that this Enquiry is capable of, is to assign
the just extent of a limited Jurisdiction, and to state as distinctly as the
Nature of the thing debated will admit, how far, in what cases, and over what
matters it may be safely exercised, and within what Limits it ought to be
restrained; and he that prescribes the most useful and practicable Measures,
makes the fairest Essay at the Decision and Atonement of this Controversy.
This was the Attempt, whatever was the Success of my Discourse: and to say
nothing of some more particular Rules and Directions, the two great Lines
wherein I have enclosed all matters of Humane Laws, are of such a wide and
comprehensive extent, that in the midst of all the variety and intricacy of
Humane Affairs, it is both easy to discern their lawful Bounds, and unnecessary
to transgress them. For (1.) let Authority beware of imposing things certainly
and apparently evil, and then there is no danger of their doing any violence to
the Consciences of peaceable and sober Men, or of their suffering any
disturbance from them: For the proper Office of Humane Power, is to consult the
Peace and Interest of Humane Society; and the only immediate use of Public
Laws, is to secure and provide for the Public Good. It Is no part of their
Concernment to institute Rules of Moral Good and Evil; that is the Care and the
Prerogative of a Superior Lawgiver; and therefore provided they do not cross
with the express Declaration of his indispensable Will and Pleasure, all other
matters fall within the Verge of their Legislative Power: For as nothing that
carries with it an antecedent Irregularity, can ever be supposed either
necessary or advantageous to the Public Good, and therefore may without any
danger of impairing the strength of its Power be lopt off from the Rights of
Sovereign Jurisdiction; so also many things left altogether indifferent and
uncommanded by the Law of God, may in all the various postures and turns and
circumstances of Humane Affairs, prove sometimes beneficial, and sometimes
pernicious to the Commonwealth; and therefore the Supreme Magistrate being
appointed the Supreme Judge of the Public Good, there is no remedy but they
must fall under the Guidance of his Laws, and Conduct of his Government. Now
it is very easy for Christian Princes to move within so fair a compass; and if
any go beyond it, as it is not for their Advantage, so it is not of our
Concernment: For that Man must talk after a wild rate, that should pretend to
discover an evident Opposition in any of the Laws of our Kingdom, to the plain
and indispensable Duties of the Gospel: or if they will be so precipitate as to
pretend this, we are very well content to devolve the issue of the Controversy
upon that Undertaking; and then are they brought under an engagement to prove a
certain and undeniable repugnancy between the Laws of our Church, and the Laws
of God; and to suspend their disobedience to them, till they can warrant its
necessity by some plain and express Text of Scripture: And if they will but
persevere in Conformity, till they are indeed able thoroughly and
satisfactorily to convince themselves of its evident unlawfulness, that would
for ever prevent all thoughts and attempts of Separation. And this crosses me
over to the opposite Bound of this Enquiry, from the Power of the Magistrate to
the Duty of the Subject, Viz. That they would not scruple or deny Obedience to
the Commands of lawful Superiors, till they are sincerely (not in pretense
only) convinced of the certain and apparent unlawfulness of the Command.

. 6. And if we stop not the Subjects Liberty to remonstrate to the Commands of
Authority at this Principle, we shall be for ever at an utter loss to set any
certain Bounds to the just and allowable Pretensions of Conscience: For if they
will not consent to have their Pleas of Exemption confined within the certain
and evident Measures of Good and Evil, but desire to be excused as to all other
Pretexts and Persuasions of Conscience, howsoever doubtful and uncertain; then
must every Conceit that may either be mistaken or pretended for a Conviction of
Conscience, be permitted to overruled all the Power, and baffle all the Wisdom
of Government: For be it never so wild or so extravagant, if they are strongly
or seriously possessed with the Phantasm, that and only that shall ever exercise
any Authority over their Thoughts and Actions; and if Magistrates shall in any
case think good to curb its heats and exorbitances, they offer violence to the
sacred and indispensable Obligations of Conscience; and this unavoidably
exposes the Peace of Kingdoms to all the Follies of Zeal, and Impostures of
Enthusiasm, and prostitutes the Power of Princes to the stubbornness and
insolence of Popular Folly. Every one that is timorous or melancholy, that has
an indisposed Body, or a troubled Mind; that wants Sleep, or wants Company;
that has an hard Spleen, or a soft Head; that has a strong Fancy, or a weak
Judgment; a bold Ignorance, or a conceited Knowledge; an impertinent Opinion,
or a restless Humor; a Whimsie in the Crown, or a Vapor in the Hypocondria,
may upon that account exempt himself from all the Authority of the Laws, and
all the Obligations of Obedience: For you know what a vulgar Phenomenon it is
for these and the like effects of folly and weakness, to abuse the Consciences
of well-meaning Men into Scruple and Irresolution; and therefore if every Man
that has or (what is the same thing in reference to Government) can pretend to
tenderness and want of satisfaction, shall be allowed to plead Exemption from
the Duty of Obedience to the will of his lawful Superiors, there will be no
avoiding the Consequence, at least as to the practice of the World, but that
all the Power and Wisdom of Authority must submit to the Follies, Passions and
Extravagances of the Multitude; and howsoever Men may wind themselves up and
down in Mazes of endless Niceties and Distinctions, they will never clear
themselves from the unavoidable event of Anarchy and Confusion, as long as they
promiscuously admit the Pretensions of an unsatisfied Conscience; and yet that
they will be forced to do, if they stop not at the plain, the easy and the
discernable Measures of Duty; and therefore Men must not be allowed to excuse
themselves from the Authority of Humane Laws upon slender grounds and weak
surmises, nor conclude the matter of the Law to be antecedently unlawful,
unless it be certainly and apparently so. And this will farther appear highly
reasonable from the Nature of Gods Laws, that are always plain and easy; and
the Nature of the Matters about which they are employed, that are always of a
great and evident necessity: so that things really liable to doubt and
disputation, are not of importance enough to be reckoned in the number of
indispensable Duties; and unless they are clearly and apparently evil, that is
an unquestionable evidence that they are not intrinsecally so: the perspicuity
of the Law, and the importance of the Duty, are to an ingenuous Mind incapable
of doubt and uncertainty; and therefore where there appears no certain and
express Repugnancy to the Law of God, that is presumption enough to satisfy
any sober and peaceable Man in their lawfulness.

. 7. But that which is most material to the Determination of Conscience in this
Enquiry, is this, That there is no Rule of Life and Manners more express and
unavoidable, nor any Duty in the Gospel enjoined in more positive Terms, and
under more severe Penalties, than this of Obedience to the Commands of Supreme
Authority; and God has tied all their just Laws upon our Consciences, by virtue
of his own Authority, and under pain of his own displeasure; and as Men would
acquit themselves in their Obedience to his Laws, they are bound under the same
Sanctions to acquit themselves in their Obedience to theirs. And now upon this
Principle no truly upright and conscientious Man will ever go about to riggle
himself out of his Duty to his lawful Superiors, out of any regard to any Law
of God, when he is not as clearly and abundantly satisfied of the certainty and
necessity of its Obligation: Nay, he cannot with safety and without violence to
his own Conscience remonstrate to the Commands of lawful Authority, unless upon
Reasons more bright and forcible than the express words of St. Paul, It is
necessary that ye be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience
sake. And if Men would (as they ought) suspend their Scruples and Exceptions
till they can make it out to themselves that they are as certain, as necessary,
and as universal Duties of Religion as Obedience to the Commands of lawful
Superiors, we could not desire a more effectual Bar to all our Schisms and
Distractions: For none of the matters of our difference can either pretend to,
or are indeed capable of equal evidence with this express Proposition of the
blessed Apostle; and therefore if they would stand firm and loyal to this
Doctrine, till they can produce more clear and convincing Scriptures to vouch
their own singular Conceits, that must for ever stifle all former Quarrels, and
prevent all farther Dissentions. v.g. Whereas our Author is required by his
lawful Superiors to use the Sign of the Cross in the Sacrament of Baptism, he
puts in his Exception against the lawfulness of the Command, in that it enjoins
a Symbolical Ceremony; and every Symbolical Ceremony is of the Nature of a
Sacrament; and no Sacrament can or ought to be instituted but by Divine
Authority; and therefore for any Humane Power to establish new Symbolical
Ceremonies, is to invade Gods own peculiar Royalty and Jurisdiction. In which
Cavil are involved a great number of dark, uncertain, and perhaps
indeterminable Enquiries: yet however, to keep to the main pretense, let him
but conform to this Injunction, till he can allege any Text of Scripture that
affirms in as clear and dogmatical words, that every Symbolical Ceremony is of
the Nature of a Sacrament, as are those of St. Peter, Be ye subject to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake. And then we shall neither need nor desire
any farther security to prevent his defection from the established Discipline
of the Church in that Affair: So that if Men would learn to be peaceable and
ingenuous, this plain and obvious Principle would either forestal or supersede
all their scruples. And in truth the Commands of Authority so much surmount
their Obligation, and anticipate their Pretense, that the very Plea of a tender
and unsatisfied Conscience in Opposition to Public Laws, is in it self a
direct Principle of Sedition, and an open Affront to Government; and therefore
whoever they are that vouch and pretend its prohibition to the proceedings of
lawful Authority, deserve for that reason alone the shame and correction of
sturdy and irreclaimable Schismatics. And here it is a woeful Impertinence for
Men to oppose (as our Author has done) the Authority of God and of Conscience
to that of Men, Page 107, 144.
for that is to plead God and Conscience against themselves, in that Humane
Laws are as much tied upon us by his own immediate Command as his own immediate
Institutions; and whatsoever lawful Superiors impose upon our Practice, that
he binds upon our Conscience; and though their Decrees pass no direct
Obligation upon the Consciences of Men, yet the Laws of God directly and
immediately bind their Consciences to Obedience; and he has threatened the same
Eternal Penalties to our contempt of, and disobedience to their Laws, as he has
annexed to his own Commands: It Is enough therefore that the Conscience is bound
by the Laws of Men, though that Obligation be tied upon it by the Laws of God.
So that it is not the different Obligations of Humane and Divine Laws, that are
to be considered in this Enquiry; for the Authority of God is equally concerned
in both, and all the Contest lies entirely between the Matters of the Command,
viz. Whether God have by as certain, as absolute and as indispensable a Law
restrained us from the practice of what our Superiors enjoin, as he has
enjoined us to yield all ready and cheerful Obedience to their Commands. And
when the state of the Controversy is shifted to this Enquiry, it is another
woeful Impertinence to plead the Rule of St. Paul, [He that doubts is damned
if he eat,] to countenance and warrant their suspension of Obedience: for where
the doubt has but one handle, there it concerns us to hold that fast; but where
it has more, it is the safest way to hold by the strongest: my meaning is, where
the danger of Sin lies but upon one side of the Action, it is no doubt a Man's
Wisdom to determine his choice on the other that is undoubtedly safe and
innocent: but when there lies danger on both sides of the Enquiry, then the
doubt ceases to bind from Action, and only binds to Enquiry, and it is his Duty
to resolve with the weightiest and most important Reasons; and the strongest
Obligation always cancels the doubt, and determines the Judgment. And this is
the palpable difference of our case from that of St. Paul. There all the
Jealousy lay on the side of the Action, and there was no ground or pretense
for any suspicion of Sin in the forbearance; and therefore it was a safe and
easy Determination of the Scruple, to resolve that way where there is neither
doubt nor danger; and in that case a total suspension of Action is our proper
Duty. But this is widely remote from the posture of our present Affairs, where
there lies some hazard of miscarriage on all sides; and therefore the doubt is
no warranty for the suspension of Obedience, because if the matter of the
Command be not certainly unlawful, it is certain that is so; and therefore it
can have no more Power to suspend, than it has to bind to Action; and there
remains no other way to appease and satisfy the Conscience, but to apply it
self to depose the doubt, and resolve to discard its unreasonable and trifling
suspicions, and confidently follow the guidance of its most probable Judgment
and Determination. And here the safest course as to the case under our present
enquiry, is to follow my former advice of joining in with the Commands of
Authority, that are not certainly and apparently sinful; for nothing can
out-balance their Obligation, unless evident and unquestionable disobedience to
God himself: so that where this is not either plainly apparent, or very
forcibly proved, there it is but reasonable to sink the Scale, and determine the
Balance on the side of Authority; and it is a safe and an useful Rule of Life,
that in all disputable Cases the Commands of Authority abrogate the
Irresolution, and oblige to Action: But if after they have determined the Case,
the Conscience will still remain stubborn or timorous, so that it will not, or
dare not venture upon a Determination, it is either such a troublesome Infirmity
as must be corrected, or such an headstrong Humor as must be broken,
otherwise there is no conceivable way of governing Men that are either proud,
or peevish, or ignorant. This is plain and downright Sense, and (if I mistake
not) Reason too. And I know but one Exception that seems to carry in it any
color or appearance of difficulty against this way of stating the Government
of Humane Affairs, and it is this.

. 8. When we come to apply particular Actions to these general Rules of Life
and Government, who shall judge of their Agreement with the Limits and Measures
assigned, if this must be left to the different Judgments of the Prince and the
Subject, this Fabric falls to pieces again, and Men are still left at liberty
to judge of the lawfulness of their Superiors Command, by the best Light God
has given them, and they may be absolved from their Obligation by the
Countermand of their private Judgment, and so we are just as before, Page 150.
and this great Engine for Public Tranquillity vanishes into Air and Smoke.

But this Cavil (if it be of any strength or value) concerns not in particular
my state of the Controversy, and lies indifferently against all Setlement of
Humane Affairs, and strikes equally at all Hypotheses of Government: for upon
what Principles soever Men shall setle and determine this Enquiry, it will
return upon them with as much, if not more force than upon my Determinations:
For whatever Bounds and Limits they assign to the extent of Humane Power, all
its Commands must still be liable to the different Judgments of the Person that
enjoins, and the Person that obeys: about which it is as possible and as likely
they may disagree, as about those that I have prescribed; and therefore I never
designed to prevent such Inconveniences as are unavoidable to Humane Affairs,
but only to setle their management upon the best and safest Principles that
the Nature of things is capable of. For either Religion is entirely exempted
from the Cognizance of Humane Powers, and the Obligation of Humane Laws, or
else it is in some cases obnoxious to their Jurisdiction. The former is an
Opinion so wild and intolerable, as that it was never heretofore owned by any
but such perverse People as renounced all Subjection to Earthly Princes, nor
indeed can it be admitted without dissolving the whole Fabric of Humane
Government: For that Prince must needs be vested with an absolute and
uncontrollable Power, whose Subjects can challenge an Exemption from his
Authority as to all matters and pretenses of Religion, i. e. as to all things,
in that it extends its influence to all the affairs of Humane Life; and
therefore its Exemption is no less than flat Anarchy, a Dissolution of all
Laws, and Subversion of all Societies. The truth whereof is so infinitely
certain from the Reason of Things, and so universally confessed by the
Experience of Mankind, that it could never enter the Minds of any Men, unless a
few savage and inhumane Wretches, that would have voted to break up Humane
Society, that they might betake themselves to the Woods and Deserts, and there
live after the Manners and Customs of unsociable Creatures, and wild Vermin.
But of this I have treated largely enough, and it is not contradicted by our
Author: he grants, as all Men do that are not utterly revolted from the first
Principles and Fundamental Laws of Humane Nature, that in some cases and upon
some occasions it is necessary for the Supreme Magistrate to interpose his Power
to setle and govern the things of Religion. Thus far we are agreed, and only
differ in marking out the distinct Bounds, and stating the particular Cases of
his Jurisdiction: and here, whatsoever Determinations he may propose, they must
fall under the different Opinions of the Prince and the Subject. v. g. Whereas
he conceits he has sufficiently stated the Controversy in the general words of
our blessed Savior, spoken to another purpose, and upon a different occasion,
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods: I demand who shall determine the particular Rights of God and of Caesar?
Who shall assign the just Limits of their respective Dominions? and who shall
judge when Caesar passes beyond the Bounds of his Imperial Jurisdiction, and
when he intrenches upon Gods Authority, by taking upon him a Dominion in such
Matters as God has reserved for his own proper Cognizance, and immediate
Royalty? So that in this, and all other Determinations, there is no possible
way to avoid making the last Appeal to different Judgments, because that is
absolutely unavoidable in the natural Constitution of Humane Affairs. And
therefore I never attempted (as some Men have done) to devolve the entire Power
of judging upon the Judgment of one Party; but only supposing our different
Respects and Obligations to these different Judgments, to propound the safest
and most moderate Principles upon which to setle and accommodate the Government
of Humane Affairs; and to adjust all matters capable of debate between them, by
such fair Proposals, and upon such reasonable Principles, that, if the Parties
concerned will be ingenuous in their respective Capacities, will effectually
enough secure the common Peace and Happiness of Mankind: if they will not, the
Public Miseries and Calamities that ensue upon the default of either Party,
will be proportioned to the degrees of their respective Transgressions; and
against them it is not in my power to provide, unless I could divest the Minds
of Men of all Liberty of Judgment, and Freedom of Will: for whilst they remain,
it is at their own choice whether they will follow the best and wisest advice in
the World.

. 9. Thus if Magistrates fail on their part, and Enact any Laws in defiance of
the certain and apparent Laws of God, from thence arise the Calamities of
Tyranny and Persecution, and against this evil there is no remedy but Patience
and Prayers: Divine Providence is Superior to the Power of Sovereign Princes,
and superintends their Government of the World; and therefore to God alone must
we address our Complaints for relief against Cruelty and Oppression; and if he
judge it convenient for the interests of his Church, and the purposes of
Religion, he will so order the Circumstances of Things, and the Management of
Affairs, as to rescue them out of their Streights and Exigences. The Hearts and
the Scepters of Kings are subject to his Almighty Wisdom; and he so disposes
them, as to make them comply with the Decrees of his uncontrollable Will; and
therefore whatever inconveniences may befall Good Men through the Folly or the
Wickedness of Governors, they must be patiently endured, as certain Issues,
and unsearchable Designs of Divine Providence; and we have no recourse for
Succor or Deliverance, but to his infinite Mercy and Goodness: this is our
only Support and Sanctuary, and who can desire greater Safety than to be under
his immediate Care and Protection? And therefore there is nothing more
unbecoming the Faith and the Profession of a Christian, than to betake himself
to violent and irregular Courses against the Inconveniences of Government: it is
a direct and open affront to the Superintendency of Providence, that has
reserved this Prerogative to it self: it is our Duty to obey cheerfully, or to
suffer patiently; and to leave all other Events of Things to his
All-comprehensive Wisdom. Mankind must be subject to Government; no Government
can be effectual unless it be Supreme and Absolute; and therefore God has been
pleased to enjoin us a full and entire Subjection to our lawful Superiors; and
as for what may ensue thereon, we must leave to his wise and unerring Disposal,
and then certainly we may rest secure of a good Issue of Things. So that if the
Magistrate err in his Judgment of the extent of his Authority, and act beyond
the Bounds of his lawful Jurisdiction, it is not in the Power of Subjects to
redress or to remove the Mischiefs that must ensue upon his Government: they
must discharge their Duty, and submit to their Fate; and as for the Reformation
of any Public Miscarriages, they must leave it entirely to the Will and the
Wisdom of the Sovereign Power. So that the material thing of which Princes
ought to be careful, is that their Laws cross not with the express Laws of God;
and this they may easily avoid, if they will be upright and ingenuous; and this
if they will do, they may as easily avoid all the Mischiefs and Inconveniences
that may befall Men of peaceable Spirits through their default. But as it is
their Duty not to transgress their own Bounds; so on the other side, it is as
much their Interest to restrain their Subjects from transgressing theirs; and
not suffer them to remonstrate to the Equity of their Laws, unless when they
can plead a clear and undoubted pre-engagement to an higher Authority; and they
must not prostitute the Interests of the Republique, and the Reverence of
Government, to the Niceties of every curious Imagination, or the Cavils of
every peevish Humor. There is no end of trifling and unreasonable Pretenses,
if once the common People are permitted to put in their Exceptions against the
Public Laws; and what a weak and impertinent thing were the Power of Princes,
if it might be overruled by the Folly of the Multitude? And how bravely would
the World be governed, if the Authority and Obligation of Laws must be left
arbitrary to the Opinion of every vain and foolish Fellow? And therefore in
such cases the Allegation of a tender Conscience confutes it self, and it is but
a soft and plausible word to qualify a stubborn and contentious Humor; and
did not something else bear Men up against the force of Authority, a weak
Conscience has not boldness enough to oppose its own Power and Judgment against
the Will of Superiors, and the Wisdom of Public Laws: it is not so imperious
and impatient in its Pretensions, but it is (if it really is what it pretends to
be) of a yielding, a modest and a governable Temper, apt and easy to receive
any competent Satisfaction, willing to comply with the Necessities of
Government, and the Interests of Public Order; and therefore when Men are
zealous and confident in their disobedience to Authority, and are forward upon
all occasions to take offense at the Public Laws, whatever they fancy to
themselves, or pretend to others, it is a proud, a malapert, and an insolent
Humor, that affects to affront Authority, and to raise Trophies to its Zeal
and Courage, by controuling the Decrees of Princes, and trampling upon the Laws
of Discipline. And therefore nothing more imports the Public Peace, than to
take down such bold and daring Spirits; and their high Stomachs must be broken,
before they can be made fit Subjects of Civil Societies, and fit Members of
Bodies Politic. Disorder and Disturbance is the natural Result of their
Complexion, and they cannot forbear to fret and annoy Authority with every
peevish and unreasonable Conceit. So that the bare Pretense of Tenderness of
Conscience in defiance to the Commands of Authority, is at once a bold Attempt,
and an impregnable Principle of Sedition: for unless Men have lost their due
sense of reverence and submission to Government, they will not pretend it; and
when they do, if their Pretense be admitted, they are but encouraged to
continue refractory in their disobedience, and to make all the Laws of
Discipline and Public Order yield up their Authority to a proud and an
insolent Humor. This is the plain and real account of my state of the
Controversy; and if any Man can determine it upon more reasonable, more
moderate, and more discernable Principles, I am not so fond of my own
Conceptions, as to be unwilling to subscribe to wiser Proposals. But these
things I have accounted for more at large, in the last Chapter of my former
Treatise; where I have in many particulars shown the horrible vanity of
pretending dissatisfaction of Conscience against the Commands of lawful
Authority. And had not our Author rather designed to prolong, than to determine
this Dispute, in stead of his wild rambling up and down without drift or
method, he would with a more particular Regard have fallen upon that part of my
Discourse; but its Examination would have been of immediate Concern to his own
Pretenses, and would have brought the Controversy to too speedy an Issue, and
perhaps too satisfactory a Decision; and therefore he baulks that as too
hazardous an Enterprise, and is unwilling to venture the whole Cause upon one
Engagement, but keeps this back as a Reserve for a second Onset, and for matter
of new Cavil: at present it suffices for his purpose (which is not to satisfy,
but to shuffle with his Readers) to load my more general Assertions with such
loose and uncertain Cavils, as are already prevented in my more particular
Determinations of the Enquiry.

. 10. But though this way of abuse be (one would think) bold enough, yet in the
next attempt his Confidence improves, (and it were hard fortune if he should
prove Bankrupt upon so fair a Stock:) before he did but overlook my plain
meaning, but now he proceeds to pervert and slander it, and his peevishness
becomes malice. He is not content to abuse the People with dull mistakes, and
to defeat the efficacy of my Discourse upon the Minds of Men, by disturbing its
method, and representing its whole design in such an awkard and disorderly
manner, as may utterly confound and perplex their thoughts as to my drift and
meaning. This, alas! is mean revenge, and is not full enough of mischief to
appease his wrath; it only calls my Understanding into question, and exposes
my Wit to the Cavils and Impertinencies of talking People; and therefore he
roundly charges me with the blackest and most horrid Tenets; he aggravates and
sets off their horror with infinite Repetitions, (for that is the most lofty
strain of their Eloquence, and the Figure that moves the Passions of their
Multitude) and employs all the forces of slander and peevishness to raise
popular rage and indignation. The Result of his Indictment is, that I assert
such Opinions, Page 97.
from whence it follows, that whatever the Magistrate commands in Religion, his
Authority does so immediately affect the Consciences of Men, that they are
bound to observe it on pain of the greatest Sin and Punishment; or, as he
expresses the same thing elsewhere, Page 105.
that no Man must do or practice any thing in the Worship of God, but what is
prescribed, appointed and commanded by the Magistrate, upon pain of Sin,
Schism, Rebellion, and all that follows thereon. These are big words indeed:
but if it shall appear that this Charge is not so loud and black, as it is false
and disingenuous, I will give him the Liberty of an Appeal to all Mankind for
the clearing of his Integrity: and when I have represented upon what slight
grounds he raises this great and heinous Accusation, I doubt not but his
disingenuity will appear so palpable and notorious, that it will expose him at
least to the pity of the most Zealous She of his own Congregation. And
therefore let us see by what mighty Topics and Testimonies he makes good so
high a Charge.

In the first place my Title Page rises up in Judgment against me, (and never
was poor Man so all-be-confuted with a Title Page as I have been) viz. Page 95.
That the Magistrate has Power over the Consciences of his Subjects in
Religion: and to strengthen this Testimony, two other Propositions are joined
with it, viz. That the Magistrate has Power to govern and conduct their
Consciences in Religious Affairs; and that, Religion is subject to his
Dominion, as well as all other Affairs of State. And now, though these are none
of my primary and Fundamental Assertions, (which an ingenuous Adversary would
chiefly have pursued) but honest and well-meaning Sayings, that the Context
would abundantly warrant and justify; yet will I for ever yield my self a
baffled Fellow, if from thence any Female or Independent Logic can infer
either that the Magistrate has an unlimited Power over, or passes an immediate
Obligation upon the Consciences of Men; or, in our Authors own words, That
whatever the Magistrate commands in Religion, his Authority does so immediately
affect the Consciences of Men, that they are bound to observe it on the pain of
the greatest sin and punishment. This trash neither needs nor deserves any
further severity; and therefore I will only leave it to the Readers thoughts
to consider by what Art, and in what Method of Reasoning this Conclusion may be
created out of these Premises: an allmighty Confidence may attempt much, and
perhaps do it too; but yet some things there are beyond the reach and power of
Omnipotence it self, and I know nothing more absolutely impossible than to
produce Sense out of Nonsense, or (what is the same thing) to make good the
Reasonableness of false and unreasonable Inferences.

But from this great head of Impertinency, he proceeds to his more serviceable
Topic of Forgery; and if he cannot bring the Mountain to Mahomet, it is no
great difficulty to carry Mahomet to the Mountain; and if his Conclusions will
not suit with my Assertions, he knows how to make my Assertions suit with his
Conclusions; and when he has charged me with a false Inference, it is an
admirable way to justify the Logic of his Calumny by forged Premises. And
thus to make good his former Inference of my ascribing to the Civil Magistrate
an immediate and universal Power over the Consciences of Men, he tells his
believing Reader I have affirmed, Ibid.
page 27. That it is a Sovereignty over Men's Consciences in Matters of Religion,
and this universal, absolute, and uncontrollable. Though this Calumny were
true, yet (so injudicious is our Authors Invention) it is monstrously
impertinent; for there is no imaginable ground to conclude from hence, That the
Supreme Authority immediately affects the Consciences of Men: For suppose the
Civil Magistrate instated in an absolute and uncontrollable Power, what
necessity is there that their Commands should tie themselves upon our
Consciences by virtue of their own immediate Authority? Nay, it is impossible
any thing should immediately affect the Conscience but the Authority of God;
and it is by virtue of his Command that any other Commands can pass an
Obligation upon it; and therefore though the Commands of the Civil Magistrate
should pass an universal Obligation upon the Consciences of Men, yet it is an
Inference like the rest of our Authors, from thence to conclude that they
therefore affect them by their own direct and immediate Sanction. But this is
not all, it is as false as foolish: I have indeed asserted the absolute Power of
the Civil Magistrate over Affairs of Religion, in Opposition to the Pretenses
of a distinct Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: For having first asserted the
necessity of a Sovereign Power over these matters, from their Concernment in
the Peace and Government of the World, I thence proceeded to enquire where and
in whom it ought to reside; and having shown the Inconsistency of erecting two
Supreme Powers, one over Civil, the other over Ecclesiastical Affairs, I
concluded that the Supreme Government of every Commonwealth must of necessity
be universal, absolute and uncontrollable, in that it extends its Jurisdiction
as well to Affairs of Religion, as to Affairs of State, because they are so
strongly influential upon the Interests of Mankind, and the Ends of Government.
And now is this to make the Ecclesiastical Authority of the Civil Magistrate
absolutely paramount, without regard to any other Jurisdiction of what nature
soever, when I only maintain it in defiance to the Claims of any other Humane
Power? This was the subject of that Enquiry. And when I asserted the Sovereign
Power to be absolute and uncontrollable, it is apparent nothing else could be
intended than that it ought not to be controlled by any distinct Power, whether
of the Pope or the Presbytery; and when I asserted it to be universal and
unlimited, it could be understood in no other sense than that it was not
confined to matters purely Civil, but extended its Jurisdiction to matters of
an Ecclesiastical importance; upon which account alone I determined it to be
absolute, universal and uncontrollable. This is the main and the Fundamental
Article of the Reformation, and that which distinguishes the truly Orthodox and
Catholic Protestant both from Popish and Presbyterian Recusants; and is the
only fence to secure the Thrones of Princes against the dangerous
Encroachments of those bold and daring Sects; and therefore from so avowed a
truth, to charge me for ascribing in general Terms an absolute, universal and
uncontrollable Power to the Civil Magistrate over the Consciences of Men in
matters of Religion, argues more boldness than wit and discretion, and gives us
ground to suspect that these Men are not less forsaken of shame and modesty,
than they are of Providence: for it must needs be a very bold Face, and a very
hard Forehead, that could ever venture to obtrude such palpable and
disingenuous Abuses upon the World.

. 11. But our Author proceeds in his Method, and his Charge and his Confidence
advance together; and before you fin^ him at the end of this Paragraph, you
will find him bravely attempting the highest degree of boldness. The next proof
he singles out for his purpose, is a passage of the twelfth Section of my first
Chapter: Page 96.
He [the Magistrate] may if he please reserve the exercise of the Priesthood to
himself: From whence it clearly follows (as he dreams) that Queen Elizabeth
might, if she pleased, have exercised the Priestly Function in her own Person.
And he takes frequent occasion to insult over the weakness of this Assertion,
Vide page 114, 136, 137, 159
and triumph in the wit of this Inference. But I shall not insist upon its
woeful impertinency to the Conclusion, wherewith he confidently winds up this
heap of Calumnies, viz. That from hence it follows, that whatever the
Magistrate commands in Religion, his Authority does so immediately affect the
Consciences of Men, that they are bound to observe it on the pain of the
greatest sin and punishment. For how is it possible for any Man to infer from
his Right to the Priestly Office, an unlimited and immediate Power over
Religion, unless it could be proved that this absolute Sovereignty is
unalienable from the Priesthood? and when that is pretended or performed, we
will farther consider the Validity of this Inference. Nor shall I mind him what
an ill piece of Policy it is for him to disavow the Authority of the Female Sex
in the Conduct of Religion; when the chief and most important Affairs of the
separate Churches are transacted and governed by their Zeal; and when the
Apron-strings are the strongest Bond of the Congregational Union; and when (as
they manage the business) St. Peter's Keys are hanged at their Girdles, and
every conceited Sister assumes to her self, if not the Infallibility of Pope
Joan, yet at least the Power and Authority of Donna Olympia. Nor lastly, shall
I present the Salique Law of the Christian Church, that devests that Sex of all
right and pretense of Succession to the Priesthood; by which they are
restrained from intermedling with any Offices of the Sacred Function, though it
should descend by right of Inheritance to the Heirs Male of the Blood Royal.
Such a trifling Objection is not worth so much pains; it is sufficient to inform
you, that in the Paragraph aforesaid I undertook to give an account of the true
Original of all Civil and Ecclesiastical Government: where I showed how in the
first Ages of the World they were vested in the same Person, and founded upon
the same Right of Paternal Authority: and in this state of things antecedent to
all superinduced Restraints, and positive Institutions, I asserted the Supreme
Magistrate might, if he pleased, reserve the exercise of the Priesthood to
himself, though afterward the Priestly Office was in the Jewish Commonwealth
expressly derogated from the Kingly Power, by being settled upon the Tribe of
Levi, and the Line of Aaron; and so likewise in the Christian Church, by being
appropriated to the Apostles and their Successors, that derive their
Ministerial Office (for that of Priesthood our Author will not admit of under
the Gospel) from our blessed Saviors express and immediate Commission. Now
what I affirmed of things in the bare state of Nature, without the guidance of
Revelation, for our Author to represent it, as if I had applied it
indifferently to all Ages and Periods of the Church, by whatsoever positive
Laws and different Institutions they may be governed, is wonderfully suitable
to the Genius of his own Wit and Ingenuity, and sufficiently discovers who he
is, though we had no other evidence of the Man and his Humor, it is his way and
method, and betrays him as much as the word Entanglement, that is the
Shibboleth of all his Writings.

But I must not think to escape thus, he is resolved to bear me down for an
illiterate Dunce with Face and downright Confidence; and to this purpose he
tells the Reader, that the Young Man, as pert and peremptory as he is, Page 159.
seems not much acquainted with the rise of the Office of the Priesthood
amongst Men, as shall be demonstrated if farther occasion be given thereunto.
This he affirms boldly, and when it is proved, it shall be granted: but till
then, let me beg the Reader to suspend his censure of my Ignorance; and I hope
by this time he is satisfied it is not absolutely impossible but that our Author
may boldly affirm what he knows not how to prove, and confidently undertake
what he is not able to perform. However, a modest Man would either not have
mentioned this Exception, or would have made it good, and not have presumed
that the World should take his Brags for Arguments; and take it for a
reasonable Confutation of my Assertion, because he says he can confute it, aye
that he can. This is the most it amounts to; and whether it be his Intention or
no, he might have said nothing to as much purpose as to say so much and no
more. But other Men would stand still as fast as this Man gallops; and when he
comes to the end of his career, he is just where he was at the beginning.

. 12. And yet the next proof is just as wise and as wonderful as this, viz.
Page 96.
That this Power I have ascribed to the Civil Magistrate, is not derived from
Christ, or any Grant of his, but is antecedent to his coming, or any Power
given unto him, or granted by him. But what is all this to his Inference of the
Magistrates absolute and immediate Power over Conscience? That Power in which
God vested Princes, must be such as is compatible with his own Supremacy, and
that consists in his absolute and immediate Sovereignty over the Minds of his
reasonable Creatures; and therefore was in its own Nature incapable of being
granted away to any subordinate Authority. Page 159.
But however, you will conclude with him from this Principle, that Magistrates
owe no Allegiance and Subjection to the Scepter of Christ, seeing they derive
not their Authority from his Commission, but were instated in its actual
Possession before ever he was advanced to the Government of the Universe. I
say, No: for though they were vested in an ancient and original Right, yet its
Continuance, ever since he commenced his Empire, depends merely upon his
Confirmation, in that whoever does not reverse a former Grant, confirms it. And
therefore though they were empowered to govern the Church of God antecedent to
our Saviors Supremacy, yet that they are still entrusted with the same
Authority they owe entirely to his Sovereign will and pleasure, because it is
now in his Power to divest them of this, or any other of their ancient
Prerogatives: so that seeing he has thought good to continue the Government of
the World in the same state and posture he found it in, Princes are not now
less indebted to him for the Grant of their Imperial Power, than if they had
been at first instated in it by his immediate and and positive Commission. And
to this purpose did I discourse in that Paragraph out of which he has singled
this Proposition, viz. to show how unreasonable it is for Men to demand an
express Grant from our Savior to Civil Magistrates for the Government of his
Church, when they were already established in the full exercise of this
Jurisdiction by the right of Nature, and the consent of Nations: so that in
stead of requiring this of us, they are rather obliged to show where he has
expressly disrobed and aliened the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction from the Royal
Prerogative: for if he have not, there is no pretense or exception but that it
still continues as inseparable a Right of the Supreme Magistrate in every
Nation, as if he had settled it upon him by his own positive and immediate
Institution.

His next Exception is downright Juggling, viz. That I assert, Ibid.
That Magistrates have a Power to make that a particular of the Divine Law,
which God had not made so, and to introduce new Duties in the most important
parts of Religion. He knows these words have no relation in the place where
they stand to matters of mere Religion and immediate Worship, but are spoken
only of the Duties and Offices of Morality, which I had before proved to be
the main Designs and most essential Parts of Religion, and likewise shown that
the Civil Magistrate was empowered to introduce upon the Divine Law new Duties
and Instances of Moral Virtue, from whence I thought it but reasonable to
conclude his Power over the outward Expressions of Religious Worship, that are
but circumstances, or at highest but subordinate and less material Duties, if
compared to the great and important Virtues of Morality. Whether my Proposition
or my Inference be reasonable or no, concerns not our present Enquiry; our
Author in this place puts in no Exception against them: but whether this
Quotation be either honestly or pertinently alleged against me, do you judge;
when he could not but know that these words, whether true or false, could have
no imaginable reference to matters of Religious Worship properly so called, but
were expressly limited to the Instances of Moral Goodness, that yet he should
produce them in this feat shuffling and uncertain manner of Expression, only
that the common People might not understand them, as they relate to my account
and Notion of Religion, i. e. as it takes in Duties of Morality; but in the
Vulgar sense of the word, as it signifies Religious Worship. This you see is
wretched Troth; but that which follows is glorious and undaunted Slander; when
he immediately subjoins to the former words, So that there is a public
Conscience, which Men are in things of a public Concern (relating to the
Worship of God) to attend unto, and not to their own. And if there be any sin
in the Command, he that imposed it, shall answer for it, and not I, whose whole
duty it is to obey. This Inference being so immediately tack't to the former
Proposition, its unavoidable result must be this at least, That as to the most
important parts of Religion, there is a public Conscience, to which Men are to
attend, and not to their own. This is somewhat rank Doctrine, and favors not a
little of the Leviathan. But yet how can I avoid it? are not these my own
words? Though that I might deny, yet am I content to confess that I have said
something not much unlike them, in the sixth Section of my last Chapter; where,
in answer to the Pretense of a tender, a scrupulous, and an unsatisfied
Conscience, among many other things, I have shown that in doubtful and
disputable Cases of a public Concernment, private Men are not properly sui
Iuris, and are not to be directed by their own Judgments, nor determined by
their own Wills, but by the Commands and Determinations of the Public
Conscience. Now does it not admirably become our Authors modesty to take this
Assertion concerning such nice and petty things as are liable to doubt,
scruple, and Disputation, and couple it with another sentence above two hundred
Pages distance, that speaks of the most important parts of Religion? as if they
had been spoken upon the same occasion, and related to the same matter; thereby
to abuse his vulgar and unwary Reader into a round belief, as if what I had
asserted concerning the Subjection of a doubtful Conscience in less important
matters to the Commands of Public Authority, were to be understood of all the
Obligations of Conscience in the most important Duties of Religion. Did I not
forewarn you of what heights and depths of Ingenuity we should meet with,
before we arrived at the Conclusion of this Paragraph? And now do you tell me
whether you ever observed in any Writer more generous strains of Candor and
Civility? Did ever Man treat Adversary with fairer and more ingenuous Usage
than I have met with from this candid Author? Disputants of a more sullen
Humor would have thrown more knotty Objections in my way, that would have cost
some pains and sweat to assoil their difficulty: but he deals tenderly with me
as a young beginner, and will not dishearten my industry by setting too hard a
Task to my raw and unimproved Abilities; that by my Conquest and Triumph over
such weak Opposition, I might be encouraged to greater Undertakings.

. 13. And therefore he proceeds to tempt my weak and juvenile Essays upon so
great a Master of Skill, by seeming serious and eager in the farther pursuit of
these vain and trifling advantages, and raising more vehement slanders upon
more unreasonable grounds; and the next Article of his Charge to this purpose
is, Page 97.
that I maintain that the Supreme Magistrate in every Nation has Power to
order and appoint what Religion his Subjects shall profess and observe,
provided he enjoineth nothing that countenanceth Vice, or disgraceth the Deity,
etc. Our Author is old excellent at Cavil and Calumny, but here he excels
himself: he gives in a brisk and rattling Indictment, without any shadow of
proof to justify the Allegation: it is drawn up in his own terms and forms of
Expression, and only one poor Line of mine bobb'd in to give countenance to
such an horrid and shameless Falsification, viz. provided that he injoineth
nothing that either countenanceth Vice, or disgraceth the Deity. This I have,
and still do affirm concerning Rituals, Ceremonies and Postures of outward
Worship, that they ought not to be censured as unlawful, unless they tend to
debauch Men either in their Practices or their Conceptions of the Deity: and
therefore if they are not chargeable with one or both of these, nothing can
hinder their being capable of being adopted into the Ministries of Divine
Service, or exempt them from being subject to the Determinations of Humane
Power. This is, I think, a chaste and a modest Truth: but for our Author to
apply this Power that I have ascribed to the Supreme Magistrate, only over the
outward Forms and Ceremonial Expressions of Religious Worship, to the
appointment and institution of Religion it self, so as to leave it entirely at
his disposal to order and appoint what Religion his Subjects shall profess and
observe, is (and I can say no worse) but like himself, and agreeable to that
Character I have often suggested to you of his way of writing and ingenuity:
and it is a falsehood so coarsly lewd and barbarous, that nothing but an
incorrigible Brow could have ventured to obtrude it upon the World, much less
to persist in it so long, and repeat it so often as he has done, as if he were
resolved to bear down the common sense and reason of Mankind, by the unyielding
Gallantry and Vigor of his Confidence.

But there is not any one passage in my whole Discourse, that has been so
serviceable to his purpose as this lame and imperfect Allegation; it vouches
every Clamor, and every Impertinency, and every Slander and false Report
shrowds it self under its Protection; and if he have a mind to forge and fasten
any extravagant Conceit upon me, it is but devising some wild Proposition, and
twisting it with these words, and then he may expatiate against the wickedness
of so dangerous an error with a grave and solemn invective; and I am as
confidently concluded Guilty, as if it had been my own express and positive
Assertion. Thus this passage is produced against me; Page 125.
That whilst Men reserve to themselves the freedom and liberty of judging what
they please, or what seems good unto them in matters of Religion, and the
Worship of God, they ought to esteem it their Duty to practice in all things
according to the Prescription of their Rulers, though every way contrary unto,
and inconsistent with their own Judgments and Persuasions, unless it be in
things that countenance Vice, and disgrace the Deity. These words are set down
in a distinct Character, and the Reader (if he be courteous) is not to doubt
but they were faithfully transcribed out of my Book, though you cannot find a
syllable of it there, except only the last words of restriction. But however,
it is a lewd and ungodly Assertion, and therefore away he flies with it; What?
it defeats all effectual Obligations of Conscience, it enervates all real sense
of Religion, and it casts off all serious regard to the Divine Authority; and
upon this Principle Men may profess what Religion they please, and turn
Mahumetans, Papists, and Apostates, for their own convenience. These indeed are
sad and woeful Inferences; but let him look to that; for the Premises are his as
well as the Conclusions; though in my Opinion it is a prodigious piece of
boldness that he should so rashly, so confidently and so groundlesly charge me
with such knavish and dishonest Principles, as are not fit for any Men to
pretend to, unless such crafty Artists as know how to sing their Songs upon
Sigionoth, and believe that God abets and owns every Interest that thrives and
prospers in the World: and when they Dance to the Tune of the Times, have the
face to look demurely, and to profess they only follow the Pipe of
Providential Dispensations. But now if we take this mangled and dismembered
Sentence, and restore it to its proper place, there is neither harm nor
Heresy: i. e. if we affirm that no Rites and Ceremonies are in themselves
unlawful (for I here speak only of things as considered in their own nature)
in the Worship of God, unless they tend to countenance Vice, or disgrace the
Deity: here is no danger of encouraging or making Apostates; for the material
and dividing differences of the established Religions in the World, consist not
in Rituals and Ceremonials, but in Articles of Belief, and Objects of Worship.
We condemn neither Turks nor Papists for their forms and postures of Adoration,
(unless they fall under one or both of the Obliquities aforesaid) but for
giving Divine Worship to a lewd Impostor, and to a senseless piece of matter:
let them but address the same Worship to its due and proper Object, and we will
never stand stiffly with them about the outward Rites and Ceremonies of its
Expression; but will freely allow them to conform to the significant Customs of
their own Country, as we do to those of ours. Now it is these things that are,
or at least are pretended to be, the only matters of our present Schisms and
Differences; and it is these things only that I assert to be determinable by
Supreme Authority, provided they neither encourage Vice, nor dishonor God:
under which Restrictions whatsoever Rites and Usages they may enjoin, can never
be concluded unlawful in themselves; and if they are so upon any other account,
that is to be discoursed elsewhere, but it concerns not our present Enquiry,
that only undertook to account for the Comparison between the matters of
Religious Worship, and the Duties of Morality, in reference to the Power of the
Civil Magistrate, as considered in their own respective Natures.

I might give you in many more proofs and instances of his abuse of these
words: but what I have already represented, is, I hope, a sufficient taste of
his Ingenuity. And yet as gross and shameless as this slander is, it is
infinitely outdone by the next, viz. Page 103.
That I have given as absolute a Sovereignty to the Civil Magistrate over the
Church of God, as to the Lord Christ himself. And this he endeavors to prove
after his way, by amassing together all the former Calumnies that I have
already washed off: but to complete and accomplish the whole design, he adds one
of his own pure wit and contrivance: Page 104.
Is the Authority of Christ the formal Reason, making Obedience necessary to
his Commands and Precepts? So is the Authority of the Magistrate in reference
to what he requires. Do Men therefore sin, if they neglect the Observance of
the Commands of Christ in the Worship of God, because of his immediate
Authority so to command them binding their Consciences? So do Men sin if they
omit or neglect to do what the Magistrate requires in the Worship of God
because of his Authority, without any farther respect. In the former passages
there are at least some sprinklings of my own words, but this is mere and
abstracted slander, and has nor color nor foundation in my Discourse; and
therefore I can give it no other Reply, than sincerely to profess, that were
there any thing in my Book that should but seem to ascribe to the Civil
Magistrate as immediate a Sovereignty over the Consciences of Men, as our
blessed Savior both claims and exercises, I my self would be the first Man
that should cast a Stone at such bold and ridiculous Assertions. And here one
would think is enough of Slander and Calumny, and yet he has not done with so
pleasant an Argument, Page 113.
but gives it you all over again in a Proclamation framed out of the supposed
Principles and Directions of my Book; which being nothing but a mere Repetition
of the same Trash, that I have already cashiered, I deem it neither needful nor
pertinent to return him any other answer, than that as it is not the first
Proclamation that this Author has drawn up, so I pray God it may be the last.

. 14. And now, Sir, tell me what I shall conclude of this Man's Conscience? Must
I impute such labored and affected Mistakes to an excuseable Ignorance, and
set the most shameless Falsifications upon the score of Inadvertency? I know
the power of prejudice and passion to seal up the Minds of Men against the
evidence of Truth; yet such is the evidence of Truth in our present case, that
no prejudice can be thick enough to withstand, or passion blind enough to
defeat its efficacy. Nothing but an hard Forehead and a lewd Conscience could
ever embolden him so rudely to spoil and discompose the apparent aim and method
of my Discourse, and so impudently to abuse and impose upon the World by such
groundless and enormous pervertings. A multitude of his weaker Cavils and less
Miscarriages I am inclined to ascribe to his rash and precipitate Humor: for I
know he is wont to write or dictate Books as fast as other Men can read them;
and a wise Man would take more time to weigh the matter of a Discourse, than he
does to confute it; and so may possibly pour out gross and palpable mistakes
through haste and inadvertency. But those Instances I have represented to you
of his way of shuffling and falsifying, are so many, so labored, and so
unreasonable, that they could proceed from no other Fountain but wilful and
affected Malice: for it is absolutely impossible that mere Chance and
Heedlesness should blunder upon so many Impostures so full of design and
contrivance. But however, you see how by this means not only the state of the
Question, but the whole matter of the Enquiry is quite altered: it is not now
contended whether the Supreme Magistrate of every Commonwealth be vested with
an Ecclesiastical Power and Sovereignty over matters of Religion. Tush, that is
granted without demur or dispute, and our Author (though his Acquaintance are
none of the most loyal and peaceable) knows no Man that pretends exemption from
the Obligation of Humane Laws, Page 139.
but only on this Plea, that God by his Law requires them to do otherwise. So
that in what matters soever the Law of God does not require them to do
otherwise, there Humane Laws must pass a certain Obligation upon Conscience:
for if they do not oblige that, they oblige nothing. Now this is an ample Grant
of all that I designed and pretended to prove in my first Chapter, viz. That
Magistrates are vested with some Authority over Conscience in matters of
Religion: So that in this it seems we are fully agreed, and our Author after
all his heat and talk freely confesses it is indispensably necessary to the
Public Peace and Tranquillity, which you know is the main Consideration that I
urged and pursued in behalf of my Opinion. But, says our Author, this is not
all, for I have so described and discoursed of the Power of the Civil
Magistrate over Conscience and Religion, as to make it of an absolute
Jurisdiction, an unlimited extent, and an immediate Obligation: it is this he
all along represents, and upon this that he mainly insists. If I am guilty of
this Charge, I must shift as I can: but if I am not, what hinders but we may
shake hands and be friends? And therefore having so fully discovered the horrid
and unconceiveable vanity of the proofs alleged against me to this purpose,
and so fairly cleared the innocence and honesty of my Intentions, I may, I
hope, hereafter reasonably expect, and justly challenge a complete discharge
from all such sinister and idle suspicions. Is not this blessed work, that I
should be forced to write so much to so little purpose; not at all to prove the
Truth of what I have written, but to disprove the Falsehood of what I have not
written?

. 15. And now though I am provided with Remarks upon the remaining passages of
this Chapter, yet I know not to what purpose I should trouble my self or the
Reader with them, after the Considerations that I have already represented,
that are (I presume) competent enough to justify the innocence of my Design,
and to shame the disingenuity of his Cavils; and that is all that is needful in
answer to his way of proceeding, which, you see, was not to confute, but to
pervert my Discourse. And if I should pursue all Advantages, examine all
Miscarriages, and lay open all Follies and Impertinencies, I should presume too
much upon the Public Patience, and swell my Reply to too unreasonable a Bulk;
so many, so vain, and so impertinent are his Topics of Cavil. However, the
remainder of his Talk is built upon the supposition of the Truth and Reality of
these Falsifications; and therefore by what I have already discoursed in answer
to their Forgery, I have made it altogether needless to take any farther notice
of his wild and rambling Harangues: For if they are pertinent to their
Premises, they are impertinent to my Discourse; if they are not, they are
impertinent to his own. Though the truth is, should I grant him the privilege
he is resolved to take, of falsifying, yet he deduce^ things so loosly and
incoherently, that I might easily make good my Cause against him, if I should
undertake the defense of those Untruths and Monstrous Absurdities he fastens on
me. I might demand of him to what purpose he here acquaints us with that solemn
and systematick distinction of the Declaration of Gods Will, either by the
Light of Nature, or by the Light of Revelation, unless it be to inform the
World of this new and important Mystery, Page 101.
that a positive Command of God may, as to any particular instance, suspend the
Obligation of the greatest Command of the Law of Nature; and so it actually did
in the Precept given to Abraham for sacrificing his Son. For whatever any
Schoolmen may determine in this case, it is apparent here neither was nor could
be any suspension of the Law of Nature, (whose Obligation is so eternal and
unchangeable, that nothing can suspend it for one moment without doing violence
to the antecedent Reasons of Good and Evil) but only a positive Command to
execute a Divine Decree by virtue of a Divine Commission, i. e. to put his Son
to death by his Authority that is absolute Lord of Life; a matter against which
the Law of Nature never had or could have any Prohibition: For though possibly
it restrained Abraham from attempting his Sons Life by virtue of his own
Dominion, yet when he was warranted to it by a special Command of God himself,
to have refused its execution, had been to remonstrate to the Justice of one of
the most Fundamental Laws of Nature: so that there was no suspension of the
Law, but an alteration of the Case, and a Command to do something, which that
neither did nor could forbid. To what purpose does he twit me for asserting
Magistratical Omnipotency, Page 108.
rather than the Divine Right of Episcopacy? I am at Age and Liberty (as young
as he would make me) to choose my own Theme; and perhaps the next Book I
publish, that shall be the Argument of my Discourse; and then I doubt not but
he will as much correct me for leaving the pursuit of my former subject, as he
does now for pursuing it. To what purpose does he preach to Sovereign Princes
not to take upon themselves that absolute Power, Page 109, 10.
I have for my own advantage ascribed to them, unless he had also proved it is
not for theirs? It Is a strong Motive, no doubt, to encourage his Majesty to
listen to his advice, by informing him, Ibid.
it was not the Acclamation of the Multitude unto Herod, The Voice of God and
not of Man; but his own arrogant satisfaction in that Blasphemous Assignation
of Divine Glory to him, that exposed him to the Judgments and Vengeance of God.
For certainly Princes will require more forcible Reasons to part with the
absoluteness of their Sovereign Power, than such Preaching Impertinencies. To
what purpose does he add, That never any Magistrate, unless Nebuchadnezzar,
Caligula, Domitian, Page 111.
and persons like to them, ever pretended to exercise the Power here assigned
unto them? I will not be so froward as to tell him, that now he is as much too
free in his Concessions, as he is at other times too stingy: for should I put
him upon the proof, he would want Records to make it good, that all these
Princes ever claimed such a bold and unlimited Jurisdiction; though perhaps
others have: for what thinks he of Artaxerxes's Commission to Ezra? Whosoever
will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let Judgment be
executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death, or to Banishment, or to
Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. I know not how any Prince can
challenge or assume a more severe, absolute, and uncontrollable Power, than
this granted in this Commission; and yet Ezra reflects upon it as a special and
immediate issue of Divine Providence. To what purpose does he tell us, the
Power I ascribe to Magistrates is none other but that which is claimed by the
Pope of Rome? Page 116.
That may be his Usurpation upon the Rights of Princes, but it is no proof that
they may not challenge the Supremacy over the Consciences of their own
Subjects, because he usurps it. To what purpose does he tell us, Page 157.
That the Mormo here made use of, is the same in substance that has been set up
by the Papists ever since the Reformation? When nothing can be justly pleaded
in behalf of lawful Government, but what may be unjustly pretended to by
Tyrants and Usurpers: and in the happy days of Oliver Cromwell, the same
Arguments and Texts of Scripture were pressed for Obedience and Subjection to the
Rebel, as were only designed to secure Loyalty to rightful Sovereigns. Let the
Romanists make out the Justice of their Title of Supremacy over the Kingdom of
England, and the Equity of their Cause in the due management of their Power,
and then we will listen to their Pretenses: but in the mean while, from the
necessity of an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to plead the Right of a Papal
Sovereignty, is an impertinency only wild enough to serve our Authors turn,
and signifies no more than because there is Tyranny practiced in the World
under fair and plausible Pretenses, that therefore there must be no just
Grounds and Principles for lawful Government. To what purpose does he waste so
many Pages, to enquire wherefore the Power of the Magistrate should not be
extended to the inward Thoughts and Apprehensions of Men about the Worship of
God, From page 117, to p. 125.
as well as to Expressions of them in pure spiritual Acts of that Worship? For
not to catch at the ridiculous, canting and mysterious Nonsense of the
Expression of our inward Thoughts in pure spiritual Acts, when all Expression
of them is outward and corporal: it is sufficient that God has not been pleased
to vest them with any Power over our Thoughts; but for what cause, himself best
knows; and therefore though I could give no account for his so doing, that
would not cast the least shadow of an Objection upon the Truth and Reality of
my Persuasion. To what purpose does he tell us in the close of this Enquiry,
that we can give no other imaginable answer to it, than that Men who plead for
Indulgence and Liberty of Conscience in the Worship of God, according to his
Word, and the Light which he has given them therein, have indeed no Conscience
at all? When this answer is so infinitely silly, that we can scarce suppose any
Man in his wits so extravagant as to pretend it, and when there are other very
pertinent Replys, so easy and so obvious, viz. That they may possibly have no
Conscience at all, whatever they pretend, or at least such an one as is abused
with foolish, or debauched with wicked Principles, and so may plot or practice
Sedition against the State under pretense or mistake of Conscience, and for
that reason ought not to be allowed to plead its Authority against the Commands
of lawful Superiors. In fine, to what purpose does he so briskly taunt me for
thwarting my own Principles, Page 133, 134, 135.
because I have censured the impertinency of a needless Provision in an Act of
Parliament? I may obey the Law, though I may be of a different Persuasion from
the Lawgivers in an Opinion remote and impertinent to the matter of the Law it
self: nay, I may condemn the wisdom of Enacting it, and yet at the same time
think my self to lie under an indispensable Obligation to obey it: for the
formal reason of its Obligatory Power (as any Casuist will inform him) is not
the Judgment and Opinion of the Lawgiver, but the Declaration of his Will and
Pleasure. There is abundance more of this slender stuff, wherewith (as himself
brags) he has loaded this Principle; though, alas! were its Foundations never
so weak and trembling, it might securely enough support so light a Burden; and
though it were really bottomed upon the Sands, there is but little danger that
such a shallow Stream of Talk should overturn it: so that though I stand upon
such advantageous ground, if I should descend to a strict and particular
examination of all the Flaws and Follies of his Tattle, yet they are so
apparently false or impertinent, or both, and afford so little occasion for
useful and material Discourse, that I had rather choose to forego my own
advantage, than spoil my Book, and tire my Reader by insisting too tediously
upon such empty trifles and dreams of shadows. To conclude, this Author is so
accustomed to popular impertinency, that he seems to hate severe Discourse as
much as carnal Reason, and both as much as Idolatry: so that he only prates
when he should argue, and inveighs when he should confute: Give him what
advantage you will, he regards it not, but jogs on in his road of talking, and
it is no matter whether you take the right or wrong handle of the Question, it
may be either for any thing material that he has to except against it. Nay, you
may suffer him to Limetwig you with Ink and Paper, and gagg you with a Quill,
and put what words he pleases into your mouth, and yet easily defend your self
against all his faint assaults, and impertinent Objections. In so much that I
durst undertake the defense of the thickest and most defenseless Impostures in
the World, against his weak and miserable way of Confutation. And I doubt not
but I could produce as strong and enforcing evidence for the Divine Original
and Authority of the Alcoran, as some body has for the Self-evidencing light
and power of the holy Scriptures.

CHAP. IV.
The Contents.
NO difference among the Ancients between Moral Virtue and Evangelical Grace.
The Vanity and Novelty of our late Spiritual Divinity. Our Authors fond
Tittle-tattle against my Scheme of Religion. Religion is now the same for
design and substance as it was in the state of Innocence. The Gospel is chiefly
designed as a Restitution of the Law of Nature. Our Duty to God best described
by Gratitude. Repentance, Conversion, Humiliation, Self-denial, Mortification,
Faith, and other Duties of the Gospel, proved to be Moral Virtues. Our Author
after his rate of cavilling, would have quarreled our Savior for his short
account of the Duty of Man. His intolerable slander in charging me of confining
the Influence of the Spirit of God to the first Ages of the Church. His
prodigious impudence in ascribing all his own Follies to the Spirit of God. The
extraordinary concurrence of the Spirit, proved it self by some evident
Miracle, the ordinary works in the same manner, as if it were performed purely
by the strength of our own Reason. Our Author himself is not able to assign any
real difference between Grace and Virtue. Their mere distinguishing between
them, is destructive of the practice of all real goodness. An account of the
Mechanical Enthusiasm of their Spiritual Divinity. Our Authors own account of
their Spiritual Godliness, is a clear instance of its Folly. Moral Virtue is so
far from being any hindrance, that it is the best preparative to Conversion. It
was not Moral Goodness, but Immoral Godliness that kept off the Pharisees from
closing with the Terms of the Gospel. The Argument from the Magistrates Power
over Moral Duties, to his Power over Religious Worship, cleared and vindicated.
The difference assigned for this purpose between the Laws of Nature and
Revelation, false and impertinent. Their vain Resolution to find out particular
Rules of instituted Worship in the Word of God, is the Original of all their
folly. Religious Worship is subject to the Authority of Earthly Powers, for the
same Reason as Moral Virtue is. A short account of some of our Authors fainter
Essays.

. 1. HAving in the former Chapter given an account large enough of our Authors
way of Confutation, by shuffling Cavils and bold Calumnies, I shall hereafter
forbear to cloy the Reader, or tire my self with any farther regard to such
trifling Exceptions, as are not capable of more useful and edifying Discourse;
and shall only insist upon such particulars as may be considerable enough to
recompense the pains of our Enquiry. My design then in the next Chapter, which
our wise Objector excepts against, was to draw a Parallel between matters of
Religious Worship and Duties of Morality, and to remonstrate to the World how
they were equally subject to the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate. And for
a more ample Confirmation of this Argument, I gave such an intelligible account
of the Nature and Design of Religion, as reduced all its parts and branches
either to the Virtues or the Instruments of Moral Goodness. From whence I
concluded, as I thought, fairly enough, That seeing Princes are allowed by the
avowed Principles of all Mankind, a Sovereign Power in reference to Moral
Virtues, that are the most material Duties of Religion, it is but reasonable
they should be allowed at least the same Authority over the outward matters of
Religious Worship, that are but Circumstances of Religion, or Instruments of
Morality. But our Author startles at the strangeness and novelty of this
Doctrine, that grants no essential difference between Grace and Virtue, and
boldly charges me with falling rudely upon Christianity it self, seeing the
Professors of it have in all Ages, Page 180.
according to its avowed Principles never before contradicted, made a
distinction between Moral Virtues and Evangelical Graces. This Affirmation he
supposes bold and sturdy enough to maintain its own ground; and if it cannot
defend it self by its own Confidence, it may perish for any proof or relief
that he will afford it. And therefore I will not be so unmerciful as to fall
foul or fiercely upon a naked and deserted Assertion, but shall only challenge
him to produce one ancient Author that makes any difference between the Nature
of Moral Virtue and Evangelical Grace; Evangelical Grace being nothing else in
their account but Moral Virtue, heightened by the Motives of the Gospel, and the
Assistances of the Spirit; both which are External Considerations to the
Essence of the Thing it self: so that the Christian Institution does not
introduce any new Duties distinct from the Eternal Rules of Morality, but
strengthens them by new Obligations, and improves them upon new Principles: for
though the Promises of the Gospel encourage us, and the Aids of the Spirit
enable us to discharge our respective Duties; yet that does not at all change
their Nature, because it eases their Performance: so that Evangelical Graces
are the same thing for substance with Evangelical Virtues, and Evangelical
Virtues the same with Moral ones; that are styled Evangelical, for no other
regard than because of that peculiar Influence the Gospel has upon the Minds of
Men, to procure their effectual practice in their Lives and Conversations. And
this is the peculiar end and usefulness of the Christian Religion, to establish
real Righteousness in the World; and in the Primitive Ages of Christianity, the
Virtues of Charity, Meekness, Patience and Humility, were esteemed the
distinguishing Graces of the Gospel; and then Professors measured their
Godliness by the Purity of their Lives, and not of their Ordinances: in those
days they made no difference between the Morality and the Spirituality of the
Gospel; nor did they despise the plain, the humble, and the downright
Christian as a mere Moralist, and a Carnal Gospeller. The Fathers and first
Preachers of the Christian Faith, did not teach their Proselytes the Trick how
to Spirit themselves into Heaven, and presume themselves into Salvation by a
stout Belief; but to purchase their future hopes by living up to the severest
and most exalted Doctrines of the Gospel: then the Righteousness of Faith was
not opposed to real and inherent Righteousness, but only implied a higher pitch
and improvement of Moral Goodness: then they gave a plain and intelligible
account of the Mystery of Godliness, and only thought it a discovery of such
Principles as would more effectually oblige and enable Mankind to an holy Life,
than any other Institution could effect, or Philosophy pretend. Nor did they
prescribe long and tedious Trains of Conversion, nor set down nice and subtle
Processes of Regeneration, nor fill Peoples heads with innumerable swarms of
superstitious fears and scruples about the due degrees of godly sorrow, and the
certain symptoms of a thorough Humiliation; but in their days, and in their
Divinity to be reformed, was without any more ado to be regenerate. Nor did
they amuse silly and well-meaning People with fond stories of unaccountable
horrors and desertions of Soul, but turned them over to the testimony of their
own Consciences, and suspended the quietness of their Minds upon the sense of
their own Integrity, and always confined the ordinary workings of the Spirit of
God, to the methods of Reason and Discourse: they never dreamed there could be
any disagreement between its Impressions and the Results of our own thoughts,
or that it would ever bereave an upright Soul of that unspeakable joy and
cheerfulness that springs from the reflections of an exact Conscience. These
and infinite more are the tricks and frenzies of a newfangled Divinity, that I
may confidently aver was scarcely heard of fifty years ago, and may as
confidently presume will be forgot fifty years hence.

For so it happened that some preaching Men among us, whose superficial Fancies
were more tickled with Metaphors and gay Resemblances, than with sober and
substantial sense, began according to the Genius of their own little wit, to
cloth and express the most weighty Arguments in Divinity with little
Allusions. And this taking with the rude and undiscerning multitude, others
that wanted better Accomplishments to recommend themselves to wiser Men,
studied this way of trifling, labored to imitate their pretty Phrases, and to
improve their Wit by more childish Fancies, beating about upon all occasions
for Metaphors and Allegories, using them to all purposes, wrapping up the
clearest Notions in cloudy words, casting darkness and mystery about the
plainest Truths, and confounding Men's apprehensions of things by the wildness
and uncertainty of their Expressions. And then the ignorant People fancy there
is mystery and secret sense in every phrase they understand not, and frame some
confused and Enthusiastic Conceit of Religion in their own Fancies, to which
they suit and accommodate all their after-conceptions. And by this means they
have at length made such an uncouth Representation of the Doctrine of the
Gospel, as would, not many years ago, have been thought a new and distinct
Religion from that established by the blessed Jesus. It being scarce an Age
since this inward, and practical, and experimental part of the mystery of
Godliness (as they call it) was first heard of in the Christian world. And it
would puzzle any man that compares the Accounts given by the Ancients of
Christianity with some of our modern descriptions of it, how it was ever
possible to derive such unrelated Notions and Principles from the same
Original. And if their new Account of Divinity were true and orthodox, the
Mystery of Godliness first began to be preached somewhere else, and not at
Jerusalem; and it has been so far from being propagated (according to our
Saviors Promise) over all the Nations of the world, that it was scarce ever
heard of out of our own.

These men are the first that ever attempted to divorce Grace from Virtue, and
to distinguish the spiritual Christian from the moral man. They examine the
Truth and Reality of men's Conversion, not by the outward and visible
reformation of their Lives, for so far (say they) formal Professors and Common
Grace may go, but by their orderly passage through all the stages of
Conviction. And unless a man be able to give an Account of having observed and
experienced in himself all their Imaginary Rules and Methods of Regeneration,
they immediately call into question his being a Child of God, and affright him
with sad stories of having miscarried of Grace and the New Creature; and he is
lost and undone for ever unless he begin all the work of Conversion anew, and
he must as it were re-enter into the Womb, and again pass through all the
scenes and workings of Conviction; in which state of formation all new Converts
must continue their appointed Time, and when the days are accomplished, they
may then proceed to the next Operation of the Spirit, i. e. to get a longing,
panting, and breathing frame of soul, upon which follows the proper season of
Delivery, and they may then break loose from the Enclosures of the spirit of
Bondage, and creep out from those dark Retirements, wherein the Law detein'd
them, into the Light of the Gospel, and the Liberty of the spirit of Adoption.
But of this perhaps our Author may understand more, before he and I part, in
the mean time let us follow our present Chase, and we shall have pleasant sport
enough; for never did wily Reynard show greater variety of shifts, windings,
and doublings than this subtle Disputant.

. 2. The Antichristian Errors of this Chapter he has reduced to four general
heads, the first whereof he confesses to be a great and important Truth, viz.
that Moral Virtue consists in the observance of the Laws of Nature, and the
Dictates of Right Reason; and therefore he only transcribes my Proof and
Account of the Reasonableness of the Assertion, Page 195.
and repeats it again in his own obscure Words and flat Expressions, and so
immediately proceeds to the second, viz That the substance, yea, Page 196.
the whole of Religion consists in moral virtues, and to prove it, he repeats
that short Scheme, that I have drawn up of the most material parts and branches
of Religion; and in answer to it, he first talks, and then objects. Page 199.
He wishes I would give him a summary of the Credenda of my Religion, as I have
done of its Agenda. And so I will, when I shall think my self obliged to write
impertinently for his humor; but should I be so civil as to gratify him in
this Request, though perhaps the positive Articles of my Belief are not
altogether so numerous as his Systematick Orthodoxes, nor my Creed so bulky as
his gross Bodies of Dutch-divinity: Yet I could give him in such a large
Negative Confession of Faith as would both satisfy, and make him repent his
Curiosity. Ibid.
In the next place he tells us, the ten Commandments would have done twice as
well on this occasion. But it is no disparagement to my Account of Religion, if
it be but half as good as the ten Commandments; though I am apt to believe the
Decalogue was never intended for a perfect Systeme of the Moral Law: I cannot
imagine, that by thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, is meant,
thou shall not institute Symbolical Ceremonies; or that by Thou shall not
murder, Alms and fraternal Correption are enjoined; nor can I fancy, that when
only one Particular is expressed, twenty more are intended that may any way be
reduced to it by strein'd and far-fetched Analogies. Ibid.
But if we add the Explication of the Church-Catechism (for which our Author
has, no doubt, a mighty fondness) it would make up a much more perfect Scheme
of Religion, than what I have represented; I confess it is contrived with a
great deal of wisdom and judgment; and its Exposition is easy, natural, and
useful, and not made out by forced and uncertain Deductions; and therefore has
admirably attained the End it aimed at, which is chiefly a plain and
intelligible Account of the main scope and intent of the Decalogue, and not an
entire Institution of Christian Theology. But upon this he takes a civil and
seasonable occasion to remark that he fears the very Catechism it self may ere
long be esteemed Phanatical, though if it should meet with such ill Usage, it
would not be much worse treated than it was ere long when it was esteemed
Popish. However his Fears are of no more force than his Arguments, they are
equally wise and reasonable, and prove nothing but his Ill Nature, or something
worse. And now to all this he subjoyns a tedious story of a foolish and
half-witted fellow, that from this Opinion, that all Religion consists in
Morality, Ibid.
proceeded to a full Renunciation of the Gospel. If either the man himself had
made good this Consequence, or our Author for him, this tale might have been of
more use than all his Arguments, that is, it might have been to the purpose,
but otherwise it is as mere Tittle-tattle as when he tells us the Papists make
use of our Pleas for Government in behalf of their Tyranny and Usurpation, I
can no more prevent some men from streining absurd Conclusions from the wisest
and most Reasonable Premises, than I can hinder others from preaching Treason
or Blasphemy from the divine Oracles. But all this is no more than Skirmish,
the main Battle follows, and he draws up all his Forces in three Objections, i.
e. in repeating the same Objection three times: (1.) My Representation of
Religion is suited to the state of Innocence. Page 203, 204, 205.
(2.) It carries in it neither supposition nor assertion of sin. (3.) It omits
some of the most important duties of the Christian Religion, Repentance,
Humiliation, Godly sorrow, etc. Whereas its being suited to the state of
Innocence, its not implying a supposition of sin, and its omitting the duty of
Repentance is apparently one and the same thing. For it is nothing but merely a
supposition of sin that makes our present Condition differ from the state of
Innocence, and that infers the necessity of Repentance; and therefore in answer
to this great Objection in its united strength, I humbly crave leave to
remonstrate, that Religion for the substance and main design of it (which is
the only thing I designed to represent) is the same now as it was in the state
of Innocence. For as then the whole duty of man consisted in the Practice of
all those moral Virtues that arose from his natural Relation to God and man, so
all that is super-induced upon us since the Fall, is nothing but helps and
contrivances to supply our natural defects, and recover our decayed Powers, and
restore us to a better ability to discharge those duties we stand engaged to by
the Law of our Nature, and the design of our Creation. So that the Christian
Institution is not for the substance of it any new Religion, but only a more
perfect digest of the Eternal Rules of Nature and Right Reason. For it commands
nothing but what is some way suitable to and perfective of Rational Beings, and
all its duties are either Instances or Instruments of moral Goodness; it
prescribes no new rules and proportions of Morality, and all its additions to
the Eternal and Unchangeable Laws of Nature are but only means and Instruments
to discover their Obligation, and improve their Practice in the World. All men
(I think) are agreed that the real end of Religion is the Happiness and
Perfection of Mankind; and this end is obtained by living up to the Dictates of
Reason, and according to the Laws of Nature, which the Gospel has framed into
positive Precepts, because they are in themselves so essentially serviceable to
the design of our Creation. And therefore our Savior came not into the world
to give any new Precepts of moral goodness, but only to retrive the old Rules
of Nature from the evil Customs of the World, and to reinforce their Obligation
by endearing our duty with better Promises, and urging our Obedience upon
severer Penalties. And as the Gospel is nothing but a Restitution of the
Religion of Nature, so are all its positive Commands and instituted duties
either mediately or immediately subservient to that end. Thus the Sacraments,
though they are matters of pure Institution, yet are they of a subordinate
Usefulness, and designed only for the greater advantage and Improvement of
moral Righteousness: For as the Gospel is the Restitution of the Law of Nature,
so are these outward Rites and Solemnities a great security of the Gospel; they
are solemn engagements and stipulations of obedience to all its Commands, and
are appointed to express and signify our grateful sense of Gods goodness in
the Redemption of the World; and our serious Resolutions of performing the
Conditions of this new Contract and Intercourse with mankind. So that though
they are duties of a prime importance in the Christian Religion, it is not
because they are in themselves matters of any Essential Goodness, but because
of that peculiar Relation they have to the very being, and the whole design of
its Institution. Forasmuch as he that established this Covenant, requires of
all, that are willing to own and submit to its Conditions, to profess and avow
their Assent to it by these Rites and Instruments of stipulation; so that to
refuse their Use is interpreted the same thing as to reject the whole Religion.
But if the entire Usefulness of these and any other instituted Mysteries
consists in their great subserviency to the designs of the Gospel; and if the
great design of the Gospel consists in the Restitution of the Law of Nature,
and the advancement of all kinds of Moral Goodness; then does it naturally
resolve it self into that short Analysis I have given of Religion; and whether
we suppose the Apostasy of Mankind, or suppose it not, every thing that
appertains to it will in the last issue of things prove either a part or an
instrument of Moral Virtue.

Page 203, 204.
. 3. But we must proceed to particulars. In the first place, Gratitude is a
very imperfect description of Natural Religion, for (says he) it has respect
only to Gods Benefits, and not to his Nature, and therefore omits all those
Duties that are eternally necessary upon the Consideration of himself, such as
fear, love, trust, affiance. Perhaps this word may not in its rigorous
acceptance express all the distinct parts and duties of Religion; yet the
Definition, that I immediately subjoined to explain its meaning, might
abundantly have prevented this Cavil, were not our Author resolved to draw his
saw upon words, viz. A thankful and humble temper of Mind, arising from a sense
of Gods Greatness in himself, and his Goodness to us. And the truth is, I know
not any one Term that so fully expresses that Duty and Homage we owe to God, as
this of Gratitude: For by what other Name soever we may call it, this will be
its main and most Fundamental Ingredient; and therefore it is more pertinent to
describe its Nature by that, than by any other Property that is more remote,
and less material. Because the Divine Bounty is the first Reason of our
Obligation to Divine Worship, in that natural Justice obliges every Man to a
grateful and ingenuous sense of Favors and Benefits; and therefore God being
the sole Author of our Beings and our Happiness, that ought without any farther
regard to affect our Minds with worthy resentments of his love and kindness;
and this is all that which is properly expressed by the word Piety, which in its
genuine acceptance denotes a grateful and observant temper and behavior
toward Benefactors; and for that cause it was made use of as the most proper
Expression of that Duty that is owing from Children to Parents: but because God
by reason of the eminency of his Bounty, more peculiarly deserves our Respect
and Observation, it is in a more signal and remarkable sense appropriated to
him: so that Gratitude is the first property and radical Ingredient of
Religion, and all its other Acts and Offices are but secondary and
consequential; and that Veneration we give the Divine Majesty for the
excellency of his Nature and Attributes, follows that Gratitude we owe him for
the Communication of his Bounty and Goodness. It Is this that brings us to a
knowledge of all his other Endowments; it is this that endears his Nature to us;
and from this result all those Duties we owe him upon the account of his own
Perfections; and by that experience we have of his Bounty, and by that
knowledge we have of his other Attributes, into which we are led by this
experience, come we to be obliged to trust and affiance in him: so that
Gratitude expressly implies all the Acts and Offices of Religion; and though it
chiefly denotes its prime and most essential Duty, yet in that it fully
expresses the Reason and Original Obligation of all other parts of Religious
Worship.

Page 205.
But in the next place he reckons up Repentance, Conversion, Conviction of Sin,
Humiliation, Godly Sorrow, as deficient Graces in my Scheme, and Duties
peculiar to the Gospel. Though as for Repentance, what is it but an exchange of
vicious customs of Life, for an habitual course of Virtue? I will allow it to
be a new species of Duty in the Christian Religion, when he can inform me what
Men repent of beside their Vices, and what they reform in their Repentance
beside their Moral Iniquities: it has neither end nor object but Moral Virtue,
and is only another word peculiarly appropriated to signify its first
beginnings. And as for Conversion, (the next deficient) it is co-incident with
Repentance, and he will find it no less difficult to discover any difference
between them, than between Grace and Virtue. And as for the other remaining
Graces of the Gospel, Conviction, Humiliation, Godly Sorrow, (and he might as
well have added Compunction, Self-abhorrency, Self-despair, and threescore
words more that are frequent in their mouths) they are all but different
Expressions of the same thing, and are either parts or concomitant
Circumstances of Repentance. After so crude and careless a rate does this Man
of Words pour forth his talk. Page 206,
In the next rank comes in Self-denial, a Readiness to bear the Cross, and
Mortification, as new Laws of Religion. But as for Self-denial, it is nothing
else than to restrain our appetites within the limits of Nature, and to
sacrifice our brutish Pleasures to the interests of Virtue. As for a Readiness
to bear the Cross, it is nothing but a constant and generous Loyalty to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and a Resolution to suffer any thing rather than betray
or forsake so excellent an Institution; and therefore its peculiar excellency
consisting in the goodness of its Moral Precepts, to continue faithful to that,
is the same thing as to be constant and upright to the best Principles of
Virtue. And lastly, as for Mortification, it is an exercise of Moral Philosophy,
and the very formality of Moral Virtue; and it is nothing else but to subdue our
sensual appetites and affections to our superior faculties in the methods of
Reason and prudent Discipline. But the main instance of defect is that dear and
darling Article of the Religion of Sinners, Page 208.
(as our Author words it) Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. And here I must
confess, as they have mistaken the Nature and Notion of this Grace, it is
neither Virtue nor Virtues Friend, though in its plain and primitive account,
it is evidently both. For I know but two acceptations of it in the Scripture:
(1.) Either as it signifies a serious and an hearty assent to the Divine
Authority of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and so it has a mighty force to engage
as serious and hearty obedience to all its Precepts. For what more effectual
and irresistible Inducements can Men have to an Holy Life, than a firm Belief
of the Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel? This then is the peculiar
excellency of the Christian Faith, viz. its mighty Influence upon a Christian
Life. (2.) Or else as it signifies a Trust and Reliance upon the Goodness of
God, and the Merits of Christ for the expiation of our sins, and the acceptance
of our Persons upon the Performance of the Conditions of the new Covenant. And
thus it is an act of that Moral Worship of God, of which we have already
discoursed. For though the Object of it be particular, and relates to our
Saviors Death and Passion; yet the Reason of it is Natural, and relates to the
Essential Truth and Goodness of God: upon his Declaration and Engagement, to
accept the Sufferings of his Son as an Atonement and Satisfaction for the Sins
of the World. And therefore into this we must resolve the Virtue and Morality
of the Grace of Faith, viz. its worthy Opinion of, and strong Confidence in
Gods Essential Truth and Goodness. And our Author himself (though upon what
grounds I know not) esteems it a part of the Natural and Moral Worship of God;
Page ^68.
and so (I remember) does I. O. in that notable Treatise of distinct Communion
with each Person of the Trinity distinctly. And now, I hope, Page 8.
from all these Premises you are sufficiently satisfied that the supposition of
sin does not bring in any new Religion, but only makes new Circumstances and
Names of old Things, and requires new helps and advantages to improve our
Powers, and to encourage our Endeavors: And thus is the Law of Grace nothing
but the Restitution of the Law of Nature; all the prime Duties it prescribes,
are but Results and Pursuances of our Natural Obligations; and all its
additional Institutions, are but Helps and Assistances to encourage and secure
their Performance. To conclude, had this Man been a Pharisee in our Saviors
time, how pertly would he have taunted him for reducing the whole Duty of Man
to two Heads, Love the Lord with all thy Heart, and Love thy Neighbor as thy
self? What, Sir! have we not six hundred and thirteen Precepts in our Law? are
there not twelve Houses of Affirmative, and as many of Negative Commandments?
and are there not large Catalogues of particular Laws ranged under each of
these general Heads? and must all, saving only two, be revers't for your
pleasure? If this be all, to what purpose are our Phylacteries? Once (I
remember) you reproved us for making them so large, now you had best quarrel us
for making them at all. Is this to fill up the Law of Moses, (as you pretend)
to abridge his whole Volume into a single Text? I must needs say, Page 194.
that I look upon this as the rudest, most imperfect, and weakest Scheme of the
Jewish Religion that ever yet I saw; so far from comprising an Induction of all
Particulars belonging to it, that there is nothing in it that is constitutive
of the Jewish Religion as such at all, etc. Now if we could suppose our Savior
would have vouchsafed to reply to such a prating and impertinent Rabbi, what
other answer can we suppose he would have returned, than that all the other
Commandments, how numerous soever, are but so many Instances of these under
various Denominations, arising from emergent Respects and Circumstances of
things? And how infinite soever the particular Laws of Life may be, they are
but Prosecutions of these general Laws of Nature, and result from those
Obligations we lie under from our natural Relation to God and to Man; and it is
for this reason that I define Love to be the fulfilling of the whole Law,
because all other Commands are but several Instruments or Expressions of this
Duty; and love to your Neighbor signifies every thing whereby you may be
useful and beneficial to Mankind. Page 208, 9, 10, 11, 12.
But having in his own Fancy (for there he does wondrous feats) demolish't my
frame of Religion, he proceeds to erect a new Model of his own; but whether
coherent or not, concerns not my Enquiry; my business is to defend my own
Discourse, and not to run after every Bubble of his blowing. Only you may
observe, that whereas I designed to represent the shortest and most
comprehensive Scheme of the practical Duties of Religion that I could contrive,
the greatest part of his Hypothesis is made up of Articles of mere Belief,
which I purposely omitted, as wholly impertinent to the matter and design of my
Enquiry; and the other Materials that he has cast in, relating to practice, are
so crudely and confusedly hudled together, that they rather make a heap of
Rubbish than any consistent Fabric of things; insomuch that one single Branch
of his Analysis comprehends all the rest, viz. An universal Observance of the
whole Will, and all the Commands of God. Page 212.
It would be an admirable way, no doubt, to represent an exact Anatomy of all
the parts of an Humane Body; to lay the Body it self before you, and only tell
you that is it. No Man doubts whether Religion consists in an universal
Obedience to all the Commands of God (and yet should I assert it, I know who
would contradict it, and object its being impossible) but what these particular
Commands are, and what the manner of their dependence upon, and connection to
each other. Some men you see cannot avoid running into Absurdities, when it
does them no service.

. 4. My third Heresy is no less than that there is no actual Concurrence of
present Grace enabling men to perform the duties, Page 213.
or to exercise the virtues of moral goodness. And now he returns to his old
Vomit of Calumny and Falsification; here he is upon his own dunghill, and
therefore here he crows and insults, and I am catechized like any Schoolboy.
What, are these things so indeed? Come, come, Page 215.
young man these are not things to be trifled with; you may vent your Wit upon
other Occasions, and not make sport with sacred and serious Truths, tell me
then, are you in good earnest? Do you think or believe that there are not now
any real gracious Operations of the Spirit of God upon the hearts and minds of
men in the World, or do you not? Page 217.
If you do, Sirrah, it is the most pernicious Heresy that ever infested the
Church of God. Page 218.
If you do not, speak plainly, and clear your self of those Tales that are told
abroad of you, and some of your Truantly Companions, that you may not have
occasion to complain that you are misrepresented. Page 217.
Indeed, Sir, I have nothing to plead in my own defense, but openly to declare,
that as I never believed, so did I never affirm, that the assistance of the
Spirit was confined to the first Ages of the Church. I have expressly taught the
contrary, and our Author is able, Page 216.
and (I thank him for it) not unwilling to bear witness that it is a flat
Contradiction to some of my other Assertions. And the only ground of so big an
Information is his impertinent way of forcing deductions; for thus he infers:
Page 214
If this be the only Reason, why any thing in Believers is called Grace, why
Virtues are Graces, namely, because God was pleased in the first Ages of
Christianity miraculously to inspire its Converts with all sorts of Virtue,
then there is no Communication of grace unto any, no work of Grace in and upon
any in an ordinary way, through the Ministry of the Gospel in these latter
Ages. If this man can argue thus and not blush, he is a match for the boldest
man living, his Confidence is impregnable, and though it is possible he may want
a good Conscience, yet he can never want a Brazen-wall. You know (Sir) my plain
design was to represent that Grace and Virtue were the same thing; In order to
which I gave a short Account how Virtues came to be styled Graces, viz. Because
in the first Ages of Christianity they were in a visible and miraculous manner
derived purely from Gods free grace and goodness; And now is it not brave
concluding from hence, that because the Original Reason of the Peculiarity of
the name is not now in being, that therefore the thing it self is perish't out
of the World too; and because the Remarkableness of those miraculous Influences
of Heaven upon the first Believers, that was the only ground that gave occasion
to this new style is ceased, that therefore the ordinary Influences of the
Spirit are not continued to Believers in all Ages and Periods of the Church.
They were then called Graces or Free-gifts, because they were the effects of
mere favor, whereas now they are the joint issues of our own Industry, and the
Spirit of God cooperating with our honest endeavors; and therefore they
cannot now with so much Propriety of speech be styled Graces, because they are
not matters of pure Infusion, though they may be allowed the Title still in
some Proportion, because they are still in some Proportion produced by the
special Energy and Cooperation of the Holy Ghost. In the same manner as those
Abilities bestowed upon the Apostles without the concurrence of their own
Industry were called Gifts, though now they might be more properly expressed by
other Names, notwithstanding that we owe them to the blessing of God upon our
studies and endeavors. And what was then the gift of Tongues, is now vulgarly
called skill in Languages; and what was then the gift of Utterance, is now the
Art of Eloquence and Rhetorique. For in our days men preach not from pure
Infusion, but either from study, or from boldness. And I. O. overlashes
according to his custom, when he tells the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, etc. that when he came to print his Sermon, sundry Passages in it were
gone beyond his Recovery, Intituted Gods presence with a People, preached
October. 30. 1656.
having had their Rise from the present Assistance, which God was pleased to
afford in the management of the Work it self. This is to fasten his own raw
Effusions upon the wisdom of the Spirit of God, and to stamp a divine Authority
upon the Extravagances of his own roving fancy. It Is another horrible Effect of
their spiritual pride, and arises from a vain Opinion of their great intimacy
and familiarity with God himself. But if you look into the Sermon, you will
scarce find any thing of immediate and infallible inspiration, but some things
false, and many ridiculous. And I dare say God never put it into his mind to
tell the Parliament that it was a great hindrance to the advancement and
progress of the Gospel in Wales, Page 37.
because they were still zealous of the Traditions of their Fathers. By which
he means their kind entertainment to the Episcopal Clergy, whom he immediately
adorns with the honorable Title of Beggarly Readers. But such was the
prodigious Impudence of these men, that when they vented any thing of a more
bold and daring Nature, they always vouched a strong and unaccountable impulse
of the Spirit of God upon their minds; and when ever they attempted any blacker
and more enormous Villainy, it was God that put it into their hearts, all their
greater wickednesses were the peculiar Issues of his Spirit; when ever they had
a mind to any new villainous undertaking, it was but seeking the Lord in Prayer,
and then if they found themselves somewhat strongly inclined to pursue their
own designs, that was a sufficient discovery of his will and pleasure to his
secret ones. Never was the Spirit of God more boldly or more familiarly
blasphemed than by these precious Wretches, and though they have at present no
such lewd practices to fasten on it, yet nothing more vulgar with them at this
time than to ascribe their Follies to its special direction; give them the best
advice in any affair that your prudence can suggest, and they will do as the
Lord shall direct them. Nay, this is their Reply to the Commands and the
Counsels of their Superiors, and they will give obedience to their Laws as
shall seem good to themselves and to the Holy Ghost. Nothing more concerns
Magistrates than to chastise such shameless and incorrigible Enthusiasts, as
the boldest and most dangerous Enemies to the Public Peace; they cancel all
the Laws of Government, and there is no disturbance or Rebellion that they may
not justify by the warrant, and pursue under the protection of the Spirit of
God. Whether this be intemperate language I know not, but if it be, it is excess
of truth that makes it so.

But to return, though the names of things, that were proper in the Apostolical
Age are not so proper now, that is not so much as the Ghost of an Argument for
the Cessation of the things themselves; because the Reason of the name was not
taken from the Nature of the things, but was appropriate to some extraordinary
Circumstances, wherewith they were attended. So that in answer to his severe
Interrogatory, seeing my Reputation, and something else lies at stake, I must
profess, that though I believe the visible and miraculous Immissions of the
Holy Ghost to have been peculiar to the first Ages of Christianity, yet am I as
far, and perhaps farther than himself from denying that its ordinary
Assistances are equally bestowed upon, and continued to all successive Periods
of the Church. For not to mention that the Conditions upon which the Promise of
the Spirit is entailed agree equally to Christians of all times and places; I
know not to what purpose men should address their Devotions to Heaven either
for Grace or Virtue (I care not which) when there is no possible way of
effecting them but by the Impressions of the Spirit of God upon the spirits of
men. And did I not believe its Influence upon the minds of men, I would list my
self among the Followers of I. O. and explode the Lords Prayer it self as a
foolish and insignificant Form; seeing the greatest part of its Petitions are
things of that Nature, as that they cannot be accomplished any other way than
by the efficacy of the divine Spirit upon ours. In short, the whole state of
this Question is plainly this: That in the days of the Apostles, the divine
Spirit proved it self by some clear and unquestionable Miracle, and that was
the rational evidence of its Truth and divine Authority; but in our days it
proceeds in an humane and a rational way, and does neither drive nor second us
with unaccountable Raptures and Inspirations; but joins in with our
Understandings, and leads us forward by the Rules of Reason and Sobriety, by
threatenings and by promises, by instructing our Faculties in the right
Perception of things, and by discovering a fuller Evidence and stronger
Connection of Truths. So that whatever Assistances the Spirit of God may now
afford us, they work in the same way, and after the same manner, as if all were
performed by the strength of our own Reason; and therefore Men are not to be
allowed to pretend to its guidance, unless they can prove it by some evident
Miracle, or at least justify it either by some clear Text of Scripture, or
some Rational Argument, and then it is that which warrants the Action, and not
the pretense of the Spirit. But as for those that talk of its immediate and
unaccountable Workings, and confine them not to the ordinary Rules of Reason,
and Methods of Prudence, they unavoidably fall into all the mischiefs and
frenzies of Enthusiasm; and there is nothing so absurd, that they may not
believe; or so wicked, that they may not practice by the instigation of the
Spirit of God.

And now after all this Noise and Cavil, I and my Adversary are fully agreed in
the main matter of the Quarrel, viz. That Grace and Virtue are the same thing:
For all the difference he assigns between them, relates not to the Nature of
the things themselves, but to the Principles from whence they issue, viz. That
the same Instances and Duties of Moral Goodness, that are called Virtues when
they proceed from the strength and improvement of our own Natural Abilities,
are called Graces when they proceed from the assistances and impressions of the
Spirit of God: so that even in his account Grace is nothing but infused Virtue,
and infused Virtue is Virtue still; and this is the only difference that I
assigned between them; and thus my Challenge, that is the Cause and Object of
all this Zeal and Indignation, stands firm and unattempted, viz. That when they
have set aside all manner of Virtue, they would tell me what remains to be
called Grace, and give me any notion of it distinct from all Morality. He that
can do this, shall be greater than Apollo and all his Muses. And whereas for a
farther proof that the Graces or the fruits of the Spirit were nothing but
Moral or (to speak in the homespun Language of our Forefathers) Ghostly
Virtues, I alleged two evident Texts of Scripture to that purpose: Page 220.
with the first, he quarrels in the first place, that I have not (either
through my own or the Printers neglect) expressed the words in a different
Character, though I have quoted both Chapter and Verse; and if this be a fault,
I must beg his pardon; and seeing it is the first he has been able to discover,
I hope I may easily obtain it. In the next place, he excepts that in rendering
the words, I use Peaceableness in stead of Peace, and Cheerfulness as
equivalent with Joy. The Cavil is but a little one, and the Fortunes of Caesar
and the Roman Empire depend not upon it; and therefore I will not trouble the
Reader with a Critical Account of the Reason of my Translation, it is enough
that these words may, and often are used promiscuously, and differ no more than
Reason and Reasoning. The other Text was Tit. 2.11. In which I affirm that the
Apostle makes the Grace of God to consist in Gratitude toward God, Temperance
toward our selves, and Justice toward our Neighbors. No, says he, Page 221;
the Apostle says not that Grace consists in these things, but that it teaches
these things. I must confess, I was not so subtle and Scholastical as to
distinguish between subjective Grace (as he there speaks) and effective Grace,
because they are but different terms of Logic for the same thing, and that
Grace that teaches us these things consists in doing them; they differ only as
the Principle and Effect of the same Virtue, and whatever the Apostle might
there intend by Grace, nothing can be more pat to my Purpose, than that he
places its whole design in teaching and promoting the practice of those Moral
Virtues. This is obvious to every vulgar eye, but our Author is forced, for
want of better employment, to saw the Air.

. 5. My last crime is, that I slander them with the Truth, and charge them of
making Virtue and Grace inconsistent, whilst they teach, that though a man may
be exact in the duties of moral goodness, yet if he be a graceless Person ( i.
e. void of I know not what imaginary Godliness) he is but in a cleaner way to
Hell, and the morally Righteous man is at a greater distance from grace than
the Profane. Though were I destitute of all other proof, their very
distinguishing between Grace and Virtue, or the Spiritual and the Moral Duties
of the Gospel, is in it self directly destructive of all true and real
goodness; for if they are the same thing under different Appellations, then
whilst this Doctrine presses men to a pursuit and acquisition of Excellencies
of Grace and spiritual holiness over and above the common virtues of Morality,
it engages their main industry and their biggest endeavors in the pursuit of
dreams and shadows, because there is nothing beyond the bounds of Moral Virtue
but Chimera's and flying Dragons, Illusions of Fancy, and Impostures of
Enthusiasm: And by this means are men at length betrayed to neglect the plain
and practical Principles of Reason and moral honesty, whilst they befool and
entertain themselves with the wild frekes of humor and melancholy; and instead
of guiding their Actions by the Common Laws of Nature and right Reason, they
are merely acted by giddy and Enthusiastic whimsies, and derive all their
religious motions and phantasms from the present state and constitution of
their Bodies, and move only upon the stage of Fancy, and according as sanguine
or melancholy are predominant, so the Scene alters. Sometimes their blood runs
low, their spirits are weak and languid, melancholy reeks and vapors cloud and
overwhelm their Fancies, and then the Scene is all Tragedy, and they are
immediately under spiritual desertions and troubles of Conscience, their
Fancies are full of Fears, and their mouths of Moan, they spend their time with
puling and whining in Corners, and annoy their Friends with the eternal
Complaints of their deadness in duties, and unprofitableness under the means of
grace. But when the Tide returns, and the spirits rise, and the natural heat
breaks out from under the oppression of melancholy humors, boyls up into the
Brain, and refreshes the drooping fancy with brisk and active spirits, and
fills it with warm and spritely Imaginations: This they presently conceit to be
the Spirit of God spreading its wings over the poor disconsolate soul, and
darting in its rays of spiritual peace and comfort upon the Child of Light
sitting in darkness: And this inflames them with Raptures and Ecstasies of Joy;
their hearts overflow with content, and their Mouths with exultation; they feel
themselves strangely enlarged in duty, their affections warm, and expressions
fluent; they admire their own freedom and eloquence of speech, and delight to
be streaming forth in Torrents of Prayer and Devotion. And withal they usually
grow amorous, and vent their swelling spirits in affections of love and
fondness, are passionately enamored of the Person of the Lord Jesus; oh! what
so dear to them as their sweet Redeemer? His very name melts them down into
love and fondness; and they bedeck him with all the glittering Gems in the
Revelations, and caress him with all the gilded expressions in the Canticles,
and embrace him with unspeakable Transport and Rapture. Now they cannot imagine
but that such great and unexpected showers of delight must be poured down from
Heaven, and by reason of that forlorn condition in which they stuck, till this
sudden Flood of Joy buoyed them up out of the dregs of melancholy, their Joy
seems almost too big for Mortality to bear, much more to give. And so looking
upon them as streaming from an heavenly and divine Original, they labor to
swell and heighten the Torrent to the utmost brink of their Capacities;
insomuch that they are sometimes stifled and overwhelmed with a deluge of
delight and satisfaction: and it is usual for them, especially after high
Fevers, the main seasons of their spiritual refreshments (as you may observe by
perusing any of their famous Histories) to heat and tickle their Imaginations
into real Trances and Deliriums. It Is sad to consider how they have abused
simple and well-meaning people with these and a thousand other wild and crazy
Imaginations, especially those of the weaker Sex, who being of strong and
vehement Affections, of quick and operative Imaginations, and having withal
some odd diseases peculiar to the structure of their Bodies, have often by
poring upon the mysterious, the spiritual, and the superstitious Writings of
these illiterate men, moped their tender Fancies into perfect madness and
alienation of mind. In brief, all this sort of Religion floats in the Blood,
and rises and falls with the Ebbs and Tides of their humors: and all the
mysteries of this new and spiritual Divinity are the mere Results of a natural
and mechanical Enthusiasm. And it were an easy Task for any man, that
understands the Anatomy of the Brain, the structure of the Spleen and
Hypocondria, the Divarications of the Nerves, their Twistings about the Veins
and Arteries, and the sympathy of Parts, to give as certain and mechanical an
account of all its phanatick Frekes and Frenzies, as of any vital or animal
Function in the body. The Philosophy of a Phanatick being as intelligible by
the Laws of Mechanism, as the Motion of the Heart, and the Circulation of the
Blood: And there are some Treatises that give a more exact and consistent
Hypothesis of Enthusiasm than any Des Carts has given of the natural Results
of Matter and Motion.

And this, I say, is that Imaginary Godliness, of which they suppose Graceless
and mere moral men to be destitute: But our Author says, No, no, it is to be
void of the Spirit of God, of the Grace of Christ, Page 226.
not to be born again, not to have a new spiritual Life in Christ, not to be
united to him, not to be ingrafted in him, not to be accepted and made an heir
of God, and enabled to a due spiritual evangelical Performance of all Duties of
Obedience according to the Tenor of the Covenant, these are the things
intended. I, I, so they are; he has nicked my full meaning, had he demanded a
definition of their Imaginary Godliness, I could not have described it more
luckily than by their rolling up and down in such ambiguous Phrases, as
implying something distinct from moral Virtue; it is this fantastic Jargon, I
mean, this canting in general Expressions of Scripture without any Concern for
their true sense and meaning. Thus the Spirit of God, and the grace of Christ,
which he reckons up as distinct parts of Godliness, signify one and the same
thing, and when used as distinct from moral Abilities and Performances, they
signify nothing. And what is it to be born again, and to have a new spiritual
Life in Christ, but to become sincere Proselytes to the Gospel, to renounce all
vicious Customs and Practices, and to give an upright and uniform Obedience to
all the Laws of Christ; and therefore if they are all but Precepts of moral
Virtue, to be born again, and to have a new spiritual Life in Christ, is only
to become a new moral man. But their account of this Article is so wild and
fantastic, that had I nothing else to make good my Charge against them, that
alone would be more than enough to expose the prodigious Folly of their
spiritual Divinity. Again, to be united to Christ, and to be grafted in him,
are still more Tautologies for the same thing, though they indeed use them to
express some secret and mysterious intercourse between the Lord Christ and a
believing soul; and from hence spring the Doctrines of Withdrawings and
Desertions, of Discoveries and Manifestations, of Spiritual Closings and
Refreshments, and all the other innumerable Tricks of Melancholy and
Enthusiasm. To be accepted and made an heir of God, is neither Grace nor
Virtue; but, if we must distinguish them, a reward of both; and therefore to
mention this as a distinct branch of Godliness, and Duty of Religion, signifies
as much as all the rest, that is, nothing at all. As for Spiritual Evangelical
Obedience, it is but a canting Phrase, if by it he intend any thing more than a
sincere and habitual Conformity to the Moral Precepts of the Gospel: Moral
Obedience to the Gospel, and Spiritual Evangelical Obedience, are but
coincident Expressions of the same thing. And lastly, as for the Tenor of the
Covenant, as they are wont to discourse of it, it requires nothing but a bold
Confidence setting up with Gods irrespective Decrees, and trading in his
absolute Promises. For I. O. as well as W. B. informs us, Sermon to the Parl.
at Margarets, Feb. 28. 1649. page 28.
That the Promises comprehensive of the Covenant of Grace, are absolute, which
as to all those that belong to that Covenant, do hold out thus much of the Mind
of God, that they shall be certainly accomplished in and toward them all. But
who are they that belong to this Covenant? He answers, Every poor Soul that
will venture to trust it self on these absosolute Promises. Faith in the
Promises, Ibid.
and the Accomplishment of the Promises, are inseparable: He that believes
shall enjoy, and this wholly shuts up the Spirit from any occasion of
staggering. O ye of little Faith! wherefore do ye doubt? Ah! lest our share be
not in this Promise. Poor Creatures, there is but one way of keeping you off
from it, i. e. disputing it in your selves by unbelief. So that the only
Condition he requires to vest Men in a right to these absolute Promises, is
nothing but mere Confidence. Though there cannot be more horrid Nonsense in
the World, than that Faith or Boldness should be required as the Condition of
absolute Promises; yet it were as well if they were altogether absolute, as
demand no better Qualification for their accomplishment than a Bold Face. Page
47.
And suitable to this, it follows some Pages after, that there neither is nor
can be any other Ground or Reason of Doubtings but Unbelief. It is not the
greatness of Sin, nor continuance in Sin, nor backsliding into Sin, that is the
true cause of thy staggering, whatever thou pretendest, but solely from thy
Unbelief. So that though a Man persevere in an habitual course of the greatest
Wickednesses; yet for all that, he has an undeniable claim to all the Promises
of the Gospel, if he will at all-adventure resolve to be stomachful in his
Conceit, that they were particularly made and designed to himself. Now if this
be one (as it is the choicest one) of the Mysteries of their New Godliness, I
leave it to you to judge whether it be possible to invent any Doctrine more
apparently destructive of an Holy Life, or repugnant to the Tenor of the New
Covenant, which is plainly nor more nor less than Gods Stipulation of Eternal
Life upon no other Condition than of an habitual and uniform Obedience to the
Gospel. So that all these Spiritual Graces, resolving themselves so easily
either into Duties, or Helps, or Hindrances of Morality, he has given us an
abundant proof of their canting and imaginary Godliness, when he produces these
Instances as things of a more precious and spiritual Nature than Moral Virtues;
and yet unless they signify them, they signify nothing.

. 6. But this is not all, the main ground of my Charge against them, for making
an inconsistency between Grace and Virtue, is, That they make Moral Goodness
the greatest Let to Conversion: insomuch that in their Case-Divinity the
Conversion of a morally Righteous Man is judged more hopeless than that of the
vilest and most notorious Sinners. Than which (our Author affirms) there is
nothing more openly taught in the Gospel. Page 227.
Than which I affirm, there is no Blasphemy more grossly false and wicked. For
what viler and more dishonorable Representation can Men make of the Doctrine
of the Gospel, than to make Virtue the greatest Prejudice to its Entertainment?
Is that Institution worthy the Divine Contrivance, that is more befriended by
Debauchery and Profaneness, than by sincere Obedience to the best and most
essential Laws of Goodness? Nothing can be more suitable to the Design and the
Doctrine of the Gospel, than the practice of Moral Virtues; and is it not
strange that it should be destructive of its own Ends and purposes? and that
Men should indispose themselves for the Discipline of Christianity, by being
adorned with its best and choicest Qualifications? We never read of any Man
that was hindered from embracing the Christian Faith by any of his Good
Qualities. Cornelius's Integrity in fearing God and working Righteousness, was
the only thing that prepared and disposed him to Conversion; and the young
Gentleman in the Gospel wanted but one Moral Virtue to make him an entire
Christian; he was upon the Borders of the Kingdom of Heaven, one step more
would have placed him in it. The only thing that kept him out, was
Covetousness; which though it may in some persons escape for an Infirmity, was
never yet rank't in the Catalogue of Moral Virtues. The usefulness, the purity,
the excellency of the Doctrine of the Gospel, cannot but endear it to a Mind
that is inclined to Goodness; and to a Virtuous Soul, the Beauty and Perfection
of its Laws, is its strongest and most effectual Obligation. It was this that
ravished some of the first Fathers out of their state of Heathenism, into the
Bosom of the Church: their Minds were prepared to embrace true Goodness by the
study of Wisdom and Philosophy; they were only at a loss where to find it; and
therefore when they met with such a Divine Religion, and that established upon
such firm and undeniable Principles, it is scarce to be conceived with what
transports of Joy and Zeal they run into its Profession. In brief, the Gospel
is all that tends to the Glory of God, to the Perfection of Humane Nature, to
the Relief of my Neighbor, and to the Security and Happiness of Societies; and
all this it enforces under the severest Penalties, and endears by the noblest
Promises: And now let any Man tell me which way it is possible for Virtue to
tempt aside from such an admirable and Godlike Institution.

How? Page 127.
(says our Author) were not the Pharisees a People morally righteous? and yet
were they not at a farther distance from the Kingdom of God, than Publicans and
Harlots, the vilest and most notorious Sinners, because they trusted in their
own Righteousness? Yes, yes, they were right-worthy Moral Men; bright and
shining Examples of the great Virtues of Pride, Peevishness, Malice, Revenge,
Injustice, Covetousness, Rapine, Cruelty and Unmercifulness. These were the
Graces and the Ornaments of those precious and holy ones. Go thy way for a
woeful Guesser; no Man living beside thy self could ever have had the ill
fortune to pitch upon the Scribes and Pharisees for Moral Philosophers. And,
Sir, were any of them now alive, they would tell him to his teeth they are no
more Moralists than himself. Their Parts and Virtues lay another way. They were
a fasting and a praying People, zealous for the Lord and his Sabboths: they
were for the Power of Godliness, and spent the greatest part of their time in
Communion with God, and in attendance upon his Ordinances: but as for the
Heathen Virtues of Morality, they scorned to trouble themselves about such low
and beggarly Duties, but left their practice to the common and profane Herd of
Mankind. This was the way and spirit of the Men; and the Ingredients of the
Pharisaick Leven, were false Godliness, and Spiritual Pride. They were highly
conceited of their own extraordinary Seize, and this made them turn so
deaf an ear to all our Saviors Doctrines and Reproofs; and this was their
Selfrighteousness as opposed to the Righteousness of the Gospel. They had spun
to themselves a Motley-Religion, partly out of the Corruptions of the Law of
Moses, and partly out of their own fantastic Traditions: and upon its
observance, they valued themselves above other Men, and challenged their
acceptance with God; so that it consisted not at all in trusting in their own
real, but in their own imaginary Righteousness: neither is the Righteousness of
Faith, that was set up by our Savior and his Apostles in its defiance, opposed
to true and inherent Goodness, but to a false and imaginary Godliness. And it is
so far from being any criminal Arrogance either in them, or in us to trust in
our own Righteousness, that (if men would suffer themselves to understand
common sense) in the last Issue of things we have nothing else to trust to: For
we have no other ground to expect the divine Acceptance, but by performing the
Conditions of the Evangelical Covenant, i. e. a sincere and hearty Obedience to
all the Laws of the Gospel; and without this to rely upon our Saviors merits,
is intolerable Folly and Presumption. A good Conscience is the only Ground of a
Fiducial Recumbency, (for that is the word) upon the Merits and Mercies of
Christ for Salvation. For though our Savior died to expiate our Sins, yet (God
knows) he never intended to supply our Duties; and it is certain as the Gospel
is true, that all the Privileges of his Death and Sufferings are Conditional,
and entailed upon some peculiar Qualifications in the Persons to whom they
belong; otherwise wicked Men and Infidels might lay as fair a claim to the
benefit, as the holiest Man living; and therefore it is in vain for the boldest
Faith to offer to lay hold upon them, unless its Confidence be built upon a
sincere Obedience: so that our Right to Gods Promise, and Christ's Satisfaction
for the pardon and forgiveness of our Sins, is the purchase of an Holy Life,
and imputative Righteousness is part of the reward promised to inherent
Righteousness. And therefore it is not Moral Goodness, and a well-grounded Trust
in it; but Immoral Godliness, and a proud Presumption upon it, that keeps Men
off from closing with the Terms and Doctrines of the Gospel. It Is the conceited
and mistaken Professor, or the vicious and immoral Saint, that is of all Men
the most desperate and incurable Sinner. Spiritual Pride is the Carnal
Confidence that hardens him into a final impenitency. He thinks himself so full
of Grace and Godliness that he needs no Virtue; he is already a Child of God,
and in a state of Grace, and then what need of any other Conversion? And this
was the Case of the Scribes and Pharisees; and for this reason were those
supercilious and self-confident Professors at a farther distance from the
Kingdom of Heaven, than the Publicans and Harlots. These our Savior could
convince of their Lewdness and Debauchery, from the notorious wickedness of
their Lives and Conversations; and could by his civil and gentle Reproofs
soften them into a relenting and pliable temper: but as for those, their false
and mistaken Piety only made them more obdurate and obstinate in sin, feared
their Consciences against the force of his sharpest Reproofs and Convictions,
and consigned them up to an unyielding and inflexible peevishness.

. 7. As for his Animadversions upon the following Pages of this Chapter, they
are so lamentably feeble and impertinent, that as there is not any necessity to
encounter, so there is no glory to vanquish them; and withal, the reason of
that part of my Discourse is in it self so clearly firm and impregnable, that
methinks it seems to disdain any other fence and protection against his weak
and womanish Talkings. And therefore I had once determined to think of no other
Reply than barely to request of the Reader, what I may justly challenge, viz.
That he would compare and consider us together; and if upon an attentive
Perusal my Arguments do not discover themselves to be vastly above the reach
and the danger of his vain Attempts, I will for ever scorn and renounce such
faint and defenseless Reasonings. For, alas! there is nothing of any
consequence objected, that was not clearly foreseen, and abundantly prevented;
insomuch that the Discourse it self is its own best guard, and strongest
defense. And it is not a little difficult to contrive Arguments more apposite to
baffle his Answers, than those very Reasonings against which they are levelled.
It Is not in my Power to keep off the Attempts of Noise and Clamor; it is enough
if I can fend and secure my self against reasonable Exceptions; as for
Impertinencies, they do but discover their own folly and weakness; and the more
bold and boisterous their Assault, the greater is the Repulse they put upon
themselves: not unlike to a Rock which you have seen unconcerned in the midst
of Storms and Tempests, it slights and regards not the fury of the Waves, and
only suffers them to dash in pieces their rage and themselves together. And
thus has this Man no where more shamefully exposed the wretchedness of his
folly and presumption, than by the pertness and French-Confidence of this
Attaque: for as I know not where his Censures are more peremptory, so neither
do I remember where their Vanity is more transparent. But this is a vulgar
stratagem of some Men, to make the greatest show where they have the least
strength, and to set off what they want of Reason with big Looks and emphatical
Confidence. But to be short, the strength of my present Argument was couched in
this method. Having first shown Moral Duties to be the choicest and most
important Matters of Religion, so as to reduce all its Branches either to the
Virtues or to the Instruments of Morality: I proceeded in the next place, that
seeing the Civil Magistrate was by the unanimous Suffrage and a vowed
Principles of Mankind, vested in a Sovereign Power over the main Ends and
Designs of Religion, to demand what imaginable Reason the Wit of Man could
assign, why matters of External Worship, that cannot challenge any other Use,
or any higher Office in the Scale of Religion, than of Ministeries or
Circumstances, should be exempt from the Conduct and Government of the same
Authority. And this I farther both improved and exemplified by a particular
Comparison of the Conveniences and Inconveniences that would probably ensue
upon the exercise of these respective Jurisdictions; showing how in every
Instance the advantage was still on the side of Morality, as to the Plea of
Exemption; and that there was vastly less danger in yielding to its Pretenses
for Liberty, from the Determinations of Humane Laws, than in granting the same
measure of Indulgence as to the Concerns of outward Religion, (most of which
our Author has gently slipped over, according to his prudent and laudable Custom
of overlooking what he cannot answer.) And then, lastly, to improve the
evidence of this Discourse beyond the Attempts of Cavil and Exception, I
explained as well as argued its Reasonableness, by running a general Parallel
between the Nature of Divine Worship, and of Moral Virtue: where I have more at
large represented their Agreement in reference to the Power of the Civil
Magistrate, and shown how the Exercise of his Dominion over both is extended
to, and restrained within the same Bounds and Limits, viz. That in both there
are some Instances of Goodness of an universal Necessity, and unchangeable
Usefulness; and these God himself has bound upon our Consciences by his own
immediate Laws of Nature and Revelation: And that there are others, whose
Goodness is or may be alterable according to the various Accidents, Changes and
Emergencies of Humane Life; and therefore the Government of these he has
entrusted with his Deputies and Lieutenants here on Earth, to setle and
determine as the Circumstances of Affairs shall require, and the Dictates of
their own Discretion shall direct; by which means he has admirably provided
both for the peaceable Government of Mankind, and for the inviolable security
of Virtue and Religion in the World. This is the scope and Contexture of my
Argument; to all which, what is replied by our Author? Page ^30.
Why! in the first place he represents its sum and substance in his own words,
and then complains of the ambiguity of the Terms; and this fills above half a
Page full of Triumph to insult over the absurdity of his own Expressions. In
the next place he excepts against the Validity of the Consequence; Page 231.
That because the Magistrate has Power over the Consciences of his Subjects in
Morals, that therefore he has so also in matters of instituted Worship: Though
this Objection was so pregnantly answered to his hand: For did I not in that
very Paragraph demand of him or any Man else to assign any tolerable Reason,
that should restrain the Authority of the Civil Magistrate from meddling with
one, that should not much more restrain it from meddling with both? Did I not
enquire, whether the right practice of Moral Duties were as necessary a piece
of Religion, as any part of outward or instituted Worship in the World? Whether
wrong Notions of the Divine Worship are not as destructive of the peace and
setlement of Commonwealths, as the most vicious and licentious Debaucheries?
Whether the rude Multitude are not more inclined to disturb Government by
Superstition, than by Licentiousness? And whether there is not vastly greater
danger of the Magistrates erring in matters of Morality, than in Forms and
Ceremonies of Worship, in that those are the main, essential, and ultimate
Duties of Religion; whereas these are at highest but their means and
instruments, and can challenge no other place in Religion than as they are
subservient to the purposes of Morality? What then should the reason be, that
God should be so much more tender of things of mere positive Institution, than
of the matters of natural and essential Goodness? That whilst he trusts these
great and indispensable Duties to the Disposal and Discretion of the Civil
Power, in order to the peace and security of the Commonwealth; why should he
not for the same regard commit the management of the less weighty Affairs of
External Worship to the Wisdom and Jurisdiction of the same Authority? To all
which, is it not, think you, a wise and satisfactory Answer to tell us, there
is, or at least there may be a difference between matters of moral and positive
Obligation, without attempting to assign any particular Reason of it in
reference to the Power of the Civil Magistrate? For suppose it granted, that
there is some difference between the Nature of the things themselves, yet what
is that to our purpose, unless it carries in it a special Relation to the
matters in Controversy between us, which is not of the Natures of the things
themselves, but of their Subjection to the Royal Supremacy? So that supposing
the difference of their Natures, the demand of the Argument is, what it is in
the Nature of instituted Worship that should exempt it from the Jurisdiction of
the Civil Magistrate, that is not as much or more discernable in the Nature of
Moral Virtue? And till this be assigned, the Argument stands firm as the
Foundations of the Earth, whatever other difference Metaphysick Wit may be able
to descry between them. But our Author adds in answer to one of the
forementioned Enquiries, Page 232, 3, 4.
viz. Whether there is not more danger of the Magistrates erring or mistakes
about moral Virtue than about Rites of Worship, that there is an especial and
formal difference between them, in that one depends as to their Being and
Discovery on the Light of Nature, which is certain and common to all; the other
on pure Revelation, which may be and is variously apprehended. But,

. 8.1. It Is certain that by what way soever God has revealed his Will to
Mankind, the Revelation is sufficiently clear and evident, so that the Rules of
Instituted Worship are after their Institution no less certain than the Laws of
Nature. It Is the Wisdom and the Glory of a Lawgiver to express his Laws with
as much Fullness and as little Ambiguity as is possible, and therefore it is but
an unmannerly Reflection upon the Divine Wisdom to conceive he has not declared
any of his Commands with all the plainness imaginable; so that all the Laws of
God, by what way soever discovered, are after their discovery equally bright
and evident as to the purposes of Life and Practice, and the Precepts of the
Gospel are as fully declared to the Consciences of men as the Laws of Nature.
And therefore the force and sense of this Answer (if it have any at all)
resolves it self into that Popish Tenet of the darkness and obscurity of the
holy Scriptures: For this forsooth is the only Reason why Duties instituted in
the Gospel should be exempt from the Power of the Civil Magistrate rather than
those of a moral and natural Obligation, because one is perspicuous, and the
other is not: and if this be not his Intention, he talks he knows not what, and
that is not impossible. But grant all this, that the Laws of Revelation are not
so discernable as the Laws of Nature, I understand not where the force of the
Reason lies, that therefore men's Persuasions about them should not be equally
subject to the decisions and determinations of the Civil Power. I should rather
have concluded, and so I am sure any wise Governor, that seeing the Laws of
Nature are so bravely vouched by the common consent and suffrage of Mankind;
and seeing it is impossible men should mistake in them, Page 234.
unless they will do it wilfully, let them (in Gods name) please their fancies
and themselves in a Liberty of Practice and Persuasion concerning them, because
here there is little or no hazard of any dangerous mistake: But seeing, Ibid.
as to what concerns the Worship of God, they are all at variance, and seeing
there is no such evidence in these things, no such common suffrage about them,
as to free any absolutely from failings and mistakes, so that in respect of
them, and not of the other, lies the principal danger of miscarrying. I will be
sure to have a more watchful and vigilant eye to their due order and setlement;
here is danger of Schisms and Dissentions, and men will run into Parties and
differences about uncertain and ambiguous things, and above all things I must
be careful to prevent religious Factions; these, of all others, are
incomparably the most dangerous, and therefore here I will not fail to
interpose the utmost of my care and power, wherever I neglect it, and if any
man will be so bold and foolhardy as to affront my Judgment and Determination
of things so uncertain with his own private and doubtful persuasions, let him
take what follows. And so I have brought our Disputer to my old Advantage, with
which he dares no more venture to close than with a Cornish hug, viz. That it is
but reasonable, and necessary too, for modest and peaceable Subjects to submit
in all Matters, capable of doubt and uncertainty, to the determinations of
their Lawful Superiors: and therefore if this be the case of the Rules of
Instituted Worship, as is pretended, this is so far from abridging the
Jurisdiction of the Civil Power over their disposal, that it is the very Reason
why they should be entirely subject to, and determinable by, the Judgment and
discretion of Supreme Authority.

2. There is as great a variety and uncertainty of Opinion concerning the Laws
of Nature, as there is concerning those of Institution; and about them the
Errors of public Government have always been as many, and much more
pernicious; and there is scarce one Instance of Natures Laws that has not been
some where or other reversed by National Constitutions. Has not our Author read
of Laws (for he is sans doubt a man of Reading, though I dare not vouch for his
Learning and Ingenuity) that reward Thieves and Pirates; that prostitute virgin
Brides to the public Lust; that bind Children to murder their decrepit
Parents; that permit Sons to commit Incest with, nay that enjoin them to marry,
their own Mothers? Numberless are the Stories of the debauched and accursed
Laws, of the horrible and unnatural Customs of the barbarous Nations in the
World. So that however Moral Virtues may be established among Mankind by the
Light of Nature: Yet, alas! that is infinitely too weak and dim to preserve men
from the numberless mistakes of Error and Ignorance. And it is not a little
strange to me that our Author, when he has so strong an Opinion of the woeful
decay and utter dissolution of all that was good in humane Nature by the fall
of Adam, should yet apprehend the Dictates of so debauched and corrupted a
Principle to make a clearer discovery of the duty of Mankind than the express
Revelation of God himself; especially when this was chiefly intended to supply
and repair the defects of the Light of Nature. For in the last and real Issue
of things, the best discovery and the strongest Obligation of all Natures Laws
will be found to depend on their positive Institution: The Gospel is the only
perfect and accurate Systeme of the Laws of Nature, it has not omitted any the
least part of our Duty, and what it has not enjoined, is no part either of the
Law of Revelation, or of the Law of Nature. And in truth were it not for the
collected Body of the Laws of Christianity, at what a woeful loss should we be
for an exact Catalogue of the Laws of Nature? And it would be an infinitely
vain attempt to find out their set and certain Number; for alas that must vary,
according to the unconceivable difference of men's Capacities and Apprehensions:
Persons of greater sagacity and more improved Reasons would be able to perceive
many moral Notices of things, that would never have occurred to the Thoughts of
ruder and more illiterate People; and therefore our safest as well as our
shortest way to discover their Nature and Obligation, is without any more ado
to search the Records of all Gods Revelations to Mankind, upon which their
greatest certainty, and by consequence their chiefest Obligation depends. So
little does this this man consider what he talks, when he ascribes so much
evidence to the Rules of moral Goodness beyond the duty of Institution, when
Institution is incomparably their greatest and most pregnant Evidence. Nay,
what is worse than all the rest, after all this Noise of instituted Worship,
nothing will ever be found concerned in it save only the two Sacraments; they
are the only matters of outward Worship prescribed in the Gospel; and thus has
he run himself into his old Praemunire, and so is brought under an Obligation to
assign any other particular Rituals and Ceremonies of External Religion
enjoined and determined in the Word of God: a thing of which they much and
often talk, but never offer to prove or specify.

And the truth is, here lies the main mystery of all their Impertinencies in
Disputes of this nature, that they are resolved to find some things in the Holy
Scriptures, which it is impossible for the wit of Man to discover there; and
hence all this Clamor concerning the particular Rules of instituted Worship in
the Word of God: though when they come to consult it, there is nothing more
determined than barely the two Sacraments. But this will not serve their turn,
they must and will have a Ius Divinum for their own singular fancies and
fashions; and therefore away they fling, and about they beat, and no passage of
Holy Writ shall be left unransackt for Proofs and Texts to their purpose. And
to this end they find out some Words and Expressions that may possibly seem to
carry some resemblance to their Prejudices and ungrounded Conceits; and then by
what violent and strein'd Analogies will they force them to countenance their
Dreams? and by what odd and impertinent methods will they pack and huddle
Scriptures together, till they seem to chime to the tune of their own foolish
Imaginations? And you would bless your self to consider what spiritual ways of
arguing they have of late invented in Opposition to common Sense and natural
Reason, to justify their own fantastic and unwarrantable Hypotheses of
things; but more especially to abet this wild and unaccountable Principle, That
the Word of God is the only adequate Rule of instituted Worship, which they
lay down in their Positive Divinity, (at which they are incomparably the
greatest Doctors in the World) as the only unquestionable Postulatum of all
their Discourses; yet when they are urged to make it out by Rational Arguments,
and particular Instances, they talk it, and talk it, but as for proof and
evidence, they never could, nor ever will be brought to produce any other
beside the Proleptick certainty of the Maxim it self: and therefore I will for
ever bar their general Pleas and Pretenses drawn from this Principle, That the
New Testament is the adequate Rule of Instituted Worship to the Church of
Christ, unless in case of the two Sacraments (though, as to them too, all the
outward Circumstances and Postures of Celebration are wholly undetermined in
the Scripture) till they shall specify some particular Instances there
directed and prescribed under a standing Obligation; however it is not to be
attended to in our present Controversy, when it is (as I have proved) as
certain and complete a Rule of moral Virtue, as they can suppose it to be of
Instituted Worship: and therefore that cannot be any ground of Exception, that
whilst the former is subject to, the latter should be exempt from, the disposal
of the Civil Jurisdiction. So lamentably absurd are the main and darling
Principles of these men, that it is not in the Power of Logic or Sophistry to
do them any kindness; and the more they stir in their Defense, the more they
expose their Folly.

. 9. And now having so woefully hurt and prejudiced his own Cause by this rash
and indiscreet Attempt upon my Inference, in the next place he rushes with a
fierce and angry Dilemma upon my Assertion, viz. That the Magistrate has Power
over the Consciences of men in reference to moral Duties, which are the
principal Parts of Religion. Page 235. 6, 7, 8, 9.
This Power (says he) is either over moral Virtue as Virtue, and as a part of
Religion, or on some other Account, as it relates to humane Society. The former
he gores through and through, and that horn of the Dilemma is above two Pages
long, and here he has exactly observed the Rules and Customs of Scholastic
Dispute, that is always prodigal of Confutation where there is no need, and
niggardly where there is. For when he proceeds to the latter (which he knows is
the only thing I all along asserted) he freely grants all I can desire or
demand; Page 239.
For moral Virtues, notwithstanding their peculiar Tendency unto God and
Religion, are appointed to be Instruments and Ligaments of humane Society also;
now the Power of the Magistrate, in respect of Moral Virtues, is in their
latter use. Very good! And the Case is absolutely the same as to all reasons
and circumstances of things in matters of Religion; for though they, as well as
moral Virtue, chiefly relate to our future Concerns, yet have they also a
powerful Influence upon our present welfare, and if rightly managed, are the
best and most effectual Instruments of public Happiness; and there lies the
very strength and sinew of my Argument, that if Magistrates are vested with so
much Power over moral Virtues; that are the most weighty and essential Parts of
Religion, as they shall judge it needful to the Peace of Societies, and the
security of Government, how much more reasonable is it, that they should be
entrusted with the same Power over matters of external Worship, that are but
its subordinate Instruments, and outward Circumstances, whenever they are
serviceable to the same ends and purposes? And if there be any advantage and
disparity of Reason, it is apparently on this side; for it were an easy Task to
prove, that moral Virtue is much more necessary to procure the divine
Acceptance, and Religion much more likely to create public Disturbance; but
that is not the subject matter of our present Enquiry; it is enough that both
have in some measure a Relation to these different Ends, and therefore that
both must, in some measure, be subject to these different Powers. You see how
shamefully this man is repulsed by his own Attempts, and that there is nothing
needful to beat back his Answers, but the Arguments themselves against which
they are directed. And now having spent his main strength in this succesless
shock, it is piteous to observe how he faints in his following Assays. He
inquires whether this Power of the Civil Magistrate over moral Virtue be such
as to make that Virtue which was not Virtue before, Page 239.
or which was Vice. It Is of the same extent with his Authority over Affairs of
Religion, as I have already stated it. But however to this Impertinent Enquiry
he need not have sought far for a pertinent Answer, it lay before his eyes when
he objected it (if he did not write blindfold) viz. Eccles. Pol.
That in matters both of moral Virtue and divine Worship, there are some Rules
of Good and Evil, that are of an eternal and unchangeable Obligation, and these
can be never prejudiced or altered by any humane Power: But then there are
other Rules that are alterable according to the various Accidents, Changes, and
Conditions of humane life; and in things of this Nature I asserted that the
Magistrate has Power to make that a Particular of the divine Law, which God has
not made so. Page 240.
In answer to which, he wishes I had declared my self how and wherein. So I
have, viz. in all the peculiar and positive Laws of Nations, and gave him
Instances, in no less matters than of Murder, Theft, and Incest, and produced
several particular Cases, in which the Civil Power superinduced new obligations
upon the Divine Law. Which it is in vain to repeat to one that winks against the
Light, you know where to find them if you think it needful: But is not this a
bold man to challenge me with such a scornful Assurance to do, what he could
not but see I had already performed? Some men are confident enough to put out
the day in spite of the Sun. He adds; The divine Law is divine, Ibid.
and so is every particular of it, and therefore it is impossible for a man to
make new Particulars, and yet in the same Breath grants my Assertion as an
ordinary and familiar truth, if I only intend by making a thing a Particular of
the divine Law no more than to make the divine Law require that in particular
of a man, which it did not require of him before. Though that man must have a
wild understanding, that can mean any thing more or less. There is a vast
difference (is there not?) between making a new Particular of the Divine Law;
and making the Divine Law require that in particular which it did not require
before. But (says he) these new particulars refer only to the acting and
occasion of these things in particular. Ibid.
It Is no matter for that; whatever they refer to, they are new Acts, and
distinct Duties or Crimes of their respective species of virtue or vice. Thus
though to slay a deprehended Adulteress (which is murder in England, though it
be Justice in Spain) relates to the manner of Execution, yet it is a new and
distinct Instance of that Sin, made by a Civil Constitution, and not determined
by the divine Law. But then here is no more ascribed to the Magistrate than is
common with him to every man in the World. Ibid.
So much the firmer my Argument; For it is not reasonable to deny so much Power
to public Authority, as every private man may claim and exercise; nor just to
forbid Magistrates to command that to their Subjects, which their Subjects may
lawfully command to themselves. But after all this trifling, he leaps to a
fresh Enquiry (for he is old excellent at asking Questions, when he should be
making Answers) viz. if Magistrates are empowered to declare new Instances of
Virtue and Vice, he demands, Whether they are new as Virtues and Vices, or as
Instances. Page 241.
This is a captious Question, and though I suspect some subtle plot, yet I have
not sagacity enough to find out either its design, or its Sophistry, and
therefore I shall only answer like a plain and cautious man, that they are new
neither as Instances, nor as Virtues and Vices, but as Instances of Virtue and
Vice; and then what becomes of this Metaphysical Dilemma? But however it
follows, if they are new as Virtues, Ibid.
would he could see a new Practice of old Virtues; but alas! this neither
proves, nor confutes, and yet because it is said it must be answered, therefore
I will only demand of him, what are the old Virtues he intends, whether those
that were in fashion in the days of King Arthur, or those that were so in the
days of King Oliver? But to tell you the truth, he cares not for any of the new
Virtues that he has lately observed in the World, Likely enough, Ibid.
for Loyalty is one of the chiefest, but they were fine days when Rebellion and
Sacrilege were signs of Grace, and men could keep up a dear and intimate
Communion with God in ways of plunder and perjury; ah! those were precious and
Gospel Times. You see I must either trifle with this man, or altogether hold my
Peace, his Objections are not capable of solid Answers. But he concludes, If it
be the Instances that are new, they are but actual and occasional exercises of
old Duties. This is trifling too, and neither objects nor proves, however it is
already answered, and though I have been so idly employed, as to follow him in
his Trifles, yet I will not in his Tautologies.

CHAP. V.
The Contents.
Our Authors wretched perverting and falsifying even the Contents of the
Chapter. Another notorious Forgery, that I have confined the Power of
Conscience purely to inward Thoughts. Christian Liberty proved to be a Branch
of the Natural Freedom of our Minds. The Discourses of the Apostles concerning
Christian Liberty, are only Disputes against the Eternal Obligation of the Law
of Moses. So that nothing can restrain it but Gods own immediate and explicit
Commands. This proved from the Practice and Precepts of St. Paul. Our
Adversaries are the most guilty of any Men in the World of intrenching upon our
Christian Liberty. It is as much infringed by the Common Law, as by
Ecclesiastical Canons. Their Notion of Christian Liberty cannot but be a
perpetual Nursery of Schisms and Divisions. This mystery of Libertinism began
first to work among the Gnostics, and was checked by the Apostles. A ridiculous
Calumny, that from my Notion of Christian Liberty, charges me of asserting the
indifferency of all Religions. A farther account of the Original of Sacrifices:
they that derive them from the Law of Nature, rely purely upon the testimony
of some ancient Grecians. The ground of their mistake, who refer them to Divine
Institution, is their not attending to the difference between Eucharistical
Oblations, and Expiatory Sacrifices. An account how the Religion of Sacrifices
might acquire a Catholic Practice, without any Obligation of Nature, or
Warranty of Divine Institution. How Abel's Sacrifice might be offered in Faith,
without any revealed Command to require it. A shameful instance of our Authors
way of begging the Question. And another of his Tergiversation. A farther
account of the prodigious Impertinency of their Clamours against significant
Ceremonies. The blockishness of their excepting against them upon the score of
their being Sacraments. The impossibility of making this good out of Scripture,
and the folly of attempting its proof any other way. The vanity of
distinguishing between Customary and Instituted Symbols. Our Authors ridiculous
state and determination of this Debate. The Impertinency of that difference he
endeavors to assign between the signification of Words and Ceremonies.

. 1. NOw our Authors Invention begins to grow dry, and his Fancy to run low, he
is forced to fly to his old Magazines for Arms and Ammunition, and to muster
up his former Cavils for fresh Arguments, and his former Calumnies for fresh
Objections, and to stuff up his following Pages with mere Tautologies and
Repetitions of his former shifts and juglings: He cannot forbear to argue from
his own Topics, and in his own Method, but still he pretends, first, to be at
a loss for my meaning, and then he perverts it, and then he confutes it. And
it is observable how careful he is always to usher in his Falsifications with
complaints of my Obscurity; that so if he should fail to justify them, he may
at least be able to excuse them; and when he is beaten out of his Cause, he may
under this reserve secure his Honor, and discharge the perverseness and
disingenuity of his own labored Mistakes, upon the perplexity of my Style, and
the looseness of my Expressions.

The first thing he takes to task and to correction, is the Contents of the
Chapter, (for he has now done with confuting my Title Page) where I represented
the scope and short design of my first Paragraph in these words: Mankind have a
Liberty of Conscience over all their Actions, whether moral or strictly
religious, as far as it concerns their Judgments, but not their Practices. And
here I could have been content, had he dealt no worse with me than they are
wont to deal with the Holy Scriptures; when they interpret the Chapter by the
English Contents, and so expound the sense of the Word of God, as if that were
only the Gloss, but these the Canon. Otherwise I am sure I. O. could never
have made good his deep Conceit of the Saints distinct Communion with each
Person of the blessed Trinity, out of the Parable of the Canticles. But this
Author has (as well he may) made more bold with me, and has mangled my single
Assertion into two distinct Propositions, viz. That Mankind has a Liberty of
Conscience over all their Actions, Page 249.
whether moral or strictly religious. And this he closes up with a full Period,
as if it were an entire Problem of it self: and when he has thus ridiculously
distorted the sense of the words, by separating them from the other half of the
Proposition, he gravely scorns and confutes them; and certainly it is no
difficult task to baffle so wild an Assertion. And then he adds (and does not
blush neither) the remaining words, [ As far as it concerns their Judgments,
but not their Practices,] as a distinct Caution to set bounds and limits to the
former Concession, though they are part of the same Proposition, setting
restraints and confinements upon it self; and then after all these little
slights of perverting, he laughs (as becomes him) at the absurdity of the
limitation: That is (says he) they have Liberty of Conscience over their
Actions, Ibid.
but not their Practices; or over their Practices, but not over their
Practices: for upon trial their Actions and Practices will prove to be the
same. Profoundly intricate! And yet had these things been expressed as he
absurdly represents them, they might for all that have been honest and
Grammatical sense: for Action, you know, is a general word, and comprehensive
of all our inward and our outward Acts; whereas Practice is a term of a more
limited signification, and peculiar only to external Actions; and therefore
may very well restrain the more universal import of the former word. But take
the words as they lie couch't together within the same Period, and then the
Cavil is so strangely nice and subtle, that it is unintelligible to Metaphysick
wit; for so to oppose Practices to the Actions of the Mind or Judgment, is no
more than to oppose them to our Thoughts and Opinions; which, you know, is
infinitely warranted both by the propriety and the vulgar use of the word. But
this Man is so unreasonably curious, that though I should write Indentures, and
heap together an hundred different words to express the same thing, I see it
would be impossible to escape his Cavils, and little Exceptions.

Sir, I am afraid you will scarce believe (to spare more intemperate Language)
that any Man should be so wretchedly foolish and disingenuous to so little
purpose; and some Stories are so prodigious, that a modest Man has not
confidence enough to vouch their truth, though he is able to swear it; and
therefore I beseech you not to trust the Credibility of this Report upon my
bare Information, but be pleased to consult Page 249, 250. of his Book, and
there you may satisfy your self of this Man's Wit and Integrity by ocular
Inspection; and it is an equal Argument of both, when a Man shall confute Books
by such trifling and manifest Abuses.

Having thus routed my Contents, in the next place he rallies up an old Cavil
against the Paragraph it self, and complains that I sometimes call Conscience
the Mind, sometimes the Understanding, Page 251.
sometimes Opinion, sometimes Liberty of Thinking, and sometimes an Imperious
Faculty. But this I have already answered, and so faint an Objection is not
worth a double Confutation. From hence he drops into a ridiculous dispute about
Free Will, and this you cannot but imagine to be of a close concernment to that
Liberty of which we discourse, viz. an Exemption from the Commands and
Determinations of the Civil Power; so that this thick impertinency is as bad as
his abuse of my Contents; and yet the next passage is worse than both, viz.
Page 252.
That the thing by me here asserted, is, that a Man may think, judge, or
conceive such or such a thing to be his Duty, and yet have thereby no
Obligation put upon him to perform it: for Conscience we are informed has
nothing to do beyond the inward Thoughts of Men's Minds. But who gives in this
Information? The Informer (whoever he is) would in some Courts of Justice have
jeoparded something that he would be loath to lose, for so lewd and bold a
Forgery. Phy! phy! for shame give over this pitiful Legerdemain; such open and
visible Falsifications serve only to expose the lewdness of his Cause and his
Conscience; and if he delight in such wretched Practices, they will in process
of time betray him to more pernicious courses: for what should hinder a Man
that can pervert and falsify at this rate, from forging Wills, and setting
counterfeit hands to Deeds? Neither fear nor modesty can ever restrain him,
that dares venture upon abuses so palpable, that it was absolutely impossible
he should hope to escape the shame and rebuke of discovery. The Assertion it
self is one of the chiefest and most fundamental Maxims of Knavery; and yet
it is boldly charged upon me without the least shadow or syllable of pretense,
either to justify his Accusation, or to excuse his Mistake. All that I
attempted in that Paragraph, was to exempt all the inward Acts of the Minds of
Men from the Jurisdiction of Humane Power, and so to confine their Government
to the Empire of mere Conscience: Now from this Assertion that our secret
Thoughts are subject to Conscience only, to infer that Conscience has no Power
but only over our secret Thoughts, is a Conclusion too ridiculous for our
Author to make either in good earnest, or through mere mistake. In the mean
time, what an unhappy Man am I, that when I would study to entertain my Reader
with useful and edifying Discourse, I can meet with nothing to encounter in
this Author but Falsehood and Forgery. But having set up this Calumny as the
mark of his displeasure, he confutes it thorough and thorough with big Words
and ugly Inferences: but whether he takes his aim aright or no, it concerns not
me to enquire; when the Premises are proved to be mine, then, and not till
then, I will take care to avoid the Conclusions. So that in the mean time we
may proceed.

Having therefore confined the entire Government and Jurisdiction of our
Thoughts to the territory of Conscience, I added that yet notwithstanding, as
for all matters that come forth into outward Actions, and appear in the
Societies of Men, there is no remedy but they must be subject to the Cognizance
of Humane Laws, and come within the Verge of Humane Power; because by these,
Societies subsist, and Humane Affairs are transacted. To this he replies with
his wonted modesty, Page 254.
That I ought to have proved, that notwithstanding the Judgment of Conscience
concerning any Duty, by the interposition of the Authority of the Magistrate to
the contrary, there is no Obligation ensues for the performance of that Duty.
But, Good Sir, have you any Patent for the Monopoly of making Conclusions, that
you can force your Neighbors to accept what Ware you please? If you have not,
I know no other Obligation I lie under to assert so wild and so wicked a
Paradox, unless perhaps mere Civility may engage me to say something, that you
may be able to confute. Otherwise I know nothing that I stand bound to prove in
this place, but what the Man himself is zealous enough to acknowledge, viz.
That all outward Actions are obnoxious to the Civil Power, as far as they
concern the ends and interests of Public Tranquillity: though how far that may
reach, as it was here asserted, so it was in the following Chapters more
largely proved and stated. However, it is apparent from the manifest scope, and
the last issue of my whole Discourse, that I stand not obliged to ascribe any
more absolute Power to the Civil Magistrate, than what is necessary to warrant
that Authority they exercise in prescribing those Rites and Ceremonies of
Worship, that are enjoined and practiced in the Church of England; that is all
I contend for at present, and will, as for what concerns this Dispute, be
content to lop off any other Branches of their Jurisdiction, that relate not to
this Enquiry. And if this cannot be justified, unless it be granted that the
Commands of Sovereign Power must always overruled all Obligations of
Conscience; then, I confess, I must submit to this disadvantage that this Man
would impose upon me: but if it can, it is no part either of my Duty or my
Interest to assert any thing that is neither true in it self, or pertinent to
my purpose. But whether it can or cannot, I have already sufficiently accounted
for both in that Treatise, and in this Rejoinder. For what our Author would
here charge upon me as my Duty, is no more than what he has heretofore charged
upon me as my Doctrine, viz. Page 97.
That the Magistrate has Power to bind the Consciences of his Subjects to
observe what is by him appointed to be professed and observed in Religion, (and
nothing else are they to observe) making it their Duty in Conscience so to do;
and the highest crime or sin to do any thing to the contrary; and whatever the
precise truth in these matters be, or whatever be the apprehensions of their
own Consciences concerning them. The falsehood of which horrid Calumny I have
there baffled with so much evidence, and reproved with so much severity, that
after that, it were an affront to the Readers Understanding to warn him against
every Repetition of so foul and groundless a slander, though it is the Burden
of every Page.

. 2. In the next Paragraph I proceeded to account for the nature and extent of
Christian Liberty; where I both founded our Right to it upon this natural and
inward Freedom of our Minds, and also proved it to be sometimes coincident with
it. But says our Nicodemus, (for he is very thick of Understanding when he
pleases) How can these things be? Page 259.
When Christian Liberty, as I have stated it, is a privilege, whereas Liberty
of Conscience is common unto all Mankind. This Liberty is necessary unto Humane
Nature, and cannot be divested of it, and so it is not a privilege that
includes a specialty in it. To this I answer, That Natural Liberty is a freedom
of the Mind and Judgment from all Humane Laws in general, and Christian Liberty
is the same freedom from the Mosaic Law in particular; which because it was
bound upon the Jews by virtue of a Divine Authority, it was a restraint not
only upon their Practices, but upon their Minds and Consciences; and
prescribed to their inward Thoughts and Opinions, as well as their outward
Actions: they had no Liberty to judge of their Goodness, but were bound to
submit their Understandings to the Wisdom of God. And this is the main
difference between the Obligation of Divine and Humane Laws, that these reach
only to our Wills, and those affect our Judgments, and determine our
Apprehensions to whatsoever they command our Obedience; and we are bound to
acquiesce in the Counsels of God, though we understand not their Reasons; and
therefore whatever Law comes with the impress of Divine Authority, it bears
down all before it, and supersedes all the weak Disputes and Reasonings of our
little Understandings; and as long as we are assured it proceeds from God, that
alone, without any farther enquiry, gives our Minds infinite satisfaction of
its Wisdom and Goodness. So that during the whole Period of the Mosaic
Institution, all freedom of Judgment in reference to the particular Commands of
his Law, was retrenched by the Authority of God; but when their Obligation was
repealed, and the impress of his Authority was taken off, then did the things
themselves return of their own accord to the indifferency of their own Natures,
and so were restored to the Judgment of the Minds of Men; and therefore though
Christian Liberty be a Privilege with a specialty, yet it is a Branch of that
Liberty that is natural to Mankind, in that it is nothing but a Restoration of
the Mind of Man from the restraints of the Law of Moses, to its native freedom;
which though it cannot be divested by any Humane Power, yet it may, then was,
and always is abridged by Divine Commands, in that they pass an equal
Obligation upon the Judgments and the Practices of Men: upon which account
alone all matters of the Law of God are absolutely exempt both from our Natural
and our Christian Liberty; but when he is pleased to reverse his own
Obligation, and to leave things to their Original indifferency, that is a
restitution to our natural Liberty, and that is our Christian Liberty.

But for a more full and exact Account of the nature and true signification of
this Pretense, it is necessary to examine how it is stated in the Word of God;
and as it is there discoursed of, it is certain it relates merely to those
Privileges that are granted or restored to the minds of men by the Repeal and
Abrogation of the Law of Moses: The whole Case whereof is plainly this. This
Law was established in the Jewish Commonwealth by Divine Authority; and was
the only Covenant and Revelation of God to mankind, that was at first consigned
with mighty Miracles, and ratified to after-Ages with their great Sacrament of
Circumcision, upon which Accounts the Jews concluded it to be of an Eternal and
Immutable Obligation. But God sends his Son into the World to take down this
whole frame and fabric of the Mosaic Religion, and in its stead to set up a
better and more manly Institution of things, to repeal the Laws and Obligations
of the old Covenant, and to govern his Church by new measures of Duty and new
Conditions of Obedience. And this is properly the Privilege of Christian
Liberty, and it comprehends all the peculiar Advantages and Exemptions granted
to mankind by virtue of the Christian Institution. It is a deliverance from the
Dominion of Sin, from the Curse of the Law, from the severity of a Covenant of
Works, and from the Yoke of Ceremonial observances. These are the matters of
our Christian Liberty, and those Doctrines that tend to bring us under any of
these old Fetters and hard services are attempts of Jewish Bondage. And this
was the plain state of the Question in the Apostolical Age, and the whole
dispute of Christian Liberty was only a Controversy between the Jews and the
Christians concerning the Repeal or the Perpetuity of Moses Law. And all the
Discourses we meet with in the Writings of the Apostles upon this subject
relate purely to the abrogation of the Mosaic Institution. And all their
Exhortations to the Primitive Christians to stand stiffly upon their
Privileges, were to persuade them not to suffer themselves to be abused into a
slavish opinion of the Eternity and unalterable Obligation of the Law of Moses,
but to rest assured that the Gospel had rescinded all the positive and
ceremonial Commands of the Jews, that the things themselves were returned to
their native Indifferency, and by consequence that they were at liberty from
their observance, any former Law or Precept to the contrary notwithstanding.
Well then, the precise Notion of Christian Liberty consists in the rescue of
the Consciences of men from the divine Imposition of the Yoke of Moses, and
therefore it is not to be pretended against any Restraints whatsoever, that do
not challenge an absolute and indispensable obligation over the Consciences of
men by virtue of a divine Authority. So that Subjects are not to be permitted
to put in this Pretense in bar of any Impositions of our lawful Superiors,
because it relates purely to our immediate duty and intercourse with God, and
is not in the least concerned in our Engagements and Relations to men. And upon
this Account is it that St. Paul so smartly encourages the Galatians to stand
fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made them free, and not to be
entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage, because if they are circumcised
Christ shall profit them nothing, in that they are Debtors to keep the whole
Law. For if the Seal of Circumcision be still in force, then is not the Law
disannulled, of which this is the Sacrament and the Sanction, but if the Law be
not disannulled, then are you still under an obligation to the same Obedience
as was required by the Conditions of the old Covenant, and so by consequence
forfeit all the Favors and Benefits of the new. But setting aside the
necessity of Circumcision by virtue of a divine Command, then its use was no
Intrenchment upon Christian Liberty; and therefore though this blessed Apostle
declaimed with so much zeal and vehemence against its use and continuance out
of respect to the obligatory Power of the Law of Moses, yet upon other Grounds,
and for different Purposes, he was content to condescend to its practice and
observation, as is notorious in the Circumcision of Timothy. So that (you see)
it is apparent his Christian Liberty consisted not in an indispensable
forbearance of Circumcision (for so to have used it in any Case had been a
manifest Forfeiture of his Privilege and violation of his Duty) but only in
not doing it with an opinion of its Necessity by reason of the perpetual
obligation of the Law of Moses. This is the plain and the only Account of
Christian Liberty in the holy Scriptures, and therefore these men do but prate
their own obstinate presumptions, whilst they persist in this vulgar Clamor,
till they can either prove that we pretend to any divine Authority for our
Ecclesiastical Institutions, or that Christian Liberty is of any concernment in
any Cases that pretend not to divine Authority. These things if they will
undertake to make good, they may talk to our Purpose, but otherwise they will
but talk to their own, and that is to none at all.

. 3. And this discovers the Impertinency of our Authors next demand, what I
mean by the Restoration of the mind to its natural Privilege: Page 261.
If the Privilege of the mind in its condition of natural Purity, it is false:
if any privilege of the mind in its corrupt Condition, it is no less untrue.
Why so? Because in things of this Nature the mind is in Bondage, and not
capable of Liberty. I cannot divine what things he here intends, nor of what
Concernment the Purity and Corruption of humane Nature is to this enquiry, the
only Liberty I treated of was an exemption from the Obligatory Power of the
Ceremonial Institutions of Moses, so that the Restoration of the mind to its
natural Privilege can signify nothing else than its being rescued from the
Yoke and Bondage of positive and arbitrary Laws, to be governed by the Laws and
Dictates of its own Nature. And what Relation this has to our natural Purity or
Corruption is past my skill to understand. And so is the Reason he subjoyns to
confirm his Assertion no better than a grave and profound Piece of Nonsense.
For it is a thing ridiculous to confound the mere natural Liberty of our wills,
Ibid.
which is an Affection inseparable from that Faculty with a moral or spiritual
Liberty of mind relating unto God and his Worship. It is so, but what in the
name of Sphinx is this to our Enquiry, what has Liberty from the Law of Moses
to do with Liberty of will? it is perfect Riddle to me where either the force or
the sense of the Argument lies: But free will is an old word of Contention, and
the bare mention of it is enough to amuse his unlearned Readers, and to make
them suspect some depth of Learning or Reason, that their shallow Capacities
are not able to fathom. And if the Argument have any subtilty, there it lies.

But his bravest and most serviceable Artifice is still behind, when an
Argument is neither to be withstood nor avoided, he can slur its force and
evidence by perverting it, and entertain his Reader by imposing a false sense
upon it, when he is not able to confute the true one. Thus he tells us, That
this whole Paragraph runs upon no small mistake, namely, Page 262.
that the Yoke of Mosaical Institutions consisted in their Imposition on the
minds and judgments of men, with an Opinion of the Antecedent Necessity of
them. This indeed is somewhat strange Divinity, and not altogether incapable of
Confutation, especially as to my particular Case, it being such a square
Contradiction to that account I have given of the matters of the Ceremonial
Law, viz. That they were things indifferent in their own Natures; that the
Necessity of their Use and Exercise was superinduced upon them purely by virtue
of a divine positive Command; that this being rescinded, their Necessity
immediately ceased, and they return to the state of their original
Indifferency, to be governed as Circumstances should require and prudence
direct; so that it is evident I have denied the matters of the Ceremonial Law
to have been at all necessary to be observed from their own Intrinsic Nature
antecedent to their positive Institution, and therefore if any where else I
have affirmed it, I have no way to avoid the charge of speaking Daggers and
Contradictions. But (says he) that this is my sense intended is evident from
the Conclusion of this Paragraph, Ibid.
viz. that whatever, and in what matters soever our Superiors impose upon us,
it is no intrenchment upon our Christian Liberty, provided it be not imposed
with an opinion of the antecedent Necessity of the thing it self. Now from
hence how natural is it to conclude, that the Yoke of the Mosaical Institutions
consisted in their Imposition on the minds of men, with an Opinion of their
necessity antecedent to that Imposition! when Heaven and Earth stand not at a
wider distance than these Propositions: No Train of Consequences, nothing but
Jacobs Ladder (unless our Author be able to fly) can ever convey him from one
to the other. And if he shall undertake to make good the Logic of his
Conclusion, I will cross my self at his Confidence; but if he shall perform it,
I will fall down and worship: for to me it would be Prodigy and Miracle, and
that man need not, in my opinion, despair of removing Mountains, who thinks he
can prove that, because humane Authority cannot impair the Liberty of our
minds, but by pretense of an antecedent Obligation to its Commands; that
therefore when God himself abridges it, he must do it by virtue of some
authoritative obligation antecedent to his own Impositions, when his authority
is the first Fountain and original Reason of all Obligations, and therefore
it is an infinite contradiction to the nature of things to talk of any Authority
antecedent or superior to the divine Law. And this is the evident Reason of my
Conclusion, that the Nature of our internal Liberty relates to the power of God
over the minds of men, and so is in its self incapable of being restrained or
imposed upon by any other Jurisdiction; and therefore whatever restraints our
Superiors may lay upon our Practices, provided they do not bind us with an
Opinion of some necessity stamp't upon the things themselves antecedent to
their Commands, that is no abatement to the inward Liberty of our minds, which
nothing can abridge but the Authority of God himself; and therefore unless they
pretend an antecedent and authoritative Obligation tied upon the Consciences of
men by his own immediate and explicit Command, whatever they may bind upon
them by virtue of their own Authority, though it may be blameable upon other
accounts, yet it cannot be charged of offering violence to the Rights of
Christian Liberty. So that though their Laws cannot of themselves restrain it,
unless by pretense of an antecedent Necessity imprinted upon the things
themselves by virtue of a Divine Command; yet the Laws of God may, because they
are the formal Reason of their restraint, and the ground of their necessity.
But he adds, Page 264.
That when St. Peter disputes against the Mosaic Rites, and calls them a Yoke
which neither they nor their Fathers-were able to bear; and St. Paul charge
Believers to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made them free;
they respect only Men's practice, with regard unto an Authoritative Obligation
thereunto, which they pleaded to be now expired and removed. Whereby however he
intends to shuffle with his vulgar Reader, he apparently grants all that is
desired or demanded, viz. That all the Apostolical Discourses upon this
subject, respect not the bare practice of these things, but their practice upon
the account of the Authoritative Obligation of the Law of Moses, (for nothing
less was pretended by the Jews) so that the only thing that made them
prejudicial to the Claims of Christian Liberty, was an Opinion of their
necessity by virtue of that antecedent Obligation; which being repealed, their
practice, upon other grounds and reasons, was not thought to infringe or check
with the Rights and Privileges of the Gospel. And for this we have the
unquestionable warrant of their own Examples, when they not only submitted to
Restraints in the Exercise of their own Liberty, but prescribed it in some
Cases and Circumstances as a Duty to other Christians, 1 Cor. 8.^*
that they would take heed lest their Liberty should become a stumbling- block
to them that are weak. Though they were entirely free from any Obligation tied
upon them by virtue of the Law of Moses, yet did St. Paul se^ fresh restraints
upon them by virtue of his Apostolical Authority. And now were it not strange
that Men should be bound to yield more to the humor of a peevish Jew, than to
the Commands of a Christian Magistrate? For the first ground and reason of his
imposing their Obligation, was then nothing but mere prudence and condescension
to their folly: but in our case, it is matter of Duty and Obedience. For in the
days of the Apostles, nothing less was pleaded by the Jewish Christians for the
necessity of their Ceremonies, than the unchangeable Obligation of the Law of
Moses; and yet for the sake of peace, they would submit so far to their strong
Prejudices, as outwardly to comply with their weak demands, though it were with
some hazard of forfeiting their Christian Liberty: for it was not impossible
but that their compliance might have confirmed the Jews in their obstinacy, and
have drawn in the Gentiles to an imitation of their example, and so have begun
a Prescription for the necessary observance of the Law of Moses to all Ages of
the Church of Christ. Whereas in our case the danger of that pretense is as
much abolish't as Circumcision it self; it being a granted and established
truth among all the dissenting Parties of Christendom, (unless we may except
the Judaising Sabbatarians, who do somewhat more than squint toward Moses) that
the Ceremonial Law is for ever rescinded to all intents and purposes; and no
Magistrate pretends a Power of imposing things indifferent by virtue of a
Divine and perpetual Obligation, but only by force of a transient and
temporary Institution of Humane Authority for the ends of Discipline, the
Uniformity of Worship, and the security of Government.

. 4. And therefore our Authors next Inference is either a woeful impertinence to
our present Enquiry, or a bold Affront and Calumny to the public Declarations
of our Church, when he concludes, Page 264*
That if Christian Liberty be of force enough to free us from the necessary
practice of indifferent things instituted by God, it is at least of equal
efficacy to exempt us from the necessary practice of things imposed on us in
the Worship of God by Men. This implies as if the Church of England imposed the
same necessity upon its own Determinations, as upon the positive Laws of God,
notwithstanding it so industriously disclaims all Divine Impositions, either
for Legal or Evangelical Ceremonies; and so expressly declares all its own
Institutions to bind only with an humane, temporary, and changeable
Obligation. Whereas they (for so it still happens, that their dearest Pretenses
are always the strongest and most unhappy Objections against themselves) would
needs obtrude upon us their own Fancies and singular Conceits, as our Saviors
own Commands and Institutions; and call their separation from the Church of
England, their departure from Antichristian Idolatries and Whoredoms, to the
chastity of Worship, and the purity of Gospel Ordinances. And (as we are
informed by I. O.) they who hold Communion with Christ, Book of Communion, p.
171.
are careful to admit and practice nothing in the Worship of God, unless it
comes in his Name, and with Thus says the Lord Jesus -- You know how many in
this Nation in the days not long since passed, yea, how many thousands left
their Native Soils, and went into a vast and howling Wilderness, (because they
made it so) in the utmost parts of the World, to keep their Souls undefiled and
chaste to their dear Lord Jesus, as to this of his Worship and Institutions. So
that they scorn to pretend any less Authority than our Saviors own express
Warrant for any thing wherein they differ and divide from the Church of
England. And this is a ruder and more insolent Affront to our Christian
Liberty, than the most confident Jew could ever have been guilty of: for though
he might endeavor to enslave us to his own Customs and Prejudices, yet they
are such as once bore the impression of Divine Authority; whereas these Men
would stamp the Authority of God upon their own Dreams and fantastic
Conceits, and vouch their humor and their ignorance with a Thus says the Lord
Jesus; and so would bore the Ears and enslave the Understandings of all
Christendom to their own folly and confidence. And certainly there never were
greater Tyrants and Usurpers in the Church of Christ than these exact and
curious Judges of Divine Rights: with what Confidence will they prescribe Truth
to Mankind, and adopt their own uncertain Problems and Scholastic Fooleries
into the Fundamentals of Religion? With what Assurance of Authority will they
restrain all Men's Faith to the Standard of their own Apprehensions? How briskly
will they warrant this Opinion, and explode that? And how dogmatically will
they assign the precise bounds of Orthodoxy? All their Sentiments are the
Decrees of the Medes and Persians; all their Rules of Worship are Obligatory as
Apostolical Canons; all their Opinions are Oracles; and had they sat in the
Infallible Chairs of Rome or Geneva, they could not have been more confident
and peremptory in their Determinations. But thus is the Church of England
requited for her modesty; and because she does not abuse the Consciences of Men
to a rigid Observance of her Institutions, under a false pretense of Divine
Authority, the gentle and moderate exercise of her own lawful Jurisdiction, is
by these Men branded with Tyranny and Usurpation, whilst themselves in the mean
while are not ashamed to obtrude their own Fancies and little Conceits upon
their credulous Proselytes with the counterfeit Seal of Heaven; and inslave
their Consciences to their own imperious dictates, by exhibiting forged
Commissions from God himself; and then the People dare not murmur against their
unreasonable Impositions, for that reverence they bear to that Authority, which
(as they are told) is imprinted on them. But this has ever been the subtilty of
these Men, as it is of all Malefactors, to rail most at their own Crimes, and
to avoid the suspicion of their own Guilt, by deriving its imputation upon some
of their innocent Neighbors.

But once more to return to our Authors Inference. If then he means that the
Church of England imposes her Ceremonial Institutions with an Opinion of their
antecedent Necessity, (and so it is apparent he is willing enough to be
understood) it is a bold Calumny: if he means that they become consequentially
necessary only by virtue of their Institution, it is a woeful impertinence, and
is no other infringment of our Liberty than what is inseparable from the Nature
of Humane Laws. And so all the Civil Laws of Commonwealths are apparently as
chargeable with this sort of Usurpation, as any of our Ecclesiastical
Constitutions. And therefore, by the way, I would willingly be satisfied, that
seeing the Judicial as well as the Ceremonial Law of Moses was annulled and
abrogated by the Establishment of the Christian Faith; and seeing by
consequence it was part of their Christian Liberty to be freed from its
Obligatory Power; what imaginable Reason can be assigned, why Authority should
more invade the Rights of our Christian Liberty by establishing new
Ecclesiastical Canons, than by enacting new Civil Constitutions? Or why the
Common Law of England should not as much infringe that part of our
Gospel-Priviledges, whereby we are exempt from the Judicial Law, as the Canons
and Determinations of the Church do that other part, whereby we are rescued
from the Ceremonial? To this Enquiry they will never be able to return any
tolerable answer, but by shifting the matter of their plea, and then they
forsake their hold of Christian Liberty, and shelter themselves in a new
Pretense.

Perhaps they may plead that God has reserved the Appointment of the way,
manner, and circumstances of his own Worship to his own immediate Jurisdiction,
but has vested Civil Magistrates with a power to govern the secular Affairs of
Commonwealths. But then this is an open Flight from our present Engagement,
and now the thing pleaded in behalf of their Disobedience, is not their
Christian Liberty or their exemption from the Law of Moses, but their Christian
Duty, or their subjection to the Law of Christ. Though when this Refuge comes
to be attaqued, it will be found more weak and defenseless than this that is
already demolished; and you may well expect wise work, when they are urged to
produce Testimonies of Scripture that restrain the Civil Magistrate from
enacting Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions for the due government and
performance of external Worship. Here their Pleas are so horridly vain and
ridiculous, that in comparison of them, the Celebrated Text of the Romanists
super hanc Petram, in behalf of the Infallibility of the Papal Chair, is (as
Impertinent as it is) Reason and Demonstration. But after this I suppose we may
have occasion to enquire elsewhere: In the mean time it is enough that we have
beaten down this Paper Fort of Christian Liberty; in which if men may be
allowed to take sanctuary for their disobedience to the Churches Constitutions,
it will not only be a plausible Refuge for all Schismatics and Malcontents,
but an eternal Annoyance to the Churches Peace, and a perpetual Nursery of
incurable Schisms and Divisions. For all parts of outward Worship, save only
the two Sacraments, being left undetermined in the Word of God; and some
particular determinations being absolutely necessary to prevent Disorder and
Confusion; and these being not capable of any force or obligatory Power, and by
consequence, of any Usefulness to their proper End, but by virtue of the
Authority of the Civil Magistrate: It follows unavoidably, that if laying
Restraints and Injunctions upon men in the outward Exercise of Public Worship
be a violation of their Christian Liberty, that it is absolutely impossible to
make any effectual Provisions for the orderly and regular performance of the
Worship of God, or to provide any security against eternal Tumults and
Seditions in the Church of God: And whenever Phanatick spirits have a mind to
be peevish and humoursom, they have here a sacred and inviolable refuge to
protect themselves and their Rebellions. And therefore it is observable, that in
the late Ruptures of Christendom, this Pretense was not pleaded by any Sects of
men to this purpose, but the English Puritans, and the German Anabaptists, two
sorts of People that never knew what they would have beyond the subversion of
the present setlement of things. In which as they have been opposed by all
other Parties, so by none with greater vehemence and warmer zeal than the
School of Calvin; who quickly perceived by clear and sad experience, that there
was no possibility of settling Churches in the World, but by setting bounds and
restraints by particular Laws and Determinations to giddy and Enthusiastic
Tempers. Insomuch that the Church of Rome it self has scarce been more severe
in making or executing Penal Laws against seditious Libertines than the Church
of Geneva.

. 5. Neither is it altogether unworthy Remarque, that this Mystery of
Libertinism began to work in the days of the Apostles among the Gnostick
Phanaticks. Who forsooth, under color of their Christian Liberty, must needs
be free from all Laws and Government; they knew no Superior but the Lord
Christ, to him they owed Allegiance and Subjection, and to him, and to him
alone they would pay it. But as for the secular Powers of the World, they were
(as they behaved themselves) mere encroachments upon the Liberties of his
Church. This Pretense they made their warrant for disobedience, and their cover
for sedition, and whenever the freak possessed them to revile or resist the
present Government, still the word was Christian Liberty. What, shall we suffer
these Heathen Princes to usurp upon our spiritual Privileges? Shall we tamely
part with that that was purchased by our Saviors Blood? We have not so mean an
opinion of his Favors, as to throw them up at so cheap a Rate; No, we will
maintain the price and purchase of his Blood with the last drop of our own: We
will sacrifice our Lives and Fortunes to the Cause of God, and the service of
his Church, and not betray its dearest Privileges to the Tyranny of Infidels
and Painims by our own dull and sheepish cowardice. Now was not this peaceable
doctrine (think you) likely enough to make wild work in the Roman Empire, and
had it prevailed in the World, what an Inundation of mischiefs and confusions
would it have let in upon Mankind? It must have born down all settled
Governments, and buried all States and Commonwealths in Anarchy and eternal
War. And therefore it is observable with what caution and industry the Apostles
bestirred themselves to make up this dangerous breach, by setting bounds and
measures to this wild pretense; and whenever they had occasion to discourse
more largely concerning the doctrine of Christian Liberty, they never forget
(as may be observed in all their Writings) to state and confine it within its
proper Limits; but as they exhorted them to maintain it in opposition to the
Peevishness of the Jews, so they always charged them not to abuse it in
defiance to the Rules of Government, and the Power of lawful Superiors. No,
this whole Affair is transacted between God and your own Consciences; he has
been pleased to take off those Fetters and obligations that were tied upon you
by the Law of Moses, that is your Liberty, and be content with that. Extend it
not to the prejudice of your Governors, it is purely spiritual, and has no
Relation to your secular regards, or to the Power of Princes: And how ill
soever they may behave themselves in the management of their Authority, it may
be an Encroachment upon your Civil, but not upon your Christian Liberty. If
indeed the Proconsul of Judea should publish an Edict that all Christians shall
submit to Circumcision out of regard to the eternal Obligation of the Law of
Moses, that were a manifest violence to the freedom of the Gospel, but whatever
else he may command you, so he pretend not any warrant of immediate divine
Authority, whatever abuse it may be of his own Power, it is no abuse of your
Liberty. And therefore be advised to submit your selves to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, for so is the Will of God, 1 Pet. 2.13, ^5.
that with well-doing ye may put to silence the Ignorance of foolish men. That
you may not give occasion to Authority to look upon your Religion as
troublesome to Government, and that you may clear its Reputation from those
unjust aspersions that have been cast upon it by the folly and hypocrisy of
some Pretenders: so that your Governors observing your peaceable deportment,
they may be disabused of their vulgar mistakes, and hereafter learn to
distinguish true Christians from Jews and Heretics. You are free indeed, but
use not your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness: do not shelter your
peevishness and disobedience to lawful Superiors, under color of your
Christian Liberty; that is but a Knavish trick, and a palpable piece of craft,
because this thing neither has nor can have any relation to matters of that
nature. It Is a Liberty of Spirit between God and your own Souls; and you may
secure this benefit of his favor by the testimony of your own Consciences: but
turn not his indulgence into wantonness, by being peevish and froward to the
will of your Superiors under its pretense and protection. And yet so strangely
wayward and humorous are some Men, that nothing can appease their Consciences
in this demand, but a full Liberty of Contradiction; and they scarce think it
worth the having or the contending for, unless it may warrant and abet their
opposition to Authority; and therefore whatever that imposes upon their
practice, though but an harmless and indifferent Ceremony, it is intolerable as
the Yoke of Moses, and grievous as an Egyptian Bondage: they groan and die
under the burden of a Straw; and a Feather laid cross their wills, breaks
their Bones and their Hearts, and lies like a Mountain of Lead upon their
Consciences; and what horrible skreams and outcries do we hear of
Antichristian Tyranny and Persecution? Like some Creatures (you may wot of)
that if they may not have their will in every trifle, will roar and bellow like
a stuck Ox. Men must be broke of this stomachful spirit, as Children are of
their sullenness, by fasting and correction; and if this truantly humor be not
lash't and kept under with a severe hand, there will be no keeping the
Multitude in order and under Discipline: for what pride so delicious to
ill-natured and ill-bred People, as to thwart and affront the will of
Superiors? Or what insolence so intolerable, as that that bears up upon
mistakes of Conscience and Religion? And therefore nothing more imports
Government, than to rid it self of the annoyance of this precise and sanctified
peevishness; especially when it is so notorious from the experience of all Ages,
that those Enthusiasts that are so squeamish as to keck at indifferent things,
have always had Estrich Consciences for the boldest Treasons and Villainies.

And now our Author, for want of new Invention, falls to chewing the Cud upon
an old Slander: for from my account of Christian Liberty, I concluded that all
Internal Acts of the Mind of Man, are exempt from the Empire of Humane Laws,
that the substance of Religious Worship is transacted by them, and that its
exterior Significations are not absolutely necessary to its performance; and
therefore whatever restraints the Civil Magistrate might lay upon their outward
Actions in reference to Divine Worship, yet notwithstanding that, they might
perform all that is necessary to the discharge and the acceptance of the Duty.
How! (says our Author) This is an open door to Atheism: Page 266.
(for he is still knocking at that upon every slight occasion:) for who would
not think this to be his Intention, Let Men keep their Minds and inward
Thoughts and Apprehensions right for God, and then they may practice outwardly
in Religion what they please; one thing one day, another another; be Papists
and Protestants, Arians and Homousians, yea, Mahometans and Christians? I see
this Man is resolved never to lose any advantage for want of confidence; and if
ill-natured Inferences can do his business, who can withstand the Power of his
Logic? Who would not think this to be my intention? say you. I say, Who would,
unless one that thinks himself able to face me out of my plain meaning, and
bear me down out of countenance and common sense? Does the difference between
Papists and Protestants, Arians and Homousians, Mahometans and Christians,
consist in Rites and Ceremonies of external Worship? Who then, beside your
confidence, from the indifferency of the outward forms and fashions of Worship,
would conclude the indifferency of all Religions? Their real differences arise
from something else, and lie not in Rites and Ceremonies, but in Principles of
Faith, and Rules of Life. Bate these, and we will never quarrel Turks or
Papists for any of their outward signs and expressions of Divine Worship,
according to the Laws and Customs of their own Country; provided they are not
faulty upon one or both of the forementioned accounts, that they tend to
debauch Men either in their practices or their conceptions of the Deity; and
therefore to apply what was affirmed only of Ceremonies of Worship, to
Articles of Belief, is such a way of dealing with Arguments as only becomes our
Authors Logic and Ingenuity. But upon this occasion let me mind him, that
public and visible Worship is no such necessary and indispensable Duty, but
that it may in some circumstances be lawfully omitted: for suppose this Man
were in the Dominions of the Grand Signior, he would not, I presume, think
himself absolutely obliged in Conscience to set up open Meetings and
Conventicles, without leave of the Government; but would for the security of
his Life be content to enjoy his Religion to himself, without climbing up to
the top of a Mosque to proclaim their Prophet a lewd Jugler, unless he were
actually required to renounce the Christian Faith, and turn Apostate to the
Mahumetan Imposture: And therefore I would willingly know why the same Liberty
will not satisfy them here, as to the Obligations of Conscience, that they
would be content with there: there is no other reason assignable than that they
will do more for Fear than for Obedience; and this is undeniable evidence, that
it is something else, and not Conscience, (as is pretended) that lies at the
bottom of all their present Schisms and Disturbances.

. 6. But now having given this brief account of the use of External Worship,
from the Nature and Properties of the thing it self; I proceeded, for a farther
Confirmation of my former Assertions, to an Historical Report, to show that God
had in all Ages of the World left its management to the discretion of Men,
unless when to determine some particular forms happened to be useful to some
other purposes. Where, in the first place, I instanced in the Religion of the
old World, and attempted to prove that Sacrifices, which were the most ancient,
if not the only Expressions of Divine Worship, were purely of Humane
Institution. Now the first murmur our Author raises against this, is, Page 271.
That I should for the most part set off my Assertions at so high a rate, and
yet found them not only upon uncertain Principles, but upon such Paradoxes as
are generally decried by Learned Men; Such is this of the Original of
Sacrifices here insisted on. Certainly it would be present death for this Man
to speak to the purpose; he avoids and dreads all Pertinency, as he would
poison or Ratsbane: For where do I lay any such mighty stress upon this
Assertion? In what great strains do I urge the necessity of its admittance? To
what purpose then does he upon this occasion upbraid me with the briskness and
vehemence of any Expressions, that were spoken upon other subjects, and to
other purposes? I have indeed loaded some other Principles with their proper
mischiefs and inconveniences: I have shown that the Pleas of the Nonconformists
from the natural right of Mankind, from the Obligations of scandal, and from
the pretenses of a tender and unsatisfied Conscience, for exemption from the
Commands of lawful Authority, tend to a direct and inevitable dissolution of
all Governments, and all Societies. There the weightiness of the matter and the
Argument required some suitable eagerness of expression; but why should I be
minded of those warm passages in this place? The matter of this Enquiry is
neither of that evidence nor that importance as to need or deserve any grandeur
and vehemence of style. It Is indeed pertinent, but not at all necessary to the
drift of my Discourse: for without its assistance I am able to prove the Power
of Christian Magistrates over the outward Concerns of Religious Worship in
Christian Commonwealths. Neither do I at all bottom my Discourse upon its
admission; but only use it as an accessional reflection to my main Argument,
and cast it in as a particular instance to give check to the Adversaries
confidence; thereby to show it is not absolutely necessary (as is pretended) to
the acceptableness of Religious Worship, that it should be warranted by Divine
Institution; when it is so contrary to experience, (for any thing that appears
upon Record) as to the Religion of the old World. But seeing it is a pretty
subject, let us a little farther examine, whether the Assertion be not evident
enough to bear all the weight I have laid upon it.

Many Learned Men have indeed stretched their Parts to make out wise accounts
of the Nature and Original of Sacrifices; and because they were in the first
Ages of the World the most remarkable, perhaps the only visible signs and
expressions of Religious Worship, nothing will satisfy their curiosity, unless
they may derive them either from the Obligation of the Law of Nature, or some
express Institution of God himself. But when we come to weigh the Grounds and
Principles of their Discourse, we find so little proof, and so much confusion,
as will at least tempt any Impartial Enquirer to suspect the probable truth and
reasonableness of both their different accounts. Those who would fetch their
Obligation from Natural Light, seem at last to resolve the Reason of their
Assertion into the naked Testimonies and Opinions of some of the ancient
Greeks, who were willing enough to deduce the Authority of their Practice from
so creditable a Fountain, in favor of the Rites and Customs of their own
Country, they being almost the only Symbols of Divine Worship among the
Grecians: And all the outward appearances of Religion among them, consisting in
the solemnities of their public and private Sacrifices, their Writers (as all
Learned Men are partial enough for the honor of their Native Soil) thought
themselves concerned to persuade the World that their National Usages were tied
upon Mankind upon the same natural Reason, and with the same natural Necessity
as Religion it self. And therefore as they were wont to derive the Municipal
Ceremonies of their own City from some Divine Institution; for so Plato in his
Timaeus pleads in the Person of an Orthodox Athenian, that the particular Rites
and Customs of Athens were first delivered by the Offspring of the Gods, and
from them conveyed down to that present Age by an uninterrupted and
unquestionable Tradition: so for the same reason did they refer the more
Catholic Customs of the whole Nation, to the Obligations of Nature; especially
if confirmed by the concurrent suffrage of their Asiatick Neighbors; for that
to them was of the same import with the consent of Mankind. Now some critical
Men that rather read than use Authors, if they happened to meet with any passage
in any of the Grecian Writers to this purpose, because it served for an
ostentation of their Reading, they immediately subscribed to their Opinion out
of respect to their bare Authority; and if they could allege an Assertion for
it out of Strabo, Plutarch, and Aristotle, (whom it was once a brave thing to
quote) they passed it without any more ado for sufficient proof and
demonstration; though in matters of such remote Antiquity, their naked
testimonies (unless they had withal given us some higher proofs and rational
motives to engage our Assent) are of little more validity than the Conjectures
and Opinions of modern Writers. And therefore when our Author alleges the
School-Doctors for this Persuasion, Page 272.
he falls as much short of its first Original as T.W. did when he quoted Peter
Martyr for the Story of the Judges in Hell.

. 7. But now they on the other side, who deduce the Religion of Sacrifices from
divine Institution, prove it thus: Because that the Light of Nature (1.) could
not dictate that God would accept the destruction of other Creatures as the
sign and token of man's Obedience, nor (2.) that the Blood of Beasts should
expiate the Sins of men, or appease the Wrath of God; for the Pardon and
Remission of sin being matter of mere Grace and arbitrary Favor, it must of
necessity depend upon divine appointment to determine by what means we may
procure it, and upon what conditions he will grant it. But the first of these
Reasons proceeds upon a supposition that all outward significations of
Religious Worship must needs be warranted either by the Law of Nature, or some
positive Law of God, which being a direct contradiction to my Principle, I
shall desire to see it better proved before I shall be willing to yield it for
a granted Truth: Especially when in my conception of things, the formal nature
of divine Worship consists not so properly in Acts of Obedience, as in Offices
of Love and Gratitude. The former indeed suppose an express and positive
Institution, and it is their Conformity to the Command that gives them the
formality of their goodness; but I cannot understand why the latter may not be
warrantable in themselves, and acceptable to God without the express Authority
of his own appointment, provided they are suitable to the nature of the thing
which they signify, and worthy of the Person to whom they are addressed. And
it cannot be supposed, either from the Reason of the thing it self, or the
Nature of the divine Goodness, that God should be offended with his Creatures
for making him any decent Returns of the grateful Resentments of their minds
for the Obligations of his infinite Love and Bounty. And therefore it is not
necessary, from the nature of Religious Worship it self, that it should be
demanded as matter of positive duty and obligation, and if it be required for
any other regard, then have I gained a fresh advantage of my Adversary, and it
is incumbent upon him, not only to produce a positive Command for the
Institution of Eucharistical Sacrifices, but an express Prohibition to the
Patriarchs to perform divine Worship by any other outward expressions of
honor, than what God himself had particularly determined and appointed. This
perhaps our Author may out of the abundance of his Reading attempt to prove
from the fond Traditions of the Jews and Easterlings, (by which he may prove
all the Fables in the World) but I am secure he shall never be able to discover
the least shadow of an Argument in the sacred Records to countenance so vain a
Fancy. Nay, so far is the Duty of Obedience from being the original Reason, and
taking in the adequate Notion of natural Religion, that it is only consequential
upon, and deducible from the Obligations of Gratitude: For from hence result
our Engagements of subjection to Gods will, and submission to his Government.
And as from his Bounty and Goodness arises the Duty of Gratitude, so from
Gratitude follows the Necessity of Obedience; cheerful compliance with the Will
of a Benefactor being one of its most eminent Instances and indispensable
Duties.

As for the second Reason in behalf of this Opinion, it proceeds upon no less
mistake than the first, for want of attending to the obvious difference between
Eucharistical Oblations and Expiatory Sacrifices; the latter whereof must
indeed of necessity owe their Original to divine Institution, because it was an
Act of Gods free-goodness, that he would accept the substitution of a Sacrifice
in place of the Offender by way of Expiation for the Offense; and therefore the
use and nature of Expiatory Oblations having their absolute dependence on the
voluntary acceptance of Gods it was necessary he should signify this Result
and Resolution of his good pleasure to mankind, before they had any reasonable
ground to suppose he would accept the substituted Expiation in lieu of the real
Forfeiture. Now as for this sort of Sacrifices, I had already acknowledged, and
proved, that they must depend upon divine Institution; for all that Religion
that resolves it self into the Will of God, must suppose Revelation, in that
nothing else can discover its Obligation to mankind: but as for all that flows
from the Nature and the Attributes of God, it requires no other discovery than
the Light, and no other determination than the choice of natural Reason: So
that though it be necessary to Instituted Worship that it should be appointed,
yet it is not necessary to divine Worship that it should be instituted. And now
though Attendance to this Distinction would have avoided all Ambiguity and
Confusion in this Enquiry, yet our Author stiffly over-looks it, and solemnly
confutes my Assertion concerning Eucharistical Offerings by Instances of
Expiatory Sacrifices, which I had before proved to his hand, must rely upon
positive appointment, from their peculiar Use and Nature, and not because this
was necessary to the Being and Design of Religion it self. But if we will
confine our Talk to the subject matter of my Assertion, viz. Eucharistical
Oblations, or any other outward significations of the natural Worship of God in
the first Ages of the World, I before affirmed and do still maintain, that they
who say they were enjoined and warranted by divine Command, take the Liberty of
saying any thing without proof or evidence.

. 8. Page 273.
But if they are Arbitrary Inventions of men, our Author desires to have a
Rational Account of their Catholicism in the World, and one Instance more of
any thing not natural or divine, that ever prevailed to such an absolute
universal acceptance amongst mankind. As for the latter part of his demand, I
think festival solemnities may challenge as great Antiquity and Universality as
Sacrifices: There being no Nation in the World that ever was known to be
altogether destitute of set and public Festivals in honor of their Gods; and
(as I before observed) the Anniversary Sacrifices of their First Fruits was the
most ancient and most universal solemnity of Worship in the World. And some
learned men conjecture, with as much Probability, as the nature of the thing
will bear, that such were the Sacrifices of Cain and Abel, and that from the
Propriety of the words, (...) at the end of days, which, say they, implies some
set and solemn season of the year; and there is no Idiom more frequent in the
holy Scriptures than to express set and anniversary seasons by Days: To omit
innumerable other Texts, 1 Samuel 2.9. The Yearly Sacrifice is called Sacrificium
Dierum; so that the End of Days implies the Revolution of the Year, when Abel
offered the Firstborn of his Flocks, and Cain the First Fruits of his Fields.
But however this may be, it is attested by all the best Records of ancient
Times, that Harvest Sacrifices and Festivals of First Fruits were the most
Ancient, most Catholic, and perhaps only Public Solemnities of Religion. And
yet it will be as impossible to discover any Obligation from Nature, or any
Warranty from divine Institution for their Practice, as for the Original of
Idolatry, which yet had universally prevailed over the Religion of mankind, and
for ought I know might have done so still, had not divine Providence been
pleased to disabuse the wretched World by so many Revelations and miraculous
discoveries of himself; so that it is possible some things may acquire to
themselves a Catholic Credit and Reputation, that never had it bestowed upon
them by God or by Nature, especially if they chance to have any near Relation
or Connection with universal and unabolishable Truths. But seeing our Author
desires a particular account of the Catholicism of Sacrifices, thus it happened.

The first Ages of Mankind having a full and certain knowledge of the Being of
God, and a strong sense of the necessity of his Worship, in that they had the
same assurance then of the first cause of their Beings, as we have now of our
Forefathers and Progenitors. From hence they became obliged from the instinct
of Nature, and the dictates of Right Reason, to acknowledge and celebrate their
Creators Bounty, and to return some Expressions of Gratitude to him for his
Favors and Benefits. Divine Worship then being so clear a dictate of Humane
Nature, it was but agreeable to the Reason of Mankind to express their sense of
this Duty by outward Rites and Significations. Now what Symbol could be more
natural and obvious to the Minds of Men, whereby to signify their homage and
thankfulness to the Author of all their Happiness, than by presenting him with
some of the choicest Portions of his own Gifts, (for they had nothing else to
present) in acknowledgment of that Bounty and Providence that had bestowed
them? And this was so far from arguing any pregnancy of Invention, that to have
missed it, would, in my conceit, have been flat stupidity. For though all
sensible signs derive their significancy from positive Institution, yet the
ground and reason of their Institution is usually (unless they are inept and
irregular) some natural suitableness they have in them to denote the thing
signified. Now I will challenge our Authors wit to pitch upon any thing in
Nature, that could be so easy and proper to express by way of outward action
their thankfulness to God, as these Eucharistical Oblations; so easy a thing
is it to fetch their beginning from Humane Agreement, without recourse to the
Authority of Nature, or Divine Prescription. The Religion of Sacrifices then
being the most conspicuous Symbol and Signification of the Worship of God among
the first Fathers of Mankind, it descended to their Posterity, together with
their natural sense of Religion, of which these were the only visible signs
and indications; and therefore without them, it could have had no outward and
sensible appearance in the World, because these were its only practical way of
conveyance; and by continuing to observe the Rites and Customs of their
Ancestors, they kept up their dictates of Religion. And thus the Idea of God,
and the use of Sacrifices, were propagated together into all Societies of
Mankind, by their observance of the Customs and Traditions of their
Progenitors. Now so easy and unforced is the probability of this account of
their Catholicism, though they owe their original purely to the Choice and
Institution of men, that as long as their Offspring kept up any belief of the
Notion of a Deity, or any Reverence for the wisdom of their Forefathers, it
was morally impossible in the ordinary course of humane Affairs, the Tradition
of Sacrifices should ever be lost in the World. And this may suffice to show
how it came to pass, that they found such a Catholic entertainment in all
Societies of Mankind; and it was all one as to that, whether they had their
first beginning from humane invention, or divine Institution; for when once
they had acquired the Esteem and Reverence of Religion, Use and Custom would
ever after keep up their Practice and Reputation in the World: So that though
it was impossible they should ever obtain such an universal use and credit by
their own strength, and upon their own account, yet when they had once obtained
such an inseparable Connection with men's natural and indelible sense of
Religion, it was then as impossible without such an extraordinary change of
things as was brought upon the World by the Institution of Christianity, that
they should ever lose it.

. 9. The last thing pleaded by our Author for the Divine Institution of
Sacrifices is the words of St. Paul, Page ^74.
By Faith Abel offered Sacrifice. And faith has respect unto the Testimony of
God; revealing, commanding, and promising to accept our Duty. And therefore
this was not done by his own Choice, but by warrant of a divine Command. This
Argument indeed is often insisted upon by some sort of Writers, out of whom our
Author (whose custom it is to pour forth his crude Dictate rather from his
Memory than his Reason) transcribes it in haste without weighing its Force and
Validity; But it bottoms upon such a short and narrow account of the nature of
Faith, as would make wild work with the Phenomenon of Providence in the World.
And therefore to be brief, the proper and last Resolution of this virtue (as I
have already intimated) is into the Goodness, and not the bare Testimony of
God, and we therefore trust the truth of divine Revelation, because we believe
him so essentially good, that he nor can nor will deceive his Creatures: So
that our Belief of the Testimony of God is not the full and adequate Notion of
Faith, but it is one particular Instance of our Confidence in his essential
goodness, and therefore there may be acts of this Duty without any supposal of
divine Revelation, and such was the Faith of Abel, as the Apostle there
describes it: For he that comes to God must believe that he is, Heb. 11.6.
and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. This upright man
therefore being so amply satisfied of the Existence and goodness of his
heavenly Father, and conscious of his own Integrity in the offering of his
Sacrifice, rested secure from the Testimony of his own Conscience, of Gods
gracious acceptance. However, might not the Faith ascribed to Abel relate to
the discharge of his Duty, and not to the manner of its Performance? And though
he worshipped God in obedience to his Command, which was an Act of Faith, yet
that is no more proof that he had any more divine warrant for the manner of his
Worship than for the kind of his Sacrifice; and yet it was indifferent as to
divine acceptance, whether he had offered the Fruits of his Tillage, or the
Products of his Flock; for the Sacrifice of Cain was not rejected because not
of the same kind with that of Abel, but had it been presented with the same
Qualifications, it had been rewarded with the same acceptance. And thus does
our Authors way of Arguing multiply difficulties upon himself; for if it be of
any force, it will infer a necessity of a divine Command to determine the kind
of Sacrifice as well as the manner of Worship, and then is he obliged not only
to produce a Law for Sacrifices, but one to Cain to offer the Fruits of the
Field, and another to Abel to offer Living Creatures; and this is competent
evidence that God never prescribed their patticular mode of Worship, but left
it to the choice of their own Convenience and Discretion, and therefore they
both chose that which was most proper and suitable to their respective
conditions of life; and God entailed his acceptance, not upon the outward
Expressions of their worship, but the inward Qualifications of their minds. To
conclude, this Argument is utterly impertinent, unless upon supposition of this
Principle, that men have not any Rational Ground to expect that God should
accept the faithful discharge of their Duty, unless himself have prescribed all
particular ways and circumstances of the manner of its Performance; but this is
to betake themselves to the lazy trade of Begging, and this man is bold enough
for this shameless employment. And though he is not so confident as to take up
his Bush so near home, yet when he gets aloof off into my sixth Chapter, he
grows as bold and sturdy as the Gentlemen Cripples of Southwark are in
Lincoln's Inn Fields. For there to secure the Fundamental Mystery of Puritanism
against all opposition, viz. that nothing ought to be practiced in the Worship
of God, but what is warranted in the Word of God, he lays down certain
Proleptick and self-evident Principles, the first whereof is, That wherever in
the Scripture we meet with any Religious Duty, Page 321.
that had a preceding Institution, although we find not expressly a consequent
Approbation, we take it for granted, that it was approved; and so on the
contrary, where an Approbation appears, and Institution is concealed. And in
another Theorem in the same Chapter to the same purpose (for People of that
Trade and Way of Life are much given to Repetitions) he gives in this very
Instance of Sacrifices for proof, viz. Whatever they (the Patriarchs) did, Page
314.
they had especial warranty from God for; which is the case of the great
Institution of Sacrifices it self. It is a sufficient Argument that they were
divinely instituted, because they were graciously accepted. What figure this is
called in his Pedling Logic, I know not; but in ours it is y^lep'd begging the
Question. A singular way of dispute this, is it not? First, to take the
Conclusion for granted, and then challenge it for a Principle to prove it self;
and to lay down the main matter in debate for a truth so certain, that a man is
obliged by the Laws of Reasoning to grant it, before he is capable of any right
to dispute it. Who would ever contradict this Author in these Enquiries, that
would admit those Postulata for self-evident Propositions? But this man is so
bold and obnoxious a Beggar, that if he will continue to follow this Trade,
it is impossible he should long escape the Beadles watchful eye, but more cruel
hand. I know no Refuge he has to protect his Back against this severe
Executioner, unless by listing himself into some Society of Gypsies, for whom
he is admirably qualified as to the two great Offices of Canting and Begging;
and wants not above one accomplishment more to complete him at all points for
that Employment; and it is more noble and generous than to beg after this
straggling rate.

After this Discourse of the Original of Sacrifices, and after another to give
an account of the reason of Gods prescribing every particular Rite and Ceremony
of his Worship under the Mosaic Pedagogy; I proceeded to show, that the main
design of the Christian Institution was to establish the great Duties of Virtue
and real Righteousness, and not to determine Rites and Ceremonies of external
Worship; in so much that we find none prescribed in the New Testament, save
only the two Sacraments: and upon this I challenged the unpeaceableness of
these Men, that upon their Principle must be Rebels and Schismatics to all
Churches in Christendom as well as the Church of England. But to this, hush,
not one syllable of reply; it is close and immediate to my purpose, and
therefore of no concern to his; he cares not for coming so near home, and loves
to keep aloof off from present Transactions. A Man may talk confident
Conjectures of things that happened so many thousand years ago, and tell fine
Stories of Men that begot Sons and Daughters before the Flood: But it is
dangerous to talk of the History and Constitution of Affairs in the present
World; a Man may possibly contradict known and undeniable experience; and every
Novice that is never so little acquainted with the present state of Foreign
Churches, will be able to check and shame our confidence. And there are two
unhappy Books of Mr. Durel, that plainly demonstrate that we are a new Race of
Men in the World, that are not yet sufficiently polish't and civilized for
Humane Society; and such as, whilst we continue fond of our wild and barbarous
Principles, must be banished all established Churches and Commonwealths in
Europe.

. 10. In the close of this Chapter I gave an account of the nature and use of
significant Ceremonies, that are the same thing with external Worship under a
different Name; outward Worship consisting in nothing else but signifying our
inward thoughts and sentiments of Religion, either by Words or Actions: where I
showed, that it might be indifferently expressed and performed by either; and
that Gestures of Reverence were of the same use in the Worship of God, as
solemn Praises and Acknowledgements; and that to bow the Body at the mentioning
the Name of Jesus, was the same kind of honor to his Person, as to celebrate
his Name with Hymns and Thanksgivings; and therefore that the Magistrates
Prerogative of instituting significant Ceremonies, amounted to nothing more
than a Power of defining the import of words; and by consequence that it is no
other Usurpation upon his Subjects Consciences, than if he should take upon him
to refine their Language, and determine the proper signification of all Phrases
employed in Divine Worship, as well as in Trades, Arts and Sciences: and
therefore I could not but profess my admiration at the prodigious confidence
and impertinence of those Men, that could raise such hideous Noises and
Outcries against the Laws of a settled Church and State upon such slender
grounds and pretenses. But here our Author quickly requites me with a
counter-wonder, Page 276.
That I cannot express my dissent from others in controverted Points of the
meanest and lowest concernment, but with crying out, Prodigies, Clamours,
Impertinencies, and the like Expressions of astonishment in my self, and
contempt of others. I might reserve some of these great words for more
important occasions. And the truth is, these are not any matters of the
greatest importance; and were our Dispute merely concerned in their
Speculation, I could discourse as coolly and carelessly about them, as about a
Mechanical Hypothesis, or a Metaphysical Notion; and should not be more eagerly
concerned to resolve the truth of the Question, than I am to determine the
Principle of Individuation. But when the established Government of a Nation
shall be subverted by such nice and new-invented Subtilties; when never any
Church in the World was more rudely treated by her own Children, than the
Church of England by the Puritan Schismatics; when Men shall cry out,
Antichrist, Popery and Superstition, and all for the Idolatry of a significant
Ceremony; and when this clamorous Exception is so vain, so groundless and
impertinent; is it not infinitely prodigious to see Men so confident and
troublesome upon such slight and vanishing appearances? What scurrilous Language
do they continually pour forth against the Church of England? What ignominious
Titles do they fasten upon her Friends and Followers? And with what disdain and
insolence do they spit at her way of Worship and Devotion? Into what woeful and
endless Schisms do they drive their Proselytes from her Communion? What
Disturbances do they create in the State? and what Ruptures in the Church? And
how do they imbroil and discompose the peaceable setlement of a flourishing
Kingdom? and all this merely out of hatred to the Popery and Paganism of a
Symbolical Rite. For ever since the Scepter of Jesus Christ (as they styled
their Presbyterial Consistory) has been wrested from them by force of Argument;
and ever since the divine Right of the holy Discipline has been so shamefully
exploded, and that time and experience have put a baffle upon the confidence of
their old Pleas and Pretenses, all the outcry has been against the
unwarrantableness of instituted Ceremonies; which after innumerable Trains of
Distinctions and Limitations about Natural, and Customary, and Topical Signs,
still spends it self against the Superstition of mystical and significant
Rites: so that the substance of this whole Contest is now at length resolved
into this single Enquiry; and upon this, all their deeper and more subtle Men
of Controversy spend all their Choler and Metaphysics. It Is true, they defend
themselves with the Pleas of Scandal, Tenderness of Conscience, etc. but when
they use their Offensive Weapons, they scarce annoy us with any other
Objections, than what are levelled against the Churches Usurpation, in taking
upon her to appoint new Ceremonies and Institutions of Worship. And therefore
if ever I had reason to cry out, Prodigies, Clamours and Impertinencies, it was
upon this subject and this occasion, when my Thoughts were warm with reflecting
upon those mighty Troubles and Inconveniences, under which these Men have
brought the best established Church in the World by their unreasonable folly
and curiosity. For tell me, Sir, is it nothing to shake the Foundations, and
hazard the Overthrow of a settled Church? Is it nothing to discompose the
Public Peace and Tranquillity of a settled State? Is it nothing for Subjects to
withdraw their assistance from their Prince and their Country? Is it nothing to
violate the Fundamental Laws of Love, and Peace, and Charity? Is it nothing to
rend the Body of a Church into numberless Schisms and Contentions? Is it
nothing to keep up implacable Feuds and Animosities among Members of the same
Commonwealths? Is it nothing to harden debauched and ungodly Men against
Religion it self, by giving them too much reason to suspect it, as a thing that
is troublesome and mischievous to Government? Is it nothing to encourage the
designs of sacrilegious Wretches, by giving them advantage under the disguise
of Zeal and Purity, to prey upon the Churches Antichristian Patrimony? In a
word, Is it nothing to gore the Bowels of a Kingdom with everlasting Changes
and Reformations; and all this upon Pretenses as thin as Sope-bubbles, and as
brittle as Glass-drops?

. 11. But let us take a brief Surveigh of their particular Reasonings and
Exceptions; and then our wonder at these Men's confidence will be so far from
abating, that it will swell into ecstasie and downright astonishment. For
first, (says our Author) To say that the Magistrate has Power to institute
visible signs of Gods honor, Page 277.
to be observed in the outward Worship of God, is upon the matter to say that
he has Power to institute new Sacraments; for so such things would be. But, I
say, so such things would not be; and so there is an end of our dispute: and at
this lock have we stood gazing at one another at least this hundred years: here
Cartwright begun the Objection, and here he was immediately checked in his
career by Whitgift, who told him plainly, Defense of the Answer, p. 618.
He could not be ignorant, that to the making of a Sacrament, besides the
external Element, there is required a Commandment of God in his Word that it
should be done, and a Promise annexed unto it, whereof the Sacrament is a seal.
Here they stopped, and his Adversary never proceeded in his Argument; but some
that came after him, resolved not to part so easily with so big an Exception,
though perhaps for no other reason than because Cartwright had started it: and
the truth is, all his followers have done little more than lickt up the Vomit
and Choler of that proud Schismatic; and therefore they never pursued this
newfangled Cavil beyond his first Syllogism, where himself was repuls't and
rebuked; and ever since this has been their post, and they are resolved to keep
it with unyielding and invincible confidence; and their foreheads are so
hardened, that you may sooner beat out their brains than shame or convince them
out of their Folly; and though they have been so frequently and vehemently
urged to a Proof and Prosecution of their Argument, they could never be made to
stir one foot backward or forward, but here they stand like men enchanted, and
whatever Demands or Questions you propose to them, they return you not one
syllable of reply, but Sacraments, Sacraments. And in this Posture do they
continue to this day, to haunt us with the stubbornness of unlaid Ghosts; and
it is the only voice this Head of Modesty is able to utter upon this Subject. He
is resolved upon it, that all significant Rites, instituted in the Worship of
God, are real Sacraments, and that so they shall be. And that is stubborn and
indisputable Proof, and it is not modest to bear up against so much Brass and
Boldness; and yet I am resolved for once to rub my forehead, and not to be
brow-beaten, but to look him in the Face with the confidence of a Basilisk, and
upbraid him either to make good, or to renounce his Argument; and if he will
neither yield, nor proceed, to scorn, and affront, and point him out of his
intolerable Confidence. Here then I fix my foot, and dare him to his Teeth to
prove that any thing can be capable of the Nature or Office of Sacraments, that
is not established by divine Institution, and upon Promise of divine
Acceptance. These are inseparable Conditions of all Sacramental Mysteries, and
whatsoever other Properties and Qualifications they may have beside, these are
always necessary and indispensable Ingredients of their Office, so that without
them nothing can lay claim to their Name or Dignity, however any thing may
happen to symbolize with them upon other Accounts, and by other Circumstances.
For the Christian Sacraments are the inseparable Pledges and Symbols of the
Christian Faith, and are established to that Intent by the Author of the
Christian Institution, and they are such outward Rites and Ceremonies whereby
we openly own the Covenant, and pass mutual Engagements to stand to its Terms
and Conditions; and therefore he alone that appointed the Religion, is able to
appoint by what outward Signs or Acts of stipulation we shall signify and
express our acknowledgment of, and submission to his Institutions. So that the
meaning and intention of it, is to assign some particular Act of Worship,
whereby we may express our Engagements and Resolutions of Obedience to the
whole Religion; and who then can declare and specify what Rite he will accept
as a full acknowledgment of our duty of Universal Obedience, but he alone that
requires it? And therefore unless it pretend to his Institution, there is no
imaginable ground why it should be thought to pretend to the Office and Dignity
of a Sacrament. And certainly they have a very mean opinion of these sacred
Mysteries, that require nothing more to their Nature and Function but bare
significancy, and make every external sign capable of that holy and mysterious
Office; and what can more derogate from the Credit of those great Pledges of
our Faith and Instruments of our Salvation? As if they carried in them nothing
of a more useful or spiritual Efficacy, than what every common Rite and
Ceremony may acquire or pretend to by Custom and humane Institution.

. 12. But it is still more pleasant and more prodigious to see men, that are so
stiff and dogmatical in their Talk, have so little regard to their own
Pretenses; thus whereas they will admit no other Umpirage of our present
Disputes about Divine Worship, but what may be fetched from immediate Divine
Authority, yet in this grand Exception, they take no notice of its Decrees and
Determinations; and though our Author will have every significant Circumstance
of Devotion to partake of the Nature and Mystery of a Divine Sacrament, yet he
makes no attempt to prove it out of the Word of God. No: there is not a Text in
the four Gospels that may be abused to that purpose. And Paul (for to allow him
the Title of Saint is Popish and Idolatrous, and our Author is as shy in all
his Writings of bestowing it upon an Apostle as upon Cain or Judas, though he
will vouchsafe the Title of Holy, that is coincident with it, to every Zealot
of his own Brotherhood) but by what name or title soever dignified or
distinguished, the Apostle Paul is utterly silent in the Case, and now we have
no higher Authority to vouch our Cause but the Schoolmen and Austin. Page 180.
As for the former (not to dispute the impertinency of the Quotation) whenever
they speak sense, we are ready to subscribe to their Reason; but their bare
Authority is of no more force in the Church of England than the Decrees and
Oracles of Mr. Calvin; their Writings are no part of the Canon of Scripture, or
the four first General Councils; and it is well known what wise accounts they
are forced to give of the Nature of Sacraments, to justify the unwarrantable
Determinations of their own Church, that had rashly and needlessly enough
defined some things to be so, that are in themselves infinitely incapable of
that sacred Name and Office. And I know nothing for which any part of their
coarse and frieze Discourses is more ridiculous in it self, or more unanimously
condemned by Protestant Writers of all Communions, than their loose and
groundless descriptions of the Nature and Office of Sacramental Pledges. But
this is one of their old ways of trifling, when the pursuit of their Principles
forces them upon an absurdity, to father it upon the Schoolmen, as if because
these men sometimes talk absurdly, that shall justify their Impertinencies.
And as for his Citation out of St. Austin, viz. Signa cum ad res divinas
pertinent sunt Sacramenta; unless he would have vouchsafed a particular
Reference, that might direct us to the sense of the Father, and the Integrity
of his own Quotation, we have no engagement to examine its Truth, or regard its
Authority: For our Author has given me as little reason to trust his word, as
he has the Public to trust his Oath. However it is neither civil, nor ingenuous
to trouble me with such Objections, that I cannot answer without reading over
eight or ten large Volumes in Folio. Though I am prettily well satisfied
aforehand from that good Fathers sense of things, that were we in a Capacity to
consult him about this Passage, we should find he as little favors this Notion
of Sacraments, as I do the Magistrates unlimited and immediate Power over
Conscience and Religion. Nay, I should have odds and advantage on my side,
should I lay a wager with him (though that is no creditable way of arguing, and
if it were, I should quickly grow rich by disputing with this man) that there
is no such Passage in all the Volumes of St. Austin. For alas he never read it
in the Father himself, and if it was not the Product of his own pregnant
Invention, it was transcribed out of Ames, or Bradshaw, or some other of the
Puritan Fathers. He is an admirable second-hand man, and seems somewhat akin to
a certain late Author, that by the help and perusal of a few of our modern
spicilegious men, could compose a Book of 500 Pages in Quarto to prove
Independency to have always been the only Orthodox Religion of Mankind, and
then (after the Dutch fashion of bragging and ostentation) add a swelling
Catalogue of 500 old Authors, that were pressed for Journey-men to bring in
Materials to his Work, though there is scarce a Quotation in the whole Book
that five new ones would not have furnished him with, nay, that has not been
lately transcribed five times over. So unhappy a thing it is when confident men
are vainglorious, they openly betray their Ambition by too bold and foolish
attempts, and melt their Wings by venturing at too high a Flight. But I begin
to preach Apophthegms, and therefore to conclude, we will not be concerned to
enquire St. Austins opinion in this Case, till we are better satisfied of the
Truth and Pertinency of this Citation; and thus have I shifted off the Task, he
would have imposed on me, upon his own shoulders, for I believe he is as much
to seek for this Passage in St. Austin, as my self. In the mean time you may
observe this man's wretched way of Talk and shuffle, when he makes such
continual and importunate demands of Appeal to the Law, and to the Gospel, and
yet in this present Argument, that is now almost their only surviving Pretense,
have no respect to neither. And therefore I shall for ever hereafter put in a
demur to this Plea, till they shall attempt to prove out of the Word of God all
significant Ceremonies to be of the same use and nature with divine Sacraments;
and if we can but prevail with them to undertake this Argument, it will give us
no less pleasant divertisement, than that learned Dispute managed so hotly
between two of their leading Rabbis, Ainsworth and Broughton, whether the
color of Aarons Linen Ephod were of Blue, or a Sea-water-green: A Controversy
of that mighty Importance to the Salvation of souls, that (beside that it
occasioned some bloody Noses) it created new Schisms, and founded new Churches;
and what became of the blue separation, I cannot at present call to mind, but
as for the Brethren of the Sea-water-green Communion, they crumbled into as
many Schisms and Churches as there are Colors in the Rainbow. And there is not
any speculation in Nature so frivolous or Metaphysical, for which these People
will not bandy into Parties, yes, and raise Armies too; as they once sacrificed
to the great Moloch of Public Faith their Wedding-Rings, the Symbols and
Pledges of their Matrimonial Engagements, to abolish their expensive use and
custom; and tied themselves by solemn Oath, and three new significant
Ceremonies; to venture Lives and Fortunes to cashier three old ones: And the
Angels that (they say) can wage War, and fight pitched Battles upon the point
of a Needle, are not at a less distance from each other in their Engagements,
than these Men are in their Disputes and Controversial Dissentions. And into
this in the last issue of things, does all their tenderness of Conscience
resolve it self: a boldness and confidence in their own little Conceits, in
opposition to the Commands of Authority, and the great Duties of Obedience.

. 13. Page 178, 279.
In the next place our Author distinguishes between Customary signs that have
prevailed by Custom and Usage, to signify such things as they have no absolute
natural coherence with, or relation unto; such are putting off the Hat in sign
of Reverence, with others innumerable. And these sorts of signs may have some
use about the Service and Worship of God, as might be manifested in Instances.
But the signs we enquire after are voluntary, arbitrary, and instituted; such
as neither naturally nor merely by custom and usage come to be significant, but
only by virtue of their Institution. And it is these that are dreaded by the
Nonconformists for such illegal and unwarrantable Additions to the Worship of
God. And why! what is the matter? Where has the Word of God prescribed this
distinction? and where has it allowed the use of the former, and disavowed the
lawfulness of the latter sort of Ceremonies? Or can they assign any natural
Immorality in instituted, more than in customary Significations? Or is the
Authority of Chance and Custom (for all Prescriptions that are not instituted,
are purely casual) more Sacred and Obligatory than the Commands of Princes, and
Councils of Senates? Or why should the appointment of the Public Laws make
unallowable Sacraments, rather than the prevalency of Custom, or (what is the
same) the Institution of Usage? I cannot fathom the depth of this mystery,
unless it lies in this, that the Consciences of the People of God need not be
so very tender and curious in any case, but only in matters of Duty and
Obedience to lawful Authority. It Is strange that things that are so harmless
upon all other accounts, should become so horridly Criminal for no other reason
than because they please our Governors. For example, let us take our Authors
instance of uncovering the Head in sign of reverence in these European Parts of
the World, whereas the Eastern Nations express the same thing by the contrary
custom, and yet both in our Authors Opinion are lawful in the Worship of God,
because warranted by Topical Usages. Now suppose his Majesty should injoin
their custom upon us; and on the contrary, a Christian Prince in Asia should
impose ours upon his Subjects, would that alter their Nature and Morality? And
make those things that were antecedently to the Command decent and innocent
Expressions of Reverence in Divine Service, immediately become sinful and
offensive to the Almighty? But if that would not alter their nature, then the
case of Symbols that depend upon Institution, is as to their lawfulness and
divine acceptance the same with those that are founded upon Prescription. And
now, what think you? are not Churches likely to be bravely governed, and order
and decency in the Worship of God admirably provided for, when all their solemn
Laws and Injunctions shall be controlled by such precarious Fancies and
Fooleries? Can you imagine any thing judged more scandalous in these Men's
Case-Divinity, than the horrid Crimes of Peace and Obedience? And so I leave it
to you to judge, whether the farther these Men proceed in the pursuance of
their Principles and Pretenses, they do not all the way increase our amazement
at the prodigiousness of their Impertinency.

But having assigned this vast distance between customary and instituted
Symbols of Reverence, he adds this final determination of the whole Case: Page
^79.
Now concerning these last, one Rule may be observed, namely, that they cannot
be of one kind, and signify things of another, by virtue of any Command and
consent of Men, unless they have an absolute Authority both over the sign and
thing signified, and can change their Natures, or create a new Relation between
them. Now, Sir, our Author grows wanton, and resolves in a jolly humor to
maintain against my self and all my Associates, that Averia Capta in
Withernamio non sunt Replegibilia. For it is all perfect Waggery and Gibberish,
and a mere design to puzzle and confound us with unintelligible subtilties; and
these are the Eisotericks of the Sect, that ought not to be understood by any
but the Sons of Mystery; and I doubt not but you understand the sense and
reason of this Rule, as much as you do those prescribed by the Rosie-Crucian
Professors, in order to the discovery of the Great Secret. But whatever the
meaning of the Oracle may be, why must it be limited to instituted rather than
customary Symbols? For what cause should Usage, where there is no natural
relation between the sign and the thing signified, be allowed to create one,
rather than the Commands of lawful Authority? For my part I am not able to
imagine any reason, unless it be his great Democratical Principles, that
ascribes less Power to the Sovereign Prince, than to the Common People, that
are always the chief Authors and Abettors of Custom? Or why may we suppose that
may apply things of one kind, to signify things of another, by virtue of
popular Consent, without having an absolute Authority over the sign and thing
signified, and yet not suppose the same thing of the Edicts of Princes, and the
Votes of Convocations; especially when in this weighty Rule, he has been
pleased (for there is no other ground for it but his own good pleasure) to
exclude the Consent of Men as well as the Commands of Governors? Nay, why may
not they, or any thing else have Power to appropriate new names and signs to
things, without having any absolute Authority over the things themselves? And
lastly, why must a Power of creating new Relations between them, infer a Power
to change their Natures? For so are they here represented by our Author as
things coincident. But such manifest and palpable Trifles are not worth so many
Objections. And therefore (to conclude) whereas I declared the signification of
Ceremonies to be of the same Nature and Original with that of Words, equally
Arbitrary, and equally depending either upon Custom or Institution; this (says
he) will not relieve me in this matter, Page 280.
for words are signs of things, and those of a mixed Nature; partly Natural,
partly by Consent: But they are not of one kind, and signify things of
another; for say the Schoolmen, where words are signs of sacred things, they
are signs of them as things, but not as sacred. But do you, or any of his own
Lay-proselytes understand this Scholastic subtilty? Does he not leave you (as
himself speaks) in the Briers of unscriptural Distinctions? However, Page 310.
why may we not affirm the same thing of Ceremonies, that he is here pleased to
appropriate to Words? And then, I hope, there is no harm done; and once, for
peace and quiet sake, we will so far gratify the tenderness of their
Consciences, and curiosity of their Fancies, as to promise never to ascribe any
other significancy to things, than what himself is here content to bestow upon
words; and then, I hope, that will appease all their Doubts, and satisfy all
their Scruples. And yet after all, these Metaphysical abstractions will not
relieve us in this affair. For I know no words, whose signification can be
pretended to be natural, (as he talks) unless Tintinnabulum, and some few
others that happen to strike our Organs with the same kind of noise, as the
things themselves do of which they are significative. And none of these that I
know of are concerned in the Worship of God, unless the Clinking of the Saints
Bell; so that by this casual Concession we have regained back the Grant of its
lawful Use and Custom. Though in their strict Reformation it was abolish't for
the more Orthodox way of Chiming: which yet carried in it as much
Symbolical-Resemblance to the ensuing Sermon, as any of our Ceremonies do to
the matters of their signification. But to be ingenuous, and confess the plain
and undisguised truth to a Friend: I am at an utter loss for a Reply to this
profound subtilty of the Schoolmen, because I understand neither its sense nor
its pertinency: unless you will accept of this, that sacred things have words
to signify them not only as things, but as sacred, otherwise there are no
words to express Divine Worship as such, for that as such is sacred: And
therefore in spite of Scotus and all his Myrmidons, I dare positively aver,
That words used in Religious Worship, do not only signify things as things,
but things as sacred; because if they should not, they were no signs of
Religious Worship. So that you see notwithstanding this unscriptural
Distinction, (which yet you know by our Authors Principles is not to be
attended to in our present Enquiry) my comparison between the signification of
Words and Ceremonies stands firm as the Pillars of the Earth, and the
Foundations of our Faith. But are not tender Consciences come to a fine pass,
when they shall remonstrate to the Decrees of Princes, and the Laws of
Commonwealths, upon such shadows of scruple, and shall run People into such
woeful Divisions and Disorders for a senseless Word? They cannot but have a
mighty Reverence for Government, and a deep sense of Duty to Superiors, that
can wriggle themselves out of their Obedience by such little shifts, and
satisfy their Consciences with such lamentable excuses. In a word, is it not a
sad Reflection to consider how many of the People of this Nation have been
scared out of their natural Candor and Civility, and Wits too, by a few idle
Words, and a few idle Men?

CHAP. VI.
The Contents.
Our Authors perseverance in Cavil and Calumny. His disingenuous way of
shifting the proof and pursuit of their own Arguments. All their Writers have
ever begun and ended with Cartwright, and either wrangle themselves into
Conformity, as he did, or run themselves into perfect Enthusiasm and Phanatick
Madness. Their impertinent way of defending their own Objections, when they
should prove them. Nothing can be charged of being a Part of divine Worship,
unless it pretends to divine Institution. This man's stubbornness and invincible
Resolution in Schism. A speech to the Non-conformists to encourage them in
their separation, in the Language, and out of the Writings of J. O. Their bold
way of abusing the People, and the Word of God, by laying the same stress upon
their own Fancies as upon the Fundamentals of the Gospel. Our Authors Plea in
their own behalf from the Prescription of one way of Worship in the Word of
God, the most effectual Argument against Toleration. This Plea, as managed by
this Author, is as directly levelled against all other Parties, excepting only
the Independents, as against the Church of England. It Is the only Pretense of
all Impostures, and it is serviceable to no other end. The silliness and
palpable disingenuity of our Authors Quotations out of the Fathers. Their
Fundamental Principle equally overthrows all manner of Church-setlement. By his
Principles and Good Will nothing is to be tolerated but Independency. The
Precedents alleged, both out of the Old and New Testament, in the former
Treatise for the warrantableness of uncommanded Ceremonies, cleared and
vindicated. Our Adversaries way of affrighting the Rabble with hard and
senseless words. The vanity of attending to these men's Proposals of mutual
Condescension. A farther Prosecution of my Challenge to the whole Party of
Non-conformists to answer Mr. Hooker. A notorious and intolerable Instance of
our Authors disingenuity in falsifying the design of my Discourse.

. 1. THus far have I made good my ground against all this man's Talk and
Confidence (for there, and there alone, lies all his strength) and should now
proceed to an Examination of his Censures against the fifth Chapter of my
former discourse; For against the fourth he only drops his old Calumny, viz.
that what I have there discoursed against the absolute and uncontrollable Power
of the Civil Magistrate, as it is stated in Mr. Hobs's Hypothesis of Government,
is destructive of my own Pretensions in the foregoing part of my discourse,
where, as he is resolved to bear me down, I have made humane Laws the sole and
supreme Rule of Religious Worship, insomuch that the Magistrate of every Nation
has Power to order and appoint what Religion his Subjects shall profess and
observe, Page 97.
and thereby binds their Consciences to profess and observe that which is by
him so appointed (and nothing else are they to observe) making it their Duty in
Conscience so to do; and the highest Crime or sin to do any thing to the
contrary; and that whatever the precise Truth in these matters be, etc. The
horror of which bold Calumny I have already, I hope, competently enough
discovered and detested. But it is the choicest Topic of this man's Logic to
falsify Arguments, and represent his own Inferences as his Adversaries
Opinions, and then load them with loud and lusty Conclusions: And then they are
Oracles and Demonstrations to the People that understand neither the Truth nor
Consequences of things; and therefore does he repeat this fundamental Forgery
in all Places, and upon all Occasions, and it is the only thing that gives
strength and color to all his other Trifles and Impertinencies, upon this he
at first founds all his Reasonings, and into this he at last resolves them,
insomuch that his whole Book is but one huge Lie 400 Pages long. And this
Confidence takes so successfully with the believing Disciples, that they will
at all adventure lay wagers, that all those Prodigious Untruths he has obtruded
on me are my own positive and direct Assertions. But having manfully quit
himself in this Performance, he baulks the whole discourse of this Chapter, as
being of no Concern to himself and his dear Brotherhood; and so advances to the
next, where we might trace him through all his former Methods of Truth and
Ingenuity; but at present we will wave that Province, and rather choose first to
discharge our selves of those froward Exceptions, wherewith he labors to
entangle and perplex the design of my sixth Chapter, because the matters there
debated are of a more close and immediate Affinity to the nature of those
things, that fell under our last Consideration; and therefore (seeing he has
been pleased to break the Coherence of my method) I conceive it will be a more
perspicuous and useful way of proceeding to dispatch them both together;
especially when what remains to be there examined, is either mere impertinence
to the drift of my Discourse, or relies merely upon the Principles here already
confuted. For what he dictates in defense of their darling Principle, that
nothing ought to be practiced in the Worship of God, but what is prescribed in
the Word of God, is either such loose and general Tattle, as whether it be true
or false, it does neither service nor disservice to our present Enquiry: Or if
there be any thing more close and direct to the Purpose, it resolves it self
entirely into the Dispute of the last Chapter; in that he restrains the
Universality of this Maxim to instituted and significant Ceremonies, which
being exempted upon this score, he seems not unwilling to allow the Governors
of the Church a Power of determining natural Circumstances for the ends of
Order and Decency; so that in the last Result of things all this Cluster of
Trifles and Impertinencies grows upon the stock of the former Principle, and
therefore that being cut down root and branch, this that depends so entirely
upon it, must by consequence fall and perish with it. For which reason I had
once resolved with my self wholly to omit its distinct Examination, and only to
put them upon the proof of this Principle, as it is here stated by our Author,
out of the written Word of God. But because he here counterfeits more
assurance, and pretends more Accuracy; and (to speak in his own style) by the
Longsomness of his Discourse, and the number of his Propositions, seems more
elaborate than in all the former Parts of his survey; and withal to avoid their
Clamor, and other men's suspicion of dealing with him as he has dealt with me,
in wholly baulking the last Chapter of my Discourse, that was most pertinent
and material to his Pretenses; I have at last resolved to undergo the Penance
of a Reply: and thus it follows.

. 2. In the first place then he flings down the Ball, viz. that nothing ought
to be established in the Worship of God, but what is authorized by some Precept
or Example in the Word of God; and then tells us, If men would lay aside their
Prejudices, Page 303.
corrupt Interests, and Passions, they would see at first view that this
Principle is not foreign unto what is in an hundred places declared and taught
in the Scripture. But, Sir, Big words break no shins, nor will Brags and
Threatenings pass for current Demonstrations: This is the only thing to be
proved, and the Principle it self refuses to accept of any other evidence, but
what is expressly approved and warranted by holy Writ; yet when he comes to
vouch its sacred Authority, he only gives in his own Affidavit. And if you will
take his word, you may rest assured there are hundred of Texts in the sacred
Volume that have adopted the Patronage of his Cause; though at present he is
not at leisure to check and rebuke our Confidence with one single Testimony.
And therefore is it not strange, that when the Issue of the whole Controversy
depends so absolutely upon this Performance, yet whenever they are forced upon
its Attempt, they still adjourn the Dispute, and respite the only Proof that we
demand, and they ought to produce, to a fairer and more seasonable Opportunity.
And this has ever been one of their most serviceable Arts of trifling; in
matters of a more remote Concernment, and secondary Evidence, they are
confident, and abound with Noise and Reasoning, but when they come to approach
the Vitals of the Question, their Fury immediately abates, and they are struck
with a sudden speechlessness, and you must wait for the farther Prosecution of
their Argument, till they are restored to the Power of Speech and use of
Tongue, and then do they entertain you with all the old Tale over again, till
they come just to the former difficulty, and then are they seized upon by the
former Astonishment. And by this Artifice have they so long kept up this
Controversy in spite of so many public and dishonorable Baffles. They have
always been brisk and talkative in the beginning of the Dispute till they are
run up into the main difficulty, and driven into the streights of the Enquiry,
and there they fling down their Arms, sometimes cry Quater, and sometimes
escape by flight, and so at present the War ends, and Peace ensues; till some
other pert Fellow chance to take up the Cudgels, and he uses the same Play till
he is brought to the same foil, and there is an end of him, and so on from
Generation to Generation. And hence it is not unobservable, that all their
Writers have ever begun and ended with Cartwright, and as he wrangled himself
into Obedience and Conformity, so have they all at length either disputed
themselves out of their former folly, or into a farther Madness: And the zeal
of their warmest Bigots has ever ended either in a peaceable Reduction to the
Church, or in some wilder and more extravagant separation. By continual
wrangling they contract a sour and froward Humor. Every thing annoys their
fretful and exulcerated Minds: They are peevish and displeased with their own
Friends, and their own Fraternity; and this transports them into some
newfangled Pranks and Projects. Hence Coppingers Raptures, and Visions, and
familiar Conferences with Almighty God; hence Hackets Ecstasies, and
Revelations, and blasphemous Prophesies; and hence the mad Frekes and Treasons
of Penry, that precious Martyr of Jesus Christ. An habitual discontent and
restlesness of mind heated their choler and melancholy blood into perfect
Frenzy and Outrage. But the most remarkable Instance of this Capricious Humor
is the story of Robert Brown, who (you know) left Cartwright and the
Disciplinarians in Babylon as well as the Church of England, and could find no
Church in the World pure enough for his own Communion, till he had established
one of his own Draught and Projectment, and then nothing was or could be
agreeable to the Word of God but what was contained in his Pamphlets of
Reformation. But having run his Followers into such an obstinate and
unfortunate Schism, the man himself becomes unsettled in his own mind, and
unconstant to his own Principles, and consumes the Remainder of his days in
discontent and restlesness of Thoughts. Sometimes in his lucid Intervals he
would suffer himself to be reclaimed to some sobriety of behavior; by and by
in a sullen and peevish humor he falls into his old fits of Raving, and then
every thing dislikes him, and he falls out with his own draughts of
Reformation: Anon in a pensive and melancholy mood he breaks all into Tears and
Invectives against Cartwright and the Disciplinarian Brethren; the natural
Pursuance of whose Principles had run him into all those miseries and
Calamities of life; and thus by reason of his frequent Relentings and perpetual
Relapses, the miserable Wretch was continually tossed from Gaol to Gaol, till
having tried his Fortune in two and thirty Prisons, and being tired with grief
and poverty, he at last setles in Conformity for a good Benefice, where he
lived to a great Age without making any more disturbances and defections in the
Church, till he died frekish in Northampton Gaol, whither he had been committed
for breach of peace, and disorderly behavior, and so (as it was meet) perished
this great Prophet in that little Jerusalem. And it is nothing but this mixture
of Pride and Peevishness that bewitches men into a love of Schisms and
Divisions; they are so highly conceited of themselves, and so willing to
censure and despise others, that nothing shall either suit or satisfy their
humor, unless it be of their own ordering and contrivance. And then must these
fantastic Sots attempt to reform the World; they must be sure to condemn and
vilify the wisdom of Superiors, and fancy themselves as Men appointed by
special Providence to give check to the errors and follies of Mankind. And
what so delicious to people of this complexion, as to be the first Founders of
Changes and Innovations? And the most famous Impostors and Enthusiasts of all
Ages have ever bewrayed rank symptoms of this spightful humor both in their
principles and practices. And I know some Men, in whose haughty and contracted
Looks Schism and Singularity are as legible as if they carried the mark of a
thorough godly Reformation in their Foreheads: and what will not such Persons
attempt or endure for the glory and satisfaction of leading a Party?

. 3. In the next place (to skip over his old complaint of the vehemence of my
style) he adds a caution of his own to limit and explain this general Position,
viz. Page 305.
That nothing ought to be established in the Worship of God as a part of that
Worship, or made constantly necessary in its observance, without the Warranty
before mentioned; for this is expressly contended for by them who maintain it,
and who reject nothing upon the Authority of it, but what they can prove to be
a pretended part of Religious Worship as such. This is another eminent instance
of their shuffling way of talk: for whereas this Principle was first framed and
managed by themselves as the most forcible Objection to beat down the
established Institutions of the Church; it was immediately replied, That it is
neither true nor certain; and they have always been pressed and demanded from its
first starting, to prove its evidence, and make good its certainty out of the
Word of God: but in stead of harkening to so hard a task, they have only
studied to defend and guard it with a multitude of precarious Distinctions, and
unwarrantable Limitations; all which amounts to nothing higher than a proofless
and impertinent Circle of talk. For it is nothing to us whether they are able to
defend it from being apparently false, unless they are able to prove it
apparently true; because there are swarms of Opinions in the World that are
certainly neither; and therefore unless they will undertake to make good its
undoubted truth, it is of no force to condemn and confute the lawfulness of any
established Practice and Prescription in the Church of God, which nothing can
make criminal but some inconsistency with some certain Duty: so that till it is
competently demonstrated that this Aphorism is prescribed as a Rule to all
Christians, they shoot shamefully both short and beside the Mark, whilst they
only endeavor to guard and secure its probability with their own arbitrary
Limitations. Thus whereas it was first urged by the Authors of the Admonition,
it was immediately answered, It is most true, Page 21.
that nothing ought to be tolerated in the Church, as necessary unto Salvation,
or as an Article of Faith, except it be expressly contained in the Word of God.
-- But that no Ceremony, Order, Discipline, or kind of Polity, may be in the
Church, except the same be expressed in the Word of God, is a great and
intolerable absurdity. The Church being trusted with an Authority to make
Orders and Ceremonies, as shall from time to time be thought most expedient and
profitable for the same, so that nothing be done contrary to the Word, or
repugnant to the same. To which T. C. replies, Defense of the Admonit. p. 2^.
Sect. 3.
It is true indeed, if they be not against the Word of God, and profitable for
the Church, they are to be received as those things, which God by his Church
does command; but there is the Question. But there is not the Question; and it
is so far from attempting to prove or justify the Argument, that it utterly
relinquisheth it to the Mercy of the Adversary. For the Question is, Whether
the Institutions of the Church ought to be repealed by virtue of this
Principle, that they are not expressly prescribed and authorized in the Word of
God? But this he forsakes by this Answer, and flies to a new Argument, that
they ought to be removed, not because they are uncommanded in the Word of God,
but purely because they are unprofitable to the Church of God. So that the old
untenable pretense was immediately yielded up at the first Summons; and a new
one taken up that was never before pretended, nor ever after proved. And in
this shifting way of arguing, is that Man exactly followed by this Author, (who
is admirably accomplished in his choicest Abilities, viz. a bold Face, and a
loose Tongue:) For by the Limitation here by him assigned, he shifts the old
Enquiry, Whether any thing may be practiced in the Worship of God, that is not
authorized in the Word of God? No, he is willing to allow it, provided it be
not extended to such things as are parts of Divine Worship; and he will reject
nothing upon its Authority, but what he is able (but never willing) to prove to
be a pretended part of Religious Worship as such: so that the state of the
Controversy is now shifted to this dispute, Whether the Ceremonies enjoined
and established in the Church of England, are pretended parts of Religious
Worship? and if they are not, he, good Man! for his part has nothing to except
against them upon the score of this Proposition; and yet that they are so, it
therefore concerns not him to prove, because it is the only thing pleaded. And
barely to affirm it is (it seems) enough to his purpose, only to tempt us to a
new trouble of proving that the Ceremonies prescribed in the Church of England
do not pretend to the Dignity of being parts of Divine Worship: And when that
is done, these Squirrels can as easily frisk to a fresh pretense and a new
Limitation; and thus by this dancing and capering humor, it is an easy matter
to perpetuate all the Controversies in the World, how plainly soever
determinable, to the coming of Elias: and after this rate shall the Barbers
Basin remain Mambrino's Helmet, and the Asses Panel a Furniture for the Great
Horse till the Day of Judgment. However, this advantage I have gained, that
this Principle is yielded up as to the general and unlimited Import of the
words; and therefore I hope hereafter I may justly challenge them not to impose
it upon the credulity of the People without the allay of the former Caution:
for at present I am sure that their Followers understand it in the broad and
literal sense of the words, and that themselves are wont to discourse of it
without any regard to these new Restraints and Limitations. And if hereafter
they will forbear these loose and general Expressions, they will lay upon us
some Obligation to acknowledge their Ingenuity, and may possibly contribute
somewhat toward disabusing the People; who though they have so easily
swallowed this Proposition in its unlimited meaning, are yet unacquainted with
the Antidote of this restriction; and therefore when they have cast up their
old prejudice, perhaps they will not so easily take in this new Notion. In the
mean time, I have nothing more to press upon our Author, than that he would be
persuaded to slake his Zeal in this Controversy, till he has at least
attempted to prove the Institutions of the Church of England to be pretended
parts of Divine Worship; though this he can never hope to perform, but either
by outfacing her Public Declarations, she having so expressly protested against
it in the account of her Ceremonies, that she has for that purpose prefix't to
the Book of Common Prayer: or else by proving that how innocently soever she
may intend, they of their own accord commence parts of Religious Worship by
virtue of their Institution. And if this he will undertake, it is easy to
foretell (without being Prophet or Prophets Son) that his whole attempt will
spend it self merely upon significant Ceremonies; and there, I hope, I have
already prevented all their weak and little Arts. However, to make all secure,
let me only add, That no Power whatsoever can adopt any thing into the Worship
of God under any less pretense than of Divine Authority: so that whatsoever
Ceremonies the Church may deem expedient to prescribe for Order and Comeliness,
unless she go about to warrant her Injunctions by pretending Divine
Institution, circumstances of Worship they may be, but parts they never can.
And of this I thought I had already given a passable proof, and so
satisfactory, that our Author has nothing to except against it, Page 352,
but by pretending its inconsistency with some other parts of my Discourse: but
for the present, that is no Objection against the positive truth and direct
reason of the Argument it self; and, in short, it is this: All Rituals, and
Ceremonies, and Postures, and Manners of performing the outward Expressions of
Devotion, are not from their own nature capable of being parts of Religion; and
therefore unless we used and imposed them as such, it is lamentably precarious
to charge their Determination with Will Worship, because that consists in
making those things parts of Religion, that God has not made so: so that when
the Church expressly declares against this use of them, and professes to injoin
them only as mere circumstances of Religious Worship, it is apparent that it
cannot by imposing them make any Additions to the Worship of God; but only
provides, that what God has required be performed in a decent and orderly
manner. And this is the real difference between the Christian and Mosaic
Ceremonies, in that theirs were made lasting and necessary parts of their
Religion, by being established with the same impress of Divine Authority as the
Duties of the Moral Law; whereas ours are not any integral parts of Divine
Worship, but purely accidental and alterable circumstances of Religious
Services; and so are not of the same standing Necessity and Obligation as were
the Mosaic Rites, but as they were first established by our Superiors
according to the common Rules of decency and discretion, so may they be
reversed by the same Authority. In a word, they are of the same Nature and
Obligation with all other matters of humane Laws, that are only disposed of by
the public Wisdom, as it shall by the common notices of things judge them most
convenient to public Ends.

. 4. And now upon this Bottom we might fairly wind up this Controversy, for I
am secure this ever has been, and ever will be its real Issue: But our Author
cries no, no. For if this Principle should fail us, Page 306,
there are yet other general Maxims, which Non-conformists adhere unto, and
suppose not justly questionable, which they can firmly stand and build upon in
the management of their Plea, as to all differences between me and them, i. e.
He is a resolved and incorrigible Schismatic, and the plain design of these
words is only to encourage the People to stand firm to their Principles; what
though we may be stormed out of our old Elsibeth-pretensions, let us not
immediately resign up our Colors, and march out of our Cause, we have, when
all is lost, unknown retreats and fastnesses (as all Banditi and Moss-Troopers
have) to secure our selves from perfect discovery and destruction. This man is
a Demetrius, a Ringleader in sedition, and therefore it more peculiarly
concerns him to bestir himself, and keep the Mutineers together, and raise and
animate their fainting spirits against discouragements and despondencies. The
People may murmur among themselves, Is this poor Pretense the only ground of
all our Schisms and Disturbances? Have our Leaders no greater grievance against
the public Laws than this lank and pitiful Story, which themselves (it seems)
dare not own without mincing and disguising it with their own shuffling, and
(to us) unintelligible Reservations? Is this all the Popery and Idolatry of the
Church of England, against which they are still inveighing with so much Zeal
and Bitterness at the Meetings? Must all this noise and stir be made, and the
King and Parliament thus disturbed for this? Neighbors, let us be advised, and
not create all this needless trouble to our selves and others, only to
countenance their Pride and Peevishness. The plain troth is, their Zeal was so
flushed with success in the late Tumults, as transported them to too much
Outrage and Cruelty against the Church; and now because (forsooth) they are
ashamed to acknowledge their fault and folly (for what disgrace so grievous to
proud and self-opinionated men, as to confess an Error) we (fools as we are)
must be inveigled and drawn in to bear out their Extravagances. Come, come,
this is the true Mystery of Separation: For you may see they themselves
(whatever they pretend) are not so fond as seriously to believe the Public
Worship Popish and Idolatrous. Do we not know that the Chiefs of the
Presbyterians came constantly to Church, and to Common Prayer till of late, and
those that are more modest and peaceable do so still, which it is apparent they
could never have done, had they really deemed it Idolatry. How then shall we
justify our selves in running thus giddily into these wild and unwarrantable
Schisms? Does not common sense tell us (though perhaps we understand nor their
School subtilties) that it is a base and unworthy thing thus insolently to
affront the Kings Laws, when we may avoid it without breaking Gods? And
therefore seeing, whatever Reasons they may have for their own Nonconformity,
we are satisfied, by their own example, they have none big enough to warrant
our Separation. Let us then resolve with one Consent to be peaceable and
ingenuous, and return every man to his own home, and his own Parish Church.

But bear back, this great Chieftain appears, for he is still upon all
Occasions the most bold and forward Orator to hearten his backsliding
Brethren against Doubts and Despondencies, witness January 31. in the year 48.
when those wretched Miscreants wanted some spiritual Comfort and Cordial
against the horror of their Yesterdays villainy. And thus he appears in this
present straight, and thus you may suppose him, after Preface of solemn wink,
to bespeak the mutinous Churches. The Reader may conj^cture with who^^ (...) I
plow f^r ^his ^l^quence. M^^t of th^se Pasages b^^ng coll^cted ou^ of two
Sermons o^ J.O. one preached on Jan 31. 1648. and the other on a day of
thanksgiving for the Kings Defeat at Worcester.
My Friends, do you consider what you attempt? Do you know what dreadful and
horrible things are still behind? Alas! False Worship, Superstition, Tyranny,
and Cruelty lie at the Bottom, and when these have possessed the Governors of
a Nation, and wrapped in the consent of the greatest Part of the People, who have
been acquainted with the mind of God, that People and Nation (assure your
selves) without unpresidented Mercy is obnoxious to remediless Ruin. If you
think Babylon is confined to Rome and its open Idolatry; you know nothing of
Babylon or the new Jerusalem: no, no, their darling Errors are stones of the
old Babel, closing and coupling with that tremendous Fabric: which the man of
sin has erected to dethrone Jesus Christ. You may venture to taste if you
please, but remember who forewarned you, there is death in the Episcopal Pot.
But as for your own Parts, let all the World know, and let the House of England
know this day, that you lie unthankfully under as full a dispensation of mercy
and grace, as ever Nation in the World enjoyed; well, you will one day know
what it is to undervalue the glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ ( i. e.
the seditious Preachings of I.O.) Good Lord! What would helpless Macedonians
give for one of your Enjoyments? O that Wales, O that Ireland, O that France,
where shall I stop? I would offend none, but give me leave to say, O that
every, I had almost said, O that any Part of the World had such unparalled
helps and means of Grace as you, who yet are so unworthy as scarce to
acknowledge the Mercy: The Lord break the pride of your Hearts, before it break
the staff of your Bread, and the help of your Salvation. But as for us Poor
nothings, the Ministers of the Lord Christ in the Work of the Gospel, we can
spend our sweat and our Lungs upon the barren and the parched corners of the
Land, upon those poor Gospelless Creatures, that as yet sit in darkness and the
shadow of death, and have none to hold out the bread of life to their fainting
souls. Does not Wales cry, and the North cry, yea, and the West cry, come and
help us? But this it is; though the sound of the Gospel pass through all your
streets, though your Villages enjoy them, who preach Peace, and bring glad
tidings of good things, so that neither you, nor your Fathers, nor your Fathers
Fathers, (and this God knows is a serious truth) ever saw the like before us:
Though Manna fall round about your Tents every day, yet Manna is loathed as
light bread; no, the Presence of Christ it seems is not Recompense for the loss
of your Swine; yes, you had rather be again in Egypt, than hazard a Pilgrimage
in the Wilderness. You forsooth boggle at tumults and disorders, poor ignorant
souls, how unacquainted are you with the methods and workings of Providence?
For why! these are the only signs and symptoms of Reformation, great works for
God will cause great troubles among men: And for the carrying on of the
Interest of Christ and the Gospel, God is resolved to work wonderful
Providential Alterations in the Governments of the Earth; what replied brave
Martin Luther, when it was objected to him, that that could not be the cause of
God, that was the cause of so much desolation, Ego nisi tumultus istos viderem,
Christum in mundo esse non crederem. I tell you, he who is the only Potentate,
will sooner or later shake all the Monarchies of the Western World: All the
Kings of the Earth have sucked in invented (and what it seems with him is
coincident) Idolatrous Worship from the Cup of Fornication, held out to them by
the Roman Whore: Show me seven of them that ever yet labored sincerely to
advance the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, and I dare boldly say, Octavus quis
fuerit nondum constat. The whole Constitution of the Governments of the Nations
is cemented from top to bottom with the Interest of Antichrist, and nothing but
a thorough shaking can ever cleanse them. And to this end has the Lord been
pleased in his good Providence to hold forth a new light to his People of this
Generation, whereby they might discover the Mystery of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Tyranny. And you are called forth to punish Tyrants, break the Jaws of
Oppressors, and disappoint the designs of Bloody and Revengeful Persecutours,
and to roll up the Heavens of the Nations like a Scroll, and to serve him in
your several Capacities in the high places of Armageddon. Does not the Lord,
think you, require that in the great things which he has to accomplish in this
Generation, all his should close with him? And what that is I have often and
long since informed you out of his own Word, and would you have greater
Assurance? Read the Prophet Isaiah 23.9. Verily the Lord of Hosts has purposed
to pollute the pride of all Glory, and to bring into Contempt all the
honorable of the Earth. Now does God call forth his Saints to execute
vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishments upon the People, to bind their
Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron? Does he bring you
forth to burn the Whore, to fight with the Beast, and overcome him, with his
Followers? And will he not give glorious Assistances to your Undertakings? I
tell you, you shall be assisted, protected, carried on, though it cost him the
making his Bow quite naked. What though some prove false and treacherous, some
base and cowardly? What though men every where combine and associate themselves
against you? What though whole Kingdoms and mighty Armies appear for your
ruin, help you need, and help you shall have, (or I tell you once again) God
will make his Bow quite naked. He will put on the Garments of vengeance for
clothing, and cover himself with Zeal as a Cloak: and according to their
deeds, accordingly he will repay them, fury to his Adversaries, Recompense to
his Enemies, to the Island he will repay Recompense, Isa. 59.18. And though all
other means should fail of success, it is in your Power to pray and believe the
Beast into destruction, Antichrist into the Pit, and Magog to ruin. Do but
believe that the Enemies of Jesus Christ shall be made his Footstool, that the
Nations shall be his Inheritance, that he shall reign gloriously in beauty,
that he shall smite in pieces the heads over diverse Nations, and live in the
Faith of these things, and as it will give you the sweetness of them, before
they come, so it will hasten their coming beyond the endeavors of thousands,
yea, Millions of Armed men. But, my Brethren, if there be any of you here, that
do not only refuse to come forth to help the Lord against the Mighty, but that
entertain thoughts to give up the Worship of God to Superstition, his Churches
to Tyranny, and the Doctrine of the Gospel to Episcopal Corruptions: Let him
give glory to God, and repent speedily, and passionately, otherwise it will be
Bitterness in the end; it will; it will. And therefore as you tender the
salvation of your poor souls, and the continuance of the Gospel to your
Families and Posterity, not one syllable more of this Tumultuatingness of
spirit against the Prophets of the Lord, and so every man to his Tents, O
Israel.

. 5. Sir, have you not read how that when discontent had shattered the Roman
Legions into Mutiny and Sedition, and that the Excesses of Outrage and
Insolence, like the violence of a resistless Torrent, had broken down all the
Banks of Government and Discipline amongst them; yet at the presence of a
Scipio or Fabricius they did immediately retire into place and order? His look
charmed them into Obedience, and with a Nod he awed away Confusion; they that
never dreaded Kings, trembled at his voice: that was more affrightful than
assured death. His Authority with three syllables stifled Sedition, disarmed
and confounded the guilty, and they could endure any thing rather than his
frown and his displeasure. And thus is all the noise and tumult of the
discontented Churches hushed into peace and order; this great Commander looks
the murmur of the People into silence and obedience, and the Winds and Seas
obey his Voice. He can raise or allay storms and seditions with the breath of
his mouth; it is but crying out, The Cause of God, and popular zeal is
immediately in Arms, and Mutiny; do but tell them, the Gospel lies at stake,
and the Rabble will die Martyrs to their own Credulity. This sacred Imposture
will as much secure their Obedience as the Roman Discipline, and the Roman
Legions could never be more forward for the glory of the Commonwealth, then
the Congregational Churches will be for the Beauty and Purity of Christ's
Ordinances. And such has ever been the boldness of this man, he scorns to vouch
any less warrantable Commission for his own Dreams and Fancies than the express
and immediate Commands of divine Authority; all his singularities must be
Gospellized, and all his seditious Doctrines broached out of St. Paul. The
wisdom of God must be prostituted to his folly and boldness, the Word of God
profaned to authorize his pride and zealous madness; all his phanatick Pranks
must be charged upon the Scriptures, and he has a Text for every extravagant
Attempt; and whatever the Principles of Reason and common Honesty cannot
account for, the old Prophets shall not only foretell, but sanctify. And
perhaps never did all the Profane Wits in the World make more bold with the
Word of God than this daring man, there is scarce any more remarkable Text in
the whole Bible, that he has not turned into Ridicule; he can guard every thing
he says and does with files of Chapter and Verse, as it were with Pikes and
Protestations, and can draw up Remonstrances and Declarations, as well as
Primers out of the Word of God; in brief, with him every thing is Scripture,
and Scripture is every thing. And this is the true Mystery of all our Schisms
and Divisions; it is not their Contest about Ceremonies and things Indifferent,
but it is their Pulpit-talk about the Cause of God and the Gospel that
transports the Peoples Zeal, and there still things are so represented as if
they alone were the People of God, and we the professed Enemies of the Lord
Christ; and the least thing they will say, when they are most cool and
moderate, is, that we are revolted from the Purity of the Gospel to
Superstition and Will Worship, and that there is no Beauty and Purity of
Ordinances but in their Meetings and Conventicles. Sermon to Parliam. April 29.
1646. Page 42.
The Fox in the Fable (says I. O.) had a thousand wiles to save himself from
the Hunters: but the Cat knew unum magnum, one great thing that would surely do
it. Earthly supports and contentments are but a thousand failing wiles, which
will all vanish in the time of need: The Gospel, and Christ in the Gospel, is
that unum magnum, that unum necessarium, which alone will stand us in any
stea^. Our Adversaries may discourse like Politicians, and make a thousand
pretenses for the necessity of Uniformity, in order to the peace and security
of Government: but we will trust to one great pretense, the Command of God, and
the Cause of the Gospel; and that with the People will do our business more
effectually than all their Stratagems of Policy.

. 6. And thus is it our Authors present design to enlarge and prolong the
Controversy, and to set up new Mormo's in our Churches, to fray away the
People from our Communion, though they all run themselves into the same
Principle, that the Word of God is the adequate Rule of the Worship of God;
yet the very appearance of number is no little security to the Cause, and
satisfaction to the Proselytes; and though they are but so many several
Repetitions of the same thing, yet that makes a show that they have a great
deal to say for themselves, and that is enough. And thus were our Author put
upon the proof of these general Maxims here by him laid down, he would and must
wholly setle himself upon this bottom. Let us briefly examine them: the two
first are, Page 306.
(1.) Whatever the Scripture has indeed prescribed and appointed to be done and
observed in the Worship of God, and the Government of the Church, that is
indeed to be done and observed. (2.) That nothing in conjunction with, or
addition unto what is so appointed, ought to be admitted, if it be contrary to
the general Rules, or particular preceptive Instructions of the Scripture.
Where you may observe, Ibid.
that these Maxims are such as they will adhere unto, and stand upon, in the
management of the Plea as to the differences between us. So that their plain
meaning, as applied to their present contest with the Church of England, is,
that the Nonconformists way of Worship is prescribed and appointed in the
Word of God; whereas our Additions to it are contrary either to the general
Rules; or particular Instructions of Scripture: and if this be not the design
of these Propositions, they are no other way pertinent to the management of
this Plea. And now are not these admirable Principles to be pleaded in an
Apology for Liberty of Conscience? The Governors of the Nation are bound to
indulge us in our different Practices and Persuasions about the Worship of
God, because there is but one particular Form allowable, only that which is
prescribed and enjoined in the Word of God, and that is ours; and therefore
are they, and all the Princes of Christendom, tied up to an exact Conformity to
that Rule, and not to endure any other Forms that deviate from its
Prescription, unless they will tolerate Men in an open and avowed violation of
the Law of God. So unhappy is this Man, as still to turn his own Weapons upon
himself; and stab his Cause in its own defense, as desperate Men choose to die
by their own hands, that they may escape their Enemies Swords. He could not
have invented a Principle more expressly destructive of his own Pretenses; for
if nothing be lawful in the Worship of God, but what is prescribed in the Word
of God; and if nothing that is unlawful may be tolerated by the Civil
Magistrate; and if there be but one particular Form appointed in the Word of
God, it cannot avoid to be concluded that all others are unlawful, and by
consequence intolerable. And thus are the Tables turned, and now the state of
the Controversy is not, whether both Parties may be safely and innocently
tolerated: no, but whether they or we: only they, (says he) because their way
of Worship is indispensably prescribed and appointed by God himself: not we,
because ours is contrary to his own Rules and Prescriptions; and therefore the
case is plain, it ought to be abolish't without mercy or delay, unless Men may
be permitted by connivence of Public Authority, to contradict the express Will
of God under pretense of his own Worship. But if this be our case, there is no
remedy but we must hereafter play a new Game in our own defense. They that
declare they will give no Quarter, have no reason to expect any. And this is a
mighty aggravation of these Men's former miscarriages and present impenitence,
that they can be so bold and confident in their demands from those, that they
have so lately treated so barbarously; and yet are so far from giving any
tokens of their repentance, that they publicly suggest, that if ever it comes
to their turn in the course of Providential alterations, they shall again
expect the same usage. But is it not a pleasant Topic of Persuasion, to move
us to treat them with all tenderness and civility, because they never did show
us any mercy, and if it lie in their power, never will? (a thing in which we
have reason enough to be satisfied, without any of these Public Declarations.)
Like the Country Swain that resolved upon his Deathbed, if he died, to forgive
his Enemy; but swore the utmost revenge if he ever recovered. Thus will these
Men, when their Reformation is in danger of breathing its last, pretend to
tolerate us only because they cannot help it; but when they can, any thing is
tolerate but Popery and Episcopacy. And this Man, this tender Man, that will
not endure any of his Disciples to be so much as present at our Antichristian
way of Worship, is, no doubt, a fit Agent (not to mention some other excellent
Qualifications) to treat with us for Indulgence and mutual Forbearance; and he
that declares by his most avowed Principles, he will not allow us permission
when he is out of Power; would, no doubt, be so generous as to grant us all
civil Liberty, were he in it. Go thy way, for a wretched Apologist! thy
Persuasions are just as wise as thy Arguments.

. 7. But farther, Is this the Plea of all Nonconformists, or but of one Party?
If of all, then have we them at old Burleigh's Lock, that engaged to grant
their demands, when they had agreed among themselves what to demand: It Is well
known into how many different Rendezvouses the whole Body of the Nonconformists
are subdivided, and withal that their Pretenses and Persuasions stand at as
wide a distance and open defiance to each other, as to the Church of England;
and therefore the whole Body can neither reasonably pretend this Plea, nor
possibly be allowed it: For howsoever the different Factions may at present
seem to piece together for the common Interest; yet when this comes to be put
in practice, they immediately fall all in pieces again, every Party has its
different meaning, and appropriates the claim of Divine Right to its own way,
and every Faction bandies against every Faction for its own Ius Divinum. They
are all zealous for erecting the Throne of Jesus Christ, but the only
contention is, which of them shall sit at his Right and his Left hand, or
rather in it. And whenever they are mounted, they lord it with the Insolence of
young Usurpers. And certainly the Scepter of Jesus Christ was never such an
Iron Rod (no not in the Kirk it self) as when it was in the hands of the
Triers, the tenderhearted Triers. And this is our Authors particular design
and intention, that the Independent way of Worship is the only way that is
prescribed and appointed in the Word of God; and therefore that that, and none
other, is lawful and warrantable: so that ('it is plain) this pretense, as he
manages it, is not the Plea of the Nonconformists in their combined strength,
but purely of the Independents in their separated Interest; and that as much in
opposition to the Presbyterians on one hand, and the lower swarms of Sectaries
on the other, as to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England: so
that here every Clan of the Fanatics is engaged as much as we to stand upon
their Guard, and it is made our common Interest to join Forces against his
usurping Pretensions. But this has ever been the crafty method of the
Independents, first to preach general Doctrines, but still to make the
particular Applications to themselves, i. e. to decoy Men into their snares by
their Text and hidden meaning, and then devour them in the opening of the Plot,
that was always reserved for Use and Application.

Thus, are the People of England enraged against them for murdering their
Sovereign? The Doctrine is, Instruments of Gods greatest works and glory, V.
Sermon before the Parliam. Jan. 31. 1648.
are oftentimes the chiefest Objects of a Professing Peoples Curses and
Revenges. And, Men that under God deliver a Kingdom, may have the Kingdoms
Curses for their pains. Are the People transported into Rage against them, for
running our Confusions beyond all visible hopes of setlement and recovery, by
that horrid Act upon the Person of their Prince? The Doctrine is, Men every way
blameless, and to be embraced in their own ways, are oftentimes abhorred and
laden with Curses for following the Lord in his ways. What precious Men should
many be, would they let go the work of God in this Generation? Do any of those
wretched Miscreants begin to think of Hell, and Halters, and, with Judas, stand
aghast at the horror of their Crime? The Doctrine is, In dark and difficult
Dispensations of Providence, Gods choicest Servants are oftentimes ready to
faint under the burden of them. Do some of the old Soldiers and Officers
begin to whisper Cavalierism and Loyalty? The Doctrine is, Plausible
compliances of Men in Authority with those, against whom they are employed, are
treacherous Contrivances against the God of Heaven, by whom they are employed.
Do the Presbyterians and Royalists begin to make head against those bold and
bloody Usurpers? The Doctrine is, God oftentimes gives up a sinful People to a
fruitless contention and fighting with their only Supporters and means of
Deliverance. And thus the Doctrine of this Book is, it is the Duty of King and
Parliament to tolerate tender Consciences, i. e. says this Application,
Independents. And the Text wherewith he vouches this Doctrine, is Matthew. 28.20.
where our Savior binds his Disciples to observe his Commands and Institutions
to the end of the World; but only the Independents observe that form of
Worship and Discipline that he has prescribed and appointed to the practice of
his Church in all Ages. Ergo. So that the most moderate Inference that can be
extracted from these Premises, is, That no form of Public Worship or
Ecclesiastical Government ought to be established in this Nation, till his
Majesty is in good earnest convinced that I. O.'s Independent Catechism (as
shamefully as it is baffled) is faithfully collected out of the Word of God.
These are hard sayings, and yet methinks the two following Propositions seem to
be somewhat more unreasonable, viz. (1.) That nothing ought to be added to what
is injoined in Scripture, Page 307.
without some cogent Reason. Or, Page 308.
(2.) If any things be found necessary, only those must be prescribed that are
most consonant to its general Rules and Institutions. Now the only pertinent
result of these Pleas as to the difference between us, is, that they apprehend
not any such cogent Reason for our Prescriptions, nor any such exact
suitableness in them to the Rules of Scripture, as in their own Models of
Worship and Discipline: and this difference of Judgment about the expediency of
things, shall abundantly warrant their disobedience to the King, and their
separation from the Church: and every Man that has folly or confidence enough
to insist upon this pretense, may claim the privilege of his Conscience to
make new Schisms and Divisions in pursuance of the best Light God has given
him. Is not this an admirable contrivance to keep us for ever wandering in the
endless Mazes and Labyrinths of Reformation, when every pert and hotheaded
Preacher that dreams the Laws of the Church are not altogether so agreeable in
every point and nicety to the Word of God, as his own Phantasms and singular
Hypothesis, shall be permitted the Liberty to withdraw his Obedience and
Conformity to the Church, to set up new Schisms of his own projectment, and to
demand of Public Authority a more thorough godly Reformation. It is not
possible for any Church in the World, upon the allowance of such delicate
Principles, to avoid the mischief of everlasting Schisms and Confusions. But
these pretenses are so infinitely pettish and unreasonable, that I will not
insist any farther upon their Confutation; especially because what I have
already discoursed both of our Obligations to Obedience in all things that are
not certainly and apparently evil; and also of the deep silence of Scripture as
to Forms and Institutions of outward Worship, does so visibly both anticipate
and surmount all appearance of difficulty in such slender Exceptions.

. 8. But our Author having, it seems, provided himself of these Retreats, (that
will give as fair shelter and protection to all the peevish and troublesome Men
in the World, as to himself) he thinks he may now proceed with more safety and
confidence to a particular state and defense of the present Controversy,
Whether nothing may be warrantably established in the Worship of God, but what
is expressly authorized in the Word of God? But here (for what reason himself
best knows, and you may shrewdly conjecture) he chooses to engage in a Wood,
rather than in open Champaign; and in stead of a frank and pertinent account of
his own thoughts, (if he have any) he bewilders himself and his Readers in a
Wilderness of Propositions, and at last leaves them (as himself speaks) in the
Briers of his own unscriptural Distinctions. He lays down a confused heap of
positive and uncertain Assertions, without any Concern in, or Reduction to the
particular matter in debate: To which they have so little relation, that
whether true or false, the Cause is not likely to gain any mighty advantage, or
suffer any considerable damage by them.

In the first place, Page 311, 312, 313.
he repeats his old trite Story, and Systematick Distinction of innate and
revealed Light; where, after some Positions, partly true, partly false, but all
impertinent, he tells us, (and it is great News) that the Enquiry in our present
Contest is only about the latter; Page 313.
and then here he distinguishes between occasional and stated Revelation;
under the former, he reduces the Institution of Sacrifices before the Law,
according to the Liberty he takes of founding Principles, which is to suppose
any thing that he ought to prove: and thus because there remains no public
Record for the stated Institution of Sacrifices, it ought to be presumed they
were warranted by private Commission; though for that presumption there is as
little ground as for their public appointment. But of this we have discoursed
already, and it is the latter that he contends to be the sole Rule of Religious
Worship. And this Principle he tells you has ever been so universally owned in
the World, Page 315.
that the Postmisnical Jews were forced to refer their Oral Traditions to a
Divine Original, and that the Papists dare not resolve their present
Church-determinations into a less Authority. Though in those very pretenses
lies the very Imposture of those Men, in that they ascribe their own Inventions
to the Wisdom of God, and impose upon the Consciences of Mankind by virtue of a
Divine Command, and with a false pretense of Divine Authority; and in the very
same abuses lies the presumption of these Men, in that nothing will satisfy
them but they must have a Divine Right for all their own fancies and practices.
So that, as far as I am able to discern, the only use this Principle serves to,
is to justify Men's Tyranny and Usurpation; and under its protection to obtrude
their own conceits and unreasonable fancies upon the Minds of Men. And it is
seldom pretended but where Men's Impositions are so wild and exorbitant, that
nothing less can bear them out than the Authority of God himself. All Cheats in
all Ages have ever shrouded themselves under this pretense; and the truth is,
it does not only encourage, but makes them too: For when the Word of God has
really prescribed no particular forms of outward Worship; and when all Churches
have and must have their own peculiar Customs and Usages; then, if Men are
resolved to own and stand to this Principle, they bring themselves under an
inextricable necessity, of ascribing something to the Command of God, which God
never commanded. But would other Churches lay on their Impositions (as the
Church of England does hers) with the Obligations of Humane Power, that which
now may be a bold Imposture, would then (unless it were faulty upon some other
score) have been an exercise of lawful Jurisdiction. But thus is our Church
requited for her frankness and ingenuity. The succeslesness of such an honest
and well-ordered Discipline upon these Men, would almost incline one to suspect
that the Generality of Mankind will not be governed but by Imposture and
Superstition.

Page 318, 319, 320.
After this follows another train of Propositions, to except natural
Circumstances, and limit the sense of the Proposition to significant and
instituted Ceremonies: all which we have already routed in our former
Engagement, and he does not rally up with that metal and briskness as to put us
upon the necessity of a second Conquest. Here are no fresh Forces and Succors,
nothing but some straggling Repetitions out of the former Chapter; and it is not
worth while to pursue them, after I have defeated the whole Body. But he having
thus scholastically finished the state of the Question, because he fears all
these Forces will not stand the shock of an Assault, he doubles his Files,
backs them with new Subtilties and Scholastic Pikes, and states all over again
in Ten Additional Propositions; though they are all apparently either
coincident with the former, or new Impertinencies, or old Beggaries, such as
that of which I gave you an account in the former Chapter, Page 321.
viz. Wherever we find in the Scripture any Religious Duty approved, though we
find no preceding Institution, we must take it for granted that it was
instituted. I have already begged his pardon to excuse me this civility of
granting up a Principle so contradictory to my pretenses, as an avowed and
common Notion between us: and if he will but give me leave to except this
single one, I will in requital freely grant him all his other Nine, if that
will do him any service; though for what use he intends them in our present
Enquiry, I confess I am not able to divine: however, I am not at all concerned
in them; and therefore if he can make any advantage of their service, much good
may they do him. And now having driven the Nail thus home with hard Notions out
of the Schoolmen, he clincheth it with Testimonies out of the Fathers; and if
I will not be born down by strength of Reason, no nor Confidence, he resolves
to sweep me away with the Torrent of Authority. But though he argues very ill,
yet he quotes much worse. For you know it has been an old and beaten
Controversy between us and the Church of Rome; whether the written Word of God
be the adequate Rule of Faith; and in this both sides have hotly engaged with
all sorts of Weapons, viz. Reason, Scripture, and the Opinion of the Ancients:
to which last purpose many Protestant Writers have collected a vast variety of
express Assertions out of their VVritings in behalf of the Protestant Opinion:
Now some of these our Author gravely transcribes for my Confutation; and what
they plainly affirmed of necessary Articles of Faith, he confidently applies to
Ceremonies of outward Worship. Out of what particular Author he made bold to
borrow them, they are so common and trivial, it is impossible to determine; you
may meet them all together with some other Company, (out of which he has
cunningly drawn these to escape discovery) in Chamier, tom. 1. Lib. 10. where
he maintains the perfection and sufficiency of the Canon of Scripture for a
Rule of Faith. And the passages themselves do so plainly limit their own sense
to this subject, that they are utterly incapable of any other Application; and
if you can prevail with your self barely to run them over, that without any
farther trouble will satisfy you of their wretched and palpable Impertinency;
for my own part I have neither leisure nor patience to waste precious time and
good Paper upon such woeful Trash. Let him take his liberty in his own wild
Rangings, whilst he roves aloof off from my Concerns; and therefore I am
resolved, without regard to his unnecessary digressions, to confine my
discourse only to those things that pretend a direct and immediate attempt upon
my former Treatise.

. 9. In the Prosecution of this Argument, I showed this Principle to be so
perpetually pregnant with mischiefs and disturbances, that it is impossible any
Church should establish any Rules of Decency, or Laws of Discipline, or any
settled frame of things appertaining to the Offices of external Religion, that
it will not of necessity contradict and abrogate; in that there never was, nor
ever can be any Form of Worship, as to all Circumstances prescribed in the Word
of God, because that has actually determined no exterior parts of Religion
beyond the two Sacraments; and therefore as long as men lie under the power of
a Principle so equally false and troublesome, they can never want what
themselves may apprehend a just Pretense to warrant Disturbance and
Disobedience. So that we found by experience, that when once it was let loose
upon the Institutions of the Church of England, it worried every thing that
stood in its way, and turned its fury alike upon every Party, that pretended to
peace and setlement; it was merciless, as some bodies rage and lust, and spared
nothing that Sacrilege could devour. And as by this the Puritans assaulted and
ruined the Church of England; so when they subdivided among themselves, and
mouldred into new Churches and Factions, it was still the Offensive Weapon of
every aspiring Party; with it the Independents vanquished the Presbyterians;
with it the Anabaptists attempted the Independents; and with it all the little
Under-sects set up against the Anabaptists; and with it, as soon as they were
born, like the Dragons Teeth, they fell foul upon each other, and had they
crumbled into a thousand farther divisions and subdivisions (for nothing so
endless as Phanatick Innovations) it would equally have served both for and
against all, because whatever particular Customs and Rules of Decency they
should have agreed upon in the Worship of God, it was apparently enough
impossible they should ever vouch and warrant their Prescription out of the
Word of God; the Reason is evident, because that has prescribed and determined
none at all. And therefore after the Liturgy it sent the Directory, with Church
music it silenced Sternholds Rhimes, with the Cross it cashiered sprinkling in
Baptism, and when it had (at least in design) plucked down Cathedral Churches,
it fell upon Steeple Houses. And what could ever stop the fury of so endless
and so unreasonable a Principle? for when it had wandered as far as Tom of
Odcomb through a numberless variety of Changes and Reformations, it would ever
have been at as great a distance from its intended End, as the foolish
Traveller, when he had compassed the Top of Olympus, was from touching the Sun.
For how should men with all their search and travel be ever able to discover
that in the Word of God, which the Word of God has no where discovered in it
self. But it is no matter for that, our Author appeals to all mankind, Page 333.
whether an issue and settled stability be not likelier to be effected by all
men's consenting unto one common Rule, whereby these differences may be tried
and examined, than that every Party should be left at Liberty to indulge to
their own Affections and Imaginations about them. In plain troth, Sir, I must
take some severer course with this man, if nothing else will reclaim him from
this lazy Trade of Begging. I had taken pains to prove, both from the Nature of
the Thing, and the Experience of the World, that this Principle carries
disquiet and disturbance in its bare supposition, because it stands upon
demands impossible to be satisfied. But this man, without taking any notice of
my Arguments, replies like himself, i. e. boldly and impertinently, to my
Assertion, and gravely supposes there is, or ought to be, a common Rule
established in the World, whereby differences concerning outward Worship may be
tried and examined, which is the very thing in Question between us, and all my
Proofs, to which this is intended for a satisfactory Answer, are directly
levelled against the very supposition it self; in that it invites and engages
men to remonstrate to any settled Form of Worship upon such unreasonable grounds
of Exception, as it is impossible for any Church in the World either to avoid,
or to redress. If indeed there were any such common Rule prescribed in the
Gospel, it would no doubt be a certain and admirable way to determine
Controversies; but in the mean while to suppose it against flat experience,
because we apprehend it convenient for our own Ends and Interests, is just such
another way of arguing as the Romanists insist upon to prove the Infallibility
of the Papal Chair, because to appeal thither, would quickly reconcile all the
squabbles and Contentions of Christendom; and so it would, were there any
competent evidence that his Holiness is really vested in any such absolute and
uncontrollable sovereignty over Christian Princes: but the mischief is, there
no where appears any Warrant or Commission to authorize any such mighty
Judicature; so that by agreeing to devolve the determination of all our
Disputes upon their final Decrees, we should only bring our selves under this
desperate Inconvenience, to embrace and submit to any thing that is, or may be,
for the advantage of the Sea or the Court of Rome; and be bound in Conscience
to believe all the absurdities in the World by virtue of a counterfeit
Infallibility, and so be unavoidably obliged to swallow the grossest Errors and
Impostures as Articles of Faith and Rules of Religion. And this is the natural
and necessary Result of this Pretense; if indeed it were true, it would do
wonderful Feats toward appeasing all our Quarrels and Divisions; but if it be
false, it will only serve to create and propagate them for ever, and as long as
men persist in its demand, there can be no end of Eternal Changes and
Dissetlements. And it does not only leave men to the liberty of their own
Fancies and Imaginations (though it is chiefly intended by our Author for the
prevention of that Inconvenience) but withal brings us under an unhappy
Necessity of yielding to them as Impositions of the divine Law, and with
respect to a divine Authority. For if the Scripture have left us no such
Determinations, then all those, that they pretend to discover there, are merely
Creatures of their own brain, before which we must fall down and worship with
as much devotion as before the divine Oracles. And now what else can be the
Issue of these Conceits, but that the established Laws and Discipline of every
Church must be unravel'd to gratify every Faction, and advance every Fancy.
And therefore unless these men are resolved we shall accept their Confidence
for Reason, they should first make good this Principle by undeniable Proofs of
Scripture, before they venture to lay so much weight upon its admission, Page
303.
and not tell us (as our Author has done) that he is able to prove it by an
hundred Texts (and yet never allege one;) for till he has performed this, he
only demonstrates his Assertion by often repeating it: but Beggars are a bold
sort of People, and will extort what they cannot challenge by Clamor and
Importunity. And thus whereas I added, that all the pious villainies that ever
disturbed the Christian World have ever sheltred themselves in this grand
Maxim, he solemnly replies, the Maxim it self here traduced is as true as any
part of the Gospel. Page 334.
This is downright hardiness, and (I confess) resistless demonstration: It
must be a desperate Wight that dares cope with such a Giantlike Confidence,
that when it is not able to answer, is able to brow-beat Arguments. To what
purpose does this young man here tell us stories of the Gnostics of old, and
the Anabaptists of late, how they either have, or would have embroiled Kingdoms
in pursuance of this Principle? To what purpose does he tell us it is an
impregnable Sanctuary of disturbance and sedition? To what purpose does he
admonish us, that if this pretense be allowed as sufficient to warrant
Remonstrances to the public Laws, it is such an unhappy ground of quarrel and
exception, that it is not in the Power of Government to provide against its
disorders and enormities, because the matter of its Demands is a thing utterly
impossible? I say pish! to what purpose all this, when I tell him that this
Maxim, whatever he may pretend or prove, is as certainly true as any part of
the Gospel. And thus do I argue against a Wool-sack, no Reasonings can make
Impression upon his mind, but fall and perish unregarded, and when you have
spent so much Ammunition to beat down this Principle, it is all defeated with
this goodly Answer, It Is true as the Gospel. When against this very Answer lies
the very Emphasis of all my Objections, that they require such an impracticable
Condition to the setlement of the Church, under such a peremptory and
indispensable Obligation. And the greater their Confidence, the more it
aggravates the mischief and strengthens the Argument: In that they make this
impossible Fancy as necessary to Church Communion as the Apostles Creed; so
that if this pretense shall pass for a warrantable ground of Separation, Schism
will become the greatest Duty, and confusion the most certain Character of a
true Church, because it will indifferently rise up against all setlements, and
implead all Forms of Discipline. What think you, would not this man's resolute
blockishness even tempt a Stoic to beat Syllogisms into his head, for you see
nothing else will ever make him attend to the hardest Arguments?

But as for our Authors own private and reserved meaning, as to the sense of
this Principle, it is plainly this; there cannot possibly be any true Church
without the Beauty and Purity of Christian Ordinances; this consists purely in
the Congregational way of Worship and Discipline, so that wherever that is not
legally established, there can be no true Church; for all others have deviated
from the Platform of the Gospel, and therefore there can be no right setlement
and due Reformation of things, till that is once more re-enthroned in the
Christian World. And it is this our Author means when he instructs us that, the
Worship of God is or ought to be the same at all times, Page 336.
in all places, and amongst all People, in all Nations; and the order of it is
fixed and determined in all particulars that belong unto it. So that by his
Principles and good will, no other Form of Worship ought to be allowed in the
Church of God, but what himself apprehends particularly prescribed to all Ages
and Nations of the World in the Word of God. And this is excellent Doctrine for
one that is pleading for Toleration, and suitable to that of I. O. who tells us
in his Romance of the distinct Communion, Treatise of Communion. Page 170.
I shall take leave to say what is upon my heart, and what (the Lord assisting)
I shall willingly endeavor to make good against all the World; namely, that
that Principle that the Church has Power to institute and appoint any thing or
Ceremony belonging to the Worship of God, either as to matter or to manner,
beyond the orderly observance of such Circumstances, as necessarily attend such
Ordinances as Christ himself has instituted, (which condition none but the
Independents observe) lies at the Bottom of all the horrible Superstition and
Idolatry, of all the Confusion, Blood, Persecution, and Wars, that have for so
long a season spread themselves over the face of the Christian World; and that
it is the design of a great Part of the Revelation to make a discovery of this
Truth. So that, to be brief, all the dreadful Prophesies of St. John are not to
be appeased till the Princes of Christendom shall be pleased to agree in the
Ius Divinum of Independency.

In the next following Section I demand, why, forsooth, this Proposition must
be limited to matters of Religion only? And why the Scripture ought not to be
esteemed as perfect a Rule of Civil as of Ecclesiastical Polity, and why not as
complete a System of Ethics as a Canon of Worship? So that if I should require
any other Reason of this Limitation, beside their own humor, it is not in its
own nature capable of any other account but what is given by the Scriptures
themselves; and therefore unless they can show us where they expressly limit
this Doctrine to matters of Worship, the very Pretense disproves and condemns
it self. But our Author instead of standing to this Appeal, and satisfying my
demands by Determinations out of the Word of God, endeavors to account for
this difference by the mere Reason of things themselves, which though it were
true, is yet coarsly impertinent; seeing the Principle it self disclaims any
other proof or Confirmation but what relies upon express Testimony of
Scripture. And yet it is as false as it is impertinent, for it is in many words to
this purpose: Page 335.
That matters of Civil Government relate to the Conveniences of this Life, and
so are capable of being varied according to the Circumstances of things and
Rules of prudence; whereas the things that appertain to the Worship of God,
have another reference to the pleasing of God, and the purchase of Eternity,
and therefore are stated by him in all particulars, and not at all left to
prudential Accommodations. This little subterfuge, you know, I have already
stopped; and though I had not, it is obvious at the first glance of a reflecting
thought, that all matters Civil, Moral, and Religious, have a common Relation
to the Concerns both of our present and future state. The Affairs of Religion
may (as they are managed) be either useful or hurtful to the Conveniences of
this Life; and on the contrary, our Civil and Political Interests have an
unavoidable Reference to the Accounts of the Life to come, and therefore (to
spare more words) this can make no difference between them as to the
Jurisdiction of Earthly Powers.

. 10. In the next Paragraph I endeavored to represent how this delicacy and
coyness of Conscience must engage men to remonstrate to the Institutions of all
Churches that either were, are, or shall be in the World. And here I instanced
in some Customs both of the Jewish and the Primitive Christian Churches of old,
and of late in those of the Lutheran and Calvinian Communion,and more
particularly in some of the Rites and Usages of the Long-Parliament
Reformation. But here he wisely winks at all the Instances I produced of things
now in being; for their notoreity of Fact is so certain and unquestionable,
that it is impossible any Face should be varnished with Confidence enough to
deny it with eyes open. And then as for the Precedents I alleged out of the
Records of Ancient times, he turns them all off with one short and scornful
glance. What tell you me (says he) of the Feast of Purim, Page 342.
was it not a Civil Observance? Though it is so infinitely certain it was a
solemn day of Thanksgiving instituted by Mordecai for so eminent and unexpected
a Deliverance of the Jewish Nation from that general Massacre that was so
bloudily plotted, and so fiercely prosecuted by Haman and his Accomplices:
Est^r 9.21
And for this reason was it attended, as all their other Festivals of Joy ever
were, (and ours ought to be) with bounty and charity to the Poor. But if he
will not allow the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the Month Adar to have been
Religious Feasts, it is to be feared he will in time proceed to deny that the
twenty fourth of October, in the year 1651. was observed with Holy Day Respect
and Religion, though it be marked out in some bodies Calendar, as a solemn day
of Thanksgiving for the destruction of the Scots Army at Worcester, and the
Providential deliverance of these Nations from their Civil and Ecclesiastical
Bondage, and from a Tyrant full of Revenge, and a Discipline full of
Persecution, with sundry other Mercies. In the next place, what do I twit him
with the Feasts of the Dedication, and the Fasts of the Captivity, when I have
no proof of their being approved? Ibid.
But, gentle Sir, had they been such bold and unwarrantable Encroachments upon
the divine Prerogative, as you pretend, it can scarce be imagined but that God
would sometime or other have protested against them, as he often did against
all their other Obliquities and misdemeanors; so that their not being expressly
scorned and rejected, is of it self a just and safe Presumption of their
Acceptance. And yet however, as for the first Feast of the Dedication of the
Altar, instituted and observed by Solomon, there is the same evidence of its
being accepted, as there is of the whole solemnity of consecrating the Temple;
for immediately after the end of this Ceremony, which was the last part of this
Princely and magnificent Performance, 2 Chronicles. 7.12.
God himself is pleased to declare to Solomon his full and entire Approbation
of the whole duty. And then as for the latter Feast of Dedication for
rebuilding the Altar by Judas and the Maccabees, 1 Mac. 4.59.
it was performed with extraordinary Gravity and Devotion, and is represented
by the Author of that History as a remarkable Instance of their Zeal and Piety.
And that is sufficient proof that the Jews themselves (as strictly as they were
tied up by the Mosaic Canon to prescript Forms) had no such terrible
Conceptions of the Sacrilegious Boldness of new occasional Solemnities and
ceremonial Additions. But those were Apocryphal Times, and therefore not
capable of the evidence of divine Testimony, unless it were that our Savior
afterward sufficiently intimated he did not dislike the Institution, Jo^. 10.22.
by vouchsafing his Presence at the Solemnity, which had it been such an
unlawful observance, he would never have done, unless that he might take
occasion to reprove it, as he did all their other unwarrantable Traditions. And
as for the other Parallel Instance of the Fasts of the Captivity, I see not how
we can expect or desire a more express Allowance and Approbation, than what the
Almighty himself has been pleased to give us by his own immediate Inspiration.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts; Zach. 8.19.
the Fast of the fourth month, and the Fast of the fifth, and the fast of the
seventh, and the Fast of the tenth shall be to the house of Judah Joy, and
Gladness, and cheerful Feasts, therefore love the Truth and Peace. Where are
reckoned up, without any mark of difference, three Fasts instituted upon
emergent and occasional reasons, together with Lev. 24.27.
one ordained and appointed by God himself; and where also it is promised, if
they would reform their Immoralities according to the Doctrines and Sermons of
his Prophets, he would so alter their condition, as to give them reason to
institute even upon those days of deepest sadness, the most memorable Festivals
and Solemnities of Rejoicing.

And then as for the last instance alleged out of the Old Testament, viz.
wearing Sackcloth in token of Humiliation, That (says he) was only a customary
sign suited to the nature of the thing: Ibid.
i. e. it had a natural aptness to represent the thing it signified; and
therefore might perchance have been made use of to that purpose in ancient
time. But how came it first to gain the Authority of Prescription? If by chance
and accidental usage, why may not the Civil Magistrate be allowed as much Power
to warrant their lawful Significancy, as Popular Custom? For if it be
antecedently unlawful to create this relation between them, nothing can do it;
if it be not, where lies the ground of exception, rather against the Commands
of Governors, than the casual consent of the People? But if on the contrary,
Sackcloth was made choice of to this purpose by design and institution, then
its case is the same to all intents and purposes with our Symbolical Rites and
Usages, against which yet they except for that only reason: however, it would
be a notable subtlety to discover any such remarkable difference as to the
concerns of Morality, between the Institutions of Law and of Custom, so as to
make one (though for no other reason) apparently unlawful, and the other just
and warrantable. These Men's Consciences are so strangely nice and subtle, that
nothing will satisfy the exactness of their curiosity, unless they may divide
an hair into all points of the Compass. But besides, as for what is here
pretended as to the natural suitableness of Sackcloth, to the nature of grief
and sorrow; if the Symbolical use of a Surplice be not so curiously adapted to
express what it is designed to signify, as is that Emblem of Humiliation; that
at worst is no defect of Morality, but merely of fancy and dexterous invention,
in fixing upon less proper Resemblances, than possibly a more curious Wit might
have pitched upon: so that though perhaps the Representation be not altogether
so neat and pretty, as some fanciful Men might have contrived; yet to make that
any ground of exception, is but a contest of Wit, and not of Conscience. And
yet after all this, I know not any Symbol in the Nature of things more obvious
or more Catholic, than the significancy of a white Vestment; in so much that
it has in all Nations ever been accepted and used as a proper sign of purity
and innocence; unless among the Blacks, where they paint the Devil white. And
therefore (if that be their grievance) its signification was not first stamped
upon it by the mere arbitrary Institution of Authority, but was first ratified
by Custom and Prescription; and for that reason was it afterward appointed to
be used as a customary sign suited to the nature of the thing, in the same
manner as was wearing Sackcloth among the Jews in token of Humiliation.

. 11. These, among many others, were the Precedents I pitched upon in the
Jewish Church; and then, as for those of the Primitive Christians, the first
instance I specified, was the Lord's Day Sabbath. To this our Author is so
confident as to tell us, Ibid.
It had a perpetual binding Institution from the Authority of Christ himself;
though he is so wise too as not to tell us where. Perhaps it is possible he may
discover some such thing described in the Canticles, or foretold by the old
Prophets: but if he will appeal to the four Evangelists, they are as silent as
to any Record or Account of our Saviors translating the Sabbath from the last
to the first day of the week, as they are of the Anniversary Observation of the
Fifth of November; and it was as much unknown, and as little observed during
his Conversation in the World. But this Man is bold enough to bear down the
truth of story, and the evidence of fact, and by downright affirmation to
vouch his own Dreams and Fancies into certain and undoubted Realities. But
perhaps by this gay and careless way of talking, our Author may affect the
humor and conversation of Gentlemen, when they are disposed to be pleasant,
and satisfy themselves with any Repartee that strikes the present Fancy,
without regard to its truth, or concern for its proof. And he may be waggish
and complaisant if he please; but as for my part, I am now resolved to be
serious, sullen, and Scholastic; and therefore tell him plainly to his Beard,
that there is not one tittle or Iota concerning Saint Sabbath among all the
twelve Apostles: and if he think himself able to discover the new Institution
of this Festival among our Saviors Precepts, he may hope after the same rate
to find out a particular appointment of all the Margaret Fasts and
Thanksgivings in the Revelations.

My two next Instances were the Love Feasts, and the Kiss of Charity: Ibid.
But in these, (he replies) there was only a Direction to use civil Customs and
Observances in an holy and sanctified manner. Dictum factum, they were purely
civil Customs, and had no relation to Religious Worship; and therefore (Sir)
this is an impertinent Allegation. This is short; but yet however, I have
learned by long Conversation with this Man, at length to look Confidence in the
face, and not to be put off with slight and positive Assertions. And therefore
in the first place, what if I should gall him with the precariousness of this
distinction, and still challenge him to show where the Word of God impowers or
permits the Church or the Civil Magistrate to institute new Civil Rites, and
where it retrenches the exercise of the same Jurisdiction as to Ecclesiastical
Customs? This single Querie is such a Choak-pear as he will never be able
either to chew or to swallow. Beside, there is no such mighty difference
between Civil and Religious Ceremonies, but that they may be frequently
coincident: outward Solemnities of Religion may be sometime used for Ornament
of State; and some of the more grave and serious Ornaments of State, may be
sometime borrowed to set off the more pompous Solemnities of Religion. And to
what purpose soever they may be intended, they are still no more than
Ceremonies of Grandeur or Decency; and their Nature (unless perchance it be
appropriated by some particular Limitation) always is of such a common and
indifferent use, that they are of themselves equally capable of being applied
either to the services of Religion, or to the actions of Civil Life, and are
denominated either this or that, according to their present Office and
Employment. But yet farther, to direct Civil Usages to be observed in an holy
and sanctified manner, is to adopt them into acts and exercises of Religion:
for so they are, as far as they are observed in an holy and sanctified manner;
for so far they have an holy and sanctified use; and all things whose use is
holy and sanctified, are (I think) of a Religious Importance: and therefore if
Humane Power may warrantably institute such civil Observances as these, that
alone is sufficient to my purpose, for they, as such, are religious Rites and
Customs. However, by this Man's Principles, what Authority has any Person to
direct civil Observances to religious Ends and Uses, unless (as he argues
against the Institution of Symbolical Ceremonies) he could change their
Natures, Page 279.
or create a new Relation between them? If he can, his grand scruple (for all
his Atoms are as big as Mountains) of applying things of one kind to signify
things of another, is of no force against instituted Symbols: For the only
thing that seems to grieve and offend him, is the arrogance of attempting to
create new Relations. It Is presumption for any finite Being to assume to it
self such an infinite Power; Works of Creation are proper to Omnipotence; so
that it can be no less than Blasphemy, and presuming our selves equal to the
Almighty, to pretend to his Power of creating Relations. Thus it is read in his
Philosophy; and yet according to the more modern and reformed Metaphysics,
this is judged so common and feasible an exploit, that some Doctors are of
Opinion that any Child is able, with the allowance of a Truss of Straw, to
create him Fifty thousand in a day. What then think you of the force and truth
of that Argument, that supposes this so great and so known an absurdity, that
to reduce you to it, is to drive you into contradictions, and run you up
against first Principles? Well! were Duns alive, he would break a Lance, or
pluck a Crow with our Author about this subtlety; and would maintain to his
Teeth, that the Power of creating Relations is competent to finite Beings. But
to be short and serious, Were you ever in all your Life entertained with such
Fairy Tales and mere Romances in matters of this importance? Consider with your
self after what rate this Man has behaved himself toward the Church of
England; and then consider how all his implacable Zeal and Indignation against
her Laws and Customs, resolves it self entirely into an Antipathy against
Significant Ceremonies; and then consider how the only ground of his hatred and
aversation to them, is the Giant-like Impiety of assaying to create Relations
between signs and things signified; and then in the last place consider the
infinite vanity and triflingness of this pretense; and when you have considered
all these things, I leave it to your own Natural Logic to draw out one farther
Conclusion. But I have entertained you too long with the Music of this Man's
Rattles, and therefore to be short after all this sport and dalliance with
these childish Notions and gay Nothings, it is beyond all peradventure certain
that the Love Feasts and Kiss of Charity were mere Religious Rites and Customs,
and pecuculiar Appendages to some public Offices and Solemnities of Religion:
and this is so vulgarly known, that no Man living but our Author, could ever
with such a slight and easy confidence have turned them over for civil
Observances, when they were never used upon any occasion but in their Religious
Assemblies. And what stronger evidence can we desire to prove them Religious
Rites, than their being appropriate to Religious Duties? Who almost is
ignorant, that in the Primitive Church they always concluded their public
Prayers in form of Benediction, wishing Peace and Unity? And this being
finished, they always sealed their mutual affections with the Holy Kiss; for so
it is called by St. Paul, Romans 16.16. And what Quotation out of the Fathers
more trite and vulgar than that of Justin Martyr, (...); When Prayers are
ended, we salute each other with a Kiss? And therefore it is by Tertullian
styled Signaculum Orationis; their public Prayers being ever concluded with
this friendly Ceremony. And then as for the Agapae and Feasts of Charity, they
were certain sacred Meetings, where Christians of all conditions were wont to
eat promiscuously together, without making any difference between the Rich and
Poor, the Mean and Honorable, in token both of their friendship and equality.
And they were so merely intended for the ends of Piety and Devotion, that they
were inseparable from the holy Communion, and indeed made up part of the
Solemnity.

. 12. And now upon the review of these things, such shadows and vanishing
appearances are these Men's excuses and exceptions, that I cannot imagine they
are serious and in good earnest in their pretenses, but they are fitted to
puzzle and amuse the common people, and that is sufficient to their purpose to
keep up the Party, and perpetuate the Faction. And if they do but bolt out upon
them with an hard or (what to them is the same) an insignificant word, a Child
is not more afraid of a Church Porch at Midnight, than they of our Churches at
Noonday; and they dread the appearance of a Surplice, as they would a Ghost or
a Spectre. Though they as little understand the Principles and Pretensions of
their Ringleaders, as they do Aristotle's Metaphysics; and are not so subtle
as to discern the iniquity of a Symbolical Rite; and if any of them have by
converse with their deeper Rabbis picked up a pittance of this Learned
Gibberish, (as Peasants and Country Swains do shreds of Latin, as well as our
Author) they talk it by rote with impertinent zeal, and clamor, and passion.
But if you demand of them, Where lies the real exception against Symbolical
wickednesses? they can give you as wise an account as if their Preachers had
railed at them under the horrid Names of Tohu and Bohu. So that the tenderness
of vulgar Conscience, is nothing else but the stubbornness of popular Folly.
They have been abused into absurd Principles, and seditious Practices, and then
to be at all adventure tenacious of their casual Prejudices, against the
Convictions of Reason, and the Commands of Authority, shall be gloried in as
the pure Result of a nicer Integrity, and more precise Godliness. And this
reminds me of a suggestion that I before intimated upon this occasion, What a
vain thing it is to have any regard to these Men's Proposals of Condescensions
and Accommodations, when nothing but Schism lies at the bottom of all their
Designs and Principles, and when their Demands and their Resolutions are so
unreasonable, that it is as impossible to satisfy as convince them; and they
scarce agree in any one common Principle, unless this, by all ways to keep up
the Faction: and therefore though they are resolved never to be quiet, till
they have brought Authority to bend to their will and humor; yet whenever the
notorious folly of their Principles is unravelled, and the palpable
unreasonableness of their Schism exposed, and by consequence the Cause
endangered, then all their Outcry is mutual Forbearance and Condescension.
Though we can never learn either the nature of their Grievances, or the end of
their Demands, how far and to what we must yield. For must we discard any or
all of our Ceremonial Constitutions? To what purpose? If out of compliance with
their scruples, they are eternally destructive of Peace and Setlement: For
whether it be because they are not expressly prescribed in the Word of God, or
because they are offensive to weak and tender Brethren, or because their own
Consciences remain doubtful, and not fully satisfied of their lawfulness, or
for any the like regards; if these are granted, there can never be any end of
unreasonable demands; and there is no Rule of Decency that can ever be
enjoined, that is not as obnoxious to the same trifling Exceptions. And if we
shall submit the Laws of the Church to such slender pretenses, we do but betray
it and our selves into a fatal necessity of endless Schisms and Distractions:
For no Man, that has a mind to be peevish, can want plausible pretensions to
put a baffle upon public Authority, if these Principles are sufficient to
warrant Remonstrances, and protect Dissenters. And therefore in stead of
indulging Men their Liberty upon the account of such persuasions, as we ever
hope to see peace and setlement in the Church, we must root them up as seeds of
eternal Sedition, and brand and punish all persons that publicly profess them,
as Men resolved to be turbulent and unpeaceable in the Commonwealth. But if
they shall be content publicly to disclaim these and the like pretensions, and
after that continue their cry for Condescension, then all the sense of their
Proposal is, that we, forsooth, must cancel the established Laws of the Church,
only to gratify their wayward and capricious humor: for when the aforesaid
Principles are discharged, there remains no other ground of scruple or
separation, but their own unyielding wilfulness. And the Interpretation is,
that they are resolved to persist in their demands, because they are resolved
not to confess their error; and will rather ruin the peace of the Church,
than hazard the reputation of their own Understandings; and having once engaged
themselves in an unjust and defenseless Cause, will rather embroil the Church
for ever, than retire with a little dishonor. And now, are not these brave,
humble, melting, and brokenhearted Christians, that dare under pretense of
scruple and tenderness, thus resolutely affront the convictions of their own
Conscience: they are satisfied both that Peace and Unity ought not to be
violated, where it may be innocently preserved; and that so it may be in the
Communion of the Church of England; and yet in spite of these Premises, the
conclusion of their practice is, that they are resolved to keep up this Schism
that they confess to be unnecessary, and by consequence unlawful.

And now as for the remaining part of this Chapter, our Author runs perfect
dregs; his Fancy tires, and his Pen faulters; and nothing holds out but brave
Confidence, and that trusty Virtue will never fail him: however, methinks it is
time for me to take up, and not waste my own pains and your patience in
resisting old Repetitions: for it is a small pittance of matter behind that is
worth our search and enquiry; and I am not so greedy of Confutation, as to
improve every grain of advantage. Thus what he replies to what I have
discoursed concerning Popery, Will Worship, Superstition, adding to the Law of
God, etc. resolves it self entirely into the unwarrantableness of mystical
Rites: so that the force of this faint Exception being already so thoroughly
broken, the reasonableness of those Discourses must be supposed to stand firm
and unattempted; and the Arguments I retorted upon them from these vulgar
Topics of their own, unanswered. And therefore seeing all his Answers
(whatever they are) rely upon the Supposition of the Truth of that Principle,
and seeing I have so sufficiently demonstrated their vanity and falsehood, it is
to no purpose to continue our Contention about those other Matters, till we
have brought the former Controversy to some issue, because whatever I can urge
from their consideration, shall be shuffled off by him upon the mere
determination of that Debate; and therefore as many and as great advantages as
I have against this part of his Surveigh, I shall rather choose to wave them
all, (for I must not expose all Forgeries, and pursue all Impertinencies) and
devolve the whole Dispute upon the Argument of significant Ceremonies: seeing
in that (as they manage it) lies the only strength and all the sinews of their
Objections. And I confess I am not at all averse from reducing the whole
Contest to that single head, not only because it would shorten it, in that it is
the bottom of all their other pretenses, but because I am so fully assured what
woeful work they must make, if we could once bring them to allege Prohibitions
out of the Word of God against the Institution of Mystical and Symbolical
Rites. By which means, though I am forced with some regret to pass by a vast
heap of Rebukes that I had remarked, (and after the rate and genius of this
Man's Writing, whatever his cause is, it is impossible to want matter of
Confutation) only that my Reply might not swell beyond the Bulk of a just
Volume, yet that may in some measure be recompensed by the fairer advantage the
Reader may have to see more particularly, and search more narrowly into their
dearest and most fundamental Trifles; And I had much rather confute the Cause
than the Man. But beside these heads, there are two or three passages
altogether foreign to the Enquiry of significant Ceremonies, them I shall
briefly consider, and so put an end to this Chapter.

. 13. First then, whereas I had upbraided them with a Challenge to vouchsafe so
much honor to Mr. Hooker in particular, among many other learned and worthy
men, as but to take notice of his Book of Ecclesiastical Polity, in that as
long as that remained unanswered it would stand for a lasting and eternal
Trophee over their baffled Cause, and therefore I advised them (and I thought
it was a friendly Office) instead of continually pelting us with their
three-half-peny Pamphlets, if they would consult their own and their Causes
Reputation, to bend their Forces upon his single Performance, seeing upon that
we were content to cast the Issue of the whole Controversy: So that how ably
and successfully soever they might discourse and argue about these things, it
was all in vain, whilst this great Champion stood unattempted; in that when
they had done their poor utmost (as it is apparent they have) this cross
Objection would still remain in every Adversaries mouth, why do you not answer
Mr. Hooker? And therefore whatever they shall do, it is all but labor lost till
that is done; and his Books being unanswered amounts to a stronger proof
against them, than all their Pamphlets against my self and all other
Adversaries are able to assoil; seeing then they want not for zeal or good will
for the credit of their Cause, he should never have escaped thus long
unattempted, had they not wanted Courage and Ability to undertake him. But to
all this our Author returns me a counter-challenge, to mind them of any one
Argument in Mr. Hookers longsom Discourse, Page 356.
not already frequently answered, and that in Print, long ago, and it shall
have its due Consideration. But thou trifler, what is this to my defiance? My
Challenge was to answer Mr. Hooker entirely, and not his Arguments by retail,
for whether they are so easily answerable, will, I hope, competently enough
appear by the last Issue and Result of our present Controversy; in that our
Author has the advantage to use and improve what has been so frequently, and so
long ago published. And therefore it was no part of my demand that they would
produce their Answers to Mr. Hookers Arguments, as they lie scattered amongst
other godly discourse (for that would be an endless and indeterminable
Controversy) but that they would of purpose undertake to confute his Book in
gross; for though his whole Discourse were replied to by piecemeal, yet that
can be no satisfaction to People so zealous in the Cause, unless the Glory and
Reputation of the Discourse it self were particularly defeated, in that as long
as that shall stand unassaulted, that alone will be sufficient to discredit and
prevent the success of all other endeavors. So that the plain meaning of my
Challenge was only, that if the substance of his discourse be so clearly
answered, as they pretend, that they would but convince the World of it by a
particular and methodical Confutation of the Discourse it self; for till that
be performed, or at least attempted, they cannot expect but that all
Adversaries as well as I should upbraid them with its unanswerableness. But
alas! what do we talk of that, that is a Burden too heavy for their weak
shoulders? They answer Mr. Hooker! Fond men! they will as soon undermine the
Pillars of the Earth as shake one Paragraph of his Writings. Remove Mountains,
repent of your sins, and then answer Mr. Hooker. It Is not for men of your pigmy
strength and skill to attaque such a Giant of Sense and Reason; you do but run
a tilt upon a Rock with Straws and Bull-rushes. It Is infinite Rashness and
Presumption for the stoutest he of you all to venture upon a man of his
invincible Abilities; in a word, it is not for Whifflers and Pamphleteers to
cope with Mr. Hooker. Our Author might better have told us as I. O. once told
the World, that this great man was unhappily engaged in the defense of such
Errors, The duty of Pastors and People distinguished p. 18.
as he could not but see, and did often confess. This is another peerless Wight
too; for where did that good man ever confess he did violence to the
Convictions of his Conscience in his public Discourses, for so he must have
done, had he engaged in the defense of known Errors? Was there ever such a
brazen head of slander as this, that dares thus groundlesly, and thus foully
asperse such a spotless Integrity? I confess, I could not but resent our
Authors disingenuity, when he frequently intimates, I have written for my
private Interest against my secret Persuasions; but what is that to this man's
Candor and Civility, who dares proclaim to the World, that that upright Soul
prevaricated with God and his own Conscience in the main work and design of his
whole life? Well! hereafter I will set my heart at ease, for what Adversary can
ever hope to escape these men's slanders, that dare attempt to blast Hookers
Reputation? But however, is it not a pleasant humor for this man seririously
to appeal from a single Author, to all the Puritan Scriblers since the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth? I am content to devolve the Issue of the Controversy upon Mr.
Hookers Performance; no, says he, all that longsom Discourse has been
shamefully baffled over and over. But how shall we satisfy and inform our
selves of that? Why, no other way but by perusing all the Pamphlets that they
have ever published since the Ecclesiastical Polity. But this is as safe a
demur as his Appeals to the day of Judgment, for who (think you) will ever have
so much time, or so little employment as to examine all their flat and empty
Pamphlets. And when that is done, it will be worth the while to raise a new
Controversy, whether they amount to a just Reply to Mr. Hooker. But be that as
it will, the plain Consequence of my Challenge is, that seeing so many men have
labored with so much zeal in this Contest, it is strange that no man, either
for the public Interest of his Cause, or his own private Renown, ever ventured
to turn his Forces particularly upon that Discourse; and therefore seeing it is
not done, that alone is sufficient Presumption (considering their zeal and
behavior) to conclude that it is too much for their courage to attempt, and
much more for their ability to perform: and withal, that all their faint
endeavors since are nothing more than an obstinate persisting in the
Repetition of old and baffled Clamours. And the truth is, I know not one
Masculine Writer that has appeared in defense of the Cause since the Conversion
of Cartwright; and I must ingenuously confess, I have not had the good fortune
to meet with any thing like a new Argument in their later Authors, nothing but
his old trash voucht with effeminate and uncleanly Railings. And therefore
instead of standing to the confidence of my former Challenge, I will now only
request them not to annoy us with any of their little Exceptions, till they
have first examined whether and how they are answered in Whitgifts Reply to
that troublesome man; for it was his Pen that first laid the Cause a gasping,
and the Puritan Reformation breathed its last in that Engagement, and never
spoke word since, but as a poor Echo does, by a faint Repetition of
Cartwrights paultry Cavils, who, poor man was beaten by downright Blows out of
his zeal and peevishness, and driven by mere force of Arms and Arguments into
order and conformity.

. 14. The next Cavil (and so I have done) is so miserably impertinent, that I
am loath to mention it, and yet so dismally disingenuous, that I am as loath to
omit it. And therefore to be brief, in the close of this Chapter I undertook to
answer the biggest and most plausible Exception, I could think of, against the
Ecclesiastical Sovereignty of the Civil Magistrate, viz. What if he should
impose things sinful and superstitious, what inconveniences would this bring
upon the Government of the World? The consequence of such an awkard state of
things would be, that men must either suffer for the sedition of their
disobedience from their Prince, or for the sinfulness of their Obedience from
God. This I had always observed to be the Gloss of all their Arguments, and the
Retreat of all their Discourses; when all their other little Pretenses are
defeated, it is still the Refuge of all their Talk, to represent what mischiefs
and inconveniences may possibly ensue upon the Exercise of this Jurisdiction.
In answer to which Objection, omitting what I had before discoursed, that the
matters of our present Debate were only external forms and expressions of
Religious Worship, where it was not easy for the Magistrate to err, or if he
should, errors in these things are seldom dangerous; which though it is a full
and competent Reply, yet I waved it, and only showed how the Objection dashed as
impetuously against all manner of Government; where I weighed its Conveniences
against its Inconveniences, and represented that how enormous soever the
mischiefs and calamities of an abused Power might chance to be, they were still
out-ballanced by the Comforts and Advantages of Government; and therefore that
this was no reasonable Exception, seeing our Enquiry is not after such a
perfect way of settling things, as is altogether free from all Abuses, but after
such an one as is liable to the fewest: So that seeing an Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction is absolutely necessary to prevent all those Confusions, that
would unavoidably spring from an unrestrained Liberty, though it may, and often
is ill managed, yet it is better mankind should be sometimes exposed to the
miseries of Tyranny and Persecution, than always groan under the Intolerable
disorders of Anarchy. And to this end did our blessed Savior arm his Followers
against the storms of Persecution, because he saw the Power of the World in
such men's hands, whose Principles would oblige them to oppose, and (if they
were able) to destroy that Economy of things that he came to establish in it.
And therefore that they might not create Disturbances in the State by
affronting and controuling the Edicts of Princes against their Religion, he
teaches them to guard themselves with patience and contentedness, that if it
happened that the Secular Powers should raise Persecutions against them for
propagating that Religion, that was so necessary to the Eternal Interests of
Mankind, they should not oppose them in any tumultuary and unhandsom ways, but
patiently submit to their unhappy Fate, and be content to lay down their lives,
rather than forgo their Consciences, or disturb Commonwealths; and by this way
of meekness and humility he assured them divine Providence would make their
cause Triumph over all the established and superstitious Worships in the World,
and so make Christianity prevail in all Kingdoms without disturbing them. And
therefore it is a vain suggestion, when they tell us this Doctrine would have
fallen heavy upon the Primitive Christians; it might, and by ill mistake it did
so; but our Savior had rather his Church should be persecuted, than that the
World should not be governed; and as the Circumstances of affairs stood at that
juncture of time, one of them was unavoidable, and therefore of these two Evils
he chose the more eligible, and went not about to abrogate or abate any part of
the Imperial Power, to keep his Church out of harms-way from their Persecution,
but rather chose to expose it to all the Tortures and Reproaches of Martyrdom,
than to weaken the Power and Interest of Government, of which he was so
careful, that he has made new Provisions against resistance, and made it highly
criminal to all the Proselytes of his Religion upon whatsoever Pretenses or
Provocations; and therefore our duty is so settled, that when the matter of
their Commands is lawful, we must obey cheerfully; when unlawful, we must
suffer cheerfully; this is the Fortune of Mankind, and the best state of
Affairs humane life is capable of. But these things I have proved more at large
elsewhere, and they are in themselves so plain and reasonable, that they could
not fail of convincing any man, that is not resolved to be peevish and
inflexible, but if he be, it is no bending men's humors, or breaking their wills
by force of Argument. And of this methinks our Authors perverting this part of
my Discourse is a pleasant and competent Instance. For he gravely represents
the forementioned Objection, as if I had been such a Sot as to propose it for a
case of Conscience, Page 367.
Whether when the Worship established be sinful or superstitious, it be lawful
to obey, or not. This difficulty (says he) every child of ten years old is able
to resolve, and away he runs with it, and falls unmercifully upon all the
Considerations that I have returned in answer to the Objection, as if they were
determinations of the Case, and then proceeds to state it himself with the
Authority of a Pope in Cathedra, Page 369
that it is not lawful to obey. Most profound and judicious Casuist! had he been
Confessor to St. Anthony, he is subtle enough to have cleared up all his
Scruples. Who beside a man of new Lights and Notions could ever have hit upon
such a notable Decision of this Enquiry, that it is not lawful to obey the Civil
Magistrate in case of Idolatry. Go thy way for the Flower of School Divinity,
thou have subtlety enough to put Scotus his nose out of joint for ever; it is
impossible but that such an extraordinary Wit should prove Master of a new Sect
of Schoolmen. But to be serious, pride and passion are blind things, how else
could this man have run so boldly upon such a blunt and silly mistake, when
it is so apparent, that the Enquiry was not at all concerned whether Obedience
in such Cases be lawful, but whether those Inconveniences, that follow upon
their supposal, be a competent ground to abrogate all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictions. Or whether this be a reasonable Exception against the usefulness
of putting it in practice, that it may be managed to evil Purposes, and when it
is so, honest men must suffer for their Integrity. I say no, and he that says
I, must for the same reason abolish all Civil Government, because all Civil
Government is as likely to be abused. But having amused his vulgar Reader with
this strange case of Conscience; and having intimated, that I sometimes speak
as though it were the duty of Subjects to comply with the establishment of
Idolatry supposed; Page 36^.
only because I have determined it better to submit to Tyrants than to hazard
the dissolution of the State by Civil Wars and Rebellions; having, I say, once
made his way into these prodigious mistakes, he is resolved to swell their
horror with a strong infusion of Slander and Infamy. And to this purpose he
transcribes a passage out of my last Chapter, concerning the Obligations of a
scrupulous and tender Conscience, viz. that in cases doubtful and disputable,
of a Public Concern, men were to resign up their own Judgments to the
Determinations of Authority. And this he brings in here as my real Solution of
the present difficulty, viz. that they ought to comply with the public
establishment of Idolatry, because by virtue of this Principle they are always
to give Obedience to all the Commands of Lawful Superiors. And now having
improved his Falsifications to this monstrous Bulk, and withal swollen his Fancy
with admiring at the boldness of such lewd Assertions; he at last bursts forth
into an impetuous fit of preaching against them. But seeing he has so
lamentably mistaken his Text, he may talk his Lungs and his heart out, and
never talk to the purpose, and therefore let him take his full Career of
Impertinency, it concerns not me either to stop or follow him, only this let me
tell him for his comfort, that I have there proved, and here defy him and all
the World to disprove it, that whoever shall contradict that proposition as I
have laid it down, viz. that in all doubtful and disputable Cases of a public
Concernment, Subjects are not to attend to the Results of their own private
Judgment, but to acquiesce entirely in the determinations of public Authority;
whoever, I say, shall contradict this, is an enemy to the peace of mankind, and
a Traitor to all Societies in the World. For Government is a word that
signifies nothing, if it be not a Power to determine and appoint what it judges
most useful and expedient for the Concerns and Interests of the Commonwealth;
and if you will cancel this Authority of the public Judgment, whatever you may
call it, it is really nothing but Anarchy. And this is the last and unavoidable
Issue of all their Pretenses. For as to their general Pleas for Indulgence,
they still press for an entire and absolute exemption of Conscience from all
the Commands of Authority, and in effect vest it in a Power Paramount to the
supremacy of Princes; so that in case of Competition, its Dictates must
overruled all their Laws, and therefore no Government shall ever be able to
pass an Obligation upon it but by its own consent, and this (if any thing) is
perfect Anarchy; every man is entirely left to the guidance of his own
discretion, and is as much at liberty, whether he will or will not obey, as if
he were absolutely free from all Superiority and Jurisdiction. And then, as to
their particular Exceptions, their scruples are so nice and delicate, so
peevish and splenetick, so giddy and fantastic, so impossible to be prevented
of redressed, that no form of setlement can ever be contrived, upon which they
will not beat with equal fury; for they are indifferently applicable to all
Cases, and their strength depends not at all upon the Reasons of things, but
the Humors of men. And if the offense of a weak Brother, or the scruple of a
Tender Conscience are sufficient exceptions against the Power and Efficacy of
Laws, then farewell all the Reverence and Authority of Government; for setle
things with never so much Exactness, it will be impossible upon these
Principles to avoid these Cavils as long as there are either Fools or Knaves in
the World. And do but observe the untenable weakness of all their Pretenses
apart, and how they shuffle from their general Demands to their particular
exceptions, and then when they are pursued to their defense, how they roll back
to their general Demands, and so dance perpetually in a manifest circle of
shifting and disingenuous Cavil, and you need no farther proof to satisfy you
of the Intolerable Impertinency of their Clamours, and unexemplified
Peevishness of the Men.

CHAP. VII.
The Contents.
THat some Men from a Belief of the Imposture of all Religions, argue for the
Liberty of all, farther cleared and justified. That some Sects of Men are
strongly inclined to Sedition, proved by their Practices and Principles. Our
Authors intolerable Confidence in denying his own Principles; especially that,
that to pursue Success though in Villainy and Rebellion, is to follow
Providence. This proved by various Instances out of the Writings of J. O. The
Arguments whereby they drew in Providence and the Rabble, were, (1.) By
applying old Prophesies to present Transactions. (2.) By believing God is
obliged to do the same things for his People now, that he ever did for his
People in all former Ages. (3.) By believing Providence is in good earnest for
them, though it is in all appearance against them. (4.) By flat Presumption,
and downright Enthusiasm. That the Interest of Religion was pretended as a
cause of our late Civil Wars, proved at large against our Author from the
Declarations of Lords and Commons, and the Sermons of J. O. The Nonconformists
are bound to give us assurance of their Repentance, before they may presume to
offer us any security of their Allegiance. Their Plea for Toleration, because
Protestants, invalid. An Account of the Reformation of the Church of England,
both as to Doctrine and Discipline. The manifest Apostasy of the Nonconformists
from both. The Reformation in most places overrun and destroyed by Calvinism.
Our Adversaries Notion of Protestancy is nothing else than a Zeal for the
Calvinian Rigours. Religion is not only the best, but a necessary disguise for
Rebellion. Men cannot gain an opportunity of committing any more enormous
Wickednesses, but under shows and pretenses of Piety. The danger and vanity of
balancing different Parties of Religion. The Civil Wars of France an eminent
instance of this. An account of the Original of all peevish and ill-natured
Religion. The Nonconformists loose way of discoursing of Conscience, as if it
were a Principle of Action distinct from the Man himself. Conscience is nothing
but the Soul or Mind of Man. Nothing in Humane Nature beside Conscience is
capable of subjection to Humane Laws. Conscience is not its own Rule, nor of it
self any Plea of Exemption from Obedience. If it be abused by evil Principles,
nothing more mischievous. Vulgar Conscience the most mistaken Guide in the
World. In the common People it is for the most part either Ignorance, or Pride,
or Superstition, or Peevishness, or Enthusiasm. The Conclusion.

. 1. OUr Authors Adventures in this Chapter are such ordinary and possible
things, that now to rehearse Enterprises so lank of prodigy after all these
wonders, were to darken the luster, and abate the admiration of his former
Performances. Many faint Essays we may observe of his ancient Courage and
Confidence: but, alas! Deeds of a greater strain, and more stupendous Prowess,
are kept for Holy Day Atchievments. Now and then we may meet with a loud and
rapping Falsification; but every Page does not entertain our wonder with
Forgeries of a Garagantuan bulk and boldness. Once indeed we are informed how I
discourse, that the use and exercise of Conscience will certainly overthrow all
Government, Page 285.
and fill the World with confusion: yet however, the old Calumnies are not
continually rattling in our Ears; as, That the Civil Magistrate is vested in an
absolute and immediate Sovereignty over Conscience in all Affairs of Religion;
in so much that whatever the precise truth of the thing may be, he has power to
order and appoint what Religion his Subjects shall profess and observe: That
Conscience has nothing to do beyond the inward Thoughts of Men's Minds: and,
That as to all their outward Actions, the Commands of Authority overruled all
its Obligations, etc. These Slanders that he has so often and so familiarly
hurled at me upon all occasions, are as big as Steeples; and had they fallen
where they were aimed, had for ever quash't me to death and nothing. But the
censures he now spits, are not discharged with that impetuous fury, but that
they may be received without danger of being killed and buried at once. And the
mistakes he invents are so vulgar and ordinary, that they might have been
contrived by Sancho his Scribe. But thus it happens, that the greatest Flowers
of Chivalry have in their declining Age flag'd and withered; and their last
Performances have fallen so much short of the Miracles of their first
Atchievments, that their new Conquests have not so much increas't the number,
as eclips't the glory of the old. And that matchless Wight, that in his
youthful days scorned to accept of any Adventures unless upon Wind-mills,
Painim Giants, and Infernal Necromancers; yet when Age had slaked the rage of
his blood and folly, was content to spend his last Exploits upon Goat-herds,
Lackeys, and Plow-men of his own Parish. And such pitiful attempts are our
Authors Remarks upon the passages of this Chapter; so pitiful, that they would
sooner raise an Adversaries Compassion than Choler; and are so far from the
appearance of a just Reply, that they will not amount to a competent Denial.
The whole drift of my Discourse is neglected; my four Fundamental Assertions,
of which, and their Proofs, the main Body of the Chapter consists, are slipped
over; only a few subordinate and dependant Propositions glanced at, with slight
mistakes and positive censures, without so much as attempting to defeat any of
my Arguments, or, in their stead, to suggest any of his own. It Is such lank and
slender talk, and so apparently unequal to the small reason of the Discourse it
would oppose, that I should never have deigned it a Rejoinder in my own
defense, but that it gives occasion to gratify the Reader with some farther
proofs of our Authors Candor and Ingenuity, and some more not unuseful
Considerations upon the matters of our present debate: though what I have
already remarked, has evidence more than enough without the help of new Lights,
to scatter all his thin and vanishing Exceptions. And should I represent to the
Reader what material things he has gently passed over, I must transcribe almost
the whole Chapter. And our Author himself seems so conscious of the meanness of
his Exploits in this part of his Adventures, that he concludes the whole
Performance with a new Challenge, and turns me over (Coward as he is) to a new
Champion, that has already (poor Man!) been rebuked to purpose: But let him
take his Fortune, Page 302.
I am resolved to keep my Man.

Page 284.
In the first place then he informs us, this Chapter is inconsistent with it
self, and other parts of the Treatise, but that is none of his Concernment. No
doubt of it, he is only concerned to defame and disparage other Men's Writings,
and not at all to make good his slanders and incivilities. No Man that had not
laid waste all sense of modesty and ingenuity, would so easily sputter abroad
his rude and abusive censures, without thinking himself somewhat concerned to
justify the matters of his charge, though it were only to clear the Reputation
of his good manners. For all Men are apt enough to suspect ill nature in
detracting suggestions; and therefore no discreet or civil Man would venture to
dart them without apparent proof, and would not accept the favor of being
credited, till he has produced evidence at least equal to the Indictment. So
that our Author would more consult the credit of his discretion, if he would
not be so free of his censures, but when he is at leisure to warrant their
truth. There are vast multitudes of them scattered up and down in all parts of
his Surveigh, that I have purposely waved because they are so wretchedly
insignificant. This one friendly check upon this particular occasion, may serve
for a sufficient correction to all the rest. That is the first impertinence,
the second (for here they are very thick sown) is this. In the beginning of
this Chapter I represented how a belief of the indifferency, or rather
Imposture of all Religion, is of late become among some persons the most
effectual and most fashionable Argument for Liberty of Conscience. Away, says
our Author, it is impossible this pretense could ever be made use of to that
purpose. Page 285.
It is suited directly to oppose and overthrow it: for if there be no such
thing as Religion in the World, it is certainly a very foolish thing to have
differences perpetuated amongst Men upon account of Conscience. This he says,
because he is resolved to say something, no matter whether to or beside the
purpose: For what is this to a Man that defies and laughs at the silliness of
an upright Conscience, and looks upon all Stories of Religion as the tales and
tricks of covetous Priests, contrived to awe the People, and to enrich
themselves? He will say that it is indeed a very foolish thing to perpetuate
differences in the World about Conscience and Religion; but seeing it is so
full of softly and conscientious Fops, that will be impatient for their own
follies and Impostures, what in this case is the best method to govern such
zealous Sots? Not by severity; for it is pity to punish silly People for their
ignorance and credulity, and it is more generous to humor them in their several
Frenzies and Fairy-imaginations; and as long as they are willing to be abused
with the belief of invisible Powers, and the dread of Infernal Goblins, that
shall after death torment wicked and disloyal Subjects in burning Vaults below;
it is unbecoming the wisdom of a Prince, that understands the Juggle, to vex or
punish such weak and deluded people for any of their other fond and little
conceits; but rather to allow them the Liberty of gratifying their childish
fancies with what phantasms shall most please and affect their folly. Now what
Discourse can be more suited to the Principles of these young Cubs of the
Leviathan, than not to punish credulous and unreflecting People for being
cheated and abused? And therefore though they believe all the different
Religions in the World to be in reality but so many different Impostures; yet
they may judge it the wisest course for Government to permit such differences
as Fools are resolved to perpetuate, rather than to exasperate their zealous
madness, by attempting to restrain their fantastic mistakes with violence and
force of Penalties* so that supposing these Men's persuasions, nothing could be
more agreeable to their small Politics than this Principle of the indifferency
of all Religions in behalf of Liberty of Conscience. And of this our Author
could not be ignorant, both by what I had discoursed in that Paragraph, and in
several others: but he was resolved to cavil, and it is his way (as I have often
told you) to overlook Arguments, and then he never wants for confidence to deny
or slight Assertions; and when their Guard is removed, it is an easy matter to
fall foul upon naked Truths.

. 2. As for what I have asserted and proved in the next Paragraph, he readily
subscribes it, viz. That Conscience and Religion are the strongest bands of
Laws, and the best security of Government; and therefore that they are its
greatest Enemies, that endeavor to weaken or evacuate their Obligations; a
wise attempt of some little and pedantick Pretenders to Policy! But this little
ingenuity in granting it is once possible that I can speak truth, is forced, and
against the grain of Nature; and therefore it immediately returns with the
greater violence, and the words next ensuing are as lewd and shameless a
Calumny as any in the whole cluster of his falsified Stories, viz. That what I
have here discoursed in one Section, (though which, he is so wise as to leave
his Reader to conjecture) is, to prove that the use and exercise of Conscience
will certainly overthrow all Government, Ibid.
and fill the World with Confusion. But here, methinks, I smell Brimstone; and
had I the Father of Untruths for my Adversary, I could not have engaged at
greater disadvantage: For what Reply should a Man make to such a rank and
essential Falsehood? After this rate there is no commencing a Dispute with this
Man but in Courts of Justice, and no confuting his Arguments but by Actions of
Slander. I confess this is the only Rapper I have observed in this Chapter; but
it is like the last clap of Thunder, that breaks with a more hideous thump, and
strikes with downright astonishment. However, Innocence (they say) is as safe
a protection against its blasting strokes, as an old Oak; and therefore I can
defy his bolts with as much assurance as Cyniscus in Lucian did Jupiter, when
he was secure his hands were tied by Fate: so that our Author has my free
consent to use these wretched Weapons as long as he pleases, for there is no
danger such bold Falsifications should ever hurt any thing but himself and his
Cause.

In the two following Paragraphs (to omit some slight and straggling Cavils) I
showed that the dread of invisible Powers is not of it self sufficient to awe
the common people into subjection, but tends more probably to work tumults and
seditions; and this was largely and (I presume) competently proved by the
ungovernableness of the principles and tempers of some Sects of Religion. But
he knows whom I reflect upon. Page 286.
Like enough, for guilt and a galled Horse are very quick of apprehension:
though here methinks he is too skittish, and starts too soon under the lash of
my general Reproof by his own particular Applications. I confess I afterward
proceeded to the known Concernments of some parties of Men among us; but in
this Section it is apparent I aimed only at the mischiefs of Superstition and
Enthusiasm from the tendency of their own Nature; in that as they were more
incident to the common people, than any other vice or folly: so when they had
once seized their Passions, they were so far from laying restraints upon their
exorbitant heats, that they were the strongest and most irresistible
Obligations to Tumult and Sedition. But seeing our Author through the quickness
of his sense, flinches at the smart of my Reproof before the blow is given, let
him satisfy me in this Inquiry, If there be no particular Inclinations in some
Sects of Men to Insolence and Presumption against Princes; whence it comes to
pass, that wherever they have been entertained, Subjects have been
immediately inflamed and exasperated against their Princes, and Princes have
been forced upon stern and ungentle courses against their Subjects; that the
times have been broken with rebellious defections, subversions of Churches, and
combustions of Religion; that the History of the Age has been made up of
nothing but Wars, Conspiracies, Insurrections, Spoils, Ravages, Desolations of
States, Confusions of Governments, and all the other mischiefs and miseries of
Humane Life? Whence it comes to pass, that no Sects of Men have been more
prodigal of ugly Language, irreverent Expressions, and lewd Titles to the
Princes of Christendom? Who was it that honored the Royal Family of France
with the Title of a Bitch-Wolf and her Whelps? Eusebius Philadelphus. Who was
it that styled Mary Queen of England Proserpine? No body but Mr. Calvin. Who
gave Mary Queen of Scots, the Title of Iezabel? Honest John Knox. Who that of
Medea? Orthodox Mr. Beza. To pass by innumerable other Titles of Honor and
Civility, bestowed by these meek and humble Men upon Sovereign Princes, it is
enough that our Author may remember who it was that branded his present Majesty
as a Tyrant full of Revenge, a Man of Blood, a Son of Tabeal, Absalom, and
Sheba the Son of Bichri. And lastly, whence it comes to pass, that this party
of Men have been the Authors of more mischievous and seditious Libels against
Princes, than all Parties in Europe beside, such as Buchanans Book de Iure
Regni apud Scotos, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, de Iure Magistratus in subditos,
Eusebius Philadelphus; not to mention that numberless swarm of shameless
Pamphlets, that were produced in our late debauched and corrupted times. It Is
enough that they have broach't more seditious Aphorisms in an hundred years,
than had been before discovered from the beginning of days. And there is a
larger Collection of Treason in Archbishop Bancroft's dangerous Positions, the
Evangelium Armatum, and the late Discourse of Toleration discussed, than can be
gathered out of the Histories and Records of all former Ages.

But from Practices we proceeded to such Principles as are not by any means to
be endured in any Commonwealth, because they carry in them an apparent tendency
to the destruction of all Government, and the dissolution of all Society. The
first is the Fundamental Pretense of all godly Sedition, and is a direct and
immediate affront to the Power of Princes, viz. That if they refuse to reform
Religion themselves, it is lawful for their godly Subjects to do it, and that by
violence and force of Arms. This has been the great Nuissance of reformed
Christendom, it overrun the Foreign Reformation with popular Tumults and
Outrages, and put the Boors and Rascal multitude every where in Arms against
the Edicts of State. All Preachers and Leaders of Sedition have combined their
Faction by virtue of this Principle; and all the sub-divided Sects, that at
present annoy the Public Peace, have unanimously agreed both in its belief and
practice. And all the other Aphorisms of disturbance that have been peculiar to
each Party, are but so many ways of reducing and applying this general Maxim to
particular Interests. But though our Author has with great care and curiosity
transcribed all the other Assertions, that I impleaded of Sedition; yet this
(though it was the first and the greatest Principle in the Catalogue) he
industriously stifles, and lops it off from the following Articles of my
Charge. He cares not to have it observed, because he neither dares justify it,
nor will renounce it. It has, and may again by Providential Alterations, do
brave service for the separate Churches; but it is so apparently inconsistent
with the established setlement of things, that it can never safely be owned but
when it may safely be used; and therefore it is more politic to let it lie
dormant and unregarded, till opportunity shall call it forth to Action. And let
us upbraid them never so much with its mischievous and noisome consequences,
it is their wisest course still to counterfeit an artificial deafness, and not
to understand its meaning till they may own it to some more effectual purpose.
What other probable Reason can you imagine, why he should so carefully pass it
over in silence, whilst he so faithfully relates all the other particulars of
my Impeachments? He cannot have forgotten how often some body has proclaimed it
from the Pulpit in a thousand dresses and varieties of Canting; it is the Result
of all his Preachments in behalf of the Proceedings in the late Rebellion; and
(what is more unhappy) it has been all along publicly owned and pleaded by the
Chiefs both of the Presbyterian and Independent Factions, and never yet (that I
could hear or read of) once disavowed by any; and therefore though I charged it
not upon any Party, but only branded the Principle it self, this advantage this
man has gained to his Brethren by his rashness and presumption, that it shall
lie at their doors, till they shall remonstrate to it by some public
Protestation.

. 3. The other Articles that I chose to specify, among many other, were these
three, that Princes, in case of Disobedience to the Presbytery, may be
excommunicated, and by consequence deposed: that Dominion is founded in Grace;
and that to pursue success, though in Villainy and Rebellion, is to follow
Providence. But all the World (says Modesty) knows what it is, Page 187.
that has given him the advantage of providing a covering for these monstrous
Fictions; and an account thereof has been given elsewhere. And what now if
those intended do not believe these things, nor any one of them? What if they
do openly disavow every one of them, as for ought I ever heard or know they do,
and as I do my self? These monstrous Fictions! so are all the Histories and
Records in the World. Were there never any Sects of men that placed a Power in
the Presbytery to excommunicate Princes; or that challenged an Exemption from
the Commands of Authority upon the score of their Saintship; or that taught
Success to be a certain Argument of Divine Approbation? Did you never hear of
such Creatures as Presbyterians, Anabaptists, and Independents? Were there
never any such men in the World as John Knox, John of Leyden, and I. O? Or are
all the Stories that are recorded of them fairy-tales and Romances? If they are
not, these things are as far from being monstrous fictions, as any thing upon
Record in the four Gospels. But an account of these things has been given
elsewhere. Perhaps so, among the Antiquities of China, or in Lucians true
History. And a wise and true account it is no doubt, that shall undertake to
prove there never were any People in the World that have abetted these
Principles. And it is hugely suitable to his following Apology, that if any may
heretofore have owned them, yet for ought he knows they have openly disavowed
them. But this is pure and burnished confidence to bear down certain and
undeniable matters of Fact, with a flat denial, and a peremptory Perhaps. Did I
ever imagine I should be put to prove there have been men in the World, that
have owned and acted these Principles, or to disprove the Reality of a public
Repentance never heard of? This man's insufferable Perverseness would vanquish
the Patience of an Archangel; he cares not what he says, so the cause go
forward, and he would deny that Abraham begot Isaac if it stood in his way. And
if he should, it would not be a greater Violence to Truth, or Affront to
Modesty, than this Attempt to clear some men from the guilt of these
Persuasions. But still, what if those intended do not believe these things?
Then (good Sir Pertinent) they are not intended. I named no body, but only
enquired, upon this supposition, that if heretofore there has been, or
hereafter there should arise, such a Race of men in the World, whether the
Belief of a Deity, and the dread of Invisible Powers, blended with such
innocent Propositions, were likely to secure their due Obedience and Respect to
Authority, or rather to drive them to attempts of disturbance and sedition,
when they thought themselves obliged under the most dreadful Penalties to act
sutably to their Principles. And therefore I intended none but those that
either actually have been, or possibly may be guilty, without naming or
specifying any particular Criminals: Though indeed the matters of fact are so
notorious, that upon bare Intimation every man has knowledge and sagacity
enough to discover the Offenders; and they themselves are so conscious of the
Notoreity of the Crime, that (as it happens in the Excuses of all Enormous
Malefactors) they cannot avoid to bewray their own guilt by their own
Apologies: unless this be sufficient to clear their Innocence, and their
Reputation, that for ought any body knows they have publicly repented, which
if they had, every body must certainly have known it. Whatsoever disorders they
have run into in pursuit of these Principles, yet if the boldest and most
scandalous offender in the whole Mutiny shall come forth, and with a barefaced
confidence tell his Governors, that perhaps, and for ought he knows, they have
forsaken them, they immediately become loyal and peaceable Subjects, and must
be supposed as white as Snow, and as harmless as Doves. But to particulars.

The first Article then falls directly upon the men of the holy Discipline, who
challenge to themselves an original and independent Jurisdiction over all
Persons, and in all matters of Ecclesiastical Concernment; so that though they
acknowledge themselves subject to the Power of Kings in civil and secular
Affairs, yet in the Government of the Church and conduct of Religion, the
temporal Power is subject to the spiritual, and Princes must submit to the
sovereign Decrees of the Presbytery: and therefore in case of disobedience to
their Authority, they are as obnoxious as any of their Subjects to the Censure
of the Church, and the Sentence of Excommunication. This in brief is the true
Platform of the Discipline, publicly owned by all its Patrons and Assertors;
and whoever does not vest the Classical Meetings with a Supremacy over Kings in
Ecclesiastical Government, is no true Disciplinarian, when it is the only design
of the Discipline to put the Scepter of Jesus Christ into the hands of the
Presbytery, i, e. to strip the secular Authority of all spiritual Jurisdiction,
and to settle it entirely upon spiritual Persons. And all this was accordingly
put in practice by the Kirk, and all the World knows how bold they made both
with the Persons and Prerogatives of Princes, upon all occasions studying to
cross with Royal Authority, daring to repeal and annul Acts of Parliament,
protesting against Edicts and Proclamations, summoning the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council before their Assemblies for giving the King evil
Counsel, and vexing and affronting the King himself upon every trifle, even to
the indicting of strict and solemn Fasts upon those days in particular, upon
which the King had appointed any greater and extraordinary Feast. But the
Characters of these men's Principles and Practices are sufficiently upon Record;
and there is not an Aphorism of Treason or Disloyalty, that they have not
justified in their Writings, and owned in their Actions; all which are so well
known that I will not insist any farther upon their proof, especially seeing
our Author himself has (when time was) branded them for a Pack of perfidious
Knaves and Hypocrites; though it was then, when they happened to fall into the
scandalous Crime of Loyalty. Thanksgiving Sermon. for the success at Worcest. p.
21.
Calling their Ambition to rule and have all under their own Power, their zeal
to the Church of Christ; and their endeavors to re-enthrone Tyranny, Loyalty;
and all according to the Covenant. This miscarriage it seems is so
unpardonable, that they must for ever become Traitors to the cause of God,
because they were but once guilty of being Loyal to their Prince. Time was when
they were better Friends, i. e. when the Presbyterian was the only visible head
of the Rebellion; then who more forward for that Church Government, Duty of
Pastors and People distinguished p. 42.
which is commonly called Presbyterial or Synodical, in opposition to
Prelatical or Diocesan on the one side; and that which is commonly called
Independent or Congregational on the other. But farewell Presbytery, if it can
be so false to its own Principles as to revolt to its duty and its Allegiance.
Then with what deceivableness of unrighteousness, and lies in Hypocrisy,
Thanksgiving Sermon. for success at Worc. Ep. Ded.
the late grand Attempt of those in Scotland, with their Adherents, was carried
on, is in some measure made naked to the loathing of its Abominations. In
digging deep to lay a foundation for blood and revenge, in covering private and
sordid ends with a pretense of things public and glorious; in limning a face
of Religion upon a worldly stock; in concealing distant Aims and bloody
Animosities to compass one common End; that a Theater might be provided to act
several parts upon, in pleading a necessity from an Oath of God, unto most
desperate undertakings against God, and such like things as these, perhaps it
gives not place to any, which former Ages have been acquainted withal. As he
speaks of the Covenanting Brethren of the Kirk, when they joined in with the
Royal Interest in opposition to the designs of the Republican and Independent
Party. This man was never constant to any Principles but those of disloyalty,
and it was his perpetual Custom to preach up that most for Gods cause, that was
most contrary to the Kings. And the work of the Lord, in which he spent so much
Pulpit-sweat, was nothing but the subversion of Monarchy in the Death of one
King, and the Banishment of another. And now is not this a modest man, to boast
of the faithful adherence of himself and his Confidents to the present
Government? Page 295, ^96.
But so much, and (I hope) enough, if not too much, of the first Principle. And
as for the second, that of the Anabaptists, that claimed an Exemption from the
Power of the civil Magistrate upon the score of their Saintship, it is so
notorious beyond all contradiction, and the blessed Pranks that John of Leyden,
Muncer, Knipperdolling, and the Boors of Germany played under its Protection,
are so vulgarly known, that I need not stand upon its proof; any man may soon
satisfy himself out of Bullinger, Sleidan, Osiander, Gualter, Alsted, and
diverse others, out of whom I am not now at liberty to transcribe Collections,
having already well-nigh exceeded the Number of Pages allowed me by the Master
of the Press: and those that remain I must reserve for matter more pertinent to
our present debate and present Affairs.

. 4. And therefore as for the third and last Principle, that of the
Independents, that to pursue success in Villainy and Rebellion, is to follow
Providence: Let us a little consider and examine their serious Thoughts
concerning it, seeing to deny it is such a frontless Contradiction, not only to
their former practices, but to their present behavior, in ascribing every
common Accident of humane life, to some extraordinary design of Providence, and
interpreting all mischances that befall their Neighbors, as visible Judgments
upon them for particular Actions; insomuch that if ever I die before the day of
Judgment (and by Constitution I am like to be none of the longest livers) I
here foretell that it shall be voted the hand of God, and the stroke of divine
vengeance upon me for my severity and unkindness to his secret ones. But it is
in vain to convince them by Experience and Notoreity of fact; and it is no
forcing them to stand to any thing, unless when they are lime-twigg'd with Ink
and Paper, and gagged with Quills, and therefore that is my comfort, that most
of them are choked with their own Gaggs, and for ever entangled with their own
Lime-twigs: For it is notorious to all the World how the Parliament Sermons
(those edifying Homilies) were continually beating upon this string; and crying
up all Transactions of the War (and false Reports too) as Tokens of Gods favor
to the Cause; and making the Diurnal a Comment upon the Revelations, and the
secrets of Providence. What our Authors private Practice has been, it were
(would he be modest) neither pertinent nor civil to pry into. It Is enough that
those of his Communion have not been behind any party of Saints in this kind of
Presumption. But it is not possible when there is such plenty of Game, I should
be able to set every Covy, and therefore (to keep to my man, and my Resolution)
I shall confine my self to the Writings of I. O. (the Cock of the
Congregation.) I am sure it was his Custom to account for all the various
Contingencies of the War by the secret Counsels of Providence, only known to
himself, and some other secret ones, and to discover its particular design in
every particular event. And should I insist upon all Proofs and Instances to
this purpose, I should exceed the eleventh Chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews in the number of Examples and Precedents. To be short then.

By Providence was General Fairfax personally called forth to the Siege of
Colchester. Eben Ezec Ep. ded.
By Providence was I. O. pitched upon to attend his Excellency in that
fortunate Expedition. Ep. ded. to the Committee.
By Providence were Sir Henry Mildmay and the Committee delivered from their
Imprisonment by the Enemy. Ibid.
By Providence were they reserved from a sinful compliance with the Royal
Party, and from a treacherous Spirit, or the malignant sin of Loyalty. Page 4.
By Providence were Gods People called to sing their Songs upon Sigionoth for
the interchangeable Dispensations of the imprisonment and delivery of the
Committee. Page 21.
By Providence were the hands of the Cavaliers, that had itching fingers and an
hankering mind after the inheritance of Gods people, knocked off an hundred
times, and sent away with bloody fingers. By Providence did the Parliament-Army
trace out their way from Kent to Essex, Page 24.
and from Wales to the North. Page 31.
By Providence were the zealous Parishioners of Coggeshal stirred up to make an
Opposition to the Enemy gathering at Chelmsford. Page 45.
By Providence was there a perverse Spirit of folly and error mixed in all
their Counsels. By Providence were they drawn into a Party, Page 44.
to force the People of God (that were before fallen together by the ears) to
piece together against the common Enemy. Page 51.
By Providence was Peter delivered out of Prison, the three Children out of the
fiery Furnace, Daniel out of the Lions Den, and the Essex-Committee from the
Jaws of the starved Cavaliers. By Providence was the great Dispensation of the
30. of Ian. 1648. carried on in order to the unravelling of the whole Web of
iniquity, Sermon before the Parliam. Jan. 31. 1648. Ep. ded.
interwoven of Civil and Ecclesiastical Tyranny, in Opposition to the Kingdom
of the Lord Jesus. By Providence did Moses deliver Israel from their Egyptian
Bondage; Page 23.
and by Providence did the Rump deliver England from Tyrannous Pride and
Oppression. By Providence were the People of this Nation given up to fight
against their Deliverers, Page 30.
by that Opposition to make its workings more clear and conspicuous. By
Providence was it, Sermon to the Parl. April 19. 1649. page 36.
that in the year 1649. there was not a Potentate upon the Earth that had a
peaceable Molehill to build himself an habitation upon; and that there were so
many Controversies disputing in Letters of Blood among the Nations, and that
for the Interest of the many. Page 41.
By Providence were the Church-Stars (the Bishops) that were merely fixed to
all men's view, and by their own Confession, in the Political Heavens, utterly
shaken to the Ground. Sermon. before the Parl. Feb. 28. 1649.
By Providence was Cromwell forced to make such havoc in Ireland, because the
Lord had sworn to have war with such Amalekites, and to avenge his People from
generation to generation. Sermon. of the Branch of the Lo^d a^ Berwick, Ep. Ded.
By Providence (and Cromwels choice) was I. O. called forth to attend his
Excellency in his Scottish Expedition, that he might be instructed by him in
the Art of discovering Gods deep and hidden Dispensations toward his secret
ones. By Providence (the mercy whereof was composed of as many Branches of
Wisdom, Sermon. before the Parl. Oct. 24. 1651. Ep. Ded.
Power, Goodness, and Faithfulness, as any outward Dispensation has brought
forth since the name of Christian was known) did the Rump by the defeat of his
Majesty at Worcester continue to sit in Council, and the Residue of the Nation
in peace. Page 7.
By Providence a mighty Monarchy, a triumphing Prelacy, a thriving Conformity
were all brought down to recover the People of the Lord Christ from
Antichristian Idolatry and Oppression. The laboring Saints dismiss. p. 9.
By Providence was Ireton, (that rare Example of Righteousness, Faith,
Holiness, Zeal, Courage, and Self-denial) disposed to close with the mind of
God, with full purpose of heart to serve the will of the Lord in his
Generation, so that he staggered not at the greatest difficulties through
Unbelief, but being steadfast in Faith, he gave glory to God, and Davidically
prepared the way of the Lord in paths of Blood. The time would fail me to speak
of Isaac, Eben-ezer. Page 52.
and Joseph, Gideon, Noah, Daniel, and Job; do but consider the Providential
Circumstances of all Transactions in our late Rebellion, Thanksgiving Sermon. for
the Victory at Worcest. p. 15.
and that will discover where dwells that spirit, which actuated all the great
Alterations, that happened in these Nations. For (believe him) such things have
been brought to pass as have filled the World with Amazement, (and well they
might.) A Monarchy of some hundred Years continuance, always affecting, and at
length wholly degenerated into Tyranny, destroyed, pulled down, swallowed up, a
great and mighty Potentate, that had caused Terror in the Land of the living,
and laid his Sword under his head, brought to punishment for Blood; Hypocrites
and selfish men abundantly discovered, wise men made fools, and the strong as
water; A Nation (that of Scotland) engaging for and against the same cause,
backward and forward, twice or thrice, always seeking where to find their own
gain and interest in it, at length totally broken in opposition to that cause
wherewith at first they closed: Multitudes of Professors one year praying,
fasting, mightily rejoicing upon the least success, bearing it out as a sign of
the Presence of God; another year whilst the same work is carried on, cursing,
repining, slighting the marvelous appearance of God in Answer unto Prayers and
most solemn Appeals, being very angry at the deliverances of Sion. On the other
side, all the mighty successes that God has followed poor despised ones
withal, being with them as with those in days of old; Who through faith subdued
Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of
Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the Sword, out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turnned to flight the Armies
of the Aliens. He, I say, that shall consider all this, may well enquire after
that Principle which being regularly carried on, yet meeting with the
Corruption and Lusts of men, should so wheel them about, and work so many
mighty Alterations: Now what is this, but the most effectual design of the Lord
to carry on the Interest of Christ and the Gospel, whatever stands in the way?
This bears down all before it, wraps up some in blood, some in hardness, and is
most eminently straight and holy in all these Transactions, Isa. 14.32. What
shall one then answer the Messengers of the Nation? That the Lord has founded
Sion, and the poor^ of his People shall trust in it.

. 5. Thus you see how Providence and O. Cromwell still headed the Independent
Faction, though perhaps you may wonder how it could continue faithful so long
to such a bloody and accursed Interest. But alas! for that you must know, it
neither had Power at first to refuse the Cause, nor being once engaged to
retreat, for by the power of Faith they can at their pleasure press it to the
Service; and by the strength of Imagination they can bind the Thoughts of the
Almighty, and engage all his Attributes to join in with their designs, and in
their way of arguing they never want for Inducements to draw in Providence and
the Rabble to their Assistance, and that chiefly among many other by these four
Topics.

1. By applying old Prophesies to present Transactions; it concerns not to what
particular Affair they might relate; if they can be streined by Faith or Fancy
to suit any present Exigence, the honor of Providence lies at stake not to
suffer such choice Believers to stick in the mire; and therefore God is bound
to protect and deliver them, though it cost him the making his Bow quite naked.
Thus were all the Promises in the Bible engaged in the Parliament Service; and
not a Text left to attend his Majesty beside Threatenings and Judgments: And
there is not a remarkable Prophecy relating to the Jewish Nation, or the
adjacent Kingdoms, that they have not accommodated by faith and boldness (for
both together can do much) to the posture of Affairs in our late Troubles. Thus
were the Essex Committee delivered from the Cavaliers at Colchester? It was
foretold ( i. e. after their deliverance) Hab. 3.3, 7. Eben ezer, p. 1.
God came from Teman, and the Holy One from mount Paran, Selah: i. e. from
Naseby and Marston-moor. I saw the Tents of Cushan in Affliction, and the
Curtains of the Land of Midian did tremble, i. e. the Enemy gathered at
Chelmsford, upon the coming of Fairfax his Army, abated their Confidence. Were
the Parishioners of Coggeshal once in great danger of the Enemy? The snares of
death compassed us, Page 13.
and the floods of ungodly men made us afraid: But the Lord thundered from
Heaven, the Highest gave his voice, hailstones, and coals of Fire: yea, he sent
out his Arrows and scattered them, and he shot out lightning and discomfited
them: he sent from above, he took us, he drew us out of many waters; he
delivered us from our strong Enemy, and from them which hated us, for they were
too strong for us. Do any Professors doubt the Event of the War? Fear not thou
worm Jacob, Page 52.
and ye few men of Israel, behold I will make thee a new sharp Instrument
having Teeth, thou shall thresh the Mountains, and beat them small, and shall
make the hills as chaff, thou shall fan them, etc. Isa. 41.14, 15. Are the
Officers of the Kings Forces divided, or irresolved in their Counsels? Page, 46,
The Princes of Zoan are become fools, the Princes of Noph are deceived, they
have seduced the People, even they that are the stay of their Tribes, the Lord
has mingled a perverse Spirit in the midst of them, they have caused the
People to err in every work as a drunken man staggereth in his Vomit, Isa.
19.13, 14. Were the Rump to be encouraged in their design of altering the
Government after the Murder of the late King, against the Apostasy of the
Presbyterians, and the Attempts of the Royalists; The Text was pat to the
purpose. Let them return to thee, This was the Text before the Part. Jan, 31.
1648,
but return not thou to them. And I will make thee unto this People a fenced
brazen wall, and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail
against thee: for I am with thee to save thee and deliver thee, says the Lord,
Jer. 15.19, 20. Is Monarchy to be for ever abolished, and the new Commonwealth
established? Behold I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall
not be remembered, nor come into my mind, Isa. 65.17. But the Kingdom, and
Dominion, and Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to
the People of the Saints of the most High: whose Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. Hitherto is the end of the
matter, Dan. 7.27. Steadfast. of the Promise. Feb. 28. 1649. p. 37.
Do the Protestants, covenanted Protestants, that had sworn in the presence of
the great God to extirpate Popery and Prelacy? Do others, that counted
themselves under no less sacred bond, for the maintenance of Prelates,
Service Book, and the like, as the whole Party of Ormonds Adherents (it is a
favor, or rather a chance, it was not plain Butler) join with a mighty number,
that had for eight years together sealed their Vows to the Romish Religion with
our blood and their own? If all these combine together against Sion, shall they
prosper? No, says the Lord Jehovah, and I. O. If Rezin and the Son of Remalia,
Syria and Ephraim, old Adversaries, combine together for a new enmity against
Judah; if Covenant and Prelacy, Popery and Treachery, Blood and (as to that)
Innocence join hand in hand to stand in the way of the Promise, yet I will not
in this join with them, says the Lord. Is the Royal Family, together with the
ancient Nobility, to be for ever cashiered upon his Majesty's defeat at
Worcester, and are the Brewers and Cobblers of the Army to commence new Lords?
All the Trees of the Field shall know, that I the Lord have brought down the
high tree, and have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree (drawn
out its sap by sequestrations) and have made the dry tree to flourish: (by
plunder and sacrilege) I the Lord have spoken it, and have done it, Ezekiel.
17.24. This was the Text to the Thanksgiving Sermon before the Parliament for
their Victory at Worcester. And now is it possible for these men to be at a
loss for Scripture to countenance their proceedings, after this rate of
imposing upon the Word of God? If such loose and profane Accommodations of
Prophetic passages to present Affairs be sufficient to support Faith in its
expectations of success, I leave it to you to judge whether it can ever want
grounds and encouragements for Rebellion; as long as the Prophesies against Gog
and Magog, the Whore and the Beast, the Pope and the Man of sin are not blotted
out of the Bible. But this is not all, Faith has other Topics to bottom its
confidence upon. And therefore,

2. It has right to all Gods mercies, and deliverances of his People in all
past and present Ages. Eben. ^zer, p. 27.
It makes all Joshuahs victories present to every true Believer: so that if O.
Cromwell had but boldness, or Enthusiasm enough to presume that the Almighty had
as great favor for his Highness, as he had for Ioshuah; he was bound to enable
him and his Army to dispatch Kings and Canaanites with as great expedition as
Ioshuah and the Children of Israel did. For the Good Will, Free Grace, and
loving Kindness of God is the same toward all his People. Ibid.
And the infinite Fountains of the Deity can never be sunk one hairs breadth by
everlastingly flowing blessings. Page 13.
So that past blessings and deliverances of Gods People are store mercies laid
up for Believers against a rainy day; and when we want present Refreshments,
what a comfort is it to chew the Cud upon the blessings of former Ages? Page 2^.
And thus they use the Records of sacred Story, just as Don Quixot used his
Books of Chivalry, in accommodating the Exploits of the Knights of yore to his
own ridiculous Adventures: And here lay the folly of his Errantry, in chewing
the cud upon the Prodigies of old Romances. And I am sure he had as wise and
reasonable a ground for his folly, when he besotted himself with a conceit of
vying Adventures with the famous Knight Valdovinos, as they had for their faith
when they expected to equal the successes of Ioshuah. But however by this means
it was easy to befool and inveigle the Common People: and if they represented
to them any act of Blood and Cruelty with Allusion to Scripture Language and
Story, that alone was enough to pass it for the work of the Lord, and the
Rabble imagined they were acting over again all the Wars and Battles of the Old
Testament, and pouring out all the Vials, and fulfilling all the Prophesies of
the New. Beside, Faith supports it self, and engages Providence by chewing the
Cud upon its own blessings as well as those of former Ages. Page 26, 27.
David esteemed it very good Logic to argue from the victory God gave him over
the Lion, and Bear, to a confidence of Victory over Goliath. Make use then of
your past mercies, deliverances, blessings, Page 29.
with promised incomings; carry them about you by Faith; use them or they will
grow rusty; where is the God of Elijah? Awake, awake, Oh Arm of the Lord. Let
former Mercies be an Anchor of hope in time of present distresses. Page 13.
Where is the God of Marstone-moor, and the God of Naseby, is an acceptable
Expostulation in a gloomy day. O, what a Catalogue of Mercies has this Nation
to plead by in time of trouble? God came from Naseby, and the holy One from the
West, Selah: his Glory covered the Heavens, and the Earth was full of his
Praise. He went forth in the North, and in the East he did not withold his
hand. So that in this gloomy day of their Persecution they are forced to
support themselves and their hopes by chewing the Cud upon their
Naseby-mercies, and their Marston-moore mercies; till God shall be pleased to
give them in some stores of fresh Providence. For however he may at present
counterfeit a total departure to punish their Apostasy, and their want of Zeal
in his Work, yet he will not, he cannot utterly forsake them. Because he is
engaged in point of honor, Sermon of Jan. 31. 1648. p 25.
What shall he do for his great Name? yea so tender is the Lord herein of his
Glory, that when he has been exceedingly provoked to remove men out of his
Presence, yet because they have been called by his Name, and have visibly held
forth a following after him, he would not suffer them to be trodden down, lest
the Enemy should exalt themselves, and say, Where is now their God? They shall
not take from him the Honor of former deliverance^ and protections: In such a
Nation as this, if the Lord now upon manifold provocations should give up
Parliament, People, Army to calamity and ruin, would not the glory of former
Counsels, successes, deliverances be utterly lost? Would not men say it was not
the Lord, but Chance that happened to them? And thus when Providence was once
drawn in, it was bound to go through, unless it would either lose the glory of
all its former exploits, or (what was more dishonorable) confess it was
overreach'd (as the Presbyterians were) by the Independent Hypocrisy. By this
Artifice they drew on each other to the height and perfection of Villainy,
because they were so far engaged, that they could not possibly retreat either
with honor or safety; and therefore resolved to secure themselves in the death
of the King, suspecting, lest if he should ever be restored to his Crown and
Royal Authority, they might be called to an After-reckoning: according to that
Maxim so much taught and practiced in the School of Rebellion, that when men
have run themselves into unpardonable disorders, there remains no way of doing
better but by doing worse. And in this Lesson they must needs instruct
Providence, now you are engaged, there is no way for you to retire with honor,
and if you do not justify your own Actings in our former wickednesses by
proceeding with us to greater Impieties, you do not only condemn them and your
self, but lose the honor of all the Margarets Fasts and Thanksgivings. What a
mean opinion must these profane Enthusiasts have of the divine Understanding,
that imagined they could impose upon the Almighty by such thin and shallow
Fetches!

. 6.3. The third Maxim of Faith is to believe that Providence is really and in
good earnest for them, though it is seemingly and in outward appearance against
them. Thus whilst themselves sat at the Helm, it befriended them from all
Points of the Compass; and into whatsoever Corner it shifted it self, it still
favored their designs, and filled their sails with success and victory. When
Affairs succ^eded to their wishes, then Providence drove them on with a full
Gale; but when there happened any cross or changeable Dispensation, so far was it
from hindering their Progress, that it gave them the greater advantage of a side
wind. Eben-ezer, p. 4.
For (as the same Author informs us) I have heard that a full wind behind the
Ship drives her not so fast forward as a side wind, that seems almost as much
against her as with her: And the reason, they say, is, because a full wind
fills but some of her sails, which keep it from the rest that they are empty,
when a side wind fills all her sails, and sets her speedily forward. So if the
Lord should give us a full wind and continual Gale of Mercies, it would fill
but some of our sails, but when he comes with a side wind, a Dispensation that
seems almost as much against us as for us, then he fills all our sails, takes
up all our Affections, making his works wide and broad enough to entertain them
every one, then are we carried freely and fully toward the Haven where we
would be. And thus (for that is the Application) the imprisonment of the
Committee of Essex was but a side wind of Providence, that drove them on with
the greater speed to the taking of Colchester. So that while their Faith was
resolute in the Belief of this Principle, it was not possible for Providence to
shake them off by any Affronts or Indignities, but they served it just as
Horace was served by the importunate Fellow, he describes Sermon. lib. 1. Sat. 9.
from whose irksom Impertinency he could neither by Art nor Violence redeem
himself. Did he divert to salute a Friend? It was his Acquaintance. Did he
pretend a visit? He was at leisure to wait upon him. Did he counterfeit any
business? He had Interest to assist him. And thus did they tease and persecute
Providence; which way soever it turned, they still would follow, no rebukes
could dash their bold-faced Faith out of countenance; though it beat them off
with open Affronts, they would still insinuate and fawn upon it; and though it
knocked off their hands an hundred times, and sent them away with bloody
fingers, they would not let go their hold, but they would cling about him by
faith, do what he can, they will not be shifted off. And let him vary his
dispensations as often as he will, they are resolved to follow him with their
Songs upon Sigionoth. Songs upon Sigionoth! What are they? I remember, I am
under the Obligation of a Promise to unriddle their meaning; and therefore to
be short, they are a sort of Pindarick Psalms, not tied to the same Rhyme or
Measure, but to be sung with variety of Notes, and interchangeable Tunes. Now
I. O. once meeting with this word in his Text, Hab. 3.1. He thus reasons upon
it, (and he is able to raise Edification out of a pair of Bagpipes) Are not
Gods variable Dispensations toward his held out under these variable Tunes,
Eben ezer, p. 3, 4.
not all fitted to one string: Not all alike pleasant and easy? Are not the
several Tunes of mercy and judgment in these Songs? Is not here Affliction and
deliverance, desertion and recovery, darkness and light in this variously? A
form of Speech familiar with that Author, when he has n^^ther Proof for what he
says beside pure Confidence.
Doubtless it is so. God often calls his People to Songs upon Sigionoth. This
is the Doctrine on which he descants, and so applies it to the present Case: We
may rejoice at the Conquest of our Enemies, and mourn at the loss of our
Harvest; that was their Song upon Sigionoth, that though they had missed their
Harvest, they had mowed down the Cavaliers; From whom Gods People were sure to
reap a plentiful Crop of Plunder and Sequestration. And that is as delicious
Music to the Saints below, as the Harmony of the Spheres, or a Consort of
Angels to the Saints above; and it is wonderful how exactly the Hearts (yea, and
Fingers too) of Gods People were set to such a sweet and comfortable Tune.

4. But if Believers should ever fail of all these supports, they are able to
build their Confidence upon flat presumption, and downright Enthusiasm; and
when they trample upon all the Obligations of Oaths, and all the Laws of
Nature, Government and Religion, they can easily justify the wickedness of
their Proceedings by bold pretenses of immediate Impulse and Revelation from
Heaven. For when God is doing great things, Eben-ezer. p. 14.
he gives glorious manifestations of his Excellencies to his secret ones. Page
15.
So that he that is called to serve Providence in high things, without some
especial discovery of God, works in the dark, and knows not whither he goes,
and what he does, such an one travels in the Wilderness without a directing
Cloud. Clear shining from God must be at the bottom of deep laboring with God.
What is the reason that so many in our days set their hands to the Plow, and
look back again? Begin to serve Providence in great things, but cannot finish?
Give over in the heat of the day! They never had any such Revelation of the
mind of God upon their spirits, such a discovery of his Excellencies as might
serve for a Bottom of such Undertakings. Men must know, that if God has not
appeared to them in brightness, and shown them the horns in his hand, hid from
others, though they think highly of themselves, they will deny God twice and
thrice before the close of the work of this Age. Hence is the suiting of great
light, Page 16.
and great work in our days. Let new light be derided whilst men please, he
will (and it is too true) never serve the will of God in this Generation, who
sees not beyond the line of foregoing Ages. Now what was this new and this
great Light, that God held forth as the horns in his hand to the Believers of
that Generation? To this Enquiry we have a plain and positive Answer: Sermon. to
the Parl. April 19. 1649. p. 35.
Plainly the peculiar Light of this Generation, is that discovery which the
Lord has made to his People, of the mystery of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Tyranny. Now this new Light, joined with this new Doctrine, that Good
Principles become abominable when taken up or pursued against the Providence of
God, is such a rank and desperate piece of Enthusiasm, as must of necessity
cancel all the Laws of Society, and overthrow all the Governments in the World;
but I must not stay to descant upon its intolerable Mischiefs, neither indeed
need I, seeing it is apparently the utmost emprovement of all Phanatick Folly
and Madness.

And now the People of God being armed with such Principles, and inflamed by
such Preachers, with what Briskness did they march under the conduct of
Providence, till at length it led the warmest and most forward Heads of them to
the Top of Westminster Hall, London Bridge, and the City Gates, or (in the
Language of I. O.) to the high places of Armageddon: And there fixed them for
Monuments of their own Hypocrisy, and sad Examples of Rebellion. But thence
Astrea took her flight to Heaven, and now public Affairs are transacted by a
Providential permissive Commission (as our Author I remember somewhere words
it, and it is but what they allow to all the wickednesses in the World.) So that
whilst the Eye of Providence shined upon them, they were flowers of the Sun,
and which way soever they addressed themselves, it was to court Providence.
When they complied with every rising Interest, it was to close with the mind of
the Lord in the work of this Generation. When they played fast and loose with
all Parties, as the Complexion of Affairs suggested to them, that was the Lords
glorious Discoveries and Manifestations of his mind to his secret ones. And
then to boggle at the wickedness of any design that prosper'd, was to flinch
from the work of the Lord. As I. O. encourages the Rumpers the day immediately
after the Kings death. Iacta est Alea, the Providence of God must be served,
according to the discovery made of his own unchangeable will, and not the
mutable Interests and Passions of the Sons of men (i. e. the Presbyterians,
whose Apostasy he is there upbraiding.) For verily the Lord of Hosts has
purposed to pollute the pride of all Glory, and to bring into contempt all the
honorable of the Earth, Isa. 23.9. And then to renounce their old Principles,
and falsify their old Engagements, was to knock off with Providence; for be
your Principles never so good in themselves, they become wicked and abominable,
when taken up against the Providence of God. And this was the sad Apostasy of
the Presbyterians from the work of the Lord; They, fools as they were, fix on
Principles, Worcester Thanksgiving, p. 22.
(though they were tied to them by Oaths and Covenants) old bounds must not be
broken up, order must not be disturbed; Let God appear never so eminently, so
mightily, they will keep to their Principle, (and their Oaths and Covenants
too) What is this but judicial hardness? What think you Sir, is it not a mighty
security, that these men are able to give of their Faith and Allegiance, when
Providence or the Turn of Affairs shall untie all the Bands of Oaths, and
Success overruled all the Obligations of Conscience. So that as long as Loyalty
is forced to be in fashion, they are peaceable and obedient Subjects; but if
Rebellion prosper, it is not for them to oppose Providence. When God has a
Controversy with the Royal Family he absolves Subjects of all their Oaths and
Obligations to Allegiance, and though the Presbyterians had loaded themselves
with chains, and multiplied Engagements to his late Majesty, and his lawful
Successors, yet not to join with the Independents in the subversion of the
Government by the murder of one Prince, and the Banishment of another, was
Judicial hardness. Did you ever read of such a mixture of Blasphemy and
Rebellion; when men shall commit such horrid and emphatical Villainies, and then
shall with so steeled a Confidence warrant not only their Lawfulness, but their
Necessity by virtue of a divine Commission; and shall break all the Laws of
Nature, Society, and Religion, by the Counsel, under the Conduct, and with the
Approbation of the Almighty? In short, there is scarce a Principle of Blasphemy
or Rebellion in the Alcoran that this Wretch has not vouched upon divine
Authority. He is a Person of such a rank Complexion, that he would have vyed
with Mahomet himself both for boldness and imposture. The divine Majesty never
had a dearer and more familiar Achitophel than he, they were always through the
whole course of the War privy to each others Counsels, were always of the same
side, and drove on always the same designs; and had this man been of the
Cabinet Council of Heaven he could not have pretended a greater and more
intimate acquaintance with the Intrigues of Providence. And now I leave it to
the World to judge whether it be not becoming our Authors Modesty to charge it
upon me as a monstrous Fiction, for saying, there have been men, who have
taught, that to pursue success in Rebellion is to follow the guidance of
Providential Dispensations.

. 7. Our Authors imprudence and unadvisedness in forcing me upon the proof of
my last Charge in defense of my own Integrity, recals to my mind another
resembling Instance of his discretion, in provoking me to an unnecessary
Dispute, where it is impossible for him to escape a manifest and dishonorable
Baffle, viz. that the Pretense of Religion had no concernment in our late
Rebellion or Civil War. And though I do not remember where I ever affirmed it
was, yet is he upon every occasion upbraiding and challenging me to prove it;
and whereas in my first Chapter I chanced to observe that it has frequently
been made use of as a covering for unruly and seditious Practices, without
descending to particular Instances (for they are too many to be specified in a
small Volume) he will needs have me to aim in particular at our late Wars and
Tumults, and appeals to the public Writings, Page 147.
Declarations, and Treaties, whereby those Tumults and Wars were begun and
carried on: And then we shall find that Authority, Laws, and Privileges, and I
know not what things, wherein private men have no pretense of Interest, were
pleaded in those Affairs. Page 301.
And upon this string he is again rubbing to as little Purpose in this Chapter.
Neither is he singular in this conceit and confidence; there are others, that
have as well as himself sounded their Alarms from the Pulpit against
Antichristian Idolatry and Oppression; and have chafed popular zeal and rage to
fight for the purity and beauty of Gospel Ordinances, who yet blush not to
declare in public (with such a competent measure of confidence are they
gifted) that the cause of Religion was not pretended or engaged in the Quarrel,
but that it was a mere Contest about Civil Rights and Privileges. Now though
this concerns not me in my own defense, yet will I a little concern my self in
the Enquiry, to discover the honesty and ingenuity of these men, that will blow
hot and cold out of the same mouth, affirm and deny the same thing, as it suits
with their present Occasion, and present Interest. And are they not arrived to
an heroic pitch of Confidence, that dare protest so boldly and so publicly in
defiance of so many public Acts, Ordinances, Protestations, Covenants,
Engagements, Declarations, Remonstrances, Treaties of peace, and Overtures of
Accommodation, in all which preservation of Religion, and demands of
Reformation still lead the Van; and the sense and substance of all the
numberless Papers of Lords and Commons amounts to no more than this, that they
were resolved to expose their lives and fortunes for the defense and
maintenance of the true Religion, his Majesty's Person and Honor, the Power
and Privileges of Parliament, and the just Rights and Liberties of the
Subject. All these Pretenses came in of course, but still Religion was the
first and dearest grievance, and its Preservation more tender to them than
their lives and liberties. As in the Observation upon the Lord Digbys Letters,
the Lords and Commons declare, that they had never done any thing against the
personal honor of the Queen, only we have desired to be secured from such
plots and mischievous designs, that they might not have the favor of the
Court, and such a powerful influence upon his Majesty's Counsels, as they have
had to the extreme hazard not only of Civil Liberty and peace of the Kingdom,
but of that we hold much dearer than these, yea, than the very being of this
Nation, that is, our Religion, whereupon depends the honor of Almighty God,
and the salvation of our Souls. And this was their perpetual answer to all his
Majesty's Propositions, that his Counsels were overruled by a malignant party
of Papists, and other ill-affected persons, that carried on their own wicked
designs of rooting up the Protestant Religion, to plant Popery and
Superstition. Innumerable are the proofs to this purpose, but we will content
our selves (because it will be sufficient) with these few particulars.

First then, it is notorious the Scottish broils and tumults were raised purely
upon a pretense of Religion, being begun about the reading the Common Prayer,
(...). p^g. (...)
and not a little promoted by that senseless Pamphlet, A Dispute against the
English Popish Ceremonies obtruded upon the Church of Scotland. And the only
Conditions of quieting these Troubles, were, (1.) That the Provost and
City-Council should join in opposition to the Service Book. (2.) That Ramsey
and Rollock, two silenced Ministers, and Henderson a silenced Reader, should be
restored to their places. And not long after there came a Petition of Noblemen,
Barons, Ministers, Burgesses and Commons, and about what, do we think, but
against the Liturgy and Canons? And the next news we hear from thence, was,
That the King having adjourned the Term to Sterling by Proclamation, the Earl
of Hume and Lord Lindsey protest against it, and erect four Tables of the
Nobility, Gentry, Buroughs, and Ministers; the first Act of which, Page 155.
is to enter a general Covenant in defense of Religion, (and for fashions sake,
the Kings Person.) This business of Scotland is an affair not unworthy the
mentioning, not only because it was well known what invitation they had from
their Party to enter England, but also because the Parliament here owned their
Cause, took it unkindly of the King for calling them Rebels, voted them a great
Supply under the name of a Friendly Assistance, and called them their dear
Brethren of Scotland. And withal, did particularly own the Scotch Tumults as
raised upon a religious account: Exact Coll. Page 494.
this we have themselves confessing in a Declaration to satisfy the World of
the justice of raising Arms; wherein they declare Religion the principal thing,
and all others subservient to it: and as to this particular business of the
Scots, Page 492.
they speak thus: When they ( i. e. Papists, Clergy, and other Enemies of
Religion) conceived the way sufficiently prepared, they at last resolved to put
on their Masterpiece in Scotland, (where the same method had been followed)
and more boldly unmask themselves in imposing upon them a Popish Service Book:
for well they knew the same Fate attended both Kingdoms, and Religion could not
be altered in one without the other: God raised the Spirits in that Nation to
oppose it with so much zeal and indignation, that it kindled such a flame as no
expedient could be found but a Parliament here to quench it. i. e. By hiring
and tempting them to a new Rebellion at the price of one hundred thousand
Pound, beside the reward of Pay and Plunder for the common Soldiers, the
promise of Church-Revenues for the chief Promoters of the service, the
sacrifice of the Archbishop of Canterbury to their malice and revenge, and
(what was most likely to endear the Cause) the Reformation of the Discipline
and Worship of the Church of England by the Model of the Kirk of Scotland, that
absolute Pattern of a thorough godly Rebellion.

Again, Ex. Coll. p. 96, 97.
The Declaration of Lords and Commons, March 2. orders this Kingdom to be put
in a posture of defense by Sea and Land, because there was a design by those in
greatest Authority about the King for the altering of Religion: That the
Scottish War was fomented, and the Irish Rebellion framed for that purpose:
That they had Advertisements from Venice, and Paris, and Rome, that the King
was to have four thousand men out of France and Spain, Page 100.
which could be to no other end than to change his own Profession, and the
Public Religion of the Kingdom.

In the 19 Propositions sent June 2. 1642. the eighth is this, Ex Coll. p. 309.
That your Majesty will be pleased to consent that such a Reformation be made
of the Church Government and Liturgy, as both Houses of Parliament shall
advise, etc. And the 17th, That the King should enter into a more strict
Alliance with the Protestant Princes and States, for the defense of the
Protestant Religion, against the Attempts of the Pope and his Adherents. And
the Propositions made by Lords and Commons, Page 304.
June 10. 1642. for bringing in Money and Plate to maintain Horse and Arms,
runs upon this ground, first, That Religion else will be destroyed; and this is
particularly recommended to all those that tender their Religion. And when the
King countermanded the Propositions, they reinforce them by the endearments of
Religion. And Tuesday 12 July, 1642. resolve it upon the Question, Page 376.
Page 457.
That an Army be forthwith raised for its defense and preservation. Their
Declaration of Aug. 8. 1642. grounds its self upon this, Page 491.
That the Kings Army was raised for the Oppression of the true Religion. And
therefore they give this account to the World, for a satisfaction to all Men of
the Justice of their proceedings, and a warning to those who are involved in
the same danger with them, to let them see the necessity and duty which lies
upon them to save themselves, their Religion and Country. Where they tell us at
large, and in great passion, That Papists, ambitious and discontented
Clergymen, Delinquents, and ill-affected persons of the Nobility and Gentry,
have conspired together, and often attempted the alteration of Religion, etc.
That all was subject to will and power, that so men's minds being made poor and
base, and their Liberties lost and gone, they might be ready to let go their
Religion whenever it should be resolved to alter it; which was, and still is
the great design, and all else made use of but as instrumentary and subservient
to it. And then after an horrible harangue about the King and Queens going
away, the Lord Digby's Letter, the Members going to York, etc. They (the
Papists, Prelates, Page 494.
etc.) come to crown their work, and put that in execution, which was first in
their intention, that is, the changing of Religion into Popery and Superstition.

The Scots in answer to a Declaration sent them by their Commissioners at
London from the two Houses, Page 598.
did Aug. 3. 1642. return another, wherein they give God thanks for their
former and present desires of a Reformation especially of Religion, which is
the glory and strength of a Kingdom, etc. Protest that their hearts were heavy
and made sad, that what is more dear and precious to them than what is dearest
to them in the whole World, the Reformation of Religion has moved so slowly. To
which they add, that it is indeed a work full of difficulties, but God is
greater than the World, and when the supreme Providence gives opportunity of
the accepted time, and the day of salvation, no other work can prosper in the
hands of his Servants, if it be not apprehended, and with all faithfulness
improved: This Kirk and Nation, when the Lord gave them the calling, considered
not their own deadness, nor staggered at the Promise (of an hundred thousand
Pound) through unbelief, but gave glory to God; And who knows but the Lord
has now some Controversy with England, which will not be removed, till first
and before all the Worship of his Name, and the Government of his House be
settled according to his own will? when this desire shall come, it shall be to
England, after so long desired hopes, a tree of life. And therefore they
proceed to press earnestly for an Uniformity in both Kingdoms, but it must be
after their own model. What hopes (say they) can there be of Unity in Religion,
in one Confession of Faith, one form of Worship, one Catechism, till there be
first one form of Ecclesiastical Government; yea, what hope can the Kingdom and
Kirk of Scotland have of a durable Peace, till Prelacy be plucked up Root and
Branch, as a Plant which God has not planted, and from which no better Fruits
can be expected than such sour Grapes, as this day set on edge the Kingdom of
England?

In answer to this goodly Declaration the Lords and Commons desire it may be
considered, Page 603.
that that Party which has now incensed and armed his Majesty against us is the
very same, which not long since upon the very same design of rooting out the
Reformed Religion did endeavor to begin the Tragedy in Scotland, etc. And
having thanked the Assembly of the Church of Scotland for proposing those
things which may unite the two Churches and Nations against Popery and all
superstitious Sects and Innovations whatsoever, do assure that they have
thereupon resumed into their Consideration the matters concerning the
Reformation of Church Government and Discipline, which (say they) we have often
had in consultation and debate since the beginning of this Parliament, and ever
made it our chiefest aim, though we have been powerfully opposed in the
Prosecution and Accomplishment of it.

And in another Declaration to the Convention of Estates, they remonstrate that
the honorable Houses have fully declared by what they have done, and what they
are desirous to do, That the true state of the Cause and Quarrel, is Religion:
in Reformation whereof, they are so forward and zealous, that there is nothing
expressed in the Scots Declarations former or later, which they have not
seriously taken to heart, and endeavored to effect, etc.

Of this the Commissioners of Scotland in their third Paper remember the two
Houses, p. 42, 43.
And in a Letter from the Assembly of Divines to them, by order of the House of
Commons, they call it twice The Cause of Religion. And the Assembly in answer
to the Parliament, desire it may be more and more cleared, Religion to be the
true state of the differences in England; and to be uncessantly prosecuted
first above all things, giving no sleep to their eyes, or slumber to their
eyelids, until it be settled.

Ex Col. p. 666.
In their Declaration and Protestation to the whole World, October. 22. 1642. They
are fully convinced that the Kings Resolutions are so engaged to the Popish
Party, for the suppression and extirpation of the true Religion, that all hopes
of peace and protection are excluded, that it is fully intended to give
satisfaction to the Papists by alteration of Religion, etc. That great means
are made to take up the differences betwixt some Princes of the Roman Religion,
that so they might unite their strength to the extirpation of the Protestant
Cause, wherein principally this Kingdom and the Kingdom of Scotland are
concerned, as making the greatest Body of the Reformed Religion in Christendom,
etc. For all which Reasons we are resolved to enter into a Solemn Oath and
Covenant with God, to give up our Selves, our Lives and Fortunes into his
hands; and that we will to the utmost of our Power and Judgment maintain his
Truth, and conform our selves to his Will.

And in the Declaration upon the Votes of no further Address to be made to the
King by themselves or any one else, Feb. 17. 1647. the Lords and Commons make
Religion one of the great Motives upon which they proceeded: for (say they) the
torture of our Bodies by most cruel Whippings, slitting of Noses, etc. might be
the sooner forgotten, had not our Souls been Lorded over, led captive into
Superstition and Idolatry, triumphed over by Oaths ex Officio,
Excommunications, Ceremonious Articles, new Canons, Canon-Oaths, etc. p. 19.
And in the last Paper to the Scotch Commissioners, Feb. 24. 1648. they declare,
that the Army of the Houses of Parliament were raised for maintenance of the
true Religion, and that they invited them to come to their assistance, and
declared the true state of the Quarrel to be Religion; and they earnestly
desire the General Assembly to further and expedite the assistance desired from
the Kingdom of Scotland upon this ground and motive, that thereby they shall do
great service to God, and great honor may redound to themselves, by becoming
Instruments of a Glorious Reformation, etc.

This was the style of all their Papers, from 42 to 48, till some of the
Grandees of the Independent Faction had by their hypocritical Prayers,
malicious Preachings, counterfeit Tears, unmanly Whinings, false Protestations,
and execrable Perjuries, scrued themselves up into a Supremacy of Power and
Interest, and then they altered the style of their Pretenses with the change of
their Affairs, and suited their Remonstrances to their Fortunes, and so stopped
not at their old demands of Reformation and purity of Ordinances; these
Pretexts were too low for the greatness of their Attempts and Resolutions, and
were not sufficient to warrant the Murder of their lawful Sovereign; and
therefore it was necessary for them to take up with new Pleas suitable to the
wickedness of their new Purposes; and then nothing was big enough to Arreign or
Condemn their Prince, but the Charge of Treason and Tyranny, and the Sentence
of Death was passed and executed upon him as a public Enemy to the
Commonwealth: So that though Pretenses of Secular and Political Interest were
necessary to cut off his Head, yet it was purely Zeal and Reformation that
brought him to the Block.

To these Declarations from the Press, I might add their Declarations from the
Pulpit, their Preachers incessantly encouraging the People to fight against the
King, as the most acceptable service to God; and the People accordingly fought
against him, because they were persuaded that he was a Papist, and would bring
in Popery; that the Common Prayer was the Mass in English, Organs were
Idolatry, and Episcopacy Antichristian. It was nothing but the purity of the
Gospel, to which they so cheerfully sacrificed their Thimbles and Bodkins. And
though here it were easy to collect vast Volumes, there being scarce a
Parliament-exercise, for which the Preacher had the Thanks of the House, in
which some sands and sweat were not wasted in crying up the piety of their
Intentions for the Reformation of Gospel Ordinances. But because this would
prove a Work too Voluminous, I will therefore put off my Reader, (and satisfy
my Adversary too) with two or three passages out of the inspired Homilies of I.
O. in his several Dispensations. In his Sermon preached before the Parliament,
Page 34, 35.
April 29. 1646. he thus bespeaks them: From the beginning of these Troubles,
Right Honorable, you have held forth Religion and the Gospel, as whose
Preservation and Restoration was principally in your Aims; and I presume
malice it self is not able to discover any insincerity in this; the fruits we
behold, proclaim to all the Conformity of your Words and Hearts. Now the God of
Heaven grant that the same mind be in you still, in every particular Member of
this Honorable Assembly, in the whole Nation, especially in the Magistracy and
Ministry of it, that we be not like the Boatmen, look one way, and row another;
cry, Gospel, and mean the other thing; Lord, Lord, and advance our own ends,
that the Lord may not stir up the staff of his anger, and the rod of his
indignation against us, as an hypocritical People. Page 4^
And Feb. 28. 1649. he tells them again, Gods Work whereunto ye are engaged, is
the propagating of the Kingdom of Christ, and the setting up of the Standard of
the Gospel. And October. 13. 1652. Page 27.
From the beginning of the Contests in this Nation, when God had caused your
Spirits to resolve, that the Liberties, Privileges, and Rights of this Nation
wherewith you were entrusted, should not (by his assistance) be wrested out of
your hands by Violence, Oppression and Injustice; this he also put upon your
hearts, to vindicate and assert the Gospel of Jesus Christ, his Ways, and his
Ordinances, against all Opposition, though you were but inquiring the way to
Sion, (for then they were little better than Presbyterians) with your faces
thitherward^ God secretly entwining the Interest of Christ with yours, wrapped up
with you the whole Generation of them that seek his face, and prosper'd your
Affairs on that account. And lastly, Feb. 4. 1658. Page 1^.
Give me leave to remember you, as one that had opportunity to make
Observations of the passages of Providence in those days, in all the three
Nations, in the times of our greatest hazards; give me leave, I say, to
remember you, that the Public Declarations of those employed in the Affairs of
this Nation, in the face of the Enemies, their Addresses unto God among
themselves, their Prayers night and day, their private Discourses one with
another, were, that the Preservation of the Interest of Christ in and with his
People, was the great thing that lay in their eyes, etc.

I must not detain you with Observations upon these passages; and they are so
plain, I need not: this is enough to send him to School to his own
dumb-speaking Egyptian Hieroglyphick, Eben^ezer, Epist. ded
with which he once thought he could stop the mouths of the malignant Infidels,
that would not be brought to believe the Success at Celchester, an ample
Testimony of the continuance of Gods Presence with the Army. (...), Men of all
sorts know that God hates Impudence.

. 8. But how ill soever the People of God may have behaved themselves in time
of yore, they are now resolved to learn better manners: for, says our Author,
(and who will not take his word?) Do they profess it is their Duty, Page 296, 297.
their Principle, their Faith and Doctrine, to be obedient to their Rulers and
Governors? Do they offer all the security of their adherence to such declared
Principles, as Mankind is necessitated to be satisfied with in things of their
highest Concernment? etc. All is one, every different Opinion is Press-money,
and every Sect is an Army, although they be all and every one of them
Protestants, of whom alone we do discourse. You offer Security for your
Allegiance! You that have violated all the Obligations of Oaths, Covenants, and
Protestations! Shall Bankrupts of all Faith and Honesty expect to be trusted
upon their bare words, that have so often proved perfidious to their Oaths?
Men, whose coy and crazy Consciences have sworn and swallowed naked and
undisguised Contradictions, are capable no doubt of giving wonderful assurance
and satisfaction for their future Fidelity. First give us some competent Tokens
of your Repentance, before you presume to tender us any Security of your
Allegiance. Men that own the peculiar and distinguishing Principle of your
Party, are not fit to be trusted or endured in any Commonwealth, viz. That
Sovereign Princes may forfeit their Title to their Crowns, and that it is in the
power of Subjects to depose them for the ill Administration of Government. By
this pretense you justified all your late Disloyal practices; by it you
adjudged his late Majesty to death; by it you banished the undoubted Heir of
the Crown; by it you proceeded to subvert the old, and erect a new Form of
Government; and by it you all along confirmed your selves in your Zeal and
Opposition to the Royal Interest. Now what signs have you given us of your
having renounced this Principle of Rebellion? And till you have, what assurance
can you give us of your Return to Loyalty; seeing it is not possible for any
Oaths to bind you to your Duty, whenever you have a mind to pick Quarrels
against the management of public Affairs? Come, come, (Sir) shuffle no longer
with us, nor with your own Consciences: Either your proceedings in the late
Confusions were great and enormous Crimes, or they were not; if they were not,
nothing can restrain you, whenever you gain the advantage of power and
opportunity, from acting such things over again, as you seriously believe to be
just and innocent: if they were, why have you not all this while given us some
competent and reasonable assurance of your Conversion? Your Crimes (if Crimes
at all) were heinous and public, and enhansed with all the Aggravations of
guilt and wickedness; a flourishing Kingdom was embroiled in Wars and
Desolations; a pious and virtuous Prince was villanously murdered; his
Children banished to preserve their Lives; his Friends undone with Rapine and
Sequestration, and adjudged to death for their Zeal and Fidelity to his
Service; thousands of his Subjects lost and sacrificed in the Quarrel, with
innumerable other mischiefs and enormities; and all this carried on with mighty
shows, and confident brags of Zeal and Piety. These are sins with a witness,
and so full of horror and amazement, that they are not to be repented of with
an ordinary Contrition; and it is not possible that any Man should be seriously
convinced of his own guilt in such prodigious Crimes, without the deepest
Accents and Agonies of remorse; or that he should appease his Conscience with
any less satisfaction than public Acknowledgment; much less that he should
expect other Men should trust the sincerity of his Repentance, without some
visible Indications of his amendment. But, alas! so far are you from affording
us any tolerable grounds to expect your change, that you give us nothing but
symptoms of reprobate hardness; and instead of open and ingenuous Confessions,
either wholly blaunch the matter, or extenuate the Crime, or (which is
unpardonable Insolence) discharge the guilt of all your practices upon our
heads: hereafter therefore forbear to think us such Sots, (unless you imagine
our Skulls are stuffed with wet Straw) as to accept of any Security you can
offer, till you have first satisfied us of your hearty and unfeigned return to
Principles of Loyalty and Allegiance: And till then, it were a shameful
forfeiture of common discretion, if we do not still suppose you the same Men we
have ever found you. Wolves (they say) may change their hairs, but not their
hearts; and it is an easy matter for Men so exercised in the Arts of
Hypocrisy, to cast their outward pretenses, without ever altering their
thoughts and inward designs. And yet they avoid the very appearances of
alteration, insomuch that nothing is more cried up among themselves than an
undaunted adherence to their old Principles and their old Cause; and if any of
the Party chance to be so ingenuous, as to confess the Error and Crime of his
Rebellion, he is sure to be loaded with all the Reproaches of Apostasy, and
branded with all the dishonor of a Renegado. And it is well known into what
deep Arrears of their Anger and Displeasure one has lately run himself by a few
gentle and friendly reproofs of their Schismatical Behavior. What if he had
exhorted them to repent of the Sins of Disloyalty and Rebellion, and had
charged it upon their Ingenuity to give some remarkable Evidences and
Engagements of their better Resolutions, as a worthy Requital of his Majesty's
Favor and Indempnifying the Outrage of all their former Proceedings? If he
had, he would have been pelted with more dirty Language than the Pope of Rome,
or the Apocalyptick Beast. They are stubborn and implacable in their old
Principles, their Minds are still possessed with the same accursed Rage and
Bitterness of Spirit, as ran them upon their late Rebellions; and they are so
little affected with any sense or sorrow for their Disloyalty, that like men
given up to a reprobate sense, they are enraged by the convictions of their own
Guilt, and labor to stifle the overruling Reflections of their own
Consciences. Rub up their Memories with their former Crimes, and you do but
inflame their Choler; invite them to Repentance, and that they call (with our
Author) an impertinent calling over of things past and bygone. Page 60.
Nay, their Faces and their Consciences are so hardened, that they will threaten
every little Reflection upon their late Enormities with the Act of Oblivion.
And when any of them are so shameless as publicly to appeal to the innocence
of their own Practices; if you shall rebuke their Confidence by representing
the base and perfidious Arts of their Hypocrisy and Ambition, they (forsooth)
will stop your Mouth with a Suit at Law. Indemnity will not satisfy their
proud Stomachs, unless they may pass for pure and unspotted Innocents. We are
bound to erase out of our Memories all Records of their Frauds, their
Perjuries, their Pride, and their Cruelty; and in spite of our Dear-bought
Experience ever suppose them as harmless in their designs as they are demure in
their Pretenses. And (what is more and more intolerable) they are so little
touched with any serious Regret for their former Actings, that they still
proceed as far as they dare venture in the same blessed paths of Reformation.
For though as yet they dare not set forth Public Declarations of Designs to
introduce Popery; of his Majesty's being seduced by Evil Counselors; of the
Corruptions of Ministers of State; and of the ill management of all Public
Affairs, and such other old Stories as served for Prologues to the Old Tumults:
Yet it is become a customary and familiar thing with them to make leering and
unmannerly Reflections upon the Wisdom of the present Government, to dispute
and condemn the Equity of Public Proceedings, to possess one another upon
every slight occasion with jealousies of Plots upon their Liberties and
Privileges, to upbraid public Misfortunes with the successes of the Reign of
Oliver Cromwell; and in brief, to alienate the Affections, and impair the good
Opinions of the People as to the present Setlement of things, by any Arts and
Devices that may not bring them under the lash of Justice, and within the
cognizance of the Laws. It Is notorious how they work their Followers to a
dislike of Monarchy, and a dis-respect to Sovereign Princes; though it is no
wonder, if we consider that the present Chiefs and Ringleaders of the Party
are such as were the most vehement Patriots and Assertors of the Republican
Faction.

. 9. For a farther proof of their Impenitence, I cannot but observe that these
men, that are as free as Publicans in their other Confessions, yet in these
matters become like the man without the Wedding Garment, Dumb and Speechless;
not for any deep sense of their Guilt, but because they disdain to own it. Here
they cover their Transgressions as Adam, and stand upon the Protestation of
their Integrity as Job. Bring them to the enumeration of Sins against the Fifth
Commandment, and they are immediately taken with a Pharisaick Costiveness, and
after all their straining and winking, nothing comes but a few general and
careless Confessions. The Good Old Cause sticks as close to them as Original
Sin, no Soap or Nitre can purge away their Principles; their Complexions are
unchangeable as the skin of an Ethiopian, and their Tempers incurable as the
fretting Leprosy.

And therefore to return to our Author, before you presume to offer us any more
security of your good Behavior: first, learn the Ingenuity of men, show your
selves humble, melting, and brokenhearted Christians; give us some symptoms of
your Repentance and Contrition: Rely not upon the Justification of your own
Works; cast off the Rags of your own Self-Righteousness, and Self-Loyalty, and
confess but once to his Majesty, as you often do to God Almighty, Our throats
have been as open Sepulchers, with our Tongues we have used deceit, the poison
of Asps has been under our Lips; Our mouths have been full of cursing and
bitterness, our Feet have been swift to shed Blood; destruction and misery have
been in all our ways, and the way of peace have we not known. We are seriously
convinced of the error and wickedness of our doings: It was the great men of
our Party (we cannot deny it) that were the fiercest and most implacable
Enemies against your Majesty's Crown and Person, that by their perfidious Oaths
and Protestations enticed your Royal Father into their Nets, and then murdered
him with equal Modesty and Conscience. It was we (with shame and horror we
confess it) that pursued your own Life with the thirst and industry of
Bloodhounds; and had your Majesty been the most hated wretch, Traitor, and
Rebel in the world, we could not have hunted you with a keener Rage. And it was
our Preachers that cried up all this as the Cause of God, and the work of
Providence, in order to the Recovery and Preservation of the Gospel. But now
(Sir) we are from the bottom of our hearts convinced of the unparalled
wickedness of all these our Practices and Opinions; and we desire with shame
and confusion of face to acknowledge and disclaim them in the presence of God,
and before all the world; we now see, and cannot but declare we have grievously
rebelled against him, in fighting for him against his Vicegerent; as we did
against you when we fought for your Authority against your Person. Sir, our
Behavior has been so unworthy, and our Hypocrisy so notorious, that we have
not confidence to desire your Majesty should ever trust us, till we have made
some reasonable Atonement for all our Miscarriages, by some public and
ingenuous satisfaction, and given some unquestionable Proofs of our Repentance
by some signal and extraordinary acts of Loyalty. And though our Brethren of
the Kirk were once so tenderhearted as to excuse a Sister that had fallen (as
they phrased it) in Holy Fornication, from the shame of her public Penance,
lest the Gospel should be scandalized: yet if there be any among us that bewray
any signs and symptoms of the old Spirit of Rebellion, we will be so far from
sheltring or conniving at such unpardonable Offenders, that we will with all
possible care drive them from our Communion, and deliver them up to the Justice
of the Laws. If they would offer us such security as this for their
Peaceableness and Obedience, they might make some impression upon our Good
Natures, and gain some ground upon our good Opinions. But if they will not, all
their other promises and Engagements are but so many assurances that they are
not in good earnest. For if they were, that alone would indispensably oblige
them to frank and open Retractions. Nothing can expiate a public Crime but a
public Repentance. But alas! these conditions are too rough for humble and
self-denying men to swallow, their Stomachs cannot down with such sharp and
unpleasant Physic; and they will rather continue for ever in a state of
Impenitence, then repent at the rate of a public satisfaction. And hence it is
that though I. O. has made the door to Atheism so wide, yet that to Loyalty is
(as to them) like that to the Kingdom of Heaven, Straight is the gate, and
narrow is the way, and few (if any) there be that find it. So that for them to
pretend to Loyalty is a ruder and more unhandsom Insolence, then all their open
Crimes and execrable Practices; it is an affront to our understandings, when
Persons so stained with perfidious and disloyal Actions, shall go about to
persuade us of their Innocence and Integrity, and cry up themselves for brave
Subjects, though they have nothing to show for it but their zeal in Treason and
Rebellion. This is bold-fac'd wickedness, when men that have done such base and
dishonorable things, shall look confidently, and scorn to accept all your Acts
of Indemnity, unless they may challenge one of Justification. To conclude,
Plutarch, I remember, somewhere commends the Wisdom of those Birds that
conspired to beat the Cuckoo, lest in process of time it should grow up to an
Hawk: but what if the Cuckoo had been an Hawk already, and they or any of their
flock had been gripped in its Talons, what sort of Birds would you have judged
them, had they been so silly as to suffer it to become an Hawk again; only
because it sung the old Cuckoo Tune? The Mythology is plain; That Prince that
has felt the pounces of these Ravening Vultures, if after that he shall be
persuaded to regard their fair speeches, at such times as they want Power,
without other evident and unquestionable tokens of their Conversion, deserves
to be King of the Night.

. 10. But here our Author adds, and it is suggested a thousand times over; Are
not we both Protestants, and shall we persecute our Brethren of the same Church
and Communion with our selves? No, no, we are Papists and Idolaters; have you
so often branded us with the charge of Popery, and so confidently involved us
in the grand Antichristian Apostasy; and can you now think it a seasonable
Argument to work upon our Compassion and Good Nature by declaring your selves
Protestants? This is an admirable motive to prevail upon the Affections of rank
Papists; it is just as if our Author should hope to win us to the grant of an
Indulgence, by pleading (as he often does) that they are right Godly men, when
he has made an implacable hatred of all Godliness, the Characteristick note of
the Episcopal Clergy. But he does, ever did, and ever will pour out his words
at Random; and they are any thing, and we are any thing, and every thing is any
thing, Truth to day, and Heresy to morrow, as it shall happen to conduce to
their present Interest. And therefore to be short and plain with them, and to
abate the Confidence of this popular pretense; The name of Protestant (as they
use it) is but a term of Faction, and the word of a Party, a Title to which
every man may pretend, that is no friend to the Pope of Rome; and if he be
fallen out with the Papacy upon what Account soever, that is enough to list him
a Member of the Protestant Communion. And if any man through the Licentiousness
of his life or principles be forced even for his own security to turn Renegado
to the Church of Rome, he shall be immediately admitted into the Fellowship of
the Reformed Churches: and thus shall the Reformation be made the Sanctuary of
Romulus, a Refuge for Enthusiasts and Heretics, a device to draw together all
the lewd and wicked people in the world, to unite themselves into one body in
defiance to the Roman Interest. This is a wild and boundless thing, and
signifies nothing but popular Tumults and Confusions, and shelters all the
Sacriledges and Enormities in the world, provided they that commit them rail at
his Holiness. And thus I confess was the Reformation of some places the mere
effect of the Tumults and Outrages of Boors, the Factions and Seditions of
Mechanics, the Crafts and Artifices of Statesmen, and the Ambitions of peevish
and pragmatical Priests. And all that some men (who think themselves some of
the most refined Protestants) contributed to the carrying on of this great
work, was by breaking Church-Windows, demolishing Altars, defacing Shrines,
beating down Images, doing despite to Pictures, burning Libraries, stealing
Consecrated Plate, plundering Churches of their Sacred Ornaments, and adorning
their own Houses with the Spoils and Relics of Popish Trumpery. And therefore
we must distinguish (and it is Mr. Chillingworths distinction) between
Protestants and Protestants; those that Protest against Imperial Edicts, and
those that Protest against the Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Between those
who only remonstrate to the Papal Apostasy, and endeavor to retrieve the true
ancient and Catholic Christianity; and those who under this Pretense shelter
State Factions, and paint Reformation upon their Banners, and purge the Church
of Idolatry by Civil Wars, and Desolations of States, and cast off Allegiance
to their Prince, together with their Subjection to the Pope: enter into Leagues
and Associations, raise Armies, and run into all the Disorders of Treason and
Disloyalty against their lawful Sovereign, to extort by force of Arms the free
exercise of their Religion. And it would grieve a man to observe how the sober
and moderate Reformers were in many places run down by seditious and hotheaded
Preachers: and (to mention no more) how Melancthon with his Disciples were
supplanted by Flaccus Illyricus and his Confidents: The Flaccinians, (because
he would allow of no Seditious Counsels to carry on the work) immediately
impeach him of Apostasy to the Papal Cause, and send their Complaints abroad
to Calvin, and other Patriarchs of the Reformed Churches, and the good man was
put to the expense of much time and paper to prove himself no Jesuit. Now the
Church of England disclaims the Communion as well as the Principles of these
blustering Religionists; she abhors Rebellion as much as Idolatry, and looks
upon defection from Loyalty and Allegiance as an Apostasy from the Christian
Faith; and therefore men of disloyal Principles or Practices do but abuse her
and themselves too, when they pretend to her Communion; because forsooth they
have a mighty spleen against the Pope and Cardinals; whereas the rankest and
most Jesuitical piece of Popery is the Doctrine of Treason and Rebellion. And
what Agreement there is between the Jesuit and the Puritan concerning the
Civil Magistrate, you may see paralleled in diverse material Points of Doctrine
and Practice, to take down the too absolute and unrestrained Power of the
Monarchs of Christendom, by Lysimachus Nicanor of the Society of Jesus, in his
Epistle to the Covenanters of Scotland. And therefore what Persuasions soever
they may have in other matters contrary to the Church of Rome, unless they are
Orthodox in this Fundamental Article of the Royal Supremacy, if they are not
Guelphs, they are (and that is as bad) Gibellines, another Party of professed
Enemies to the Church of England. But to take down the Confidence of these
forward Pretenders, and to give a more distinct and satisfactory Account of
this Affair, you may know that our Reformation consists of two parts, Doctrine
and Discipline; the design of the former was to abolish the corruptions and
innovations of the Church of Rome, and to retrieve the pure and primitive
Christianity; and the design of the latter was to abrogate the Jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Rome, and to annex all Superiority and Pre-eminence over the
Ecclesiastical State to the Imperial Crown: in both which attempts, the
Non-conformists or Puritan-Recusants have absolutely forsaken our Communion.

1. As to Discipline, The design of those great men that first arose to that
great work was to redeem the Christian World from the shameless and exorbitant
Usurpations of the Bishop of Rome, that had invaded the Thrones of Princes, and
made their Scepters do homage to St. Peter's Keys, and enslaved the Royal
Dignity to the Interests and Insolences of a proud Vicar. And this was the
Schism of the Church of England, its defection to its lawful Prince; and its
first departure from the Church of Rome was nothing but its Revolt to its due
Allegiance, and at this day its greatest Heresy is the uncatholick Doctrine of
Obedience to Sovereign Authority. Whereas the great project of the men of the
Separation was never to abrogate, but only to exchange the Papal Usurpation,
and to setle that Power and Supremacy of which they stripped his Holiness of Rome
upon the Presbyterial Consistory. The Holy Discipline is but another name for
the Papal Power, it equally disrobes Princes of their Ecclesiastical Supremacy,
and entirely setles its Jurisdiction upon the Presbytery, and vests them with
an Authority to control their Commands, restrain their Civil Power, and punish
their Persons: in that by the Principles of the Huic disciplinae omn^s Orbis
Princip^s and Monarchas ^^sces (...) sabmi te^^ and (...) necesse est. ^^ave^s
de Disc. Eccl. p. 142.
Holy Discipline Kings must be subject to the Decrees of the Presbytery in all
matters of Religion; neither small nor great may be exempted from subjection to
the Scepter of Jesus Christ; by which they mean the same thing that the Papists
do by the Keys of St. Peter, viz. an Original Power in themselves of exercising
a temporal Jurisdiction over the Kings of the Earth under pretense of their
Spiritual Sovereignty: So that in this part of the work we have not been
encountered with more disturbance and opposition from the Jesuits than from the
Presbyterians, that are as to the Doctrine of Regal Supremacy as arrant
Recusants; and therefore it as much imports Princes for security of their own
Rights and Prerogatives to have an eye to the Factors of Geneva, as to the
Emissaries of Rome. They are both men of bold and fiery spirits; and all the
late Combustions of Europe have either been procured or occasioned by the
seditious and aspiring attempts of these two daring Sects. But the Tumults and
disorders of the Jesuits concern not our present Enquiry; nor may I enter upon
the History of all the Leagues, Conspiracies, Seditions, Spoils, Ravages, and
Insurrections, of the Puritan Brethren. It has been lately performed by an
Elegant Pen to purpose, that has thereby done that Right to the Cause of
Reformation, as to absolve the true Protestant from the Charge of Seditious
Doctrines and Practices, and to score all the Embroilments of the Kingdoms and
Estates of Christendom, on the Account of the Calvinists, who thrust themselves
into all Places and Designs; and if any where they were suffered to grow into
any considerable strength and Interest, were upon all occasions drawing in the
zealous Rabble into holy Leagues and Confederacies against their Governors.
And if you will but compare the first practices and proceedings of the Hugonots
in the Kingdom of France, of the Gheuses in the Belgic Provinces, of the
Kirk-faction in the Realm of Scotland, with the Actings, Treasons and
Disloyalties of the English Puritans, as you will discover a strange agreement
in the issues of their principles and proceedings, so you will find their
disorders to exceed the common mischiefs and exorbitancies of Mankind. But I
must not pursue particular Stories, the History of their Tumults, Outrages, and
Desolations, would require a larger Volume than the Book of Martyrs. It was
these hot and fiery Spirits, that in most places spoiled this gallant
Enterprise; and by their seditious Zeal and madness, drove up the Reformation
into downright Rebellion; and were so outrageous against the Church of Rome,
that they had not patience to wait the lazy temper of Authority for the
Reformation of Abuses. Its Wisdom and Moderation was Carnal Policy; and if
Governors would not set upon it in regular and peaceable ways at their first
alarm, then the only Doctrine they thundered from the Pulpit, was, That if
Princes refuse to reform Religion themselves, it is lawful for their godly
Subjects to do it, though by violence and force of Arms. These are the Men that
are so forward to thrust themselves into the Reformed Communion, and whom we
are so resolved to disclaim as shameful Apostates from the Reformed Cause, and
judge just such Protestants as the Gnostics were Christians, the scandal and
dishonor of their Profession; and whom the true Sons of the Church were forced
to avoid as much, if not more, than Heathens and Infidels, though it were only
to secure their own Reputation, that their Tumults and Disorders might not be
scored upon their Reckoning. This is plain matter of Fact, though how it will
relish with our Author, it is easy to foretell; and it is not to be doubted but
he may have the confidence to remonstrate to the most credible evidence of
History, that has the boldness in defiance to so many public Ordinances and
Declarations, to deny that the Pretenses of Reformation had any concern in our
late Confusions. But however, he would be well-advised not to dare to Apologize
for other Men, unless he could first clear his own innocence: for if a Man
shall undertake to plead the Cause of a notorious Offender, that stands himself
chargeable of the deeper guilt, he does not defend, but betray and upbraid his
Client; his very Apology becomes a strong Accusation, and all the World will
suspect that Man's innocence, when they shall see a person so scandalous, so
forward in his defense. He is but an ill Apologist for the peaceableness or
Loyalty of any Party, that has himself been a famous Trumpeter (not to say, a
great Commander) in Rebellion; and when our late Thirsty Tyrants had gorged
themselves with Royal Blood, was the first Chaplain that proffered his service
to say a long Margarets Grace to the Entertainment.

. 11. This short account may suffice to let you see that the Nonconformists, as
to this particular, (however they may glory in the Name of Protestant) are but
another sort of Papists, that plucked down one Popery to set up another; and
justled his Holiness out of the Chair, only to seat themselves in it. And as
for the under-Sects, and farther improved Schismatics, that have since sprung
out of the Corruptions of Presbytery, our Controversy with them is not between
Protestants and Protestants, but between Protestants and Anabaptists; a sort of
people (as to this particular worse than Papists) whom nothing will satisfy
but absolute Anarchy and Confusion in the Church, and by consequence in the
State: for in a Christian Commonwealth they are but one and the same Society,
which, as I have proved over and over, and our Author sometimes confesses,
nothing can avoid but an Ecclesiastical Supremacy, or coercive Jurisdiction in
matters of Religion. The hearty and serious acknowledgment whereof, is the true
Shibboleth, and distinguishing mark of the right English Protestant. This is
the pride and the glory of the Church of England, that she was never tainted
with Sedition and Disloyalty; and in the management of her Reformation, never
out run the Laws, but always moved under the Conduct of Sovereign Authority. It
grieved our Prelates to behold the Dignity of the Throne prostituted to a
Foreign Tyranny; and when, chiefly by their counsel and assistance, our Princes
had disingaged themselves of their ancient Fetters, they proceeded to engage
and encourage them in the Reformation of the Christian Faith to its ancient
purity; and with the advice of their Ecclesiastical Senate, to establish Rites
and Ceremonies of Worship by their own Authority. So that there is not a
Monarchy in the world that might be so well guarded as the Crown of England, by
its Orthodox Clergy, were they allowed that Power and Reputation that is due to
the Interest and Dignity of their Function; not only because they hold so
entirely from his Majesty, and are so immediately dependant upon his favor for
their Preferment; but chiefly because there is not any sort of Men in the World
possessed with so deep a sense of Loyalty: it is become their Nature and their
Genius; it is the only thing that creates them so many Enemies, exposes them to
so much Opposition, and divides them from all other Parties and Professions.
What is it that so much enrages the Roman Clergy, but that we will not suffer
his Holiness to usurp upon the Rights of Princes? And when these Janissaries
invade and assault their Thrones, and attempt to seat their great Master in the
Imperial Primacy, it is we, and only we that have ever stepped in and beat back
all their approaches with shame and dishonor. And whatever provisions might
have been made against the Encroachments of Rome upon the Crown of England,
they would have been lamentably weak without the aids and assistances of
Religion, because it is that alone that is pretended in their Opposition; and
its very pretenses, where they prevail, are so strong and powerful, that they
easily bear down all the Arts of Civil Policy and Government. Nothing but
Religion can encounter Religion. And how easy had it been for Rome,
considering its Power, Interest, Cunning and Activity, to have either inslaved
our Princes to their Tyranny, or annoyed them with eternal Broils and
Seditions, had not the English Clergy bestirred themselves to counterwork all
their Mines, and to possess the peoples minds with an impregnable sense of
Loyalty? And this, whatever is pretended, is the real ground of the breach
between us, viz. The Interest and Grandeur of the Court of Rome. And would we
but grant them back that Sovereignty they once exercised over the Kings and
Kingdom of England, they would never stand so much upon any Controversies about
Doctrinal Articles, and would willingly permit us to enjoy all our other
fancies and persuasions; knowing, that if they can but regain their absolute
Dominion over us, they shall soon be able to model our Opinions to their
Interest.

And what was it that so exasperated the Disciplinarians, but when these pert
Gentlemen would have been perking up into their Spiritual Throne, and (in
imitation of their Kirk-brethren) Nosing the Power of Kings both in and out of
the Pulpit, they plucked down such pitiful Pretenders with scorn and dishonor,
exposed their folly and ignorance to the public Correction, and let the world
see they were more worthy of a Pillory than a Throne? But these bold Youths
have at length in pursuance of their designs, run themselves beyond their
Pretensions, and lost their Cause among the Disorders and Confusions of their
own procuring; out of which have sprung new swarms of Sects and Schisms, that
were born and bred in Rebellion, and were never known to the World by any other
visible marks than their Opposition to the Royal Interest. Yet have these Men
the face to challenge their Right of Liberty and Indulgence, and to rail at us
for not granting it, though the things, for which they demand it, are nothing
but principles of Sedition and Disloyalty. The World knows what pranks and
practices they have committed with the confidence, and under the protection of
Religion; and they have never given us the least signs and tokens of
repentance, and that alone is an infallible symptom of their impenitence: for
were they sincere Converts, the World should be sure to know their resentments;
so that we have all the reason in the World to believe them no Changelings; and
then would it not be admirable policy to trust Men of such implacable Spirits
and Principles to the present setlement of things? For if we have no ground but
to suppose them Enemies to the Public Peace, we certainly have no Motive or
Obligation to treat them as Friends, but rather to use them as People that
thirst after a Change, and aim at nothing more than our ruin. Tenderness and
Indulgence to such Men, were to nourish Vipers in our own bowels, and the most
sottish neglect of our own quiet and security, and we should deserve to perish
with the dishonor of Sardanapalus. And howsoever their Ringleaders may whine
and cant to the people grievous complaints of our present Oppressions and
Persecutions, yet would they inwardly scorn us as weak and silly Men, that
understand not the height of our Interest, if we should be prevailed with to
bestow any milder usage upon such irreconcilable Enemies. And it is not
impossible but that the Mercy of the Government may have been a great
temptation to their insolence; and perhaps had some of them been more roughly
handled, they had been less disobliged. They think Lenity and Compassion to an
implacable Enemy, an effect of weakness; and would never forgive themselves,
should they not use all means to suppress all known and resolved Opposition to
their own Interest. And therefore as many of these Men as have been Objects of
Royal Mercy, if they expect to obtain any farther favor to their Party, they
would do well to give us some public and competent assurance of their
renouncing their former principles of Sedition, as to Civil Government. Though
not a Man, continuing in their Communion, has ever as yet given the World any
satisfaction of this kind; and certainly they can never take it ill in good
earnest, if we only deny them the Liberty and free Exercise of their Religion,
till they are willing to give us some security of their being governable.

. 12. The second part of Protestancy, is the Reformation of Doctrine; and here
the design was to abolish the Corruptions and unwarrantable Innovations of the
Church of Rome, and to retrieve the pure and primitive Christianity. It was not
their aim to exchange Thomas Aquinas his Sums for Calvin's Institutions, or
Bodies of School Divinity for Dutch Systems; but to reduce Christianity to the
prescript of the Word of God, and the practice of the first and uncorrupted
Ages of the Church, to clear the Foundations of our Faith from all false and
groundless Superstructures, and once more recover into the Christian World a
pure and Apostolical Religion. And therefore the only Rule of our Churches
Reformation were the Scriptures, and four first general Councils: She admits
not of any upstart Doctrines, and new Models of Orthodoxy; but all the Articles
of her Belief are ancient and Apostolical; and if she her self should teach any
other Propositions, she protests against their being matters of Faith, and of
necessity to Salvation. And for this reason she imposes not her own Articles as
Articles of Faith, but of Peace and Communion: Nor does she censure other
Churches for their different Confessions, but allows them the Liberty she
takes, to establish more or less Conditions of Communion, as the Governors of
the Church shall deem most expedient for peace and unity. And she only requires
of such as are admitted to any Office and Employment in the Church,
subscription to them as certain Theological Verities, not repugnant to the Word
of God, which she has particularly selected from among many other to be
publicly taught and maintained within her Communion, as necessary or highly
conducive to the preservation of Truth, and prevention of Schism: and for this
reason she passes no other censure upon the Impugners of her Articles, than
what she has provided against the Impugners of the Public Liturgy, Episcopal
Government, and the Rites and Ceremonies of Worship, because they are all
intended to the same end, the avoiding Disorders and Confusions. These then are
the conditional Articles of the Communion of the Church of England, and they
are necessary and excellent provisions for peace and unity. For among all the
Disputes and Divisions of Christendom, it is but reasonable she should take
security of those Men's Doctrines and Opinions whom she intrusts in public
Employments, to prevent her being embroiled in perpetual Quarrels and
Controversies. So that Subscriptions to the Articles is required chiefly upon
the same account as the Oath of Supremacy, whose Penalty is, That such who
refuse it, shall be excluded such places of Honor and Profit as they hold in
the Church or Commonwealth. And it is very reasonable that Princes should be
particularly secured of the Fidelity of those Subjects that they entrust with
their public Offices. And thus all the punishment that the Church of England
is willing to have inflicted upon Dissenters from her Articles, is to deprive
them of their Ecclesiastical Preferments, as being unfit for Ecclesiastical
Employments: For though she is not so careless of her own peace, as to empower
Men in the exercise of her public Offices at all adventure; so neither is she
so rigorous as to make Inquisition into their private Thoughts. And therefore
we are not so harsh and unmerciful as somebody, (you wot of) who would be
thought a warm Bigot for Toleration; and yet has sometime professed he would give
his Vote to banish any Man the Kingdom that should refuse their Subscription.

But as for the absolute Articles of the Faith of the Church of England, they
are of a more ancient date; they were not of her own contriving, but such as
she found established in the purest and most uncorrupted Ages of the Church,
and in the times nearest to the primitive and Apostolical simplicity. That is
the measure of her Faith, and the standard of her Reformation: here she fixes
the bounds of her Belief, and seals up the Symbol of her Creed, to prevent the
danger of endless Additions and Innovations. But as for all other matters, I
say, (with the late Learned Archbishop, as he discourses against Fisher) If any
Error, which might fall into this (as any other Reformation) can be found,
then, I say, and it is most true, Reformation, especially in cases of Religion,
is so difficult a work, and subject to so many Pretensions, that it is almost
impossible but the Reformers should step too far, or fall too short in some
smaller things or other, which in regard of the far greater benefit coming by
the Reformation it self, may well be passed over and born withal. And withal by
virtue of this Fundamental Maxim, may in due time and manner be redrest. By the
wisdom and moderation of this Principle, the Church secures her self against
the Prescription of Error: So that if she should at any time hereafter
discover any defect in any particular instance of her Laws and Constitutions,
(and in a work so great, so various, and so difficult, it is not impossible, as
the Archbishop observes, for the greatest caution and prudence to be overseen
in some smaller things) she has reserved a just power in her self to reform and
amend it. This, in brief, is a true and honest account of the Protestancy of
the Church of England.

But so it happened, that beyond the Seas there arose another Generation of pert
and forward Men, the vehemence of whose Zeal and Passion transported them from
extreme to extreme; so that they immediately began to measure Truth, not by its
agreement with the Scriptures, and the purest Ages of the Church; but by its
distance from the Sea of Rome, and the Apostasy of latter times; whereby it so
came to pass, that they did but barter Errors in stead of reforming
Corruptions; and in lieu of the old Popish Tenets, only set up some of their
own newfangled conceits. But above all the rest, there sprung up a mighty
Bramble on the South-bank of the Lake Lemane, that (such is the rankness of the
Soil) spread and flourish't with such a sudden growth, that in a few days,
partly by the industry of its Agents abroad, and partly by its own
indefatigable pains and pragmaticalness, it quite over run the whole
Reformation, and in a short time the right Protestant Cause was almost
irrecoverably lost, under the more prevailing Power and Interest of Calvinism.
That proud and busy Man had erected a new Chair of Infallibility, and
enthroned himself in it; and had he been acknowledged their Supreme Pastor, he
could not have obtruded his Decrees in a more peremptory and definitive way
upon the Reformed Churches. Nothing can be rightly done in any Foreign Church
or State, but by his Counsels and Directions: He must thrust himself in for the
Master-workman, wherever they were hammering Reformation: He must be privy to
all the Counsels, and govern all the Designs of the Princes of Christendom: And
his Mandates and Decretal Epistles must ever be flying about into all Parts and
Provinces; and when any doubt or difficulty arose, away to Geneva to consult
the Oracle, that always returned his Answers with the Confidence and Authority
of an Apostle. And thus did this hot and eager Man bear down all before him by
the boldness of his Nature to attempt, and indefatigable vehemence of his
Spirit to prosecute what he had once attempted, till he made himself at once
both Pope and Emperor of the greatest part of the Reformed World. All his
Dictates were Articles of Faith, and all his Censures Anathema's; and every
dissent from his least important and most unwarrantable Principles, was
Heresy; and every Heresy, capital and damnable. All Schemes and Models of
Truth were coined in his Name, and warranted by his Authority; it was his
Decree that stamped them Orthodox, and no Opinion that did not bear his Image
and Superscription, might pass for current Divinity. And whoever was so hardy
or so unhappy as to oppose himself to this bold and insolent Usurpation, or but
to demur upon the Infallibility of his Determinations, he was immediately
assaulted with Volleys of Anathema's, and they poured upon him showers of
Invectives, and hated Names; and he was shunned like Infection, and dreaded as
the Pest and Plague of the Reformed Communion; and if they wanted power to
persecute him with Fire and Faggot, they would kill him with Noises and
Anathema's.

And thus has this man and his followers intricated the way to Heaven with
their own new Labyrinths, and wild turnings, trifling Questions, and uncertain
talkings: they have smothered and buried the Truths of God under the
superstructures of their own foolish Inventions; they have blended their own
dreams and Visions with the Divine Oracles, and then require the same Assent to
their ill-spun Systems and Hypotheses as to the inspired Writings of St. Paul,
and obtrude pure nonsense and contradictious Blasphemies upon our Belief with
as much rigor and boisterous zeal as the most indispensable Truths of the
Gospel: requiring as confident an Assent to the black Doctrine of irrespective
Reprobation, as to our Saviors Death and Resurrection; and making it as
necessary a point of Faith to believe that the Almighty thrust innumerable
myriads of Souls into Being, only to sport himself in their endless and
unspeakable Tortures, as that he sent his own Son into the world to dye for the
Redemption of mankind: Nay, this they stick not to discard and disavow for its
inconsistency with the Hypothesis of absolute Decrees: This is the Fundamental
Article of their Creed, and all other points of Divinity must be so modeled,
as to suit and accommodate themselves to this Foundation of their Faith. And
thus in most places did the design of Reformation degenerate into a furious
Zeal for the Calvinian Rigours; the seeds of which Doctrine have produced
nothing but thorns and briars of Contention, that have eaten out the life and
power of true Religion, and make men barren in every thing but discords and
disputations. The woeful effects whereof are visible in most Foreign Churches,
where Piety is exchanged for Orthodoxy, and Devotion for speculation, where
their Religion is a zeal for a Scheme of Opinions, and their Learning an
Ability to maintain them.

. 13. But in the settling or modelling of our Reformation, by the Providence of
God and our Governors, this man's assistance was refused, and his advice
rejected: they understood him too well to admit him into their Counsels, and
resolved to keep up close to their first design of reforming the Church to the
Apostolical simplicity: Though afterward this Doctrine took root here by the
industry of some zealous youths, that had been trained up at the feet of that
great Gamaliel, and returned home Seminary Priests of the Calvinian Theology.
This was the only errand and design of Whittingham, Travers, Cartwright, and
others; and the only original of all the Schisms and disturbances that have
ever since infested the Church of England, was the unseasonable zeal of these
men to reduce its Doctrine and Discipline to the platform of Geneva. And though
they were immediately checked in their attempt upon the Discipline, that they
thought good to assault with fierce and open Violence; yet as for the leaven of
their Doctrine, they insensibly spread and conveyed it into the minds of their
Disciples; and it grew and prosper'd mightily in all places; because as it was
cultivated with much zeal, and watered with much preaching, so was it not
encountered with any public opposition: the Church not having declared it self
positively in any thing but against the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of
Rome: and as for all the other Disputes of Christendom, she contrived the
Articles of her Communion with that prudence and moderation, as to take in all
men of whatsoever different Persuasions in other matters into her bosom and
protection. She embraced Trojans and Tyrians with equal Favor, and would not
wed her self to the narrow Interests of a Party, nor determine all the quarrels
and differences of disputing men: No, she left them to the Liberty of their own
Opinions, only reserving to her self a power to quash and silence their
Disputes for the ends of Peace and Government. But this moderation was too cool
for these warm and hotheaded men; they thought it not enough for the honor of
Mr. Calvin, and therefore resolved to declare themselves expressly for him in
defiance to all other Doctors and Heads of Parties. But the Pulpits must make
good this, and they are resolved to make good the Pulpits; and therefore they
make them and the People to groan with nothing but the continual noise of
Decrees; and the depths of Election and Reprobation were always rattling and
thundering in their ears. The whole Circle of their preaching and practical
Divinity was reduced to Calvin's Interpretation of the ninth Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans. And when they had scared and astonished the People into
an admiration of these gloomy Mysteries, nothing will satisfy their restless
heads, unless they may be voted the Doctrine of the Church, and the cause of
the Reformation. And all the men of the first moderation must be branded for
Apostates, and the People let loose to rail at them as Papists, or under some
other hated name, that they abhorred, but did not understand. And this is the
Interpretation of our Authors malicious suggestion of his being aggrieved to
observe such evident declerisions from the first established Reformation,
toward the old, page 395.
or a new, and it may be worse Apostasy; such an apparent weariness of the
principal doctrines and practices, which enlivened the Reformation, i. e. A
wicked schismatical Relapse to Popish Arminian Errors, an Apostasy from the
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches to worship the old Pelagian Idol Free Will
with the new Goddess Contingency, or an halting between Jehovah and Baal,
Christ and Antichrist, admitting the Belgic Semipelagians into the Communion
of our Church, and joining with a Spanish Plot, by opposing the Calvinists to
reduce the people again to Popery; all which are the Methods of Satan, and the
Designs of some who sit aloft in the Temple of God, to hew at the very roots of
Christianity. As I. O. expresses himself in the Preface to his Display of
Arminianism.

Yes, no doubt, it was the great design of our first Reformers to state (as he
has done) the order and succession of eternal Decrees; to reconcile a fatal and
irresistible determination of our Actions with the Liberty of our Wills, to
account for the consistency of the Decree of irrespective Reprobation of the
greatest part of mankind with the Truth and the Goodness of God, when he so
plainly protests he would not any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance; and to set up a secret and reserved will in God in defiance to his
revealed will, and then make it consistent with the honor of his Attributes to
profess one thing, and at the same time resolve another. It was no doubt their
Zeal for these weighty and fundamental Truths that was the avowed cause of
their Protestations against the Church of Rome; and those great Prelates that
first arose to that great Attempt, chose to fall Martyrs to the cause, only to
justify their own absolute Election, and to prove the Impossibility of their
Relapse from Grace. And among Mr. Foxes wooden Cuts we find many Pictures of
Martyrs for the supralapsarian way, and the chain that tied them to the Stake
was no doubt the noose of Election, and the Label that hangs out at their
mouths, the decretal Sentence. So that they that will not burn and broil for
these Fundamental Articles of the Geneva Zeal, are the Iulians and Apostates
from the Protestant Faith, the Popes or the Devils Instruments (as our Author
speaks) to betray us, to the old, or a new, and it may be a worse Apostasy.
Men may mince the matter, and pretend only a dislike of the Doctrine of
Reprobation; but alas! who knows not this to be the Serpents subtilty, Ibid.
wherever she gets in her head, she will wriggle in her whole body, sting and
all: give but the least Admission to these Heterodoxies, and the whole poison
must be swallowed. This Apostasy from the single Article of Reprobation
unavoidably brings in the whole body of Popish-Arminian Errors. And therefore
whoever offends but in this particular, is absolutely fallen from the Catholic
Faith, and the Orthodox Doctrine of the Church of England; and then he has
pronounced his Doom, and pronounced him incapable of our Church Communion.
Admirable Doctrine this for a Patron of Indulgence, not to endure a Poor man
that dares not dogmatize in the mysteries of Reprobation, but to deliver him up
without mercy, or any sense of Compassion, to the exterminating Censures and
Anathema's of the Church, and (what was then more dreadful) the Parliament too.
Thus you see what are the Articles of these men's Zeal and Orthodoxy, and by
what Doctrines and Principles they take their measure of Reformation, making a
Rigor in the Calvinian Tenets, the only estimate of the Purity of Churches. So
that because we are willing to clear our Church from the Encumbrance and
Incroachment of these innovations, and are resolved not to trouble our selves
with abetting the modern Controversies, and Mushrome Sects of Christendom, but
to stick fast to the wisdom and moderation of the first design of returning to
the ancient and unblended Doctrines of Christianity: And are therefore careful
in our discourses and representations of Religion to avoid all new and
unwarrantable mixtures, and to represent the Truths of the Gospel with the same
simplicity, as we should have done before these Novelties were started in the
World. For this are we taxed by these Imperious Dogmatists of perfidious
Designs to betray the Protestant Cause, and to return back to the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome; and the People must be alarmed and
confounded with hideous Outcries against Popery and Babylon, Spanish Plots and
Jesuitical Designs; and then must they stand upon their Guard, and nothing must
assuage their Choler but an humble submission to their sturdy humor. They must
not attend to any Articles of Agreement, or Overtures of Pacification and
mutual Forbearance; and unless we will declare our Assent and Consent to all
the curious and perplexed Opinions of their Sect, they will hear of no other
Conditions of Peace, and there is no Remedy but we must part Communion. They
must (as I. O. Ibid.
speaks) proclaim (...) an holy War to such Enemies of Gods Providence. This is
hard measure, but yet such as was strictly meted out without a grain of
Allowance, not only by the Rigid Presbyterians, but the Indulgent Tryers, those
Patriots of our Christian Liberty, those renowned subverters of Ecclesiastical
Tyranny.

Now there can be nothing more mischievous, or intolerable in any Church or
Commonwealth then these peremptory Dictators of Truth, and professed Masters of
Polemick Skill; they are so exact and curious in their own Speculations, and
impose them with that severity upon the Consent of Mankind, and by consequence
require such hard and impracticable Conditions of Agreement and
Church Communion, as must unavoidably break any society of men into Factions
and Parties: For what so vain as to expect an Unity of Judgment in such a
multitude of uncertain and undeterminable Opinions? And therefore those men
that stand with such an unyielding and inflexible stiffness upon the admittance
of their own Conceits, make all reconcilements impossible, and all ruptures
incurable. Every little Opinion must make a great Schism, and the bounds of
Churches must be as nicely determined as the Points of a Dutch-Compass. Their
bodies of Orthodoxy are as vast and voluminous as Aquinas Sums, and they have
drawn infinite numbers of wanton and peevish Questions into the Articles of
their Belief; and now when they have swollen up their Faith to such a mighty
bulk, and refined it to such a delicate subtlety, it is unavoidable but that
this must perpetuate Disputes and Divisions to all eternity. And for this
reason it is, that these perverse and imperious Asserters are the most
insufferable sort of men in any Christian Commonwealth, in that they are such
incorrigible enemies to peace, and are so good for nothing else but to raise
disturbances and contentions in the Church. So that though we should suppose
Liberty of Religion to be the common and natural Right of mankind, yet these
Persons apparently forfeit all their Claims and Pretenses to it, not only
because their principles are directly repugnant to the quiet of States and
Kingdoms, but because they invade other men's rights, and offer violence to
their Neighbors just Liberties. And so cast themselves into the condition of
Outlaws and Banditi; that once indeed had a natural Right of Protection from
the Government, under which they were born; but if they will not submit to the
Conditions of Society, and will be preying upon the Lives and Liberties of
their fellow Subjects, they become public Enemies to the common Good, forfeit
all Right of Protection, and put themselves out of the benefit of the Laws*
Such is the outrage of these haughty men, they are not content with their own
just privileges, but assault those of their Neighbors, and will not endure
others to live in society with them, unless they will yield up the Liberty of
their Understandings to their imperious folly, and no man shall be suffered to
live in peace and quiet, unless they may be allowed to usurp and exercise a
supremacy of Power over the whole Communion, and this is a direct subversion of
the Authority of Government, and a manifest violence to the Fundamental Laws
and Conditions of Society, and by consequence a Forfeiture of all Claims to its
rights and privileges. And yet notwithstanding this savage and insociable
humor, they suffer not for that, but only for their incorrigible stubbornness
against the Laws of Government and Rules of Discipline. And if they would learn
to be modest, and yield to be governed by any thing but their own intolerable
peevishness, they would seldom feel the severity of the Churches Discipline for
the unmannerly rigor of their own Doctrines: these are matters of our mutual
forbearance, and whatever may be the Opinions of private men, our Church does
not dogmatize in scholastic speculations: and we must never expect to see
peace re-enthroned in the Christian world, till other Churches shall suffer
themselves to be brought to the moderation of the Church of England, to have as
little Faith, and as much Charity as the Primitive Christians. But to contend
for the same ease and indulgence (as these men do) in the Laws of Discipline,
as in the broils of Disputation, is to cut the Nerves of all Ecclesiastical
Government, and remonstrate to all the Conditions of Church Communion. For it
leaves every man at liberty to except himself from the Laws of the Society: and
therefore (to conclude) hereafter let them not tell us of their being
Protestants, unless they will satisfy us of their being governable. And when
that is done, they may be secure to find from us more tenderness and moderation
in case of their Dissent as to matters of Controversy and Opinion, than we
ever have found, or ever expect to find from their waspish and choleric humor.

As for what remains of my Discourse, Page 299.
It is (says the bold Objecter) all resolved into a supposition, that they who
in any place or part of the world, desire Liberty of Conscience for the Worship
of God, have indeed no Conscience at all. For it is thereon supposed without
further Evidence, that they will thence fall into all wicked and
unconscientious Practices. This is downright forgery too, but yet it is weak
and modest if compared to the Boldness of his former Calumnies: For it is a
small thing for him to pervert my sense by an ill-collected supposition, that
has wittingly falsified my express words, and laid to my charge lewd Assertions
of his own pure Contrivance. However it is a popular surmise, and suited to the
folly of the common People, and that is enough to his purpose; though the wise
Surveyor himself can never be so short-sighted as not to see that the only
supposition, upon which I all along proceed, was founded upon the clearest and
most unquestionable experience of mankind, viz. that all men are either not so
wise as they would seem, or not so honest as they would pretend; that it is a
familiar thing even for well-meaning Persons to mistake humor and passion for
Conscience; that Fanaticism is as incident to the Common People as folly and
ignorance, and yet more mischievous to Government then Vice and Debauchery,
with diverse other common and easy Observations of humane life, from whence it
is an obvious and natural deduction to conclude, that men may easily run into
tumults and seditions under mistakes of Conscience, though they do not
wittingly, and out of design abuse its Pretenses to wicked and mischievous
practices, but purely for want of knowledge and understanding in the nature of
good and evil, and the moral reasons of things; whence it comes to pass that
there are so few, who do not, or at least may not mistake their Vices for their
Religion, and mix their passions with their Zeal. But because this suggestion
is one of the great burdens of our Authors Complaint, and is so pertly glanced
at almost in every Paragraph, and so industriously pursued upon every occasion,
I think my self obliged, before I conclude, to entertain the Reader with some
farther Account, how Conscience and Religion are the aptest and most suitable
instruments to be employed for creating Public Disturbances.

1. First then, they are the most usual mask, and most plausible pretense to
cover the basest and most unworthy ends; Sacrilege and Rebellion ever shroud
themselves under the hatred of Superstition and Idolatry, barefaced villainy
has but an ugly look, and has not confidence to show it self to the World, but
in the disguise of Reformation. The blackest Enterprises could never have been
attempted, had they not put on the fairest Pretenses; for men cannot (as the
world now goes) gain the opportunity of attempting any more enormous
Wickedness, but under popular shows and affectations of Sanctity; and all the
more exorbitant Crimes of Disloyalty that were ever committed in the World have
sheltered themselves under glorious Appearances of Godly Zeal. The Cause of God
is the best spur and stirrup too to the advancement of Ambitious men; and there
is no such easy way for them to exalt themselves above their Superiors, and
to trample upon their Equals, as when they do it for the Glory of God. Nothing
else could have so long supported the Credit of his late Highness through so
many Murders, Perjuries, and manifest Villainies, but his great dexterity in
Praying and Preaching, his counterfeit way of whining, his dreadful Appeals and
Protestations to Heaven, and his great and extraordinary Communion with God.
And therefore this specious piece of Hypocrisy being so absolutely necessary
to give reputation to the basest and most disloyal Actions, Princes are thereby
sufficiently warned to be jealous of those Designs that are ushered in under
this popular and plausible Pretense of Reformation, and to be more watchful to
suppress their Attempts than open outrages; because it does not only disguise,
but gives Countenance to any mischief, and makes the ugliest Projects appear
fair and plausible to vulgar eyes. It naturally dazzles and lures in the wild
Multitude to any design, and there is no way so easy to infuse into their
heads an ill opinion of the present State, as to inveigle them with conceits
and jealousies of miscarriages in, or designs upon their Religion. No, however
they may out of a sense of the great duty of Obedience suffer Princes to waste
and subvert their civil Liberties, yet they must not endure them to encroach
upon the Rights of Religion: So that there is no other effectual Artifice to
decoy Christian Subjects into Mutiny and Rebellion, but the taking Pretenses of
Godliness and Reformation. They are all agreed in the Belief of the necessity
of subjection to their lawful Superiors in all things that concern their civil
rights; but where the Glory of God and Purity of his Worship lie at stake,
there they must whet and sharpen their Zeal in his Cause, and not betray the
true Religion by their neglect and stupidity. And let but a few crafty men
whisper abroad their suspicions of Popery or any other hated name, and the
Rabble are immediately alarmed, and they will raise a War and embroil the
Nation against an Heretical Word.

And to this Purpose their Leaders are ever provided with such juggling and
seditious Maxims, as effectually overruled all Oaths of Allegiance, and all
Obligations to Obedience, as that all Good Subjects may with just Arms at least
defend themselves if questioned or assaulted for the cause of Religion, though
when they send their Armies into the Field, they are as well armed with
Offensive Weapons as their Enemies, and are furnished with Swords and Muskets
to annoy them, as well as Shields and Bucklers to defend themselves. That the
maintenance of pure Religion passes an Obligation upon their Consciences, of
force enough to evacuate all Oaths and Contracts whatsoever, that may stand in
the way of its advancement; and then how naturally does this not only warrant,
but enforce their Resistance to their Lawful Prince in defense of the cause of
God, and to extort the Free exercise of Religion by force of Arms? which if
they should lay down at his Command, that were to betray the Gospel to the
Power of its professed and implacable Enemies by their own neglect and
cowardice. Not that they fight against the King himself, God forbid, their
intention is nothing else then to rescue him out of the Power and Possession of
evil Counselors: You must not believe them such disloyal Wretches as to rebel
against his Sacred Majesty, alas, they design nothing but the discharge of
their Duty and Allegiance; and though they take up Arms against his Person, yet
it is in defense of his Crown, and they fight against him in his Personal
Capacity only to serve him in his Political. That in the management and
Reformation of Religion, there is no respect to be had to carnal and worldly
Wisdom; and therefore when the Propagation of the Gospel lies at stake, it is
but a vain thing for men to tie themselves to the Laws of Policy and
Discretion. Civil Affairs are to be conducted by secular Artifices, but matters
of the Church are to be directed purely by the Will of God, the Warrant of
Scripture, and the Guidance of Providence. Now what exorbitances will not this
wild principle excuse and qualify? In all their disorderly and irregular
Proceedings, they do but neglect the Rules of carnal Policy for the better
carrying on of the work of the Lord, where there is no place for moderation and
compliance; and nothing must satisfy or appease their Zeal, but a full
Ratification of all their demands. Though these and infinite other as vulgar
Artifices are as old as Rebellion it self; and though wise men can easily wash
off their false Colors, yet the Common People will suffer themselves to be
abused by them to the end of the World; partly because they are rash and heady,
and apt to favor all Changes and Innovations; partly because they are foolish
and credulous, and apt to believe all fair and plausible stories; but mainly
because they are proud and envious, and apt to suspect the Actions of their
Superiors. So easy a thing is it for your crafty Achitophels to arm Faction
with Zeal, and to draw the Multitude into Tumults and Seditions under color of
Religion, whilst themselves have their designs and projects apart, and
influence the great turns of Affairs for their own private Ends, and so manage
the zealous fools, as to make them work Journey-work to their ambition, and
employ seditious Preachers to Gospellize their Conspiracies, and sanctify
their Rapines and Sacriledges to display the piety of their Intentions, and cry
up the Interest of a State-faction for the Cause of God, and sound an Alarm to
Rebellion with the Trumpet of the Sanctuary.

. 15. Thus (to omit the known Arts of the Grandees and Junto-men in our late
Confusions) were the Confederate Lords of France, that involved their Native
Country in such a long and bloody War, during the Reign of four or five Kings,
at first to seek for a plausible pretense to secure and justify their
Resolution of taking up Arms against their lawful Sovereign, till the Admiral
Coligny hit upon that unhappy counsel, to make themselves Heads of the Hugonot
Faction; and then they had not only a strong party to assert, but a fair
pretense to warrant the Rebellion: And the War that was first set on foot by
the envy and ambition of some Malcontents in the State, was prosecuted with
greater rage and fury by Zeal for the true Religion. In all their Manifests and
Declarations, they protested for nothing with so much seeming Resolution, as
their Demands of Liberty and Indulgence for tender Consciences. And when either
Party fortuned to be worsted, they reinforced themselves and their Cause by
Religious Leagues and Covenants, and then the heady multitude flowed into the
assistance of the different Factions, according to their different
Inclinations. D'avila, lib. 2.
So that by degrees, (to use the words of the Historian) the discords of great
men were confounded with the dissentions of Religion; and the Factions were no
more called the discontented Princes and the Guisarts, but more truly, and by
more significant Names, one the Catholic, and the other the Hugonot Party.
Factions, which under color of Piety, administered such pernicious matter to
all the following mischiefs and distractions. Which how sad and how tedious
they were, I need not inform you; only this, both Parties being balanced, and
successively encouraged by the inconstancy of Government, the change of
Interests of State, and the windings of an ambitious Woman, the public Broils
and Disorders were kept up through so many Kings Reigns, and might have been
perpetuated till this day, had not the equality quality of the Factions been
broken, and the power and interest of the Hugonot Party absolutely vanquished.
So that though these two opposite Parties might, if let alone to themselves,
have lived peaceably together in the same Commonwealth; yet when headed and
encouraged by great Men in the State, they immediately became two fighting
Armies: and when they were once enraged against each other by Zeal and
Religion, it was not possible for all the Arts of Policy to allay the storm,
but by the utter ruin and overthrow of one of the contending Factions.
Dissembled Pacifications and plastered Reconcilements, proved more bloody and
mischievous in the event, than the Prosecution of an open War. This would have
put a certain period to the public Miseries by the Conquest of a Party; but in
the other, the times were broken by various changes and turns of Fortune, the
State miserably involved and entangled in perpetual Revolutions, and the short
Intervals of peace, were but Preparations to War. Accommodations were only
offered and procured by the weaker Faction, thereby to gain advantages of
mustering stronger Forces; and when they had power enough to look the Enemy in
the face, the counterfeit Peace dissolved of its own accord, and upon the first
occasion they brake out into wider and more obstinate Ruptures. So natural is
it for Dissentions of Religion to heighten themselves into implacable hatreds
and animosities; and it is as natural for them, when drawn to an head by any
unlucky conjuncture of Affairs, to break out into open Wars and Rebellions.
Popular Zeal is always heady and presumptuous; and when let loose from the
restraints of Government, and the dread of Punishment, it knows not how to
contain it self within the limits of reason and modesty. Connivence does but
encourage its peevishness and presumption, and it strengthens and supports it
self upon the slightest and most ungrounded Encouragements. Not to check the
tumultuous proceedings of the multitude by Laws and Penalties, is to make them
insolent; and if the State be not concerned to suppress them with rigor and
severity, they immediately conclude themselves its greatest Friends and
Favorites; and the inconsiderate Rabble are easily persuaded, that they are
secretly countenanced by Authority; and that as soon as the circumstances of
Affairs will permit, that will openly declare for the Interest of their
Faction. And then they cannot rest satisfied in the enjoyment of their own
Liberty, but grow insolent toward the predominant Party; and by all the acts of
a saucy and unpleasing deportment, exasperate their rage and indignation. Who
on the other side looking on them as a mean and despicable people, are apt to
trample upon them, especially when provoked by their insolence, with the
greater scorn and disdain; whereas nothing so inflames and so embitters proud
minds, as to be despised: and therefore this again puts them upon all
endeavors to rescue themselves from so unpleasing a condition; and whenever
they grow to any confidence of their strength and their numbers, they are
presently grappling with the Power that oppresses them: and thus by
counterpoising of Parties, their differences swell and increase (like angry
Biles) till they break out into open dissentions. So easily are public Tumults
and Factions kindled, and Kingdoms set all on fire with Fanatic Wars and
Combustions. It Is but for one of the Parties to enter into Covenants and
Combinations under pretense of public Good, and this without any more ado
alarms the other to provide for its own security, and then do all things
immediately dissolve into confusion and disorder: for Confederacies are but the
Openings and Declarations of Wars, and entering into Leagues is no less in
effect than Listing of Armies, all the Confederates being under a sacred
Obligation to assert the Cause against all Opposition by force of Arms. And
this shows the vain Policy of the Counter-balance, a Project too nice and
subtle for the vehement and boisterous passions of Humane Nature: and however
it might strike the fancy of a capricious Woman, no trick of Policy has ever
proved it self more unsuccessful than this, whilst practiced in the same
Kingdom; and the issue has ever been, that the Commonwealth has struggled with
mutual Opposition, and tottered with Civil Wars, till it has either recovered
it self by an absolute suppression of one of the Factions, or sunk into utter
ruin and confusion. As indeed the Popes of Rome have managed this artifice to
balance the Princes of Christendom, it was neither unuseful nor unpracticable,
because the equality was kept up between two different and independent States,
that could not suddenly work each others destruction; or if they should attempt
it, he could easily overrule the contest by the intervention of a third Power.
But when mutual dissentions are kept up under the same Government, it is always
in hazard of being torn in pieces by its own intestine Quarrels. And whenever
there happens an open Eruption, the Prince is not provided with a third Power
to give check to the growth and exorbitances of the predominant Faction, and
can now no longer juggle and dissemble between both, but must of necessity
declare for one Party, and cast himself and his Crown upon their fortune; and
if he chance to hit upon the wrong Faction, he is lost, and remains a prey to
the Conqueror. Whether this speculation of the balancing project be profound
and political, (as our Author reflects upon it) it is no great matter; I am sure
it is founded upon the plainest and most obvious experience of Humane Nature and
Humane Affairs. And when he can make differences in Religion, without making
distinct parties and interests in the Commonwealth; then, and not till then,
may he be able to prove Toleration consistent with public peace and
tranquillity; i. e. when he is able to abolish all the follies and passions of
Mankind. But for that, we must stay to the coming of the Fifth-Monarchy; though
when those golden days shall come, it will then be our turn, as some of our
Adversaries have cast up our Reckoning, to beg and to be denied Indulgence: for
that, as they cast up their own Accounts too, shall be the time of their
revenge; and then, you may be sure, they will not fail to be even with us for
all our hard measure; and King Jesus shall make us feel what it is to persecute
his Favorites, and will not neglect his Friends to reward his Enemies. But
then the Saints (as I. O. speaks) shall take Vengeance of the Whore for all her
former rage and cruelty; and the Rochets of the Prelates, together with the
Robes of persecuting Kings and Princes, shall be rolled up in Blood.

. 16. This may suffice to discover the danger of Knavish and Political
Hypocrisy, but this is founded upon Atheism and Irreligion; and it is such a
lewd affront to the Almighty, and such a desperate attempt of Impiety, that
it is not every one can arrive to boldness or wickedness enough to put it in
practice. And therefore the more dangerous, because more frequent sort of
Hypocrisy, is that which is more serious, more confident, and more incurable.
When Men put a Cheat upon themselves as well as upon the World, in that having
no right understanding of the Nature and Properties of true Religion, they
embrace something else, that looks like it, for its substance and reality; and
by this fond mistake, flatter and abuse themselves into a strong and serious
conceit of their own Saintship. This is the Pharisaick Leven, that (as I have
often suggested to you) has in all Ages of the World been the most fatal and
epidemical miscarriage of Religion. Because when well-meaning Men have once
satisfied their Consciences in a false and mistaken Godliness, this becomes not
only a strong prejudice upon their minds, against the admission of all true and
real Goodness, but a fatal snare to betray them into all those vices that are
most destructive of the Peace and Government of the World. In that
notwithstanding this, they may continue proud, peevish, insolent, passionate,
self-willed, and malicious; and yet be highly satisfied and conceited of their
own Integrity: So that these Vices (that are the strongest and most
ungovernable passions of Humane Nature) escaping unregarded and unmortified
under the protection of this self-chosen Godliness, it is unavoidable but that
they will mix with their religious Zeal, as well as any other Concernments
whatsoever. For there being nothing to discover or restrain their
Irregularities, what should hinder but that they will as much vent themselves
in the Cause of Religion, as in any other Affair of Humane Life? And because
they are there more passionately concerned, their excesses cannot but be
proportionably more vehement; insomuch that he that is spightful, will be more
so for the Glory of God; he that is factious, will be more so for the Godly
Party; he that is peevish, will be more so for his Orthodox, or (what is the
same to him) his own Opinion; and he that is malicious, will be more so against
the enemies of the power of Godliness. So that when Men's passions are (as you
easily see they may be) infused into their Religion, that does but make them
more eager and turbulent; and it is so far from abating their rage, that it
heightens and imbitters their malice. And therefore to me it is no wonder to
observe how some Men will pray with the ardours of an Angel, love God with
raptures of joy and delight, be transported with deep and pathetick Devotions,
talk of nothing but the unspeakable pleasures of Communion with the Lord Jesus,
be ravished with devout and Seraphick Meditations of Heaven; and, like the
blessed Spirits there, seem to relish nothing but spiritual delights and
entertainments: who yet when they return from their Transfiguration, to their
ordinary converse with Men, are churlish as a Cynick, passionate as an angry
Wasp, envious as a studious Dunce, and insolent as a Female Tyrant; proud and
haughty in their deportment; peevish, petulant, and self-willed; impatient of
contradiction, implacable in their anger, rude and imperious in all their
Conversation, and made up of nothing but pride, malice and peevishness. The
reason is obvious, because whilst they are so mighty warm and zealous in the
Duties of Godliness, and so exceedingly busy in the Instruments and
Ministeries of Religion, and their Consciences so fairly satisfied by this
wonderful strictness in the Performances of Devotion, they hug themselves in a
dear Opinion of their own Saintship; and resting content in the Formalities of
Religion, they are never concerned to proceed to the habitual Mortification of
their passions and depraved dispositions; which being neglected, will of their
own accord grow upon them, and overrun the whole habit of their Minds; and if
Men are not careful to correct and subdue the petulancy of their Natures, it
thrives and increases under their neglect, because it is natural: so that where
it is not opposed with a constant and resolute Industry, Men will by instinct
and natural tendency be untoward and intractable; but much more in concerns of
Religion, because this superinduces an Obligation of Conscience upon the
malignity of Nature, and consecrates all their scurvy and unkind Offices into
Duties of Zeal. And this is the true Original of all that peevish and
ill-natured Religion that is so common in the World. And now are not Kingdoms
likely to be bravely governed, if Authority must indulge Men such exorbitant
and pernicious Vices, as directly tend to the disturbance of all Society,
because their well-meaning ignorance may imagine them to be symptoms and
results of Godly Zeal? And therefore supposing all that pretend to Conscience
to be serious and upright in their pretensions; yet that is so far from being
any Argument for Indulgence, that it is the most powerful disswasive against it,
it being such great odds that it engages them to be troublesome to Government.
And this is the plain reason of my Assertion, (over which our Author has so
frequently and so ridiculously insulted) viz. Eccl. Pol. p. 150.
That Princes may with less hazard to their Government, give Liberty to Men's
Vices and Debaucheries, than to Fanatic Consciences; because though they are
both justly punishable, yet they are not equally mischievous, in that the sins
of Debauchery make Men useless in a Commonwealth, but those of Religion make
them dangerous; because when their passions are warranted by their Religion,
that obliges them by their greatest hopes and fears to act them to the highest;
and then it is easy to imagine what calm and peaceable things those Men must
be, who think it their Duty to enforce and enrage their passions with the
Obligations of Conscience.

. 17. But for a more accurate and satisfactory proof of this sober Truth, we
will a little consider and explain what is the true and real meaning of
Conscience; and that will abundantly evince, that there is nothing in Nature
more uncertain or ungovernable than vulgar Conscience. First then, these Men
are wont to discourse of it, as if it were a principle of Action distinct from
the Man himself, according to their loose way of talking, to discharge the
guilt and imputation of their Crimes upon any thing but themselves. Thus, does
a Child of God fall into any scandalous miscarriage? the mortified Man is only
foiled by the strength and subtlety of Indwelling sin. Is he perfidious to his
Engagements? and does he violate all the Obligations of his Faith and Honesty?
the Upright Man is imposed upon by the deceitfulness of his Heart. And after
the same rate do they discourse of Conscience, as if it were some infallible
thing within, that presides over all a Man's thoughts, and directs all his
Actions: so that whatever they attempt to do, if they shall pretend the
Warranty of Conscience, that shall excuse and justify their Action; and how
unaccountable soever it may prove, let Conscience look to that, they are
innocent. And though they themselves (Good Men) do not desire to be excused
their Obedience from the Commands of lawful Authority, yet it is neither he nor
they that can force Conscience to Subjection. And when the Magistrate drives,
if they grow resty and skittish, it is because Conscience stands in their way,
(like the Angel before Balaams Ass) and then it is nor in their power to move
one step forward. But this is downright Juggling; for in plain English, a Man
and his Conscience are but one and the same thing; and such as the Man is, such
is his Conscience. So subtle are these Men, when they declare themselves his
Majesty's most humble Servants, and only beg he would spare their Consciences;
and if he will grant them but that one reasonable demand, Ah! how will that
endear them to his Government, and oblige them to their Duty? i. e. If he will
set them at perfect Liberty from all Subjection, and absolve them from all
Obligations to Allegiance, they will promise to be his most Loyal Subjects.
For, if you consider it, you will find nothing in Humane Nature capable of the
Obligation of Laws beside Conscience. For Obligation is but a tie to Duty, and
all Duty is tied upon the Conscience, i. e. the Mind of Man, as it is capable of
Moral Actions, or of being governed by the Rules of Good and Evil.

Conscience then (to omit the equally nice and useless Definitions of the
Schools) is nothing but the Soul or Mind of Man, that undergoes various
Denominations from its various Powers and Abilities; as when it conceives of
things, it is called Understanding; when it discourses, Reason; when it
determines, Judgment; when it chooses, Will; and when it reflects upon it self
and its own actions, Conscience. Every Man's Mind is his Judgment; his Reason,
his Will and his Conscience; that are but several Names of the same Being,
according to its several Functions and Ways of Acting. Now though Conscience in
the Grammatical sense of the word may indifferently signify all reflex
Knowledge; yet it is by common use appropriated to the Mind, as it is employed
about Good or Evil, and capable of being guided and governed in reference to
its Moral Actions. I say, of being guided and governed; because though it is
its own Judge, yet it is not its own Rule; but all the Laws, whereby it is
conducted, are derived from other Principles.

First, There are the natural Reasons and Proportions of Good and Evil, that
arise from the unalterable Respects and Relations of Things to Things, in
acting suitably to which, consists the natural Morality of all prime and
essential Goodness. Thus from the relation between God and his Creatures,
springs the natural Duty of Divine Worship and Religion, i. e. of making
grateful Returns and Acknowledgments to Him for all the Communications of his
Bounty and Goodness to us; in which there is a natural Decency and
Agreeableness that obliges every Rational Creature to its performance,
antecedently to all superinduced obligations of Laws: It being therefore
commanded, because it is good; and not therefore good, because it is commanded.
And from the like Reasons and Correspondencies of Nature, arise all the Duties
in reference to our Neighbors and our Selves, whereby we are to conduct all
our moral Actions, and are obliged to every thing that is either perfective of
our own Natures, or conducive to the Happiness of others. Now these essential
Reasons of Good and Evil, are either the subject matter, or the end of all
Laws, that are enacted only to prescribe and enforce either the practice of
these natural Duties themselves, or of something else subservient to them. But
as these are the only Rule of Laws, so are Laws the only Rule of Conscience;
it is not left at liberty to follow its own inclinations, but it is bound to
guide it self and all its Actions by the Rules prescribed to it by its
Superiors, i. e. by Divine and Humane Laws. Though indeed, without these, an
upright Conscience left to it self, would be an excellent Guide of all our
Actions; and if rightly observed and attended to, sufficient to secure the
Peace and Welfare of Mankind. For an honest Mind that prudently and impartially
attends to the natural Reasons of Good and Evil, and endeavors to make them
the Rules and Measures of its Actions, can never fail of some competent
Performance of its main Duties in all its Relations. And if all Men's
Consciences might have been trusted with their own Wisdom and Integrity, all
other Government would have been useless and superfluous, in that every man
would have governed himself by the Laws of essential Justice and Equity, i. e.
if all men might be supposed wise and good, they would stand in need of no
Governors but themselves; and what they now do in Obedience to the Laws of the
Commonwealth, they would then do out of choice, and in obedience to the
Obligations of Conscience. But because this supposition is become impossible
(and proved so by experience) through the universal Depravation of humane
Nature; and because few Persons have either leisure or ability to search out
the original Reasons of Good and Evil, that are discoverable no other way then
Mathematical Problems and Propositions are, by serious and attentive
meditation, and laborious trains and deductions of Reason; mankind are not left
to the workings and discoveries of their own Minds for the Rule of their
Actions. But our whole Duty is digested to our hands in bodies and digests of
Laws, and nothing is required of us but what is prescribed by express and
particular Constitutions. And therefore men consider not what they would have
in their general demands of Liberty and Exemption of Conscience, because
Conscience it self is an indefinite Principle, and undetermined to Good or
Evil, and becomes so respectively according to its agreement or disagreement
with its Rule: If it act conformably to that, its action is good; if it do not,
its evil, how bold and confident soever it may be in its Persuasions: so that
it is no competent Justification of any action to plead that it agrees with the
Persuasions of my Conscience, unless I can first prove that the Persuasions of
my Conscience agree with the Rules of my Duty; and therefore Conscience alone
is no sufficient warrant of its Lawfulness; because a man may act according to
his Conscience, and yet do very ill by acting contrary to his Rule. But
Conscience when it is rightly instructed, and well acquainted with the Rule of
its Duty, then it is a true guide of men's Actions; but this takes in all the
Dictates of right reason, as they lie couched under divine and humane Laws:
Both which in their several Proportions make up the adequate Rule of
Conscience, that without them signifies nothing else then an unaccountable
will, humor, or inclination: And therefore it is ridiculous to oppose the
Pretenses of Conscience to the Prescriptions of Lawful Superiors, unless by
virtue of some express command of an higher and overruling Authority: because
it is the Law it self that directs and warrants our Actions. And therefore in
any case to plead Restraints of Conscience, without producing some particular
Law, is in effect to plead nothing at all, or at best nothing but humor and
peevishness; for by what name soever men may call it, it is nothing else when it
lies not under the direction of Law: And therefore their claim of Liberty from
the nature of Conscience (which they lay down in all their Discourses, as the
Fundamental Principle, and first Postulatum of this Controversy) is too
exorbitant for their purpose, and abates the whole plea by the intolerable
unreasonableness of the Pretense. For they challenge this Prerogative upon this
Account, that it is such a Judgment of a man's Actions, as carries in it a
relation to the future Judgment of God: and therefore seeing it is so
immediately subject to his Authority, it must of necessity be priviledg'd from
all the power of all other Laws and Jurisdictions. But if this be a fair and
logical Deduction, there is no avoiding to conclude, that every man's Conscience
is in all its actions exempt from all humane Authority, and ought not to be
subject or accountable to any other Power, but the Divine Majesty; seeing in
all the other Affairs of humane life, it is as much obliged to regard the future
Judgment of God, as in matters of Divine Worship: and therefore if its
reference to its future Accounts be sufficient in any one case to give it
Protection against the Power of Princes, it is so in all.

. 18. But further, what if it so happen that Conscience is abused by false and
evil Persuasions, then it unavoidably leads into all manner of lewd and vicious
Practices; and there is nothing so mischievous or so exorbitant to which an
erroneous Conscience will not betray us: For when it has once entertained
wicked and Seditious Principles, there mischief becomes irresistible. Rogues
and Outlaws are under some possibility of Reformation, because they never think
themselves obliged in duty to their Villainies, and are convinced in their own
Thoughts of the baseness of their Practices, and stand in some awe of the
Penalties of the Laws. Whereas debauched Consciences are bold and confident in
their Wickedness; and their Guilt is (in their own Opinion) their Innocence,
and their Crime their Duty. And if Authority ever punish their Disobedience and
Rebellion, they suffer with the confidence of Martyrs, and they dye for
preserving a good Conscience, and following the best Light God has given them.
If they rebel, it is their Zeal for the Lord of Hosts: God and Religion are ever
concerned in their Quarrels; and when they fight against their lawful
Superiors, they only oppose the Enemies of the Gospel; and when they embroil
Kingdoms in Wars and Confusions, they only wage War against Babylon and
Antichrist; and whatever they attempt, be it never so vile and wicked, it is
still in the Cause of God. And now considering how few they are, that pursue
the right methods of knowledge, and upon what innumerable Accounts the minds of
men may be abused and misguided, vulgar Conscience will be found the most
mistaken, most mischievous, and most unreasonable Guide in the world. For as a
right Conscience is acquired only by a sincere, regular, and impartial use of
our Faculties, so is a wrong one by all the possible ways and causes of Error,
viz. Ignorance, Fancy, Prejudice, Partiality, Self-love, Envy, Ambition, Pride,
Passion, and Superstition: Any of which (though they are the greatest
Principles of Disturbance in the World) may corrupt and debauch the minds of
men, and then challenge to themselves the sacredness and authority of
Conscience. For every man's Error in matters of Religion becomes his Duty; and
Pride, and Folly, and Ignorance, and Malice, and any thing else, if it were a
Religious Dress, immediately becomes sacred and inviolable. And now when the
principles of natural Reason are debauched with absurd and seditious
Prejudices, the Contradictories of moral truth and goodness, become the only
Rule of Conscience; and men think themselves directly obliged to what directly
opposes the highest Interests of mankind, and the main obligations of Religion.
And from hence it is so vulgar a Phenomenon in the world, that Sacrilege is
transformed into Reformation, Inhumanity into Zeal, Perjury into Religion,
Faction into Humility, and Rebellion it self into Loyalty. So that it is no
unusual thing for the Persuasions of Conscience to cancel the very Laws of
Nature, and pervert all the differences of Good and Evil; and then are men
brought under all the obligations, that Conscience can lay upon them, to the
practice of Wickedness and Villainy. And then to leave them to their own
liberty, is not only to allow them to be wicked, but in effect to oblige them
to be so; because this delivers them up to the guidance and authority of a
profligate Conscience, that effectually binds them to follow its own wretched
and unreasonable Dictates. So that the result of all is, that there is no folly
or wickedness, how lewd or extravagant soever, that may not patronize it self
under mistakes of Conscience.

Sometimes (and always, unless by a mighty chance) it is ignorance and popular
Folly; for it is natural to the Multitude to be ignorant and foolish, or to use
false and incompetent methods of knowledge, and to determine their notions of
things upon unreasonable grounds and motives. Their Judgments are disposed of
by chance and accidental Principles, and their fancies and fond Persuasions are
the measures of their Consciences; and they pursue things for their
agreeableness with weak and vulgar Prejudices, without ever proceeding to an
impartial deliberation of their Truth and Goodness. Opinion (they say) is the
guide of fools, and such is the vulgar and ignorant sort of mankind, that
generally judge of things by trifling and impertinent Conceits, and then force
their Reasons to follow, as chance and folly shall command them. And then all
this is their Conscience, that must in spite of all its exorbitances be
suffered to do as it please. Folly (especially in divine matters) is always in
conjunction with confidence, and there is nothing in the world more obstinate
and inflexible then religious Ignorance. And men never play the fool with
greater assurance and satisfaction then in sacred matters; insomuch that some
who are always telling tragical stories of the ruins and desperate Corruptions
of humane nature, as if it had irrecoverably lost all power of discerning
between truth and falsehood; and are so far from having any pretense to
infallibility, that, if they would understand the necessary and unavoidable
Consequences of their own Principles, they cannot pretend to any such thing as
certainty, yet are as confident in all their Persuasions, as if all their
thoughts were Oracles; and a Person, that knows himself to be acted by an
unerring spirit, could not be more peremptory in his sentiments of things, than
they are in their rash and ungrounded Prejudices. Now it is the Consciences of
the vulgar rout, or the drove of Ignorance and Prejudice, that are wont to be
so troublesome and wayward to Government; they are zealous and confident because
they are ignorant, and they are therefore impatient of all contradiction in
their mistakes, because they have fastened upon them at all adventure. Are not
Commonwealths then likely to be admirably governed, when their peace and
setlement must lie at the mercy of every cross-grained and insolent Fool?
Sometimes it is superstition, and nothing more vulgar than for men to abuse
their Consciences with this unquiet and impotent Passion. For when their minds
are possessed (and it is an epidemical Malady) with wrong notions of God, and
hard jealousies and suspicions of his Government of the World, this cannot but
make them apprehend her Laws over-severe and rigorous; and this cannot but make
them fearful and irresolved in all their Thoughts, and this cannot but fill
their heads with foolish and silly scruples, and this cannot but make them
afraid of every Action, lest whatever they do should offend their stern and
angry Deity. So that whilst this restless passion reigns in their minds, it
cannot but make them as troublesome to the Commonwealth as to themselves: and
their Governors can command them nothing so innocent and harmless, against
which their nice and troubled Fancies cannot raise multitudes of scruples and
little exceptions. So that every trifling imagination of their own shall be
able to countermand the wisest and most useful Laws; and the public order and
setlement of the Society, in which they live, shall be eternally disturbed by
their stubbornness and invincible Folly. For though Superstition springs from
pusillanimity and irresolution of soul, yet if it fixes and setles, it soon
hardens it self into downright Confidence; and there is nothing so impudent
and inflexible as a mind confirmed in Superstition. No Laws or Penalties can
work it off from its Resolutions; but it grows resty, peevish, and impatient;
and whatever troubles or contradicts it, stirs up its fury: And hence it is
that Princes have always found Religious Cowardice the boldest and most warlike
temper in the World, because it is armed and ensured by Conscience. According to
that vulgar and obvious saying of Cicero's, Superstitione qui imbutus est,
quietus esse non potest. The leaven of Superstition is a restless thing, and
minds tinctured with it, naturally work and ferment themselves into an unquiet
and seditious temper. Sometimes it is Pride and Insolence; and it is a mighty
gratification of this Vice in some men to control their Governors: for when
they swell with conceits of their own extraordinary Godliness, and dote upon
themselves as the special darlings and favorites of Heaven, it is natural for
them to grow saucy and presumptuous, and to think themselves too precious to be
governed after the rate of ordinary men. The privilege (forsooth) of being the
Children of God, tempts them to conceit themselves better and wiser than their
Governors, who alas! unless they are (which rarely happens but in Usurpers) of
their own Faction, are natural and unregenerate men, that understand not the
things that appertain to the Kingdom of Heaven, and can promote nothing but
their own carnal ends and Interests. And this cannot but possess them with wild
and ungovernable conceits, and make them turbulent and seditious, and willing
to pick quarrels with the wisdom and discretion of their Superiors. With what
other spirit can those men be acted, who plead niceness and tenderness of
Conscience to exempt themselves from the force of Laws, and the duty of
Obedience; and yet are of all men the most positive and confident in their own
Persuasions, think themselves the only Sons of Knowledge, and fit to instruct
and reform the World; and wherever they have any power, enjoin their own fond
conceits with the fiercest and most decretory severity. And if any man be so
sturdy, or so unfortunate as but to question their imperious and peremptory
Decrees, he is sure to be censured and treated as an Heretic or worse, and he
cannot possibly err out of weakness, but obstinacy. What else I say can be the
humor of these men's Consciences, but a proud Impatience of all control, and a
restlesness against all Authority, till themselves may have it at their own
disposal. Sometimes it is Clownishness, and Ill-manners: there is a passionate,
untutored, and impetuous Conscience, that becomes rude and insolent from the
sense of its own Integrity, and because it is confident in the goodness of its
intentions, it is furious and ungovernable in the Prosecution of its ends. The
very honesty of such men is in effect nothing but rashness and violence, they
are transported by the outrage of Zeal, and regard not the peace of Government,
but pursue their own Persuasions, to which they are determined by Chance, or
Folly, or Passion, without Reason or Abatement, they must not give up a
Metaphysical Notion for the removal of a Civil War, or the preservation of the
State; and in stead of submitting to the common and necessary methods of
Government, they will force Crowns and Scepters to yield to their Imperious
Folly, or involve a Kingdom in all the Miseries and Desolations of War. Their
particular Opinions are of more force than the Edicts and Declarations of
Kings; and who but themselves are fit Judges of their Duty and Obedience? The
bare Authority of their own Persuasions, is supreme and uncontrollable; and
they will prove themselves his Majesty's best Subjects, by disobeying his
Commands, and fighting against his Person. Now though these boisterous Men may
have no formed and malicious designs against the State, yet this savage and
extravagant Probity is more troublesome and mischievous in a Commonwealth, than
open and premeditated Villainy; it will ruin a Kingdom for the Public Good.
And Men of this humor are bound to that rigor and niceness of Conscience, as
makes them incapable of peaceable Obedience and Subjection: for unless the
public Laws suit exactly with their own private Sentiments, that unavoidably
exasperates them against the Government, and they must be making Remonstrances,
and entering into Confederacies for redress of Public Grievances; and yet so
nice and narrow are those Rules they prescribe to themselves and their
Governors, that it is impossible to fit Laws that are made for the Community,
to their pettish curiosity. It Is natural for these Men to be displeased with
the Grandeur and Prosperity of the Court. The height of a Princes Felicity
frets their proud and envious Minds; and they are never so apt to complain of
the badness of the Times, as when the Government is most flourishing. They are
incurable Malcontents; and to prevent Arbitrary Power, are upon all occasions
making Encroachments upon the Royal Authority, and lying at catch for all
Advantages, and husbanding all Opportunities to abate the Sovereign
Prerogative, and the Monarchy must be kept low, to secure the Liberty of the
Subject. It was such hot Spirits as these that were the late Patriots of their
Country, and Fathers of the Public Liberty, that involved the Nation in a
bloody War upon no other Motive than of the Goodness of their Prince, and the
Happiness of his Reign. And when they were once engaged, they resolved to have
their Wills, or the Kingdom should be ruined. Nothing but the utmost rigor to
be found in all their Treaties and Transactions; and not an Iota to be abated
in any of their Edicts of Pacification; but they were all along craving and
importunate in their Demands, imperious and inexorable in their Impositions:
when it was their turn to make Petitions, they would extort their Desires by
clamor and importunity; but when to grant, all their Favors were clogged with
such stern and rigid Conditions, that an open Affront would scarce have been
more grievous. They never returned an Answer to any of his Majesty's Proposals,
that was not more rude and uncivil than flat denial. Nothing to be done for him
out of respect to his Person or his Interest, till all their Demands, how
horrid and unreasonable soever, shall first be fully satisfied: not an Article
of Peace and Accommodation to be attended to, unless he would give up his
Crown, his Friends and his Conscience to the mercy of their Insolence. Insomuch
that I remember when the King was in the hands of the Independent Army, and in
such apparent danger of speedy ruin, the General Assembly of the Kirk (those
savage Clowns) even then, though it was so utterly needless and unseasonable,
resolve it upon the Question, that it is not lawful for the Scots to assist the
King for the Recovery of his Government, till he has first granted all the
Propositions made to him by both Kingdoms. Sometimes it is Enthusiasm and
Fanatic Madness, when Men are carried out of all use of their Rational
Faculties by the strength and vigor of their Imaginations; and are possessed
with a strong conceit that all the wild and extravagant Phantasms, that arise
from the steams of their own melancholy, are the immediate Impressions of the
Spirit of God. Nothing more dangerous than this Imposture; it is confident in
its folly, and eager in the pursuit of its Extravagances. It is a direct
subversion of all Government, because it is constant to no certain Principles
and Rules of Action; its very Oaths are vain as the Faith of Pirates; the
Spirit of God shall cancel and dispense with all its Obligations; and there is
no attempt so wicked or so exorbitant, in which these Men may not warrant their
Proceedings by an unaccountable Impulse. And whatever they do, or whatever they
have a mind to do, is prosecuted with the utmost violence, because they act
with a full and unabated assurance of the goodness of their Cause, and they
shall contradict their own Pretensions by virttue of a Divine Commission. As
the Anabaptists were commanded by the Holy Ghost to take up Arms to beat the
Princes of Christendom into the Belief of this Article, That it is not lawful
for them so much as to make use of Defensive Arms.

This sort of Fanaticism is an incurable and a Dog-day madness; and those that
are tainted with it, are not only bereaved of all use of Reason themselves, but
convey and propagate the Phrenzy to others: for it is a Disease strangely
incident to the common people; and wherever it breaks forth, the rage spreads
and prevails like infection; it is enough to scare or juggle whole Nations out
of their wits; and is, like the possession of wicked Spirits, raving and
ungovernable. And where it enters, if the Men possessed are not kept bound in
chains and fetters, they will not only fall foul upon each other, but worry
their Keepers, and foam out their rage against their Governors; nothing can
appease or satisfy their fury, but, like the Legion in the Gospel, they will
rail against the Son of the most High God; and it would make one tremble to
consider what horrid Blasphemies some of these rampant and begodded Wretches
have belcht forth against their Redeemer.

This in short discovers the mystery of that grand Imposture, when the same Men
cry down the use of Reason, and cry up the Liberty of Conscience, and so leave
People under a necessity of being governed by nothing but their own
unreasonable and Enthusiastic Follies: for when Conscience is opposed to
Reason, it can be nothing else. Whereas they are all along the same thing:
Natural Reason is the same with Natural Conscience, i. e. the Mind of Man
acting and guiding it self by those Principles, that it is able to discover by
its own experience and reflection; and illuminated Reason is the same with
illuminated Conscience, i. e. the Mind of Man acting and guiding it self by
those Principles that are discovered to it by Divine Revelation: so that still
whatsoever Illumination Men pretend to, it must be in a Rational Method* and if
it be not managed in a way of Reason, it is but Fancy and Enthusiasm, or an
imaginary Conceit of being directed by a Divine Inspiration, when they are
really befooled by Humor and Melancholy.

And now (Sir) let me only desire you to consider, first, the natural and
probable effects of Pride, Superstition, ignorant Zeal, Peevishness and
Enthusiasm; and then how sturdy and exorbitant they will grow, when Authorized
by Conscience and Religion; and lastly, how incident and almost unavoidable
they are to the common People; and then I will leave it to you and all wise Men
to judge, whether Liberty of Conscience will prove any better than a License
for Anarchy and Confusion. Though I might proceed to exemplify out of the
Histories and Records of all Ages what mischiefs these Errors (and I might add
all the other passions of the Minds of Men) have created to Mankind, under
disguises and mistakes of Religion: but I have proceeded too far already, and
am quite ashamed of the length of my Reply: But if I have been too tedious, I
may for once demand your pardon, because I resolved to answer and confute this
Scribbling Man once for all. I might indeed have shaken off the Viper with less
pains, but I was willing to dissect the Beast, and discover the seat and
symptoms of its poison. Perhaps some may apprehend, I have taken too much
personal advantage of my Adversary, and I doubt not but this will be pleaded in
his behalf by his own Party. But beside that they were most of them extorted by
his own unprovoked and impertinent Challenges, you and all impartial Men will
easily discern, that setting aside all Collateral Reflections, I have
abundantly baffled all his little Pretenses, and satisfied all his poor
Objections; and what I have added over and above, is by way of accessional
Proof to my main Argument, to let the World see what sort of Men they are, that
are the great Zealots of the Party; and withal to discover them to their
Followers, that if they are of the same Kidney and Persuasion with their
Leaders, they may be convinced what little Reason they have to murmur at their
Governors for their severest proceedings against them: If they are not, to
discover to them into what inconveniences some Men have drawn them for the ends
of their own Pride and Ambition. However, it is fit to let them see how
dangerous it is for Men so obnoxious to be meddling; and then that is enough to
gag and limetwig the Chiefs of the Faction.

I will not detain you with Reflections upon the malice and profaneness of his
Conclusion, though it is no better (and it can scarce be worse) than a bold
abuse of our Saviors words, to suggest a spightful and uncivil slander: but
it is the way and spirit of his Ingenuity, and much good may it do him; and
therefore for my own part, I am resolved to keep to my own Conclusion: for
having once dropped a rash Challenge, I am now in honor bound to keep up the
humor; and to let them know that I am so far from abating of my Courage, that I
fear not to heighten the defiance: so that you have my free leave to publish
this Discourse (if you will) in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew; and to proclaim to
all Nations, Kindreds and Languages, that What I have written, I have written,
and justified,

THE END.
SIR,
YOU have been pleased to interess your self so obligingly in my concerns, that
though I have been thinking of it near half a year, I could never tell in what
terms to give you thanks for the excess of your civility to me. I was forced to
be silent, because I knew not what to say: And I think you had not now heard of
me, were it not for the vexation, I have conceived, at the trouble you have
drawn upon your self, by your kindness to him, that cannot yet deserve the
title of your Friend. Not that I think it will cost you much pains to blow away
the trivial exceptions which a rash Head has taken at what you said about the
Friendly Debate; but you are like to consume so many precious hours in raking
into that indigested heap of stuff which he has hudled together against your
own Book, that I ought not to presume you have any spare moments to throw away
in the Vindication of mine. Your good nature indeed, I know, will be apt to
prompt you not to leave it without some defense; and in your hands it will be
safer then in my own: Yet pardon me, I beseech you, if I be not wholly an idle
spectator in the contest; and let not your zeal to serve me so exceed all
bounds, as not to leave room for me to appear with an offer of that help, of
which you have no need.

The most of his Declamation every body sees is spent against the manner and
way of my Writing; which he would have his easy Disciples believe
(notwithstanding all that has been said) is peculiarly accommodated to render
the sentiments and expressions of our Adversaries ridiculous, and expose their
persons to contempt and scorn p. 47.48.
. Insomuch that in points of Faith, Opinion and Judgment, this way of dealing
has been hitherto esteemed fitter for the stage, then a serious disquisition
after Truth, or confutation of Error p. 50.
.

Thus this high and mighty Dictator is pleased to pass his censure; and he
seems to pronounce it standing on his tiptoes, imagining he has spoken
bravely, and blasted the credit of all Dialogues for ever. But when his head is
a little cooler, so that he can distinguish between the results of a sound
judgment, and the flashes of a distempered fancy, I persuade my self he will be
ready to eat his words, and wish they had never been spoken: especially if he
consider these things following.

First, From whence it is that he dates the time, in which to the day of his
Writing this way has been in so low esteem. I doubt he will find it is but a
little while ago, no longer then since the Printing of the Friendly Debate.
Before that, the most excellent persons have chosen this way as exceeding fit
and accommodate (if not the aptest of all other) both to teach the weightiest
Truths, and to baffle popular Errors. Minutius Felix, for instance, a famous
Advocate, thought good to plead the most sacred cause on earth in a Dialogue
between two Disputants, a Christian and an Heathen Dialogu^ scripsit Christiani
and Etha^^i dispu^an^^um, Hi^ro. in ca^al. scrip. Eccl
. Which that great Lawyer and Antiquary, Franciscus Baldvinus, calls Antiquum
cruditumque scribendi morem, an ancient and learned manner of writing. For in
this, I observe, Tully himself handled a great and grave Argument, [ Rem ma^nam
complexus sum and gravem, as he speaks] viz. that concerning a Commonwealth:
and tells us withal, that a great many of the Books were joculatoria
disputa^io, a pleasant and jesting disputation, as his words are in one of his
Letters to Atticus L. 4. Epist. 16 And in another place tells us, Atticus
himself composed Mirisicos cum Publi^ Dia^ogos, l. 2. ep. 10.
. And so were Erasmus his Colloquies in the beginning of the Reformation: which
were received notwithstanding by the wisest and best men with great applause,
read in the Schools with much greediness, and commended for this among other
things, That by an admirable dexterity and most sweet manner of speaking they
delivered to youth the precepts of Piety and good manners Melch. Adam, in vita
Jac. Heerbrand p. 669.
. Since which time several matters of no small moment have been handled in this
way by the approbation of the highest persons. Mr. Alexander Cook I remember
wrote a Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, to prove there was a woman
Pope; which was entertained even by strangers with so much respect, that it was
translated into the French Language by I. de la Montagne Printed at Sedan, 1633.
. And he has heard I suppose of one before that, called Deus and Rex, God and
the King Printed, 1615.
between Philalethes and Theodidactus; wherein is proved that the King justly
challenges whatsoever is required by the Oath of Allegiance. Is this, must we
think, no point of Faith, Opinion, or Judgment? Or, was his Majesty mistaken in
recommending to all his Subjects the perusal of this Book, which handled the
matter in such sort (according to this Rabbi) as made it fit only for the
Theater? So the Oracle has in effect pronounced; and we must all lay aside our
doubts and acquiesce in its word. Kings themselves must not scruple submission
to so inspired a Supremacy. Now they hear the voice of this more Sovereign
Judge, they ought to revoke their own decrees, and teach their people Obedience
according to his sentence.

The only comfort is that he may contradict himself, and so give us leave to
decline his Authority. And truly I have some hope to convince him of his
Error, though he should loftily overlook all this as unworthy his notice, if
he will but vouchsafe to stoop so low as to cast his eye upon what he has writ
himself. For I find, that he who taxes others so boldly for not clearly stating
the question in hand, is doubtful and staggering in this easy business. After
he has told us that Dialogues are peculiarly accommodated to the ends
mentioned, p. 48. and that they are absolutely most accommodated of all sorts
of writing to such a design, p. 50. He sinks extremely in his confidence, and
only tells us, the advantages mentioned are somewhat peculiar unto Dialogues,
p. 61. His heart at last began to fail him, when he had a little evapourated
his ungovernable heat; and I have great cause to think it checked him often in
the very midst of it, and bad him not be so presumptuous. For (Good man) he
dare not stand to this neither, but acknowledges unawares before he has done,
that there is no peculiarity at all, in this way of writing, to make things or
persons ridiculous. For first he is forced to acknowledge that it may be used
to very serious purposes; as it was by Tully and Plato who employed this method
(as he confesses, p. 47.) to make their designs of instruction more easy and
perspicuous. And whatsoever he is pleased to say falsely and scornfully
concerning my boasting of the skilful contrivance of my Dialogues (Ib.) This is
all that I alleged as my reason for that way of writing Contrived the
discourse into the form of a Dial^gue to make it more easily apprehended, P^ef.
to the first part.
. Which he is so far from disapproving when he is in a good humor, that he
cites Bishop Bilsons Dialogue in answer to the Jesuits Apology and Defense,
with due respect, p. 174. But when he has done this, then ( secondly) he
cannot deny that Orations and Declamations, that is, his own way of writing,
are capable to be employed to the contrary purposes (which he makes peculiar to
Dialogues) as well as any other way of speaking or writing whatsoever.

Cato, for instance, was made the peoples sport, no less by Cicero's Oration,
than Socrates by Aristophane's Dialogue (so he calls his Comedy.) For he
represented, he acknowledges, the opinions of that Sect to which Cato was
addicted, in such a fashion, That he put the whole Assembly into a fit of
Laughter, p. 51. And he might have known and remembered (if he be such a Scholar
as he makes a show of, by pouring out so much Greek and Latin) that the best
Masters of Rhetoric have given precepts about ways of facetious speaking and
moving laughter, in the making of Orations. Cicero himself has treated at
large of this Argument in his second Book, de Oratore: and touches it again in
his Orator ad Brutum. And whosoever he was that wrote the Books ad Herennium,
he shows ( Lib. 1.) how to refresh the Judge when he is weary of hearing a long
Speech, by jests and pleasant reflections. So does Quintilian likewise; who
treating of the way to move affections, spends a whole Chapter (and one of the
longest in all the twelve Books) in a discourse concerning Laughter L. 6. Just.
Orat. c. 3. de Risu.
, the exciting of which he acknowledges may be useful and to good purpose. Now
what plainer instance can we have than this, of the childish forwardness,
negligence, or ill nature of this haughty Writer, that after so peremptory a
censure as that beforementioned, he should himself grant, that serious things
may be advantageously delilivered in my way of writing, and ridiculous things
in his own? He seems to me to have a tang of the spirit of those Divines whom
Martin Dorpius described (above 150 years ago) Prolog. in Mil. Gloriosum.
and forbad to meddle with that Dialogue, which has furnished this Writer with
some swaggering language ( p. 13.46.) who in this angry, envious, and impatient
humor carp and bawl at every thing indifferently, which is not in their way of
learning. Siquidem stomachabundi, oblatratores, facere
Pergant etiamdum, quoth. nunquam non factitant;
Clamoribus ampullosis infremere, and
Venena livoris effunditare sui,
Et obloqui, and ogganire, and dentibus omnia
Arrodere carnivoracibus; and sicut canes
Solent, quibuslibet allatrare sibi obviis.
Which a Friend of yours and mine has thus Englished.

And let the choleric testy Sirs bawl on,
Peevish and moody, fret and chafe their fill;
They act in all this but their nature still.
The secret poison in their entrails pent,
By full-mouthed clamours seeks it self a vent:
Nothing from their envenomed tooth is free,
But like to village-currs they snarl at all they see.
If he would have done like a man, he should not have stood quarrelling with
the way, but plainly shown that their opinions or sayings were falsely
represented by me. And if he had withal done this in the same form of writing
that I used, it had, in my poor judgment, been more for his reputation: and he
might have found a great example for it. Gregory Nazianzen, I mean, who
observing the Books of Apollinarius (a person of great wit and learning) his
New Psalters (though jarring with that of David) his Elegant Poems on diverse
subjects, take so much with the people, that they were esteemed as if they had
been (...) a Third Testament; thought of a way how he might disenchant those
poor souls, and instill some better principles into their minds. And what course
did he pitch upon? To declaim, as our new Doctor does against this way of
dealing? to say that Poetry was always employed to cheat and gull the easy
multitude? peculiarly fitted to charm and bewitch their affection without, nay,
against all reason? No such matter. He knew very well that this was an ancient
way of instructing the World; that Laws were sometime writ, though not in Ryme,
yet in Measure; and as St. Hierome Praef. in Lib. Job.
his Scholar observes, the most ancient Book (as it is esteemed) of all the
Scripture, is for the greatest part composed in the same manner. That great
Divine therefore resolved to encounter him with his own Weapon, and tells
Cledonius, Greg. N^z. Ep. 1. ad Cied. seu crat. 51.
(...), etc. We will compose Psalms too, we will write many Books, and make
Verses as well as Apollinarius. And so he did: some in his Old Age, when he
might seem to be most unfit for such inventions. But this was the occasion (as
Elias Cretensis notes) of his writing such a volume of Poems, which still
remain, and were then in so great esteem, that they made those of Apollinarius
be quite forgotten. Now what if Apollinarius had decried the Verses of this
Father because they were not all Heroicks, or all Iambicks, or such as he most
fancied? Nay, what if he had taken occasion to reproach those Composures,
because he used (...), the Style both of Tragedies and Comedies? (as Gregorius
the Presbyter tells he did, that he might represent divine things in all shapes
and fashions to the Church of Christ) would he not have been thought a
ridiculous Caviller? and justly passed for a pitiful Coward, who when he durst
not assail the Body of his Adversary, fell a fighting with his Shadow? It is no
less ridiculous in this Innovator, to reproach this ancient and profitable way
of writing which I have used, as if it were fit only or principally for abuse,
sport or laughter. Let me tell him, He that asserts this, forgets that he
condemns in effect the Holy Scripture it self: For the Song of Songs, as a
learned Person of our own long ago expressed it, Dr. Featly Rehearsal Sermon at
Paul's Cross, 1618.
is a kind of Divine Pastoral, or Marriage-Play, consisting of diverse Acts and
Scenes; or a sacred Dialogue with many interlocutory passages: First, the Bride
comes in, and says, LET HIM KISS ME WITH THE KISSES OF HIS MOUTH: Then the
Bridegroom, I HAVE COMPARED THEE, O MY LOVE, TO A TROOP OF HORSES, etc. After
which, he withdraws himself, and sits at his repast, v. 12. leaving the Bride
with her companions as it were alone upon the Stage, who thus speak to her, WE
WILL MAKE THEE BORDERS OF GOLD, AND STUDS OF SILVER, v. 11. Nor is this any
novel Conceit of his, but I can justify it out of the Father before named: who
persuading Virgins of both Sexes to be carried with the whole force of their
Affections unto God, and to think that only fair and amiable which is Eternal;
So, says he, may thou be wounded in such sort by the chosen Dart, Greg.
Nazian. Orat. 31. p. 503. Edit. Paris
and learn the Beauty of the Bridegroom, that thou may be able to say, (...).
Out of the Nuptial Play and Song, SWEET ART THOU, AND ALTOGETHER DESIRABLE.

I could produce more to the same purpose, but that I begin to be a little
ashamed that I am fallen into this strain of quoting Greek and Latin. All that
I have to say for my self, is, That our Antagonist makes such a noise with
them, that I was willing to make a small show of Learning, merely to be even
with him: especially when it would serve not for flourish or vapor, but
offered it self for a substantial proof. It is likely indeed that he will smile
among his Clients, and say I have proved nothing; nay, crow over me, like a
Cock of the Game, when his Head bleeds, as if he had got the Victory. But
whatsoever he may say in private, he will be better advised, I believe, than
hastily to renew the Quarrel in public again: and not be tempted by their
importunities to make such another vain Babble as this Book, for them to sport
themselves a while withal. If he be wise, he will take more time, and consider
what he says, before he make his Second Survey. And if he think he is able
solidly to answer what I have now writ, I hope he will take this one thing more
into his thoughts.

That let this way be as peculiar as it is possible to the ends he mentions,
yet it is not peculiar to us; but (as has been shown already in the second
part of the Friendly Debate) has been often employed by themselves. He ought
therefore in justice either to have acquitted me, or condemned us altogether.
For even Aristophanes his way of Dialogue by Comedy, has not been balked by
these solemn Men, and that in serious, if not holy Arguments, when it would
serve their turn; witness a Book called Tyrannical Government Anatomized:
Licensed by a Committee, and subscribed by Mr. John White in this manner: Die
Martis 30 Jan. 1642. It is ordered by a Committee of the House of Commons
concerning Printing, That this Book be forthwith Printed and Published. In
which the Coll^cutors and Complainants (as the Author speaks) are Malchus,
Gamaliel, John the Baptist, Chorus, or Company of Jews, King Herod, the Queen
Herodias, her Daughter and Messengers. What should be the reason that these men
are so coy and nice now, that they cannot away with a simple Dialogue, who
could digest a Comedy, and that a sacred one, heretofore? Is not their stomach
to it, think you, as good as ever? I can make no question of it: But the matter
is not now for their tooth, and that makes them spit it out of their mouth.
They would dissemble the distaste they have taken at just reproofs, by making
faces at the manner in which they are delivered. And like the Cuttle-Fish,
which hides it self in its own Ink, they shuffle up and down, and endeavor to
blot my Dialogues, that none may read their faults which are there discovered.
Were it not for this, Dialogues should have their good word as well as any
other form of Writing. They are inwardly convinced there is no harm in them;
nor is a pleasant way of conveying our thoughts into other men's minds,
condemned by unbiassed and impartial Judges. Only, as Erasmus speaks in his
Preface to Tully's Offices, Aliter scurrajocatur, aliter vir probus and
integer: A scurrilous Companion jests after one fashion, an honest man after
another. The distinction between them is so easy, As Tully observes, L. 1.
Offic. Facilis est distinctio, etc.
that I shall not mention it: but only remember, that an honest man may write
after such a fashion as I have done, Beza thought was without all dispute;
What, says he, if I have answered one that deserved no better, Quasi per
ludum, etc. in a spo^ting manner, as the times would then bear? Solomon sure
does not simply forbid us to answer a Fool; and what hinders but that a man may
laugh and speak the truth? The Spirit of the Lord sometimes does not abstain
from holy Ironies: and Nazianzens Orations against Julian, even after he was
dead, are in every bodies hands; which though they be biting enough, thou have
not the face to blame. They are his words in his defense of himself against the
Accusations of Genebrard An. 1585. page 61, 62
, who dealt with him just as this Gentleman has done with me. He found fault
with him not only for writing a wanton Paraphrase, (as he would have had it
believed) upon the Canticles, but for writin it in Trochaick Verses, whereas
Ia^^ick best pleased his bitter humor. B^t what was this to the business, as
Beza truly answered, (and I may reply to this Accuser) for one may flatter in
Iambicks, and be angry in Trochaicks? And who gave him this Authority, to
impose silence on us, or else to prescribe a certain sort of Verse to which we
must be confined I^. page 1^.
? If such reasoning be sufficient to blast a Work, S^^rates and his Friends
were very weak people to suffer Aristophanes his Comedy to go away with
applause. They might have only said, Good Mr. Poet, you are exceeding witty,
but it is only by a knack you have at one kind of Verse, which ought not to be
used; and then his Clouds had vanished with a breath. For this you know was the
thing that gave him so much reputation, not his mere Dialogue-way, (as this
Author would have it believed, else the story is nothing to his purpose) but
his smooth and pleasant Verses, as Aelian, whom this Writer follows, expressly
tells us. And indeed he had a singular faculty in such composures, there being
one sort of Measure which bore his Name, and was called the Anapaestus of
Aristophanes Mentioned by Tully, in his Ora^. ad Bru^.
, (...), because he used it so frequently, as the In Act. 1. sc. 3. and Schol.
in Plu^. Act. 2. sc. 5.
Scholiast tells us upon that very Comedy called the Clouds: Which Play he
needed not be hired to make, having conceived a displeasure at Socrates because
he despised the Comedians, though he would come to see Euripides his Tragedies.
This Aelian himself confesses was the (...), and not merely the instigation of
Anytus and Melitus; and it appears from the Comedy, that this stuck in his
stomach, for in the latter end of it Nub. Act. 5. sc. 2
he jeers at Euripides his Poetry. Nor is it supposed by any ancient Writer
that I can meet withal, that Aristophanes was hired to abuse the Philosopher,
as he stands accused by our Author; who justifies the old saying, That it is
easy to make the Tale run which way it pleases the Teller. Aelian himself
does not suppose it, but only says, Perhaps he was; and that it would be no
wonder if he did take money; concluding at last (as Men do now that have little
ground for their suspicions) but Aristophanes himself knows whether it were so
or no. It seems none of his acquaintance did; and since the Poet was not alive
to tell the very truth, both he and this Gentleman ought to have left out that.

Nor is there any cause that he should make this Comedy strike such a stroke to
the taking away of Socrates Life. Alas! it abated so little of his Reputation,
that by his brave contempt and scorn of those abuses which he expressed even in
the open Theater, as Aelian confesses And Diog. Laert. observes that (...).
, in the midst of the Action, he did himself a world of credit, which he
preserved and maintained a long time after. It is confessed by Learned Men,
that he lived sixteen years after the acting of this Play: but Palmerius has
demonstrated that he lived no less than four if not five and twenty years
after. For it is plain from several places in the Play, that it was acted
before Cleon's death, which happened the tenth year of the Peloponesian War; at
which time Aminias was the chief Magistrate at Athens, an. 2. Olymp. 89. But
Socrates was accused when Lachetes governed, an. 1. Olymp. 95. three and twenty
years after the death of Cleon. Which is sufficient to show that the Comedy did
him little hurt, and that our Author was rash, ignorant, or ill advised to say
P. 49^
, That when his Adversaries had got this advantage of exposing him to public
contempt, they began openly to manage their accusation against him. This is to
invent, not to write a Story: A pure fiction of his own or some other confident
brain: like that of the late Commentator upon A. Gellius Ant. Th^sius in l. 1.
c. 17. 1^66. who borrowd it I have cause to think from Oliverius in ^. 7. Val.
Maxim.
, who says that Aristophanes having lacerated Socrates in his Comedy called
the Frogs (so he mistakes) the very next day he was accused and condemned to
death. For it is neither so, nor so: He neither became hereby the public
scorn; nor did they now begin to manage their accusation. He flourished a long
time after in no small esteem both for his Wisdom, and for his Wit. Which was
so excellent and smart, that I do not see but Socrates was as great a Wit in
his way, as Aristophanes in his. And that was the Dialogue-way, in which no man
could do better. Nor was any man more skilled in Ironies, or could manage that
which is now wont to be called, ingenious raillery, with greater dexterity Vid.
Cicero, l. 2. de Oratore.
.

Cicero in the first Book of his Offices, says, that he was wondrously
facetious and pleasant in his discourse, Atque in omni ratione dissimulator.
Plato himself could not otherwise represent him, then as one that was perfect
in the art of jesting: which he used so much, even in his most serious
discourses, that such morose men (as I fancy him we have to deal withal)
commonly called him the Scoffer Cicero mentions one this called him Atticum
Sc^rr^^, l. 1. de Natura a^orum; See Seneca,.5. De Benef. c. 6.
. Their sullen gravities did not, or would not understand that this was a very
subtle and ancient way of teaching morality: and that the shortest way to
persuade, is to please those whom we treat withal. He was persecuted I imagine,
as much by their sour Wisdoms, as by Aristophanes. They were afraid he should
grow too popular, and therefore called him the Mocker, that they might ingross
the name of Philosophers. This I am told by a good Author ( Diog. Laertius) was
the reason that Anytus, one of his Accusers, took such a pique at him. Socrates
made little account of his Worship, and had given him a nip, for which he
resolved to be revenged. And the envy of others (as the same Author tells us)
began upon this occasion. The Oracle told Chaerephon (one whom Aristophanes
also abuses) that Socrates was the wisest man living: and he was wont to
represent the self-conceited wise men, as very Fools and Idiots. They resolved
therefore to have him out of the way, if it were possible: But did not lay to
his charge his Nonconformity in Religion (as this Writer is pleased to tell
the tale). page 49
a^ the principal Crime he was guilty of. There was not one word of that matter
in the first Libel exhibited against him, as any one may see in Plato's Apology
page 19 Edit. Ser^an.
, where it is recorded. Xenophon indeed, Laertius and others tell us, he was
accused of bringing in new Demons, etc. but this, learned men agree, was the
crime which his latter accusers objected to him (with far less probability than
the other) to make him the more odious. No man was more conformable in his
practice to the Laws about Religion than himself, if we may believe some of
those very Authors which this person quotes. Xenophon for instance, assures us,
that as he allowed Divinations, so he sacrificed openly, oft-times in his own
house, and often upon the common Altars of the City L. 1. Memorabil. page 708.
. And moreover, that he regulated himself both in Sacrifices, and in the
Service of their Ancestors, and in all other things, according to the Direction
of the Oracle; which said, that those did godlily who performed them (...)
according to the Law of the City. So Socrates himself did; so he exhorted
others to do: and those that did otherwise, he held to be (...) Ibid. page 72^^
, impertinent and vain persons.

All which considered, I hope this worthy Author (to return him that Epithete
which he bestows on one of my Books) p. 47.
will be persuaded that he had better have let this story alone; though it make
the most plausible show of any thing he has writ. And since Socrates was no
Nonconformist, methinks hereafter he should be none of his followers: nor
study that knack, which Aristophanes so often twits him withal, (...), to make
a bad cause appear as if it were good. I confess he has a pretty gift this
way, and has learned one lesson very well which the great Orator teaches his
Scholar, viz. to slide over those arguments which are hard, and take no notice
of them. Nay, he goes beyond the ablest Masters in this point. He contemns the
difficulties that are objected to them, and pretends they are so slight and
frivolous, that they merit not an Answer. But methinks, there is some
Conscience to be made, when a man uses this trick; and I expected a little more
honesty in him, then that he should say; There is but one thing in all my
Discourse that seems to him of any consideration, p. 54. He cannot be so blind,
I persuade my self, if ever he cast his eyes on them, as not to see a multitude
of things there, that deserve not only their serious thoughts, but call for
their ingenuous Confession, and hearty Repentance. He knows those Books are not
mostly filled (as he calumniates, p. 60.) with exceptions against expressions,
sayings, occasional reflections on Texts of Scripture. These make the least
part of them, and are not their main design, but alleged to show either that
they who despise our Ministers, are not such powerful men as they persuade the
people, nor so full of the Spirit as they pretend, or that they can bear with
worse things in them of their own party, then those they accuse us of, or for
some such like considerable purpose. But as for Invectives there are none,
unless they be such as those of Nazianzen against the Apostate Emperor, which
(as his Scholiast in (...).
interprets the word) were (...) a reprehension of those things which had been
done by Julian.

For this, though it was very smart, Beza thought Genebrard himself durst not
accuse the Holy Father: But behold a man here, that has the face to talk of
impertinent calling over of things past and bygone: which is such a piece of
confidence, that it deserves the name of impudence; for nothing can be more
pertinent, than to remember how they have deceived the poor people, and how
they contradict themselves. And if they were such Friends to Morality (as he
would have us believe) they would save us the labor of remembering these
things, by doing it themselves: Nay, they would call to mind, bewail, and
openly renounce all and every those disloyal, unmerciful, and irreligious
actions, which they have been either guilty of themselves, or countenanced and
connived at in others. But we must not hope I see for such Ingenuity and
Condescension, from men of this lofty Spirit; who are not so much for the Good
Old Way, which calls men to Repentance, as for the Good Old Cause, which could
justify all things, and hallow the blackest Crimes. These they must by no
means hear of, because they will not condemn, and dare not defend them. It is
an unpardonable fault, if we do but make mention of their evil deeds. They will
never have a good opinion of us more, if we do but tell them how bad they are.
This I know has stirred up such anger at me; that I have put them in mind of
but a little of their Folly; and told them of some Sins, which I cannot learn
they rebuke as they ought, and some Duties which they do not press, and that if
they be pressed by our Ministers, they run away, and say they will hear them no
more. From this we may conclude (notwithstanding his fine talk of their
Principles concerning Sin, Duty, and Holiness, etc. p. 55.) that they are very
sore, who cry out if we do but touch them, and cannot endure to be meddled
withal. His advice to me, to surcease my proceeding, (p. 52.) sounds no
otherwise in my ears, than the words of that ulcerous Fellow in Sophocles,
mentioned by Tully 2. Tusc. Q.
: who not being able to abide so much as the Chirurgeon's hand, cried out, --
Abscedite, dimittite;
Nam attractatu and quassu saevum amplificatis dolorem.
Be gone, let me alone, for by this handling and shaking, you increase the
cruel pain. He would fain affright me indeed with the danger of Retaliation;
but alas! that is a mere Bugbear, and will not hurt my Cause at all. Nothing
that they can do in that kind, will be to the purpose, or give any Answer to my
Writings, as I have told them often enough. And therefore notwithstanding that,
I shall not fear to go on, if there shall be any need. And let him threaten
what other danger he pleases, I hold the resolution of the great Captain in
Homer most Noble, which the same Roman L. 2. Epist. ad Attic. 3. ex Iliad. ^.
elsewhere mentions: (...). Englished thus by one of our own Writers:
Whatsoever the Chanting of the Birds foretell, it is best to defend a man's
Country valiantly.

In that Employment, I believe, this Letter will find you, and therefore it
shall not trouble you further. But I shall beseech GOD to prosper your Labors,
and to give us all Grace to submit to Truth wheresoever we meet it, and in
whatsoever shape it appears to us: And likewise shall watch all opportunities
to serve you, and approve my self

Your affectionate Friend.

FINIS.

