A FREE and IMPARTIAL CENSVRE Of The PLATONIC PHILOSOPHY Being a Letter
Written to his much Honored Friend Mr N. B.

By SAM. PARKER. A. M.

OXFORD, Printed by W. Hall, for Richard Davis, Ann. Dom. 1666.

To the Reverend Dr. BATHURST, The Worthy and Learned PRESIDENT Of TRINITY
COLLEGE in OXFORD.
I Shall not need (as the Custom is) to argue the decency and fitness of this
address, nor to excuse its many nice and critical Solecismes, because your
absolute and unalienable Right to all the Fruits of my Studies has made it due
and necessary; (and the Obligations of Duty cancel all the Laws of Indecency)
so that if to present you with so mean a trifle be unhandsome, yet not to have
done it, would have been unjust. For my Studies (Sir) are too deeply indebted
to your Encouraging Directions, to make any other repayment then by entirely
resigning themselves up into your hands, and therefore I cannot alienate any
thing that is theirs, from being Yours, without being guilty at once of the
greatest Injustice and Ingratitude. So that though I do but Injure your Name by
concerning its Authority in behalf of so worthless a Trifle, yet an Injury
that is the result of Duty and Gratitude, may hope for not only your Pardon, but
(such Sir is your Candor) your Acceptance too; since you cannot suspect the
Reality of my Resentments, when I decline not so Criminal an Evidence thereof,
and rather wilfully chose to commit any Faults and Indecencies then lose the
least Opportunity to prove it.

I will not be so troublesome as to remind you of the retaile of your
Obligations, yet there is one, whose peculiar matchlesness obliges me to as
peculiar an acknowledgment. For to your prevailing advice (Sir) do I owe my
first Rescue from the Chains and Fetters of an unhappy Education, then which
'twas impossible either for you to have conferred, or for me to have received a
greater benefit, there being no Perfection to be Valued at so high a Rate as a
true Freedom and Ingenuity of Mind: It Is this, that distinguishes Churches
from Herds. And those men that have laid aside the free and impartial use of
their Reasons, are just as fit for Religion as Sheep and Oxen, for they differ
only in this, that the one are Brutes without Reason, and the other Brutes with
it. How could the Scythian have sacrificed Rational Beings, had he not first
sacrificed his Reason; or the Egyptian adored Irrational Creatures, had not
himself been one? Onyons could never have been Deities if Egyptians had been
men; but when Reason was once banished the Temples, no wonder if folly and
superstition commenced Religion; a stock might be a Deity when the Priest was
no more. But (Sir) the excess of my Joy and Zeal tempt me to be impertinent.

Philosophy may perhaps think her self hardly dealt with, to have two of her
famousest Sects called to the Bar by so mean a Cleark as my self, yet I think
I have done them not a little Honor in citing them before so Eminent a Judge,
and one so much their Peer in all Sublime Learning and Generositie of Soul;
that their great Masters Zeno and Plato might justly Resign the Chair, and
yield their Porch and Academy inferior to the College that you Preside. Where
the many good foundations, and grounds of Polite Literature, that you alone
have laid, may well be thought the only Talismans of its present flourishing
and prosperous Condition. These Papers therefore which were formed and hatched
under your immediate Influences, being to take their flight abroad into the
World, ought to be legitimated by no other then that Sun, which has always
shined so favorably upon all my Endeavors. I cannot but acknowledge that (
Sir) I have one selfish design in this Epistolary Address; namely, to bribe
your affection that it may defend me from the Power of your Judgment. It Is a
very unusual request I confess, but yet it is mine at present, that you would be
pleased to Protect me from your self; For I here offer to your sight that Paper
which (did I not know your Candor to be proportioned to your other
Accomplishments) I could even wish might escape it. And thus (Sir) by prefixing
your Name to this Pamphlet, I have not only Rescued it from your own Judgment,
and the Contempt of others, but have also in some measure gratified my own
Pride, in that as many as shall chance by the sight thereof, to understand that
there is such a thing as I in the world, may withal be informed of the Honor
and Happiness I have in being

Reverend Sir, Your most Faithful, most obliged, and most humble Servant, SAM:
PARKER.

A Free and Impartial ACCOUNT OF THE PLATONIC PHILOSOPHY.
SIR,
WE that are so inconsiderate, as to print Books, sell our selves into the
greatest Slavery in the world, being thereby exposed to the severe commands of
those that know us, and severer lashes of those that know us not: so that you
may perhaps sooner expect to find me in a Venetian Gally then in the Press
again. Not as if I were either so little a Philosopher, as to regard other men's
Censures, (for I have too little esteem for the Generality of Mankind, to be at
all concerned how they esteem of me; and you know it is one of my greatest
designs in this world, to be one of the most unconcerned men in it,) or so
little your Friend, as to style your commands Burdens: yet, (to be plain with
you upon the warrant of our Philosophic Friendship) had they not surprised me
at a very seasonable time, I had sent you no other reply, then either of
Excuse, or flat Denial: For, though I was then addressing my self to some
Mathematical Studies, to the pursuance whereof I allotted the next portion of
time, yet the main of my Studies for some weeks before had been employed in
Platonic Authors, so that both my Brain and my Papers being well stuffed with
Ideas, I was not displeased with the opportunity you have given me of Venting
the one, and Methodizing the other.

The Task then you enjoin me, is, To give an account of two Passages in my
Tentamina Physico-Theologica; The one out of the last Chapter of the first
Book, in which I exclaim against the Platonic Philosophy, as an ungrounded and
Fanatic Fancy: The other out of the last Chapter of the second Book, where
disputing against those that assert the necessity of the Worlds Eternal
Existence, I was occasionally obliged, to glance upon the two grand Attributes
of Gods Dominion and Goodness; hence you enjoin me to make good my charge
against Plato by giving you a larger, and more particular account of his
Phylosophie, and to send you a further Explication of the Nature and Extent of
the forementioned Attributes, especially, as they have reference to the lately
revived Hypothesis of the Preexistence of Souls, seeing I have there reckoned
that up among other rash and unwarrantable opinions, which some men think to
maintain from the Nature of Gods goodness; together with a special account of
the groundlesness of the Hypothesis it self.

But if ( Sir) I now pay one part of this Debt, I owe to your Commands, I may
safely presume upon your Candor for a forbearance of the other half; because
(as I have often told you) although the Recreation, I sometimes take to frame
my Thoughts and Conceptions into words, almost equals the Ravishing delight I
derive from their first Births and Discoveries, yet too long a continuance at
this employment is to me (and I believe to most men else) the most tedious and
wearisome piece of Drudgerie in the world; so that if after this payment in
part, you will but grant me a short respite to refresh my self with a little
Variety, I do here engage to discharge the whole Debt, when ever you shall
demand it. At present therefore deferring the latter half of my Task, I shall
only send you as satisfactory an account of the Platonic Philosophy, as I am
able; and that it may be as full and entire as its brevity will permit: I shall
consider it in all its parts, according to the most usual, and perhaps most
comprehensive division of Philosophy into Morality, Logic, Physic, and
Natural Theology.

FIrst then, as for their Morality, no Platonist can set an higher estimate
upon it, then my self; For beside those useful and excellent Notices, which it
teaches in common with the Ethics of other Sects, it may challenge a signal
Pre-eminence upon several accounts; as

1. In that the Rules and Directions it prescribes are Sober and Practicable;
it does not flatter men with Romantic Degrees of Happiness, upon fond and
fantastic Principles, but complies with the conditions of Humane life, and
neither Promises nor Designs greater proportions of Felicity, then our present
Capacities will allow of. The Platonists were not so Vain as to comfort
themselves with high strein'd Paradoxes against the convictions of Sense and
Experience: They do not teach us, when we are in the extremity of Pain and
Anguish, to sing Quam suave, quam dulce hoc est, Quam hoc non curo? No, but
they esteemed of every thing as they found and felt it, and therefore
whatsoever they experienced agreeable to their Natures they put into the
Accounts of Good, as on the contrary, whatsoever they found to be a Grievance,
they needed no other inducement to convince them of its Evil. Whereas it was
the humor of the Stoics, rather to strein for Parodoxes and Braveries then
give practicable Rules of Life: And therefore it was well observed by some of
the Ancients, that never any man could attain to that height of wisdom, which
the Stoical Philosophy pretends to. Stoici eam Sapientiam (says Cicero)
interpretantur, quam adhuc nemo mortalis est consecutus; And Seneca speaking of
a true Stoic; Fortasse (says he) tanquam Phoenix semel anno quingentis simo
nascitur; and then only mentions the single instance of Cato. But the last time
I had the happiness to Discourse with you, you was sufficiently convinced how
little the virtue of Cato, and the honesty of Regulus are to be valued. If you
should demand of me an account of the Stoical Principles, they are such as
these. That the Beggarly Stoic is the only Rich man, (...), because forsooth
he is Master of all other men's wealth. That he alone is beautiful, free, and
noble, that all other men are ugly sordid slaves. That he alone is Prince and
Emperor of the Universe. That he can vie Perfection and Happiness with God
Himself; nay Seneca blushes not to affirm, Epist. 53.
est aliquid quo sapiens antecedat Deum. That he alone is a true Poet, Orator,
Painter, Shoo-maker, Cobbler, Tailor, or that himself is good for everything,
and no body else good for any thing. That to kill a Swallow is not a less
villainy then Parricide. That it is as great a virtue to take a flea-biting
patiently, at it is to preserve ones Country by the most Gallant and Heroic
Actions. That there is as much prudence in lifting up your finger with
discretion, as in managing the Roman Empire. That he always has his will,
(...); Wish what you will, and you shall obtain what you wish: Like old
decrepid Iolaus in Euripides, that by the force of a wish, retrived his
youthful Vigor and Spritefulness, etc. After all which, you will think this a
Paradox indeed, (...), that it is impossible for a Stoic to be mad. So
Extravagant are their Principles, that Plutarch has made it the Title of one of
his Books, (...) That the Stoics talk more Extravagantly then the Poets. I
could quote you many places out of Lucian to this purpose against the Stoics,
but then it must only be to show you how well I am acquainted with his
Writings, for he is every where so abusive and bitter in his Satyrs, against
all sorts of Philosophers, that if his mouth be any slander, they must have
been a pack of the Vilest Villains that ever breathed, and upon that score I
shall wave his Testimony: To proceed therefore,

Whereas it was a Fundamental Principle of the Stoics, to esteem all things
out of the power of a man's own will, (...), nor good nor evil, and thence not
to reckon Health, Cheerfulness, good Name, Wealth, Friends, Sickness, Grief,
Disgrace, Poverty, Enemies, into the accounts of Good or Evil. The Platonists,
on the contrary, made their measures of Good and Evil, from the observations of
Sense and Experience; They therefore went not about to persuade themselves that
any accident, which they felt to be evil, was ere the less so, by being placed
beyond the reach and command of their own wills; but looking about into the
Nature of things, they first found that Man was a complex and multifarious
Being, integrated of Body and Soul, and so that his felicity could not be
consummate, if one constituent half of him was miserable: and then, that the
body was liable to a thousand foreign contingencies, which it is not in the
power of the mind of avoid, but yet that Virtue and Consideration, which have
the most immediate, and most diffused influence upon the repose and
satisfaction of mankind; derive entirely from within a man's self, and depend
not at all upon any external occurrencies; whence they concluded, that though
the biggest portions of our felicity be at our own disposals, yet that it must
be acknowledged that some of the smaller parcels thereof are left to Chance,
and uncertain Emergencies. And these they did not hope (with the Stoics) to
escape by a wilful senselesness and stupidity, like Posidonious, who when a
very importunate fit of the Gout attempted to interrupt his Harangue before
Pompey, cries out, Nihil agis dolor, quamvis sis molestus, nunquam consitebor
te malum esse; the most pathetical Expression of the acuteness of his pain!
But the course they took, was to purge their minds of froward popular humors,
and to sweeten them with mild and benign Principles; to moderate and command
their passions, to furnish themselves with prudence and experience, and then
whatever happened, to govern themselves by the Laws of Wisdom and Moderation:
Because, though all the Fountains of contentment are not within, nor do all our
joys issue from our own Bowels, yet they receive their chief tinctures thence:
and hereby almost all our happiness is prudently confined within the compass of
our own minds; for all intellectual endowments (which are our greatest
perfection, because they perfect and advance our highest faculties) depend upon
our selves, and when the mind is furnished with Virtue and Wisdom, it is able
to extract something beneficial to its own Interests, from the most malicious
accidents. For every thing having two ends as well as two handles; if a wise
man miss the one, he will not fail to hit the other; as he in Plutarch, who
throwing a stone at a dog, but hit his cursed Mother in Law, said, That he had
not mist his Mark. A Wise man having his Palladium deposited within his own
bosom, by whatsoever circumstances he is besieged, must needs be secure, if by
good, they minister to the delights of Temperance, if by bad, they are improved
to the interests of Patience and Contentedness; so that though a Wise man be
obnoxious to the spitful injuries of Fortune, and may be assaulted by foreign
calamities, yet his mind (his Fort-Royal) is impregnable, and in the midst of
all disappointments, its serenity shines as indisturbedly as the Lights of
Pharos in the midst of Storms and Tempests. Hereby you see that though many of
the ingredients of our happiness grow not within our selves, yet their
composition being at our disposal, it is easy, either to add to their good
qualities, or to allay their bad ones. But because herein consists the
Fundamental difference between the morality of the Academicks and Stoics, I
will endeavor to assert and illustrate it a little more clearly, by discussing
the main objecdtion of the Stoics; which is this,

If (say they) our satisfaction should depend upon foreign advantages, and any
part of our happiness should be beyond our power, then it being suspended on a
thousand uncertainties, it would both render Philosophy useless, and the
condition of mankind unavoidably calamitous and deplorable, in that no body can
be master of his own satisfaction, but must be forced to entrust it with so
blind and so uncertain a thing as Fortune, and so must needs be continually
liable to infinite misfortunes, and incessantly harassed with fears of loosing
those things, which are not more necessary to his happiness, then they are
uncertain and variable.

Though this objection be pregnantly answered by every man's Experience of
humane affairs, yet partly because it is the main Basis of Stoicism, and partly
because it reflects unhandsomely on the dealings of Providence, supposing that
mankind would be hardly dealt with, if all his Goods be not placed within the
confines of his own power, I shall endeavor to silence it for ever, which I
think may be done by these ensuing considerations.

1. That our Earthly happiness is never mere and unmixt, but when it is purest,
its diluted with some dashes of misery.

(...), Eurip.

(...).
Unallayed satisfactions are too Divine to be enjoyed any where, but where the
Divinity it self Resides: For as to the happiness of this life, there is no
one ultimate Object or summum Bonum, to the Acquisition whereof all other Goods
do but contribute as Intermedial Instruments, but every thing that Ministers to
our Contentment, is a Portion of our Sovereign Happiness, which is nothing
else but a man's present repose and satisfaction. I can not therefore but
commend that Principle of some of the Cyrenaicks, that neither expected, nor
pursued any other happiness in this life, beside what was to be found in every
single action and affair thereof. For all unanimously teach, that the
tranquillity and satisfaction of the mind, is the Sovereign happiness of this
life, and yet that is only an act of the mind exercised about its present
objects, and not any distinct object thereof: But the Creatures are not
replenished with that variety of perfections as to be able to gratify all our
Appetites, much less with that infinite fullness as to be able to satisfy them:
for alas! all Created Beings are but small fragments of perfection, which only
serve to support our Souls, till we arrive at the fruition of that Object,
whose Prerogative it is to be adequate and satisfactory to all our desires and
expectations. The Stoics then forget themselves, when they think an
impossibility of being certainly and entirely happy here, such an insupportable
Misery; when all things in this world are by the unalterable Laws of
Providence imperfect, variable, and subject to the Vicissitudes of Fortune. Now
Wise men, that consider the Nature and Inconstancy of things, will not design
to themselves more raised degrees of Blessedness, then the World can afford:
but will be content to be as happy as their own Capacities, and the present
Condition of things will permit and not fruitlesly aspire to heights of
felicity, which they can never reach.

2. Though some smaller parcels of our happiness be beyond the command of our
wills, yet the greater Portions thereof are not: for instance, all that in
which the Stoics place their whose felicity; and that is pregnant enough of
Tranquillity, to render our lives sedate and comfortable. What though some
appendages of our happiness are out of our own reach, if the main body thereof
be within it? Sure if Virtue be so Sovereign a good, as singly to complete our
felicity, it will be sufficient to support our repose in the absence of smaller
helps and assistances; Why then should they deem our estate so deplorable, when
we can be secure of our most important interests, though some lesser
concernments be left to the disposal of fortune

3. It Is in our power to alleviate and qualify those evils, which it is not in
our power to escape. What though I can not avoid Sickness, Poverty, and
Disgrace, yet I may by prudent reflection avoid being grieved at them, and may
improve them to the benefit of Virtue and Wisdom? The mould of a man's Fortune
is in his own hands, though the materials are not. Although a firm and
healthful habit of body be exceeding conducive to a cheerful Tenor of mind, yet
may I be cheerful without it, though I might have been much more so with it.
When I cannot suit events to my desires, I will suit my desires to them, I will
compromise with those grievances which I cannot shun, and those blows of
Fortune, I cannot ward off by Prudence, I will dead by meeting them with a
hardy courage and resolution. I know I cannot bend the Laws of nature of my own
will, there remains therefore no other remedy then that I sweeten and mollify
their rigor, by a cheerful and generous compliance with them, and so according
to that vulgar, but very wise saying, Make a Virtue of necessity: and so that
metal that is most solid and generous, is most malleable too. But (to dispatch)
methinks it becomes not a dull Apathist to object that we should be disquieted
with perpetual fears, if any parcel of our happiness should not be locked up
within our own breasts: sure he might resolve, when there remained no other
remedy, to cast himself into an insensible Apathy. How ever every man that
premeditates the nature and uncertainty of things, will neither be so stupid,
as to be surprised with any disaster, nor so silly as to double it by a
fruitless anxiety, but will make the best of his condition by prudence and
discretion.

2. A second thing for which I value the Platonists above all other
Philosophers, is the innocent Gayety and Pleasantness of their Humors. For
Whether I look into their Principles, or into their lives, I can see nothing
but what is calm and cheerful. For beside that their complexions were
generally brisk and spritely, the Genius of their Philosophy was free and
facetious. It being one of its main principles, That as God had provided
ineffable pleasures for good men in the next world, so he had made liberal
provisions for their entertainment in this, and consequently that this life
affords enough to please, though not to satisfy; whence they were willing to
enjoy all its innocent pleasures and sensualities, though they thought them not
of any great concernment to such as were furnished with capacities of rising
above it, and aspiring to heavenly delights. And thus you may see, how at the
same time a wise man may enjoy the world and despise it too. And from this
manly and Philosophic indifferency of life, resulted a handsome and generous
contempt of death, for they did not so much defy it, out of a dogged neglect
of life, as slite it out of a sober and Philosophic uncertainty, whether it
were better that they continued in their present happiness, or left it to enjoy
more pure and generous delights. This was the main ground of Socrates's
undaunted constancy in reference to death, because whether it were preferable
before life, (...), it was uncertain and ambiguous to all but God alone, as
Plato concludes his incomparable Apology. (...) (says Euripides) (...); Who
knows whether is life to live or dye? To die, is to be born into another world,
which every goodman may justly presume he shall find better then this. Though
the main reason, why they were so willing to bid adieu to this present Stage of
life, was an eager curiosity to be acquainted with the transactions and
Phoenomena of the next. And methinks, had I no other Rule to guide my self by,
then mere Philosophy, I could willingly play the Platonist in this particular:
For though I am neither valiant nor miserable, and am as yet in my green and
unexperienced years, and have tasted less of sensual delights, then (I believe)
any one placed in the same capacities and circumstances with my self (for I
have hitherto scarce employed any of my senses, but that of seeing) insomuch
that though my Palate be not surfeited and cloyed with the same repeated
relishes, nor my Eye quite weary of beholding the same repeated objects, yet I
could be highly content (upon the account of a Philosophic curiosity) to leave
this present Theater, that I might enter upon the next, for the delight of
being entertained with a new Scene of things. Socrates having been discoursing
of the condition In Apolog.
of good men after death adds (...), were I but sure of the truth of these
things, I would die a thousand deaths, for an experimental knowledge of them.
Besides the whole life of man is transacted in the short space of 24 hours, in
the rest of his age he does but tread the same Stage over and over, the same
businesses always returning in the same compass of time. Now any wise or
generous person, that shall but reflect upon the best spent day of his whole
life, will scarce find the business of it so enticing, as to make him over
greedy of more of it. But a man that has been running in this Round several
years, should (methinks) be so sick and weary of doing the same things over and
over, as to be willing to be at Rest, or at least to change his Employment; so
that though life be no misery, yet because there may be a satiety of it, deaths
a privilege. But for the Stoics (that I may continue the parallel with their
only Rivals in mortality) they founded their satisfaction upon a scornful and
Frierly contempt of every thing, and are so injurious to their Creator, as to
teach that he has provided nothing to entertain his Creatures with, but a few
such childish empty trifles, as grave men ( i. e. Stoics) should scorn to
taste, much less to feed upon. But though the Platonists are not so impious as
to think that God made the world vain, yet they are so wise and observing, as
to perceive that it has made it self so; and therefore I meet with no Sect
raised so much above the admired and gaudy trifles of the vulgar, as they, nor
any more confidently putting the worlds Pomp quite out of countenance by a
handsome and free-spirited disdain, then they; nor any less concerned in news,
and the little transactions of humane affairs; Nor any better entertaining
themselves with the various and odd humors of mankind, making daily Comedies
to themselves from the follies and little conceits of the inconsiderate many.
Thus the spangled and glittering Squire, who came to Athens very brave and
gallant, with a numerous train of Attendants, supposing himself fine enough to
be adored by the Athenians, and to be reputed at least a Demi-God, was by the
discreet and facetious Satyrs of the Platonic Philosophers laughed out of his
vanity, and reduced to discretion and sobriety. And thus the Platonist in
Lucian raises mirth to himself from the several Acts of the Play; now he laughs
at the Rich man's displaying his Purple, with his troublesome crowd of
poor-spirited Sycophants; anon pleasing himself with the disturbances and
foolish madness of the Horse-race; and then with those pretty passages which
happen at Funerals and making of Wills; next at the silly pleasures of great
Feasts and curious Entertainments; and then at the little tumults and odd
contingencys at the Baths, etc. But to conclude this head, the Platonists were
generous souls, that being raised above the little concernments and
under-Shreiveries of this life (as the Cardinals of Rome are pleased to style
all secular employments) sat as unconcerned spectators, looking down from
aloft, with pity and disdain, upon the odd Carriage of humane affairs. And
happy is he -- Celsa qui mentis ab arce
Despicit errantes, humanaque gaudia ridet.


For no Prospect is so pleasant and delightful to the mind of man, as when he
sees all the world below him, and beholds all others scrambling for aspiring to
those things which himself contemns and tramples upon.

3. The third good quality of the Platonists, was their valuing goodnature at
so high a rate, which though it be a constitution no less virtuous and
excellent, then it is charming and amiable, yet the estimate they set upon it
was proportionable to its real value. Whence resulted that exceeding delight
they took in the Society of ingenious and sweet-natur'd young Gentlemen, V.
Platonis Convivium.
upon which score they professed themselves as great Votaries to the Celestial
Venus, as common Mortals are to the Earthly one, for their Amors were not
kindled by lust and petulency (they being professedly the most generous
contemners of Women in the world) but were pure and cleanly enough to become
Angels and separated souls, Plato's Love-Laws forbidding to court any other
objects then abstracted and intellectual Beauties. And Plotinus makes it the
first ascent to wisdom, Ennead. 1. l. 3
to be affected with the mere proportions of Harmony abstracted from the
sensible sound, and to be enamored with the features of beauty, without
respect to the body, which they render beautiful. And yet hence some have taken
occasion to slander Plato himself (together with his incomparable master
Socrates) as guilty of that unnatural beastliness of the lustful Sodomites.
Although Plato at the end of his Convivium has said as much to remove all
suspicion from Socrates, as a matter of this nature is capable of. And himself
in his first book of Laws detests and strictly prohibits this (...)
dishonorable impurity as (...) a most unnatural impudence. But the
forementioned calumny had never gained any credit with us, had it not been
reported by some of the Ancient Fathers, and yet it is too notorious to
dissemble that they were not only very careless in their relations concerning
the Philosophers, being apparently guilty of innumerable (...), but also in
many Instances highly disingenious, insomuch that I find no Prose-writer to
agree so much with their reports as Lucian, whose main design it was to abuse
every body that was grave and sober. Which may a little appear by giving you an
account of the original and progress of the forementioned slander. The first
Authors then of this and other resembling reports were the Comick-Poets, who
were persons of a free, droling, and Satirical humor, and whose chief design
in their Comedies, was to abuse men with roguish and unlucky Stories; whatever
was their Argument, their Plot was always Satyr. They therefore who flourished
about the time of the Peloponesian War, when the government of Athens was
popular, were wont to traduce the great and rich men of the City: But when the
Grandees were grown too big to be brought upon the Stage (by the alteration of
the Government into an Aristocracy) they betook themselves to abuse former
Poets, and in that Age, Homer was sufficiently lashed; but afterward, when
Philosophy began to flourish, the Philosophers (upon every small quarrel that
happened between them and the Poets) were brought upon the Stage, and persecuted
with all their Satyrs. And thus this foul charge of Sodomy, wherewith Socrates
has been so loudly impeached, was nothing else but an abusive invention of
Aristophanes, who having an implacable picque against him, endeavored by all
means to render him both odious and ridiculous: For Socrates being of a grave
and severe humor did not a little dis-relish the vanity and looseness of the
Stage, whereupon Aristophanes the Poet Laureat of that Age, was so netled, that
he immediately left the old Comical Argument of droling upon former Poets, and
set himself to abuse the Philosophers, but especially Socrates, all whose
actions he continually persecuted with sharp and unlucky Satyrs. And therefore
whereas Socrates was wont to take home to himself, the most ingenious and
spritely Youths, he could meet with, to bestow upon them an Education
proportionable to their parts, Aristophanes (with too much foulness for any
Ingenuous Person) represents him as one that picked up the loveliest youths, to
the foulest and most beastly purposes. And whereas Socrates taught, that God
was to be sought after in Heaven, and not in their Images. Aristophanes
perstringes him as one that Worshipped the Clouds, and to this end he Wrote his
(...) only to abuse Socrates and his Gods. Neither did their Malice rest here,
but proceeded to Death and Banishment; for the Poets had the greatest hand in
the impeachment of Socrates; and Melitus, that was his most vehement Accuser,
was one of Aristophanes's Players. And a while after (about the CXX. Olimpiad)
one Sophocles, a Pragmatical Fellow of the Poetic Faction, procured a Decree
for the Banishment of all the Philosophers from Athens, which took effect, till
at length the Controversy being fairly debated before the Senate, the cause of
the Philosophers seemed so apparently innocent to them, that they immediately
caused the Decree to be cancelled, ordered that the Philosophers should be
speedily called home, and fined Sophocles five Talents. Now, though the Fathers
could never meet with any such filthy Relations in sober and impartial
Historians, yet because they apprehended (though very ineptly) that it made for
the Interest of Christianity, that the best men among the Heathens should be
but bad enough; rather then be destitute of competent Testimonies against
Socrates, (the most eminent instance of Ethnic Virtue) they would cite them
from such as were not only his Enemies, but Poets and Satyrists too; i. e. from
those who were not only obliged by their design to abuse all men, especially
the wiser and more serious sort, but also were incensed with a peculiar spite
and malice against him. Any one therefore that is acquainted with the Genius of
the Grecian Comedy in general, and with this now mentioned Contest of the
Philosophers and Comedians in particular, will be far from thinking their
Satyrs a sufficient Testimony against any man's morality. And therefore some of
our modern Critics are not very kind to the Philosophers, when they think a
good part of the Philosophic History is to be collected out of the Ancient
Comedians. Having consumed so many lines in Vindicating our Philosophers
chastity, I shall wave adding any farther Evidences of the goodness of their
Natures; only give me leave to throw in this single item thereof, that in the
Platonic History you may meet with more instances of true Philosophic and
Heroic Friendship, then in all the world beside. They were indeed generally
somewhat too fond of their Friends, and it was their expressing the offices of
Friendship and Goodnature (by way of Allusion) in amorous terms, that gave too
much ground for the forementioned slander.

And now (Sir) how much will this Excellent Quality recommend them to our
esteem, when we consider at how high a rate our Blessed Savior himself valued
it? If we look into his Laws, what are they but so many injunctions to the
several instances of good nature, Mildness, Patience, Mercifulness, Humility,
Candor, Ingenuity? His new and peculiar Precept is, That we should love one
another, and be kind not only to Friends, but Enemies. And therefore a peevish
ill-natured Christian, is the greatest contradiction in the World. Peevishness
being the greatest reproach and weakness of humane Nature, and most contrary to
the temper of the Divine Mind: So that they, who, not long since, were wont to
discourse, that the Saints or People of God ( i. e. That sort of people who can
be Devout and Godly, without being Virtuous) are indeed peevish here, but in
Heaven this imperfection shall be removed, might as well have told us, that the
Saints are Drunkards here, but in Heaven they shall be Temperate; the Saints
are Cheats and Knaves here, but in Heaven they shall be Honest; the Saints are
Adulterers here, but in Heaven they shall be Chaste; for an habitual Peevishness
is as inconsistent with the design of Christianity, as the sins of an habitual
dishonesty, Drunkenness, and Adultery. And then if we look into our Saviors
life, the unparalled civility and obligingness of his Deportment, seems to be
almost as high an Evidence of the Truth and Divinity of his Doctrine, as his
unparalled Miracles were; For it is altogether unimaginable that so
sweet-natur'd a Person should be such a base and profligate Impostor, as he
must have been, if he had been one. And among all his Favorites, it was the
Gentle and sweet-natur'd St. John that was his darling Disciple; whilst we
often find him checking Peter's rude and unmannerly Zeal.

But all this while, by good Nature, I do not barely design a sweet Complexion
and temperament of Body, (though that is an happy advantage to Virtue) but such
a Divine and Gracious temper of Mind as produces a sincere kindness and
benevolence toward all men. It Is the fairest Character and Imitation of the
Deity, that distributes his Bounty to all, and like his own Sun, shines upon
the Just and Unjust. It Is a Catholic Charity that enfolds the whole world in
the Arms of love and kindness. Only there are some persons of such pevish and
self confined Spirits, that will not suffer themselves to be embraced by those,
whose unbounded embraces equally comprehend all, and disdain to be but the
partial objects of an impartial Love. These men confine the displays of their
love and tenderness, within the narrow and contracted Circumference of a small
party, and Excommunicate the residue of Mankind as unworthy their charity, and
think it a great pollution to entertain any kind thoughts for any besides
themselves, confining the Elect within the walls of Rome or Geneva: Now against
such testy and irregular Spirits, the sweetest Natures have the greatest
Antipathies, not from any malice or bitterness against their Persons, but from
a true Zeal, for largness and ingenuity of Spirit, and a real hatred against
all those Pestilent qualities that tend to supplant or destroy it. Whence the
Blessed Jesus (who was the highest and most matchless Pattern of all the
Instances of Goodnature) was remarkably sharp and severe in his Invectives
against the Pharisees; because these Ill-natured Fellows despised and scorned
all that were not of their Sect, endeavoring to confine all Goodness to their
own Faction, and looking upon the rest of Mankind, as a rout of vile and
worthless Reprobates. Now, though our Savior could win and oblige Publicans
and Harlots, (persons of the most debauched and loosest lives) by his mild and
sweet Deportment, yet when He had to do with these holy Pharisaical Zelots, his
usual Language was, Ye Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, ye are of your Father
the Devil. There being nothing more hateful to God, then a high pretender to
Religion, void of Charity and true Goodness.

I have heard some men (of a bitter and envious Complexion, that have too much
Gall to have the Innocence of Doves, and that through the bitterness of their
own Spirits, cannot relish the sweetness of Goodnature) enveigh against the
advancing of Goodnature, as if it were a more neat and secret design of
undermining the Interests of Religion, and advancing those of Atheism. A
Calumny as absurd as it is impious: For how can that undermine Religion, which
is its prime intendment? Can any design be injured or defeated by its
intrinsic and proper end? And what more evident, then that one of the main
purposes of Christianity, is to sweeten and refine our Natures? What does our
Lawgiver more vehemently and frequently urge, then Meekness, Mercifulness,
Humility, and other resembling Instances of Goodnature? What bids greater
defiance to the genuine Spirit of Christianity, then rude, churlish, and
ungentile Peevishness? What more lovely in the Blessed Jesus then the sweetness
and obligingness of his Conversation? What did he ever more inveigh against,
then an uncivil and Pharisaical Zeal, howsoever otherwise sincere and cordial?
so that if to urge upon men the practice of Good-natured Qualities be to
supplant Christianity, then Christianity must supplant and contradict it self.

But men have unhappily of late Christened a sort of sulphurous and Fanatique
fire, by the name of Zeal: And when once their minds are tainted and enraged by
this hot devotional Zeal, it is as natural to them to be rude and base-natur'd,
as it is to Dogs and Tigres. Zeal is a fire in the Soul, which unless qualified
and slaked by meekness and a calm-nature, does not only prey upon the mind, and
devour its intellectual Powers, and inflame all the Passions, but its rage
breaks forth, and sets whole States and Kingdoms into a combustion, and reduces
the whole World to Ashes; the greatest Zealots always proving the greatest
Incendiaries; so that what Homer says of the Syrian Star, is not more true of
any thing then this fiery Zeal, (...), Iliad. (...).

(...).


4. A fourth pre-eminence of the Platonists (that I may insist on no more) is
their readiness and ability in the smaller Morals, by which I mean their skill
in all the Arts of behavior and conversation. For though I have sufficiently
experienced a modest shamefacedness, and uncoothness in ceremonial addresses,
to be the natural and unavoidable results of privacy, (as all Metals contract
rust by lying) yet the Platonists, notwithstanding their contemplative
retiredness, were not inferior to the most polished Courtiers, in the neatness
and complaisance of their Deportment. Which I am apt to ascribe chiefly to the
readiness and pregnancy of their Fancies; for though a sound and steady
Judgment (which rarely goes in company with subtle and flashy imaginations) is
the most useful and commanding ability in business, yet it is the quick and
spritely fancy that takes and commands most in converse. A strong ready wit,
with a bold and plausible Tongue, shall win more respect and reputation, then
all other more valuable and emproving accomplishments, if wanting these
advantages. Besides, they did not spend all their time and diligence in
Bookishness, which renders Scholars soft, silly, unexperienced things, but
proposing to themselves ability and judgment in business, as one main end of
Study; they rather used their Learning, then admired it, according to that
Aphorism of my Lord Bacon, Crafty men contemn studies, simple men admire them,
and wise men use them. But the main ground of their good-meen, was their being
blessed with all the advantages of nature and education. Were it not too tedious
to run through the whole succession of the Academy from the first rise thereof
to its utmost period, it would not be difficult to represent to you, how every
member thereof superinduced to a pure complexion, and a gentile education the
advantages of Travel and severe Study; and what more could be desired to
complete them in all the Realities and Ornaments of Humane Nature? As Plato
himself was of so well-tempered a complexion, that he chose an unhealthy place
of residence, for a check and revulsion to his too high and luxuriant habit of
Body, and yet lived to a great age unacquainted with sickness and diseases, and
at last this Socratick Swan expired insensibly in a pleasant contemplation: Est
etiam (says Cicero) quietae and purae atque eleganter actae aetatis placida ac
lenis senectus, qualem accepimus Platonis, qui uno and octuagessimo aetatis
anno scribens mortuus est. And then for his Parentage, though I do as little
credit that he was begot either by Apollo or by a Spectre in his shape, as I do
that he was born of a Virgin Mother (and yet both are reported by many Authors,
and seem to be believed by more) yet it is past doubt that his extraction was
from two of the most Ancient and most Noble Families in Athens, his Mother
Perictione being of the race of Solon, and his Father Aristo of the Family of
the Codri. And then for his Education he was no Athenian Cockney, but was
Socrates's darling favorite, Traveled into all parts of the Learned World,
resided a considerable time in the Court of Dionysius, where he was both
admired and envied by the Courtiers for the unaffected Gracefulness of his
addresses, and some say the reason why he received so bad usage from the
Tyrant, was that he excelled him so far in all the Arts and charms of
conversation, that he seemed to be almost as much respected and admired as
himself. For he knew how to be facetious without being vain or trifling, and
how to be serious without being sour or morose, his behavior was always mild
and courteous, his humor always cheerful and uniform, and his gravity at an
equal distance from moroseness and vanity; to be brief, he was entirely adorned
with all the accomplishments that can command either love or honor. And then
for Plotinus, his deportment (as Porphyrie relates in his life) was so gentile
that his Audience was composed of a confluence of the Noblest and most
Illustrious Personages in Rome; his integrity so eminent, that he was deputed
over-seer to most of their Wills, and Arbitrator in most of their
Controversies, and yet managed all with that Candor, Prudence, and Sincerity,
as that he neither lost one Friend, nor Purchased one Enemy in five and twenty
years Residence at Rome, For the rest of his life consult Porphyrie and
Eunapius. For the life of Porphyrie, I refer you to Eunapius, but yet I cannot
omit this single instance of the goodness of his humor, that after an
obstinate conflict, and many reiterated controversial Rencounters with Amelius,
as soon as he was convinced that Truth and Amelius stood together, he neither
scrupled to make a Public Recantation then, nor to record it to Posterity,
that himself was bafled (as he has done in the Life of Plotinus) then which we
scarce know a greater instance of an Heroic Candor. For Proclus consult his
Scholar Marinus the Neopolitan, and Philostratus the younger De vitis
Sophistarum (I say the younger, because he was Nephew to him that wrote the
History of Apollonius Tyanaeus, though they be usually confounded upon the
Authority of that careless Rhapsodist Suidas, who has been the Author of
infinite other resembling mistakes) lastly consult Eunapius for the lives of
AEdesius, Iamblicus, Sopater, (Constantines unhappy favorite) Eustathius, and
his eminent wife Sosipatra (of whom so many strange stories are reported,)
Crispus one of Iulian's Courtiers, a man of eminent prudence and policy,
Oribasius, Iulians Physician, Maximus and Chrysanthius his great Favorites,
the former whereof, was an eminent Courtier, during the time of Iulian's Reign,
and afterward (I fear too much) an instance of Christian Cruelty and Revenge;
though the generous Chrysanthius could never be courted from his Philosophic
retirements by all the Emperors importunity: Proaeresius, who was so famous an
Orator, that the City of Rome erected to him a public Statue of Brass with
this inscription, Regina Rerum Roma, Regi Eloquentiae. Hephaestion, Himerius,
Libanius, Nymphidianus, etc. and you will find them such a succession of
Gentile, Virtuous, and Generous Persons, that the Ethnic world cannot show the
like. To these I might add the novel restorers of Platonism; for as the
Platonic succession expired not long after the reign of Julian, having
received its mortal wound from Constantine, who dissolved their Schools and
dispersed their Professors; so about the fourteenth Centurie, it began to
revive and to wrestle with Aristotle's Philosophy: for some of the Grecian
Prelates, that then sat in the Council of Florence (called to reconcile the
Greek and the Latin Churches) seeing all other Philosophy quite dashed out of
Countenance in these Western Parts by the Aristotelian, they were not a little
zealous to restore that of Plato, whence arose the disputes between Georgius
Trapezuntius, and Georgius Scholarius on the behalf of Aristotle, and Bessarion
Bishop of Nice, (made Cardinal for his eminent services in the Council) and
Gemistus Pletho on the behalf of Plato. But Pletho getting into favor with
Laurentius Cosmo the great Duke, inspired him with such a mighty zeal for the
Platonic Philosophy, that he immediately devoted young Ficinus (Son to one of
his chiefest Phisicians) to its Restoration, and educated him accordingly; and
invited that worthy Hero Johannes Picus the Earl of Mirandula, Georgius
Vespusius, Christophorus Landinus, Angelus Politianus, and others to Florence,
where they erected an Academie. Which, with much more, you may meet with in the
extant Epistles of the Earl of Mirandula, Marsilius Ficinus, and Angelus
Politanus. But I proceed, though the Platonists could Artificially conform
their Behavior to the more refined and Gentile sort of Men, yet as for that
salvage Beast, the Popular Rout, they valued no more to please them, then to
gratify Wolves or Tigres; for really (Sir) folly is so molded into the
Constitution of the common and mechanical sort of men, that that Philosopher
must be well-nigh as absurd as they, who supposes them capable of wisdom, when
they have scarce wit or judgment enough to think a thought, that is not inept
and ridiculous. Their childish and froward humor is not unhandsomely displayed
by Charon. All that they think is Vanity, all that they say is false and
erroneous; that they reprove is good, that they approve is naught; that which
they praise is infamous, that which they do and undertake is folly. So that
it is not possible for any man, who aspires to wisdom, to condescend to any
compliance with their base and absurd humors. And therefore these Sons of
wisdom were ^egardless of them, as of Apes and Baboons.

But now for the Stoics, their Conversation was insolent and supercilious,
their looks affected and artificial, their Deportment was such a sour and
morose behavior, as the vulgar style gravity. And I think Josephus was not
much mistaken, when he described the rude and ill-natured Pharisees by
comparing them with the Stoics, (...) (says he, describing his own Sect)
(...). For as the supercilious Pharisees accounted their own Sect the only
School of Sanctity, so the Stoics esteemed themselves the only Sons of
wisdom, and all others Children, Fools, and Madmen. I might both evidence these
things by several particular instances, and add several other Prerogatives of
the Platonic Morality, but because I fear I have more need to beg your pardon
for having been already so tedious, I shall only tell you, that you may find
the fairest and exactest Idea and Picture thereof in the Life and Precepts of
Socrates, the several lineaments of which lie scattered and diffused in Plato's
Writings, but are pretty handsomely collected into one Table in a late French
discourse of Mr. Iulien Davion, Entitled, Le Crayon du Christianisme en la
Philosophy de Socrate.

And now I proceed to the ne^^ ^art of my Task, their Logic, of which my
censure is briefly this, That as Plato's manner of arguing is more succinct
then the tedious way of Syllogising, so it is not less sure and evident; for
what discourse can proceed with greater evidence and conviction, then after you
have explained the Terms of the Question, and agreed with your Adversary about
the matter debated of, to propose to him some Principles so clear and palpable,
that they shall either presuppose or enforce his assent, and from thence to
lead him by Induction through a series of propositions depending upon and
orderly deduced from your first Proleptick Principles, till he is fairly
brought or unawares betrayed into an unavoidable necessity of assenting to the
Truth you assert? Which is the method that Plato pretends to. I must confess
that arguing by Syllogismes is more suitable to Youths and Novices in Reason,
but it is far more Elegant and Manly, to manage a few short Interrogatories
with that dexterity and strength of Reason, as thereby to distress your
Adversary so far, as to force him either to Seal to your Opinion, or to retract
his own former concessions: For in the former Method, the Disputant moves on by
slow Progressions, and takes a great compass about to approach and get up to
his Enemy; but in the latter his motion is quick and nimble, and the engagement
so direct and smart, that it cannot be closely pursued, but by Persons very
expert and knowing in the Art and Laws of Reasoning.

But some that make the best Laws, are not always their best observers. Thus
though Plato's discoursings about practical matters are exceeding handsome and
pertinent, yet when he treats of speculative Notions, his rules of arguing
could not be more strict, close, and exact, then his Argumentations were wide,
In his Plato Exotericus.
lose, and incoherent: When Patricius confidently asserts Plato's
demonstrations in his Parmenides to be so strong and undeniable, Ut nullae
tales apud Mathematicum ullum reperiantur; I commend his confidence, but dare
not contradict his assertion, because I think it unhandsome to contradict in a
matter, which I dare not be very confident I understand. But when Cardinal
Bessarion asserts, Adv. Calum. l. 1. c. 5.
Totum Platonis Timaeum ex syllogismis demonstrativis constare; I who have read
over that discourse with as much caution and attention as I could, dare (by the
Cardinals leave) pronounce that there is not one demonstrative syllogism in
the whole Book; nay that there is not one true and valid Argument, but that the
whole discourse is weak and incoherent: And (to speak out plainly) that Person
will much oblige me, that shall direct me to one material ratiocination about
speculative Theories in all Plato's Writings, where I cannot show him some
manifest flaw or other. For they either (1.) bottom upon uncertain and
inevident Principles, as they generally do; but because there can be no
certainty in the conclusion, without a certainty in the premises, and the
certainty of intermediate propositions depends upon the first, if that be
uncertain, the whole trayn of Inferences deduced from it, (though aptly
connected to each other) must needs be so too. Or else (2.) they are circular,
as in his Meno he bottomes the Souls Reminiscency of those Ideas, it conversed
with in a former state, upon its presupposed Immortality; and yet in his
Phaedo, he fairly argues for the Souls Immortality from its presupposed
Reminiscency. And any one that peruses his Writings warily, will find them to
abound with infinite such Circles. Or (3.) he wanders into matters remote and
impertinent to the Subject and Argument of his Discourse, roving into disputes
of a quite distant nature from the Question in debate; or beating about through
wild, intricate and uncertain Ambages, or taking a wide and tedious compass to
pursue and drive a trivial word into its proper signification. Though perhaps
this charge will admit of an Apology. Because most of his disputes were
managed against the Sophists of that age, who made it their whole business to
maintain wrangles by tricks and shifts of words, and therefore whoever
undertook to dispute against them, must of necessity be engaged in word
quarrels. And hence it was that Plato does almost every where take such large
compasses merely to vindicate the signification of a single word against their
idle cavils, and though sometimes he may pursue his task presly and coherently,
yet because of the small importance of the matter debated of, his discourse
must needs be both very tedious and not very profitable. Or else (5.) there is
some flaw and incoherence in some of the intermediate propositions, which must
needs mar the chain of his whole Discourse: For the certain knowledge of
Consequences is only conditional, and supposes the Truth of Premises, so that
where any Proposition is false, there the coherence ceases, and all conclusions
that follow it are absurd, because incoherent. But if I should give you a
Catalogue of his Circular arguings, incoherences, contradictions,
non-consequences, and all other violations of the Laws of Reasoning, I must
send you a Volumn as vast as his. And besides it would not be less fruitless
then tedious, and might seem to aim at no other design, but merely his
disparagement. But yet that you may not suspect me of rashness in drawing up so
big a charge against so eminent a person without being able to back it with a
proportionable evidence, I suppose it will not be impertinent to give you a
competent proof of it, if I can perform it without being tedious. Which may be
done by proposing one instance and referring you to an Author, that will supply
you with infinite more, if you think it worth the while to examine them. The
Instance I shall give you, is the known and famous Argument for the Souls
Immortality in his Phaedrus. (...). The sense of which words is fully and more
plainly contained in this Analysis, The Soul is always in motion; that which is
always in motion, is self moving; that which is selfmoving, is never deserted
of it self; that which never deserts it self, never ceases to move; that which
never ceases to move, is the source and origin of all motion; that which is
the source of all motion has no beginning; and that which has no beginning can
have no ending. To omit that every Proposition is either false, or uncertain,
or incoherent, as your self will easily observe, judge whether we are not
likely to have a mighty proof of the Souls immortality, when it must be
resolved into its own self-subsistence.

The Author I shall refer you to, is Johannes Baptista Crispus his Quinarius
Primus de Ethnicis Philosophis caute Legendis. It Is a Book of no small bulk,
containing above 500 pages in folio, and yet the main business of it is to
display the defectiveness of Plato's arguings: Where you may be supplied with
infinite apparent and palpable instances thereof if you will be at the pains to
read and consider them. We might possibly have had a better account in
Theopompus his Book (...), of which thus Athenaeus 11. 15. (...). Theopompus in
his Book against the Platonic Discipline and Institution, maintains that a
great many of Plato's Dialogues are trifling and false, and that many others of
them are stolen out of the Discourses of Aristippus, or Antisthenes, or Bryson
of Heraclea.

After this brief account of Plato's Logic, I come now to his Natural
Philosophy, in which I shall endeavor all possible brevity, because this
part, as well as the former, does not so directly concern my present design,
the intendment of my charge being chiefly against his Natural Theology. But
that my Discourse may be entire in all its parts, and regular in its method, I
shall to my account of his Logic cast in this of his Physiologie. Which will
be sufficiently displayed and disparaged too, by telling you that in its main
strokes it accords with the Aristotelean Philosophy; a parallel between them
was asserted and demonstrated by Ammonius, Porphyrie, Hierocles, V. Phot.
eclog. CCLI.
and others of the sacred succession among the Ancients, and among Modern
Writers has been attempted by Foxius, Carpentarius, Marronius, Buratellus and
others. The Retail of instances you may see in them, but he that tells you in
gross that they agree in one Principle, by which alone they solve all the
appearances and productions of Nature, tells you all. For as Aristotle resolves
all Phenomenon into his Forms, (which he starts from the Bosom of matter) so
Plato solves all by the Soul of the Universe and Ideas, (which in Greek are all
one with Forms.) For the Mechanical Hypotheses having been probably advanced to
a considerable Grandeur by Leucippus and Democritus (of whom Plato makes not
any mention in all his Writings) and other Ancient Vertuosi, these two great
and ambitious Wits, Plato and Aristotle, designing a Philosophical Empire to
themselves scorned to be so meanly employed, as only to improve other men's
principles, and therefore endeavored to amuse the world with new ones, which
they knew others could as little confute, as themselves could prove, by reason
of their obscurity and remoteness from sense. How little Aristotle intended his
Forms should be understood is already infinitely notorious, and how little mind
Plato had that it should be ever known what kind of Thing his Universal Soul
is, is as notoriously apparent from his descriptions of it, which are nothing
else but some odd fantastic Schemes of numerical figures and proportions, as
you may see in both the Timaeus's; where it is highly pleasant to read how
seriously he prescribes the Method of its Composition out of numerical
Ingredients. Take (says he) all the numbers which make up Musical proportions,
as Diapasons, Diapente's, Diatesserons, and an infinite number more, but be
especially careful not to omit the double (...), that which arises by even
proportions, as 1, 2, 4, 8, etc. and that whose proportions run into odd
numbers, as 1, 3, 9, 27, etc. Mix and pound them together with all possible
exactness, and if you find any void spaces between the even and odd numbers,
fill them with the smallest (...) (which are some very fine and minute
fragments) and when you have wrought all exceeding exactly into the shape of
the Letter I, divide it in the middle long ways into two equal parts, cross
them in the form of the Letter X, and be sure to fasten them very strongly at
the Commissure, and then bow all four joints, till at length you make them so
pliable, as to bring them into a Spherical figure, and then it is brought to a
right Animary Temper and Harmony. If this description (to what ever purpose
it is designed) be not prodigiously silly and ridiculous, pray tell me what is.
And yet this senseless insignificant Jargon is made the sole and intimate
Principle of all Natural Events. All Motions, Generations, Corruptions,
Alterations, Sympathies, Antipathies, the properties of Bodies, the figure of
the Heavens, the systeme of the Stars, the motions of the Planets, Eclipses,
Comets, Meteors, The roundness of the Earth, the Flux and Reflux of the Sea,
the Original of Rivers and Fountains, the Generation of Winds, Thunder,
Lightning, Clouds, Rain, Hail, Snow, Ice, Dew, Petrification, the wonders of
the Magnet, the Generation and Transmutation of Metals, the Powers and
Specific Virtues of Plants, the Variety of Animals, their Origin, their
Shapes, their Nutrition, their Faculties, The Qualities of the Elements, Heat,
Cold, Gravity, Levity, Fluidity, Firmness, Rarity, Density, Perspicuity,
Opacity, Hebetude, Subtilty, Smoothness, Asperity, Hardness, Softness,
Stubbornness, Flexibility, Light, Colors, Sounds, Tastes, Smells, and all other
Phenomenon of Nature are only so many Tricks of this Magical kind of Soul. If I
could have satisfied my self it had been to any purpose, I should have given
you an account of his enormous absurdities in all the forementioned
particulars, as they are discoursed of in his Timaeus, which contains the whole
Body of his Natural Philosophy. But I shall beg your leave to dismiss this
Theme, partly because none have more professedly disclaimed the Platonic
Physiologie, then they that stickle most for his other Whimsies, partly because
the Aristotelian Philosophy having been of late so shamefully bafled, this
which agrees so much with it in its main Principles, and more in its Genius,
must of necessity perish together with it, and so will as little need as
deserve any particular confutation; partly because their Physiologie is well
nigh purely Theological; The Platonists always Treating of (...). as Proclus
observes; so that in ventilating and sifting their Theology, I must also of
necessity discuss their Natural Philosophy, which is every where so intimately
mingled with it; but chiefly because I am lately grown such a despairing
Sceptick in all Physiological Theories, that I cannot concern my self in the
Truth or Falsehood of any Hypotheses. For though I prefer the Mechanical
Hypotheses before any other, yet me thinks their contexture is too slight and
brittle to have any stress laid upon them; and I can resemble them to nothing
better then your Glass drops, from which, if the least portion be broken, the
whole Compages immediately dissolves and shatters into Dust and Atoms; for
their parts, which rather lie then hang together, being supported only by the
thin filme of a brittle Conjecture (not anneal'd by experience and observation)
if that fail any where, the whole Systeme of the Hypothesis unavoidably
shatters: And how easy a thing it is to spoil the prettiest conjecture, is
obvious to the most vulgar observer. The chief reason therefore, why I prefer
the Mechanical and Experimental Philosophy before the Aristotelean, is not so
much because of its so much greater certainty, but because it puts inquisitive
men into a method to attain it, whereas the other serves only to obstruct their
industry by amusing them with empty and insignificant Notions. And therefore we
may rationally expect a greater Improvement of Natural Philosophy from the
Royal Society, (if they pursue their design) then it has had in all former
ages; for they having discarded all particular Hypotheses, and wholly addicted
themselves to exact Experiments and Observations, they may not only furnish the
World with a complete History of Nature, (which is the most useful part of
Physiologie) but also lay firm and solid foundations to erect Hypotheses upon,
(though perhaps that must be the work of future Ages:) at least we shall see
whether it be possible to frame any certain Hypotheses or no, which is the
thing I most doubt of, because, though the Experiments be exact and certain,
yet their Application to any Hypotheses is doubtful and uncertain; so that
though the Hypothesis may have a firm Basis to bottom upon, yet it can be
fastened and cemented to it no other way, but by conjecture and uncertain
(though probable) applications, and therefore I doubt not but we must at last
rest satisfied with true and exact Histories of Nature for use and practice;
and with the handsomest and most probable Hypotheses for delight and Ornament.

And now I pass over to the main design of these Papers, which is to give an
account of the Platonic Theology: The Civil Part whereof, viz. That which
concerns their Public Worship, I shall omit, For all the Religious
Observations of their Country being trifling, obscene, or inhumane, their
temporising Conformity to them, stands upon Record as one of their greatest
Blemishes: Though it must be confessed that the Platonists were of all men the
greatest Refiners and Improvers of Helenisme; instead of rude and barbarous
Usages, introducing civil and more modest Ceremonies. And yet the latter
Platonists, or second School of Plato, degenerated into the basest and foulest
Superstition, being the greatest Patrons of Theurgical Rites and Magical Arts,
or rather Iugling Tricks, (for whatever they were, they could be no better)
especially those of them that did most Pythagorise, As Apollonius Tyanaeus,
that grand stickler for Ethnicisme; Iamblicus, one of their Famousest Devoto's;
Iulianus the Syrian, Surnamed Theurgus, from his Eminent knowledge and agility
in Magical Tricks, were great Zealots for the Pythagorean Philosophy. But if
you look into Eunapius, you will see, that not only these, but the Emperor
Julian, Porphyrie, Maximus, Libanius, Amelius, Sopater, AEdesius, Chrysanthius,
and others were Zealous Asserters of this Magical kind of Juggling, chiefly (as
it is supposed) to confront the Christian Religion, and the Miracles on which it
stood. But I forbear to prosecute this Theme, my intention being not to
discourse of their public and political actions, but only of their private
sentiments.

Their Theology then consisted of two parts; Practical, or that which concerns
Theological Virtues; and Speculative, or that which concerns speculations about
Theological matters. Which two parts integrate a Body of Divinity not unlike to
that of King Ptolomies man in Lucian, who was one half perfectly black, and the
other exceeding white; so that part of their Theology, which relates to
practice, is eminently clear and perspicuous, whilst that which is employed in
Theorie and Contemplation is monstrously dark and obscure. This latter I shall
endeavor to evince more largely in the sequel of my discourse; but for a brief
evidence of the first, take this short Catalogue of their Sentiments concerning
Religion, which are such as these.

Its main design is to perfect and dignifie humane Nature, it is consonant to
our Natural Reasons, complies with our Natural Necessities, relieves our
Natural Wants. It consists in living up to our Faculties, and acting as becomes
Rational Beings; In clearing the Soul from prejudices and prepossessions, and
pursuing Truth with an honest and impartial Simplicity: In following the
Conduct of Reason, and being confident in its Guidance, seeing the Condition of
him that does so is as secure, as it is certain that Infinite Goodness cannot be
angry with him, that has endeavored with all faithfulness and diligence to
know and do his Duty. It resides in the Mind and Spirit, not in Customs and
bare Ceremonies. It is Free and Ingenuous, not Slavish and Troublesome, because
it flows from a true Love of God and Goodness. It is truly Noble and Generous,
and requires of us to act suitable to the Dignity of rational Beings, to keep
up the Splendor and Grandeur of our Natures, and to scorn any Action that is
unhandsome, or unworthy our Station and Quality: It commands us only to live
like Men, and forbids us nothing but what makes us Brutes or Devils. It teaches
us to imitate and resemble the Divine Perfections, to be God-like in Wisdom,
and Justice, and Goodness, in Meekness, and Pity, and Clemency, in Kindness and
Patience, in forgiving Injuries, and Pardoning Enemies, in doing hurt to no
Man, and doing good to every Man. It interdicts us not any Innocent Delights,
but only restrains the Extravagancies of our Passions and Appetites. It is the
most conducive Instrument in the world to the pleasures of both Mind and Body;
Infelicities (though Providence were banished the World) being the Spontaneous
Issues of Vile Practices; and Sin the Natural Womb of Punishment; it therefore
permits (unless in some special contingencies) all Corporeal Pleasures, as far
as they are healthful and pleasant, and debars us of no delights, but those
that are destructive of the Tranquillity of our Minds, or Indolency of our
Bodies. It produces a sweet and gracious temper of Mind, that causes an
universal benevolence and kindness to Mankind. It makes us Affable, Humble,
Courteous, Charitable, Moderate, Prudent, Unpassionate. It consists of Love,
Candor, Ingenuity, Clemency, Patience, Mildness, and all other Instances of
Goodnature. It detests nothing more then a Peevish, Froward, Morose, Uncivil,
Passionate, Furious, Talkative, Fanatic Zeal. It begets a true Liberty and
Freedom of Spirit. It Exempts us from all effeminate Fears and Scruples, and
begets the greatest Serenity and Cheerfulness of Mind. It instructs us to dread
no Evil from God, but to look upon Him as an infinitely Gracious and Benign
Being, that designs nothing more then the happiness and perfection of his
Creatures; that Transacts with Mankind by gentle and paternal Measures, and
that is so far from tying upon us Niceties and Scruples, that he pities our
Infirmities, and bids us to concern our selves only about plain and palpable
Duties. It is the most spritely and vivacious thing in the world, driving away
all sad and gloomy Melancholy, begetting in us a firm and rational Confidence,
and the ineffable joys of a good Conscience. It advances the Soul to its Just
Power and Dominion, and enables it to govern all Corporeal Appetites, and
therefore enjoins us above all things to shun Intemperance, not only for its
own Intrinsique Baseness, but for its mischeivous Effects; because it naturally
so debauches and dulls our Reasons, as to disable them for all good and
virtuous Actions. For Religion is pure, cleanly and spiritual; but an
intemperate sensuality is nasty, sottish, and makes the mind of man cheap and
foolish, and unapt for any thing that is Manly, Generous, and Rational, and so
is the greatest Impediment to all the ends and Exercises of Religion, which
directly tends to the enobling of our Natures, the fortifying of our Reasons,
the subduing of all our lower and sottish Appetites, the advancing of our manly
and intellectual Abilities, in any thing that renders us less like Beasts, and
more like men. But as for Intemperance, that does by a natural necessity besot
and weaken the vigor of our Reasons, and so directly thwart all the ends of
Religion, for it either stupifies or enrages our Spirits, either stuffing our
Bodies with dull, watery, and flatulent humors, or putting their Ferments into
irregular and extravagant motions. I have often known a rude, wild, dissolute,
choleric, ungovernable Spirit enter into persons (otherwise of a well-inclin'd
Complexion) by no other way then a wide and devouring Throat. To conclude, our
work in this World is to see that the (...) maintain its own Authority against
all the assaults of rude and barbarous Passions; that it tame and civilize that
wild and salvage Beast, to which Providence has tied it, that by a complete
Victory over all ignoble and unhandsome motions of the brutish Faculties, it
may be in a manner restored to the condition of a pure and intellectual Being;
and so be capacitated to relish the joys proper to God and Spiritual Natures,
for we are not capable of that degree of Felicity which they enjoy, till our
Souls are rendered so by proportionate degrees of Purity and Holiness; for the
happiness of Heaven is pure and intellectual, and therefore our minds are
purged here from all feculencies of matter, that they may be fitted and
qualified to relish its Enjoyments; so that when the vigorous Energy of the
Soul has melted down all the drossy parts of sluggish and unweildy matter, and
is become (...) God-like, and purely spiritual, then it shall mount up into the
Regions of Bliss and Happiness, and shall be admitted into an intimate converse
and union with the Divine Nature, and shall live in the Ravishing
Contemplations and Embracings of uncreated Beauty, and bathe its dilated
Faculties in the full streams of Infinite Goodness, and Sun it self in the
Invigorating Beams of Light and Love, and spend a whole Eternity in the
blissful Acts of Love, and Joy, and Peace, and every thing that can procure or
increase its happiness. By all which, you easily discern that Religion is no
Arbitrary Exaction, but Wise and Rational, and of natural necessity to perfect
and refine our Natures, to raise and purify our Minds, to prepare and fit us
for a higher and more Divine Condition, the Soul being not capable or fit
without it to enjoy the pleasures of God and Heaven.

And now I descend to their Speculative or Metaphysical Theology, which the
Platonists style Divine; The Peripateticks Primitive Philosophy; and include
in it that which they call Sapience or Metaphysics; so that I shall not
confine my self to matters merely Theological, but shall take in all the
general Principles of Science; especially because I do not intend a pursuit of
all particular Disputes, (for that would be an endless undertaking) but only
some such General Exceptions, as though they may have a more direct aspect on
Metaphysical Speculations, yet may concern their Philosophy in gross, and cast
an oblique look upon all its other parts, This premised, I proceed

1. The first thing therefore, against which I except, is their way of
resolving knowledge into its first and fundamental Principles; in that by
rejecting the Testimony and Judgment of sense in matters of Philosophy, they
do but involve and perplex the Principles thereof, under the pretext of a more
abstracted and intellectual discovery of things: For hereby the minds of men
are taken off from the native Evidence of plain and palpable Truths, and are
fain to ground all their knowledge upon nice and subtle Speculations, whereby,
at least, clear and unquestionable Truths are resolved into Principles
infinitely more uncertain and disputable then themselves. And that the
Platonic way of resolving knowledge is justly chargable herewith, needs no
other proof then barely to represent it. They then suppose that the Truth of
all Beings consists in a conformity to their Archetypal Ideas, whereby they
mean some General Patterns, by which all the Individuals of each species are
framed, so that to investigate the Nature of things, we must endeavor to know
the Resemblance they have to their Originals; and that therefore to reflect
upon these, and to consider their agreement with sensible things, is the only
way to attain a certain knowledge of the Natures of the things themselves. And
therefore Plato concludes the Omniscience of the first Mind, from the
supposition that it is furnished with the Ideas of all things. And that Mankind
might be in a capacity of knowing the Natures of things, he asserts that God
has hanged a multitude of these little Pictures of himself and all his
Creatures in every man's understanding, that by attending to them, he might
direct himself in his Conceptions and Notions of the things themselves; and
that herein alone consists the Nature of true Science; In Timao.
and therefore the only difference he assigns between Science and Opinion, is,
that the one attends to these unchangable Ideas, but the other to the uncertain
and variable Reports of sense. And in another place, In Epist. ad Dionis Amicos.
discoursing more particularly of this Notion; to the Science of a thing he
requires a threefold knowledge, viz. of its Name, of its Definition, and of its
Picture, which last he asserts to be the chief cause of knowledge, and
instances in a Circle, to the true Science whereof, it is necessary that we know
by what name to express it, and then its Definition, that it is a figure, whose
parts are every where equally distant from the Center; and lastly, that it be
represented to us by some visible figure; which, says he, gives us a far more
solid knowledge of the nature of a Circle then the other two; and is that which
advances our knowledge from Opinion to Science: Now (continues he) the same use
that these delineations have in Mathematical Theories, Idea's have in Physical
Speculations, as therefore we best understand what a Circle is by looking upon
its Delineated Figure, so the surest knowledge, we can have of the Natures of
things, is gotten by contemplating their Ideal Pictures or Images engraven on
our understandings.

But first, methinks this fetching of Principles and Proleptick Notions out of
the mind of Man, is the same thing, as to anatomise the eye to search for the
first Principles and Postulata of Optics: For as it is the Nature and Office of
the Eye to contemplate and observe those objects with which it is presented, and
thence to frame Optical Rules and Maxims, so it is of the mind to speculate and
consider those things, which are any way conveyed to its notice, and thence to
make general Rules and Observations, which after an exact scrutiny and
comparison of every individual, are justly admitted for Proleptick and
fundamental Verities: so that general Axioms are only the results and
abridgments of a multitude of single Experiments; thus from the plain
experience and observation of all mankind was framed that unquestionable
Maxim, That the whole is greater then its parts, because they saw and found it
was so in all individual Bodies in the world, and the Reason why all men assent
to it at the first proposal, is because they cannot look abroad, but they are
presented with innumerable instances thereof, every visible thing in the world
being a whole compounded of parts sensibly smaller then it self. Now to what
purpose should Providence imprint such obvious and apparent Notices as this
upon the minds of Men, when as but to open our eyes, is enough to discover
their undoubted Truth and Evidence? A man that has animadversive Faculties, has
as little need to be minded of such obvious and apparent Certainties, as a man
that has his Eyes in his head, has to be taught that there is a Sun in the
Heavens. But suppose that we were born with these congenite Anticipations, and
that they take Root in our very Faculties, yet how can I be certain of their
Truth and Veracity? For it is not impossible but the seeds of Error might have
been the natural Results of my Faculties, as Weeds are the first and natural
Issues of the best Soyles, how then shall we be sure that these spontaneous
Notions are not false and spurious? Now the only way to be fully satisfied of
their Truth and Sincerity, is to examine them by a wary and discreet
Experience, the Test whereof will remove all ground to doubt for the future of
their Integrity. And if so, to what purpose do Connate Principles serve; for
before I have made Trial, I cannot use them, because I have no Reason to trust
them, till I can be certain of their Veracity; which I cannot be, but by
Experience, which yet makes them useless; because Experimental knowledge is of
all others the safest and most unquestionable, and therefore must needs render
all lesser evidence vain and unnecessary. At least when our knowledge proceeds
in an Empirical way it is solid and palpable, and made so undoubtedly certain
from the plain and most undoubted Testimony of Sense and Experience, as
undeniably to convince Skepticism of a pitiful and ridiculous Obstinacy. But
when we begin our knowledge from Notions within our selves, besides that it is a
difficult and nice dispute to prove that the mind of man is furnished with any
such innate Prolepses, and that we are destitute of any sure (...) to discern
Natural Anticipations from Preconceptions of Custom and Education (unless we
bring them to the Touchstone of Experience) it is doubtless that Generalites are
not capable of so palpable and convictive an Evidence, as single and particular
Observations. Advancement of Learning. l. 1. c. 5.
And therefore my Lord Bacon has well noted it as none of the least
obstructions to the advancement of knowledge, that Men have sought for Truth in
their own little Worlds, and that withdrawing themselves from the Contemplation
of Nature, and the Observations of Experience, they have tumbled up and down in
their own Speculations and Conceits; And so have by continual meditation and
agitation of Wit urged, and as it were, invocated their own Spirits to Divine,
and give Oracles unto them, whereby they have been deservedly and pleasingly
deluded.

But secondly, however the case may be as to other Innate Notions, the
Existence of Plato's Ideas is altogether precarious and uncertain, and
therefore absolutely unfit to be made the foundation of all Science, for by
them they unanimously understand real Pictures and Images of things, painted
and carved upon the Mind, rather then Habits, Thoughts, or Conceptions, and
therefore Plato defines them to be (...), which further appears from the
grounds from whence they labor to deduce them; for it is evident, say they,
that the Eternal Mind exerted Intellectual Actions from all Eternity, but
because there can be no Intellection without an Intelligible Object, it must
follow, that there must be Exemplars and Ideal objects in the Divine Mind, to
terminate the actions thereof. But to suppose that the understanding cannot
act, unless it be employed about an object really existing, is not only
precarious, but for any thing appears to the contrary, contrary to every man's
Experience, seeing we are all able to create Chimaera's at pleasure. But though
this Postulatum were granted as to created Intellects, yet to tie and limit the
Contemplations of the Divine Mind to a pre-existent object, is (beside many
other absurdities) not less rash and unwarrantable then to confine the
operations of Omnipotence to the Laws of Matter and Motion: seeing then there is
no tolerable Evidence to be produced of the Truth and Reality of these Mental
Images, what can more betray the cause of Science to the Exceptions of
Scepticks, then to resolve its utmost Truth and Evidence into such uncertain
and imaginary Principles?

2. A second Fault, for which they are justly blameable, is their serious
endeavoring to know and define the Notions of abstracted Essences; for these
pure and Seraphick Intellectualists forsooth despise all sensible knowledge, as
too gross and material for their nice and curious Faculties, and disdain to
pursue any knowledge, but what is pure and Intellectual, that is such as is
suitable to their refined, and as it were, separated Understandings; and
therefore they chiefly employ their Thoughts about abstracted and purely
Metaphysical Beings; and thence they take upon them exactly to describe the
mere Essences of all sorts of Beings, whether Material, or Immaterial; whether
they belong to the intellectual, or to the sensible World: In order whereto,
they resolve all Beings into their simple and unmixt Ingredients, and then
attempt to assign their precise notions and differences from each other. Thus
they Analyze all Physical Bodies into ten Principles or Primitive Ingredients;
for first, they supposing that all things, by how much the less perfect they
are, are so much the more compounded, and then placing Bodies in the lowest
rank of Beings, they infer that something of all Superior Essences must
concur to their Constitution, so that all Bodies must participate of the nine
Superior Orders of Beings, See Patricius's Panarchia, especially the eleventh
Book.
viz. Form, Quality, Nature, Soul, Mind, Life, Essence, Unity, One, from the
mixture of which, after the four several ways of Composition, i. e. of
Profundity, Latitude, Longitude, and Solidity results Corporeiety, And some are
so strangely subtle and abstractive, as to make a real and substantial
difference between Matter and Body. Again, to pass by their several kinds of
immaterial Motion and Harmony, they make five sorts of Numbers, Divine, whose
Property is Uniformity; Substantial, whose Property is Immobility; Animarie,
whose Property is a Power of Self-moving; Natural, whose Property is a Capacity
to be moved; Mathematical, which is the common sort, and the grossest of all,
because (say they) it may be deciphred by External figures. But if they are
able to frame a Conception of any Number, besides that which is Mathematical,
they have more faculties then I, who am born but a Man, and live by the use of
my Reason, and five Senses.

And yet they confidently enough assay to give the world minute descriptions of
these, and such other nice and subtle Essences. It will be unnecessary to
examine their particular performances, if I can evidently Convict the Attempt
it self of Folly and Madness, as I presume to you I easily can, Because I know
you are already sufficiently convinced how fruitless and insignificant these
definitions of Metaphysical and abstracted Essences are, for they are in truth
nothing else but notifying that thing by more words of a narrower
signification, which at other times is signified by a single one of a larger
Import, as if in Arithmetical Accounts, we should denote one greater sum by
many little ones. But the expressing of a thing by diverse words, does not more
unfold its Nature, then when it is signed by one; because the use of Words is
not to explain the Natures of Things, but only to stand as marks and signs in
their stead, as Arithmetical figures are only notes of Numbers; and therefore
Names are as unable to explain abstracted Natures, as figures are to solve
Arithmetical Problems. I am not ignorant that it has been an ancient and
creditable Opinion of the Platonists, that Names have in them a natural
resemblance and suitableness to things, and are peculiarly expressive of the
several natures and properties of those things they are used to represent. But
words being merely several Modifications of sound made by the Organs of Speech,
can have no likeness to any thing but sounds; and where a word signifies any
peculiar sound, it may have a natural resemblance to it, by giving it a sound
like that which it represents, as Tintinnabulum and Clangor, which words strike
the Organs of hearing somewhat after the same manner, as those things do, of
which they are expressive. But to imagine that any words should carry in them a
resemblance to any things besides Noises, is an absurd and groundless conceit;
which will evidently appear by imposing upon words contrary significations, and
applying them to express things quite contrary to what they now signify. For
Example, take the Names, by which Fire is expressed in all Languages, and apply
them to water; and so on the contrary, call Water by the names of Fire, and you
will easily perceive they have no more natural Correspondency to the one then
to the other, and that the Names of fire have as much agreement with the Nature
and Properties of water, as they have with the thing they now signify, and
that they would as well express it, if men would agree to change their
Imposition.

And therefore I conclude that the office of Definitions is not to explain the
Natures of things, but to fix and circumscribe the significa^ion of Words; for
they being Notes of things, unless their significations be settled, their
meaning must needs be Equivocal and uncertain; that is, unless it be determined
of what things such particular Names are signs, no man shall be able to
signify his Thoughts to another, because he will use uncertain signs. And
therefore to define Matter, Form, Substance, Accident is not to unfold the
Intrinsic nature of those things, of which the names of Matter, Form,
Substance, Accident are marks and signs, but only to define what things I
intend to express and signify by these Names. And unless I have some Idea and
knowledge of that thing which I call Form or Accident, Antecedently to my
denoting of it by these Names, they will be altogether insignificant, because I
know not what thing it is which they signify, and the Names themselves give me
no more knowledge of those things, then Gas and Blas or any other words of no
defined signification. All which I hope sufficiently evinces the vanity of
Metaphysical definitions in order to the discovering the hidden Essences of
things. But yet further, we are so far from attaining any certain and real
knowledge of Incorporeal Beings (of an acquaintance with which, these Visionists
so much boast) that we are not able to know any thing of Corporeal Substances
as abstract from their Accidents. There Is nothing can more perplex my Faculties,
then the simple Idea of naked matter. And certainly, it was never intended that
mere Essences should be the Objects of our Faculties. And therefore the truly
wise and discerning Philosophers do not endeavor after the dry and sapless
knowledge of abstracted Natures, but only search after the Properties,
Qualities, Virtues and Operations of Natural Beings; the knowledge whereof may
be acquired by Observations and Experiments; but there are no certain means or
rational Methods (that I could ever yet meet with) to investigate the
mysterious Ideas of bare and abstracted Essences. Besides, all Beings are
either Objects of sense, or not; now to go about to discover the nature of the
former by metaphysical definitions, would be ridiculous, seeing they are far
better understood by our senses. If any one should ask me, what a Bed-staff or
a Joint-stool is, the only way to acquaint him what they are, is not to amuse
him with fine artificial definitions, but to show him the things themselves:
And besides to abstract sensible things from materiality, is to abstract them
from themselves, because their very Essences are Material. And then of them
that take upon them to describe the Natures of Beings that are not obnoxious to
sense, I demand by what ways and methods they came to that knowledge. For it is
not enough to prove that this or that is the Idea of any thing, because some
fanciful men are able to make pretty Hypotheses concerning it, but if any man
have attained any certain knowledge thereof, he is able to give a rational
account of the way and method, by which he proceeded in his Enquiry. But this
these bold definers neither have, nor can do; but if you will be so civil as to
take their words, they will requite your Civility by acquainting you with more
strange and stupendous Mysteries. And here (before I conclude this head) I
cannot but proclaim a Quarrel against the Metaphysics of the School-Doctors,
who pretend too by their definitions to unfold the most hidden and abstracted
Essences of Things, But their performance is a pregnant Argument of the vanity
of their undertaking. For their Vast Volums are filled with well nigh nothing,
but empty and insignificant words, frivolous and confused distinctions, useless
and imaginary notions, precarious and uncertain suppositions, senceless and
unintelligible Discourses, and with a deal of such fantastic and uncouth
stuff, as makes Fools stare, and Wise men laugh: But the Intrinsic Essence of
any one Being is no more explained and unsecreted after all their Labor, then
it was before. This, Sir, you may understand as a recantation of my Error, or
rather bemoaning my unhappiness, in that I have (contrary to what you once
advised me) lost so much time and industry in these absurd and senceless
Authors. And though this be only to accuse, yet it is as easy a task to make
good my charge to the utmost, as it is to make it, but that, because it cannot
be done unless by an induction of particular instances, would require a larger
Discourse then can be allowed to a Digression in this Letter.

3. My Third Impeachment, is their affecting a mysterious obscurity and
abstruseness, thereby to render their notions more solemn and venerable. Of
this I might produce you infinite Instances: But for a full conviction, let me
only engage you to spend one hour either in Plato's Parmenides (which though
Proclus thinks an entire and exact System of Platonic Divinity, In Plat.
Theol. lib. 1. cap. 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.
yet himself wastes several Chapters in an Enquiry after the scope and design
of that Dialogue) or any of those of his Theological Commentators, whom they
will allow to have understood him, (for Patricius will not allow that his first
Glossers to the number of above 75 were able to reach his meaning) In his Plato
Exotericus.
but chiefly Proclus his 6 Books upon Plato's Theology, or for brevity sake
his Theological Institutions annexed to them. Of the Obscurity and Ambiguity of
Plato's sentiments concerning the Deity, I have treated you know where, and
therefore thither I refer you, only let me note, Adv Calum. l. 2. c. 3. the
passage is somewhat too tedious to transcribe.
that when Cardinal Bessarion professes to give us a brief and summary account
of Plato's notion of God in his Parmenides, he amasses together (as their
manner is) a Cento of flat contradictions, and gives a Description much like
that Peripatetick Riddle of matter, Aelia Laelia Crispis, nec Mas, nec Foemina,
nec Androgyna, nec casta, nec meretrix, nec pudica, sed omnia, and then
applauds both himself and Plato for their Orthodox sentiments about the Deity.
Just such another senseless Iargon is that supposititious piece of Dyonysius
the Areopagite, de Divinis Nominibus. Again is it not a wild kind of
speculative fanaticisme to explain the unaccountable Ideas of immaterial
Beings, by numbers and figures, of which I have already given you a sufficient
Instance? But if I should transcribe their pretty dreams and conceits of the
superessential Unity, of the Divine Orders and Oeconomys, of the (...), of the
Paternum Profundum, Iynges, Teletarchae, Fontani Patres, of the Field of Truth,
the Super-celestial Regions and Invisible Heavens, together with the
descriptions of their several Inhabitants, and of all other Intellectual
Hypostases, I am confident it would tempt your gravity (though you were
Stoically morose) much beyond the essay of a smile, unless perhaps your perusal
of Jacob Behem may have prevented their novelty.

But the Grecian Theology (as Proclus contends being founded by Orpheus, Plat.
Theol. l. 1. c. 5.
advanced by Pythagoras, and completed by Plato; as Orpheus represented his
mysteries by Tales and Fables, Pythagoras by Numbers and Symbols, so Plato and
his Followers have (in imitation of them) communicated their Notions by
Emblems, See Proclus in Platon. Theol. lib. 1. c. 4.
Fables, Symbols, Parables, heaps of Metaphors, Allegories, and all sorts of
Mystical Representations (as is vulgarly known.) All which upon the account of
their Obscurity and Ambiguity are apparently the unfittest signs in the world
to express the Train of any man's thoughts to another: For beside that they
carry in them no Intelligible Affinity to the Notices, which they were designed
to intimate, the Powers of Imagination are so great, and the Instances in which
one thing may resemble another are so many, that there is scarce any thing in
nature, in which the Fancy cannot find or make a Variety of such Symbolising
Resemblances; so that Emblems, Fables, Symbols, Allegories, though they are
pretty Poetic Fancies, are infinitely unfit to express Philosophical Notions
and discoveries of the Natures of things: and besides, seeing they have left us
no key to these dark Ciphers, there can be no sure and constant way to unriddle
what conceptions are locked up under them; so that it does not only require a
great deal of pains to frame conjectures of their mea^ing, but the surest we
can pitch upon are withal so uncertain and ambiguous, that they unavoidably
leave us fluctuating in mere uncertainties. And what wife man will take so much
pains for such a knowledge that can at highest amount but to a doubtful guess?
The truth of it is, they have by these Exorbitances been highly injurious to
the advancement of true and solid Philosophy; for it needs little less pains
to discover their meaning, then perhaps it would to have examined the thing it
self, and yet when that is done, we are as far from our end as before. The end
of Philosophy is to search into and discover the Nature of things, but I
believe you understand not how the Nature of any thing is at all discovered, by
making it the Theme of Allegorical and dark discourses.

But I must not too much aggravate this Accusation upon the Platonists in
particular, seeing it has been the Catholic Crime of all the Learned World.
The Monk of Viterbo in his Counterfeit Berosus derives this Art of wraping up
and unfolding Mysteries at the same time from Noah, but perhaps another man
would have fetched its Invention from the Oracular Devils, who taking upon them
to foretell, what they could not foreknow, were forced to use such shifts to
hide their Ignorance. Ambage nexa delphico mos est Deo
Arcana tegere.
And from hence they who affected a Title of Wisdom imitated their Oracles, and
because they undertook to explain those secrets, which were above the reach of
their Inquisition, that they might not discover their ignorance instead of
their knowledge, they wrapped up their Mysteries in dark and aenigmatical
Representations, as being too Sacred and Venerable (as they pretended) to be
prostituted to vulgar and unhallowed Minds. Stromat. l. 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus roundly charges almost every Sect of the Philosophers
herewith. Laert. in his Life.
Only Epicurus took the word (...) Perspicuity for his Motto, whereas the rest
generally disclaimed it. The story is common, that Hipparchus was banished
Pythagoras his School, and a (...) set in his place, as of a Person lost, and
all because he went about to unriddle the Pythagorick Arcana: Cic. de finibus.
l. 2.
neither is Heraclitus his Surname (...) because of the obscurity of his
Writings less famous, Clarus ob obscuram linguam magis inter inanes, as
Lucretius quibbles upon him, and Laertius relates of him in his life, That he
Wrote a Book so monstrously obscure, that at length it became a Controversy,
whether it treated of a Commonwealth, or of Nature. And no less common is
Aristotle's Epistle to Alexander, (...) Plut. in Alex.
wherein he professes that though he had made his Books public, yet he had not
published them, and therefore he divides his Writings into Exotericks, that
were Intelligible to Vulgar Readers, and Eisotericks, that were Intelligible to
none but Sons of Art; whence Atticus in Eusebius compares him to the
Cuttle-Fish, because he like that sort of Fish, hides himself with his own
Ink. And how well the School-Doctors (his great Admirers) have imitated him, I
need not tell you, only I have more then once with pleasure observed it of
Aegidius, that where he cannot make his Master Aquinas speak good sense,
(though the Nonsense be palpable) he attributes a Mysteriousness to his
extraordinary and more then humane subtletie. Shall I add the proud Race of
Spagyrists, who (like Aeneas) go clothed in clouds, and what they discover by
their fire, darken by their smoke? I might add many modern Writers, but I
forbear, only methinks all the World seem to have gone to School to that
Pedagogue in Quintilian, Qui discipulos obscurare quae dicerent, juberet,
graeco verbo utens (...). Institut, l. 8 c. 2.
All Writers are ambitious to have Commentators, and certainly it is not a
little estimation that obscurity gains from the Vulgar, whence that
commendation in Quintilian, Tanto melior, ne ego quidem Intellexi; and that
conclusion in Lucretius, Omnia enim stolidi magis admirantur amantque,
Inversis quae sub verbis Latitantia cernunt.
But all that they understand, they despise, (...), says Synesius in his
Encomium of Calvisi^^. Now since I have ventured to play the Aristarchus in
reference to so many eminent Vertuosi, methinks I may dare to add the same
Censure of our late English Rosie-Crusians, but yet of all men I am most sorely
afraid of angring these, because they seem to be of a very quarrelsome Humor,
and to have a huge ambition to be esteemed the Polemical Scripturients of the
Age; whereas I have been scared from Engaging with a Rosie-Crucian, ever since
I first saw the Controversial Rencountres of Eugenius Philalethes; and besides,
(to confess my fears to you) I know not but the Romantic Heroes of this Order
may have retreiv'd the lost Invention of Enchanted Arms, especially that lovely
Fairie Knight descended (as the Romance of his Life relates it, it is a prettier
Tale then that of Amadis de Gaul) of the Caesar Heydons of Rome, and the
venerable Author of the Heydonian Philosophy, as himself modestly styles his
own ignorant, uncouth, and ridiculous Scrible.

But it is more fitting that these Pedantick Cheats were chastised by the
Public Rods, in that they directly Poison men's minds, and dispose them to the
wildest and most Enthusiastic Fanaticisme; for there is so much Affinity
between Rosi-Crucianisme and Enthusiasme, that whoever entertains the one, he
may upon the same Reason embrace the other; And what Pestilential Influences
the Genius of Enthusiasme or opinionative Zeal has upon the Public Peace, is
so evident from Experience, that it needs not be proved from Reason. To
conclude, I am confident, that from the beginning of time to this day, there
has not been so great a Conjunction of Ignorance with Confidence, as in these
Fellows, which certainly of all other Aspects is the most contrary and
malignant to true knowledge.

4. My next Accusation is, that instead of pure and genuine Reason, they abound
so much with gaudy and extravagant Phancies. I that am too simple or too
serious to be cajoled with the frenzies of a bold and ungoverned Imagination
cannot be persuaded to think the Quaintest plays and sportings of wit to be any
true and real knowledge. I can easily allow their Discourses the Title of
Philosophical Romances, (a sort of more ingenious impertinencies) and it is with
this estimate I would have them read: But when they pretend to be Natures
Secretaries, and to understand all her Intrigues, or to be Heavens Privadoes,
talking of the Transactions there, like men lately dropped thence encircled with
Glories, and clothed with the Garments of Moses and Elias, and yet put us off
with nothing but rampant Metaphors, and Pompous Allegories, and other splendid
but empty Schemes of speech, I must crave leave to account them (to say no
worse) Poets and Romancers true Philosophy is too sober to descend to these
wildnesses of Imagination, and too Rational to be cheated by them. She scorns,
when she is in chase of Truth, to quarry upon trifling gaudy Phantasms: Her
Game is things not words. I shall not presume to censure Plato's Style for its
being too Pompous and Poetic, though this has been done already by Aristotle,
Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Vossius, and other Professors of the Critical Art.
Only I remember I had not long conversed with Platonic Authors, when I took
occasion to set it down as a note to my self, that though a huge lushious style
may relish sweet to childish and liquorish Fancies, yet it rather loathes and
nauceats a discreet understanding, then informs and nourishes it. That
Platonisme is almost nothing but an Allegory, is too notorious to want a
proof, Plato's two famous Dialogues, viz. his Symposium and his Phaedrus,
ranked by Ficinus among his Metaphysical and Theological Treatises, treat of
nothing but Love and Beauty, and of them too in Poetic Schemes and Fables.
It Is pretty to read their Metaphysical Discourses of Truth, which are nothing
else but Love-stories. The soul being enamored with the transcendent Beauty
and Loveliness of Truth is enflamed with impatient desires of enjoying her
embraces, and therefore Wooes and Courts her with indefatigable Patience, for
she must be supposed (as all other Beauties are) excessively coy and difficult,
but by diligence and importunity the understanding wins and enjoys her; And
then they express their embraces in the same language, they would speak of the
private transactions between Man and Wife. Thus (you see) they have the main
Property of Romaneers to talk much of Love. And indeed Plato himself seems to
have been the first Author of Amorous Romances, for toward the beginning of
his Convivium he chides the Poets, that lived before him, for their Omissions
in reference to Love, and that when they had made Panegyricks of all the other
Gods. None of them had ever attempted an Elogie upon This.

Now to Discourse of the Natures of Things in Metaphors and Allegories is
nothing else but to sport and trifle with empty words, because these Schems do
not express the Natures of Things, but only their Similitudes and Resemblances,
for Metaphors are only words, which properly signifying one thing, are applied
to signify another by reason of some Resemblance between them. When therefore
any thing is expressed by a Metaphor or Allegory, the thing it self is not
expressed, but only some similitude observed or made by Fancy. So that
Metaphors being only the sportings of Fancy comparing things with things, and
not marks or signs of Things. All those Theories in Philosophy which are
expressed only in metaphorical Terms, are not real Truths, but the mere
Products of Imagination, dressed up (like Childrens babies) in a few spangled
empty words, such as the Greeks call (...) empty Phraseologies that have not
Notion and Thing enough to fill them out. Thus their wanton and luxuriant
fancies climbing up into the Bed of Reason, do not only defile it by unchaste
and illegitimate Embraces, but instead of real conceptions and notices of
Things, impregnate the mind with nothing but Ayerie and Subventaneous
Phantasmes.

But it is still more fantastic and absurd to talk metaphorically concerning
those things, of whose Ideas we are utterly ignorant, and of which we are not
able to discourse in Proper Terms, for such Discourse must needs be Nonsense,
and the matter of it must needs be nothing; because they treat of they know not
what. For Metaphors not signifying things, and things being always signified by
proper Terms, what can be more evident then that mere Metaphors without proper
Terms are employed about nothing at all, or only an Imaginary something. And
they that talk thus, do but first imagine a Subject, and then imagine in it
some Resemblances to something else, that is in effect, they make a bauble, and
then play with it. Of this Nature, (to give you one Instance) are the greatest
part of their discourses concerning the Soul, in discoursing of which, they
draw Metaphors from all the Senses, Members, and Functions of the Body, from
all the General Hypotheses of Nature; from all the Phenomenon of the Heavens
and the Earth, from all the several Properties and Operations of the several
species of Creatures, and apply them to the Nature, Faculties, and operations
of the Soul; But because they are altogether ignorant of the nature and
substance of the Soul, and are not able to express the greatest part of these
things by proper terms; all these Metaphors must pass for idle and
insignificant Nonsense, because they signify we know not what, and describe
we know not how; so that methinks the Platonic Philosophy is just such
another thing as the Epicureans fancy the world to be, a Mass of pretty words
handsomely and luckily pack't together; I must confess that before I had
examined it, by reason of its huge Tumid words, I looked upon it at a distance,
as the loftiest and sublimest knowledge in the world, but when I came to survey
it more closely, I soon found that it was nothing else but words, so that I may
more handsomely compare it to a Landscape, in which at a distance appear huge
Rocks, and vast Mountains, that seem to vie height with, and out-reach the
Clouds, and yet by a nearer approach these vast bulky Appearances are found to
be nothing but a few Artificial Shadows.

5. Another miscarriage is, that they employ much of their Contemplations in
things altogether uncertain and unsearchable. They delight excessively to
wander into remote and invisible Notions, and to talk confidently (as
Travelers into foreign Regions are wont to do) of doubtful and unaccountable
Problems, and any thing which is as far distant from Humane discovery, as
concernment. Which scopeless desire of searching into things exempt from humane
Inquisition, is that which renders Curiosity Criminal; For Curiosity it self is
a gallant and heroical Quality, and the natural Product of a Generous
Complexion, but when it aspires after the knowledge of things placed above its
Reach, it degenerates into a vain and fruitless Ambition, or rather an
unnatural lust of the mind after strange and extravagant Notions. Though the
Truth of it is, The minds (or rather fancies) of men have such a natural
liquorishness after the knowledge of things strange and remote, that they
swallow nothing with so grateful a Gusto, as stories of things rare and
unusual; neither care they how uncertain and fantastic they be, so they be
but odd and prodigious; and hence it comes to pass, that men are generally more
tickled and enchanted with Legends and Romances, then with useful and
remarkable Memories. Which (they say) is the Reason why the Ancients made so
much use of Fables and Apologues to instruct the People, because they carried
in them something monstrous, and exceeding the limits of Probability. The
senseless multitude, that could not relish the wise Discourses of Socrates,
would be much taken and surprised with a pretty and extravagant Tale of a Lion,
an Ape, or a Fox, etc. But not to aggravate this Childishness of these dull and
muddy Souls. It Is an unpardonable Luxury and Wantonness for Wise and
considering Philosophers, to spend their time and study to disclose distant and
inscrutable Mysteries, and frontlesly to dictate to the world in such Theories,
as are infinitely remote from humane knowledge and discovery, and which it is as
impossible to know, as it would be if they had never been. And that the
Platonists are of all men most chargeable with this folly, these few ensuing
instances may demonstrate. As when they confidently take upon them to give the
world exact and minute descriptions of Incorporeal Beings; To give an account
of the Nature and Economy of the Godhead, and how the several Ranks of Ideas
are suspended upon the three (...) Uniform Hypostases, to pry into the most
hidden Recesses of the Divine Mind, and distinctly to delineate how the Ideas
of all Created Perfections are there displayed. To discourse about the
Substance, Nature, Properties, Offices, Actions, Orders, and Polities of
Angels: To assert that the Heavenly Host is divided into three Hierarchies, and
that each Hierarchy is subdivided into three Orders, and every Order into as
many Legions, as there are contained Individuals in every Legion, i. e. 6666;
and that this Ternary of Hierarchies, and Norary of Orders do Circulate about
the threefold Essence of God, (as the Planets about the Sun) with infinite
other the like Dreams about their peculiar Natures, Offices, Distances, and
Employments: See Proclus in Plat. Theolog. l. 4. c. 19.
And withal to pretend to demonstrative Evidence in these things. Again, when
they confidently assert the First Mind to be the only Author of Souls; and
that humane Souls were tempered in the same Vessel, where the Soul of the
Universe had been wrought; and that they were made out of some remaining
fragments of that mixture out of which the Gods of the second and third Classis
had been framed; That the First Mind had deputed the Genii or Junior Deities
Guardians of his Offspring; and that it is they, that Marry them to their
Respective Vehicles. When they define whether the Apostate Genii be purely
immaterial; and whether they be vitally united with matter; and whether they
were made peccable only by union with their Vehicles; whether any of the Aerial
Spirits be Atheists or no, whether any of them be of a sportive, droling
humor, and delight to effect Antic Prodigies in the Air, to abuse and
affright silly Mortals; How they change Intelligence, and discourse together.
When they delineate the Cosmographie of the Archetypal World, replenished with
the Immaterial Ideas of all material Beings; and describe the Systeme of the
Invisible Heavens. When they frame particular Hypotheses, not only of the
nature of the Soul, but of the manner of its living, before its lapse into this
life, and after its return home again. Lastly, when they Graphically describe
the manner of the worlds last and final Conflagration: I might add too their
Hypotheses about the manner of the worlds Production; for unless they had been
Spectators, it was not possible for them to know in what way and method the
Universe was Erected; that depending wholly on the free Election of the Divine
Will: Though some Learned Men have thought it a mighty Confirmation of the
Truth of the Mosaic Writings, if they could but evince a consonancy of any of
the, Philosphers Hypotheses with the Mosaic Account of the Origin of the
Universe; as if their naked surmises could give any Testimony to Truth: For
either they received the Account they give, from a credible Tradition, and if
so, then Moses was the first Author thereof, for none else could give any
certain Account of the Process, Providence was pleased to use in the Production
of things, but certainly it is no Argument of the Truth of the Mosaic Account,
because the Jews told it to the Egyptians, and they to the Grecians, for this
can add no Authority or Evidence to it: Or else they were of their own
framing, and consequently were altogether groundless and unwarrantable
Conjectures; for it was surely impossible any man's Reason should tell him the
particular Circumstances of the worlds Creation; as that its material Principle
was a Tohu and a Bohu, that it was agitated by the Divine Spirit, that several
Portions were formed at several times, that all was finished in six days space,
rather then five or seven, and the like: this design therefore of discovering
a Consonancy between the Hypotheses of any of the Philosophers concerning the
Origin of the Universe, and the Mosaic Account thereof, is absolutely
scopeless and unprofitable. But this is a digression that has thrust its self
in here before I was aware of it. To resume therefore my former Theme, is it
not the highest and most disingenuous madness for men to give such confident
and definitive sentences in matters so remote and unaccountable? All the
forementioned particulars (to which it were easy to add a thousand more) are
apparently beyond the reach of humane Cognizance, and such things as cannot be
known but by Revelation, there being no other means to attain to any knowledge
of things of their vast distance and remoteness. And if we will but reflect
upon our own Thoughts, we must confess that we cannot perceive the Ideas of
Beings that are not placed within the Horizon of Sense, and those that pretend
to a discovery of them, had better pretend to Oracles, Prophesies, Illapses,
and Divinations, then to the sober and steady Maxims of Philosophy. And
therefore it is not unusual with the Platonists to pretend to a kind of
Enthusiasme. They style themselves (...), the inspired Priests of Truth; and
their Philosophy (...) as if it had been poured into them in a Divine and
Extatical Fury, and Proclus says it a thousand times of Plato and his
Commentators, that they did (...), as if they had written with a kind of
Bacchical Enthusiasme; And they every where talk so like Prophets and Oracles,
as if they were inspired at least by a Bath-Col: And it is hugely pleasant to
read their own Exorbitant Parades of the Exalted, Divine, and Extatick
sublimity of Platonic Contemplation; they boast so often of sequestring
themselves from all Corporeal Commerce, and soaring up into the Ethereal
Regions, that a man would expect News from the third Heaven every day. If they
were in good earnest, we might expect strange discoveries indeed, but alas,
these Sons of Imagination are as little troubled with Real Ecstasies, as other
men, only they are pleased to express the Frenzies of their fiery and subtle
Fancies by these Allusions. So that let them talk never so Seraphically of
retiring from the trivial and common Entertainments of sense, they do but sit
down in the Theater of Fancy, and entertain themselves with the Idola Specus,
or Images of their own Complexion, and though they take them for great
Realities, (as other Sleepers do their Dreams) yet when they awake out of their
fanciful Visions, and return to a strength and consistency of Reason, they then
discern them to have been only evanid Appearances represented (as all Dreams
are) upon the Scene of Imagination.

Now it is a great mistake of some men to think it necessary that we should be
able to confute such vain and ungrounded Positions; and that for this Reason,
because they are out of the Sphere of humane knowledge; for though they may
sometimes perchance, like the Cartesian Vortices, justle with some certain
Truths belonging to our Sphere by reason of their Vicinity, yet that happens by
chance, and is not necessary: But being in their own Natures out of our View,
it is not to be expected we should give any account of them, because that would
be to assert what we cannot know, which is to commit the very fault we are now
chastising; it is therefore sufficient to show the absurdity of an assertion, if
I can evince it to be unevident, though I can not to be untrue, for it is not
less unbecoming a Wise man to assent to an uncertainty than to an untruth:
because it is not the real certainty of a Truth, that is a sufficient motive of
our assent, but its evidence to us; for all Truths are in themselves equally
certain (though not equally necessary and durable) but it is from the variety of
evidence that the difference of our knowledge proceeds; and howsoever
assertions may be in themselves real and certain Truths, yet unless they are
evident as well as certain, they will be to us vain and fictitious Phantasms.
And therefore I cannot but commend this one Paradox of the Stoics, That a Wise
man is always free from Opinion, Ignorance, and Error: From Opinion, because he
will not assent to uncertainties: from Ignorance, because what he knows not, he
knows that he knows it not, and so has as much knowledge of the thing, as he is
capable of: from Error, because he that will neither assent to what is
uncertain, and knows what is to be known, and what not, can scarce be liable to
mistakes. And it was none of the least Instances of Epicurus's Wisdom and
Modesty, that he made it one of his chiefest Physiological Canons, that he had
nothing to do with (...) matters merely Possible, and merely Contingent; and
therefore he was always wont to state and conclude all Questions about the
Phenomenon of the Heavens, and all other remote and unevident Enquiries, with
nothing else but It may be so.

Besides in such cases any man may assert whatever a warm or giddy Brain may
suggest, and we shall have equal inducements to embrace contrary Hypotheses;
thus as Mahomet has somewhere in his Alcoran, described the Systeme of the
invisible Heavens, the Orders of Angels, and the several Folds, in which their
several Choruses reside, as well as Plato, so I have as great Reason to induce
me to credit the Mohammedan Hypothesis as the Platonic. And then (to dispatch)
we are not concerned in such cases to show the vanity of the Assertion (for
that we suppose impossible) but that of the Assertor, whom we blame for acting
so much against all the Rules of Reason, in affirming that, which it is
evidently impossible for him to know; whereby he both troubles the world with
debates equally unnecessary and endless, and obstructs the Advancement of True
Knowledge, by diverting those that are in quest after it, into dark, dubious,
and endless Traverses: And certainly among the many things that have been
hindrances to the discovery of Truth, none seem to have been of a more unhappy
and diffused Influence, then that men have been generally digging for it, where
its veins lie too deep, and out of the fathom of humane Industry.

Now if this one Caution against dogmatizing in matters remote and unevident
were well imbibed, it would not only prove an effectual Antidote against many
thousand pestilent controversies, that infest the world, but also a deadly Bane
to the Platonic Philosophy; for if in reading the Platonists, you shall as
you proceed, but ask them for a rational evidence of their magisterial dictates
(especially in those things which they boast of as their sublimest
speculations) and resolve that you will not make them matters of opinion, 'till
they shall have given you some rational inducements so to do, I will engage you
shall never be one of their Disciples, though you should study them to the
revolution of their Great Year.

Before I take my leave of this Consideration, I cannot but note that this
Impudent humor of talking confidently of things uncertain and widely remote
from humane Cognizance was the peculiar crime of the first and earliest
Heretics in the Christian Church. Thus the main of the Heretical Opinions of
the Gnostics, and the several sub-dividing Factions of them, Valentinians,
Saturnilians, Basilidians and other primitive Heretics were only some
extravagant Hypotheses concerning the Divinity, and its Essential Emanations,
and their several Syzigiae, and Pleromata, out of which they framed a peculiar
Oeconomie of the Godhead, compounding the Divine Nature out of a multitude of
Orders and Individuals (you may fancy it such a kind of Monster, as the Picture
of Mr Hobbs's Leviathan.) And this they did by blending some Fancies out of
Plato, and Fables out of Hesiods Theogonia with the Gospel of Saint John, as
the Fathers unanimously conclude. And as it is reported of Simon Magus, that he
endeavored to compound a Religious Worship out of the Rites of Paganism, and
the Sacraments of Christianity; so it is manifest that the Gnostics would have
integrated one System of Divinity by mingling the Orphean, Pythagorean, and
Platonic Theology with the Doctrines of the Gospel. Of this sort of men and
their Doctrines all the more learned Commentators understand the frequent
cautions of the Apostles against Heresies and Heretics, and peculiarly that
eminent passage, Colos. 2. 8. where the Apostle warns them against Philosophy
and vain deceit, after the Tradition of men, after the Rudiments of the world,
i. e. a (...) a false knowledge that pretends to know the highest mysteries
upon the naked Assertions of some confident men. And of these (...) and the
several emanations of the Godhead do they understand those fabulous (...) Saint
Paul mentions 1 Timothy 1. 4. so that the Heretics, the Apostles speak of, were
only giddy and opinionative men, that took upon them to introduce the Opinions
of the Philosophers into the Christian Faith: For which reason it was that
Tertullian styled the Philosophers Hereticorum Patriarchus, because from them
were borrowed the greatest part of Heretical Opinions. Thus the Learned
Dissert. de vita and scriptis Porphyr. c. 1.
Holstenius has made a Parallel between the Pythagorean and Manichean
Principles. And Johannes Baptista Crispus in his discussing of Plato's
Opinions, has at the end of every Chapter shown what Heresies sprung from each
Opinion. In this Notion of Heresy the School-Doctors will prove as
Arch-Hereticks as any of the Ancients, for they have in the same manner
corrupted the simplicity and purity of Christian Religion, by blending the
Placits of Aristotle with the Articles of Faith, as Manes and Valentinus did by
mingling with the Christian Faith, the Philosophy of Plato and Pythagoras. And
then they have filled their vast Volumns with subtle and nice Hypotheses made
out of this mixture, out of which are of necessity generated an infinite number
of idle and unprofitable Altercations, or as (as my Lord Bacon prettily styles
them) Vermiculate Questions, because they are generated from the putrefaction
of ture and solid knowledge, like worms from putrified substances: though
perhaps they may ere long deserve that Epithete upon another score. I might
have added to them the late grand Dogmatical Master of Orthodoxy, whose rude
Dogmatising has occasioned as many Controversies in the Christian Church, as
ever Manes or Valentinus did. The result of all this is to direct to the true
Apostolical Notion of Heresy, which is not so much an Opinion that is
apparently false, as one that is groundless and unwarrantable, and so naturally
tends to the creating unnecessary disputes, and making Factions and Divisions,
as Plotinus speaks of the Gnostics, Ennead 2. lib. 9.
that they were Inventors of new and vain Opinions, to no other end then the
erecting of a peculiar Sect. And though most of the Primitive Heresies were
false and impious, as well as rash and ungrounded, yet that which gave them
their denomination, was their vanity and tendency to create mischeivous and
destructive Schisms. The way then to prevent Controversies, and to avoid
Schisms, is not to define, but silence groundless and dividing Opinions. The
Church should in such cases imitate Socrates's Demon, that never gave any
positive Answer, but as often as it was consulted answered either No, or Nothing;
because they are usually started about matters uncertain, and consequently
undeterminable. So that when both Parties determine contrary to each other, and
upon that separate, they are both equally Schismatics, because they both
divide upon insufficient and unwarrantable grounds. For instance (to pass by
that early and unhappy Quartodecimarian Schism.) In that grand Schism of the
Greek Church from the Roman, though the latter was notoriously Schismatical,
yet the former was not altogether guiltless: for although they had Reasons
sufficient to warrant a secession from the Romanists; as the Popes usurpation
in challenging a Power to impose on them new Articles of Faith, and putting of
this Tyranny into practice, by requiring of all that would be Members of the
Roman Communion, to receive his addition of the Filioque into their Creeds:
Now (I say) had they divided only for the maintaining their own Liberty against
the Papal Encroachments, and for not admitting the addition of Filioque as an
Article of Faith, their separation had been just and noble. But when they stood
as obstinately on the other side, as the Romanists did, and would not admit of
an Union, but upon Condition, that it might be received as an Article of Faith,
that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father only, they cannot be cleared of a
Schismatical division. Now if instead of being dogmatical in both these
contrary Extremes, both Parties had agreed to silence the Controversy and
decide it neither way, as Truth would not have been less secured, so Peace
would have been much better preserved. I conclude therefore in the words of a
late Learned and Judicious Divine. If the Church had stopped and damned up the
Originals and Springs of Controversies, rather then by the determining for the
one part, to give them as it were a Pipe and Conduit to convey them to
Posterity, I persuade my self the Church had not suffered that inundation of
Opinions, with which at this day it is overrun.

The supposed Agreement between MOSES and PLATO DISPROVED.
I Have ( Sir) presented you with these Reflections rather then any other, not
so much because I apprehend them more considerable (though perhaps they are so)
as because they first occurred to my Thoughts: For it had been no difficult
work to have added Infinite more; but these Considerations being already too
prolix, and the small portion of Time allotted for this Task almost expired, I
shall wave those that remain, and only vindicate the Accusations I have already
made, by examining and controuling an Apology, that endeavors to wash them off.

For it is replied on Plato's behalf, that he cannot well be charged with
Rashness and Futility, but the Accusation must reach Moses also, and the rest
of the Sacred Prophets; because from them Plato borrowed his choicest and
sublimest Theories, which if in any thing vain and trifling, the first Authors
ought in reason to bear the greatest Blame, and so at length my charging Plato
with Futility, if it be valid, will fall foul upon Moses himself. Which farther
completely excuses his Rashness, seeing he delivered his Theological Theories,
not from his own Fancy, but derived them from so good and sure an Authority, as
Moses and the Prophets. And that he did so is the unanimous consent of all the
learned world: Fathers, School-Doctors, and Modern Writers agree not more
unanimously in any one Principle then this: (...) is now become as vulgar and
trivial as a Proverb. The particular account they give hereof, is this, That
Plato derived many of these Mysteries from Pythagoras, who in his Travels into
Egypt and the East had either immediately received them from the Jews
themselves, or from the Egyptian Priests, and the Chaldean Wise men, who came
to know them by Converse with, and Tradition from the Jews. And that Plato
himself traveling into Egypt in quest after knowledge, received his choicest
and most important notices concerning Divine and Supernatural things from the
Jews, who about that time in great flocks resorted thither, or from the
Egyptian Priests, who either derived them from the Mosaic writings, or
received them from the Jews by an Oral Tradition. For (say they) God delivered
to Moses in Mount Sinai a twofold Law, (...) The Written Law, and (...) The
Vocal Law, which is the Mystical and Enigmatical meaning of the Former, but by
reason of its extraordinary sacredness was not exposed to the rude People, but
only whispered and conveyed in the slender Pipe of Auricular Tradition from age
to age among the great Sanhedrim and the Prophets down to the time of Esdras,
by whom (and the great Synagogue, of which many of the latter Prophets were
members) it was committed to writing, least by reason of their frequent
dispersions and captivities it should by some ill fortune perish: which carried
its stream out of the private Channel, in which it run before, and soon spread
it abroad among Foreign Nations, especially in Egypt and Chaldea, where great
numbers of Jews resided. For an eminent* Instance of all which, they allege
the Doctrine of the Sacred Trinity, which (say they) being one of the Rarest
and Choicest Mysteries of this Vocal Cabala, was greedily embraced by the
Egyptians, from whom Plato and his Followers received that clear and full
knowledge thereof, which appears so much every where in their Writings.

To all which I answer in these ensuing Considerations.

1. That it is so far from being matter of commendation that it is rather a
disparagement to have been conversant in, and borrowed from the old Eastern and
Egyptian Learning. That the Ancient Sages of Egypt and the East were acquainted
with the first Rudiments of Mathematical Sciences is evident from the most
authentic Records of Ancient Times, and from that skill, which the Grecians
gained among them. But it is as evident that all their Theological Learning was
lamentably frivolous, obscure, fabulous, uncouth, magical and superstitious.
The Scythian Tarabostesci, the Persian Magi, the Indian Brachmans and
Gymnosophists, the Egyptian Priests, the Bards and Druids of Gaul and Britain,
and other Ancient Sects have (I confess) made a great noise in the world, yet
they that endeavor to celebrate them most, tell us so many Superstitious and
Pedantick stories, as sufficiently evince them to have been no very
extraordinary Persons. Any one that considers those few Opinions and
Ratiocinations of theirs that are still extant, will easily conclude them to
have been men of no great Reason or Judgment. Some have endeavored to maintain
the Credit of this Ancient Learning by retreiving and collecting its scattered
Fragments, and others by counterfeiting supposititious Authors, such as
Zoroaster and Hermes Trismegistus, but whoever will be at the pains to peruse
Zoroaster's Oracles, the Books of Trismegist, the Writings of Psellus, and the
Earl of Mirandula's Riddles, with which he challenged all the Learned world,
will need no other proof of the Vanity of all pretenses to the more abstruse
and mystical Learning of the Ancients. I do not question but that great and
honorable Personage I last mentioned, was a Person of stupendous Parts and
Learning, yet I am sure that those Notions, wherewith he made the greatest
Noise in the world, were but grand and pompous Futilities.

The Old Egyptian Learning was so Famous, that the Spirit of God, Act. 7. 22. 1
King. 4. 29, 30.
sets forth the Eminency of Moses's knowledge by his skill in it, and the
matchlesness of Solomon's Wisdom by its exceeding it; And therefore I conclude
that it was conversant about more generous and more useful Notices then
afterward; such as Geometry, Astronomy, Policy, Physic, and other resembling
Arts, which either were perfective of their Rational Faculties, or did minister
to the uses and necessities of Nature: as is generally reported by all Ancient
Historians. But had the Pristine Learning of Egypt been the same it was in
latter Ages, it had been as great a disparagement to Moses, as it is now justly
reputed a commendation, that he was accomplished in all the Egyptian learning,
and had amounted only to this, that he was a vain, trifling, superstitious
Fellow. And what the Egyptian Priest objected to the Greeks, that they were
always Children, might be more truly applied to themselves, if it be the
property of children to value trifles. What childish fooleries their
Hieroglyphics were, Learned Men now prove from the lost labor and fruitless
industry of Kirchers Oedipus Aegyptiacus. CertaSinly, if they had designed to
abuse and debauch this humor, they could scarce have contrived more fond and
extravagant Emblems; and indeed their courseness and unlikeness to the things
they should resemble, sufficiently discover them to have been but the rude
Essays of a barbarous and undisciplined Fancy. The truth of it is, the
Egyptians seem to have had only knowledge enough, to know that their
neighbors had none at all, and cunning enough to vaunt an Inspection into
strange and abstruse Mysteries, knowing that others by reason of their
Ignorance could not control them, and by reason of their credulity would be
very apt to credit them, and thence they continually abused the credulous
Grecians with Tales and Fables. And surely the Egyptian Priest took not a
little secret pleasure, In Platonis Timaeo.
when he perceived Old Solon to entertain his Romantic and Legendary account
of Ancient Times with so much greediness and satisfaction; unless perhaps
himself had been imposed upon by earlier Romancers, for I fancy the Egyptian
Priests to have been such another generation of men, as our Monks were in the
darkest times of Popery, who believed as well as recorded those Legends, which
earlier Impostors had Coined. So that if the ancient Sages of Greece had
purchased no more knowledge by their Travels into Egypt, then those few
remainders of Egyptian learning still upon Record (excepting a few Mathematical
Theories) they had spent their time and pains to as little purpose, as the
famous Traveller of Odcomb, who footed most parts of the known world to no
other purpose, then to describe his Hosts Beard or Sign-Post. I might here also
give an account of the mean abilities of Orpheus and Pythagoras, but I delight
not to speak too hardly of any Vertuoso's Ashes, and therefore I forbear: For
it is not my design, by representing these Primitive sages as fools and dunces
to rob them of that esteem and veneration, with which they have been deservedly
honored in all succeeding Ages, for though it be granted that their knowledge
was much inferior to that of latter Ages, (for Learning being then in its
Infancy, must needs be Childish, but is since grown more solid and manly) yet
it is but reasonable they should be allowed bigger Proportions of Honor and
Renown, not only because they were very wise Men, considering the rudeness and
ignorance of the times, in which they lived, but because they were the first
founders and discoverers of that knowledge, which after Ages have but improved,
and the world surely is much more beholding to those that first invent useful
Arts and Sciences, than to those that only improve them; it is therefore just,
they should be allowed greater Glory, though they had much less knowledge then
their followers. Besides, Theological speculations met with the latest and
slowest improvements, and therefore those that might have considerable skill in
other Theories, might be (as indeed they were) barbarously ignorant in these.

2. I perceive not any such clear Agreement between the Platonic Philosophy
and the Sacred Scriptures, as may give us any tolerable ground of suspecting
the one to have been derived from the other: For most of the Notions, in which
Plato speaks most consonantly to the Scriptures, are so obvious and so
universally acknowledged, that it is easy to discern how he came by them,
without any acquaintance with the holy Writings: such as are the Being of God,
the Immortality of the Soul, the Essential differences of Good and Evil, some
general Rules of Natural and Essential Goodness. Thus his Exceptions against
the Grecian Idolatry and Superstition must by all means be transcribed from the
Mosaic Writings, and when in the Eighth Book of his Laws, V. Collium de
animab. Pagan. l. 5. c. 17. 25. Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. Eusebius. prepar. Evang. l.
11, 12.
he enjoins Solemn Festivals in honor of the Gods, he must needs have it from
the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, and when in the Tenth Book, he
declaims against Irreverence in Divine Worship, he must by all means borrow it
from the second Precept, and when in his Eleventh Book he treats of honor due
from Children to their Parents, he must doubtlesly have read the fifth
Commandment, and the like in other Instances. Whereas the natural
reasonableness of these Principles is in it self so apparently clear and
evident, that they could scarce escape the observation of any rational and
inquisitive man; and therefore Plato's lighting upon them is no more an
Argument, that he was conversant in the Mosaic Writings, then is his saying
that the Sun is the brightest Star in the Firmament. And then as for their more
hidden and abstruse mysteries, where they seem to agree most, their difference
is greater then their agreement; and it would not be difficult to show how
these Notions, which have the fairest Consonancy to Scripture, are derived from
Hypotheses that have none at all, as I shall anon evince in the Article of the
Trinity. And shall in the Interim show the infirmity and vanity of this
conceit, by showing the weakness of that Authority, upon which it is grounded.

The first time then, that I met with it, was in Modern Authors, who vouched
the Authority of the Primitive Fathers for it, betaking my self therefore to
them, I found some of them to aver it indeed with no small earnestness,
especially Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Theodoret, but upon no better
grounds, then the naked assertions of two or three Jews (especially Cleobulus
and Josephus) and that, when contending about the Glories and Prerogatives of
their own Nation, in which Controversy men of all Nations are apparently
partial for their own, but none so grossly as the Jews; who would have their
Nation the only Fountain of all knowledge and wisdom (as if all other men had
been mere Mushromes, and had not reason enough to reflect upon and observe the
natures and properties of Things) and therefore Aristobulus (the first Founder
and Foundation of this Conceit) does with the same Confidence maintain that the
Peripatetick Philosophy was stolen out of Moses and the Prophets, Apud Clem
Alexand. Strom. 5.
as that the Fancies of Plato and Pythagoras were taken thence. There are
perhaps one or two obsolete Grecian Testimonies produced on the behalf of this
Opinion, but I shall not be at the pains critically to examine their weight and
authority, because I have as great a suspicion of all those obsolete records
concerning the Jewish Nation cited by some Ancient Authors, as I have of their
Sibillan Prophecies and other confessed Impostures, in that most of them
discover their own Forgery: As those so famous and still credited Testimonies
of Apollo's Oracle on behalf of the Jews, of which there is ^ great multitude
in Eusebius his Praeparatio Evangelica, among the rest this is one of the
famousest (...)
(...). lib. 9. c. 10.

The Chaldeans and Hebrews alone are Professors of true Wisdom, who worship
the Eternal God in a pure and holy manner. It Is strange Eusebius should think
the world so credulous (and yet so credulous it has been) as to believe that
this Distick ever dropped from Apollo's Oracle, for whether that were inspired
by the Priests, or by the Devil, I am confident they were neither of them so
honest or so simple, as thus openly to commend the Jewish Religion and condemn
their own.

But now as for those Writers, who were best able to give the truest account of
the Commerce between the Jews and the Grecians (if there had been any) they
are universally silent in it: The Ancient Records of Greece are scarce more
silent in any thing, then the Jewish Nation. Though they relate frequent
Voyages of their wise men into Foreign Countries, yet no mention at all of
their Jewish Traffic; they acknowledge their Geometry to have been imported
from Egypt, their Astronomy from Chaldea, their Arithmetic from Phenicia,
their Theology from Persia, but no account of their Cargo from Iudaea. And
Lactantius justly and seriously chides with the Ancient Philosophers, because
they neglected to trade with the Jews for wisdom, as well as other Nations.
De vera Sap. cap. 2.
Equidem mi^ari soleo (says he) quod cum Pythagoras and postea Plato amore
indagandae veritatis ad Aegyptios, and Magos, and Persas usque Penetrassent, ut
earum Gentium ritus and sacra Cognoscerent (suspicabantur enim sapientiam in
Religione versari) ad Iudaeos tamen non accesserint, penes quos tum solos fuit,
and quo facilius ire potuissent. There are indeed some conjectures to make it
probable that the Grecians might confound Judea with Phaenicia, which if true,
it is a good Argument that they had very little knowledge of it; for it is not
likely that any, who conversed with the Jewish Nation should confound them with
the Phaenicians, when there was so vast not only difference but contrariety
between them as to their Civil State, Laws, Customs, and Religion. Nay the
Jewish Religion, Customs, and Laws being of so peculiar a constitution from
those of all other Nations, it can scarce be supposed but that those who so
carefully observed the Laws and Customs of Foreign Nations, as the Grecian
Philosophers did, should have taken a more signal and particular Notice of the
Jewish Constitutions if they had been acquainted with them. Besides all which,
let me add that we find as great a consonancy of the opinions of the Wise men
of other Nations with the Hebrew Writings, where there appear no footsteps of
commerce between them, as of the Grecians. For instance, though Numa Pompilius
is generally acknowledged the first Pythagorean (being more ancient then
Pythagoras) yet there is not the least appearance of any commerce between him
and the Jews. And therefore when Mr Seldom thinks that if those 7 Books of
Wisdom found in the Field of Petilius An, De Iure Not. and Gent. l. 1. c. 2.
ab U. C. DLXX. and attributed to Numa by an Inscription upon the Chest in
which they were, were really his, that he was probably not unacquainted with
the Discipline of the Hebrews, only because Cassius Hemina and C. Piso in
Pliny report that the matter contained in them was very consonant to the
Pythagorick Philosophy; the best foundation of the conjecture is the
(deserved) greatness of his own name and authority, for you cannot but perceive
that in it self it is very fond and frivolous, and if such a licentious latitude
may be allowed in historical guesses, Quidlibet ex Quolibet will soon be as
warantable a maxim in History, as it is in the Epicurean Philosophy. It were
easy to have given you a larger account hereof, but I write a Letter not a
Treatise.

3. As to the pretense of a Vocal Cabala, I can scarce without amazement
consider with what confidence and eagerness some learned men of late have cried
up an invention so novel and fanciful; for I know nothing more precarious and
destitute of tolerable pretenses then these Cabalistical Traditions, being only
a late and silly Invention of the Jewish Rabbis: for they are altogether
unknown to and unmentioned by the ancient both Jews and Christians. Oedip.
tom. 2. class. 4. prefat.
And yet Kircher (who never gives out at credulity) would have every one that
does not believe the Divine Original of the Cabala to be convicted of Heresy
as an Enemy to the Divine Providence. But for my part, I cannot understand how
any Rational man can be at all concerned for so vain and frivolous an Invention
of the Modern ( i. e. trifling) Rabbis. But he that could find all the
Learning of the world in an Egyptian Hieroglyphick may find all the Articles of
his Faith in a Rabbinical Fable. It Is certain that the Cabala was invented
since the dispersion of the Jewish Nation, (there being not the least footsteps
of it before) but in what Century or Period is uncertain and must remain so,
for from the Destruction of Jerusalem there commenced as to the Jewish History
a Tempus (...) (a Period always fit for Fables;) there being no Records or
Monuments of their Condition and Affairs, (unless some few fabulous Relations
in the Talmud.) But whatever became of them, it is certain that being given up
to a vain and trifling spirit, they employed themselves, in foolish and absurd
Inventions, of which making Mystical and Allegorical Interpretations of
Scripture is none of the least: especially when they prefer them so much before
the true and literal meaning: for they compare the Scripture it self to a
Candle, but the Mystical sense to a Jewel, for the discovery whereof of the
Candle is lighted; and the Misnical Doctors (that is, they that study only the
litteral sense) are compared to Apothecaries, who only prepare those
Medicaments, which the Physician prescribes, but the Cabbalistical Doctors to
Physicians, who understand their Natures, Uses, and secret Properties. And
therefore they leave the litteral and superficial sense of Scripture, to the
rude and ignorant People, whilst they that are Learned dive into the mysteries
and depths of the Law, and by the help of Fancy fetch strange and wonderful
secrets from Words, Letters, Points, from their several Shapes, Combinations,
Transpositions, Abbreviatures, Arithmetical Indications, and the like. And then
with a frontless Impudence, assert that they came Originally from Adam,
Abraham, and Moses. You may see enough of this Cabbalistical Trash in a
thousand Authors, but most Copiously in Reuchlin de Art Cabbalistica, and in
that grand Thesaurus of Learned Trifles, Kirchers Oedip. tom. 2. Class. 4. The
first that produced them into the Christian World was the Earl of Mirandula, in
whose time the very word Cabbala was so unknown, that (as Hottinger relates out
of Garzon) it was taken for a Witch, Vetula venesicits dedit^. And the Earl
himself relates in his Apology, that one of his greatest Antagonists being
asked what this Cabbala was, replied that he was a certain notorious Heretic,
that had opposed himself against Jesus Christ, and that from him his
Accomplices and Followers were named Cabbalistae. The Earl, when he had at a
high price purchased some small fragments of it from the Jews, thought himself
Master of the most ancient and valuable Monument in the World: The mistake was
pardonable in him, but unpardonable in those who since have had opportunity to
examine its first rise and antiquity, and cannot discern the least Traces of it
beyond the Talmudical Rabbis: Besides this, I might overthrow the Cabbala from
rational Arguments taken from the thing it self, as that it would reflect upon
the Wisdom of God, that he should conveigh down such material and important
Truths (as are supposed to be contained in the Cabbala) by so uncertain and
questionable a way, as Oral Tradition. That it renders the Word of God
ridiculous and useless, and makes its meaning altogether doubtful and
ambiguous, and exposes it to the giddy and fanciful Conjectures of every warm
Brain: but the groundlesness of the thing it self, makes all other confutation
needless. Some (not unlearned men) have urged the Consistency of the Cabbala
with it self, and the suitableness of the Allegory to the Text as no
contemptible Argument of its Truth and Solidity. But alas, (beside that most of
their Analogies between the Mystery and the Text are sufficiently forced and
uncouth) there is nothing more easy then for Fancy to find some Consonancy
between the most distant things, especially in such various and unlimited
things as Allegories are. If you should require it, I think I could with an
ordinary plausibility draw up a body of the Epicurean Philosophy out of the
Writings of Jacob Behem, and yet perhaps it would puzle you to think of any
Hypotheses of a more distant Genius then they. Such an Africa is Fancy, that it
can couple things of the most distant and contrary Natures. And therefore I
shall never think the prettiest Parallels, Analogies, and Similitudes, to be
any tolerable Arguments.

4. Having thus evidenced the unwarrantable Rashness of deriving Platonic
Notions from Jewish Traditions, I come in the next place to give (1.) A brief
Account of the Rise of that seeming agreeableness between the Platonic and the
Christian Trinity. (2.) To show by what Principles and steps the Platonists
happened upon their Triad.

For the first it seems to have its Original from those counterfeit and
supposititious Authors, which pretended to the greatest Antiquity, but yet were
really composed by the Gnostics out of the Ethnic and Christian Theology,
and ascribed to names of the greatest Antiquity and Veneration, such as Hermes
Trismegistus, Zoroasters Oracles, the Sybillan Prophecies, now it were strange
if in these Authors there did not appear some kind of Resemblance and Vicinity
between the Platonic Philosophy and the Holy Scriptures, seeing they had by
all Artificial ways blended them together; as by coupling their different terms
to express the same thing, for whereas the Scripture styles the first Person of
the Trinity (...), and Plato the first of his Trinity (...), they joined them
together, and call him (...), and as the Second Person is in Scripture termed
(...), and in Plato (...), in these he is generally styled (...): Now they that
knew nothing of the Imposture, meeting with such an Artificial agreement
between Platonic Notions and Christian Doctrines, might easily imagine that it
was natural. The first Author of this mistake seems to have been Ammonius of
Alexandria (Father to that Golden Chain of Philosophers of the Sacred
succession) who being both a Christian and a Platonist, and lighting upon these
Spurious Books, in which the Platonic Notions and Christian Articles were
blended and reconciled together, might thence be easily induced to fancy a true
and real Consonancy Pa^arch. lib. 9.
between them, And therefore Patricius avers that he was the first that
understood aright the notion of Plato's Threefold Principle, and that he came
by this knowledge by perusing the Books of Trismegistus. And hence those
Platonists that followed him might speak of the Trinity more consonantly to the
Scriptures, then perhaps they intended, though not long after these Impostures
were discovered by Porphyrie, as himself relates in the Life of Plotinus.

For the second, the Platonic Triad is widely different from the Christian,
for they intend by it so many Orders and Ranks of Intellectual Beings, and
frequently added a fourth, which was the Humane Soul, and set it at no greater
distance from the Third, by which they meant the Soul of this Universe, then
that was removed from the Second, by which they meant the First mind or soul of
the Immaterial world. And their Progress to the knowledge of these Beings
proceeded in this Method.

1. They suppose all things to ascend by Scales to Unity, as Plato endeavors
to prove in his Parmenides, (...) Unity is the Origin of all Number, or all
mixed and compounded Beings must be at last resolved into some one simple and
unmixed Principle, otherwise the resolution would be endless, so that all
blended and Heterogeneous Perfections both material and immaterial must of
necessity exist somewhere simple and unmixed. And then all Immaterial
Perfections being found blended together in the Humane Soul, they concluded
that as many degrees of Perfection as they could discover there, that there
were so many Ranks of superior and more homogeneal Beings in the Intellectual
world. The Soul therefore (as they apprehended) consisting of four parts, must
have the fourth Rank in the order of Intellectual Beings, and by consequence
there must be three superior Orders more simple and uncompounded, which must by
several steps as far exceed each other, as the lowest order surmounts the Soul,
to the highest whereof must of necessity agree pure and mere simplicity.

2. That which is the supreme Being, and consequently the first Author of all
other Beings, must of necessity be the highest perfection, and contain in it
self all the Excellency and Accomplishments of all its Productions, and yet by
virtue of the former maxim it can be but one simple and uncompounded
perfection, and therefore to find out its Nature, they consider with themselves
what one Simple Perfection is so absolute and transcendent as to comprehend all
others; and at length conclude that Goodness is the most consummate and most
entirely complete Perfection conceivable, and therefore that the most simple
and unmixt Goodness must be the First Being. Which as it is (...) i. e. pure
goodness, so it is (...) i. e. mere Unity or rather simplicity, and has the
same Relation to the other Beings, as Unity has to Number. Now they do not
attribute the Creation and Government of the world to this Being we have
already discovered, but to the second Being, for, say they, it could not flow
from the First, unless the Ideas of all Things had resided in him, but then he
could not have been absolutely simple, having such a multiplicity of Ideas
within him. But Ideas lodging in the Intellect, the Second Being which was
nothing but Intellect was not only capable of receiving them, but had in him as
it were an Ocean of them, which flowing from him filled all Possibilities of
Being with actual Existencies. Upon this account they styled there (...)
because it was not the immediate Fountain of Things, but only the Cause of that
which was. And therefore I am apt to think that upon what Rationalities soever
they pretend to introduce their (...), that their first inducement to it was,
that they might rise higher then Anaxagoras and those other Philosophers, that
asserted an Eternal (...) to be the First Being and First Cause of all things.

3. Intellect or Understanding being the Noblest Perfection next to Goodness,
the second thing must be simply and absolutely (...), and being the Supreme
Entity, it must also be (...), but because it is compounded of Intellect and
Entity it is (...) only by Participation. And hence was started that nice
Controversy, whether is superior Ens or Unum? The Earl of Mirandula's Book de
Uno and Ente is only a Dispute against the Platonists, to prove Unity not
superior to Entity, because they assert their Original and Uncreated (...) to
be the Principle of all Beings, whilst it self is (...), and therefore they
will not permit you to term it (...), but have invented that higher one of
(...) a Nature that is placed above Essentiality. But seeing (by the way) (...)
signifies nothing but the Essence or Existence of the Thing, to which it is
applied, it is a gross Contradiction to deny it* of any thing, that really
exists, because if it exists, it must surely be it self, and if so, it may by
consequence with as great Propriety of speech be denominated (...), as any
thing else. But whatever that Term imports, the signification of (...) is of
necessity most uncertain and ambiguous, for no body understands how much (...)
advances the signification of (...), and because it may signify any thing it
does in effect signify nothing, for an indeterminate signification is all one
with an insignificant one. And yet in this Particle consists a great part of
the mysterious sublimity of the supposititious and counterseit Areopagite. But
it is not my business to confute but to represent their Notions, seeing
therefore they will Place the Supreme Cause of all (...); the Second Being in
order which is (...), must be (...) becasuse it is (...).

4. Their third Principle, which proceeds from the second as that from the
first, is (...), by which they understand nothing but the Soul of the Universe,
and therefore usually style it (...), as being the Architect of the World; and
hence as they assert the (...) or self originated Goodness to be (...) Causally
Intellect; and the (...) or First mind to be (...) Causally Soul, so they make
(...) to be (...) because it is the Cause of Matter and the Universe. I have
already given you Plato's wild description of this Hypostasis; and therefore
(especially because I begin to tire and faulter) I shall not trouble you with
any farther account thereof, having sufficiently showed the difference of the
vulgar Doctrine of the Trinity from the Platonic Triad, and withal from what
Principles and by what Reasonings the Platonists happened to own and assert
their Threefold Principle.

It were easy ( Sir) to add Infinite Considerations more, but if these
wherewith I have already presented you be material, I have said enough; if not,
too much. Being therefore already tired, I will not put my self to the trouble
of caressing you with a fine and courtly Conclusion, but shall Bluntly and
without any Ceremony sum up the main scope and signification of this tedious
Letter into this one Serious and Eternal Truth, that I am,

Sir Your most Faithful most Humble, and most Affectionate Servant, S. PARKER.

Page 16. l. 15. for Mortality read Morality. p. 18. l. 7. for scrambling for
aspiring read scrambling for And aspiring. p. 33. l. 3. for Politanus read
Politianus. p. 93. l. ult. for (...) read (...)

FINIS.

