A DEMONSTRATION OF THE DIVINE AUTHORITY OF THE Law of Nature, And of the
Christian Religion.

In Two Parts.

By SAMUEL PARKER, D. D. Archdeacon of Canterbury.

LONDON: Printed by M. Flesher, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
Majesty, and R. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's Churchyard. 1681.

To the Reverend Dr BATHURST, Dean of WELLS And President of TRINITY College in
OXON.
SIR,
BEing my self competently satisfied in the true reasoning, and thoroughly
assured of the good meaning of this ensuing Discourse, I am thereby encouraged
to present it to your view, as the most able Judge, that I know, both of the
Argument, and the Performance, and to beg your impartial Censure and Opinion of
it. I know indeed by long Experience your Candor and Kind-nature to be so
great, as to be apt sometimes to sway your Judgment; but (Sir) I beseech you to
set that aside for once, and to peruse this Treatise not with the courtesy of
a Patron but the more obliging freedom of a Friend, (to which familiar
Relation, after your kindness had made me in any measure fit for and worthy of
it, you have been pleased long since to admit me.) And so (Sir) you very well
know that of old the Philosophers and Professors of Learning were not wont to
address their Discourses to great and unlearned Patrons, as has been the
fashion of our modern times, but to their friends and acquaintance of the
greatest skill in that sort of Learning that they professed, and that not for
their Protection, as the Complement now runs, but their sincere and friendly
Censure. Varro was a greater Patron than any Senator of Rome. And though some
of the eminent men of Learning were great men in the Commonwealth too, yet
their Friends were not wont to make their Addresses to them as Members of the
Senate or the Areopagus, but of the more honorable Society of Philosophers.

And that (Sir) is the only design I have in presenting these Papers to your
hands, not to load your modesty with the usual complements and formalities of
Dedications, but to request your free and impartial Judgment of them, and by
that I shall be directed to frame my own. And if they prove so fortunate as to
gain your Approbation, that alone will secure me of their Acceptance with all
wise and learned Men. But whatever they are, I earnestly beseech you to accept
of them as a small Token of unfeigned and indelible Gratitude from,

SIR, Your most humble and most obliged Servant, Sa. Parker.

PREFACE.
THis Treatise being written in pursuance of a former in the Latin Tongue,
ought to have been penned in the same Language; and so very probably it might,
had it not been first undertaken at the request and for the use of an English
Friend. Though upon review I cannot wish that it had been composed in any other
Language, because though the Latin Tongue be of more universal use, yet the
benefit of it is confined to learned Men, who have less need of such helps as
these, and when they have, are able to satisfy themselves. Whereas the
ignorant and the unlearned among our selves are become the greatest pretenders
to Skepticism, and it is the common People that now a days set up for Atheism
and Infidelity. And as much as the Age we live in is improved Vice and
Wickedness, yet it is not so considerable for the baseness of Men's Practices
as for the extravagance of their Principles. For we have not invented (because
indeed we cannot) any new acts of lewdness and debauchery; and the Sins that
are now committed, have been sometimes (though very seldom) committed in former
Ages, but then they were not defended for wise and harmless Actions. Whereas we
are grown so subtle as to suit our Notions to our Vices, and will not be so
rash and unadvised as our dull Forefathers were, to be wicked and not be able
to justify it upon principles. They were so foolish as to act against the
persuasions of their own Consciences, and condemn themselves in their own
Practices, but we are so prudent and philosophical, that unless we can argue
our selves into Liberty from those uneasy Restraints, we will never violently
break through them. So that Atheism and Irreligion are at length become as
common as Vice and Debauchery, and the Vulgar (by which I intend both sorts, as
Seneca expresses it, the Man of Title as well as the clowted Shoe, if equally
unlearned and barbarous) declare that they would not be so wicked as they are,
if they thought that they lay under any obligations to be good.

In short, this is the first Age of the World that I know of, in which Atheism
ever appeared any where in public open and barefaced. For though in the
corruptions of the Roman Empire Men were as prodigious in their impieties as
debaucheries, yet the public Reverence of Religion (such as it was) was in
appearance preserved with some show of sacredness among the rankest Atheists
and the worst of Men, this was thought intolerable when all other wickednesses
were openly allowed and practiced. But how it comes to pass among us (unless it
be that the Hypocrisy of one Age makes way for the Atheism of another) I know
not, the Plebeans and Mechanics have philosophised themselves into Principles
of Impiety, and read their Lectures of Atheism in the Streets and the
Highways. And they are able to demonstrate out of the Leviathan, that there is
no God nor Providence, but that all things come to pass by an eternal Chain of
natural Causes: That there are no Principles of Good and Evil but-onely every
Man's Self-interest, nor any Self-interest but only of this present Life: That
humane Nature is a mere Machine, and that all the contrivances of the minds of
Men are nothing but the mechanical Results of Matter and Motion. That the
Christian Religion has no sufficient proof of its pretended Divine Authority,
and that no wise Man is under any obligation to embrace it, but only as it
happens to be commanded by the Laws of the Realm.

These and such like Doctrines are the most avowed Principles of the unlearned
Herd among us. And the truth is, almost all sense of Piety is confined to the
Men of Sense, whilst the Rabble are run into all manner of Atheism and
Profaneness. (For as for that Antinomian Enthusiasm that is grown so rife among
us, it looks more like Blasphemy than Religion, and is so far from making Men
less wicked, that it only makes them more confident in their wickedness;) And
now when they have thrown off either all regard of duty or sense of distance
toward God, they quickly cashier all conscience of honesty or even civility
toward Men, and together with their Religion loose their good Manners. This is
the bottom of that epidemical Falsehood, Perfidiousness, Fraud, Oppression,
Rudeness and Barbarity that has overspread the whole Kingdom.

Now when Peoples Wickedness is bottomed upon Principle, it is absolutely
necessary to convince them of the vanity of their Principles, before we can
hope to work them to any effectual Reformation. And though I think it an
imprudent thing to be disputing the Fundamentals of Religion to the common
People, if it could be avoided, because it commonly rather weakens than
confirms their Faith, and makes them think that to be only problematical,
which before they supposed to be unquestionable; yet when they have raised the
dispute among themselves, and have by chance (for they never judge of any thing
upon due enquiry, because they never make it) run away with the wrong side of
the Controversy, they are to be reduced by better Information. And that is the
design of this following Treatise to demonstrate to them these two great
fundamental Truths, viz. The evident obligation of the Law of Nature, and the
Divine Authority of the Christian Religion, which alone will scatter away all
their little Principles and pretenses of Skepticism and Infidelity; and if it
do not work so effectually upon them as to reduce them to a right sense, yet it
will at least destroy the rudeness and confidence of their Impiety, and force
them to be more decent and modest in their Wickedness, by letting them see that
what they supposed an high attainment in wisdom was the effect of extreme
ignorance and mere want of enquiry, for there is nothing in the World so
lamentably dull and silly as the Atheistical Philosophy.

And now when we have spoiled their pedantry, that was the only thing that
spoiled them, we have half reduced them, by letting them see that it is not for
them to be philosophising. And that when all is done, it would turn to a much
better account as to their own design, if instead of bewildring their fancies
in the Leviathan, they would learn the Lord's Prayer, the Creed and the Ten
Commandments in the vulgar Tongue. For after all their labor after
philosophic knacks and curiosities, they are certain to loose their vanity,
and instead of being admired for their learning as they design, only make
themselves despised for their conceited folly. An Ass will never become a
Lion's Skin, nor a Mechanic a Philosopher's Cloak. And yet I must confess that
I have scarce any hopes of reclaiming such of the multitude, as are already
tainted with this plague. For I know by too much experience that there is but
one thing in the World more inflexible than Ignorance steeled and hardened with
Wickedness. And therefore my only design is to step in between the dead and
the living, the infected and the sound, and, if it be possible, to give some
stop to the contagion, or at least to keep the Disease from descending to
Posterity. For as for this unhappy Age, it is so universally overspread with
Vice and Wickedness, that it is not reasonable to expect that the Principles of
Virtue and Religion should ever find any just entertainment in it. But
certainly undebauched Posterity will judge more impartially; and such I know is
the power of Truth upon the minds of Men, that if it can but gain Audience it
will at last prevail upon all that are disengaged from Prejudice, and disdain
not to attend to the results of sober Reason. And that is the aim of this
ensuing Discourse, that whenever Virtue shall begin to lift up its head and
recover its right, I may give some little assistance to its Restoration. And
both as a Clergyman do something toward promoting the Happiness of the Souls
of Men, and as an Englishman toward recovering the ancient Reputation of my
native Country for Civility, Justice and Integrity.

As for the Law of Nature, which is the Argument of the First Part, I must
confess there has been much talk in the World about it, but very little said.
The Civilians, Canonists and Schoolmen have attempted little more than to
define it, and in that they have failed too. Even Grotius himself has so far
mistaken it, as to suppose it obligatory without the supposition of a Deity.
Puffendorf has indeed of late happened upon its right definition in general, but
has neither described its particular Branches, nor demonstrated any of the
grounds and reasons of its Obligation. And the Author of the Book De
Principiis Justi and Decori, once or twice started the right notion of it, but
quite lost it in the chase, by quitting his own scent to follow Mr. Hobbs's
cry. Among the Ancients, both Greeks and Romans, I find as little performed,
seldom any thing more than mere Definitions and positive Assertions, and at
most some witty and fancifull reasonings in the Platonic Writers. What was
done by Tully in his Books De Republica, where, as he informs us in his Book De
Legibus, it was copiously treated of, is not now to be known, that excellent
Treatise, which himself valued much above all his other Writings, being
unfortunately perished, but by those fragments that are remaining of it, I am
apt to think that this Loss has been competently compensated by the learned and
judicious Treatise of our Countryman Dr. Cumberland upon this Argument, who
has not only hit upon the right Notion of the Law of Nature, but has, in a
method heretofore proper only to mathematics, demonstrated its obligation.
But his Discourse being every where interwoven with mathematical, logical,
metaphysical, and physiological terms and notions, I meet with very few that
have been able to master its sense, and therefore I have taken his main notion
alone stripped of all accessional Ornaments of Learning, and prosecuted the
demonstration of it my own way in a familiar style and an easy method.

As for the proof of the whole matter, it depends upon the supposition of an
Author of Nature; for unless that be antecedently granted, we cannot so much
as proceed to enquire after the Law of Nature. Because if he never contrived
the Nature of Things, it is evidently in vain to search for his design in the
Contrivance. And herein I have a very considerable Advantage of the learned
Author that I follow, for he beginning at the Dispute of the Law of Nature,
was forced to presume upon the Supposition of its Author, which without any
Presumption I demand and challenge. For having first proved all those physical
Ends and Designs that he has discovered of his Providence in all parts of
Nature, if after that any moral Ends and Designs discover themselves in the
same things, it cannot be doubted but that they are the effects of the same
Providence, and that plainly connects the proof of one with the demonstration
of the other.

Now as to the former, I have run through all parts of Nature and all sects of
Philosophers, and shown that no one thing in the World could ever have been as
it is, but by the ordering of Providence: and that all their several Attempts
to give any other account of the Nature of Things, are intolerably childish and
beyond all things ridiculous. And this may be presumed without any breach of
modesty, because Nature it self is its own demonstration, and it requires only
eyesight to observe that it could be contrived no other way but by Divine
Providence. But when I pretend to have routed all the mechanic Philosophers,
it is so far from presumption, that there is no more glory in it, than in the
Conquest of an Infant. And indeed nothing does more exactly resemble their wise
contrivances than the little sports and works of Children; for just as they
make their Playthings, so do these grave Philosophers make their Worlds. In
short, the folly and nonsense of mere Mechanism or accounting for the nature of
Things only by Matter or Motion or any other second Causes, is so notorious,
that all the Philosophers in the World never were, nor ever will be able to
give any the least account how so much as a Stone should fall to the ground
without a Divine Providence. This may seem a very odd challenge to be made to
the great Wits and Virtuosi of Mankind, but I make it not rashly, and have
thoroughly considered all their Attempts, and more than enough demonstrated
their Vanity, and am sure upon the most diligent enquiry that it can never be
done any other way than by resolving it into the force of Magnetism, than which
in all the Universe there is not a more amasing piece of Divine Art and Wisdom.

But here, before I can proceed to what ought to have immediately followed, I
am forced to thrust in a kind of preposterous digression, in answer to a very
mean piece of disingenuity that I have lately met with from the Mechanic
Philosophers, viz. That I have made too bold with the reputation of great and
famous Men, and treat those that have been admired and renowned for Wisdom and
Learning in all Ages as if they were void of common sense. And thus the late
Author of the Augmentation to Mr. Hobbs his Life, p. 205.
when he has represented me as one of the keenest and unkindest of his
Adversaries, brings off his Master with this clean Complement, that he has no
reason to take it unkindly from one, that sticks not to treat the greatest even
of the ancient Philosophers after the same rate, and gives the same correction
even to the great Aristotle himself as to Mr. Hobbs, and as for the famour
de-Cartes he sticks not to chastise him like any Schoolboy.

But in the first place methinks this is a very poor and humble Objection, and
becomes not the due confidence of a Philosopher. For it is this sort of Men,
that first upbraid us with the great and unanswerable Performances of Mr.
Hobbs, and tell us that till we can answer him we may preach what we please to
the People, but wise Men will be of his mind. And yet when we not only answer
but plainly demonstrate the pitiful and even childish folly of his pretended
Philosophy, that is objected as an unpardonable rudeness to so learned a Man.
But I would fain know what is to be done in this case, you will not be content
till we undertake him; and yet if we do, you grow angry, and our very
attempting it is made our crime. But yet if he be exposed, it is none of our
fault but his own, for it is not in any Man's power to make his Notions better
or worse than they are; and if we represent them truly, and they prove
ridiculous, we cannot help it; but if we do not, it would be somewhat to the
purpose if they could convince us of so unmanly a piece of disingenuity, but
till then it is at best but a very childish thing to complain either of unkind
or uncivil Usage.

And therefore, in the second place, it was done much less like a Philosopher
only to give an account of my Assertions against Mr. Hobbs, without taking any
notice of our Reasons and Arguments. For if I have charged any thing upon Mr.
Hobbs, and have not demonstratively proved it, I am bound to give public
satisfaction to his memory. But if I have, then the severity of my charge is no
fault of mine; and for that I dare and do appeal to the judgment of all
impartial Men, whether I have not proved upon and against him all that I
pretended to; and if I have, then it is evident that Mr. Hobbs has asserted a
very wicked Cause very foolishly.

But, lastly, it is done still much less like a Philosopher to load me with that
invidious charge of traducing the greatest Worthies among the Ancients. For I
know no one quality more unbecoming a Man that pretends to letters and civility
than an envious affectation of finding fault with the Performances of great
Men. This has ever been the creeping artifice of small People to make
themselves considerable only by the greatness of their Adversaries, and it is
a practice that I detest as I do Slander or Perjury. And if they could but
assign one Instance in which I have in the least wronged any learned Man, they
should not be so forward to show it as I would be to confess it. But otheways
to insinuate that I spare not the greatest even of the ancient Heroes, is (to
say no worse) but a sneaking way of encountering an Enemy, and indeed an inward
confession of the want of some better reply. For if they thought they were able
to overthrow Arguments in fair Combat, they would scorn to betake themselves
to such skulking Artifices. For when all is done the whole merits of the Cause
will rest upon the reason of the thing, so that if I have opposed or confuted
any of the ancient Philosophers upon good and substantial grounds, I have done
them no wrong in doing Truth right. If otherwise, I have not really injured
them but my self, and it is in these Gentlemen's power, that make the complaint,
to demonstrate the falsehood or the folly of my Opposition. But till then I
think it becomes not the state and grandeur of a Philosopher to condescend to
such poor topics of Insinuation. But if they will do so, it is all one to me;
for my only design is the pursuit of real Truth, I mean not useless and barren
Speculation, but such as is serviceable to the Happiness of humane Nature, and
that is all the Learning or Wisdom that I care for. And if any Man stand in my
way, though it be Aristotle or de-Cartes, Epicurus or Mr. Hobbs, Friend or Foe,
yea though it be M. Tullius himself, yes though it be an Angel from Heaven, I
must on, and if I am forced to justle them out of my way, I cannot help it, for
I am resolved never to leave it my self.

However it is a vain thing for Mechanic Philosophers to complain of being a
little derided, when they so wantonly and affectedly expose themselves to it.
For how is it possible for the wittiest Men to come off with better success,
that, when we see the whole World framed with such admirable Art and Wisdom,
shall undertake to teach the senseless Materials, of which it is made, to be
their own Architect? I will and do grant that they were very witty and acute
Men, but if they will presume so extravagantly upon their own wit, as to think
themselves such almighty Conjurers as to be able not only to raise all the
parts of dead Matter into Life and Motion, but so to inspire them as to make
them dance of their own accord into exact Order and Symetry, I think the
greatest right that their Friends can do them is to tell the World that much
Learning has made them mad, for it is scarce to be imagined that any Man in his
right wits could ever so much as dream of so wild a design. It is just as if a
Person famous for Architecture should grow so odly conceited of his skill, as
to take upon him with the greatest gravity to instruct the World how to build
Houses and Palaces without Workmen, by teaching his Art to the Materials
themselves, whereby Stone, Mortar, Timber, Lead, Iron, Glass shall be enabled
to work and contrive themselves into a regular Building; his Friends certainly
could never take it unkindly if any Man should conclude him a little beside
himself. And yet this is the very case of all our Mechanic Philosophers, that
they will be building of stately Worlds without an Artificer. For in that alone
lies all their folly, and it is so enormous in it self, that no Man's wit can
ever help or mend it. Whereas if they would but take the Divine Wisdom into
their Mechanics, and make their several ways of mechanism the effects of his
contrivance and not the results of blind and stupid Matter, for me they might
play at mechanising as long and as variously as they please. But till then I
must beseech them not to take it unkindly if some splenetick People cannot
hold, and if after this they shall persevere in their complaint, the next thing
they can do will be to pity them. And thus having removed this poor but
plausible Objection, that I found spitefully thrown in my way, I may now
proceed where I broke off.

Well then, if the physical Ends of things are so obvious in the whole
contrivance of Nature, and if they are laid for the groundwork by the Divine
Providence, the great lines of Morality that are so plainly interwoven with
them, must so much the more evidently appear to have been drawn by the same
hand. For things Moral are not so plain and visible in their own nature, as
things Physical, or the Rules of Good and Evil so easily observable as the
Contrivances of Art and Wisdom; and therefore when those are drawn out of and
connected with these, they cannot but derive a greater light from them than
they are able to give themselves. Thus for example, there is nothing more
evident than that the Sun (whatever other uses it may have) is designed to give
Light and Comfort to this lower World, and that the regular motions of one or
both are so artificially contrived, as to be most serviceable to this design,
insomuch that if any the least alteration were made, it must prove a
considerable prejudice to this whole Globe. Now if the same cause that
contrived this exact harmony between the Sun and the Earth, has in any part of
this Contrivance intimated any Laws of Life, then is it as certain that he as
much intends that Mankind should govern themselves by those Laws, as that the
Sun should give light to this World.

This connection between the physical and moral ends of things being thus firmly
knit, the first Observation of Nature will direct us to one great end of
Morality, and that is universal and mutual Love, Kindness and Benevolence
between all rational Creatures, in that the nature of Things is so laid as to
make it appear that he that made it, first designed the Happiness of all, and
then secondly to oblige us all to prosecute his own design, has so ordered the
natural course of things, as to make every single Man's Happiness to depend
upon their honest and sincere endeavors to promote that of the Community. And
that is all that is requisite to make a Law or enact an Obligation, the first
declaring the Will of the Lawmaker to all his Subjects, that are capable of
observing it; the second engaging their Obedience to it by the Sanctions of
Rewards and Punishments. But though this be all that the Philosophers think
requisite to be proved upon this Argument, yet here also as I began higher, and
founded my Argument of the Law of Nature not upon the bare supposition but the
evident demonstration of a Deity, so have I proceeded farther to the certain
inference of a future State. For though that be the natural course of things,
as they are settled by the Divine Providence, and as far as our Actions are in
our own power, that Interest should be connected with Honesty, yet it may and
often does so happen that by the voluntary wickedness of other Men they are
opposed. What then is to be done in that case? If interest ought to be
preferred, then there is no such thing as Honesty, for then are we cast upon
the Principle of all Wickedness, that is, not to care what we do, so it be in
order to our own particular Self-design, and if that be once taken up for our
Resolution, nothing can ever bring us under any true obligations of Virtue and
Goodness. If Honesty must be preferred, what recompense shall we receive for
the conscientious discharge of our Duty? For in this Life it is supposed that
in this case they run counter, and therefore unless the Providence of God have
some reserve for it in a Life to come, he has obliged us to a Duty without any
sufficient Reward, that is to say, he has obliged us without a sufficient
Obligation. So that from hence it is as evident that the same Providence that
made the World, and has interwoven in the make of it the Laws of mutual Justice
for the attaintment of our common Happiness, has withal secured a future state
of Reward for all that uprightly comply with his design, because without it,
they may, when they have discharged their Duty, be defeated of their Happiness
by the default of bad Men. For as all moral Goodness is resolved into that one
Principle of seeking the common Good in the first place, so is all Wickedness
and Immorality into the contrary Principle of neglecting or opposing it.

Seeing then that all Men have some power over their own Actions (for without
the supposition of that all Morality sinks into nonsense and nothing) and
seeing we find by too common experience in the Affairs of the World, that good
Men when they have done all they can as to the discharge of their Duty and
Obligation, may be defeated in this Life of their Reward by the wickedness of
bad Men, what can more evidently follow than that the same Providence that has
obliged them to their Duty, should secure their Reward in a Life to come. These
things are so inseparably connected, that if one be true, all is true; if one
false, all is false. So that if there be a Deity, there must be a Law of
Nature; and if a Law of Nature, a future State. And on the contrary, if no
future State, then no Law of Nature, and if no Law of Nature, no Deity. So that
the proof of all the rest ultimately resolves into the proof of a Deity; and
that being the most evident thing in Nature, it gives the same evidence to all
other Principles that are so inseparably connected with it.

And having brought our Argument to that head, there we may safely leave it,
and challenge the assent of Mankind to both the other, till they can rationally
quit themselves of the belief of that. And it is for this reason chiefly that I
have waved all physical Arguments for the Soul's Immortality, because how valid
soever they may be, they cannot be so certain (nor indeed any thing else) as
the existence of a Deity, which is the most certain thing in Nature, and of
which I have as good assurance as of my own Being. Beside I am quite tired out
with the dullness of Mechanical Philosophy, with which I must have engaged, if I
had undertaken the Physical Argument; but alas when they are not able to give
any tolerable account of a Stone's falling to the Earth by mere Mechanism, what
wretched work are they like to make of it, when they would make out all the
Actions of humane Understanding by the fortuitous workings of Matter. And when
Mr. Hobbs tells us that Reflection upon our own Thoughts is nothing but the
Reaction of one parcel of Matter upon another, the Notion is just as wise and
philosophical, as if the witty old Gentleman had told us, That when one bowling
Stone beats back another, the repercussion is Understanding. I know some
attempts of the same kind have been made by wiser Men, but as long as they
terminate in mere Matter, and make the Brain any more than the Instrument of
Conveyance between the operations of the Mind and the Body, their discourse is
full as wise, as if they would undertake to turn Custards and Mince-pies into
Philosophers or Statesmen. And therefore I cared not to meddle with this part
of the Argument, because I must confess I was ashamed to be caught at Child's
play.

However if there be any Mechanism (as no doubt there is) it is Divine
Mechanism, but as for that I will not be so presumptuous as to pretend to
fathom it, and though it were easy enough from philosophic Reasons,
Observations and Experiments to demonstrate that God has actually made humane
Nature something more Noble, yet because there is nothing in all natural
Philosophy so evident as the Being of the Divine Providence, and because the
future state of Mankind is so apparently connected with it, that alone far
exceeds the evidence of all other demonstration. And I have so much the rather
pursued this Argument, because though I find it suggested by several Authors
both ancient and modern, yet it is not, that I know of, prosecuted by any. If I
would have been more copious than was absolutely necessary, after I had shown
that there was no account to be given of the Providence of God in the
Government of Mankind without the supposition of a future State, I might have
run through the whole Series of humane Affairs, and shown not only how just
but how wise the Providence of God is in the management of all things upon this
Supposition. But alas when it is once proved that Divine Providence cannot be
justified without it, it will immediately and of it self clearly prove how
excellently it is quitted by it. All Objections from the real Vanity of this
World, and the seeming inequality of Justice toward good and bad Men are
cleared up by the certainty of a future reserve. But the proof of this being so
easy and obvious after the proof of the other, it is needless to treat of it
apart, because it does not so much follow upon it, as go along with it, and at
the same time we perceive that Providence cannot be justified without it, we
cannot but see how admirably it is justified with it.

Thus far may we advance by following the nature of Things and the conduct of
natural Reason; and it is a sufficient declaration of the will of God to
Mankind, supposing that he has endued them with a faculty of Understanding, and
that they are pleased to make use of it; for if he has, the connection of these
things is evident enough to any Man that will observe it, but if he will not,
he is not capable of any kind of Information, no blindness more incurable than
when Men will not see. But as bright as the light of Nature shines, it is but a
dimm thing, if compared to that great glory that is revealed in the Gospel;
there Life and Immortality are brought to Light, so as to be made evident not
only to our Reasons but our very Senses, our belief of it is founded upon
visible experiment and ocular demonstration. And that is the Argument of the
Second Part, to demonstrate that the original proof of it is on all sides so
evidently confirmed, and so advantageously guarded against all Objections, that
it is not possible for the wit of Mankind to have laid the same design, so as
to have made it more unquestionable. For that is an undoubted proof of its
being a contrivance of the Divine Providence, in that if we would only suppose
that the Providence of God should set such a design on foot, we cannot
comprehend how it was possible to recommend its truth to the World with greater
Advantage. And as it was at first attended with all imaginable Evidence, so is
the Testimony, whereby the knowledge of it is conveyed down to us, so undoubted
and uninterrupted, that if we our selves had been Eyewitnesses of it, we could
scarce have had a greater assurance of its truth and reality; in brief, there
are so many and so forcible Arguments to prove it apparently true, that I
cannot think it too much confidence to affirm that it is scarce possible to be
false.

And therefore for the more effectual demonstration of it, I have gone that way
to work, to make out its proof from the monstrous and infinite absurdities of
Unbelief; and shown that it must believe every thing that is incredible, all
the contradictions to humane Nature and humane Affairs. I have laid the whole
stress of my Argument upon the Evidence of the matter of Fact, and for its
greater advantage I have leapt over fourteen Centuries, and taken a prospect of
things in the same posture, in which they stood the three first Ages of the
Church. For then the History of our Savior's Reformation was as certain and
undoubted to the Men of that Age, as the change of Religion under Henry the
Eighth is or can be to the Men of this. And here I have so closely traced the
Tradition of it up to the very Beginning, that if it had not the Beginning that
it pretends to, it could never have had any Tradition. And therefore I shall
only desire the Reader, to suppose himself as near to the time of our Savior
as he is to the Reign of Henry the Eighth, and then to consider with himself
which way it was possible, that there should over have been any such thing as
the pretense of Christianity in the World, if it had not come with all those
miraculous proofs of Divine Authority that it pretends to. And that I hope, if
it be made out, is satisfaction enough to any reasonable, nay to any
unreasonable Man. It is needless here to trouble the Reader with any farther
Account of the particulars of my Argument, because if he desire a view of them
beforehand, they are all distinctly drawn up in the following Schemes of the
Contents of the several Sections. Where all the chief materials of the whole
Discourse may be seen, though not the connection of its parts with each other.

I have no more to say but only to desire the Reader, to peruse the whole with
the same honest and impartial mind wherewith it was written, for I will assure
him that I have given the Cause no more advantage than that has given me. And
as I may challenge my Reader's Honesty, so I must his Ingenuity too, viz. That
whereas I have built my whole Argument upon matter of Fact, so he would receive
every matter of Fact only as I have presented it: For some things, and indeed
very nigh all, that I have urged, I insist upon as undoubted Records and
demonstrative Proofs, yet some few there are that I have only propounded
problematically, and have asserted them not because I thought them any way
necessary to the Argument, which though they were granted to be false, stands
unshaken upon its own undeniable evidence, but because I thought them more than
probable Conjectures, which if true might reflect some little glimmering light
upon the main demonstration. Neither indeed do I mention them of my own choice
or urge them as any part of my positive proof, but only bring them in by way
of objection in answer to the humoursome singularity of some learned Men, who
of late affect, out of I know not what vain ostentation, to disparage, what in
them lies, the Records of the Christian Church and the Evidences of the
Christian Faith. Of whom the learned Mr. Vossius thus justly complains:
Profecto De Sybill. Orac. cap. 11.
nullos Religio Christiana infensiores habet hosts, quam ipsos Christianos,
cum vix ullum apud antiquos de Christo aut Vaticinium aut Testimonium invenias,
quod non complures etiam doctissimi viri labefactare aut etiam penitus evertere
fuerint Conati. The Christian Religion has met with no Enemies so fierce as
Christians themselves, when so many learned Men have made it their business to
discredit, and, if it be possible, to destroy every Prophecy and every Record
that might do it service. And this he speaks with regard to the old Sybilline
Verses, which some of late have so confidently rejected with a scornful
reflection upon the credulity of the ancient Fathers: though beside those
miserable slight pretenses that they have for their confidence, it is
undeniably evident from the very Books themselves that they were composed by
some body out of the Writings of the ancient Prophets; so that these critical
Gentlemen might, when ever they are disposed to it, as reasonably fleer at the
Original Prophesies, as at these Translations of them. And this is clear enough
as to all those passages that are quoted in the Writings of the ancient
Fathers, and that is more than enough to justify their sincerity; but it is by
no means ingenuous or indeed honest, to load their credit, as some learned Men
have done, with the forgeries of later and barbarous times.

But the things that I chiefly intend in this Premonition are the Testimony of
Josephus concerning our Savior, the reconciling him with Saint Luke about the
Tax of Cyrenius, the Testimony of Phlegon concerning the Eclipse at the
Passion, the Letter of Pontius Pilate to Tiberius, the Therapeutae in Philo,
whether they were Christians, and lastly the story of Agbarus King of Edessa.
All which I first intended to prosecute rather as digressions than as any
direct part of my Argument, and therefore though they all prove true (as I
think they do) yet I cared not to lay any argumentative stress upon them,
because the evidence of their truth is so weak and dusky in comparison of that
undoubted and noonday certainty of the other matters of Fact, upon which I have
founded my demonstration. But finding a fantastic and unnecessary coyness in
our great Professors of critical Learning against the forementioned
particulars, and that upon reasons very far short of that great confidence
wherewith they are pleased to vote them down, I thought it would not be
altogether unseasonable to give some little check to this light and wanton
humor, by showing that these stories were not so improbable as these Men would
force us to believe, nay, by proving that they are very good and authentic
Records, notwithstanding all that they have been able to object against them.

As for the Testimony of Josephus, it is well known with what an unanimous cry
of the whole Pack it has been run down, and yet upon such lamentable pretenses,
as would rather amaze than startle any Man to consider them; so that I must
profess that upon the utmost enquiry that I can make, I cannot see any the
least ground to doubt of that particular passage more than of any other in the
whole History of Josephus. And therefore though I at first intended to use it
only as an accessional proof, yet it does more service than I expected from
it, and by its own force makes its own way into the main body of my Argument,
and stands there as unmovable as any other Testimony whatsoever. The
Reconciliation of Saint Luke and Josephus is endeavored only to prevent a
critical Objection; for though it cannot reasonably be required in a matter so
remote, and in a time of so much variety of civil Action, as was the Reign of
Augustus, that we should be able to give an exact account of the time and
circumstances of every particular Affair, and make an agreement among all
Writers about it. Yet when both these stories may be made to run clear together
only by making one easy conjecture and mending one obvious mistake, I thought
it could not be amiss to propose it to the Reader's satisfaction.

As for the Testimonies of Phlegon and Pontius Pilate, I cannot see any the
least ground of calling the truth of either into question, beside this that the
Critics have got the Itch. And as for Philo's Therapeutae being Christians,
his description of them agrees so exactly to the state of the Primitive Church,
that it cannot without manifest violence be applied to any other party of Men;
so that I take it to be as full a Testimony as any the most undoubted Record of
the Christian Church; and in this I am since the writing of it very much
confirmed by an excellent Discourse that I have met with upon that Argument in
Dr. Beveridge his learned and judicious Defense of the Apostolical Canons
against all the Dalleans, Lib. 3. cap. 5.

And, in the last place, as for the Edessean story, I will, because I would not
be too retentive, grant that it may be more qucstionable than any of the other;
For though there is not the least ground of suspecting the Integrity of
Eusebius, when he protests that he translated it out of the public Records of
the City, upon which alone I ground my proof, yet it is not impossible but that
story might have been foisted into the Records themselves, and that this
learned Man might with too much greediness have swallowed such a strange and
surprising story. At least he could not have that opportunity of making that
exact enquiry into its truth, that he did into the other ancient Records of the
Christian Church, because it stood singly by it self, and could not, as the
others were, be vouched by concurrent Writers; so that though it were not easy
to impose upon Eusebius with any forgery thrust upon the Greek Church, yet even
he was no more able, as having no better means, to judge of the truth of a
Record so remote, than any other Person less learned. And this I say, not
because I see any ground to suspect it of forgery, but because I am not willing
to lay too great a stress upon it upon the score of its solitude and privacy.
For otherwise the weightiest Objections that are made against it, are too light
to weigh any thing in my Opinion. These are the two chiefest; First a passage
in our Savior's Letter taken out of the Gospel of Saint John, when the Gospel
it self was not as yet written: Secondly, such a mistake in Chronology, as
antedates our Savior's Passion three years.

But as for the first, viz. Blessed art thou, O Agbarus, who, though thou have
not seen, yet believe on me; for it is written of me, That They who see
should not believe, and they who see not should believe and be saved. This
passage is of a quite different sense from our Savior's words in Saint John
chap. 20. v. 29. Jesus says unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou
have believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.
Where seeing and believing are not opposed, as in the former words to Agbarus,
but believing upon that rational Evidence which our Savior had given the World
of his Divine Commission, without that certainty of sight that Thomas had, is
preferred as more ingenuous and commendable. But, secondly, it is evident from
the words themselves, that our Savior quotes them not as an historical Record
but as a prophetic Prediction, and therefore uses the same form of speech that
he does in the Evangelists, as often as he applies the Prophesies of the Old
Testament to himself, (...) it is written of me, i. e. it is foretold. But then
the difficulty will be where to find out this Prophecy; Valesius has spied out
a passage as he thinks somewhat like it in the sixth of Isaiah, but as the
passage it self is very obscure, and cannot without too unnatural a force be
brought to parallel this saying, so I think it needless to accommodate the
saying it self to any particular Prophecy, when it agrees so fully with all
those innumerable Predictions concerning the stubbornness and infidelity of the
Jews, among whom our Savior conversed, and the wonderful conversion of the
Gentile World to his Faith, who were strangers to his Person and Conversation.
Infinite are the passages to this purpose in the holy Evangelists, especially
as to the strange unbelief of the Jews, which is every where represented as a
thing so monstrously stupid, as if no other account could be given of it than
by the utter loss of the use of their Eyes and Ears, as if they neither saw nor
heard those things that were daily said and done in their presence. And
therefore it is no wonder if our Savior use this saying of himself without
alluding to any particular Text, when it is so exactly suited to the whole
Tenor of all the ancient Prophesies concerning his entertainment in the World.

As for the other Objection, if it could be certain, it might be of some
moment, but chronological mistakes are so very easy, and indeed in length of
time unavoidable, that all Histories would be overrun with them, were we not
directed either by some other passages in the History it self, or by some other
contemporary Writers, to find out the faults and mistakes crept into the
Copies. So that in such a singular story as this, if there should be any
mistake of a Transcriber, we have no means to correct it. And that it is
actually so in this case is evident from the great variety of Copies, that are
so strangly different, that learned Men could never make any probable
conjecture of the certain time of their date, till Valesius referred it to the
Edessean account. But then (say they) according to that it must have happened in
the 15th year of Tiberius, whereas learned Men are now agreed that our Savior
suffered not till the 18th, after which time Thaddaeus must have come to
Edessa. But be it so, yet the difficulty is very easily solvable, for if the
date in Eusebius refer (as it is most probable it should) to the time of our
Savior's writing, it falls in exactly enough with the 15th of Tiberius, in
which our Savior first publicly entered upon the exercise of his Office, and
went to the Passover at Jerusalem, where Proselytes of all Nations were then
assembled, and whither some might as well repair from Edessa and the parts
about it, as the Eunuch from Ethiopia, from whom King Agbarus might receive his
information concerning Jesus the same year; especially when the account of the
Edessean year commenced from the Autumnal Equinox, which was a considerable
time from the Passover, and might take in a great part of the year following,
and so include the second Passover. So that if this account be applied to the
main transaction between our Savior and Agbarus, and not to the coming of
Thaddaeus (as Valesius has done) to Edessa, which was but an Appendix to it,
the Chronology is very punctual, and therefore upon the whole matter I can as
yet see no reason to suspect the Record of forgery, and that is all that I
undertake, viz. To vindicate it from the confident but groundless exceptions of
learned Men, and desire them till they can produce some more material demurrs
against it, that its plea may be admitted. Though otherwise because it is a
single and unassisted Testimony, I should be wary of laying any more stress
upon it, than as it agrees exactly with all those other innumerable Records,
that I think I have proved unquestionable. But if I am mistaken either in any
of these or any other historical or chronological Nicities, they are no more
than the fringes of my Argument, which is demonstrative either with or without
them. And now this being premised that the Reader take all matters of Fact as I
have intended and represented them, and lay the same stress upon them that I
have done, I will upon the perusal of the whole leave it to his own choice to
make his own conclusion.

I am not ignorant that it is commonly looked upon as an invidious thing for an
Author to seem to speak with any assurance of his own performance; but for
that I am not concerned, for I only make use of my own liberty to judge of the
nature and capacity of my Argument, and leave others to theirs. And as I would
not be so vain as to overvalue, so neither would I be so formal as to
undervalue a Discourse, only because it is my own, lest by this seeming and
counterfeit modesty in my self, I reflect but a scurvy and uncivil complement
upon my Cause. For Writers, when all is done, do not create their Topics of
Reasoning, no more than Workers in the Mines do their Oar, but only dig up
such Materials as the Vein will afford. So that if I should pretend to less
Evidence than my Cause has given me, I should only wrong that, for I do not
make, but find it. And therefore though I would not forestall my Reader's
Judgment, much less upbraid his Ingenuity by pretending too confidently to
demonstration, but leave every Man to the result of his own impartial thoughts,
yet this I cannot but declare for my own part, That the Evidence that the good
Providence of God has given me of my Christian Faith, is much greater than I
could in reason have expected, and I am sure much more than I should in modesty
have desired. And the satisfaction that upon a thorough Enquiry I have received
is so very great, that as much as I think my self obliged to the Goodness of
the Divine Providence for the strange work of my Redemption, I think my self
not less obliged for the wonderful and amasing Evidence that he has given me
of it. The security of the Gift is as valuable as the Gift it self. For it is
the certainty of our Title to good things, that gives our Minds satisfaction in
them. And certainly it is the highest contentment that humane Nature is capable
of, to live, not with a mere fluctuating Hope and unexamin'd Belief, but a just
and reasonable Assurance of immortal Happiness. But if in this this following
Discourse fall short of demonstration, yet however I am ensured of its
acceptance with all good Men from the goodness of its design, which is to do
some honor to our dear Savior and his Divine Religion. And if by this
Undertaking I have done any thing toward that, it is enough, and I may from
this time forward as cheerfully, as the good old Man did, when he had his
Savior in his Arms, sing my Nunc Dimittis.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. A Demonstration of the Law of Nature from the Nature of Things, and of
the future State of Mankind from the Law of Nature.
I. THE Enquiry after a Law of Nature supposes and depends upon the antecedent
proof of an Author of Nature. page 1. II. The Law of Nature not to be proved
by Instincts and Notions within us, but by the outward Appearances of Things.
p. 5. III. The greater and the lesser Rules of Morality; the greater evident to
all the World, the consent of Mankind as to their Obligation, unknown to none
without the most wilful ignorance or most brutish stupidity. The lesser are
only Rules of Decency: one Direction about them all, viz. To avoid unnatural
imitations. p. 9. IV. All the Laws of Nature reduced to one Principle, viz.
Mutual Love and Kindness among all Mankind; this demonstrated to be the will
and intention of their Maker. The absurdity of Mr. Hobbs's supposed state of
War shown, though there were no Deity. But if there be a Deity the Obligation
of the Law of Nature unavoidable. p. 17. V. The end and design of Society, its
Divine Institution demonstrated. The state of War shown to be contradictory to
humane Nature. p. 25. VI. The Divine Institution of Propriety and Dominion
proved first from the limitedness of every Man's Nature, secondly from its
subserviency to the public Good. p. 35. VII. The Law of Nature made known and
recommended to us from the constitution of all things within us; First, From
the natural activity of the mind of Man. p. 42. VIII. Secondly, From that
natural sense and desire that every Man has of his own Happiness. p. 47. IX.
Thirdly, From some natural instincts and inclinations of humane Nature. As,
First, Conjunction of Sexes for propagation of the Kind. Secondly, The strength
of natural Affection between Parents and Children. Thirdly, Natural Pity and
Compassion. Lastly, From the Passion of Laughing. p. 50. X. All the particulars
of the Argument recapitulated. p. 57. XI. The Sanction of the Laws of Nature by
natural Rewards and Penalties proved. p. 60. XII. The first reward of Virtue is
its own intrinsic pleasure, and natural tendency to tranquillity of Mind and
health of Body. p. 64. XIII. The second is the Conscience that a good Man has
of his approving himself to the wisdom of the Divine Understanding, and the
acceptance of the Divine Will. p. 69. XIV. The third is the endearment and
recommendation of himself to the love and good will of Mankind. p. 74. XV. The
first natural Punishment of Injustice is the forfeiture of all other Men's
Kindness. The second is Insecurity. The third is provoking the whole Society to
endeavor his destruction in order to the public Safety. p. 79. XVI. As the
Law of Nature follows upon the supposition of a Divine Providence, so does the
certainty of a future State upon the supposition of a Law of Nature, in that
without it it can never attain the end of its Institution; and first because
without it Mankind is utterly incapable of Happiness; this proved against all
the Philosophers. p. 84. XVII. And first against the Epicureans. The
Controversy with them stated, not whether Pleasure be our sovereign Happiness,
but what Pleasure. p. 88. XVIII. The meanness and foulness of Epicurus his
Doctrine, that all Happiness consists in sensual Pleasure, proved against those
several Apologies that are made to excuse it. p. 91. XIX. There can be no
Happiness in this Life, if taken alone, because of the fickleness and
uncertainty of all its Enjoyments. p. 96 XX. The several prescriptions of
Epicurus and Seneca against the miseries of Life shown to be vain and trifling.
p. 99. XXI. The fear of Death proved an inevitable and insuperable misery of
Life, without the hope of Immortality. The vanity of Epicurus his great
Antidote against the fear of Death, viz. That Death cannot hurt us, because
when that is we are not. p. 106. XXII. All the other Receipts prescribed by the
Philosophers against the fear of Death represented and exploded. p. 113. XXIII.
Without a future State no sufficient foundation for Virtue: First, Not for
Temperance. p. 120. XXIV. Secondly, Not for Justice, nor Magnanimity. p. 124.
XXV. The vanity of the stoical Philosophy represented, upon its Principles
neither Happiness nor Virtue without a future State. p. 131. XXVI. An account
of the Platonic and Peripatetick Morality out of Tully. And first his
consolatory Discourses, in his first Book of Tusculane Questions, against the
fear of Death proved vain and ineffectual. p. 139. XXVII. The same shown of the
Remedies prescribed in his second Book for the alleviating of Pain. p. 147.
XXVIII. The same shown of the Prescriptions of the third and fourth Books
against Grief and Trouble under the calamities of Life, and all other
perturbations of the Mind. p. 151. XXIX. An account of the fifth Book, where he
forsakes the Peripatetick Philosophy as insufficient to his purpose, and what
good reasons he had so to do. p. 157. XXX. The defect of his own new way of
philosophising proved in general. p. 162. XXXI. That great and glorious Maxim
of his Friend Brutus, That Virtue is sufficient to its own Happiness, proved to
be a vain and empty saying without Immortality. The Argument concluded. p. 167.
PART II. A Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Christian Religion,
from the undoubted Certainty of the Matter of Fact, and the uninterrupted
Tradition of the Church.
I. THE great advantage of the Gospel above the Law of Nature. page 175. II.
The Evidence and Certainty of the Christian Faith demonstrated from the
infinite and intolerable Absurdities of Unbelief. p. 179. III. This
particularly proved, according to our Savior's own Advice, in the Article of
his Resurrection. p. 182. IV. The impossibility of the Apostles being false in
their Testimony of it, demonstrated from the first Instinct of humane Nature,
love of Life, and desire of Self-preservation. p. 184. V. The same proved from
its contradiction to all the principles of Prudence and common Understanding.
p. 190. VI. The same proved from its inconsistency with and contrariety to
their own design in publishing Christianity to the World. p. 193. VII. The
undoubted Truth of the Scripture History, if written by those Persons whose
names it bears. p. 199. VIII. That it could not be written by any other
demonstratively proved. p. 204. IX. The Books of the New Testament, whose
Authority was sometime disputed, proved to be of Apostolical Antiquity. p. 207.
X. Mr. Hobbs's Witticism against the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, that
the Canon was first compiled by the Council of Laodicea, confuted. p. 210. XI.
The concurrence of Jews and Heathens with the Testimony of Christian Writers.
p. 112. XII. Josephus and Saint Luke reconciled about the Tax of Cyrenius and
the Death of Herod Agrippa. p. 215. XIII. The famous Testimony of Josephus
concerning our Savior vindicated from the exceptions of Tanaquil Faber and
other Critics. p. 222. XIV. The Testimony of Phlegon concerning the Eclipse at
the Passion asserted. p. 229. XV. Pontius Pilate his Narrative concerning our
Savior to Tiberius, and Tiberius his Opinion of it, cleared. p. 230. XVI. The
Story of Agbarus proved genuine. p. 235. XVII. The impossibility of the
Apostles prevailing upon the Faith of Mankind, if their Story had been false.
p. 239. XVIII. The speedy propagation of Christianity in all parts of the World
described. Philo's Therapeutae proved to have been Christians. p. 241. XIX. The
first disadvantage of Christianity, if it had been false, its being a late
matter of Fact. p. 251. XX. The second disadvantage of Christianity was its
contrariety to the Atheism and the Luxury of the Age in which it was published.
p. 256. XXI. The third disadvantage of Christianity was its defiance to the
established and inveterate Religions of the World, both Jewish and Heathen. p.
259. XXII. The wonderful success of Christianity, notwithstanding all other
disadvantages, not to be ascribed to any thing but the greatness of that
rational Evidence that it gave of its Truth. p. 263. XXIII. That the Apostles
planted the Christian Faith with so much speed by the power of Miracles; and
that it was not possible to have done it any other way. p. 266. XXIV. The
continuance of the same power to the next following Ages asserted, and with the
greatest Assurance appealed to by all the Advocates of Christianity in their
public Writings. p. 275. XXV. The vanity of the Objection of the Ancients
against the Miracles of our Savior and his Apostles, that they were wrought by
Magic. p. 283. XXVI. The vanity of the Miracles opposed by the Heathens to our
Savior, particularly that of Vespasian in curing the Lame and the Blind. p.
287. XXVII. An account of the evident Imposture of Apollonius Tyanaeus from his
own Historian Philostratus. p. 293. XXVIII. The Evidence of the Christian Faith
from mere humane Tradition, and that first public by the uninterrupted
succession of Bishops in the chief Churches from the Apostles. p. 300. XXIX.
The same proved by private Tradition, and first of Saint Clement Bishop of
Rome. p. 308. XXX. Secondly, of Saint Ignatius, with an account of himself and
his Epistles. p. 311. XXXI. Thirdly, of Saint Policarp, Pothinus and Papias.
The wisdom of the Ancients vindicated as to the Paschal Controversy. p. 320.
XXXII. Of Hegesippus. The purity of the primitive Church vindicated against all
Innovators. And Hegesippus his History against the cavils of Scaliger. p. 328.
XXXIII. Of Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and a great number more. p. 338. XXXIV. The
Objection from the Infidelity of great numbers of Men in that Age answered; the
first ground of the Infidelity of the Jews was their invincible Prejudice in
honor of Moses. p. 343. XXXV. Their second great Prejudice was their
expectation of a great Temporal Prince for their Messiah, and how they were
crossed in it by our Savior. p. 349. XXXVI. Atheism the ground of the
Sadducees opposing Christianity, and fanatic Pride and Arrogance of the
Pharisees. p. 357. XXXVII. The Heathens opposed Christianity for the sake of
Idolatry. The Neronian Persecution only a trick of State to secure himself
from the fury of the Multitude, by delivering up the Christians to it. p. 363.
XXXVIII. Domitian's Persecution founded upon jealousy of State against the
Line of David. Hegesippus vindicated in his account of it against Scaliger. The
jealousy both of the Emperors and the Senate about the Messiah. p. 370.
XXXIX. An account of the following Persecutions, and of the injustice and
unreasonableness of their several Proceedings against the Christians. p. 376.
XL. The Persecutions not set on foot or carried on by the Governors
themselves, but the rage and fury of the fanatic Rabble. p. 380. XLI. The
Rabble enraged against them by impudent Lies and Calumnies. p. 387. XLII.
Christianity opposed by the Pythagoreans upon the score of Superstition. An
account of the Superstition of that Sect. Of Porphyrie, Hierocles and Julian.
p. 391. XLIII. Christianity opposed by the Epicureans upon the score of
Atheism. A large account and particular confutation of Celsus his Cavils and
Calumnies. p. 397. XLIV. The Conclusion. p. 417.
A Demonstration OF THE LAW of NATURE, FROM THE NATURE of THINGS; And of the
Future State of Mankind, from the Law of Nature. PART I.
1. HAving already from all those admirable contrivances that are visible in
Nature, and from all those wise designs that discover themselves in the frame
and constitution of things, demonstrated that there is a Sovereign Lord and
Governor of the Universe: I shall now endeavor in the same method and by the
same argument to discover that model of Government that he has set down to
himself, and those Laws that he has prescribed to us, and those Sanctions by
which he has recommended them to our practice; And here I shall desire nothing
more to be granted me then what I think I have sufficient right to demand, viz.
what I have already proved, that there is a God, or an Author of the Universe,
and that is the last result of this Enquiry; for if there be no Deity, there is
an end of our present Disquisition, and we must turn back to the former
Question, which must be determined before we can proceed to this Enquiry: but
that being granted, the other unavoidably follows, that if the world be
governed by a divine Providence, there are then some certain Laws and Rules of
Government. And therefore the Epicureans, when they would take away all natural
Obligations to Religion, Justice and Honesty, first endeavor to free the minds
of men from all apprehensions of a Divine Providence; for it is certain that
without a Lawgiver there can be no Laws; so that if there be no Deity, or if
the Deity that is, have no Regard to or Knowledge of humane Affairs, he can
neither prescribe any thing to our Actions, nor abet his Prescriptions with
Rewards and Punishments. These men are consistent with themselves and their
Principles, but Master Hobs, that he may be constant to his own way of
contradicting himself as well as all the World beside, has given us a Body of
Natural Laws that were never enacted by the Authority of a Legislator; for upon
that one absurd Supposition he founds all his Morality, beginning his
Hypothesis from a supposed State of Nature, in which nothing is or can be just
or unjust, which can never be supposed, if there be a Deity, and to suppose it,
is to suppose no Deity; and then whatever Laws the Philosopher afterward
provides for the Government of the World, they are made Laws by himself, and
require Obedience without the Will and Command of a Governor. And there is the
whole Mystery of all his Politics, by this sly Supposition to leave the Deity
out of the Government of the World; and without it there is no difference
between his Laws of Nature and those of all Mankind: for though he boasts
himself the Founder of all Morality, yet he gives us the very same that have
been acknowledged in all Ages, only we must not receive them upon the
Authority of God, but upon his own; for by virtue of his own Wit, after he has
discarded the Authority of God, he has (as he thinks) found out a way to make
them obligatory to all the World. But how ineffectually to his own purpose and
how inconsistently with himself I shall not now trouble my self to enquire,
having elsewhere sufficiently proved that by that one Supposition he has
irrecoverably let all Mankind loose to all manner of Wickedness and Vilany. But
if we will own any Laws of Nature to any material purpose of Life, we must
first suppose a supreme Governor, by whose Authority they were enacted, and to
whom we are accountable for our Duty and Obedience. So that all that remains to
be accounted for is, to demonstrate from the Nature of Things a Divine
Institution of the Law of Nature enjoining its Observance to all Mankind. For
if the Nature of Things were made and contrived by a wise and intelligent
Cause, that proposed to himself some Design in the Contrivance of every part,
then whatever Effects result from the Nature of Things as they stand contrived
and constituted by him, are to be ultimately resolved into his Providence. And
therefore whatever Notions or Observations are imprinted upon our Senses or
upon our Minds by outward Objects, he is as much the Cause of all such
Impressions as if they had been stamped upon us immediately by himself. If then
from the Observation of the Nature of Things that present themselves to our
Senses we are made to understand that such Actions produce such Effects, it is
the same thing as if we had received our Informa tion from the supreme Author
himself, because he has on purpose so contrived them as to make it necessary
for us to take notice of that Information that is given us by their being so
contrived. And herein consists the Institution of the Law of Nature, that God
has signified to us his own Design and Intention toward Mankind in the
Contrivance of it, and has induced us to pursue the same Design with himself by
Rewards and Punishments resulting from the Nature of Things as we comply with
or disobey his Will. For that is all that is proper or necessary to make a Law,
or to pass an Obligation, first, to declare the Will or Command of the
Legislatour; secondly, to enforce Obedience to it by consequent Rewards and
Penalties. So that if it can be proved that the Author of Nature has signified
any certain Rules of Life to Mankind by the very Order and Frame of Nature, and
that he has farther made them obligatory to all the World by making the same
necessary connection between the Duty and the Reward as there is between every
natural Cause and Effect, their Obligation will be established upon no weaker
Grounds or Proofs then of certain Demonstration, and we shall have the same
Assurance that they are designed for the Rules of our Actions as we can have
that any natural Cause was ordained to produce its natural Effect: And it will
be as manifest from the whole Constitution of Nature, when it is considered and
reflected upon, that God intended Mankind should govern themselves by such
certain Principles as that it is the Office of the Sun to give Light to the
World. This is the thing that I here attempt to prove and hope to perform. And
the Proof of it will consist of these two parts, first, to demonstrate the
Publication; secondly, the Sanction of the Laws of Nature.

II. 1. As to the Sufficiency of the Publication of the Law of Nature, the
plain Account of it has been obscured by nothing more, then that it has always
been described and discoursed of in metaphorical and allusive Expressions, such
as Engravings, and Inscriptions, and the Tables of the Heart, etc. As if the
Law of Nature consisted of a certain number of Propositions that were imprinted
upon the Minds of Men, and concreated with their Understandings, by attending
to and reflecting upon which they were instructed or bound to govern their
moral Actions. Perhaps this may be true, and God may possibly have put some
secret Notices into the Minds of Men for the greater security of Justice and
Honesty in the World; but then, beside that there is no way to prove the
Certainty or demonstrate the Obligation of any such inward Record, this plainly
resolves the Authority of the Law of Nature into uncertain and unaccountable
Principles, or such as may be pretended, and, when they are, ought to be
admitted without any Proof or Evidence of Reason, and this amounts to no more
then all the idle and precarious Pretenses of Enthusiasm; and whatsoever some
Men affirm or fancy to be written upon their Hearts must immediately pass an
Obligation upon all Men's Actions, and the Finger of God may be as wildly
pleaded in all cases that are not to be accounted for by the Principles of
natural Reason and Conscience, as the Spirit of God has been. But though that
influences the Minds of Men with secret and undiscernible Impressions, yet it
must not be made use of to warrant the Lawfulness of any Undertaking; but that
must be decided by the common and avowed Rules of Virtue and Religion; because
it is certain that the Spirit of God always acts according to their Intendment
and Direction: so that by them we must judge of its Impulses, and not suffer
our selves to be determined in any Affair, but where they will abet or justify
our Proceedings, whether we really are or are not acted by any other Principle,
otherwise there could be no certain Rule of moral Actions.

And thus too may Men that are bold and confident call every thing the Law of
Nature that they have a mind or fancy to, without being bound to give any Proof
of its Reasonableness or Account of its Obligation; it is no more but calling
it the Law written in their Hearts, and then it must right or wrong pass for
the Universal Law of Mankind: so that after this rate there will remain no
certain method whereby we may discern men's own Fancies, Prejudices and
Inclinations, from the true Dictates of right Reason and the natural Grounds of
Good and Evil.

And therefore these Phrases are not to be taken in exact propriety of Speech,
but only in a loose and popular way of Expression; and so they were intended by
those that first used them, that only alluded to the known Customs and
Solemnities of enacting Laws, that were always wont to be declared and
published to the Subject by Writing or Proclamation; and in allusion to this
they came to describe the Law of Nature by the Voice within, the Book of
Conscience, the Tables of the Heart, etc. because the Laws of Nature are as
certainly declared reasonable and obligatory by the State of Nature, as if they
had been written upon our Minds by the finger of God, or proclaimed by an
audible voice to our Consciences.

However, Though we should allow them in their literal sense (and so, for any
thing I know, we may) yet we can never derive the certainty of their Obligation
from such uncertain Suppositions, at least we need not, when they are so
clearly demonstrable from Reason and Experience, from the Observations of
Nature and the Necessities of Life, from the Advantages of Justice and the
Comforts of Society; this gives a complete and satisfactory Account of their
Authority to the Minds of Men, and they may come to a sufficient Knowledge and
Understanding of their Duty by their own Thoughts and Reflections without any
other declaration or express discovery of the Will of God.

And this seems to be the meaning of Saint Paul in his description of the case
of the Gentiles, Romans 2. 14, 15. where it is observable that he describes the
Law which he affirms to be written in their Hearts (in allusion to the Mosaic
Tables) not by the common expression of (...) general Notions or Instincts of
Good and Evil, but by the word (...) Reasonings, or such evident Results or
Conclusions as it is natural or at least very easy for the Mind of Man to make
from its experience and observation of things; for the Heathen World had no
other Objects to exercise or entertain their Thoughts withal, but what Nature
presented to them, and therefore those Reasonings of their Consciences that
Saint Paul here speaks of, must of necessity be deduced from this Principle and
no other.

And thus are the Laws of Nature drawn forth into use and bound upon the
Conscience, not by any express Voice or immediate Impression of the Legislator,
but by virtue of the workings of our own Minds and the unavoidable Results of
our own Consciences, that as long as we act sincerely and meditate impartially
upon the Nature of things, will lead us into some knowledge of our Duty and
convince us of the reasonableness and necessity of our Obedience.

There is no man so desperately dull and stupid as not to be able to perceive
and examine the Truth of the first Problems in Morality, when (as we shall
prove) they are so evident from the whole frame and constitution of Nature, and
when they are found so useful from all the experience and observation of
humane Life, that it is even impossible to open our Eyes or to look abroad
without observing their Goodness; so that we cannot suppose any Person to live
without any sense of Virtue and Religion, without supposing such a brutish
Stupidity as can scarce be supposed incident to a Rational Creature.

But if any Man will choose inadvertency, and resolve to make no serious
Reflections upon the most common Objects that present themselves to his outward
Senses, there is nothing in the World so plain or so obvious that he may never
so much as take notice of. But then this is such a brutish Affront to his
Nature, such an affected and wilful sottishness, that it is of all Crimes the
most unnatural and inexcusable. It is indeed not impossible but a Man may be so
wretchedly regardless of all things as never to have made one Observation all
his lifetime, and to be ignorant even of the Truth of that Proposition, that
the whole of any thing is bigger then a part of it; but then nothing can ever
be pleaded to excuse such a palpable brutishness and inadvertency; and all the
World will impute so gross an Ignorance to the most shameful and unpardonable
neglect of his natural Abilities; and no Man will ever pretend in his behalf
that he wanted sufficient Means for making the discovery.

And thus it is in the first and fundamental Principles of good and evil; they
are so legible in the whole Contrivance and all the Appearances of Nature; they
are so necessary to the Being and Preservation of Mankind; their Equity is so
apparent and their Convenience so obvious in every Action of humane Life, that
no man can reflect upon any thing either within or without him, but it must
make him sensible of their Obligation; and he that does not perceive it, is
guilty of the same unconceivable Stupidity, as the Man that should pass through
the World without ever knowing that twice two make four.

III. For there are but two Rules of humane Actions, either the greater or the
smaller Morals, as the Platonists divide them.

The first takes in all the great and fundamental Principles of Morality; whose
evidence is so notorious, that it is not possible for an Upright man not to
discern their Goodness and Obligation; and whose Usefulness is so common and
diffusive, and so necessary to the good of all Mankind; that it is not so much
as possible for any Society to subsist without some regard to their Authority:
and in these great and fundamental Measures of good and evil all Men and all
Nations agree, the most civil and the most barbarous People consent in the
first Principles of natural Religion, and the first Provisions of natural
Justice.

We have no reason to believe there are any Corners in the World void of all
Notices of a Deity and all sense of Humanity; and though some men that may tell
us any thing what they please, are pleased to tell us that there are, yet they
give us very little ground to credit their Report, because their Converse in
those places was so very short, and their Intercourse with those People so very
imperfect, and withal their Languages so utterly unintelligible to one
another, it is easy enough to suppose the Inhabitants might have diverse Notions
of which Strangers were not capable of making the least Observation, no nor so
much as any Enquiry; at least it is sufficient to destroy the Credit of their
Testimony concerning their Manners and Customs, when the best Information they
were capable of was so imperfect and so incompetent.

But however, suppose there were any part of Mankind so desperately debaucht as
to live without all sense of God and good Manners; yet there are none so much
as suspected of so great a degeneracy, but such as give us too manifest Tokens
of extreme Sottishness and Stupidity as to all the other Necessities and
Conveniences of Life, and that live altogether like the brute-Beasts heedless
and regardless of themselves and their own Natures, without making any
reflections upon their own Minds, or emproving any observations from their own
Experience.

Now I will not deny but that it is possible for Creatures so utterly supine
and negligent, to be ignorant of the most common and most obvious Notions of
things. For all Knowledge is the effect of some Attention; and if Men will not
attend, they deprive themselves of all means of Information; If they will not
make use of their Faculties, it is not the certainty nor the evidence of Truth
that can force or obtrude an Impression upon their Minds; and though perchance
it is possible that the Almighty Power of God may overcome their Dullness, yet
this is violent and preternatural, and it is not to be expected that he should
alter the course of Nature only to repair our wilful Sottishness; for that
were to destroy the Principles of all Morality and to make us incapable of all
practice of Good and Evil by forcing, i. e. destroying our Wills. And therefore
humane Kind must be governed in an humane way, and not be overpowred by any
such forcible and vehement means as may offer violence to its Liberty. So that
when the Divine Providence has done all that is fit or necessary to bring them
to the knowledge of their Duty, it must after all be left to their own Power and
the freedom of their own Choice, whether they will or will not make use of the
means that he has left them for that purpose.

And therefore as to this it matters not whether the natural Law be written
upon the Mind of Man or the nature of Things. For wheresoever it may be
recorded or howsoever collected, it cannot be drawn forth into use and practice
without the help of Reflection. And though it were properly (...) a certain
number of Propositions imprinted upon the Heart or Conscience of Man, yet he
may as easily take no notice of what is legible within him, as not observe what
is plainly deducible from the whole frame and constitution of Nature without
him, in that the knowledge of both depends entirely upon his own Animadversion.

So that if the Author of Nature have made any sufficient discovery of his Will
and Pleasure either by Instinct or by the Order of Nature, that is a sufficient
Provision for the due government of Mankind, and the common welfare of the
World; and though there are some few in it so monstrously dull and sottish, as
not to take the least notice of the most obvious Truths, yet that is merely the
defect of their own Will, and not any default of his Wisdom; and it is enough
to secure the common good, that their usefulness is so great and notorious,
that it cannot but be observed by all that make any use of their
Understandings. And thus is the Consent of Nations a great proof and
confirmation of the Laws of Nature, for though their differences are numberless
as to casual and arbitrary Customs, and as to their municipal Laws, and their
more remote and less useful Rules of Morality, yet as for the great and
fundamental Laws of Justice and Religion, they are vouch't by the Catholic
Consent and Practice of all known Nations both Civil and Savage.

The belief of a Deity, the obligation of Oaths, love to Parents and gratitude
to Benefactors, and to do to all Men as we would be done to our selves, are
catholic and obligatory all the World over, and are the Laws of Nations as
well as Nature, or (as Aristotle expresses it) are of the same force in all
places, as fire burns every where alike, and is of the same use in Greece and
in Persia. And these if attended to will provide competently for the great
necessities and the main duties of Mankind, and from them may easily be derived
all other emergent and subordinate Rules of Good and Evil; though it is not to
be expected they should be ratified with the same consent of Nations, and
require an equal Obligation in all times and all places, because their
Usefulness is neither so great nor so certain; and by consequence not so likely
to be attested with the same agreement of Voices: For where the Evidence is not
so very notorious and the Obligation so very reasonable, it is an easy matter
for Men to differ in their Persuasions about them.

Especially if we consider how Mankind are everywhere more or less determined
by uncertain and casual Principles, by wild Customs, by superstitious Fancies,
by National Interests, etc. and therefore though all the World agree in the
first and fundamental Principles of Morality, yet they differ endlesly in
deducing and drawing forth particular Laws from them into use and practice; and
all Nations have their own proper Usages, that they set up to themselves as the
Rules and Measures of Civility and good Manners, and judge all People wild and
barbarous, whose Practices do not agree with their own National Customs.

And from hence it comes to pass that many Propositions are reckoned into the
Laws of Nature, that derive all their Authority from accidental Prescriptions,
or at most from emergent Cases of Necessity; for it may and often does fall out
that an Action may be highly useful at a certain time or place, and so be fit
to be established into a standing Law, and yet may afterward by change of
things lose the ground and reasonableness of its Institution; and yet if it
have once been honored with public Reputation, and have perhaps acquired a
religious Opinion with the People, it is not after that to be revers't or
violated without the most horrid and unnatural Impiety; and those Nations are
supposed to be fallen from all the good Principles and Inclinations of humane
Nature, that live in contrary or but different Customs. And this is in no other
Instance more remarkable than in the several ways of Burial and Ceremonies of
treating the Dead, which though they are capable of no other Decency or
Determination than what is derived upon them by the manners of the Place, yet
are they everywhere looked upon with a religious Reverence; and therefore all
that use different Customs must be looked upon by the People at least as brutish
and unnatural.

But setting aside such fancies as have no other obligation but of old Usage
and strong Conceit, the differences about the real Laws of good and evil are
neither great nor many, at least among the better-manner'd and more civil
Nations, i. e. among such as have considered the reasonableness of things and
the conveniences of Life; and if men will be upright in their Endeavors, and
honestly and impartially weigh the Reasons and true Accounts of things, though
they may and always will differ in their Persuasions, and entertain very hard
and unkind Opinions upon the account of their Differences, yet their Errors can
neither be very wicked nor very dangerous. Integrity ensures both their own
Innocence and the Divine Acceptance; for the man that really pursues his best
apprehensions of things can never fall into great and enormous Mistakes, and if
he run into less important Miscarriages, he may be secure to have them
discharged upon the score of his Sincerity: And when God has prescribed him no
particular Rules of Duty, but left him to the conduct of his own Reason and
Observation, and when the Man has followed the best notices of things that he
was able to discover in his circumstances and according to his abilities, it is
as certain as that the Almighty is good and just, that he will accept the
uprightness of his Purposes and the worthiness of his Endeavors.

So that in these less material and more remote Instances of Morality the
Divine Wisdom has sufficiently provided for the government of the World and the
Happiness of Mankind; for if they will but attend to the first Results of their
own Minds, and the most evident Principles of good and evil, and guide their
Actions and Sentiments by a respect to them, they can never be dangerously
deceived or abused in all other apprehensions of things, so that all the
difficulty that is required to secure our Obedience both to the greater and the
lesser Laws of Nature is plainly no more than to resolve to be honest and
upright Men; If they will, that alone will instruct them in all the Obligations
of their Duty: if they will not, it is certain all the Revelations in the World
can never master wilful Perverseness or Ignorance; and this is enough to prove
(if it prove true) that the Providence of God has not been defective in making
sufficient Provisions for the government of Mankind.

The other Rule of Manners comprehends all the Laws and Prescriptions of
Decency that serve chiefly to adorn and set off the practices of essential
Goodness; which though it be beautiful and amiable enough in it self, yet it
appears much more lovely to the World, when it is accompanied with handsomness
of Address and Behavior, and that is the proper meaning of Civility and
good-Manners; in opposition to Rudeness and Barbarity; it is not to be
practiced and disciplined in Formalities and fashionable Gestures, but it is
confined to the exercise of Virtue, to take off all seeming sullenness and
austerity from it by the smoothness and agreeableness of Conversation.

But then all its Rules are the results of Prudence and Wisdom, of Custom and
Observation, and are not (as the former) capable of any certain determination,
and especially because they depend upon and are only to be determined by that
infinite variety of Circumstances that are incident to humane Actions; and
though in some emergent cases a prudent Man may possibly miss in arts of
Ceremony, yet he can scarcely fail in the more material Rules of Decency.
However to be ready at them and exact in them requires rather wit than
integrity; and therefore though they are great advantages to Virtue, yet are
they no parts of natural Morality, and so are not to be sought for from the
nature of things, nor to be considered among the Laws of Nature; and by
consequence have no concernment in our present Enquiry. Only give me leave to
prescribe one general Rule concerning them, because its Observation is of so
very great usefulness to the real interest of Virtue.

And that is that every man for the wise and decent management of himself and
his own Affairs would have a special regard to the capacity of his Nature and
the particular tendency of his Humor. For beside that all strein'd and forced
Behavior is plainly undecent, it probably betrays men into unhandsome Shifts
and Actions, in that nothing is more uneasy than to carry on an humor that is
unnatural; and then when they have entangled themselves in streights and
difficulties, they are forced to break loose by false Stories or false
Promises, or some other unjust and unworthy Artifices.

Thus severe men can never sustein the Person of the courtly and the facetious,
but will quickly run themselves into such inconvenient Obligations, as they can
neither handsomely keep nor honestly break: and therefore it is not only a Rule
of Prudence but of Honesty not to affect unnatural Imitations, but that every
man live after his own manner, and provided the design of his life be virtuous,
that he pursue it in his own way. Thus men of quick and ready thoughts, that
know how to meet with sudden turns of Affairs, and can foresee probable Events
and Contingencies of things, may be more reserved and designing in the
prosecution of their Ends, because they are to be obtained by nothing so much
as Secrecy, and whenever they are discovered, are defeated.

But as for Persons of a more blunt and downright humor, that are not nimble
or foreseeing enough to way-lay all changes, it is more advisable to live with
more openness and simplicity of manners, and to pursue their Ends rather by
Courage than Dexterity, it is more becoming their Person and more useful to
the World; so that as long as the cause of Virtue and the good of Mankind lie
at the bottom of men's Intentions, it is not material which way they work out
their Ends. But every man must perform his own part in his own way, i. e. as
Nature has furnished him with Abilities, and so he abstain from fraud or
violence (that directly contradict all pretensions to Virtue) he may behave
himself in all Entercourses of life, either with closeness or openness of
Address, according as he shall find himself most able to manage and maintain
the humor.

Now these smaller Morals being filled off the Account, because though they are
pretty ornaments of civil Conversation, yet are they not absolutely necessary
to the happiness and security of Mankind, which is the only Principle by which
we are to guide our selves in our Inquest after the Laws of Nature; reckoning
therefore no Rules into their Account, but such as apparently provide for our
natural and common Necessities; we shall find their Obligation as evident and
unavoidable as their Necessity; and though this might be proved beyond all
contradiction by an induction of Particulars, yet the clearest method of
Demonstration is to reduce all particular Cases to one general Head, in which
all the rest are apparently included, or from which they are unavoidably
deduced.

IV. And that is universal Justice or Humanity, or so much love and good will
to all Mankind, as obliges every man to seek the welfare and happiness of the
whole Community and every Member of it, as well as his own private and
particular Interest; and this one Proposition (if once consented to) is enough
to restrain him from all wrongs and injuries; in that they never proceed from
any other Principle than too much love and concernment for a man's own self,
without any regard to the good of others; whereas had he any affection for
their welfare together with his own, he would have no inducement to invade
their Rights for the enlargement of his own Propriety.

And this becomes more forcible upon his Mind, if he be seriously convinced
that the most likely way to improve or secure his own private Weal is to
consult and promote the common Good; and that his own happiness depends so much
upon his contributing, according to the measure of his ability, his serious
endeavors to procure the good of all, insomuch that it cannot possibly subsist
but in conjunction with it and subordinate to it, and yet all this, Nature it
self declares to every man that will observe it, and that is all that is
needful to establish a Law or pass an obligation; and this is the thing that I
say is so plainly observable from the whole contrivance of the Universe, that
it cannot possibly escape any Man's knowledge without wilful Ignorance and
Perverseness.

And now if this one general Rule be so legible in the nature of things, it
draws after it all the particular obligations of Virtue and Honesty, and
whoever is upright in his Intentions of behaving himself in all things
according to the best of his Understanding by its guidance and direction,
cannot easily fall into any considerable mistakes or miscarriages in matters of
Justice and Equity, but must necessarily quit himself like an honest man in all
entercourses and toward all Relations.

And yet the reasonableness and necessity of this Rule is so obvious, that a
man cannot so much as look abroad into the Fields without being informed of its
Obligation; for there he beholds the Fruits of the Earth provided for the
preservation and the comfort of the life of Man, which himself can never expect
to reap and enjoy, unless he will be content with the Comfort of his own share,
and allow every man else his lot and proportion; So that the knowledge of this
Virtue and the benefit that accrues to every man by it requires no deep and
philosophical Speculation of things, but is plainly visible in the most common
prospect of Nature. In which it is certain that the provisions made for the
preservation and the comfort of the life of Man were made by the Author of
Nature for the use and benefit of his whole Family, so that if any one or some
few should go about to engross them to themselves and exclude all others from
partaking with them, they cannot but be conscious to themselves that they act
cross to their Maker's design. And as it is certain that God designed that all
his Offspring should share in the Blessings of his Providence, so is it certain
that they cannot be enjoyed but by mutual help and kindness; so that every man
as he is concerned to enjoy his own share is obliged to love and assist his
Neighbor, at least to suffer him quietly to enjoy his. And this brings every
man to understand all the Benefits of Peace and Society, that are so many
Rewards naturally annexed to the several exercises of this Duty. But because the
generality of men are not so sensible of Rewards as Punishments, I shall rather
choose to demonstrate the great Benefits of this Virtue of mutual love and
kindness by the horrible mischiefs that must follow upon the general breach and
dissolution of it: and they are so great that though it were only to prevent
and provide against them, it were abundantly sufficient to recommend its
practice to Mankind, For it is manifest that if they once betake themselves to
contend and scramble, and live in a perpetual state of war, every man taking
care for no more than one, and standing upon his own guard in defyance to all
the World beside, they will only hinder one another from the common Enjoyment
of all the necessary Provisions of life, and instead of living securely and
cheerfully upon the bounty of Nature, they must unavoidably destroy both that
and themselves too; for certainly no man can ever expect to be safe or happy,
that has all the World to his Enemy, and yet that would be the condition of
every man, if we all pursued our own Interests without regard and (whenever it
happens) in opposition to the welfare of all others.

What a miserable and distracted World would this be, if every man's care and
kindness never reached beyond himself? Our Lives must be for ever poor and
solitary, and infinitely more unsafe than Hares and Foxes and Vermin, and we
should all without a Metaphor be worse then Wolves to one another; always
insecure and uneasy, eaten up with jealousies and suspicions, troublesome to
our selves and to all the World beside, and in continual fear and danger from
the whole Creation; and yet in spite of all our vigilance and industry every
man's Life would be short and his Death violent.

All this is so manifest at first view, that one would wonder how a late
Author could be so wild as well as wicked in his Conceits as not only to
define the State of Nature to be a State of War, but to lay down this
Supposition as the only fundamental Principle of all Government and Morality:
for if that be the State of Nature, to which Nature it self would guide and
direct reasonable Men, though they were under no obligation of Laws or
Covenants no nor Deity, then certainly the State of Nature must be a State of
Peace and Friendship in that it is so apparent from the plainest and most
familiar Observations of things, that Mankind is furnished with sufficient
Provisions for the necessities and comforts of life, if every man would be
content with his own moderate and reasonable proportion; but if not, that then
their lives must of necessity become for ever forlorn and miserable, and that
they would all be so far from being ever secure in their own enjoyments, that
it would be plainly impossible for every or any single Person to defend himself
against the fraud or the violence of all the World beside.

If this (I say) be so visible from the very first Observation of things,
Mankind cannot be supposed so wild and extravagant (unless we can suppose them
all perfectly mad and void of all sense of wisdom and reason) as naturally to
fall into a state of mutual hatred and enmity, when that were so manifest a
contradiction to the first dictates of their own Understandings, and the most
obvious directions of the nature of things. And therefore they can never come
into this inhumane condition of life, till they become so unwise and so
unnatural, as to act against all the principles of their own Reasons, and all
the suggestions of their own Interests. So far is this from being the original
State of humane Nature, that (without the supposition of a Providence) nothing
can ever betray men into it but the most unnatural and unreasonable folly in
the World.

So that though we could suppose that humane Race sprang out of the Earth
without dependence upon or obligation to any Creator, yet if we will be
pleased only to suppose them endued with the Faculties and Apprehensions of
Men, they would naturally fall into a condition of Peace and Society, it being
so evidently every Man's Interest to seek and procure it. So that this
imaginary State of War is just so much the State of Nature as it is for all
Mankind to be Fools and Madmen. But if it be more natural for this sort of
Beings that we call Men to be guided in their Actions by the nature of things
and the convictions of their own Minds, and the love of their own selves, that
will immediately reverse the whole train of their Thoughts and Inclinations,
and bend all their Designs to a quite contrary course of life, and instead of
every Man's falling upon every Man he meets (as that Hypothesis imagines) he
would court his Friendship, though he had no other motive to it, than that by
his help and assistance, he might the better secure his own safety.

And if it be natural for every man in his wits to seek and desire that (which
no man in his wits can ever doubt of) it is as natural to enlarge his
Friendships and Dependances, in that as many as he endears or obliges, so many
he engages to his service and defense; so that so far as Men live according to
the first Principles of Nature and Discretion, so far do they endeavor after
the love and good will of Mankind, because their safety and happiness is
greater or less according to the number of their Friends or Enemies; and
therefore every Man as he is concerned to secure his own quiet, is concerned to
secure the good will of all Men, and to procure it by being as unfeinedly
concerned for their welfare as for his own.

For that is the most proper and effectual method to engage any Man to seek or
consult my Interest; to convince him that it is most serviceable to his own; so
that the strongest motive that can be propounded to court his benevolence, is
to persuade and satisfy him that it is the most natural and most probable way
to endear me to his cause and service; and therefore upon the same Principle
that every Man is inclined to seek his own private good, unless he will
directly cross with his own designs, he is obliged to seek the public too, i.
e. the good of all others within the sphere of his own Power and Capacity.

But now if he be so plainly directed to this by the nature of things, and if
the nature of things were so framed and contrived on purpose by a Wise and
Supreme Cause; that is a sufficient Indication to Mankind, that it is his mind
and will that they should govern themselves and their Actions by its direction;
because, as I premised at the beginning, the whole train of natural Effects are
ultimately to be resolved into his Providence, that is the only cause of the
nature of things, and of all the properties that result from it; and therefore
if the usefulness and necessity of this Rule be so evident in the whole
Contrivance of Nature, it is the Author of Nature that has made it so; and
then there is no avoiding the Conclusion without downright and wilful
perverseness, but that he intended that those of his Creatures, that were able
to make Observations upon his Works, should take it for the Rule of their
Actions.

So that if there be an Author of Nature, this is a demonstrative proof of the
Law of Nature; and no Man can desire a greater Evidence than he has or may have
of the truth of that Supposition. For if there were no God, it is certain we can
be under no Obligation; but if there be one, and if he have so clearly
discovered his Will in all the Effects of his Providence, he has done all that
can be required to establish it into a Law, and declare it a matter of our Duty.

So that by the same method that we arrive to the knowledge of the Supreme
Cause, are we forced into an acknowledgment of his Sovereign Will and Pleasure;
and if from all the wonderful and curious Contrivances that appear in the
nature of things, it be reasonable to conclude that they were so disposed by a
Wise and Intelligent Being; the very same Appearances that discover him,
discover his Intention too. And therefore whoever goes about to avoid the
Obligation of the Law of Nature, must first casheir the Being of a God; and
then indeed (as I observed at first) our work is done; for it is in vain to
vindicate the Goodness and Wisdom of his Providence, if there be no such thing
at all; for that destroys the matter of Enquiry and the Supposition upon which
we argue; and then we must betake our selves to a new dispute, and prove the
Existence of a Deity; and when that is granted, we may then and not till then,
proceed to demonstrate from all the Effects of his Providence the Obligation of
his Laws. And that is all that can be demanded or need to be performed, upon
supposition of a Supreme Governor of the World, to assign by what Laws he
governs it; and he is a very unreasonable Man that requires greater Evidence of
the Being of a Law, than can be given of the Being of the Lawgiver himself; and
if we have so much, we have enough and all that we can justly desire, and he
that would have more, is not to be satisfied without a contradiction.

This then being granted that there is a Sovereign Cause of the Universe, which
must be supposed in the order of Nature, before we can proceed to any farther
Enquiry; the best and easiest way to find out the rules and methods of his
Government, is to reflect upon the natural order and tendency of things; for
that being altogether contrived and designed by himself, it manifestly
discovers to all that are able to observe the connection between causes and
effects, what he principally intends and aims at.

So that all things in Nature being so ordered as to inform every Man that the
happiness of all Mankind and every member thereof is to be obtained by mutual
Benevolence, and by nothing else, that is a clear and satisfactory evidence to
them all, that as it is the end of all his purposes, so it is his intention to
oblige all his Subjects to act in pursuance of the same design. And what could
be done more effectually to engage them to it, than to let them know (if they
will know any thing at all) not only that it is his own will and pleasure by
that order that he has established in the world; but also that he expects that
they should comply with it, as they intend to enjoy all the comforts and escape
all the miseries of life; and that he has done to purpose, when he has made
every Man's private Good so manifestly to depend upon his sincere and serious
Endeavors to promote the Good of all, with the same necessary connection as
natural Effects do upon their natural Causes; and therefore seeing we have
such an ample assurance of the nature of our Duty, and such vehement
Enforcements to perform it, we have all the conditions that can be required to
bring us under the Power of a Law or an Obligation to Obedience.

V. Now this sense of mutual Benevolence, as it contains in it all the duties
of Justice and Equity, and is able (if attended to) without any other direction
to preserve men honest and virtuous in all their entercourses of life, so it
erects (without any train of Consequences) the two things, that are the most
necessary to the happiness and security of mankind, Society and Propriety; in
that it consists in nothing else than a just and reasonable Division of every
Man's Love between himself and the public, i. e. between himself and all
others to whom his Power and Concernment reaches.

Now if there be a common interest, in which every Man is concerned, as he is
concerned in his own, that is it that makes Society; and if no Man from the
natural condition of his faculties be able to carry on either the one or the
other without having a peculiar share divided and appropriated to himself for
the exercise and employment of his industry; it is that that assigns and
settles propriety; so that both these result immediately from the constitution
of nature, and are as evident to any Man that observes the natural frame of
things, as any experiments in natural Philosophy, or problems in Mathematics,
and resolve themselves into such propositions as these, that those causes that
preserve the whole, preserve its parts also; and that those that preserve the
parts, preserve the whole; but for a fuller and more distinct demonstration of
both, we shall prove and consider them apart.

And first as for Society; it is absolutely necessary to the support and
comfort of the life of Man; for were this once dissolved, and should Mankind
once betake themselves to the Woods and the Deserts, and imitate the manners of
wild and unsociable Creatures, they must subsist by destroying and preying upon
each other; and then the most innocent would always be the least secure, as
never being apt to invade other men's rights, and lying always exposed to other
men's wrongs and injuries; and on the contrary the most injurious would always
upon that account be the least unhappy, ever studying to enlarge the bounds of
their Power by wily and unjust Invasions; and then the wanton and the violent
Leviathan must at length devour all, as being the cruelest, and so more apt;
the strongest, and so more able to oppress the rest.

Whence that saying of one of the Ancients that Laws and Societies were
established for the sake of wise and good men, viz. to preserve them from the
injuries and oppressions of the bad; for as much as if these would but be
content to prescribe bounds to their appetites, and moderate their desires by
the capacities of Nature, they would never be disposed nor invited to encroach
upon other men's enjoyments; but whilst their Appetites are unbridled and
exorbitant, and not restrained within the necessities and conveniences of
Nature, they must be invading the Shares and Proprieties of their honest and
harmless Neighbors to satisfy their wanton and unreasonable Humors.

This then is the proper end and usefulness of Society, to institute a common
Amity and Friendship amongst men, to unite multitudes together into
combinations of Friendship, to endear them to each other by mutual Offices of
love and kindness, and by a joint defense of their common welfare against all
foreign Injuries and Invasions; so that to be just and honest is only to be
true and faithful to our Friends; and were Mankind as faithful to one another
as the condition of their Nature requires, and the Author of it expects, there
would be no need of civil Laws and Penalties, that are only a second and
subsidiary help to force a few bad men to preserve that amity and friendship,
which, were they good and virtuous, they would choose of their own accord, as
most reasonable in it self; and most agreeable to humane nature.

So that this is plain, that if Men will but reflect upon the Condition of
their Natures; consider the insufficiency of their own personal Strength to
their own Security; observe the necessity of a public Concern in order to the
preservation of every Man's private Interest, that alone (unless they were in
good earnest resolved to work their own destruction) would combine and embodie
them into Societies to maintain each others Rights by a common Assistance
against all the Invasions of Fraud and Violence. And without this what could be
more wretched, forlorn, and melancholy than the Life of Man? for if we suppose
him in that State of War, that as our Author tells us, could we suppose him
out of Society, must be natural and unavoidable, every Man must then live in
perpetual dangers, fears and jealousies, seeing he must have every Man to his
Enemy; and is not his Condition sufficiently desperate, that must trust to his
own single Strength and Wit to guard and defend himself against the Fraud and
Violence of all the World beside?

There is nothing more obvious than that this eternal Warfare is the most
improper State for the Happiness of Mankind in general, or the security of
every Man's particular Possessions and Accommodations; and that is it certainly
destructive of all those Comforts and Advantages, that are to be reaped from
and enjoyed in a State of Peace and Society. And therefore no Man that has any
kindness for himself can ever think it wise or reasonable in it self, or
well-pleasing to their Maker, for all men to continue in such a State, in which
they must all for their own security be obliged to seek their own mutual
Mischief and Destruction.

And if a State of War and Anarchy be so manifestly uncomfortable, that alone
is a sufficient Direction to all men in their wits to think of conditions of
peace and mutual defense; and men must be supposed so cross grained to
themselves, that they must wittingly choose to thwart both their Interest and
their Reason, before they can reconcile their minds to any other thoughts than
of Love and Society. And if it were possible ever to imagine Mankind out of a
condition of Government, we can never conceive them so absurd, as to choose to
continue in a posture so unsafe and so uncomfortable.

And therefore it is as wild as confident an assertion of our Philosopher of
Malmsbury to lay it down as the fundamental Principle of all Government, that
Mankind is inclined and determined by Nature to acts of mutual hatred and
hostility. For what does he mean by the nature of Man? If those passions and
inclinations that are common to him with other Creatures; even that is
manifestly false as we shall prove in the sequel of this discourse by an
induction of particulars, in that every thing in humane nature has a vehement
tendency to acts of love and good will.

But suppose his brutish part to be wild and savage, yet if we take in the
whole account of our Nature, and only suppose our selves intelligent and
rational Beings, nothing will appear more extravagant than to affirm that
nature inclines or rather (as he determines it) forces us into a posture of War
and mutual Cruelty; and here it is not at all material whether Reason be an
innate faculty, or only an acquired habit and result of Experience; but it is
sufficient to my purpose that every Man has or may have ability and sagacity
enough to observe what tends to, and what contradicts his own happiness; and to
govern his appetites and passions, so as may be most serviceable to the comfort
and cheerfulness of his own life.

And then it is as absurd to say that it is natural to Mankind to hate and
destroy one another, as that it is prudent and reasonable for every Man to
follow such courses, as are apparently contradictory to his own safety and
interest, for nothing is more plainly so, and more freely acknowledged on all
hands to be so, than a State of perpetual war and enmity; and so it is largely
enough represented by the Author himself of that Hypothesis. So that if it be
most natural to Mankind to love their own ease and happiness, and to use and
pursue those means that are absolutely necessary to its attainment, then it
follows unavoidably that nothing is more natural than to seek peace and
friendship, without which the life of Man must of necessity be sadly unsafe and
uncomfortable.

So that we can never suppose it natural to every Man to quarrel with every
Man, till we can suppose it natural to all Mankind to be raving and bedlam
mad, and to endeavor by all violent means as well to make away themselves as
to destroy one another; and when we have supposed that, it will then (I must
confess) not be impossible but that his Philosophy may meet with some
entertainment in the World; but as long as men are content to continue in their
Wits, they will always judge it most natural and most reasonable to choose
such a method of life, as is at least consistent with their own quiet and
safety, and by consequence will abhor nothing with a more natural Aversation
than thoughts and designs of an eternal War, that is so palpably inconsistent
with it.

And as for what is pretended of the equality of all men's strength by nature,
that it causes mutual fear, and that mutual fear puts them upon mutual
violence, every Man endeavoring to secure himself by anticipating the attempts
of every Man. This is so far from being any likely motive to contention, that
there cannot be a more effectual Argument to persuade and force men to
Friendship, and to assist and oblige each other by all the Offices of love and
kindness.

For if their Forces are equal, so is the danger of the Combat too, and if
they engage it is possible they may both perish by the event of War, at least
the Victour cannot gain so much by his Enemies destruction as he ventures by
the hazard of his own life; and therefore seeing there is so little advantage
to be got in this way of defense, every Man can have but very little reason or
inclination to make use of it for his own safety. And then beside as their
power is equal to injure, so it is to help each other; and if I employ my
strength for another benefit, that is the likeliest way to oblige him to a
just and honorable Requital; and certainly his inclination to do me good
turns is somewhat more comfortable than his displeasure or hostility; and
therefore it must needs be a much more forcible inducement to win his good will
by Anticipations of Friendship, than to provoke his rage and revenge by
invading his Rights, and making the first Assault upon his Life and Liberty.

But if we farther consider how vastly every single Man's Power is surmounted
by the Power of all men, and how unable one man is to defend himself against
the violence of a multitude, and withal how much his interest is secured and
enlarged by the accession of all men's love and assistance, then if men are by
nature bereaft of their understandings, if they are born possessed with wild and
lunatic Spirits we might suppose they would all run raving and foming up and
down the World, and every Man fall upon every Man he meets with, and that for
no other reason than because they are an equal match, so that if he did not
give, he must take the first blow.

But if we suppose them in their right minds, with any sense of humanity or
discretion about them, able to reflect upon the great advantages of mutual
Benevolence, and the horrible mischiefs of a perpetual Hostility, it is easy
to imagine how ready and forward such sober People would be to oblige one
another by kind and civil Treatments, and to rejoice in any opportunities of
doing good Offices to others for the Comfort and Cheerfulness of their own
lives. So that the result of all this dispute, viz. what use men would
naturally make of their Power upon one another from the consideration of its
Equality; is only to enquire whether Mankind be by nature in or out of their
wits; if the former may be taken for granted, the case is very plain that men
(unless they are altered by preter-naturall distempers) are creatures tame and
civil enough; but if it must be presumed that they are all naturally frantic,
and void of all principles of reason and sobriety, that indeed will be a proper
foundation for the Hobbian Politics, and upon that supposition it is possible
they may be allowed; I am sure they never can upon any other.

And as for what is farther pretended of the passion of fear, the desire of
Glory, and some other affections of humane Nature, that they naturally dispose
men into a posture of mutual violence. This too is only credible upon the
former supposition; for if all Mankind were acted purely by unaccountable
humors and whimseys, and were driven upon the wildest and most extravagant
attempts without their own consent and deliberation, then indeed we might
suppose they might be hurried upon rash and foolhardy actions, they know
neither why nor how.

But if these passions (how vehement soever) are or may be brought under the
conduct of reason and discretion, and if we have so much power over them, as
that we may (if we please) not indulge them any farther than may be consistent
with our own quiet and tranquillity, then the Question is what course a prudent
man would take to gratify these inclinations. And that is answered from the
premises that any Man in his wits, whatever he designs, would endeavor to
carry on all his projects in ways of peace and civility; and especially if he
were afraid of all other Men, he would think it his wisest course rather to
court them by offers of friendship, than to provoke them by injuries and
ill-turns.

So that the inclination of these passions can only be accounted for in
conjunction with the Reasons and Understandings of Men; and then what way a
prudent man would naturally determine himself, that must be supposed their
natural tendency. They are not capable of any certain determination from
themselves, but receive their Biass from the bent of Men's designs and
resolutions, and may be inclined either way as they choose to act rashly or
advisedly; and the same passions that make Fools and Madmen turbulent, make
all Men in their wits modest and peaceable.

And here to this purpose it is pretty to observe that when Mr. Hobbs treats of
War and the causes of War, it is then manifest in that Chapter that Men are
forced into it by the violent passions of Fear, and Hope, and Glory; but then
when he proceeds to discourse of Peace and the inducements to Peace, the same
passions are ready to serve his purpose thereto, and the very same natural
causes may be assigned either for War or Peace as it pleases him and serves his
turn and his cause. But after this rate of talking it is an easy matter to
prove any thing out of any thing, it is no more than first to lay two
propositions together, and proceed to say this follows that, though there be no
other reason for it, than because it did not go before it, and that is an
Hobbian Demonstration.

But this may suffice to show that as mutual Benevolence is necessary to the
happiness of Mankind, so is society necessary to the exercise of mutual
Benevolence; and if so, then if there be a supreme Governor of the World, that
is an unquestionable proof of its Institution by virtue of his Authority; in
that without it, it is manifest he can never obtain the end of his Creation,
which (if it be any at all) must be the happiness of his Creatures, a thing
plainly impossible to be hoped for without the benefit of Society.

Especially when he has vested all Mankind in an equal and common Right, to
the comfort and felicity of their Lives, and when we know that he desires and
intends the welfare of all his Offspring, and when he has made that to
depend so unavoidably upon the care and the safety of a common Interest; all
that is a sufficient declaration of his will to all his Creatures, that are
able to observe and reflect upon that order of things that he has instituted
and established in the frame of his Creation, that he expects they should
pursue the same end with himself (which is the good of all) and make use of
such means as are absolutely necessary to its attainment (which is Society)
especially when he has farther enforced it by such powerful Rewards and
Penalties, as to annex every single Man's Happiness to the performance, and his
Misery to the neglect of this Duty.

VI. Secondly, as for Propriety, it is as plainly instituted and injoined by
Nature, or the Author of Nature as Society; and that upon these two accounts,
in that every Man's natural power and capacity is limited, and that
unavoidably and by it self introduces a limited use and enjoyment of things;
for no Man can claim a greater right from Nature than he is capable of
enjoying, and therefore seeing that is fully provided for by a parcel that is
proportioned to it self and its necessities, he cannot challenge by virtue of
his natural Right any power over the Remainder; but will be content to leave
whatsoever he cannot enjoy himself to other Men's use and advantage; and
certainly that is very reasonable to allow our Neighbors to challenge their
share of happiness when our own turn is fully served and satisfied. So that
Nature by setting bounds to the capacities of our Appetites and Enjoyments
thereby plainly determines the limits of our Rights, without setting them forth
by any other lines and descriptions.

For the right of Nature neither is nor can be (as some Lawyers and
Philosophers have wildly enough defined it) any such state of life in which
Mankind may be supposed free from all manner of Laws and Obligations, because
this very supposition is made inconsistent and impossible from the Nature of
created Beings, which can never be supposed to exist without depending upon and
being subject to some superior Power, and that implies or at least inferrs
their Obnoxiousness to Duty and Obligation; and then his will or pleasure by
whatsoever means it is revealed and discovered becomes the measure both of
their Duty and their Liberty.

And therefore it must needs be a wild account of things that supposes any
right of Nature antecedent to the Law of Nature, because it is so flat a
contradiction to the natural state of things, that carry conscience of Duty
and engagements to Obedience in their very existence; and therefore to suppose
them to be, and not to be subject to the law of Nature or the will of its
Author, is to suppose them both to be and not to be at the same time. And
though Man be made a free Agent, that is endued with a Power to do whatsoever
pleases him, yet Power is not Right, but the right use of Power is; and when he
does or desires such things as are fit and consonant to his Nature, he observes
its Laws and maintains its Rights, because he is allowed every thing that is
natural and forbid nothing but what is not.

So that the Law of Nature is no restraint superinduced upon the desires and
liberties of Nature (as it is generally conceived) but it is such a rule of
life as is most agreeable to the natural state of things; and it is only a
regard to that that determines the measures of our Duty, and from thence the
bounds of our Liberty. Natural Justice consists in restraining our desires to
our natural Appetites, all that exceeds them, it forbids; that is the Law of
Nature; all that does not, it permits, and that is the right of Nature; so that
it is plain that Nature sets bounds to it self by the limitedness of its own
Being, and that it is impossible there should ever be any state of Nature
capable of an unlimited Right, for its Liberty can never be greater than its
Capacities, and therefore if its Powers are confined within certain measures,
its Rights must be restrained to the same allowances, for it is apparently
absurd to say that any Man has a right or a license to do more than he can do.

So vain a conceit is it to suppose that in the state of Nature every Man has a
Right to all things, when it is so contradictory both to the nature of things,
and so inconsistent with the reasonable claims of all other Persons; and
supposes no less absurdity than that Nature and right Reason advise a Man to
engross to himself whatsover he can, though it be of no advantage to himself
and injurious to all the world beside; than which nothing can be conceived more
disagreeing with the state of Nature and the dictates of right Reason; for that
being of a limited capacity, every Man's understanding cannot but inform him
that he ought to challenge no more by virtue of its Right, than what it is
capable of enjoying; and if he do, that then he claims it in vain and to no
real purpose, and that certainly agrees neither with the dictates of Nature nor
of right Reason.

So that though we should remove the Divine Providence out of the world; yet
notwithstanding the Right or at least the Necessity of Propriety would arise
from the natural constitution of things; which will direct every Man to
confine his desires to his Appetites, and when he has his own share of
happiness to content himself with its enjoyment, and not to disturb himself or
defraud his Neighbors without increasing his own felicity, a thing so
apparently absurd that nothing can be more so, than to suppose that this is the
natural humor of Mankind, and especially of the wiser part of it.

But then if we suppose a Divine Providence, (as here we must do) we must
suppose too that he has given us all a natural Right and Claim to our portion
of happiness, from whence it follows that it is but just and reasonable, and
agreeable to his will that every Man should be willing that others should have
Liberty to enjoy their own proper share of Felicity, as well as he desires to
enjoy his; because the same Providence that vests me in a Right to my own
Propriety, has granted the same Right to all Mankind beside; and therefore
natural equity and regard to his Sovereign will commands me to be content with
my own allowance, and to suffer them to enjoy what is allotted to their share.
So unavoidable is the Institution of Propriety from the limitedness of our
Natures and their natural Capacities.

And therefore following the supposition that there was once no Propriety, and
that all the World lay in common to all its Inhabitants, yet the Nature of
things would have directed them to a division, it being so plainly necessary
both to the preservation of the whole species and of every individual Man. And
so all rational Creatures would be obliged by the same Law, and with the same
Sanctions to establish Propriety, by which they are obliged in obedience to
their Creatour's will to promote the public good. And yet this very
supposition is a flat contradiction to the natural condition of Mankind, every
Man being born in a state of Society and limited use of things; for, as Mr.
Hobbs himself states it, we are no sooner born, but we are actually under the
Power and Authority of our Parents, so that it is as natural to Man to be in
subjection as to be born. Neither for the Proof hereof is it needful to appeal
to the Testimony of the sacred History or any other ancient Record concerning
the Original of Mankind, humane Nature it self is a demonstration of its own
beginning, for seeing it cannot subsist but in individuals, and seeing every
individual Man is mortal, there must be some other cause of the whole race of
Mankind. And he having so disposed the natural condition of Men as that no Man
can come into the World but in a limited state of things, that is a
demonstrative evidence of its Divine Institution.

2. But then Secondly, we are forced upon it in that as single Persons cannot
enjoy their own Lot, so neither can they contribute their Assistance to the
public good but by a limited and appropriated use of things, for their
natural Powers being of a finite and contracted force as well as their
natural Appetites; they can serve the Commonwealth only according to the
proportion of their Abilities, and therefore seeing one man cannot do all
things, it is necessary every Man should take some particular task for the
carrying on of the public Welfare.

And if right reason i. e. the mind of Man guiding it self by an upright
observation of the Nature of things, commands every Man to seek and endeavor
the happiness of all Men, it commands us to confine our endeavors within the
reach of our own Activity, for it can require nothing but what is possible by
Nature, and therefore its Obligation must stint it self to the bounds of every
Man's Power, and so it promotes the Interest of the Community by engaging every
single Member of it to do his own work and mind his own business.

So that whoever performs the duty of his Station and Employment, serves both
himself and the Commonwealth; in that the Prosperity of the whole arises from
the Industry of the several Parts, and their Industry cannot be employed
without assigning them distinct Offices and divided Interests; for till that be
done it will be impossible to prevent those eternal Quarrels and Contentions,
that must arise about the limits of every Man's Right, and the proportion of
every Man's Work; and whilst they are taken up with their own picques and
animosities, the Earth must lie uncultivated and the public Weal neglected,
from whence nothing else can naturally follow but perpetual want and misery.

And the most common experience informs us that there is no way of avoiding or
ending Contentions but by dividing the common Interest into particular shares,
and setting out every Man his own Propriety, so plainly does there follow from
the fundamental principle of seeking the public Good an Obligation upon every
Man to accept his own Lot, and to leave all others undisturbed in theirs,
whereby he fully acquits himself as to all the duties of Justice or Honesty,
whether public or private.

And for this Reason has the Divine Providence distributed among the Sons of
men variety of Abilities, whether natural or artificial, suitable to all the
needs and conveniences of humane life, that so by a joint contribution of
every Man's Talent and Faculty, all our wants may some way or other be
tollerably supplied; so that to do good Offices cannot so properly be said to
give as to exchange Favors; and they are duties of Justice rather than
Charity; every Man stands endebted by the bonds and engagements of Nature to
cast his Symbol into the public Stock, and therefore if he expect to enjoy the
industry of other Men without making any return of some service of his own, he
does not only cheat them, but he robs and defrauds the whole Society. And he
that carries on no designs of good but purely for himself, is not only
wretched and nigardly, but he is false and injurious.

In short all the Laws of Justice and Society are contained in that one
excellent and comprehensive Rule, Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto
you, even so do unto them. And therefore unless a Man would be content (which
no Man can be) that all other Men should mind nothing but their own mere
selves, and that in opposition both to his own and the public Interest, he is
unjust or does not as he would be done by, if he perform not to others the same
Offices that he expects from them, in all his respective capacities: but if he
does, he is an honest man, a good Neighbor, and a good Subject, and discharges
all that can be required of him toward all Relations.

So that Propriety and Commerce are so far from being of any positive
Institution, that Mankind are forced upon it by the first necessities of
Nature, and naturally fall into it for their own subsistence and preservation.
Its benefit is so obvious and its practice so unavoidable, that Men betake
themselves to it almost antecedently to their Reasonings. The limitedness of
every Man's own Nature confines him to a certain Propriety, and the convenience
of his own life invites him to trade and transact with others thereby to
partake the use of their Proprieties as well as his own; for that is the proper
advantage of Commerce to improve and enlarge the comforts of life by mutual
Exchanges, whereby every Man enjoys what every Man possesses.

And this is the natural Original of dominion too, that is nothing else but a
lasting and continued Propriety; for if at present I have a Right to a divided
use of things, both for my own preservation and the common Good, their future
enjoyment has the same Relation to the future security of both, as their
present has to the present, and therefore it is as natural and as necessary
that I should be vested with a perpetual Power to hold my Estate against all
other claims and pretenses hereafter, as it is that I should use or enjoy it at
present; and that is all that we mean by Dominion. This may suffice in general
to show how plainly Nature, and God by Nature informs Mankind of these great
and fundamental Duties of Justice and Morality; their Knowledge is so obvious
as to make their Obligation unavoidable.

VII. But beside this undoubted signification of his Will, that he has given
from the Constitution of all things without us, he has farther secured our
regard and obedience to it from the Constitution of all things within us: there
is no Faculty or Passion in humane Nature that does not incline us to, or
rather enforce us upon their Observation, insomuch that we cannot neglect them
without doing violence to all our own Inclinations as well as affronting all
the dictates of Reason, and the directions of Nature. I shall not insist upon
all Particulars, but shall content my self with only these Three.

1. The natural Activity of the Mind of Man. 2. Its natural Sense and Appetite
of Happiness. 3. Some natural Instincts and Inclinations of humane Nature.
All which necessarily lead to the Knowledge and engage to the Practice of the
Laws of Nature. All which will amount to no inconsiderable proof of the
abundant care that the divine Providence has taken to acquaint us with the
nature of our Duty, and to endear it to our Regard.

1. The natural Activity of the Mind of Man; it cannot avoid to reflect upon
its own Nature, and observe its own Inclinations and Faculties; and by that
means it immediately perceives it self to be a thinking or a reasonable Being;
and then it is as natural to it to act suitably to the condition of its Nature,
as it is to all other Creatures to follow the Instincts and Appetites of
theirs; for as the brute-Beasts are prompted to pursue agreeable Objects by an
inward Sense of their own Desires and Necessities; so is Man inclined to act
rationally by that inward Assurance he has that he is endued with Reason and
Understanding; and that alone is sufficient to bring an Obligation upon him
without any other express and positive Command.

For as by this Reflection he is lead into the Knowledge of Himself and his
Nature, so by that Knowledge is he instructed in the Rule of his Duty; which is
only to live and behave himself as becomes a reasonable Creature; and in that
consists the morality of his Actions; so that from the Nature of Man, and from
the Knowledge of his own Nature (of which yet it is impossible for him to be
ignorant) results the Sense and the Conscience of his Duty; because he cannot
so much as reflect upon himself (and yet that he cannot avoid) without being
conscious of the Faculties of his Mind; and when he is so, it is not more
necessary to follow its Dictates and Suggestions, than it is to inform him how
to satisfy his natural Appetites, or to teach him that when he is hungry or
thirsty, it will be convenient for Nature to eat or drink. His own inward Sense
is enough to convince him of their Use and Comfort, and that without any other
Instruction minds him of seeking such Objects and doing such Actions as will
please and satisfy his Appetites.

The case is the same as to the suggestions of our Minds; to be sensible of
them is of it self sufficient to oblige us to act accordingly; and therefore
there is nothing more needful to acquaint Mankind with the Obligations of the
Law of Nature, than only to let them know that they are rational Creatures;
and it is as easy for them to know that, as it is to know that they are. But as
it is unavoidable for the Mind of Man to understand it self and its own
Abilities; so is it to take notice of all such things as are any way presented
to its Observation, and then to reflect upon its own Knowledge, and then to
weigh and consider the nature of its Objects and to compare them among
themselves, and out of all to draw Conclusions for its own Use and
Satisfaction, especially when it perceives it self employed in such matters as
have any considerable influence upon its own Welfare and Contentment.

And yet such are all the first Apprehensions of Things, they thrust and
obtrude themselves upon our Thoughts, and are so obvious and so perpetually
before our Eyes that it is scarce in our Power to shift their Notice. Thus has
every Man a natural Notion of Pain and Pleasure, and he feels by daily
Experience what things are grateful or unpleasant to the respective Faculties
both of his Body and Mind, and those he pursues and these he shuns with a kind
of fatal Necessity.

So that if he will but attend honestly to his first Observations of Things,
that alone will lead him into a clear and distinct knowledge of his Duty, i.
e. to apply himself to such a course of life as he apprehends and feels to be
most serviceable to his own Interest. And that a very little Experience (if he
be at all upright) will convince him, is rather to be obtained in the ways of
Justice and Integrity than of Fraud and Violence; and this, if he will be true
to his Principles, immediately enters him upon the serious Practice of all
moral Virtues. So that upon this account too it is impossible for any Man to
avoid the knowledge of his Duty without wilful and affected perverfeness. He
must choose to be ignorant of his own Being, he must resolve not to reflect
upon the most common Objects of his Senses, or to act cross to the most
necessary and unavoidable Convictions of his own Mind, before he can ever think
of reconciling himself to unjust and vicious Practices; and if so, then can no
Man ever pretend that he wants competent Means to bring him into a sense and an
acknowledgment of his moral Obligations.

For in the result of this Principle there are but two things necessary to a
Life of Virtue, and they are Consideration and Integrity; both which are so
entirely within our own Power, and so easily secured without pains or study,
that no Man can possibly fail in either of them without wilful Prevarication.
As for the first it is (as I have already proved) natural and unavoidable to
the Mind of Man, that is of so spritely and active a Temper, that it cannot
subsist without thinking and reflecting upon its own Thoughts, and of this
every Man is convinced from the workings of his own Mind.

When he is at leisure and free from all other Employment, that is seldom or
never Idle, but is always framing some Conceits and Apprehensions of Things,
and entertaining it self with its own Thoughts and Reasonings, so that it is so
far from requiring any strength of Intention to consider of Things, that it is
scarce in any Man's Power to avoid it: Especially when there are so many
outward Objects that perpetually thrust themselves upon his Observation, as all
the Appearances of Nature do; so that at last there is nothing more requisite
to make him acquainted with whatsoever that suggests, than only to take notice
of what he cannot but behold. And such Animadversions are so familiar and so
importunate, that to overcome their force and vehemence, a Man must first take
no little pains to stiflle and neglect them; so easy is the knowledge of the
Laws of Nature, that no Man can escape it without labored Ignorance.

And then as for Integrity, it is so far from requiring any new task to secure
it, that (unless we will wilfully pervert the workings of our own Minds) it
unavoidably follows upon Consideration: For certainly there is nothing more
natural or more agreeable than for a Man to act suitably to the Dictates and
Results of his own Thoughts; and the Man that determines to act otherwise,
resolves to be cross and peevish to himself and his own Counsels; so that if
Men will but only suffer themselves to follow the plainest Directions of their
own Minds and Judgments, that alone will keep them Upright and Innocent as to
the main and most important Matters of their Duty.

And that is enough to secure the Welfare of Mankind and the Peace of
Societies, and to satisfy every Man's own Conscience, and to obtain the Divine
Acceptance, in that he does all that can reasonably be expected or demanded
from any Person in his Condition; and to suppose that the Almighty requires
more, is plainly to destroy the Goodness and the Justice of his Providence. For
if once he exacts of any Man beyond the proportion of his Abilities, he may as
reasonably impose all the impossible things in Nature, in that there are no
degrees of Impossibility; so that if he enjoin me any one thing that is never
so little above my Power (so it be but above it) he may as well enjoin all the
Contradictions that are impossible to Omnipotence it self, for to Me and my
Powers they are both alike Impossible. So that unless we will (and that in
defiance to our own experience) charge God's Government of the World with the
most petulant and unreasonable Tyranny, it is manifest that there is nothing
more easy or more obvious in Nature than for Mankind to know his Will and
procure his Favor; it requires nothing more than not to be wilful Sots and
Fools.

VIII. The Second Principle that forces us into a knowledge of our Duty is that
natural sense and desire that every Man has of his own Happiness; the
apprehension and the appetite whereof result from the first and the strongest
instinct of Nature, in that it is without doubt natural to Mankind, as well as
to all other Creatures, to love and desire their own Welfare, and consequently
to consider by what means and in what methods it is attainable. And now the
bare proposal and prosecution of this design immediately brings every Man into
a sense of all the main duties of Morality.

For, upon the serious consideration of the nature of Things, he cannot but
discern in the result of all, that Justice and Benevolence has a more effectual
tendency to procure his Happiness than Fraud and Oppression.

And then, if, upon the force of that persuasion, he set himself upon
resolutions of Virtue and Honesty, he will, by a little care and experience,
gain such a skill in their practice, as Men usually do prudence and dexterity
in the management of those Affairs that they choose for the serious employment
of their Lives. For they, according to the sagacity of their minds, quickly
grow subtle and curious in their own proper business; so as to be able to
perceive the less discernible degrees of advantage and disadvantage, and to
follow them with greater readiness and to improve them with greater art.

And so is it if they make it any part of the design of the business of their
Lives to look after and obtain their own Contentment, and so betake themselves
to those courses and manners of life as are most apparently serviceable to that
end; they cannot but arrive at a competent knowledge and sufficiency, not only
in the great and fundamental rules of Morality, but in all the subordinate
measures and less observable circumstances of good and evil. So that it is made
almost unavoidable, even from the very first instinct of Nature, but that all
Men must have some sense and notion of their Duty, because it is impossible but
they must sometimes have some thoughts and some designs of being happy; and
then if they act in order to it, according to the dictates of their own minds
and the directions suggested to them by the nature of things, they must
determine themselves to pursue it in such ways as are agreeable to both, i. e.
by living according to the Laws of Nature and the Principles of Integrity.

Or by being sincere in their pretenses of Kindness and Benevolence to all Men,
and faithful to this Principle in their Entercourses and Transactions with
them, which alone will easily lead them into the knowledge and bring them
under the obligation of all the Duties of Morality; because they so naturally
arise out of this Principle, or are rather so apparently contained in it, that
whoever embraces it as the best Rule of his Actions, and the most useful
Instrument of his Happiness, cannot, as occasion is offered, but acknowledge
himself bound to act according to the rules and prescriptions of all the
particular Virtues that are but so many ways and means of pursuing this one
general End: And in whatsoever capacity we consider Mankind, if we are resolved
to seek our own happiness in conjunction with the common good, (and yet nothing
is more manifest than that it is not to be compast upon any other terms) this
will secure a worthy and honest behavior in all regards and toward all
Relations.

Thus take them in their greater or their lesser Societies, this still enforces
them to pursue what is useful or necessary to the good of all; some things
there are necessary to the welfare of Mankind in general, and these take in the
fundamental Rules of Morality and the Laws of Nations; (which are nothing else
than the Law of Nature, as exercised between Nation and Nation) and some things
there are that are useful to one City, or a certain Body of Men united under
one civil Government, and these are provided for by national and municipal
Laws; and some things there are that have a peculiar Influence upon the good of
particular Families, and these direct to us the performance of all oeconomical
Duties as we stand engaged in our several domestic Relations; and lastly, some
things there are that relate only to the concernments of single Persons, and
by these is every Man obliged to deal justly and heartily in all his affairs
and transactions.

So that if Men have any sense of or design for their own Happiness, and if
they will be upright in the use of those means that they cannot but understand
to be most effectual to procure it, this alone will irresistibly drive them
into a sense and acknowledgment of all their respective obligations. And in the
same manner might I proceed to draw forth the whole System of all moral Virtues
from this natural appetite of Happiness; but that is too large an undertaking,
and more than is necessary to our present purpose; it is enough that if Men
will follow their own natural Instinct of self-love, and take those courses as
cannot but appear to themselves most agreeable to it, that this alone will
guide them into a sufficient knowledge of all the rules of Good and Evil.

IX. Thirdly, The observation of this Law is farther recommended, and in some
measure secured, by its agreeableness with all the Appetites and Inclinations
of humane Nature; all our natural desires are not only just and reasonable in
themselves, but they incline us to such designs and actions, as naturally tend
to the good and welfare of Mankind. And if there be any practices that have a
more remarkable consonancy to our Reasons, and are of a greater necessity to
our Happiness, they are peculiarly grateful and acceptable to our strongest
Instincts and Appetites.

So that before a Man can cast off his Obedience to the Laws of Nature, he must
do violence to all its Inclinations, and pervert the bent of its first
Impressions as well as affront the dictates of his Understanding, i. e.
Injustice and Cruelty are Unnatural as well as Unreasonable; and all Men are
guarded and prejudiced against such attempts by the temper and constitution of
their Natures; that recoils at an unjust or an unkind action, and has some
affections so tender, that they cannot naturally endure to entertain injurious
or wicked designs; and withal so strong and vehement that they force him to a
prosecution of the most commendable acts of love and kindness.

So that though they were not established into Laws, nor received any Sanction
from the mere inclinations of Nature (though that they must, if we suppose an
Author of Nature) yet are they thereby endeared to our care and observation;
and that is a very considerable advantage to secure their credit and reputation
in the world; in that it is impossible for any humor to keep up its esteem for
any time, that is not acceptable to Nature: and therefore how much soever Men
may labor to debauch their Minds by wicked Customs and affected Impieties, yet
in spite of all their sturdy Resolutions, natural Affection will at last
overcome, and there are very few (if any) that can so far harden themselves as
to shake off or vanquish all natural Endearments. But for a more satisfactory
account of this Principle it is necessary to specify some particular Passions
that incline Mankind to a love of Society and Goodnature, or (in other words)
to Justice and Friendship and Honesty.

1. Conjunction of Sexes for propagation of the kind: and this becomes
necessary from the same Causes that are necessary to the preservation of every
single Person, and this not only inclines but compels them to delight in each
others Society, with the highest Affections of mutual Love and Kindness.

So that they cannot take care of their own support without being obliged to
extend their Affections beyond themselves; and this inclination is of greater
force and has a stronger tendency to Society in Mankind than in any sort of
Creatures, in that it is constant and perpetual, and not confined to certain
times and seasons; and that makes them more capable of these tender
impressions: and thus are the generality of Men carried on by the instigation
of Nature, as well as some other motives to seek Marriages, and take upon them
the care of Families and the education of Children; and that obliges them to
Justice and Civility as well for the sake of their domestic Relatives as for
their own.

For the preservation of Propriety is as necessary to the preservation of
Families as of Persons; and therefore as I would not provoke my Neighbor to
invade my own Enclosures, I must avoid to lay waste or plunder his; and as I
would secure my own Plantation, it concerns me to oblige the affections and
assistence of all others that lie within the compass of my Affairs, i. e. of
all that are able to succor me with their Friendship or annoy me with their
Injuries.

And thus are we all enforced to neighbourly kindnesses from the same principle
that endears us to our nearest and natural Relations, and this concern extends
it self from House to House through whole Kingdoms and Countries; for every Man
has the same tenderness for his own Family as for himself, and therefore are
they all equally concerned to have their Rights kept safe and inviolable. And
thus are great Empires and Common wealths but so many Combinations of so many
Families for their own mutual defense and protection; and now if Men are
strongly inclined by Nature to enter into Families; and if a regard to their
own Families oblige them to be just and honest to their Neighbors; and if both
these combine them together into greater Societies, both for their private and
their common Safety, the Institution of Government is so far from being any far
fetched contrivance, that it is natural for Men to fall into this Order; its
necessity is so great and so apparent, that no Man can refuse or dislike it
without being very unwise or very unnatural.

2. The strength of natural Affection between Parents and Children; and this
proceeds from the same mechanical Necessity with the passion of self-love;
Eurip. (...), in that they are made up of the same material Principles that
necessarily beget a sympathy between their native Contextures and Dispositions;
so that setting aside the workings of their Minds and the emprovements of their
Understandings, that alone must quickly oblige natural Relations to mutual
Endearments. The propriety of their Constitutions and the peculiar mold of
their Bodies disposes them to agreeable passions and inclinations.

Children are, (as the Ancients phrase it) (...), pieces of their Parents, and
the matter of which they are formed is stamped with the same Characters and
Propensions. And this is very visible in the outward signatures and features of
their Bodies; but it is much more certain in the inward complexion and
modification of their humors; and it is impossible but that must breed an
agreeableness of temper and affection. At least from whencesoever this (...)
may arise, it is evident from the most universal Experience that there is no
passion more natural or more acceptable to Mankind; insomuch that no people
were ever able to resist or to overcome the vehemence of its bent and
inclination; neither were there ever any able so much as to attempt it, unless
here and there such a Monster, as affected both to put an affront upon the
strongest principles of his own Nature and the most avowed practices of Mankind.

And their singularity is so unnatural, that how boldly soever these wretches
may seem to pretend to it, they can never be confident or serious in such an
enormous baseness. It is impossible for any thing that has the shape or the
bowels of a Man to be cruel to his own offspring without a sad regret and
recoil of his own Nature. And now when this Instinct is imprinted upon us with
such deep and lasting Characters, when the force of its inclinations is so
strong and vehement; and when it is very nigh as natural and inseparable as the
love of our selves, it is a mighty inducement to seek peace and exercise good
will as well for their sakes as our own.

Beside that this endears us to something out of our selves, and obliges us to
some concernment beyond our own mere self-interest, and is the first beginning
of a Society, and lays the first foundations of a public Good, that spreads it
self into a wider extent with the increase of Families and Kindreds, which
being related to each other as well as single Persons make up Kingdoms and
Commonwealths; beside all this, it cannot but be a mighty inducement to all
persons to settle Peace or Obligations of mutual Love as well for the sake of
posterity as for their own, in that it is equally necessary to the happiness of
all Mankind in all times and all places; and therefore as they desire the
happiness of their offspring (which yet it is natural for them to desire as
vehemently as their own) they cannot but be concerned for the continuance of
Peace and Amity among them.

And this obliges them not only to keep the World in good order for their own
time, but to take care of the settlement and tranquillity of future Ages. From
whence proceed the establishments of Government and the standing Laws and
prescriptions of Justice: this then is plainly no inconsiderable enforcement to
the practice of Virtue and Honesty, when it is so absolutely necessary to the
gratifying of so strong and so natural an Inclination.

3. Natural Pity and Compassion. The Divine Providence has implanted in the
Nature and Constitution of humane Bodies a principle of Love and Tenderness,
and the bowels of Men are soft and apt to receive impressions from the
complaints and calamities of their Brethren; and they cannot, without doing
violence to themselves and their own natural sense of Humanity, be altogether
senseless of the miseries and infelicities of other Men. It is possible indeed
that some few may so long accustom themselves to savageness and cruelty, as to
have no more sense of any kind and humane passions than Wolves and Tigers; but
then these are Monsters, and such as have apparently debauched or affronted all
the principles and inclinations of their own Natures.

But as for the generality of Men their hearts are so tender and their natural
affections so humane, that they cannot but pity and commiserate the afflicted
with a kind of fatal and mechanical Sympathy; their groans force tears and
sighs from the unafflicted, and it is a pain to them not to be able to relieve
their miseries. All mercy is mingled with some grief, and we are so far
interessed in the sufferings of others, as to make us apt to rescue them from
their sorrows for our own ease as well as theirs.

And though every Man is not endued with the same degree of Tenderness, yet
there are no natures or tempers so sullen and morose as not to have some sense
of Compassion and Humanity, at least so much as shall oblige them to succor
the extremely miserable, when they can do it without any damage or
disadvantage to themselves; and he that refuses to light his Neighbor's Candle
(as old Ennius discourses) when it may be done without diminishing the light of
his own; and he that suffers a Stranger to perish for Thirst, rather than be at
the pains to lift up a Finger to direct him to the next Fountain; and he that
should wittingly let a Garment perish for want of use, and a naked Brother
perish for want of it, would be detested by all Mankind, as a degenerate Churl
from that natural Instinct of love and pity that they (as well as almost all
other Creatures) have to their own kind.

Now this passion has a vehement tendency to the Institution of Friendships and
Societies, not only in that it gives restraints to the fury of Men (supposing
them in a state of War) by making them even ashamed to add more load of misery
to the extremely calamitous, and to fall foul upon one that adverse Fortune has
already beaten to the ground, an outrage so more than brutish, that even Beasts
of prey themselves are reported to abhor it; but beside, by making
opportunities of mutual Assistence, and by endearing the good will of all that
any Man has the good fortune to help or relieve, especially when there are so
many inconveniences and infelicities of life, and when some of them are so
incident to all states of Men, that there is no man so perfectly and
independently happy, as not at some time or other to accept of another pity,
if not to stand in need of his help: And thus by virtue of this passion are all
Men not only in a natural capacity of obliging each other, but under a strong
inclination to a state of mutual Benevolence.

And here I might subjoin that the Faculty or Passion of Laughing is peculiar
to Mankind: The cause (they say) is a certain branch of Nerves derived from the
Brain partly to the Heart and partly to the Diaphragm; from whence it comes to
pass that upon every grateful Imagination the Heart is moved and affected with
joy, and the Diaphragm drawn into such motions as usually appear in Laughter.
But whatsoever the physical reason of it may be, this is certain, that it is a
great delight of humane Life, and endearment of humane Society; the pleasure of
friendly Conversation, and the main ease and divertisement of all our Labors;
without which the life of Man would be irksome, tedious and solitary; eaten up
with perpetual cares and melancholy thoughts, and this draws and allures Men
out of their dens and retirements, and makes them to rejoice in that
satisfaction they find in each others company; and nothing can tend more
naturally to the creating of kindness and cementing of friendship than that
mutual complacency they reap from each others mirth and cheerfulness; so that
both sorts of passions, as well the pleasant as the grave, are so contrived as
to incline us to the love of Society, and the exercise of mutual Benevolence.

X. And now when we lay all these premises together, and consider how many ways
the Divine Providence has signified the intentions of his will and pleasure to
all his intelligent Creatures; and by how many motives he has endeared and
recommended it to their regard, it will amount to no less than a demonstrative
assurance of their perpetual and universal Obligation; He has made their
knowledge so obvious and so unavoidable, that there is no possible way to
escape their Observation but by the most inexcusable ways of neglect, either
wilful Ignorance or wilful Perverseness,

How could the Almighty have made fairer provisions to guide and instruct us in
our Duty, than by making every thing in Nature, within and without us, an
argument and declaration of it? He has first furnished us with wit and
understanding enough to consult the comfort and happiness of our own lives; and
then he has so contrived the nature of things, as to let us see (if we will but
make any use of our natural abilities) that there is no peace nor safety to be
had, nothing but trouble and misery without engagements of mutual Love and
Friendship, that alone is sufficient to discover the intention of his Mind and
the matter of their Duty, and to oblige them without any farther enquiry to
apply themselves to act accordingly.

So that if Men will but suffer their own Minds to attend to the most
unavoidable Objects of their own Senses, and the impartial Results of their own
Thoughts, they cannot avoid to conclude that it is the will and intention of
the Author of Nature, that they should conform themselves to those directions
that he has prescribed to them in the Order of Nature, and that is to conform
all their designs and actions to this comprehensive principle of mutual and
universal Benevolence.

Which because it can never be reduced to practice without Society and the
establishment of a common Interest, that is an unquestionable evidence of the
Divine Institution of it, for whoever commands the End, thereby commands the
necessary Means, and therefore if it be so manifest from all things in Nature
that every Man is enjoined by his Creator (if he own and acknowledge any) to
love and bear hearty good will to all Men as well for his own as their
Interest; and if it be as manifest from all the same appearances of things,
that this can never be done without entering and engaging themselves into
Societies, that is an undoubted proof of their Institution.

So that though we could suppose that they were not at first formed by God
himself (though no supposition can be more uncooth and unimaginable) but that
Mankind once lived without them, and ranged themselves into several Bodies and
Combinations by their own voluntary Consent, yet if they were certainly
instructed and commanded so to do by the supreme Governor of all, that
clearly resolves the Institution of Society into his Will and not their Choice,
in that they are determined to it in Obedience to his Command.

And now this being so plainly established by virtue of his Authority, it
comprehends all things that are necessary to its Exercise or Preservation,
especially Propriety and Dominion, without which no Man can do any service to
the common Interest, and by which Men are forced to live in the practice of
mutual Justice and Honesty; so easily and almost irresistibly are they drawn
under an obligation of the main Duties of Morality, if they will but make any
reflections upon the natures of Things, and the observations of their own
Minds; and that one would think is enough to acquit the Divine Providence from
any the least suspicion of being defective in giving any part of Mankind
sufficient Rules and Instructions for the due Government of themselves and
their moral Actions.

And yet is he not content to provide such means, as cannot but be effectual
without extreme sottishness, but withal makes some accessional security to
prevent us from the danger of that, and to force us to take some notice of his
Mind and Will: so that unless we can prevail with our selves to stifle all the
workings of our own Minds (as busy and thoughtfull as they are) unless we can
prevail with our selves to take no care for our own Happiness; unless we can
overcome the most vehement instincts and inclinations of our own Natures, all
these must unavoidably carry us into a knowledge of his Will, and by their own
force determine us to a compliance with it.

So that, all these things being first seriously weighed apart, and then laid
together, they will prove such a mighty demonstration of the existence of a Law
of Nature, that if we can with any confidence conclude any Discourse with an
(...), we may much more do it in this, there being no one Argument in the
world, except the existence of a Deity, upon which it is founded, that can
equal it in the pregnancy and the variety of its proof. And this may suffice
for the proof of the declaration of the Law of Nature; the next thing to be
considered is its Sanction.

XI. And this comes to our knowledge in the same way of conveyance or
publication with the Law it self; for as the Author of Nature declares to
Mankind by the Order of Nature, that he seriously intends the welfare and
happiness of the whole Community; so does he at the same time and by the same
means require of all and every Member of it to act according to his will and
pleasure under the enforcement of natural Rewards and Penalties, and those
motives of obedience are the proper Sanction to make the Law obligatory.

For Obligation properly signifies nothing but laying a Necessity upon us to
act according to the direction of the Law; not that the Mind of Man can be
determined by outward force or violence, or that any Lawgiver whatsoever can
compel it to a compliance and submission to his will against its own: It is
only to be wrought upon by Reason and Persuasion, by Arguments of Hope and
Fear, by Rewards and Punishments; the consideration whereof though it does not
by its own direct influence overpower the Minds of Men, yet it does it
effectually enough by virtue of that natural Instinct that is implanted in them
to pursue their own Happiness.

For being determined by a Necessity of Nature to pursue such things as are
productive of it, and to shun such as are inconsistent with it, all such
considerations as inform or assure us what Actions are so, bring a kind of
Necessity upon our Understandings, forasmuch as it is natural and therefore
necessary to seek our own Happiness and the means of acquiring it. And that is
the proper meaning of Obligation, not to bind any fetters and restraints upon
our Wills; but to propound such powerful motives and arguments to them, as
cannot but determine their Choice, if they will either attend to their
reasonableness, or follow the first Appetite and strongest Inclination of their
Natures.

So that if the Divine Providence have so ordered the Constitution of Things,
as to make it necessary that such a proportion of happiness should follow in
the course of Nature upon the performance of such a Duty, and on the contrary
as much misery upon its neglect, he has plainly established it into a binding
Law by all the force and energy that is proper to Legislation; and if he had
revealed it to the world by an express voice and declaration, or any other
visible way of intercourse, it would not have been a more proper Sanction and
more powerful enforcement of his Will.

Seeing all the use of any such Revelation must have been to move them to
Obedience by Arguments of Hope and Fear; so that if he have set before us by
the frame of Nature so many effectual Motives of this kind, they are of the
same force, as if they had been first made known to the world by Writing or
Proclamation or any other Solemnities of inacting Laws. So that only supposing
an Author of Nature, which (as I have often already suggested) must be
supposed in the order of Nature antecedently to all enquiries after the Law of
Nature, this matter will demonstrate it self from the most obvious effects of
his Providence, and the most undoubted designs of his Government.

For it is demonstratively certain by induction of Particulars that every
Virtue has some natural efficacy in it to advance both the public Good and the
private Interest; so that these things being so inseparably joined together,
and that by an order and necessity of Nature, i. e. by the contrivance and
wisdom of that Divine Providence that made it, what can be more evident than
that he commands and requires all his Creatures, that are capable of any
knowledge of his Will and sense of their Duty, to act sutably to that order of
things that he has established in the World, and to that declaration of his Mind
that he has made by that Establishment.

And thus is it notorious from the first Principles of natural Philosophy and
the most obvious appearances of daily Experience, that Temperance, Love of
Friends and Neighbors, Faithfulness in Oaths and Promises, an Aptness to kind
and obliging Offices, Gratitude to Benefactours, Love and Affection to natural
Relations, and a gentle and peaceable Disposition toward all good Men are
highly useful or rather absolutely necessary to all the comforts of humane
Life, to Peace and Quietness, to Safety and Contentment, to health of Body and
satisfaction of Mind, as well as to happiness of Society, the preservation of
Government, and the securing of all Men in their just Rights against all manner
of Injuries and Oppressions.

And it is certain from the same Principles that all contrary Vices have the
quite contrary Effects, and tend both to the destruction of the public Safety,
and of every Man's private Tranquillity, Unpeaceableness, Injustice,
Persidiousness, and all other acts of excessive and unreasonable Self-love,
that looks merely to its own Interest without any regard to or concern for the
good of others naturally produce all the Mischiefs and Calamities of Life; and
in the same proportion that these prevail in the practice of the World, in the
same do they abate the Peace of the Society, and the Safety of every Man's
Life, and the Quiet of every Man's Mind.

So that these things being thus apparently tied together by such an inevitable
train of Causes and Effects, and their connextion being so obvious and so
palpable to every Man's notice, what can we imagine the Divine Providence could
have done more to recommend their Practice and enforce their Obligation? and
for a farther proof of this I might resume all the Heads of Discourse, that I
have already represented to discover the Sufficiency of the Publication of the
Law of Nature, and show what particular Rewards are entailed upon the
performance of particular Duties, and what Punishments are in the course of
Nature inflicted upon their Neglect.

But what I have performed in the former part of this Discourse supersedes the
necessity of any distinct account of it here; because I have all along, as I
have proceeded, demonstrated together with their subserviency to the public
Weal their serviceableness to every Man's private Interest, and that includes
as well the Sanction as the Declaration of the Law. And therefore without
descending to all Particulars, I shall only in general treat of those
Enforcements, that Nature or the Author of it has added to all his Laws, and
they alone will give us a sufficient account of their Obligation; in that they
are so many and so obvious to the most vulgar Experience and most easy
Observation, that there is nothing else that concerns the Life of Man, the
knowledge whereof is more familiar and more unavoidable. XII. The first Reward
of Virtue is its own natural and intrinsic Pleasure. Acts of Love and Kindness
are in themselves grateful and agreeable to the temper of humane Nature; and
all Men feel a natural Deliciousness consequent upon every Exercise of their
good-natured Passions; And nothing affects the Mind with greater Complacency,
than to reflect upon its own inward Joy and Contentment. So that the Delight of
every virtuous Resolution doubles upon it self; in that first it strikes our
Minds with a direct Pleasure by its suitableness to our Natures, and then our
Minds entertain themselves with pleasant Reflections upon their own Worth and
Tranquillity.

And this is made so apparent from the plainest and most easy Experience, that
it cannot possibly escape any Man's Animadversion; There is no Man that does
not perceive more satisfaction in the Affections of Love and Joy and Good Will,
than in the black and unquiet Passions of Malice, Envy and Hatred, that do but
torment the Mind with Anguish, Restlesness and Confusion. A base and
ill-natured Disposition frets and vexes it self with perpetual
male-contentedness; and the Man that gives himself up to any spite and rancour
of Mind, is not so much as within the capacity of Happiness: at least in the
same proportion that good or bad Passions prevail in the Minds of Men, in the
same are they affected with Joy or Misery. Now this being made so plain and
visible in the whole Intercourse of humane Life, it must needs lay a mighty
Enforcement and manifest Obligation to a suitable Behavior; for what Motive
can we conceive of nearer concernment, than when the Action it self is its own
Reward or Punishment?

And as the kind Passions are most agreeable to the temper of our Minds, so are
they most healthful to the Constitution of our Bodies, and have a natural
Influence upon the Cheerfulness and Preservation of our Lives. The Affections
of Love and Hope and Delight cherish our natural Heat, sweeten our radical
Moisture, beget gentle and vigorous Spirits, promote the Circulation of the
Blood, and make the Heart and all the vital Parts more brisk and lively.
Whereas on the contrary, Hatred and Envy and Discontent stifle the motion of
the Blood, oppress the Heart, damp the Spirits, and hinder the functions of the
Brains and Nerves, and breed Diseases and Obstructions of the Spleen.

For when the briskness of the vital Heat is checked, and the contraction of the
Heart weakened, the Blood grows thick and cold in the Extremities of the
Vessels, and is not able to thrust it self forward through the remoter Branches
of the Arteries into the Fibers of the Veins; but stagnates in all the more
narrow Passages of the Body; especially in the more curious and delicate
Vessels that are every where spread up and down through the substance of the
Brain; from whence proceed tremblings in the Heart, paleness in the Face, and
(if they are strong and inveterate) scorbutic Distempers through the whole
habit of the Body.

So that as a Man desires length of Life and preservation of Health, he is
obliged to shun all bitter and unkind Passions; in that they are in the
constitution of Nature necessary causes of Discrasies and Diseases; and though
their Symtoms, unless they are very vehement, are not so obvious and palpable,
yet are they certain from all the Experiments and Observations in natural
Philosophy; and in what proportion soever they prevail over Men's Minds, in the
same do they disorder and disturb their Bodies. So that the Law of Nature is
recommended to the nature of Man in all its Capacities, and is suited to the
satisfaction of all its respective Faculties of Body and Mind, and by
consequence is designed to make up the completest and most entire Enjoyment of
Pleasure and Happiness.

But besides this, as it extends its Delight to all our Appetites, so does it
make the sense of their Felicity more intence and affecting, and entertain the
Mind with the most vehement and transporting Joys. For there are but two things
requisite to raise Pleasure up to the height of Beatitude; and they are the
spriteliness of the Act and the excellency of the Object. Now the Good of all
Mankind (which is the general notion and scope of all Virtue) being of the
largest and most diffusive extent, and the biggest Design that we can either
desire or propose to our selves, it calls forth all the vigor and earnestness
of our Minds, and employs the utmost force and vehemence of our Passions, and
transports us with perpetual Delight and Satisfaction.

Every Man enjoys a sensible Complacency in every act of Kindness, his
Good Will reflects back upon himself, and when he is concerned to procure
another Happiness, he thereby increases his own; but when the Object of his
Affections is so vast and unbounded a Good, it excites a force and quickness of
Mind proportionable to its own greatness; it equals the utmost capacity of all
our Powers, and we can never outdoe its worth; it is sufficient to entertain
all our Thoughts and to employ all our Actions; and the Man that propounds this
to himself as the delight of his Soul and the design of his Life, never wants
for objects or opportunities of Content, but enjoys a complete and continual
Felicity from the exercise of his own goodwill and the reflections of his own
Mind.

And though no Man can be capable of so pure and unmixed a Satisfaction in this
Life, there being so many Calamities out of their own power and disposal to
discompose it, yet are the degrees of a Man's Happiness (as far as he is master
of it himself) always proportioned to the emprovement of this temper of his
Mind; his Joy and his Delight are of the same extent with his Love and his
Good Will, and he that most dilates the exercise of his kind Passions, most
widens the capacity of his Enjoyments; and so much as a Man falls short of this
universal Kindness, so much does he afflict himself with Anguish and
Discontent, and that is sufficient encouragement to excite him to work up his
Mind to habitual Resolutions of Love and Kindness, when they are all along
their own Reward in proportion to their own strength and vigor; and he that is
possessed with most Good Will, becomes thereby the happiest and most contented
Man, and he that is possessed with nothing else enjoys his full and adequate
Felicity.

Though so great a Goodness and by consequence so great an Happiness is only
agreeable to the descripsion of the Joys of Heaven, where eternal Love will be
our eternal Bliss; yet seeing in this World there is a difference as to the
Misery or Happiness of every Man's Life in proportion to the degrees of this
Affection, that is a sufficient inducement to him to habituate himself to its
free and constant Exercise; when he is so plainly engaged as he desires and
designs the improvement of his own Content, to procure and delight in the
Content of others; and so far as he extends his concernment for their welfare,
so many Objects does he provide for the entertainment of his most pleasant and
agreeable Passions.

Which being all the Happiness that is within our own power, it is the most
proper motive to determine our Wills to such Thoughts and Actions as are most
effectual to attain or to advance it. For that is the proper use of Rewards and
Penalties to set before us such Considerations as are suited to determine our
Wills to such Designs and Actions as lie within our own power; if they do not,
all the Arguments in the World are to no purpose, and nothing is more absurd
than to court or threaten a Man into the doing of what is impossible. And
therefore seeing the casual or the fatal Calamities of humane Life are
altogether out of our own disposal, and will befall us whether we will or will
not, they can have no possible influence to determine the choice and the
resolution of our Minds, but the only things that can affect us as moral
Agents, are such Proposals of good or evil, as we know our selves able to
dispose of, as we are pleased to incline our own Wills.

What then though the natural Calamities of Life are incident to the Good
equally with the Bad, it is not in our power to avoid or overrule their
Necessity, but when they happen to us, all we have then to do, is to bear them
as we are able. And what will enable us to bear them as we ought, I shall
represent in the second part of this Discourse. But because there are some
things that have some influence upon our Happiness, that are altogether out of
our own disposal, shall we therefore take no care of all those that are
altogether within it? That may become the humor of peevish and unreasonable
People, but certainly no prudent Man, because he cannot overpower all things to
comply with his own Will, will therefore conclude with himself that it is in
vain to be concerned about those that he is able to command.

And therefore all those we must set aside as of no use and consideration in
matters of Morality, in that they are of another Nature, and depend upon other
Causes; it is enough at present that the Providence of God has left a certain
proportion of our Felicity to our own disposal, by a regard to which we ought
(if we are wise) to order our Designs and Actions; and that he has annexed such
degrees and advantages of Happiness to such practices and habits of Virtue; and
that is all that can be done to recommend them to our choice and good Opinion;
especially when the Act it self is its own Reward; and is the most pleasant
Exercise of the Mind of Man.

XIII. 2. If there be a Deity or Sovereign Cause of all things (that is ever
supposed in this Enquiry) we must of necessity suppose him endued with the
highest measures of Reason, Wisdom and Goodness; for these are Excellencies
that we perceive to reside in some degree within our selves; and therefore much
more in him whose Idea comprehends all Perfections, and who is the only cause
of all ours. Now right Reason is the same in God and in his Creatures, because
it is measured by the same Rule, and that is the Nature of Things; and when it
agrees with that, it passes a true Judgment, and when it does not, it is false
and erroneous; and therefore if it be consonant to the Reason of Man and the
Nature of Things to judge that the Good of all is preferrable to the advantage
of a single Person, it cannot be supposed that the unerring Wisdom of God
should fall into a different or a contrary Persuasion, for that were to
reconcile no less than contradictory Propositions to right Reason.

And therefore this Rule of Justice and Goodness results unavoidably from his
essential Attributes, and therein consists the whole Account and Employment of
his Providence to carry on the common Good of his Creatures by proper and
effectual Instruments; and all Goodness and Wisdom and Virtue is reducible to
these two Principles, first to propound worthy Ends, and then to pursue them by
suitable means; there is nothing else capable of praise and commendation, and
therefore if the Good of all be the noblest End that he can design, it is
certain that it is agreeable to his Will, that all his Creatures (that are
sensible of it) should seek it by those means that they shall judge most
agreeable to his Understanding.

And this is much more evident, if we consider the Deity not only as the most
excellent of all rational Beings, but as the supreme Cause of their Existence,
and then it is but reasonable, if he first created them, to conclude that he
desires their continuance and preservation; otherwise he must have made them
without design and to no purpose; and then if therein consists the common Good
of all that they should continue to enjoy those Natures and improve those
Perfections that he bestowed upon them; that cannot but be conceived most
acceptable to the Intention of his Will, and most agreeable to the Scope of his
Creation.

Especially if to all this we shall add those Intimations of his Mind that he
has so plainly interwoven with the whole Systeme of Things, in that all the
Effects of Nature are the Effects of his Will; and therefore when any thing in
Nature declares any Proposition to be true, and enforces or invites us to
accept of it as the Rule of our Actions by discovering its good and bad
Consequences to our selves, God only by that means discovers to us what it is
that he requires of us.

So that the natural Trains and Results of Things being laid and framed by his
Providence, when they thrust themselves upon the Observation of our Senses or
our Minds, they only inform us (if we will at all attend to our own
Experience) upon what Rules and Principles he has established the Government of
the World, and by consequence instruct us how to behave our selves suitably to
his Will in all our Designs and Actions. So that it is past all Controversy
that whatsoever force the Law of Nature carries along with it, is derived upon
it purely by virtue of the Divine Authority.

And therefore they cannot pass any proper Obligation upon any of his
Creatures, but only such as are capable of knowing that they proceed from
Himself, in that all their obligatory Power depends purely upon that
Supposition; and from hence it is that they are peculiar only to those that
are endued with Reason or Understanding, in that they alone are in any
condition of knowing from whom they are derived; and this being premised, all
that remains to be enquired after is to find out by what natural Sanctions God
has bound his Precepts upon the Minds of his reasonable and intelligent
Subjects.

For when his Almighty Wisdom did so contrive the Nature of Things, that such
Effects should naturally follow upon such Actions, and withal made their
connection so necessary that they could not but be foreseen by all that were not
wilfully blind or perverse; it is not to be doubted but that he intended that
they should seriously weigh and consider them before they address't themselves
to Action, and so determine their Wills according to the strength and direction
of their Motives.

And that such Effects there are, I have already in part proved in the Premises
by showing the necessity of universal Good Will to the satisfaction of our
Minds, and shall farther make good in the sequel by showing its necessity to
the preservation of our Beings: Though all this I have sufficiently made good
in the former part of this Discourse concerning the Declaration of the Law of
Nature, wherein is demonstrated that Mankind cannot subsist but in a condition
of mutual Love and Assistance, and that certainly is sanction or obligation
enough to a suitable Behavior.

And now this Concernment of the Divine Providence in our Actions being taken
into the consideration of our Affairs, as it resolves the total obligation of
the Law of Nature into the Will of God, so it backs and enforces it with the
most powerful and effectual Sanction in the World, viz. the Pleasures or
Torments of Conscience, or the Judgment of a Man's Mind upon his own Actions in
reference to the Judgment of God; and this of all things has the most
irresistible Influence upon every Man's Happiness or Misery.

I shall not here heap up all the Horrors that naturally arise out of an
accusing Conscience; Grief and Shame and Distraction and Fear and Restlesness
and Despair, and every thing that can vex and torment our Minds; nor on the
contrary all the Felicities that follow upon an acquitting Conscience, Peace
and Quietness and Confidence and Joy and Courage and Assurance of the Love and
Favor of God. These have been often enough described to the World, and every
Man is able to describe them to himself. It is sufficient to observe in general
that those Laws must needs be strictly tied upon us, that are bound on with a
regard to the Judgment and Observation of the Almighty, from the Apprehension
whereof result all the forementioned Effects of a good or a bad Conscience. And
to specify no other particular Effects, I shall mention only these two.

1. The first Effect of an honest and upright Conscience is the unspeakable
Pleasure and Satisfaction that a Man reaps from the inward Assurance that he
has of the Agreement of his own Mind with the Wisdom and Goodness of the
supreme and most perfect Understanding; then which nothing can be conceived
more pregnant with Delight and Joy; in that every Man has the highest esteem
and opinion of the Deity that he worships, and it is his greatest ambition to
imitate and resemble Him in his Attributes and Perfections; and he is satisfied
and pleased with himself according to the degrees of his confidence of
approving himself to the Divine Mind by his conformity to it. And on the other
side the contrary Effects of Shame and Discontent follow upon an evil
Conscience, or the sense of his falling short of the Glory of God, and of his
defection from the Excellency of his own Nature.

2. And then secondly as every good Man approves himself to the Wisdom of the
Divine Understanding, so also to the Acceptance of the Divine Will; in that he
knows that whatever may be propounded to him as the first Inducement of his
Obedience, it is certain that the last End of the Legislatour is the good of
all his Creatures, and by consequence to seek and procure that is the most
effectual way to render a Man grateful and acceptable to him. His Goodness
extends it self to all his Works, and his Providence is concerned for the
Welfare of all his Subjects. That is the great design of his Creation, and the
main care of his Government; and for that purpose only did he bestow their
Beings upon them, to put something into a capacity of being happy beside
himself, and nothing can so much honor or gratify him as their Felicity.

So that it is certain that nothing can so much please or oblige the supreme
Governor of the Universe, as that all his Creatures that observe the
Conditions of the common Peace and live according to the Rules of common
Justice should be treated with all manner of kindness and fair-dealing; and
that nothing can so effectually force him to the greatest severity of Revenge
and Punishment, as when any of his Subjects set themselves to act cross to a
Design that is so dear and tender to him.

For as it is certain that the Creator of all intends the Good of all, so it
is as certain that all right Reason (and by consequence the Reason of God)
judges it necessary for its security and preservation by some proportionable
Punishments to restrain all Attempts inconsistent with it. And then because no
wickedness (how secret soever) can escape the Divine Cognizance, it cannot be
doubted but that he will peremptorily determine to punish it according to the
Tenor of his Threatenings, because he knows it to be so highly useful to the
last and greatest end of all his Providence.

XIV. 3. But then in the third place, there is no Man but that owes more to the
kindness and assistance of others for the Comforts and Enjoyments of his Life
than to his own personal Care and Providence; our Plenty is so short, that we
cannot subsist without foreign Supplies; and our Strength so weak, that we
cannot defend our selves without foreign Assistances, and let any Man reflect
upon his own Selfsufficiency, and then consider, whether as the Nature of
Things is contrived, if he were impertinent to all the World beside, and no Man
else were concerned to relieve his Wants, whether then, I say, his Life would
be comfortable enough to render it at all desirable.

Were States altogether unconcerned for the Welfare of their Subjects; were
Parents utterly regardless of the Education of their Children; should one Sex
give a Bill of Divorce to the other; should every individual Person separate
himself from his Family and from his Prince and from his Country; should all
Mankind agree to break up Society, and resolve every Man to shift only for
himself, and take no care in the World for the Welfare and Preservation of all
the rest, they would be the most helpless and forlorn Creatures in the World;
they would become an easy Prey, not only to the Beasts of their own kind, but
to all those of the Wilderness; Man is born so defenseless, and so without all
those Weapons, wherewith Nature has furnished some other Creatures, that he has
nothing to arm himself against their Fury, but by united Strength and Counsel.
Fac nos singulos, quid sumus? proeda Animalium and victimae, ac vilissimus and
facillimus sanguis. Sen. 4. de Benef. c. 18.

The Mischiefs and Calamities of Life are so many and so unavoidable out of the
state of Society or mutual Good Will, that nothing can be more unquestionable
than that if there be any such thing as a Divine Providence, it was his
Intention not only to oblige them to seek, but to force them to enter into a
Condition of Peace and Friendship. And this dependence of the Happiness of
Mankind upon each others Benevolence comprehends so great a variety and
accumulation of things, that there is scarce any Man that is not or may not be
in a condition of assisting or obstructing another Man's Affairs, and therefore
it is alike every Man's Interest and Wisdom to win the widest and most
diffusive Friendship that he is able to compass or manage in all the ways of
Integrity, thereby to strengthen and secure his own Interest, that one way or
other or at some time or other might otherwise be endangered by the Enmity of
those who now secure it by their Friendship.

And to this he is obliged (as he would consult his own Content) not once or
twice but through the whole course and design of his Life, because his
Happiness always depends upon the Good Will of others; and therefore in every
Action he is bound to consider what Opinion other Men have of it as well as
himself, because their good Opinion has so powerful and so necessary an
Influence upon the right carriage of his Affairs. So that as he desires Success
in all his Undertakings he is highly concerned to purchase their Good Will by
all civil and obliging Offices.

And then if they will obey the Dictates of right Reason, they will think
themselves obliged to bear the same Affections to him and to each other as he
expresses to them all, because the Happiness of them all singly has the same
foreign Dependence with his own. And thus if Men will have any regard to the
quiet of their own Lives are they brought under the plainest and most
unavoidable Obligation to mutual Love and Friendship, and they improve the
Comforts of their Lives in proportion to the degrees of their Benevolence; its
lowest Exercise is rewarded with proportionable Benefits, but as it improves it
self to higher and more friendly Offices, so its Advantages increase all along
with the kindness of its Intentions.

Thus Innocence or a mere forbearance of Injuries is the lowest exercise of
Benevolence and Humanity, and yet this defends from all those mischievous and
malevolent Attempts that otherwise would destroy the common security of
Mankind; for if we suppose them in a condition of defyance to all engagements
of Kindness, and settled in a perfect state of War, in which they were bound to
endeavor each others Destruction, and do the utmost mischief they were able,
nothing could be expected but utter misery and wretchedness, and it would
unavoidably bring in all the Evils to which humane Life can any way be supposed
obnoxious; so that when Men refrain from this wild and wanton Cruelty, that
proceeds from some sense of Humanity, and is of it self a very considerable
ease and security to the Life of Man.

We are hereby permitted to enjoy what we can get by our own Industry without
disturbance from others, though our Labors are not eased by their Assistance;
and this is a little more comfortable than to be in perpetual danger of being
robbed both of our Enjoyments and our Lives by every Man that happened to find out
our Dens and lurking Holes. Nothing can be imagined more miserable than a state
of perfect Inhumanity, and that is a sufficient Signification to us, that the
Divine Providence if he ever designed the Happiness of any of his Creatures or
ever intended that they should design it themselves (and these are two very
modest Suppositions if there be any Providence at all) that he requires them to
avoid it under the severest and most dreadful Penalties.

And the farther off they keep from this savage State, the nearer do they
approach to the Contentment and Tranquillity of their Lives; and if they resolve
not only to refrain from weakening each others Interest by Wrongs and
Oppressions, but to advance it by all the Offices of Love and Kindness, and
add Beneficence to Innocence, they raise the happiness of their Condition
according to the height of their Friendship. Nothing is in this Life so
satisfactory and comfortable as an entire Affection and Fidelity between
Friends; it is the Consummation of all humane Joys; and as much as any Man fall
short of this perfection of Kindness, so much does he abate of the complacency
of his Life.

This is visible in all the experience of the World and the management of all
Affairs, and there is no Man that regards the natural Consequences of Things
that does not understand the advantage that accrues to himself from all his
good Turns and Obligations past upon others. And for this Reason all Men that
pretend to any Wisdom or Sobriety, are thereby easily determined to a
courteous and obliging Conversation, and therefore it is needless to represent
to such Persons the convenience and prudence of their own choice: the only
People that need information in these matters that so nearly concern them, are
the negligent and inconsiderate part of Mankind. These do not think or observe
enough to see into the probable Events of things, and are to be made sensible
by nothing but the actual Infliction or certain Foresight of Misery, and
therefore letting pass that part of the Sanction that comes from the Reward, I
shall only a little particularise that part of it that is derived from the
Punishment, and show into what manifest disadvantages every Man runs himself by
every unjust and dishonest Action.

XV. 1. He thereby manifestly impairs and often forfeits a proportion of his
own Interest, in that his Happiness (as well as every Man's else) depends in
some considerable measure upon the good will of his Neighbors, and it is
always in their power either to promote or to hinder his welfare; and then
their Friendship or their Enmity is chiefly determined by his own Behavior; if
they perceive him sincere for the advancement of the common Good, and forward
to all offices of Kindness and Humanity, that is a considerable obligation to
them to requite his Goodness with a suitable Behavior, but if he neglect
opportunities of doing good, and show himself regardless of all manner of
Interests but his own, that naturally estranges their Affections, and they
throw off all inclinations of Kindness to him, as a Person that disclaims all
designs of Kindness to them. And then a Man's condition is uncomfortable
enough, when he is forsaken of all the World, and left all alone to shift for
himself with a bad Conscience. The bare want of Friends is a sad punishment of
all selfishness; and though he be in Prosperity, it is no pleasant reflection to
consider that he is scorned and neglected and hated by the public Vote of all
good Men: but if he fall into Adversity (and that sometime or other happens to
every crafty and dishonest Man) he is left to the sadness of his own Fortune,
and no Man is concerned to assist or relieve him, but the whole Society
triumphs and rejoices in his Ruin.

2. The next natural Punishment of Injustice is Insecurity; for let the
wickedness be committed with never so much craft and privacy, yet no Man can
ever certainly assure himself to escape discovery; so many unforeseen and
unsuspected ways are there of betraying the most secret Crimes: so that though
it were possible to shake off all apprehensions of a Divine Displeasure, yet
there is no Remedy against the perpetual Fears of Revenge from Men. And thus
Epicurus after he had set Men loose from any regard to the Observation of
Providence, yet he thought it so difficult and so almost impossible to conceal
any enormous baseness for ever, that he concluded no wise Man could venture
upon it but with the uneasiness and terror of an accusing Conscience.

(...), no Man can be secure of privacy: and though it is possible he might be
so dexterous or so fortunate as to have passed through a thousand Impieties
with credit and impunity, yet all this while the Man enjoys but little comfort
in himself and his unjust possessions, because he cannot but be always
diffident that first or last once before he dies by some unlucky accident or
other, he is either intrapt in some new Attempts, or betrayed in some old Wiles.

So that though dishonest Men may sometimes have the fortune, yet they can
never have the confidence, to pass unpunished, and the incessant fear of this
robs them of all real mirth for the present, and all security for the future,
Potest nocenti contingere ut lateat, latendi fides non potest. So that
howsoever he may shift the public Justice, there is no avoiding the punishment
of his own Fears, especially when there is so much likelihood that some time or
other he is surprised and discovered, and when it is so very probable and usual
in the order of humane Affairs for all Guilt some time or other to be brought
to Judgment. Plerumque (says Torquatus in Cicero prim. de fin.) improborum
facta primo suspicio insequitur, deinde Sermo atque fama, tum accusator, tum
judex, multi etiam se indicaverunt.

3. The Man that is false and injurious does not only forfeit the advantages
of being loved and trusted and protected, but he provokes all Men even from
their natural principle of self-love to seek and contrive his destruction, and
engages them all (as they tender their own safety) into a combination against
him. And that is the proper use and design of public and capital Punishments,
it is only an agreement or confederacy of the whole Society to cut off all
such private Members of it as disturb the common Peace, and thereby endanger
every particular Man's Safety; and it becomes the joint and equal Interest of
all that are peaceable or desire so to be, to declare open War against him; and
that Man has disadvantage enough that contends with his single Strength against
the Power of a Multitude; and yet so does every one that declares by his
practices, that he is not concerned what becomes of their Interest by not
sticking to oppress and oppose it in all the ways of fraud and violence for the
advancement of his own.

And to punish such is the defense of the public Weal, and the equal Interest
of the whole Community and every Member of it, and therefore it is but
reasonable that every injurious Person should expect that they should appear
and rise up with one consent against him and his Interest. They have all a
tender sense of their own Happiness as well as he of his, and are sufficiently
jealous of all designs and entrenchments upon their Rights; so that if they
once observe a Person that cares not how much he lays them waste* for the
enlargement of his own Power and Propriety, it is natural for them to fall upon
him with all the keenness of Revenge, and to treat him as a common Enemy
without Mercy or Compassion.

And though the injury may possibly in its direct intention reach no farther
than a single Person, yet the affront and disobligation extends it self to all;
for he thereby plainly discovers that he is prepared for any mischief against
any Person for the advancement of his own Ends, and every Man has reason to
conclude that he would serve him in the same kind, if ever he happened to fall
into the same circumstances; so that though he suffer not at all by the
Oppression of his Neighbor* yet he cannot but resent it even for his own sake,
and if it ever lie in his power revenge it too.

And now that Man can have but little assurance of his Safety, or comfort of
his Life, that knows it to be the common concernment of all, that have any
power in or over his affairs, to work and contrive his Ruin; and though he may
escape all his days (as some Thieves and Out laws do) unpunisht and unrevenged,
yet the apprehension of his danger and sense of his insecurity are enough to
destroy all the quiet of his Life and tranquillity of his Mind, and he is or has
reason to be fearful in the same proportion that he is wicked and unjust.

And now so much as a Man hazards of the safety of his Enjoyments, so much does
he abate of their Value. So that though this part of the natural punishment of
Vice that is to be expected from the persons injured or offended, is not always
certain and unavoidable, in that all humane Actions are in their own nature
contingent, and so it is possible that the Persons they provoke may never have
the Power or the Will to revenge their Wrongs, yet because the consequence is
so very probable as it is, that carries in it such a certain and valuable
proportion of Evil, as may serve to deter all Men from venturing to incur their
displeasure by unjust or unkind Attempts, and may be so designed and propounded
by the supreme Law giver as inducements to all his Subjects, that have any
regard to their own Happiness, to have some regard to this in all their Affairs
and Entercourses with Men.

The case is the very same here as it is in all civil Laws, where it is not
necessary that every Malefactor should be certainly brought to public
Justice; but yet because there is so fair a likelihood that one time or other
he comes to execution, the very fear of so probable an Event is a sufficient
Sanction and an effectual one too upon the generality of Men to refrain them
from a course of open and professed Violence. And thus when it is mighty odds,
though it is not absolutely certain that every injurious Person shall
(considering the natural passions of Men) not only be fully repayed in his own
kind, but be forced to suffer a greater damage by his breach of Peace and Faith
(for that is done by every act of Injustice) than he can ever hope to gain
advantage by it, if he should have the good fortune (that seldom happens) to
escape unpunished: this consideration alone is in all common cases an
overruling Argument with any Man of any tolerable Understanding to determine
him to resolutions of just and honest dealing with all Men.

I might add innumerable other particulars to this purpose, but they occur so
easily to every Man's Observation, that after I have given this Specimen of it,
that alone is abundantly sufficient to the satisfaction of sincere and
ingenuous Minds; so that it were to be tedious to very little if any purpose to
represent the whole Train of good or bad Consequences that naturally follow
upon all good or bad Practices; but it is enough that in the ordinary course of
Nature and Providence, the Happiness and Safety of every Man's Life is
proportioned to the degrees of his Virtue and Honesty. And if Men will but be
at the pains to attend to this single Observation, that alone will bring them
into some competent knowledge of all the subordinate Duties of Morality, and
under a sufficient obligation to their serious and habitual Practice; and no
Law of what nature soever is capable of a more proper or more powerful
Sanction. And therefore to conclude, and not to recapitulate all particulars,
the premises seriously laid together, will, I think, amount to a fair and
forcible demonstration of the Problem I undertook to prove, viz. The certain
Institution of the Law of Nature, in that the Author of it has signified to us
his own design and intention toward Mankind in the contrivance of it, and has
obliged us as far as our actions are in our own Power to pursue the same design
with himself by Rewards and Punishments resulting from the nature of Things, as
we comply with or disobey this publication of his Will.

XVI. Hitherto I have endeavored to demonstrate that if there be a supreme
Cause and Governor of the World, that then the design of his Government is the
common Happiness of all Mankind, and that for the attainment of this general
End, he has so contrived the nature of Things as to make every Man's particular
Happiness to depend, as far as things are within his own power, upon his
endeavors of promoting that of all. Which two fundamental Principles being
laid, first, of the Being of a Providence, and then of the Goodness of it, that
will certainly guide and direct us to something farther than what we have
hitherto demonstrated. For all that I have already proved is not sufficient to
make us actually Happy, but rather puts us into a capacity of being so. If
indeed the Providence of God had not taken so much care to secure the common
Peace and mutual Love of Mankind, we had all been certainly and fatally
miserable; though when this provision is made it is not enough to make us
happy, and therefore he has in vain done so much for us, unless he do
something more. Especially when, after all our best endeavors to attain
Happiness in that way that the Providence of God has chalk't out to us, it is
possible to be defeated of it by some other causes without our own default, and
then what must follow but that the Divine Providence (if it be constant to its
own design, and unless it be so it is no Divine Providence) is obliged to
compensate or secure it some other way. For it is certain that a great part of
our Happiness is out of our own power, and therefore notwithstanding all our
endeavors after it, we may not attain to it, and then if the design of the
Divine Providence be to make us happy in the way of Virtue, (as I have proved
it is) in this case he has obliged himself to ensure it by some other means,
unless we can suppose that he has proposed to himself an end without providing
sufficient means to effect it; which is to say that this excellent Being, that
has contrived the whole Creation with such wonderful Art and Wisdom, has done
all this in order to a thing impossible: or that he has engaged us to the
performance of our Duty by the promise of a Reward, and yet when we have
faithfully done our Work that he should defraud us of our Wages.

And this brings in the second part of my Argument, That seeing God designs our
Happiness, and seeing he has contrived things so as to oblige us as far as it
is in our own power to procure it in the way before described; and seeing that
alone is not sufficient for the attainment of this End; and if it were that yet
notwithstanding we may be defeated of it, there must (I say) remain some other
design of Providence than what we have hitherto discovered. And here
unavoidably comes in the Happiness of a future state. For if it be made
evident, after the proof of the Premises, that we are not capable of Happiness,
or after our best endeavors after it that we may be deprived of it, it then
undeniably follows that either there is such a state, or that there is no such
thing as a Divine Providence. And this I shall endeavor to make good from
these two plain and easy Propositions.

First in general, That without it no Man is capable of being happy.

Secondly in particular, That without it no Man can be obliged to be virtuous;
nay, on the contrary, that the best Men may, and frequently are, upon the
account of their Goodness, notwithstanding all that care God has taken of them
in this world, the most miserable. From whence it is manifest that either there
is no Providence, which I have already proved, and therefore now suppose; or if
there be, that upon that supposition there is the same certainty of a future
state as there is of the Being and Providence of a Deity, so that whoever
denies one must be forced to disavow both, which I now undertake to prove from
the forementioned Principles.

First, That without a future state Mankind is utterly incapable of Happiness.
And for the more convincing demonstration hereof I shall consider the most
famous Opinions of Happiness among the Philosophers; and that I may the more
easily do, because they are not so many as some men would persuade us they
are; for as for the known and common citation out of Varro insisted upon, and
if true, justly upbraided by Saint Austin of their being divided into 288
different Sects and Opinions, it is obvious enough that this was but a crude
and injudicious Collection; for if we impartially consider those various
Instances, more distinctly recorded or collected by other Authors, we shall
find them either so many differences of Words and not of Conceits, or else
Motto's and little Sayings, (according to the fashion and affectation of the
Greeks) rather to express their own fancy and peculiar humors than their
serious and Philosophical account of things. And it is obvious that all their
discourses about it, relate either to the general and abstracted Notion of it,
or to the Causes and Objects that produce it. As for the first it must be
confessed that they describe it by an infinite variety of Expressions; but as
for the things productive of it, there neither are nor can be more than those
three famous Opinions, that place it either in Pleasure only, or in Virtue
only, or in both together with the goods of Fortune; to which all other
subdividing Sects, how numerous soever, are easily reducible. And here, that I
may represent them to the best advantage, I shall chiefly consider them as they
are discoursed of and accounted for by Tully himself; because of all Men of all
Ages he was most able to set them out with all the beauty of Wit, and force of
Reason, and accordingly has, in those admirable Books of his about the Ends of
Good and Evil, and his Tusculan Questions, discharged this noble Argument as
became himself, i. e. with all the possible advantages of Wit and Reason;
insomuch as (if I may presume to judge so much, and yet the case is so plain
that it needs no presumption) all the other Discourses beside upon the same
Subject are not to be compared, either for Use or Delight, to these two
Treatises. For as he has omitted nothing that is either plausible or pertinent
to his Argument; so has he recommended his Notions with a singular and
unimitable force of Expression. For though possibly others (and yet if any,
very few) may have equaled him in Philosophic Skill and Knowledge, yet all the
World falls short of him in his miraculous Art of Eloquence. And so I call it,
in that it looks like more than a Prodigy, that one Man should so strangely
excel all the rest of Mankind, and stand alone, as it were, a Being of a
superior Order; Insomuch that when all the great Wits of all Ages since have
swol'n and labored to rival his Glory, he has been so far from having an
Equal, that he never yet had one that could attain the honor of being his
Second; but still, after all their utmost endeavors, they appear no more than
the Toad to the Ox or the Stars to the Sun. And therefore, in my following
Discourse, I shall in the first place confine my self to a stricter and more
particular examination of his performance, though under him I shall take an
occasion to give an account of the several endeavors of other valuable
Authors upon the same Argument.

XVII. First then as for the Epicurean Hypothesis, with which he begins, he has
indeed done us that kindness, as in part to show us its insufficiency, but then
himself has not been able to direct us to a better; and all the instructions he
has given us afterward for the obtaining of Happiness are chiefly borrowed from
the Canons of Epicurus. Neither indeed was it possible to be otherwise, for how
variously soever Men may delight to amuse themselves with their own particular
Fancies and Hypotheses, there are no more than two real accounts of the state
of humane Nature, either that which supposes Immortality, or that which does
not; so that the supposition of Immortality being taken away, all the other
accounts of Happiness can amount to no more than that of Epicurus, placing it
in the pleasures of this Life alone. And yet for the fuller demonstration of
the thing I shall consider them singly, that thereby it may appear how plainly
defective all the various arts and methods of Philosophy are without our
Supposition. And as for Epicurus, the Question between him and his Adversaries
is, Whether Pleasure be the Sovereign Good: In answer to which our Author's
Discourse consists of two parts, first, to settle the right Notion and
Definition of Pleasure: secondly, to prove that this one Principle blows up all
the foundations of Justice, Virtue, and Honesty. As for the first, I shall not
much concern my self about the Grammatical signification of the word Pleasure.
For I must confess that both Epicurus and his followers are by many Authors
too crudely reviled in general terms for placing our sovereign Happiness in
Pleasure, when it is so very clear that they are but equivalent terms to
express the same thing. For by Pleasure all Men mean that content and
satisfaction that is agreeable and proper to the Nature of any Being, so that
when it enjoys and possesses all those Objects of Delight that are suitable or
adequate to its respective Capacities, it is then, in all Men's account, arrived
at the state of its perfect Happiness or full Contentment. And therefore it is
but an idle and needless dispute between them and the Stoics, whether Pleasure
or Virtue be the supreme Good. For whatsoever may be the reason of the goodness
of Virtue, yet the reason of our choice must, in the last account of things, be
resolved into its subserviency to our delight and satisfaction; And if moral
Goodness be (as it is) our supreme Felicity, it is so because it is most
agreeable to the perfection of our Natures, and most conducive to the quiet and
satisfaction of our Minds. For it is a contradiction to the Nature of created
Beings to act without any regard to some self ends, unless we can suppose them
divested of self-love, than which no Supposition is or can be more impossible.
And therefore this, as it is not a reasonable, so neither is it the proper
ground of exception against the Epicurean Philosophy: but its mischief and
malignity derives from a much worse Principle, viz. its unworthy conceptions of
the mean and narrow capacities of humane Nature, to which it is necessary to
reduce the proportion of humane Happiness. And therefore, the Epicureans
allowing no other Principle of Being to Men than the Engine of their Bodies,
and by consequence no other sensation than what results from the contrivance of
the parts of matter, from hence it plainly appears that they resolve our
sovereign delight purely into sensual enjoyments; because, upon their
Principles, we are, from the condition of our Natures, utterly incapable of any
other gratifications. And therefore we dispute not with Epicurus whether
Pleasure be the end of Virtue, but what Pleasure. If he had taken in the full
capacity of humane Nature as it consists of Soul and Body, he had said nothing
less than the best and wisest Philosophers do or ought to say. But when he
intends the Pleasure of the Body alone, he destroys the very Being of Virtue
and humane Happiness, and resolves all our enjoyment into mere brutishness and
sensuality. And that he intends nothing more is past all dispute to any Man
that is not resolved to abuse himself, in that he never taught any thing more
constantly, concern'dly and expressly than this, That Man is nothing else beside
the fabric of his Body. In this one desperate Principle lies all the poison of
his Philosophy of old, and so does that of another of late, that makes
Selfinterest (which is but another word for Pleasure) the only end and reason
of all humane actions. For if he had meant the Self-interest of the whole Man
as it comprehends the interest of the Soul and Body, that is, his present and
his future state, it had been an honest and a pious assertion: But when he
intends nothing more than the narrow interest of our present advantage, and
takes off all regard to the future, this defeats all the obligations of Virtue,
Religion and Honesty, and leaves all Men at liberty to do all things
indifferently, as they shall apprehend most convenient to their own private
ends and interests, ease and pleasure.

XVIII. Great numbers of Apologies have indeed been made by learned Men to
abate or rather altogether excuse the meanness of Epicurus his Opinion, but all
in vain. For what though (as they plead) he distinguished between the Pleasures
of the Body and the Mind, and gave the latter the Pre-eminence, yet it is
notorious not only that by the Mind he never intended any Being distinct from
the Body, but only the power of Imagination, which, in his Philosophy, is
supposed the highest instrument of sensual perceptions; but (what is more
palpable, as I shall show more at large anon) that he placed our supreme
Felicity only in the pleasures of the Body. Though here their Opinion is so
very foul, that they are forced upon all turns to talk ambiguously, and for the
most part inconsistently with themselves, sometimes they will have their
sovereign Pleasure to signify the actual enjoyments and gratifications of
Sensuality; sometimes nothing more than indolency or mere freedom from pain;
sometimes both together, with the reflection of the Mind upon them. Thus
Epicurus speaks out plainly, that he understands not what Happiness is, nor
where it is to be found, if it be not in the delights of the Palate and some
other that modesty forbids to name. So the wise Metrodorus (for that title
Epicurus was pleased to bestow upon his Friend as well as himself) expressly
teaches that the Belly is the only proper seat of Happiness, and that no Arts
or Sciences are any way useful or valuable than as they are subservient to its
delights. But because this account of the utmost emprovement of humane
Happiness and Wisdom too seemed too mean and brutish for those lofty
expressions wherewith they had set off their own Happiness, making it equal
with that of the Gods themselves; they sometime tell us that by Pleasure we are
not to understand the mere actual delights and gratifications of the Body, but
partly a freedom from the pain and trouble that is removed thereby, and chiefly
those delightful reflections that we naturally enjoy upon it; so that they
intend not the pleasures of Sensuality, but that innocent satisfaction of Mind
that naturally ensues upon their enjoyment; in that when the desires of the
Appetite are quieted, and its wants supplied, the pure consideration of this
affects the Mind of every wise Man with great joy and tranquillity of thought.
And this poor slender Subtilty they fancy to be of mighty use to palliate the
foulness of their Doctrine, and to enhance their grave and philosophical
account of the Divine Felicity of humane Nature; and herein do all the
Epicurean Apologists, with a singular confidence, triumph, as if their great
Master had undoubtedly placed our sovereign Happiness purely in the Operations
of the Mind. But beside what I have already observed that Epicurus spoke out
too bluntly to find any subterfuge in this Apology; it does not at all mend the
matter that they would excuse. For if to resolve all our Happiness into the
actual delights of Sensuality, be thought somewhat too shameful to own, it is
very little more honorable to place it in entertaining the Fancy with
reflections upon them. And if it be below the dignity of humane Nature to do
nothing better than to Eat and Drink, it is altogether as unworthy of it to
think of nothing greater: this is only to remove its Happiness from the Table
to the Couch. All their boastings concerning the pleasures of the Mind amount
to no more than this; and therefore Plutarch, when the Apology is made, takes
them up quick for it. Yes, yes, says he, this Plea were to some purpose if they
would acknowledge any Pleasures wherewith the Mind might entertain it self
distinct from those of the Body: but when they openly declare and protest that
it is not capable of any other satisfaction than what it enjoys in providing
for or reflecting upon its sensual delights, do they not avowedly resolve all
the Happiness of the Mind into pure Sensuality, when they only make use of it
as an Instrument to repeat or improve that sort of Pleasures, as it were by
preserving the fumes of them in the Fancy, and when the sensual delight it self
is gone, feeding upon its mere imagination. So that all that this pretense
amounts to is, that the Mind continually pleases it self with the memory of
past Pleasures and the hope of Pleasures to come. And is not this a brave
account of all the Wisdom and Happiness of the Mind of Man, that it is only a
Cook to cater for the Body, that it is ingenious to provide for the pleasures
of the Flesh, that it has a quick and a strong Fancy that makes it as happy as
God himself by being perpetually fixed upon them? At least this great
satisfaction (that they will have to be the only privilege of a wise Man) is
the very height of brutish Lust, and only serves when the natural Appetite is
satisfied, to provoke it to new and preternatural desires. Plut. non posse
suaviter.
(...). This lustful kind of rolling past Pleasures in the thoughts serves
only to keep up the rage and fury of our beastly Appetites, and, if there be
any Pleasure in them, it is not so much in chewing over our past delights, as
in provoking our Appetites to new desires. And is not this a strange
description of a wise Man, one that approaches nearest to the condition of the
Gods, that he thinks of nothing but the pleasures of his Belly, that the only
design of all his thoughts is to inflame his Lusts and make them more vehement
and outrageous than they could have been without the assistance of this Divine
Wisdom and Philosophy? The very brutishness of this Opinion, one would think,
should make it too shameful and dishonorable for any person that pretends to
any modesty or ingenuity openly to assert it, and yet that is the last
resolution of all their contemplative and philosophic Happiness. So that,
admitting this Apology, it is plain that the Epicurean Doctrine falls in
exactly with the ignominious Philosophy of Aristippus. For whereas this places
all Happiness entirely in the actual pleasures of the Body, that only adds to
it the complacency of the Fancy, so that still sensual Pleasures are the only
matter of all their Happiness, and all that tranquillity of Mind, of which they
speak so loftily, as if it so very much exceeded the poor delights of
Sensuality, has no other Object wherewith to entertain and support its
satisfaction. So that it matters not whether those passages that are objected
against Epicurus by the Ancients were (as is falsely pretended) foisted into
his Writings by the Stoics: his Opinion is as foul by their own Apologies as
his enemies Calumnies can make it. For what though Epicurus himself never
protested that he knew no other Happiness than the pleasures of the Belly? What
though Metrodorus never said that the Belly was the chiefest seat of Happiness?
yet these Propositions are the true and plain account of all their Philosophy.
For if all Happiness consist in Pleasure, and if there be no Pleasure but that
of the Body, what need of any farther contention? the case is very plain, that,
according to them, there is nothing else of any real use and value in humane
life. And then, lastly, as for those great outcries that they raise of the
blessed and heavenly state of indolency, they signify no more than their
magnificent stories of the pleasures of the Mind; for it is a plain case that
Felicity cannot consist in, or result from the mere absence of misery; that is
the Happiness of Stocks and Stones, that are neitheir sensible of pains nor
subject to calamities; so that this it self does not directly affect with any
sense of Happiness, but all that results from it is derived from the reflection
of the Mind upon its blessed and godlike freedom from misery. And is not this a
sovereign piece of Happiness to think now and then, when at leisure, that I am
not actually miserable? It must needs be a wonderful support to the Mind of a
thinking Man to consider with it self that the very best of its condition is to
be sometimes out of pain. This is a lanker Happiness than that of Aristippus,
for that carries in it some real and positive satisfaction, such as it is, but
this contents it self merely in not being dissatisfied. Who can express or
conceive (as Plutarch derides them) the Happiness that these Men reap by
rejoicing in not being miserable? Have they not great reason to think and speak
so extravagantly of themselves? Well may they talk of immortal Pleasures, and
boast themselves equal to the Gods, and rave and rant with the transport of
that divine Happiness, that they alone of all mortals feel, when all their
Heaven is nothing else than that at present they are only not miserable.

XIX. And thus having briefly unravel'd the little knots and mysteries of the
Epicurean Philosophy, and cleared it from those obscurities that they
themselves have been forced to cast upon it in their own defense, I have by
that alone dispatched the greatest part of the Controversy with them: For in
all disputes with this sort of Men, it is a much harder task to make them own
their own Doctrines, than it is, when owned, to confute them. And therefore it
has ever been their custom to keep their Notions in the dark and under some
disguise, lest if they should appear in the open light, and in their own naked
form, they should, without any curious survey, discover their own foulness and
falsehood. As in our present case. All Happiness, say they, consists in
Pleasure. What in sensual Pleasure? No, that is too gross and filthy. In what
then? In indolency. But mere indolency, say I, is the Happiness of Stocks and
Stones. The highest Pleasure of all therefore, say they, consists in
tranquillity of Mind. But whence arises that tranquillity? From its reflecting
upon the pleasures of the Body. Now the plain truth is forced out, that the
pleasures of the Body are the only sovereign Happiness, and that all the
pleasures of the Mind result wholly from them, and are entirely resolved into
them. But I shall not concern my self in their Greekish subtilties, and shall
only discourse with them according to the common sense and understanding of
Mankind, and therefore will suppose that by Pleasure they mean, as they ought
to do, all the Happiness we are capable of in this life, be it actual
enjoyments, or a sense of present indolency, or both, or any thing else that
can contribute to our present contentment. And upon this state of the Question,
which is the fairest that can be made, I shall proceed with them. And here two
very frightfull Objections against the pleasures of this life taken alone,
immediately present themselves to our view; first, their notorious Vanity;
secondly, their woeful Uncertainty. So that if they were solid, yet their
falsehood and treachery would rifle their satisfaction; and if they were
constant, yet their meanness would render them inconsiderable; but when they
are both vain and insecure, if the Providence of God, that has taken care in
some measure to provide for us, has not provided some farther Happiness, after
all his wise contrivances for the good Government and happy estate of Mankind,
he has in effect done no more than if he had done nothing at all. As for their
Vanity, I shall defer to discourse of it till I come to the more plausible
account of the Peripateticks, who though they place not so great a value upon
them, as to make them the whole Happiness of humane Nature, yet they make them
a part of it subordinate to Virtue, which I shall there prove to be as lank as
the Epicurean Hypothesis, without the addition of Immortality; but with it, to
carry in it as much contentment and satisfaction as the nature of the thing is
capable of, and as the Providence of God can be supposed to design by it. And
that will be enough, upon the supposition of the Divine Providence, to prove
the necessity of a future state. But at present its mere fickleness and
uncertainty is more than enough to destroy all its delight. For the two great
Ingredients of Happiness that they (and truly enough) require, are present
contentment, and security of it for the suture; so that if this last be an
impossible thing, that alone overthrows all the designs of Happiness. And this
is as certain, by the daily experience of all Mankind, as that there are such
Creatures as Men upon the face of the Earth. For what Man can be secure of his
present good condition. I will not say all his life, for that supposition is
too enormous, but a year, a month, a day, an hour, nay the next moment? For
considering how many are the Evils of humane life, how many ways they may
befall us; that there is nothing within, nor nothing without us, that may not
discompose our present Tranquillity, he must be a very vain and foolish Man,
that can secure himself from all future trouble and disturbance; and if any Man
could flatter himself to so high a degree of stupidity, yet his own experience
would quickly convince him of his folly. Nay, so far are we from being any ways
happy by our security for the time to come, that the mere foresight of future
evils is one of the heaviest and most unavoidable miseries of humane life:
Plut. non-posse sua. etc.
(...), A Man may sooner expect a Winters constant Summer, than hope for a
perpetual ease and health of Body. So that suppose a Man in never so happy a
condition at present, he cannot avoid being troubled with the foresight of all
those sad accidents that may probably befall him, and in his greatest ease
whilst his Mind is employed in reflecting upon its present repose, it must
withal be thinking how obnoxious it is to innumerable Pains and Miseries. And
this one lean Meditation of the shortness and uncertainty of his present ease,
and the foresight of all those Evils that in a little time may, and some time
or other must discompose it, must devour all the other delights of Life, were
they much bigger and much more solid than they are.

XX. And of this the Epicureans themselves were so forcibly convinced by the
most obvious experience of things, that they thought it was in vain and too
great a confidence to deny it; and therefore seeing that we can never hope to
escape all the Miseries of Life, they have furnished us with several Antidotes
or rather Charms and Conjurations to relieve us against them. For alas all
their Prescriptions are only so many little Sayings and Apothegms fit for
Schoolboys Declamations, but are by no means such Reasons as become the wisdom
and gravity of Philosophers, or can afford any the least satisfaction to a wife
and sober Man. Nay so far are they from that, that they are like the Dreams of
frantic People, stubborn and wild Conceits persisted in against the nature of
things and the experience of Mankind. As that length of time makes no accession
to a Man's happiness. He might as well have told us that continuance of Pain
makes no accession to his Misery, and that the Man who suffers any Pain a year,
endures no more than he that suffers the very same Pain but an hour. However,
there is no Man that thinks himself happy, but must for that Reason desire its
continuance, and if it be not eternal, fear its loss. So that when he tells us
that Eternity it self could not improve our Felicity, he is inconsistent both
with the nature of things, and with himself. With the nature of things, because
all Pleasure is enjoyed at the present time, from whence it is undeniably
evident that how much longer time any Man has of his Enjoyment, so much more
does he enjoy of Happiness. In short, we are either happy in this present
State, or we are not; if not, then according to the Epicurean Hypothesis we are
never happy; if we are, then the case is plain that no Man can ever be
reconciled to the loss of his Happiness. It is in vain then to tell us that
time makes no addition to our Felicity, when we are certain that the cutting
off of time alone utterly kills and destroys it for ever. And as he contradicts
the nature of things, so himself; in that he places the peculiar Happiness of
his God's in this, that they are not only happy at present, but are secure to
continue so for ever. And indeed without it their present Happiness would
afford them but a very slender Contentment; nay the greater it is, so much the
more would the certainty of its future loss afflict them. For what Being can we
imagine more miserable than one that being advanced to the utmost pitch of
Happiness knows it self condemned to be in a little time cast down from it for
ever? In this case the more happy, the more miserable; for by how much the more
any one delights in his present Condition, by so much the more must he dread
the loss of it. So that length of time does not only make accession to our
Happiness, but makes the very Happiness it self. And as Maximus Tyrius very
well observes, (...) Dissert. 32.
(...). We may as well suppose the Earth without stability, and the Sun without
motion, as Happiness without perpetuity; take stability from the Earth, and you
take away its Being; or motion from the Sun, and you had as good take away the
Sun it self; so separate perpetuity from Happiness, and separate Happiness from
it self. And yet they are bold enough to tell us that a wise Man is not only
able to preserve his Contentment under the prospect of future Miseries, but
under their present Pressures. Why so? Because all Pain, which according to
Epicurus is all Misery, is short if great, light if long. But this though it be
one of the most admired Decrees of their Philosophy and the choicest Receipt in
all their Dispenfatory, it is nothing better than a charm of jingling words. For
who is ignorant that there are some very sharp Pains of a very long
continuance? What relief then will this Proposition afford against their
Assaults? But if our Philosopher would have taught us any real use of this
Principle, he should first have defined what he means by long and short, great
and small, and then have made some application of it to some particular cases.
First, how few or how many days, months or years denominate a Pain long or
short, and what degree of Pain makes it great or little: and if that were done
(which yet they never will do) we might perhaps understand the benefit of this
Advice; but without it, it can only serve to entertain a Philosophers fancy
when he has no use of it, but not at all to relieve him when he has. For
whenever it is reduced to practice, it is baffled and affronted by the most
vulgar experience of the World, the acutest Pains being for the most part of
the longest duration; particularly those two great racks of Mankind, the Stone
and the Gout. How many years do they assault People before they destroy them?
And yet what sort of Pain is there more exquisite? Now then when a Man has
suffered under either of these five or ten years, would it not be a very strong
and effectual lenitive to be told by a Philosopher, si magnus brevis, short if
sharp? Nay I will only suppose a Person fretted continually with the
Toothache, should a Philosopher seriously go about to give him ease with this
little charm, I am very apt to think he would more provoke his Choler than
assuage his Pain. And yet this sort of Cordials, as fantastic as they are,
are as much trusted to by other Sects, particularly the Stoics, as the
Epicureans, an Abstract whereof we meet with in Seneca's 78 Epistle so much
magnified by those two great Men, Lipsius and Gassendus; and because it is so
full an Account of all the Epicurean Wisdom, I shall here a little consider
it, though it consists only of a great many provoking Sayings to a wise Man,
but much more to a Man in pain. First he would demonstrate by natural
Philosophy that all Diseases in the Nerves and Membranes, which are of all
others the most acute, quickly vanish of their own nature. Which no doubt must
be a wonderful satisfaction to such Persons as have been all their lifetime
troubled with the Stone, the Cholick, or the Headache. They tell me it is
impossible that I should for any long time have been tormented with them,
because they are of that sort of Diseases that from their own nature are of a
short continuance, and this as I am a wise Man I am obliged to believe,
notwithstanding that I know by sad experience that they have lasted as long as
I my self. In the next place, noli mala tua facere tibi graviora. Impatience
does but exasperate the pain. True, but yet Patience does not assuage it; the
Torment is not the less because it is born with the greater stubborness of
Mind, for if that prevent new Troubles, it does not at all alleviate the old
ones. And yet were it so that patience would lessen pain, yet is it not able to
support it self under great extremities (i. e. when we stand in most need of
it) without some better Principles than we are furnished with out of the
Epicurean Shop. But then levis est si nihil illi Opinio adjecerit, your pain is
light enough in it self if you would not imagine it great. But this is still
harder when a Man feels the most exquisite pains, to be told that they are
light enough of themselves, if he would not greaten them by his own weakness:
this is to upbraid a Man's misery, not to relieve him; and to add Reproach to
his Calamity by making his Infelicity his Folly. But supposing his Fancy to be
so foolish, how shall he prevent it? It is no more in a Man's power to avoid
being sensible of what he feels, than it is to avoid the sense it self. Or if
it were, I am sure it is not in his power, as he is here advised (levem illam
dum putas facies) to make a great pain a little one only by thinking it so. In
the next place, circumcidenda duo sunt, and futuri timor and veteris incommodi
memoria. We must neither remember past nor fear future evils. And this
Prescription were of some use against enflaming our pains by our thoughts, if
it were practicable; but alas it is not in any Man's power to forget his last
fit of the Stone, or not to think that when this is over, it will some time or
other return again, and the very certainty of that is a very great part of his
misery. But however this concerns not his present actual sensation; For whether
he think or think not of past or future Evils, it is certain that he now feels
all that he feels. And here the next advice ought to have been according to
Epicurus to solace himself with the remembrance of his past-pleasures. Which at
best is but a very mean Satisfaction, and for the most part rather affects with
trouble than delight, in that it reminds us of a happiness that is already
perished, i. e. lost for ever. And certainly such Thoughts are like the
Reflections of old Men upon the pleasures of their Youth, that rather trouble
them because they are past, than delight them because they were once present.
But suppose there may be some pleasure in these Reflections, yet how mean, how
abject, how unsatissying an happiness is this to think to day under extremity
of pain, that yesterday I allayed my hunger and quenched my thirst? So that
when the Object of our Thoughts is in it self so mean, they can give us no more
contentment than that affords. Seeing therefore that its real enjoyment is
altogether so unable to procure any substantial and satisfying happiness, how
much like a mere shadow is that delight which we create to our selves by a mere
fantastic and imaginary reflection upon it. But if it have intervals, it will
be the more tolerable. It will so, but yet the future ease does not take away
the present pain. It only proves it to be a less misery than if it were
continual, but does not make a Man at this present time feel less than he
feels. Beside, these intervals do him no kindness against the Evil I am now
chiefly discoursing of. For though in them he may be free from actual pain, yet
is he then grieved with the memory of the sharpness of his pastpains, and the
expectation of his next approaching fit; and that is the thing that I am here
representing as inconsistent with Happiness. But a wise Man must command his
Memory, so as only to remember his pleasures and forget his pains. This is
another very imperious Edict, for we can no more command our Memories than our
Senses. And the sharper our miseries have been, the more importunately will
they thrust themselves upon our Thoughts. The next advice then is, toto contra
illum pugnet animo, vincetur si cesserit, vincet si se contra dolorem suum
intenderit. Let him resist with all his might, if he fly, he shall be
vanquished; if he stand his ground, he conquers. But this is only to put us off
with metaphors and similitudes, that because when a Man is assaulted by his
Enemy, it is safer to resist than fly, therefore the same course is to be taken
with Pains and Diseases. And it were well if it could, but alas in these cases
it is not in our power either to fly or to resist. And then it is in vain to
exhort us to either. And therefore instead of advising us to this, he would
have done much more like a Philosopher, if he would have instructed us how to
do it, and furnished us with Arms and Weapons for the Combat; otherwise it
would have been more advisable to lie down under the Burden then to think of
making resistance to no purpose. For that is only a new trouble and vexation,
and adds fury to pain, like a Captive that will not yield to his imprisonment,
but bites his Chains and fights with the Stone-walls to assert his Liberty. Or
to keep more closely to our Author's metaphor, that resolves not to lie down
under a weight, though he knows that he cannot bear it. For so he immediately
tells us, Nunc hoc plerique faciunt, attrahunt in se ruinam, cui obstandum est.
Istud quod premit, quod impendet, quod urget, si subducere te coeperis,
sequetur, and gravius incumbet: Si contra steteris, and obniti volueris,
repelletur. Men draw ruin upon themselves by shunning what they ought to bear;
when they would avoid what lies upon them, it presses them so much the heavier;
but if they keep their station, they support it: But what if I cannot bear up
under it, must I not then yield? whether I will or no, I must; and it is no
more in my power to thrust away a Disease by force, than to support the Ruins
of a falling Rock. Some more advices there are to the same purpose, that is to
no more than that (supposing the Firmament it self should fall) they should
advice us to prepare our Shoulders without the help of any other props to bear
it up.

XXI. But if there is no Remedy we must not fear to die, and this the
Epicureans reckon to be the first point of Happiness. For seeing Death is
unavoidable, that Man can never enjoy any tranquillity of Mind that continually
dreads so great an evil. And therefore here they begin to lay their first
foundations of Wisdom in the overthrow of their worst and greatest Enemy. And
indeed they that have conquered the fear of Death, have nothing else to fear.
But alas that is an insuperable Evil and the most insupportable Calamity of
humane Life. So that though Happiness were otherwise acquirable in this World,
this alone is more than enough to sadden all our joys and overwhelm them with
perpetual melancholy and sorrow. For suppose a Man born with all the advantages
of an healthful Body and a cheerful Mind, and blessed with all the
circumstances of Success and Fortune, yet when he had compassed all his
Projects, when he was happy to the utmost of his capacities, when all things
had conspired to complete his Felicity, so that there remained no unsatisfied
hopes or desires; even then having no farther Expectations, wherewith to
entertain his Mind, he would naturally fall into the melancholy meditation of
Death and the Grave. Now what Reflection can be more sad and dismal than the
inevitable necessity of bidding an eternal adieu to all his mirth and
happiness? What a tormenting satisfaction must he enjoy in his freest Caresses
of pleasure and delight, whilst he knows the fatal Knife to hang perpetually
over his Head? So uncomfortable would be the Condition of the most happy and
fortunate Men in the World, that when they had arrived at the highest pitch of
humane Felicity, the most pleasant prospect they could take from thence would
be the gloomy Regions of everlasting Death and Darkness; and all the advantage
they should gain by their height, would be only to see themselves encompassed
with the Grave and bottomless Dungeons of Oblivion, which they know must after
a few days swallow them up for ever. And now what can create greater horror
than the fear of an eternal Annihilation? What is there so much shrinks and
affrights the Mind of Man as the dark and fearful Thoughts of its own
Mortality? How must it for ever die and languish under the dreadful
expectations of eternal Darkness, when after a short mushrome life it must
return into dust and silence, and be for ever buried in the horror and
loathsomness of the Grave? So that when men have done and talked all they can,
nothing can ever vanquish the fear of Death but the hope of Immortality. This,
and this alone is able to scatter all the black and melancholy Apprehensions of
our approaching Fate, and to support our Minds against all its Horrors. And
without this, however Men may pretend to comfort themselves with Apothegms,
Paradoxes and brave Sayings, the Terror of Death is insuperable to all other
Principles and Resolutions.

Thus what a lame and silly device is that great Subtilty of Epicurus, to this
purpose, That death cannot hurt us, because when that is, we are not? For,
first, there is no appetite either more strong or more natural to any thing,
that is sensible of its Being, than the desire of the continuation of its
Existence. This desire results from the same instinct of Nature with the
passion of self-love. And it is as possible to reconcile a Man to an abhorrency
of himself, as it is to the thoughts of his Annihilation. For if he delight in
the enjoyment of his Being, he cannot but dread the loss of his enjoyment; and
therefore it is a dismal meditation, do what we can, to think of being blotted
out of Life for ever. So that, notwithstanding this device, the continual
foresight of this black and inevitable Fate of things, cannot but damp all our
mirth and embitter our biggest joys with the saddest accents of grief and
sorrow. And it is in vain to advise us, as Epicurus does, to accustom our
selves to the thoughts of Death, when Nature it self recoils and stands aghast
at the very apprehensions of it. And the Man that is seriously possessed with the
Opinion of its being an everlasting Annihilation, can never after lift up his
head with any cheerfulness and clearness of spirit; but will droop away his
life, in spite of all his arts and diversions, with a perpetual inward
dismayedness and discontent. And I may safely appeal to the sad experience of
Epicurus himself and all his followers, whether any thing so much checks and
abates the comfort of their lives as the importune thoughts of dying. If they
would speak out their inward pangs, they must confess, that when they have done
all they can to reconcile themselves to this necessity of Fate, that they dread
nothing with so much anguish and confusion as the approach and apprehension of
Death. It is a stupifying horror and strikes Nature it self with an infinite
and unexpressible amazement. But Epicurus himself (say they) a little before
his death, when he was quite worn out with the Stone and Strangury, the torment
whereof he thought so exquisite that nothing could increase it, was able to
magnify that mighty pleasure and happiness, that he then reaped from the
remembrance of his wise thoughts and inventions. But certainly, if he expected
to be believed, either himself was none of the wisest, or he thought his Friend
Hermachus, to whom he wrote his dying Letter, very credulous. For what were
these comfortable and ravishing inventions that could so much beatifie a Man in
that sad condition? That God takes no care of Men, that Men have no other Being
than their Bodies, that Death annihilates them for ever, that they have no
greater Happiness than to gratify their sensual appetites, and to please
themselves with reflecting upon it. Ravishing inventions these to compose the
thoughts of a dying Man! For, first, what comfort or happiness can there be in
casting off all intercourse and commerce with a Deity? Is it not much better to
have a modest and awful reverence of a Divine Providence, than to cut off all
dependence upon his bounty and goodness? Nothing can equal the satisfaction of
Mind that a good Man reaps from his trust and confidence in God; for he is ever
secure of his care and kindness in all conditions; and what greater quiet can
he enjoy than to have a well grounded assurance that he stands upon good terms
with, and has a powerful interest in the great and sovereign Governor of all
things? He is in all conditions safe under his almighty Protection, in that
there is, upon the supposition of a Divine Providence, a kind of Friendship
between God and all good Men; so that it is not in his power not to be good to
the good. Thus what happiness can exceed that of Hermogenes, in Plutarch, who
could say of himself, the Gods that know Non posse suaviter, etc.
all things, and can do all things, are so much my Friends, and so highly
concerned for my welfare, that I am never, night nor day, out of their
watchful Providence, but whatever I do, I have their assistance, and whatever
I design, their direction. And now beside the gifts of Providence in
themselves, this is that which affects with the greatest delight to think that
they are tokens of the Divine Love and Goodness. But by taking away the Being
of a Divine Providence the Epicurean robs himself of that which is most
delightful in his happiness, and leaves nothing wherewith to relieve himself
in his afflictions. For, in the next place, when he thinks to take refuge in
Death, that (as Plutarch observes) Adv. Colot.
is such another kind of comfort, as if you should tell a Man in a storm at
Sea, that your Ship has no Pilot, and that there is no hopes of allaying the
Tempest, but yet however be not afraid, for in a little time the Ship shall
split and sink, and when you are drowned then the Storm will trouble you no
longer. Such is the Philosophy of the Epicureans in all great calamities. Do
you hope for any ease from the Deity by your Prayers? You are too vainly
conceited, his blessed Nature is concerned about nothing but it self. Do you
expect a recompense in the life to come? Be not deceived: when you are dead,
you shall be for ever incapable of Sense, and therefore of Pleasure; and for
this reason I advise you to eat, drink and be merry in the fury of the Storm,
because by and by you shall sink and sink for ever.

So that granting to Epicurus his darling Principle, that after Death there
remains nothing of us sensible of Pain or Pleasure; and therefore though we
lose our Beings, yet as long as we are not capable of being affected with the
loss, we thereby become no more miserable than we were before we were put into
Being; Granting, I say, all this, yet the love of Being, and the desire of
self-preservation is so vehement and earnest, that the very fear of ever being
defeated of it is a desperate confusion of all the joy and tranquillity of
present life. Such a Man knows not which way to determine his thoughts and
designs, but his Soul or (as they will have it) his Fancy pines and languishes
for want of some suitable Object to entertain it self withal, and sinks for
ever into despair and melancholy. The utmost Happiness of this life is in it
self so vain and empty, that in spite of all the arts of diversion and
forgetfulness, it is infinitely unable to appease our discontents; and Men that
have nothing else to trust to, what dismal and disconsolate lives must they
live in every condition? If they lie under calamities and afflictions, this is
an intolerable accession to the load. For is it not a sad reflection to
consider that when the period of life is so short and fading, so much of so
little should be lost and worn away in sorrow and misery? And no doubt it
cannot but be hugely comfortable to a Man, that groans under the sorrows of a
sharp Disease, to despair of any other remedy or deliverance but in eternal
Death: and it must be a mighty relief against the unavoidable cares of Life to
consider that, when a Man has spent the greatest part of his days in toil and
drudgery, he must then die for ever. So that, according to this Hypothesis, the
whole and best account of Life will be no better than this, that it is a short
period of trouble and misery, and that Men are born into the world only to
grieve and die. And no doubt they cannot but be much in love with their Beings,
that they cannot value at an higher rate. For if the date of our existence
expired with that of our lives, and if our whole duration were but threescore
years and ten, if all our hopes were buried with our Bodies, and if wewere
thrust into Being only, after a few days or years, to be thrust back into
nothing, it is much more eligible never to have been born, than to be born
only to drop a tear and vent a groan and die. For who would choose to float up
and down a few minutes in this stormy and tempestuous world, instantly to
disappear and sink back into nothing? Who would be born for no other end than
that he might be put into a capacity to die? Who would enter upon this tragical
Scene of things only to appear and so return into dust and silence? Who would
dance upon these restless Waves a little while, till either Violence crushes or
Nature sinks the bubble into an eternal nothing? But if on the contrary a Man
should happen to enjoy the delights of ease, affluence and prosperity, a
perpetual health, and an undisturbed tranquillity, how does this meditation dash
and scatter all his joys? With what a weight of despair and astonishment must
it lie upon his oppressed Mind? And how must he for ever droop and languish
under the expectations of his endless fate? In a word, what is or what can be
conceived more frightfull to the minds or the fancies of Men, especially in
Prosperity, than the aspect of eternal Death? And yet this representation
haunts and follows such Persons like a murdered Ghost in all companies and all
delights. Nothing is able to lay or divert its importunity. It frights away all
considerations, and the more Men study to reconcile their Minds to their Fate,
the more it scares and distracts their thoughts. There is no charm nor counsel
against necessity; and a terror that is unavoidable is above the power and the
relief of Philosophy, and will not be vanquished by stubborn thoughts or proud
words. So that it is altogether as easy to prevail with a Man to hate and
abhor his own Being, as to reconcile him to the thoughts of his own
destruction. For by the same necessity that Nature loves and desires the
continuance of it self, it recoils and starts back from all thoughts of its
dissolution. This then is, upon the Epicurean Supposition, a vain, an useless
and unreasonable advice, being it is so insuperable a contradiction to the
nature of Things. So that the fear of Death, which is the thing I am now to
represent, is as certain and inexorable as Death it self, and Men may as soon
divest themselves of their own Natures, as suppress the convulsions of this
inbred passion. And now when it is so incurable, and yet withal so importunate
and disquieting, it is easy to imagine what desperately cheerful lives those
Men must live, that always live under its sad and dismal apprehensions.

XXII. But beside this great and sovereign Antidote against the fear of Death,
they have several other little receipts scattered up and down in their Writings,
I shall but briefly mention them because all that little force which they seem
to have, depends upon the former fundamental principle. First, say they, let us
be thankful to the bounty of Nature for making our lives so long, instead of
repining at it for making them no longer. But I say, if our whole Being be at
all mortal, we have no reason to be at all thankful for it, and if our whole
Being be worn out with this Life it is much more eligible never to have been.
But then, say they, we were admitted into Life upon this condition, that we
should give place to others, as others have given place to us. Were we so? Then
were we all admitted upon unacceptable terms. Yes but by troubling our selves
in vain we do but add one misery to another. It is true, but that is a fatal
misery, and it is as necessary to fear Death as it is to die, and that is it
that makes up the complaint, that we are put in such a state of Being which we
cannot enjoy without this continual anguish and perplexity annexed to it. So
that how wise or foolish a thing it is to fear Death is not at all material,
but whether it be unavoidable, though if it be, I am sure it is a very foolish
thing to endeavor against it. But how irksome soever Death may be, yet seeing
it is fatal, we ought to make it as easy as we can by a voluntary compliance
with it; but this beside the folly that is common to all the rest, that it
advises to an impossibility, is not so properly compliance as despair, and is
like the condition of a condemned Malefactor that goes to his Execution only
because otherwise he must be driven and whipped to it. And no Man has any other
comfort all his Lifetime against the terrors of Death than a Thief upon the
Gallows, that would, if it were possible, counterfeit to die cheerfully because
there is no remedy. To the same purpose is that other advice, that it is in
vain to fear Death, because it is natural, necessary and inevitable; that is,
because it is remediless, and there lies the very agony of all our horror,
that a thing so infinitely terrible should withal be so utterly unavoidable.
And when they tell us how strange a folly and madness it is to torment our
selves with the fear of that, which we are infallibly certain we can never
escape, they do but persuade us to the madness of despair instead of courage
and resolution. For how foolish or unreasonable soever this fear may be, it is
natural, antecedent to the choice of our wills and the discretion of our
understandings, and so above all the rules of Prudence and prescriptions of
Philosophy: They can only guide and instruct our Minds in things subject to
their own election, but cannot affect, much less over rule the instincts of
Nature. In the next place, we are already dead, say they, to so much of our
Life as is past and gone; so that so much as we live we die, and that which we
call Death is but our last Death, and therefore as we fear not our Death that
is past why should we that which is to come. But what Child understands not the
difference between Life and Death? and if to live be to die, notwithstanding
this quibble we are troubled never the less that this new way of dying puts an
end to our old way of dying; and if we have been dying ever since we were born,
that is the thing that grieves us that we cannot be dying so for ever. But
Bassus Aufidius, the Epicurean old Man in Epist. 30.
Seneca, reconciled himself to his approaching Death with this reason, because
it was as absurd to fear Death as old Age, which yet all Men desire to come to,
in that as old Age follows Youth, so Death follows old Age. But if he were in
good earnest satisfied, it is a sign that he had lived not only to his old Age
but to his second Childhood. For old Age is desirable not because it follows
Youth, but because it defers Death, and that is it which makes it so much less
valuable than Youth, because it is so much nearer to Death. And the
Philosophers reason had been altogether as comfortable if he had preferred old
Age before Youth, because his Youth was very old, it being many years since he
was a young Man, whereas his old Age was of a later date, he having been but a
little time an old Man. By which device he might have proved to himself that
Youth is old Age and old Age Youth. Much like this is that other reasoning
wherewith Gassendus himself seems so much pleased, that whereas we now count
our selves happy if we live to an hundred years, yet if the natural course of
our Life were as much shorter we should be as much satisfied with twenty; and
if our natural course reached to a thousand years, we should then be as much
troubled to die at six hundred as now at sixty, and so forward. It is like all
the rest of the Philosophic comforts, and is so far from reconciling us to
Death at any time, that it is a demonstration that there is no time in which an
Epicurean can or ought to be content to die; and that be our lives longer or
shorter, yet unless they are eternal, we cannot rid our selves of this
importunate and intolerable evil. And of the same nature is that witty saying
of Seneca, that a little or great circle are both equal in perfection of figure
though not in quantity, so is the Life of Man whether it last to twenty or to
an hundred years. But certainly no Man that might live to an hundred would be
content to die at twenty years of Age for this reason, because a little circle
is as round as a great one. But, lastly, Gassendus has a very remarkable
device, with which the learned Man is so much pleased as often to repeat it,
that though a Man's Life may be short in it self, yet may he make it equal with
the duration of the whole World, because he may converse with the transactions
of all former times, and be as well acquainted with them as if himself had then
actually lived. And as for the time to come, he knowing that nothing shall be
but what has been, understands all future events as if present; so that a wise
Man, partly by memory, partly by foresight, may extend his short Life to all
Ages of the World. But if he could, unless he could make himself immortal too,
the Objection would still lie as heavy as ever. Beside, can any wise Man be so
very fancifull as seriously by this device to persuade and satisfy himself,
that though he is not above forty years old, he was born at the beginning of
the World, and that though he die to morrow he shall live to the end of it? If
he can, he must be a very foolish Man too; if he cannot, it will be no support
against the approach of Death that he has already lived to the World's end.
This is the full account of all the Happiness of humane Nature, according to
the Epicurean Principles, which you see, without this support of a future
state, sinks of it self into a bottomless want and misery. And therefore, to
anticipate our Exceptions, Gassendus, at the beginning of his moral Philosophy,
has warily (as he thinks) distinguished between a twofold Happiness of Man: the
one supernatural, which we are taught by Religion, that instructs us in the
knowledge of that future state of Bliss, that good and pious Men shall enjoy in
the vision of God. The other natural, which we are taught by Philosophy,
whereby we are instructed to live as happily in this Life as the condition of
humane Nature in general, and every Man's own circumstances in particular, are
capable of. And this, he says, is all the Felicity that Mankind can naturally
desire or justly aspire to. But this is like all the rest of his excuses,
particularly that of his account of Epicurus his filial Reverence to the Gods
as opposed to the vulgar servile Fear, when by denying their Providence he
expressly destroys all manner of reverence to them. So again when he
distinguishes of two sorts of Sense, the one external, that of the Body; the
other internal, that of the Mind; and that when Epicurus affirms that all sense
is extinguish't in Death, it may be interpreted of all sense of the first kind;
when nothing can be more evident than that he intended all manner of sense
whatsoever. So now here does he distinguish between supernatural and natural
Happiness, and that it was proper for Epicurus to treat only of the latter as
a Philosopher, when it is so notorious that as a Philosopher he made it his
utmost endeavor to overthrow the very Being and belief of the former. But
however, if this Happiness which he calls natural be all that Mankind is
naturally capable of, then is he naturally capable of none at all. And as for
the two Arguments he subjoins to persuade us to be content with it, they only
aggravate and upbraid our wants instead of satisfying our desires. As, first,
that otherwise we forget our Mortality and the frailty of our Nature, in that
we are born exposed to innumerable mischiefs and miseries; which is nothing
else but the description of a forlorn and miserable condition, and amounts to
no more than this, that a wise Man must be happy, i. e. content with his
condition, because he knows his condition to be miserable. And, secondly, that
it is some comfort that when all Men are exposed to misery, and when there are
so many degrees of it, that you are less miserable than others, and that you
are as little miserable as the condition of your Nature will admit of. That is
to say, that though I endure most of the calamities of humane Life, yet must I
think my self an happy Man, if there be any one Man in the World that endures
more; and though I feel my self actually miserable, yet Philosophy teaches me
to think my self happy, because I feel as little misery as any of my
Neighbors. If these are the great Topics of philosophic Consolation, they
had better prescribe but this one Remedy instead of all, viz. To make our
selves happy only by despairing of ever being so, for that is the last result
of all their Propositions. And therefore, to conclude, it is remarkable that
Hegesias his Philosophy, who vehemently persuaded all Men to be their own
Executioners, was but the natural emprovement of that of Aristippus, whose
Scholar he was; For when the Master had once taught that there is no Happiness
but in the pleasures of the Body, it was easy for the Disciple to add that
then there is none at all, and therefore Death is the best thing that we can
either pray for or give our selves. For our Bodies are liable to such an
infinite number of Evils, and our Minds so sensible of what our Bodies feel,
that it is much more eligible not to be at all, than to be in a state of so
much misery. And that is the unavoidable consequence of all Opinions that take
away a future Immortality. Though it is pretty to observe that this same
Hegesias, as warm and eloquent as he was in persuading other Men to throw away
their lives, when King Ptolomy threatened him himself with Death if he would not
forbear those kind of Discourses to the People, how easily he was cured of his
Pedantry. For how pleasant soever the death of others might seem to him, yet
when it concerned himself it was quickly too hard for his Philosophy. And that
is the true desperate condition of all Men of the same Principles, that they
neither care to live nor care to die.

And now upon these fantastic Principles after what a rate do we rant, and
with what magnanimity and greatness of Mind do we defy all the miseries of
Life and pangs of Death? And how do we boast, that in spite of the extremest
torments that tyranny it self can inflict upon us, we will enjoy Pleasures
equal to the Happiness of the Gods? Roast us in the Bull of Phalaris, we will
make it more pleasant than a Bed of Roses, and instead of roaring out through
extremity of pain, we will spoil the Tyrants jest, and only laugh and sing
quam suave hoc est, quam hoc non curo. But could one think it possible that the
same Man, who had placed all Happiness in Pleasure and all Misery in Pain,
should be so artificial as to reconcile his sovereign Happiness with all the
anguish and extremity of Pain; that is to say, to think himself most absolutely
happy when he is most extremely miserable? But certainly he must be a very
cunning rather than a very wise Man, that can by mere subtilty be too hard for
the nature of Things, and by the mere force of imagination make an agreement
between the widest of Contradictions.

XXIII. But, secondly, as upon the Epicurean Supposition, all Happiness is no
more than a shadow, so upon the same is all Virtue no better than an empty
name. For beside that it thereby loses the foundation on which it ought to
stand, in that, if there be no such thing as Happiness, there remains no motive
for Men to act at all, when whatever they do, they must do in order to that
or to nothing; so that Happiness being taken away Virtue loses all its force
and obligation, and that Man is good in vain that is never the better for his
being good. But beside this, and granting such a thing as mortal Happiness, yet
it is too weak and narrow a Foundation for the stability of Virtue; in that it
resolves the measure and the reason of all the Virtues purely into their
subserviency to corporeal Delights, and makes the whole account of their
goodness and usefulness to lie only in this, that they are greater arts and
more prudent emprovements of the pleasures of Sensuality, and were it not for
that there were no other ground of difference between Virtue and Vice. Si ea,
quae sunt luxuriosis efficientia voluptatum, liberarent eos deorum and mortis
and doloris metu, docerentque qui essent fines cupiditatum, nihil haberem quod
reprehenderem, etc. Upon supposition that the extravagancies of debauchery had
but happened to be as serviceable to the ends of Pleasure, and did as much
deliver Men from the torment of superstition and the terrors of Death, as a
discreet, regular and temperate course of Life, they would be of equal goodness
and excellency: but because it so happens that the practice and the observation
of the Laws of Virtue is more serviceable to the delights of the Body than the
enormities of Vice, therefore and therefore only is this Virtue more valuable
than that Vice. And that is the only office of all the retinue of moral
Virtues to wait and attend upon the commands of sensual Pleasure, to direct the
Body how to use its delights to its utmost advantage, to assist it in the
contrivance and right management of its proper joys, and to minister to the
content and satisfaction of all its Appetites. Egregium habet virtus apud vos
Seneca de Vit. Beat. c. 11.
officium voluptates proegustare. This is a brave account of the essential
reasonableness of moral Virtue, that it is a discreeter and more healthful
Luxury; that is, that it is a thing of no greater excellency than the art of
Cookery, that a picquant Sauce is as valuable as an heroic Virtue, and that
Apicius and those practical Epicures that were a secretis to the voluptuousness
of the Roman Emperors, and studied all the emprovements and advantages of an
healthful and an easy Luxury, were not only the best Philosophers but the
best Men. And that the Treatise that Apicius wrote De Gulae irritamentis was
more beneficial to the life of Man and the advancement of Virtue than all the
Volumes of the Greeks and Romans beside.

But this will best appear by an induction of Particulars; and we will begin
with the Virtue of Temperance, in which they pretend most to glory in defiance
of all those enormous slanders that have been cast upon them, as placing their
sovereign Happiness in Luxury and Voluptuousness. All which they easily prevent
both by Epicurus his Doctrine and Practice. For who (say they) has more
severely inveighed against all sottish Pleasures? Who has more passionately
commended a sober and abstemious Life? Who has with more indignation shown the
inconsistency of all manner of Intemperance with Wisdom and Contentment? Who
has left a more illustrious example of Abstinence and Moderation? Whoever lived
upon meaner fare, his ordinary diet being only course Bread and Water, and
sometimes a little Sallet? And therefore, say they, it is in vain to conclude
that upon Epicurus his Principles there can be no such thing as the Virtue of
Temperance, when himself has answered all Objections by his own certain and
undeniable Practice. But it concerns not us to enquire what Epicurus his
Practice was, but what it ought to have been if conformable to his own
Principles. Especially when it is so usual a thing with him to contradict
himself upon all Arguments; as when he had denied the Providence of God, to
stand in it that yet notwithstanding he has left Devotion; when he has taught
that all Friendship must be contracted purely for the sake of Self-interest,
and yet that Men are bound to undergo the greatest Miseries, even Death it self
for the sake of Friends. So here, when he has placed our highest Pleasure in
the delights of the Palate, he places the highest Pleasure of those delights in
their lowest Enjoyment. But beside the natural stupidity of the Man, we are
beholden for such Doctrines as these not to the severity of his Virtue but the
weakness of his Stomach, which was so very infirm that it was not able to
digest the most simple and easy diet. No wonder than if he made a virtue of
necessity, or if he so far envied the rest of Mankind, that because himself was
incapacitated to enjoy his sovereign Pleasure, he spitefully persuaded all
others to quit theirs. But otherwise to tell us that the meanest and the
coarfest Fare is the most delicious, argues the Man (as Tully observes) to have
lost his taste as well as his understanding. For, as he discourses, if I were
to describe the pleasures of Luxury, I would not, as the Epicureans are wont to
do, paint such Sots as are carried sick from their Table to their Bed or their
Couch; that suffer the penance of a surfeit for every debauch; that doze away
their whole lives in perpetual folly and sottishness; that are never sober
enough to relish and enjoy their own Pleasures; that every day load themselves
with a fresh stowage before they have discharged the crudities of their last
debauch; that have little more sense than a Sponge; that eat and drink
themselves into a continual Lethargy, and are senseless before they are dead.
The case is plain that these are of all Men the most miserable. But beside
these there are your neat, your polite, your witty, your artificial Epicures,
that study all the arts and emprovements of an easy Luxury; that avoid all
irksomeness by the skill of their Cooks, the delicacy of their Meats, the
picquancy of their Sawces, and the richness of their Wines; that give
themselves entirely up to sensual Pleasures and Gratifications, and are
concerned for nothing but merely how to eat and drink to the utmost emprovement
of Delight. And if these may be accounted temperate Persons, then have we found
out a Virtue destructive of the Peace and Welfare of Mankind; for that, as I
have demonstrated, cannot be preserved but by seeking the good of others as
well as our own; whereas this utterly neglects the public, and merely regards
every Man's private satisfaction. And if all Men should betake themselves to
this course of Life, it is obvious to every Man what would become of humane
Society. But seeing Epicurus casts these Self-indulgers out of the number of
his wise Men, I would fain know how he can do it and be consistent with his own
Principles. For if our sovereign delight consist in those Pleasures, and if he
be the happiest Man that enjoys them most, and if he be the wisest Man that
most consults his own Happiness, there is no avoiding it but that Apicius will
carry the cause from all their Philosophers.

XXIV. And so again if we once take off those obligations to Justice and
Honesty that are laid upon us by our relation to the Life to come, it will be
ever after absolutely impossible by all the arts and devices in the World to
preserve any sense of them any other way. For whatever advantages Men may think
to reap as to their present Interest from their observance of the Laws of
Justice and Integrity, that may make them crafty, but never honest. And when
they are once got loose from the ties of Conscience, they are then not
concerned to be innocent but only to seem to be so; and this does not at all
restrain them from designing and doing vile things, but only engages them to
be cunning in their wickedness. And agreeably to this Principle and these
Consequences does Epicurus discourse, when he challenges the World, after they
have set aside the consideration of present Pleasure and Self-advantage, to
assign him any other possible reason or end of Virtue beside popular fame. For
that, says he, when all is done is the only measure of common Honesty. And if
you once remove the Opinion of the multitude, there remains nothing in it self
either praiseworthy or dishonorable. But this again (says he) is the Fate of
Mankind, that the vulgar rout take up with prejudices and invincible conceits
of things; and then whatever they authorize into Customs, must out of mere
compliance with their importunity be voted the standing Rules of Virtue and
Honesty. So that a wise Man, setting aside all regard to his own present
convenience, can see no other reason to be Just and Honest beside compliance
with casual Custom and popular Opinion that it seems must be submitted to, as
he ever intends to enjoy any peace or quiet of Life; in that the rabble are
always so impatient of all contradiction to their customary belief. And this is
all the account that he or any other of his persuasion is able to give of the
turpitude and deformity of Vice. So that a Philosopher might justly and wisely
betray his Friend and his trust to defeat him of his pledge; or murder his
Father to secure the Inheritance, if he can but avoid the shame of discovery
and the inconvenience of popular hatred. So that if we remove the folly and the
ignorance of the Rabble, there is no other difference between Virtue and Vice,
Integrity and Treachery, but what is made purely by the consideration of every
Man's own private Interest: So utterly destructive are these Opinions not only
of the Happiness of humane Nature in general, but of the Peace of every
particular Society of Mankind: And such as spread and propagate their repute in
the World, do but instruct Men in the fundamental Principles of Falsehood,
Treason and Perjury. And therefore deserve greater severity from Government
than Outlaws and open Rebels, as being beside their impiety more dangerous and
mischievous to the Commonwealth for their Pedantry: In that they are not only
content to do wicked things, but think themselves concerned in honor to bring
their own wicked Practices into Reputation, and to infect all others with such
Principles, as will oblige and encourage them to imitate their Villainies.
However these Principles, are so far from procuring the Happiness or securing
the Duty of single Men, that if embraced and reduced to practice, they must
unavoidably involve all Mankind in eternal mischiefs, wickednesses and
confusions. And it is to these accursed Principles that we owe the miseries of
common Life, they being the fundamental Rules and Maxims of all the Tyranny,
Fraud and Oppression in the World.

But if the shame of the World or the fear of the People were sufficient to
restrain from open and avowed Wickedness, what shall withhold from secret
Attempts? Insecurity and fear of discovery, says Epicurus. But besides that
this only obliges wicked Men to be more crafty and cautious in their
Villainies, it is not powerful enough to give a true and real restraint to
dishonest actions, in that the advantage is certain, but not the discovery, and
a certain good is a much stronger motive than an uncertain evil. And though it
may give check to Fraud and Violence in some common cases (as it is of very
good use and service in humane Life) yet those acccidents are very frequent, in
which Men may be very highly wicked, and yet very secure in their Wickedness.
As when Saint Peducoeus was entrusted by his Friend with his last Will and
Testament, and that with so much privacy, that if he had kept the whole Estate
to himself no body could have suspected his dishonesty; that then he should
surprise the right Heir, who expected no such thing, with the news of a great
Inheritance, it was done like a Gentleman of a Roman Education, but he could
not be forced to it by any obligation upon the Epicurean Principles; in that
they could not requite his Integrity with a reward equal to so fair a Fortune.
A great Estate and a fine House are of more value than the empty names of
Justice and Friendship, and so they are to the Man that counts upon no other
Interest and expects no other Happiness than in this Life. And Sestilius, who
by a forged Writing cheated his Friend's Children, that were left to his trust,
of their Inheritance, and secured the Estate to himself and his Posterity by a
Decree of Law, was upon the Epicurean Principles, much the wiser and nothing
the worse Man. For by this one Act he made provision for the Happiness of his
whole Life, and yet was so far from any fear of discovery, that his Fraud,
being abetted and secured by Law, was no small accession to the pleasure and
satisfaction of his good fortune. And in truth this restraint is so far from
reaching all cases of Fraud and Oppression, that one half of the wickednesses
of Mankind are unavoidably abetted and ratified by the Laws themselves. For
seeing they can judge and determine only according to Evidence, and seeing the
Persons, who invade other Men's Rights, will not stick to make out their Title
by any falsehood and villainy, then as long as the forgery is not discovered (and
that is no easy matter) the Law is forced to pass Judgment on the wrong side.
But beside the injuries of Fraud, the greatest miseries brought upon Mankind by
Injustice are supported by Power and Greatness; and in such cases the Tyrant
and Oppressor defies all discovery, and though he cares not if all the World
sees his Wickedness, yet if any Man shall pretend to have his Eyes open, he
shall forfeit his head for the boldness of his Eyesight. So that if this were
the only state of things the Governor of the World has provided neither
sufficient rewards for Justice and Honesty, nor restraints from Fraud and
Oppression. And if he has not, then he has laid no effectual obligation upon
Mankind to be Just and Honest; for the force of every Command depends upon its
Sanction, and therefore if he have enjoined this Duty, and have not backed it
with sufficient motives of Obedience, he has only enacted useless and
ineffectual Laws. In short, the only difference between the Man that is Honest
and the Man that is not, is merely this that the one prefers his Duty before
his present Interest; and the other his present Interest before his Duty. For
if he observe the Rules of Justice only so far as they conduce to his own
ends, then whenever they happen to thwart, he is obliged to quit his Duty
rather than his Interest. And when he does so, he is so far destitute of all
Principles of Honesty, that he is entirely governed by the fundamental Maxims
of Fraud and Oppression. And if this be the only difference that distinguishes
Good and Bad Men, I would fain know what motive or reason a good Man has, to
pursue his Duty when contrary to his Interest; or a bad Man has to quit his
Interest out of respect to his Duty, if there be no other state of things than
the present. And therefore, without Immortality, Justice is so far from
deserving our regard in all cases, that in many it is a contradiction to the
first Instinct of Nature, that is self-love, in that it obliges a Man to act
cross to that without any reason or recompense for his so doing. And therefore
seeing the Providence of God has prescribed to us those many and plain Laws of
Justice that I have discovered from the Nature of Things in the precedent
Discourse, it unavoidably follows that upon that Supposition those Laws that he
has prescribed must be abetted with the Rewards and Punishments of a future
State, because those of this, if taken alone and separate from those of that,
are not of sufficient force and validity.

And as Justice the most necessary, so Fortitude the most noble of all Virtues
will have no Foundation upon the Epicurean Principles, or rather will sink
together with them. For if there be no such thing as Justice, to what purpose
should any Man run himself into hazards and hardships for the sake of it; and
yet that is the only Office of Magnanimity, which when separated from a good
Cause is no more than folly and fool-hardiness, and in a bad Cause is no better
than cruelty and oppression. And beside this, as every Virtue must have some
Principle to warrant its Wisdom and Reasonableness, so above all others
Magnanimity, because it puts us upon the severest and hardest Service, and
does, more than any Virtue beside, endanger our own Interest for the sake of
Duty. But if there be no other Interest than that of this Life, it is apparent
madness for any Man to hazard Life and Fortune, and all that is dear to him
here for any thing whatsoever; when all other Motives that can be proposed to
him are of less concernment to himself than his own Self-preservation. Beside,
true Magnanimity bottoms all its Courage and Assurance upon no other Principle
than the Conscience of its own Integrity: It is that alone that gives a Man a
sufficiency and satisfaction from himself; that raises him to a contempt of all
outward things; that makes him searfull of all Assaults and Dangers; and that
supports him under all Losses and Misfortunes, as esteeming all things
whatsoever as mean and worthless Trifles in comparison to the Happiness of its
own Reflections. But then as Conscience is the only support of Courage, so is
immortality of Conscience; for that is nothing else but the Mind of Man acting
with reference to the future Judgment of God. And therefore from thence alone
it derives all its Force and Authority, and without that all seeming regard to
it is nothing but Pretense and Pageantry. For what comfort will a good
Conscience afford a Man, if he be to give no Account of his Actions? Upon that
Supposition the Guilty and the Innocent are upon equal Terms, when the best
Man is never the better for all his Virtues, nor the other the worse for all
his Villainies. If then Integrity of Conscience be the only Principle of all
Magnanimity, and if the firmness of that depends merely upon Immortality, then
that being taken away, the one sinks into Crast, the other into Cowardice. In
short, there are but two Offices of Magnanimity, either to do or to suffer
gallantly, both which are manifest Contradictions to the Epicurean Principles;
For what Inducements can that Man have to put himself upon Hardships, who knows
no other Happiness but Ease and Lasiness? And therefore upon their Supposition
it was wise Advice of Metrodorus to his Brother, not to concern himself in
desence and preservation of his Country, but to eat and drink with philosophic
Wisdom and Discretion. And then as for bearing up decently under Calamities, I
have already shown that they have not one Principle wherewith to support
themselves, and without such Principles as can supply the absence of their
present Happiness, nothing else can relieve their Loss; and therefore instead
of bearing up with any cheerfulness under Miseries and Afflictions they must
for ever sink into insupportable Anguish and Despair.

And now from these Premises (to mention no more Particulars, because all the
other Virtues depend upon these) it is demonstratively evident that to root up
the sentiments of Immortality out of the Minds of Men is to blast and put out
the Sun, and to overwhelm the World in eternal Night and Darkness: Erasing all
the Foundations of Happiness, tearing up all the Roots of Virtue, and laying
wast all the Principles of humane Nature and humane Society. And (as Plutarch
discourses) where such Principles Adv. Colotem.
of Philosophy prevail as enervate the Laws of Virtue, Men have nothing left to
distinguish them from Brute-beasts, but that they want the Claws of Lions, and
the Teeth of Wolves, the Stomachs of Oxen, and the Backs of Camels. In a word,
upon this single Principle of a future State depend all the differences of Good
and Evil; if this stand firm Virtue is secure, but otherwise (after all that
care that the Divine Providence has taken to recommend it to us) it is all no
more than Craft or Folly.

XXV. And now having thus far and fairly casheird the Epicurean Principles, I
shall be so much the more brief with the Stoics: partly because of the great
agreement between their Paradoxes and the Decrees of Epicurus: Both being only
so many stubborn Opinions taken up against the Nature of Things and the
Experience of Mankind. And notwithstanding that the Stoics may seem so
contradictory in many of their Propositions to the Epicureans, yet after all
they rely upon the same Principles, and therefore when reduced to practice
will resolve, themselves into the same Actions. But chiefly because they only
amuse us with the noise of wrangle and disputation: so that almost all their
Disquisitions upon this noble Argument spend themselves in vain and impertinent
Contentions about technical Terms and Phrases, that serve neither to promote
the attainment nor to unfold the nature of true Happiness; but rather to
obstruct all serious and effectual endeavors after it by entertaining and
diverting the Minds of Men with innumerable curious and useless Niceties. And
though the Writings of Cicero and Seneca may supply us with many excellent
Rules and Helps for the tranquillity of our Lives; yet their value is strangely
abated, and their use sadly defeated by their too much mixture of dry and
barren Speculation; insomuch that a Man may sooner arrive at the end of true
Happiness, than of their Disputes and Distinctions about it. And for that
Reason I shall wave enquiring into any of their logical and metaphysical
Subtilties, and only represent in general the vanity of their attempts after
Virtue and Happiness in their way of philosophising. They therefore gravely
considering with themselves that these outward things could never afford but
very little and very uncertain satisfaction to the Minds of Men, in that they
were liable to so many Chances and foreign Contingencies; and therefore being
unwilling to be endebted to Fortune for their Content, confined its disposal
entirely within themselves, so that every Man's Happiness was to be spun out of
his own Bowels. And thence discarding all the outward Advantages of Life,
Riches, Honor, Power, Health, and Friends as things altogether indifferent,
they summed up all the numbers of their Happiness singly in the Joys and
Pleasures of a Life conducted by the Rules of Virtue. This indeed were a great
and glorious Account of things, were it supported by any wise and sober
Principles; but alas it is so far from having any real Foundation, that it is
inconsistent with the first and fundamental Principle of humane Nature, as it
is owned by the Stoics themselves. For they begin from the Catholic Doctrine
of all the Philosophers, the natural passion of Self-love, that Mankind as well
as every other Creature has to its own welfare and preservation, to pursue what
it supposes will advance its Content and Happiness, and shun whatever may
impair or destroy it. Now what is humane Nature according to them but a Being
compounded of Body and Soul? and if so, then it is obliged as it loves it self
to seek the welfare of both. How then comes it to pass that it should so far
forsake it self as utterly to forget one moiety of it self in its pursuit of
Happiness? So that they must either renounce their first Principle of our Love
to our whole selves, or their first Maxim that our whole Happiness relates to
the Mind alone. But that is the peculiar vanity of these Men, that they would
be philosophising after the rate of Angels, and discourse without considering
that their Bodies are one half of their Natures, and that their Souls are not
disengaged from Matter, and by consequence have sensual Appetites too gross to
be satiated by bare Thoughts and Reflections; and sensitive Pains too sharp to
be allayed by Words and Subtilties. This I say is the peculiar Pedantry of this
Sect of Men to be disposed of by the power of Phrases, without attending to the
nature and reality of things; and they would cheat our Senses and delude our
Appetites with tricks and arts of Sophistry. That which all the World dread and
fly from, they forbid us to acknowledge to be evil, though we are convinced it
is so by sad and sensible Experience. And when Dionysius a reverend Sage of the
Sect was so rackt and torn apeices with the torments of the Stone, that the
continuance and unintermission of his Pain had tired out his Patience and
vanquished his Apathy, and at last forced him to cry out in the extremity of
his Anguish, O'Pain, I yield, I must and do acknowledge thee to be an Evil;
this Confession put Cleanthes that Bigot of Stoicism into such a fit of zeal
and outrage that he could not refrain to chide and upbraid his Apostasy with
the most satirical sharpness of Expression, and the poor Man was in great
danger of being expelled the Sect for not being able to outface his Misery. But
if you demand why Pain is not to be reckoned among things evil, their answer is
ready, because it is not vicious and criminal. This is a doubty Solution, and
worth the wagging of a Sages Beard; for all the World knows Pain or Sickness to
be no immorality, it is in vain to prove it; but when I feel my self restless
and miserable, let them, If they can, convince me whether it be indifferent or
equally eligible to be at ease in perfect Health, or to endure the torments of
a Feavour. O yes, say they, for though it have no relation to or influence upon
our Happiness, yet ought it to be rejected, because it is unpleasant, unnatural,
uneasy, grievous, and troublesome. Here is plenty of Phrase and synonymous
Expression for what other People in one word call Evil; and by what title
soever we may pretend to despise it, that is no aswaging the Pain, and if it be
grevious I am not less miserable than if it were Evil. So that after all their
Rants and Braveries they are forced to submit to the common Fate and Calamity
of Mankind, and to acknowledge from the conviction of their own Senses that a
Sage, however he may swagger, is obnoxious to sadness and misery, as well as
other ordinary Mortals. And so Seneca De Constan. cap. 3.
objects to himself without ever attempting to answer it. You boast of mighty
things, things too great not only to be wished for, but to be understood: and
when you have vented these glorious Braveries, viz. that it is impossible for a
wise Man to suffer poverty, you deny not but that he may as often as others
want Food and Raiment. When you say that he cannot be obnoxious to madness, you
deny not but that he may be beside himself, rave, talk wildly, and do all the
other Pranks of frantic People. When you affirm that he cannot be any Man's
Servant, you deny not but that he may be sold for a Slave and do all the
offices of a Black. And so when you have talked after this proud and
supercilious rate, after all you submit to the real Condition of other Mortals,
only abusing your selves with big and lofty Words. And there indeed lay all
the Wisdom and all the Folly too of the Stoics, that they would needs change
the Natures by the change of the Names of things. And if there be any thing
peculiar to their Philosophy it consists in the invention of new Words and
pedantick Distinctions. And therefore Tully very unhappily brings in Zeno thus
rating all the Philosophers that went before him, and that were content to suit
their Principles to the Nature of Things and the Experience of Sense: what can
be more absurd, more foolish, and more insufferable than to reckon Health,
Plenty, and all the other Comforts and Advantages of Life into the accounts of
Good things? I tell you Plato, and you Aristotle, you are dangerously and
woefully mistaken, to call those things Bona that are only proeposita. A
desperate Error, that unavoidably destroys all the Rules and Obligations of
Virtue, and confounds all the differences of Good and Evil. This change of
words, as small a matter as it may appear, has so much influence upon the
practice and emprovement of Morality, that sufficiently re^ompences all the
pains and disputations of the Porch. O magnam vim ingenii, (as he concludes)
causamque justam, cur nova existeret disciplina! O brave Zeno, it is gallantly
done to reform the Manners and the Wisdom of the World; Thou, upright as thou
art, wilt not be born away by carnal compliance with the Corruptions of the
Age, or by the Authority of self-seeking Philosophers, that yield so much to
the degenerate and low conceptions of the Vulgar as to acknowledge that it is
some kind of blessing to enjoy the Comforts of Health and Plenty. O brutish and
Epicurean Sottishness to adopt such sordid, such common and such uncertain
things into any part of our Happiness! This is to expose a wise Man as well as
one of the common Heard to the insolence of Fortune; and she may, if she
please, in spite of Virtue, riflle him of some share of his Happiness. This is
not to be endured that any thing should have any influence or power over a Sage
beside his own sovereign and imperial Will. And therefore however any Disease
may rack or torment you, keep your Courage, and never confess it to be Evil,
it is nothing worse than a mere Refusable Event. And then no doubt the poor
Man's Mind is at perfect ease, and bravely fortified against all manner of Pain
and Impatience. And that is the great power of their Philosophy to assuage
Pains and cure Diseases by exotic words, and by giving it a greek name they
can make Sickness, Poverty, or any other Calamity of Life harmless things. And
let a Vertuoso determine a fit of the Stone to be no more than (...), a
refusable thing, and not (...), an Evil; and he makes it as pleasant and
agreeable to himself as the Joys of Paradise. And think not to convince Zeno or
Antisthenes of their mistake with racks and tortures, alas they laugh at all
your vain attempts, and what have they to do with the (...); no, they too are
as much at ease in the Bull of Phalaris as upon a Bed of Roses. The Fire has
not so much power or confidence as to dare to singe one hair of a Philosophers
Beard, and if it should be so bold as to attempt them, they will damp and
basfle all its fury with a querk of Logic. In short, these Men talk more like
Magicians than Philosophers, and can do any thing or be any thing by virtue of
a strange word. Ex iisdem verborum proestigiis (as Tully to Cato) De Fin. l. 4.
and regna nata vobis sunt and imperia, and divitiae, and tantae quidem, ut
omnia, quae ubique sint, sapientis esse dicatis. From these juggling tricks and
legerdemains of Words you raise, and as it were conjure up to your selves
Kingdoms and Empires, and Wealth so much, that nothing less will satisfy you,
unless every wise Man among you may be master of the whole World. But to leave
them to their own conjuring Arts, I shall briefly discourse with them according
to the true and real account of things. If then there be no such thing to be
reasonably expected as a future State, let us only see what ground of
Happiness is to be enjoyed from Virtue, and what obligations of Virtue can be
passed upon the Stoical Principles. As for Happiness they lay the foundations
of it (as I have already observed) upon that self-love that every Creature
bears to it self and its own preservation. Either then humane Nature is nothing
but Body, or compounded of Body and Soul; if it be nothing but Body, then upon
the Stoical Principles it is capable of no Happiness at all, seeing they pass
nothing in their Account of Good and Evil but only the Virtues of the Mind,
and therefore if they are nothing but Body, all the qualities of their Mind are
nothing. But if beside that we have a Soul, either it perishes with the Body or
it survives it; if it perishes then it is no more than the sense of the Body it
self, and it plainly casts us back upon the Epicurean Principle, that there is
no Happiness but present Pleasure and Interest; if it survive, then that
entitles it to an Happiness beside that of this Life, and so we are advanced to
our own Hypothesis. As for Virtue the whole Sect place it in one Catholic
Principle of living according to Nature. But then the difficulty is to discover
what they mean by Nature, and there every Man is a Sect to himself, and we have
as many different Accounts of it, as there are ruling Schoolmasters of the
Porch. But what Interpretation soever we follow, unless founded upon our
Supposition, we are still forced back to the School of Epicurus, for his
Principle too was to live according to Nature, which was to enjoy the utmost
Pleasure of this present Life; and if there be no other State, it is certain
there can be no other way of living according to Nature. Thus Zeno's (...), i.
e. a constancy to a Man's self, and some settled course of Life, would amount
to no more than this, that every wise Man ought to consult how to live here
with as much ease and pleasure as he can; for if there be no other State, he
cannot be wisely constant in the pursuit of any better Design. And then as for
Cleanthes his Notion, that living according to Nature is to comply with
universal Nature, that is to submit to the Providence of God. This properly
concerns the single Virtue of Patience, and yet affords us no more Comfort than
that forementioned Principle of the necessity of the thing; for if I am any way
fatally involved in misery, whether by Providence or by Chance, I am equally
miserable. But then this Rule, if applied to the Duty of Man in general,
signifies nothing at all. For what is it to follow the Providence of God unless
it be to approve of and comply with every thing that comes to pass? If so, then
seeing Villainy does as often prosper as Virtue, by that alone the Providence of
God would recommend it to our choice. And that no doubt would be an admirable
Rule of Justice and Honesty (as we have found by late Experience) that destroys
all difference between Good and Evil but what is made by the event of things,
and changes their Natures with the change of Times and Fashions. The third and
last Opinion is that of Chrysippus, that to follow Nature is to follow our own
proper Nature or the guidance of our own Reason. But then if there be no other
Estate of things beside this, every Man's own natural Understanding will easily
inform him that he is concerned in nothing else then to consult his own present
Pleasure and Advantage. But this Conclusion is so evident that I shall pursue
it no farther, so that though after I had considered their general Principles,
I intended to have entered upon the particular Treatises of Seneca, Antoninus
and Epictetus; I now find it absolutely needless, of which any Man that will
read them over may satisfy himself, for if he read them with our Supposition
he will find them for the main wise and rational Discourses; but if without it,
they all vanish into mere Poetry and Elysian Dreams.

XXVI. In the third place, the Platonists, and from them the Peripateticks were
pleased to enlarge the Bounds of humane Felicity, and make our Happiness of
equal extent with our Capacities; making every thing an Ingredient thereof,
that is any way grateful or suitable to our Natures. And therefore to a
virtuous Life they superadded all the Goods of Body and Fortune; and to render
a Man truly and completely happy they required, beside the Endowments of the
Mind, all the other Comforts and Enjoyments of humane Life. And this they
assert reasonably enough from the first Principle of Nature, in which alone all
Sects of Philosophers agree; that every sensible Being bears an innate love and
kindness to it self, and from that is possessed with a natural desire not only
of its own preservation, but of the most perfect state and condition that its
Nature is capable of. So that the parts and degrees of our Happiness are to be
measured only from the capacity and variety of our Faculties: And therefore
humane Nature being compounded of two Principles, Body and Mind, they must both
be gratified in their respective Sensations to make up the adequate Notion of
humane Happiness. And as for the gratification of the Mind, that they say
consists principaly in the constant exercise of Virtue; and subordinately in
Knowledge, Wisdom, Contemplation, or any other exercise of Wit and Ingenuity.
And then as for the Happiness and Well-being of the Body, that consists chiefly
in an healthful, sound, and vigorous Constitution; and subordinately in all
the other accidental advantages of this present Life, that are so many
instruments of Pleasure and Delight. These Men discourse more consistently than
the other Sects to the constitution of humane Nature, and give a fuller account
of the condition of humane Happiness, in that they take in all our Capacities,
and do not with the Epicureans consine it to the Body alone, nor with the
Stoics to the Mind alone; but take our Nature as they find it, and suit its
Happiness not to the workings of their own Imaginations, but to our real state
of Being. But though these approach nearer than either of the former to the
true notion of Happiness, yet are they as distant as either of them from its
acquisition: Insomuch that when they come to reduce their Principle to
practice, they are at last forced to delude themselves with the very same
Maxims and Paradoxes. And therefore though Tully has, in his Books de Finibus
fully confuted the Hypotheses both of the Epicureans and Stoics, yet when he
comes, in his Tusculine Questions, to discourse practically concerning the same
things, he at last produces no better grounds of comfort and contentment than
those that he had at first rejected, and is in the result of every Discourse
either an Epicurean or a Stoic, or both. And this I shall prove distinctly in
both the forementioned heads of dispute. First, that he is able to give no
better account of Happiness than the Epicureans. Nor, secondly, to lay any
better grounds for the stability, or assign any more effectual motives for the
practice of Virtue. From both which it will evidently appear that there is some
further account to be given of these things than what he has given upon
supposition of the Soul's Mortality, if there be a Providence that has made
Happiness our End and Virtue the means to attain it.

And first he begins with the greatest difficulty of all, the fear of Death;
where all the philosophic Consolation he is able to give us, is built upon
little tricks and subtilties, and chiefly upon that pitiful sophism of
Epicurus, that Death can never do us any harm, because when that is, we are
not. But, first, let him say what he will, it is inconsistent with his own
first and fundamental Principle, viz. That the most vehement passion of humane
Nature is a love of it self and its own preservation; and therefore to
endeavor to reconcile a Man to utter death and dissolution is to persuade him
to contradict himself and his own Nature. This Principle then of
self-preservation being once supposed as natural and necessary, it prevents the
very consideration of all manner of Discourses opposite to it. And to what
purpose is it for Tully with all his Wit and Eloquence to persuade me not to
dread Death, when he has beforehand told me it, as the most undoubted truth in
all Philosophy (and so it is) that I cannot avoid to love and desire Life? He
must first renounce his Principle, and I my Nature, before we can begin to
philosophise upon this Argument. And therefore, secondly, be it so, that when
Death is, we are not, yet what relief is this against the melancholy thoughts
of the living, who as much as they love their own existence by virtue of their
former Principle, cannot but as much dread by virtue of the same the
apprehensions of its utter dissolution? So that as long as this invincible
instinct of Nature remains, that can neither be destroyed nor commanded, the
anguish of this single Meditation is too close and affecting to be allayed or
overruled by any other. Or, as himself has framed the Objection, without so
much as attempting to answer it, Quid? qui vivimus, cum moriendum sit, nonne
miseri sumus? Quae enim potest in vita esse jucunditas, cum dies and noctes
cogitandum sit, jam jamque esse moriendum. What though after Death we shall
never be sensible of the loss of Life, yet whilst we live what comfort can we
enjoy, if we lie under such an invincible necessity of dying? What freedom and
satisfaction can we reap from all our Pleasures, whilst this ugly thought
haunts us day and night, jam jamque esse moriendum? Whatever diverting arts we
may fly to to stifle this reflection, it is so unwelcome to our Minds and so
affrightfull to our Natures, and so insuperable to all the powers of Reason and
Philosophy, that when all is done there is no remedy but we must lie down and
languish all our days under its fatal and intolerable expectations; so that if
any thing can be said well of Death, it is only this that it delivers us from
the fear of it self. But however (proceeds he) Death ought not to appear so
formidable to a wise Man, though it were for no other reason than that it
delivers us from the miseries of Life. And when it is objected that, granting
all his subtilties, and that there is indeed no capacity of Misery where there
is no Sense, yet illud angit vel potius excruciat, discessus ab omnibus iis,
quae sunt bona in Vita, It Is this that grieves and gripes our Souls, that we
must for ever forsake all the joys and comforts of this Life; he returns upon
the Objection with this brisk and nimble Answer, Vide ne a malis dici verius
possit. You miserably mistake your self in the framing your Objection, instead
of the Joys and Comforts you should rather have said the Evils and Miseries of
this Life. And when you consider the emptiness and dissatisfaction of all its
Enjoyments, and reflect upon the smart and the weight of all its Calamities,
you will be so far from trembling at the horror of your Fate, that you will
esteem it your greatest Privilege; and there may you, when you please, take
Sanctuary from all those troubles and vexations that pursue you and all Mankind
through the whole course of Life. And now is not this, think you, a mighty
support to the Minds of Men, to be informed that all the Happiness they are
capable of is only to cease to be miserable? With what cheerfulness and
tranquillity can those Men live, that live all their days upon this lank
Meditation, that though I must endure Torment as long as I endure Life, yet the
time will come when I shall escape both, and cease to be miserable by ceasing
to be. Oh the transport and ravishment of these philosophic Reflections! Who
can desire greater ease and complacency of Soul, than to be always thinking (if
thinking at all) that though my present state be so utterly forlorn and
restless, yet however this is my comfort that I shall one day be at quiet, when
Death shall deprive me of all Sense and Being for ever. Is not this a very
comfortable representation of the best condition and whole capacity of humane
Nature to be uncessantly bandied up and down (like the old Britains between the
Sea and the Barbarians) between two such formidable Evils? The sorrows of Life
drive us to Death for refuge, and the horrors of Death fright us back upon the
Miseries that we fly; and thus whether we resolve to live or to die we are
equally distressed and miserable. So that he is so far by this principle of
Consolation from giving us any comfort against the terror of Death, that he
has instead of that destroyed all the comfort of Life too.

But Nature (he tells us) has not granted us our Beings upon the Title of
Fee-simple, but has only lent us the use of our Lives for a certain time, and
that during pleasure, and therefore we have no reason to complain of her,
whenever she demands them back, because she gave them upon no other condition
than that we should always be ready to resign them upon demand. But if Nature
have clogged her Kindness to us in bestowing our Beings upon us with this hard
Condition, she had been much kinder if she had never bestowed them at all. For
the severity of the Condition annexed to the Gift, not only destroys all the
pleasure and enjoyment of it, but turns it into anguish and misery. And this is
all along our very complaint against Nature, that she has put us into such a
condition of Life, as that we cannot enjoy it without continual grief and
horror of Mind. So that she has sent us into the World, not like her
Offspring, but like Malefactors, with the sentence of Death passed upon us as
soon as we are born. And therefore to tell us that this is the order and
disposition of Nature is not to answer but to grant the Objection, because that
alone makes us fatally miserable. So that when Monsieur Charon asks me, If it
grieveth thee to die, why were thou born? I tell him plainly, if I was born
with that Condition of dying for ever, I was born to no other purpose than to
be miserable: So that if it could have been in my power to have prevented my
coming into Being, I should more passionately have fled from Life than now I do
from Death; And being I could not avoid to be born, I am bound all my days to
curse and hate the Cause that gave me so wretched a Being. At least if Nature
resolved to beget us Mortal, she might have been so kind as to have kept from
us the knowledge and foresight of our own Mortality, and then might we have
enjoyed our present lives with some competent content and cheerfulness; but
when she has given us so strong a love of Life, continually to embitter that
with as vehement a fear of Death is only to make our very existence a scence
of Misery, and to give us our Beings to be a torment to themselves. And
whereas, as he adds for our comfort, that there is no such thing as length or
shortness of Life in it self, but that it consists merely in comparison; and
that the Insect, whose Life begins and ends with one half revolution of the
Sun, is as old at the evening of the day as a Man at threescore; beside that
this is but a poor shift of Sophistry, as I have already shown against the
Epicureans, I would be content to exchange my Life of sixty years with your
little happy Insect that lives but a day. For when the Sun has scattered all
the chill horrors of the night and darkness, and gilded the World with light
and splendor, then it is that this little Creature thrusts up its Head, assays
its Wings, forsakes the Clod that bread it and mounts up into the calm and
gentle Air; where it sports and revels and rejoices in that Light and Warmth
that gave it Being, and dances away all its little Age with mirth and gaiety.
Its Life is short indeed but pleasant, ours long and tedious; its Age is all
sunshine, the greatest part of ours darkness and sorrow; it sports away its
little interval of Being, but ours is fretted and consumed away with restless
cares, mournings and afflictions. But that which makes the main difference
between us is, that this little Creature as it lives merrily so it dies
unconcernedly; whereas my whole Life, howsoever otherwise happy, is turned into
mere anguish and bitterness with the perpetual and intolerable horrors of
Death. And the longer it lasts, the more miserable it is, in that it is nothing
else than to be so much the longer tormented with the fearful expectation of a
certain Evil; and therefore as the Law (as Cardan observes) De Consol. l. 1.
takes care that at the execution of Malefactors the more modest and less
Criminal should be first dispatched, but the bolder and greater Offenders be
made Spectatours of the Death of others before they suffered themselves; so
Nature, where she has a mind to show the greatest kidness, puts soonest out of
pain, but where she intends severity she keeps Men longer in suspense, and
makes them to behold their Friends and Companions Fate before she brings them
to their own Execution. In short, this is a very strange oversight of all the
Philosophers, that when they have instructed us that the love of Life is of all
passions the most Natural, they should notwithstanding that with the same
unanimity agree to persuade us not to fear Death because that is natural too.
What a contradiction is this in Nature to force us to desire the continuance of
Life, and yet require us not to fear its discontinuance? But if the first be
(as it is) the most natural of all our passions, it prevents the force of all
others that are inconsistent with it. So that if in the first place we desire
to live, it is a vain attempt to persuade us not to fear to die, because upon
the supposition of the love of Life, the fear of Death is unavoidable. So that
the Philosophers having unanimously laid the love of Being as the fundamental
Principle of all their Morality, it spoils all their consolatory Discourses,
from what Topics soever, against the dread and terror of dying; and therefore
it is needless for me to pursue any more of their particular Reasonings upon
this Argument, because they all at first view dash so apparently against this
first Principle.

XXVII. And now having, as he supposes, vanquished this King of terrors the
fear of Death, he thinks it an easy task to rout all the little evils of Life;
and had he done that, he had without any farther pains performed his whole
design. For what can hurt the Man who fears not to die? For Death is a remedy
always at hand, so that if he think it not convenient to struggle with the
miseries of Life, by dying he may put an end to all. But having beaten him out
of that Sanctuary, which he had raised by his first days Conference, we shall
follow him through the rest of his ensuing Disputations. The two next Enemies
therefore that he undertakes are Pain and Grief. And though his Discourses upon
these Arguments are very large, copious and eloquent, yet all the Philosophy of
them is comprehended in two or three short Propositions. The first is, That
Dishonor is worse than Pain; and yet nothing can be more dishonorable to the
courage of a Man, or more unbecoming the dignity of a Philosopher than
complaints and impatience, or an abject behavior under Calamities. Yes, no
doubt there is a decency in bearing Afflictions with a manly Courage. What
then, is this any remedy to relieve or assuage the Pain? For, first, wherein
consists this ground of comfort? Is it not that other Men judge that you behave
your self handsomely and like a Man? Now who are they? They are either the
foolish or the wise part of Mankind. But how can the Opinion of Fools afford
any comfort to a wise Man? Especially when you have (and that justly) discarded
the common People as an ignorant, idle and regardless herd. And as for the
Opinion of the Wise, which way can that alleviate any Man's Pain? For if you
are in Pain, and counterfeit that you are not, if they are wise they know that
you dissemble, and certainly their knowledge of your Hypocrisy can be no
comfort; or if they thought you in good earnest, it is not conceivable how
their false Opinion should afford any true satisfaction to a wise Man. But,
secondly, how does the decency of my behavior any way assuage my Pain? Or do
the Cholick, the Gout and the Stone rage ever the less for the stoutness of my
look? And then if the Pain be not rebated by my Courage, though I have strength
of Mind enough to seem to follow this advice, yet am I notwithstanding never
the less miserable. Not that I deny it to be a wise advice, for though it is
not sufficient to remove our Pains, yet it instructs us not to double their
smart by fretting under them. And that is the most material difference between
a wise Man and a Fool in this case, that the one endures only the simple and
natural sense of his Pain, whereas the other by his impatience adds to that the
anguish of his own resentment, which affects quicker and pierces deeper than
the Pain it self, and makes way for it through the Body into the very Soul. But
though the advice be wise not to make our selves more miserable than we needs
must be, yet it is utterly ineffectual to make us less miserable than we really
are. And therefore it is no remedy against the Distemper for the cure whereof
it is prescribed, because the Pain it self is the same with all the resolution
in the World as it is without it. And yet that is the thing that he undertakes,
to bring us to an absolute neglect and contempt of all Pain. And then, lastly,
we are in quest of Happiness, whereas this only instructs us how to behave our
selves under Misery; and so destroys the Supposition of the Subject of our
Question, which is, Whether a Man under Pain can be Happy? and that he cannot
is very evident, because all Pain is Miserable. And if it be so, Sentences will
do no good, unless he could give us some real ground of comfort to support our
Minds and cheer up our Spirits; and for that there can be no other than the
thoughts of and reflections upon an Happiness to come. And that indeed would
make all our Pains very light and tolerable, but without it there is no remedy
but they must lie upon us with their full load. But Virtue, he says, requires
Patience. It does so, but it does not assuage Pains. And if it could, yet taken
alone, it is so far from supporting our Minds that it cannot support it self;
as I have in part proved already, both against the Epicureans and the Stoics,
and shall do more largely when I come to consider our Author's Discourse upon
that Argument. And this is all that I meet with material in his Second Book.
For as for the Examples of the Lacedaemonian Boys and the Roman Gladiatours,
and other Instances of Hardiness, they only prove the strange power of Custom
and Education, but are no proof that they are less affected with their Pain
because they are able to stifle the natural expressions of it. But however it
looks brave and generous out of Principles of reason to be able to do what
they are able to do out of a mere customary Hardiness. It is so, and more than
that, it is wise too. But yet that, I say, is no relief against the Pain; and
if it be not, our Philosopher falls short of his whole design. For as in his
former Discourse he endeavors to deliver us from that misery that we suffer
from the fear of Death, so in this he undertakes to rescue us from that which
we suffer from bodily Pain; and then if he has prescribed nothing to remove it,
he has done nothing to his purpose. Though after all, his Discourse is very
wise and useful, in that it keeps us from increasing our Pains when we cannot
allay them. And that alone is of very considerable use in humane Life. And I
doubt not but we may (as he says we may) arrive to a great degree of Patience
and Constancy by an habitual Firmness and Resolution of Mind, or as he
expresses it, by an inward discourse with our selves to do nothing that is
weak and unmanly; and therefore, whenever we see a Calamity to approach us, to
betake our selves to these thoughts as it were to our Arms, and to stand
prepared to receive it with a steady Foot and an undaunted Look; and then
though we cannot repulse it, yet we shall bear it more firmly.

XXVIII. The next Passion that he undertakes is that which he calls AEgritudo,
Grief, Trouble, or Discontent of Mind for all losses and misfortunes that
either have or may betide us. And, first, he confesses that this is an humane
Passion, that we are not made of Flints, nor hewed out of Rocks, but that there
is a natural softness and tenderness in Mankind, which forces them to yield to
the weight of those miseries that oppress them; and therefore that it was not
absurdly said of that eminent Philosopher of the Academy Crantor, that
Indolency was so far from being the perfection of Wisdom, that it was the
effect either of outrage in the Mind or numndness in the Body, and that as long
as a Man has the use either of his Senses in the one or his Understanding in
the other, he cannot avoid to shrink wherever he feels it smart. And yet for
all this he undertakes to rid us of all kinds of disturbance; which if he could
perform, I must confess his Philosophy is much more powerful than his Oratory,
though here his Eloquence must be very great too to persuade us out of our very
Senses; For that is the main Argument of his Discourse, That whatever Trouble
we may think we lie under never arises from any real Cause but merely from
Fancy and Opinion. But this methinks he ought to have proved by running through
all the supposed Miseries of humane Life, and if he could show that there is no
reality in any of them, that would plainly make good his Undertaking, that
there is no real cause of trouble in the World, nay that would save him the
labor of all his other philosophical Discourses; for it is plain that if there
be no such thing as Evil, there is no need of any comfort against it. But
instead of this he only makes good his own Proposition by his own Definition;
a fault, of which all the Philosophers are extremely guilty: all trouble says
he is unreasonable because all perturbation is a motion of the Mind either void
of or contrary to Reason, that is to say, because it is unreasonable. And yet
this (I am sorry to say it) is all the proof that this great Man brings to make
good so strange a Paradox, that whenever Men complain of any thing that
disquiets them, they do not really feel any inconvenience at all, but only
dream and fancy that they do so. As if all Mankind were in the same condition
with the Madman that Cardan speaks of, that though he had De Consol. l. 1.
a great Estate and his Barns and Storehouses full, yet because he could find
no Corn in the Straws, that he was wont to pick in his raving fits, was
continually bemoaning himself that he must be famisht for want of Bread. But
whether the Evils of Life be real or fantastic, there is a very cunning trick
to avoid all their trouble; that is, by foreseeing and expecting them, in that
it is not so much the Calamity as the Surprise that afflicts the minds of Men.
And here, in the first place, I grant that this preparation of the Mind to
receive the blows of Fortune does not a little deaden their stroke, and that
the Man who thoroughly considers to what innumerable Miseries humane Nature is
obnoxious, when any of them befall him is not half so much grieved as he that
thinks of nothing but Sunshine and Prosperity. But though this may perhaps make
us less Miserable, yet it does not make us in any degree Happy, which is the
thing that our Philosophy here promises, and if it do not perform it, our
Objection still stands good, That upon their Principles there is no such thing
as humane Happiness; and then as to that point it matters not what arts and
methods there may be of lessening humane Misery. But then, secondly, this
Artifice as much as it abates in the intenseness of the trouble, so much it
increases it by extending it. For as a foreseen misfortune affects not the Mind
with so sharp an Agony when it comes, yet the very foresight it self is some
degree of Anxiety, so that it takes off no more of the present evil than it has
inflicted beforehand; as standing upon the guard to expect an Enemy, though it
prevents the fright that would have been made by a sudden Assault, yet is it a
considerable piece of pains and hardship in it self. So that though the misery
may seem more tolerable by being undergone by degrees rather than all at once,
yet taken all together it is never the less misery. And therefore it was a moot
Point even among the sensual Philosophers themselves which was most eligible,
to suffer all at once, as the Epicureans; or to anticipate some of the present
misery by premeditation, as the Cyrenaicks. Epicurus his prescription was never
to think of miseries till they came, but on the contrary Aristippus his advice
was to be ever thinking of them. And which was the wisest counsel it is very
hard to determine; for it is a very melancholy thing to be always reckoning
upon being miserable; and beside the natural anguish of such thoughts
themselves, they inflict upon us innumerable Evils, that would otherwise have
never befaln us; they make every misery that is but possible, to be an actual
grief and torment. And on the otherside, it is very grievous to be surprised
with an unsuspected misery; the fright is as great as the smart, and the defeat
of our expectations greater than both. So that though in this Controversy our
Philosopher is pleased to side with the Cyrenaicks, he brings no reason for his
so doing beside his running down the Epicurean Philosophy in gross; and yet
that as much concerns the Cyrenaicks as themselves; for though they differ in
this particular Proposition, they both agree in the same general Principle,
that there is no Happiness but of the Body. And that being supposed, it is hard
to say who gives the wisest advice to prevent misery, either he that by
foresight abates but extends the Pain, or he that by neglect contracts it into
a sharper but a shorter fit. Though which soever is best, they are both no
better than the comforts of Despair, which is the very abyss of misery; for
they both resolve into one and the same Principle, that we are condemned to
misery; and therefore, says one, count upon it aforehand, and then you will
feel it less when it comes; no, says the other, think as little of it as is
possible, it is enough to endure when we cannot avoid it. And this is all the
comfort that our Philosopher, and indeed all Sects of Philosophers send us in
against the Evils and Misfortunes of Life, to let us know that such and such is
the condition and fate of Mankind. Art thou tortured with any violent and sharp
Disease? why! thou were born with a Body liable to such Distempers. Has Death
robbed thee of thy dearest Friend? why! he was born Mortal. Have thou suffered
great Losses? why! then Fortune is unconstant, etc. A strange way to be happy
this, only by counting upon being miserable! Can this mitigate the tortures of
the Stone, to be told that my Body is exposed to their rage? does this lessen
my Pain? Has it any influence upon my sensories, or does it at all dull and
mortify their sensations? Nay, is not this the very root of all my misery,
that I have such a sad and experimental conviction of the inevitable Evils of
humane Life? And when a Man is rackt and torn apieces with torments, it is no
more ease than it is news to him to be told that indeed he may suffer them. So
that the result of all came to no more than this, we all know the worst of our
condition, that it is fatally miserable, and therefore we must resolve to bear
it as we can, which is not to make us patient, but fullen, discontented and
desperate. What then will you say, is there no difference between a Fool and a
Philosopher? Truly upon their Principles very little as to this Point. They are
both equally liable to the sorrows and calamities of Life, and equally
destitute of any grounds of comfort to support their Minds under their
sufferings. For it is not Paradoxes and great Sayings that can do the
business, and they may preach to us ten thousand witty Apothegms, but nothing
can ever really affect us, unless the discovery of some real and substantial
good; that indeed would enable us to endure all our present sorrows, not only
with patience but with cheerfulness; in short, nothing but the reasonable hope
and expectation of the happiness of another Life can bear us up under the
sorrows and calamities of this. And therefore, this Principle being not taken
in among their philosophic Rules, Advices and Receipts of Happiness, they fell
as short of its attainment as the vulgar and the ignorant part of Mankind.
Though I will not say that they were altogether as miserable, because the
foolish people superinduce their own voluntary trouble from within to their
casual calamities from without. Thus though a Philosopher does not assuage his
Pain by his Patience, yet a Fool increases it by his Impatience. Though the
main advantage of all their Philosophy was this, that it instructed them in the
true value of the things of this Life, so that they might not abuse themselves
and their hopes with too swelling and vain expectations, and so forgo the
actual comforts of their lives, such as they are, for pompous and troublesome
nothings. And that is the unhappy condition of the vulgar herd, that they
understand neither themselves nor the World, but are bred up to Covetousness or
Ambition, and fancy to reap such a vast Happiness out of their designs, that is
not in the least suited to their present condition, but is only such a
Paradise as they dream of; and thus not being aware of the meanness of their
capacity, forgetting their mortality, and not considering that they creep upon
the Earth, they think to lift their heads alost, and fancy they walk among the
Stars, take mighty pains to compass their little great designs, and if at last
they do it, they are then sadly cheated of their expectations; if they do it
not, they are then infinitely undone, and for ever strangled with insupportable
grief and anguish. This, I say, is the great and common folly of humane Life
and the ground of Men's renouncing that little quiet they might otherwise have
enjoyed, only to pursue some great and anxious fancy. Whereas wise Men deal
faithfully with themselves, reflect impartially upon the condition of their
Natures, understand the true state of humane Affairs, and expect no more from
the World than the World is able to afford; and hence they moderate their
designs and desires, and do not lose that little present tranquillity that they
might enjoy, with surious and restless prosecutions after such an Happiness as
they can never obtain. But though they do not load themselves with needless
cares and vexations, yet they must with all the rest of Mankind couch under
such as are necessary and unavoidable, because they have no substantial good to
support their Minds under them, and for want of that the difference between a
Fool and a Philosopher in point of positive Happiness is very little and
inconsiderable.

XXIX. And thus having taken in as it were all these little Outworks of the
Philosophers, we now come to lay siege to their very Capital, viz. That let our
condition be what it will, Virtue will supply all Wants and overcome all
Miseries; or that that alone is, as Brutus expresses it, abundantly sufficient
to its own Happiness. Than which there is no one thing more greatly and
magnificently said in all Philosophy, and it is a Sentence worthy the noble
Courage and Gallantry of its Author, by which he apparently stear'd the whole
course of his Life, though it seems it failed him at his Death. But if there be
any such thing as Virtue (says our great Philosopher) it is entirely satisfied
in it self, and being so, it is above all the attempts of Fortune, and then may
with confidence and bravery despise all whatsoever, that can befall it. This,
this is the true ground of all philosophic Wisdom, slighting all other things
as trifles wholly to employ our selves in this great and noble exercise of
Life. O thou sovereign Guide of humane Kind, thou Patroness of good Men, and
Scourge of Vice, how forlorn and despicable a thing were the Life of Man or Man
himself without thee? Thou did at first found Cities, thou did at first
call that wild Beast Man out of Caves and Dens into Societies, thou were the
first Author of all Domestic and Civil Friendships, thou art the only
Foundress of all Laws and good Manners; to thee alone do we owe all the
Comfort and Happiness of humane Life, and to thy Divine Discipline do we
entirely submit our selves; one day spent according to thy Precepts is
infinitely to be preferred to an Eternity of Vice or Luxury. With many more
such flights and transports are we entertained in this eloquent Discourse, and
it seems to have been written with a more than usual warmth and spirit out of
that vehement delight he ever had to oblige and gratify his justly admired
Brutus: But as for Arguments he is forced to satisfy himself with such as
himself has already confuted. For it is very observable that he here wholly
quits his own Sects of the Peripateticks and Academicks, and turns perfect
Stoic, and cashiers all the Goods both of Body and Fortune out of the accounts
of Happiness, and confines all the nature and exercise of it only to a Life
conducted by the Rules and Laws of Virtue. First then, let us see for what
reasons he forsakes his own Discipline; and, secondly, by what Arguments he
establishes that of the Stoics. As for the reason of the first it is very
obvious, forasmuch as no Man can be Happy that is in Misery; and therefore if
that may be created by the Evils of Body or Fortune, then no Man, how good or
wise soever, is capable of being Happy. For if there be three kinds of Good and
three kinds of Evil, as they say there is, then he that is tortured with all
the Evils of two of them, that is, he that is racked with all manner of pains
in his Body, and is oppressed with all the spites of Fortune in his Estate is,
notwithstanding all the Happiness that he can reap from the third sort of Good,
sufficiently miserable. Secondly, no Man can be happy that is not secure of his
Happiness, in that his very insecurity is so much Misery; and therefore he that
places two shares out of his own power can have no security of their Enjoyment,
and so no Happiness. So that if health of Body and prosperity of Fortune be two
necessary ingredients of humane Happiness, the case is plain that it is
impossible to secure that, because it is impossible to ensure their
continuance. But of the uncertainty of these things I have already discoursed
against the Epicureans, and now I shall, in a few words, represent their
Vanity. Suppose then a Mamblessed with all the advantages that the whole World
is able to afford him, what is it all but a shadow and a phantasm? And, to make
short work of it, how vain and imaginary are the Prerogatives of the most
envied and desired conditions of Life? For Princes cannot enjoy beyond the
capacities of private Men, and though they may possess the whole World, yet
they can use and taste no more of it than inferior Persons. Their Appetites
are as finite as other Men's, and when they have all the delicacies that a
wanton or a witty Luxury can devise, they can but enjoy and seast to Satiety,
and so can the meanest and most despicable Cottager. In short, they enjoy
nothing beyond others but tumults of Pomp and Ceremony, unless great Cares and
Anxieties make up any part of humane Happiness. And of this Cardan propounds De
Consol. l. 3.
a very apt instance in Charles the Fifth, King of Spain and Emperor of Rome,
the most fortunate Prince, not only of his own time but of many foregoing
Ages; who enjoyed a very large Empire not only in Europe but in the Indies;
who was successful in all his Enterprises beyond his hopes and desires; who
was not only absolute Sovereign in his own Dominions, but Umpire between all
Christian Princes, and disposed of Seigniories and Kingdoms at his imperial
will and pleasure. And yet this mighty Man lived always in danger of the
Incursions of Solomon the Great, was continually fretted with the endless
Divisions of the German and Italian Princes, perplexed with the loss of this
Fleet and that Army. Now, says he, shall we esteem this Man happy, that was so
perpetually disquieted with such cares, such dangers, such losses? May I perish
if I would not rather choose the condition of a poor Carthusian, though it is
in reality no better than that of a Slave. And as if this had been a real
prophecy, that great Prince ratified it not many years after by his own
choice, taking Sanctuary from all his Greatness and Prosperity by entering into
a monastic Life. And should we ransack the Histories of all the most fortunate
Princes in the World, we should quickly find all their Felicity embitter'd with
so many Griefs and Crosses as to conclude with Pliny, after all his search,
that there never was any such thing as an happy Prince in the World. And now,
when we have cut off the vanities of State and Grandieur, that so much dazzle
and amuse those that know them not, and so little satisfy those that do; the
delights of Nature that remain, and that all Mankind do or may equally enjoy,
though they are not altogether as useless and impertinent, yet are they
altogether as unable to minister any competent satisfaction to the Minds of
Men. For as for the pleasures of the Body, their enjoyment consists rather in
allaying Miseries than in any true and real Delight; for they are Pleasures
upon no other account than their supplying some present wants, and when the
indigence of any Appetite is appeased, its Pleasure then ceases, and when
Apicius has glutted himself with the choicest delicates that wit or wealth can
compass, he does then loathe and nauseate them more than he ever desired or
relisht them. Beside this (...) (as Plutarch styles it) this little lump of
Flesh is of all things the unfittest to be made the seat of Happiness; not
only because all the Pleasures it is capable of, are so vain, short and
transient, but because it is liable to so many, so sharp, so lasting, and so
stubborn pains, any one whereof is heavy enough to weigh down our biggest
Happiness, though it were much more solid and substantial than it is. And yet
there is no Man that does not labor under some distemper or other, and though
possibly at present he may be free from its actual pain, yet he cannot avoid
its perpetual fear and foresight; and certainly no Man can be happy that lives
either in actual misery or under the constant expectation of it, and yet into
these two seasons is humane Life as naturally divided as into Night and Day.
And then as for the Goods of Fortune, no Man was scarce ever yet so completely
lucky as to have her always to comply with his desires. Aristotle here reckons
up Riches, Friends, Authority, good Birth, virtuous Offspring, Strength,
Beauty, a sufficiency not only for a Man's own personal Wants, but all the
necessities of Kindred, Friends and Neighbors. What a strange variety of
Ingredients is here prescribed to make up an unattainable Happiness? For can
any Man ever be so fantastic as to imagine he can compass all these
particulars? If he can, he is certain to enjoy more Happiness from his Fancy
than ever he can reap from his actual Enjoyment. No, the World is too thick
crowded with Evils for any Person that passes through it to escape them all;
and yet one single sorrow embitters all our comforts, and one disaster rifles
the magazine of all our joys. At least one acute Disease withers the most
Cicero.
prosperous and flourishing condition; so that suppose a Man whose Enjoyments
are as great as his Desires, enriched with Virtue and in favor with Fortune,
yet one sharp Distemper despoils him of all his Comforts, and one rebellious
Humor is enough to poison a whole Sea of Content, and mountains of Joy are not
able to counterpoise one single Misery. Suppose a Man advanced to the top of
all possible Prosperity, and encircled with an affluence of all Delights, yet a
fit of the Stone disrobes him of all his Grandieur, and casts him into a
condition infinitely more comfortless than the most desperate and forlorn
Poverty. And this is the saddest proof of the inevitable misery of humane Life,
to consider to what innumerable sorrows we are obnoxious, and how impossible it
is to escape them all; and yet if one single Misery do but mix it self with all
our Joys, how suddenly do they vanish and disappear, and how fatally do we
sink under the intolerable Burden. In short, all the Glory and all the
Happiness of Mankind, is not able to support him under an ordinary Distemper.
To say nothing of the Gout, the Cholick, the Stone, Pleurisies, Feavours,
Consumptions, and a thousand more Instruments of humane Miseries; the
Palpitation of the Heart, that is scarce accounted among Diseases, if we may
believe Cardan, who knew it very Podag. Enc.
well, is like the pains of the damned. Nay, if but a fit of the Toothache
make any Man miserable, he can neither eat nor sleep; and whilst it lasts it is
not in the power of all the Wealth and all the Philosophy in the World to help
or to relieve him. From all which it is sufficiently evident what good reason
he had to renounce his own Masters, that would have every wise Man secure of
his Happiness, and yet make the goods of Body and Fortune part of it, of which
no Man can have any security. And now let us see how he acquits himself upon
his own new Principles.

XXX. First he refers us to his foregoing Disputations, that if he have there
concluded as he ought according to the Rules of Logic, that then Virtue alone
is abundantly sufficient to its own Happiness; because he has there effectually
taken away all perturbations both of Mind and Body; which being removed, every
thing is avoided that is destructive of an happy Life; for it is they, and they
only that make him miserable; so that Virtue being able to cure or remove them
all, it is for that reason alone sufficient to its own Happiness. But then if he
have performed nothing of all this in his former Disputations, then this way of
arguing turns back upon himself, that Mankind is fatally miserable, in that it
is exposed to so many Evils, which it is not in our power either to fly or
conquer. For as himself argues, how is it possible for any Man not to be
miserable, that fears either Death or Pain, when the one is often present and
the other always at hand? to which if you add all the innumerable calamities of
Life, some whereof we feel, and all we fear; and if we have no remedy against
all that trouble they create, we are not only not happy but in the highest
degree miserable; so that, having shown that he has performed nothing of what
he has undertaken in his former Disputations, I may now justly conclude him by
his own Argument, that there is no relief against the miseries of humane Life.
But then, secondly, what though we are furnished with Antidotes against Evils,
yet that does not place us in a condition of Happiness, for it is one thing to
be happy and another not to be miserable; so that, all miseries taken out of
the way, there is still something more required to give us actual content and
satisfaction. No, says he, but as the Sea is made calm only by the ceasing of
Storms, so is a Man happy by the cure of his Passions. This is a pretty
Similitude, but (as most Similitudes are) a very weak Argument, for the
calmness of the Sea is a stupid, life-less and insensible thing, but Man's
Happiness arises from his own Sense and Reflection; and therefore it is not
enough for him not to be rufled with Sorrow and Discontent, but to render him
really happy, he must enjoy some substantial and suitable Good, that may
gratify his Faculties, and satisfy his Mind. So that though he had performed
what was promised in the former Discourses, yet notwithstanding that, has he
done nothing toward the acquisition of any real and positive Contentment.

But he proceeds; every Creature has its proper Perfection, the proper
Perfection of the Mind of Man is Reason, the Perfection of Reason is Virtue,
Virtue therefore is the Perfection, that is the complete Happiness of humane
Nature. And it is true that every Creature excels in some peculiar Faculty, but
then all its Pleasure and Satisfaction consists not in the single gratification
of that Faculty, but beside that all its other Appetites are to be gratified in
their several Sensations; and if they are not, that alone will overthrow all
the Delight that can arise from the exercise of its supreme Faculty. Thus the
most accurate Sense in a Spaniel is smelling, which yet can afford but little
contentment, if he be tortured in all his other Senses. And so it is plain that
the highest Faculty in a Man is his Reason, but then it is plain too that the
utmost emprovement of that can never place him in a state of sovereign
Happiness, if he endure Pain and Misery in his other inferior Faculties; so
that it is not the Perfection of our highest Faculty, but of our whole Nature
that is our supreme Felicity. And therefore that consisting of Sense as well as
Reason, it is not Reason alone howsoever accomplished and emproved that can
complete our Happiness. And then secondly, if there be no immortality, not
Virtue but Self-interest is the perfection of humane Reason; for if Man be
capable of no other but his present Happiness, then his Reason will tell him
that he is only concerned to take care of that, and to value Things and
Actions not as they are good and evil, but only as they are subservient to his
own present Advantage. And then is the very Being of Virtue overthrown, which
were not Virtue if it did not oblige to Duty contrary to Interest; for that is
the only difference between a good and a bad Man, that one prefers Duty before
Interest, the other Interest before Duty. Again, all Happiness, says he, is
matter of Joy, all Joy delights to show it self, what delights to show it self
is glorious, what is glorious is praiseworthy, what is praiseworthy is honest,
and therefore nothing is good but what is honest. Or thus, whatever is good is
desirable; whatever is desirable deserves approbation; whatever deserves
approbation has worth and dignity in it self; whatever has worth and dignity in
it self is praiseworthy, whatever is praiseworthy is honest, and therefore
whatever is good is honest. Which Argument he pursues after the manner of the
Stoics in an hundred other ways of connection; but howsoever it is varied all
the stress of it lies only in the connection of laudabile with honestum, praise
or commendation with Virtue; for how great soever compass they may take, that
is still the last medium by which they join Happiness and Virtue together. So
that though the Stoics wrote numberless Books of Sorites (as they called them)
upon this Argument, they all amounted to no more than this one short Syllogism;
whatever is good is praiseworthy, whatever is praiseworthy is honest, and
therefore whatever is good is honest. But this, as Tully himself has elsewhere
De Fin. l. 4.
answered, is a very trifling and precarious way of arguing. For who (says he)
that affirms the goods of Body and Fortune to be part of our Happiness will be
so easy or so silly as to grant the first Proposition, that all good is
praiseworthy; or that being granted, there is no need of proceeding to the
second; for there is no doubt of it, but that if all good be praiseworthy, all
good is honest too. And therefore Aristotle and the whole School of the
Peripateticks, against whom they dispute, will flatly deny the Assertion, and
tell you that Health, Strength, Riches, Friends, Authority are very good
things, and yet deserve not that which Men call praise and commendation, that
is the imputation of moral Goodness. So that to pass this Proposition as they
do without any farther proof, is first to take what no Man will grant, and then
to conclude from it what themselves please. And now this one false step being
barred, there is an end of all the Stoics voluminous Disputations, and of all
our Orators rhetorical Flourishes, that are only so many artificial
transports and forms of Eloquence in praise of this one Proposition; all which,
if it be false, can never make it true; and therefore till that is done, it is
all nothing but empty Declamation. And for that Reason I shall pursue him no
farther here, but shall return back to his foregoing Discourses, and show first
that he himself, after all his pains, has not been able to lay better Grounds
than the Epicureans for the stability of Virtue, nor more effectual Motives for
the obligation of its practice. And secondly, that when he has said all he can,
that Virtue alone is so far from being any sufficient ground of Happiness, that
it is not able to deliver us from any single Misery; from both which it
evidently appears, that there is some farther Account to be given of the
Government of the World, if there be such a Providence as I have proved, that
has made Happiness our End, and Virtue the means to attain it.

XXXI. And first, the state of the Controversy between him and the Epicureans
is, whether Pleasure or Honesty be the Supreme Good. That Pleasure in the sense
of Epicurus is not we have already proved; and now we prove that Honesty alone
without some Motives and Enforcements beside it self is so weak a thing, that
sensual Pleasure and Self-interest must get the upper hand of it in the Minds
and the Actions of Mankind. And if once we can prove that, we have routed the
whole design of all his mortal Morality; and for its proof we shall follow his
own steps. And first, whereas he defines Honesty to be such a thing, as taking
away from it all other Rewards and Advantages is justly commendable for its own
sake, he makes it only a glorious nothing. For what does this great word
Virtue signify when separated from all other Considerations? Do not all the
Philosophers agree there can be no such thing without Prudence? And will not
common Discretion dictate to any Man not to do, much less to suffer any thing
for the sake of Virtue unless upon prudential Motives? and then they ought to
give us some account of the Grounds and Reasons that we have to prefer Virtue
for her own sake above all things else, and that without any present regard to
our selves; for if we act with regard to that, then we act not merely for the
sake of Virtue, but for the sake of the present Reward. But, say they, Virtue
is its own Reward. Be it so, then this turns us back upon our own Principle,
that it is of no force of it self but by virtue of its Reward; and then if we
choose Virtue because it is its own Reward, we choose it for the same reason as
if it were recommended to us by any other Reward. But how is it its own Reward?
For if it be true Virtue it must foregoe all things rather than it self,
otherwise still it is nothing else but present Design and Self-interest. Now
then, how can Virtue taken alone give me any recompense or satisfaction for any
loss that I sustain merely upon her account? How can Justice alone requite my
Honesty if I lose either my own Estate because I will not violate her Laws; or
my Neighbors, when I might have gotten it by Fraud or Oppression? How can
Fortitude that puts me upon all manner of Dangers even of Life it self,
recompense my pains, if it have no other Reward beside the unaccountable
Happiness of enduring them? So that this Maxim, that in general looks so great
and glorious, when applied to particulars is plainly no better than a shining
and an empty bubble. And then to tell us as he does, that Nature alone obliges
us to Virtue, is to say nothing at all, unless he would inform us too by what
Sanctions this Nature ties her Obligations upon us. For there can be no
obligation that is not enforced by Rewards and Penalties; so that if Nature
bind Men to Honesty against present Interest, it must give them some reason of
the Duty; that is, it must propound to them some advantage on the side of
Justice, and then they do not choose their Duty against their Interest, but
foregoe a lesser for a greater advantage.

So that if Nature put us upon the practice of Virtue, it is by virtue of some
Reward; but where that fails, it is in vain to talk of the power and authority
of Nature, or any thing else. And whereas he adds that other Creatures have no
apprehension but of their present Necessities, that yet Mankind is endued with
such a vigor and sagacity of Mind as to foresee all the consequences of
Things, and to take the whole compass of humane Life into consideration, and
thereby to determine it self to the designs of Virtue and Honesty. This amounts
to no more than what Epicurus himself affirms, viz. that in the whole Account
of things Virtue is for the most part most pleasant and advantageous; and that
where it is not so, there is no solid Reason why it should be most eligible: So
that still Epicurus is plainly in the right, that whilst we discourse of
Happiness as attainable in this Life only without any expectation of future
Rewards, Honesty if separate from Interest is no more than an empty Name, and
amounts to no more dignity than popular Opinion.

And as for all the fine Stories that he tells us of some brave and heroic Men
that have been just to their own disadvantage, when they might have been unjust
without danger or discovery; it argues the generosity of their Nature and their
Roman Education, but does not prove that they lay under any the least
Obligation to it, and wholly resolves it into an empty Name, and enforces it
with no other Reward but merely Vainglory. For if it be recompenfed with no
advantage in this Life, nor have hopes of any in the next, there remains no
other motive to persuade its practice than barely to be talked of.

And this was the case of his own famous Countrymen, Curtius, Torquatus, the
Decii, etc. that cast themselves upon extravagant and desperate Attempts, only
to be praised by their Fellow-citizens, that is out of vanity and ostentation;
for if they had no prospect of a future Reward, they could have no other
inducement to sacrifice their Lives and Beings. So that all the fine Stories
both of the Grecian and Roman Heroes signify no more than those of the Boys at
Sparta, and the Gladiators at Rome, who endured any hardship, even Death it
self with a steady Countenance for no other Reward but the applause of the
Spectatours. And if this be all the ground of Virtue, we are again turned back
to the Epicurean Hypothesis, viz. that it has no Foundation beside the Opinion
of the common People, and yet that that is none at all, I think I have already
proved more than enough against the Epicureans.

But lastly, as Virtue alone is no sufficient Foundation for it self, so much
less is it able to secure our Happiness.

For first, granting all their strein'd Panegyricks, that it is (as it is)
without all competition the noblest and most raised Satisfaction of humane
Nature, yet it is no security against the common Calamities of humane Life; and
though it may instruct how to bear the blows of Fortune, yet is it no
enchantment against its force, nor impenetrable to its spites. Its Votaries are
no more exempted from Disasters and sinister Accidents than the Profligate and
the Vicious. But all Mankind are equally assaulted by those Troops of foreign
Calamities that harass the confines of humane Contentment with perpetual Alarms
and Encounters. And though it were possible for Philosophy (as it is not) to
alleviate our Miseries, yet it can never transmute them into Joys; and though
the infusion of Virtue into the Cup of Asfliction may lessen, yet it cannot
abolish its bitterness. In short, though wise Men were able to abate the sense
of their Calamities by prudent Reflections, whilst the froward and passionate
double their Resentments by their impatience; yet they can neither make
themselves senseless of evils and malicious Events, nor so far alter the
Natures of Things, as to extract Pleasures out of painful Sensations. For
howsoever any Sect of Men may affect to vent Paradoxes and speak big Sentences,
yet the most Stoical and conceited Apathist of them all would have but little
heart to boast of his Pleasures under Cholick pangs. Sickness and Poverty lose
not their Stings when they fasten upon good Men; and Virtue, whatever it does,
repreives us not from the impressions of Sense; and therefore howsoever our
Minds are qualified, we are always exposed to the Casualties of Body and
Fortune. So that still a calamitous Virtue is so far from rendering us
completely happy, that it cannot make us less miserable; and is rather an
Object of pity than desire, and apter to move compassion than envy.

But secondly, the great service of Virtue is to support us under and
recompense us for those Losses that we suffer upon her account. Now how is it
imaginable that she can do this? By her self alone? But I have already shown
that so she is nothing; and that no good Man can draw any satisfaction from his
being undone for having done well, if merely his having done well be all the
Reward of his so doing, because he can never satisfy himself that he has done
wisely too; and then Virtue separated from Prudence becomes Folly, and that can
give no wise Man any real Contentment; and if it should he would neither be a
wise Man, nor his Content real. But a good Conscience is the effect of Virtue,
and that alone makes every good Man happy. But if Virtue have no other Reward
beside it self, it lays no ground for a good Conscience to bottom it self upon.
For what Comfort can it be to any wise Man only to be conscious to himself
that he has undone himself for the sake of Virtue, when he can give himself no
reasonable account, why he should stick so stubbornly to her in opposition to
his own Interest? For, that Virtue alone is no reason, is already proved; and
if there be any other, then is there some other ground of Happiness beside mere
Virtue and Conscience, and that is the thing we are in quest of; but without
it, a good Conscience alone is the same thing as Virtue alone. What then, shall
Virtue ascend the Rack and the Gibbet, and leave Happiness behind it? Yes, if
Virtue will be so hardy as to encounter Racks and Gibbets by her own naked
strength, she may thank her own rashness if Happiness forsake her there: For as
there is no Pleasure in being rackt and torn asunder, so neither is there any
in suffering it merely for the sake of Virtue. But then, as Happiness cannot
ascend the Rack, so Virtue will not: For to what purpose should a wise Man
endure Torments for no other recompense than only his enduring them, and yet
that is the highest Exercise of his Virtue. If he be wise, he will say or do
any thing rather than suffer the least thing for he knows not what; and if he
be a Fool, it is not Virtue but Folly that mounts the Gibbet. So that which way
soever Men turn themselves, all Morality sinks to nothing without our
Supposition; and therefore seeing the Governor of the World has provided so
carefully for it even in the Nature of Things, there is no avoiding the
Conclusion but that this must be added to it, because without it all his other
Provision would be useless and ineffectual.

Upon supposition then that there is a Deity, and that this Deity has enacted
those Laws for the government of the World, that I have described in the former
part of this Discourse; it follows with undeniable demonstration that for that
Reason alone, though there were no other, he has withal provided some other
state of things beyond that of this present Life; because otherwise when he has
built this World with so much art, and contrived the Nature of Things with so
much wisdom, he has done it all to no purpose; and then there is neither Art
nor Wisdom. So that these being antecedently proved, this that is so
unavoidably connected with them, though it had no other proof, stands upon the
same evidence of Reason. Especially when it is so needful not only to moral
but to natural Philosophy, that without it not only all the Laws of Virtue
vanish into nothing, but the whole frame of Nature sinks into utter Chaos and
Confusion.

For that the World was built by a Principle endued with Wisdom and
Understanding is I hope sufficiently demonstrated from those evident Ends, Uses
and Designs of Things that he propounded to himself in their order and
contrivance; and yet unless we suppose some other state of things than what is
at present visible, after those undeniable Demonstrations of all those wise
Designs that appear in every part and parcel of Nature, it will as
demonstratively follow that the whole was made to no end at all. Which because
it is so plain a contradiction to what was before so evidently demonstrated,
that alone is as evident a Demonstration of this, that is so certainly
connected with it, as it is of it self.

A Demonstration OF THE DIVINE AUTHORITY OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION, From the
undoubted Certainty of the Matter of Fact, and the uninterrupted Tradition of
the Church. PART II.
I. HAving demonstrated the general Providence of God in the Government of the
World by those Laws of Nature that he has enacted and proclaimed to all his
rational Creatures; and proceeded, as far as the natural use of our Faculties
would guide me, to discover both the Duty and the Happiness of Mankind. I now
advance to a much greater and more glorious discovery of both, by that
particular Revelation that he has made both of them and himself in the
Christian Institution. And here the Advantages both as to the Certainty of the
Reward and the Perfection of the Law are so exceedingly great, as almost
utterly to supersede the necessity and usefulness of the former Discourse.

For, first, we were there forced to make out the Law of Nature to our selves
by various Observations of Nature and Trains of Reasoning, but here we find
them all distinctly and exactly drawn forth for our present use into particular
Rules and Precepts, and made easy to our practice by familiar Instances and
Examples of Life: so that now without any laborious workings of our own Minds,
without any knowledge of Nature, and without any skill in Philosophy, our whole
Duty is made known to us in a System of plain and easy Propositions.

And then, secondly, when we had wrought out the Laws of Nature to our selves
from the nature of Things, after that we were forced to work the proof of a
future Reward out of them; and though the connection, when it is discovered, is
very evident and undeniable, yet it requires some careful intention of Mind,
and competent skill in the Art of Reasoning to discover it; whereas now it is
made evident to us beyond all doubt and exception both by certain Revelation
and experimental Proof; the knowledge whereof is conveyed to us by such
undoubted Records that we could scarce receive greater satisfaction of the
matter of Fact by the Testimony and Conviction of our own Senses. And the
Divine Providence has given us so great an Assurance of the Being of a future
state, that we have not much more of the present. At least the Grounds and
Motives of our Christian Faith are so convincing and demonstrative as not only
to persuade, but even to enforce our Belief; so that no ingenuous and
unprejudiced Mind can withstand their Evidence, though it is possible that
malice and peevishness may defeat their Efficacy; and so it may too, if it
please, over rule the Power of Mathematical Demonstration.

But if Men will be honest and impartial in the Enquiry, and not do manifest
violence to their own Convictions, it will be as easy for them to doubt of or
disbelieve all the Problems about Lines or Numbers as to suspect the
Foundations of the Christian Faith. Not that it is capable of the same kind of
Evidence, but because its Proofs are so forcible in their own kind, that upon
the same ground that any Man shall distrust or demur upon their credibility, he
is obliged to an universal unsettledness and irresolution of Mind. For when we
have weighed and considered the whole account of Things, we shall find the
rankest Skepticism to be very little more unreasonable than Infidelity. Because
though the Evidence of all matters of Fact and Faith be only historical, yet
some historical Evidence is so strong and convictive as in the last result of
things to equal Mathematical Demonstrations. I know indeed we are told by some
learned Men that in matters of this nature we are not to expect demonstrative
Arguments, when the things themselves are not capable of any other than moral
Certainty.

But here I would first enquire, What they mean by moral Certainty. And to this
their Answer is ready. That it is all the certainty that the Nature of the
thing is capable of. But if that be the definition of moral Certainty, then is
all certainty moral, for every truth is capable of its own kind of certainty.

But then, secondly, There are very many things, from which I am in reason
obliged to suspend my Assent, because they are not capable in their own Natures
to warrant its Wisdom; and though I cannot rationally expect more certain
grounds concerning them, yet I cannot rationally give up my Assent to them,
because their Evidence (though the clearest that in that case I can expect) is
too obscure and uncertain to found any consident Assent upon. Thus have I a
moral Certainty that Romulus was the Founder of Rome, i. e. I have all the
proof of it that the matter is capable of, and yet have I not sufficient
grounds to venture any thing that nearly concerns me upon the truth of it;
because the first beginning of the Roman Story is in many things very fabulous,
and in all very far from being sufficiently certain.

And therefore, thirdly, If by moral Certainty they mean any less degree of
evidence, as they plainly do when they distinguish it from the more certain
ways of proof, then the scruple that remains after this their determination is
this, that the very thing, the belief whereof is made the very Foundation of
our Religion, is capable of no higher degree of evidence than only moral
Certainty. In that it seems not consistent with the Divine Wisdom and Goodness
to lay any thing as the Foundation of Faith, but upon the firmest and most
evident Principles, when it is a matter of so vast and infinite concernment to
Mankind: so that when the Object of our Faith is a matter of the greatest
moment, it is but just and reasonable that the evidence of its Truth should be
proportionable to the weight and value of its Importance.

In short, If they mean that this particular History has as great evidence as
it is capable of, then all that they say, amounts to no more than this, that it
has as much proof as it has. If they mean that this historical Truth has as
much certainty as any historical Truth whatsoever is capable of, then why
should they call this kind of certainty moral rather than any other? Historical
certainty it is, but historical certainty is as certain in its kind, as
physical or mathematical are in their kinds. And I have as great assurance that
the Fanatique Rebels murdered King Charles the First, as I have of any
Proposition in Euclid; and a much greater than I have of any thing in natural
Philosophy, except the Being and Providence of a Deity which indeed equals it.
And the same evidence do the Grounds and Motives of our Christian Faith carry
along with them; in that the History of it asserts it self with so great and so
many demonstrative circumstances, as makes it impossible to be false.

II. For though their direct evidence be made up of many less evident
Particulars, yet the accumulation of all together amounts to the full evidence
of demonstrative Certainty. It being impossible that so vast a multitude of
fair and plausible things should conspire to vouch and authorize a mere
Imposture. And that a palpable Lie should by chance have as much evidence of
proof as can be demanded for the most unquestionable Truth of the same Nature.
Or what can be more absolutely incredible than that a mere Fable should be set
off with all the Advantages of Argument, that the truest and best vouch't
History in the World can pretend to? And yet, I say, so many and so reasonable
are the inducements of our Faith, that though it be possible to hold out
against their single force, yet in their united strength they grow into an
evidence so great that it is little less than irresistible. They come so strong
and so thick upon our Minds, that they force their own way; so that it is
scarce left in the power of an honest Mind to resist such armies and legions of
Reason; though I know a stubborn Man may struggle with the strongest
conviction, and if he be resolved to be humoursome in his Infidelity, it is not
in the power of all the reason and all the demonstration in the World to force
a wilful Understanding. And yet at prefent I shall wave all that variety of
Argument that by direct force asserts and proves the Divine Authority of the
Gospel, and rather choose to proceed in an inverse method, by turning the
Infidels Weapons and Skeptical Objections upon themselves. So that whereas they
are wont to attempt the Foundations of our Faith with a few weak and little
Cavils, I will load their Infidelity with such an intolerable heap of
Absurdities as shall for ever dash their Confidence and disarm their Impiety.
And if I can demonstrate the horrible Absurdity of Unbelief, that will be an
irresistible demonstration of the Reasonableness of Belief. And I chose this
way of procedure rather than the other, because though perhaps it is not more
evident in it self, yet is it more affecting to the generality of the Minds of
Men; For I find most Men so ill-natured as to be much more apt and forward to
discern a Falsehood than to acknowledge a Truth, so that it is much more easy
to convince them by the Absurdities of that, than by the rational Proofs of
this. Though the chief reason why I pitch upon this method is because it is
most proper and suitable to the temper of this present Age: In that there are a
sort of Men too common among us, who, because they can say four or five witty
things against the Christian Religion, will by all means be setting up for
Infidels, in spite of all that innumerable multitude of soher and reasonable
Arguments, that, if they do not utterly prevent, yet infinitely out balance all
their little Talkings. And if they can but pick up two or three unhappy
Remarques upon the holy Scriptures out of that foolish Book the Leviathan, they
think themselves made for ever, and how happy are they in the luckiness of the
discovery. It mends their humors and raises their parts, and they that the other
day were but ordinary Mortals as to the endowments of Nature, and sufficient
Dunces as to the emprovements of Learning, immediately become great
Philosophers and deep Clerks. The forward Youth sets up in his Country for the
Man of Logic and Disputation, makes the simple and ignorant People stand
amassed at the Wit and Profoundness of our young Master's Discourse, and the
poor Village Curate is sure to be the Trophee of his Confidence; and if at any
time he chance to encounter a Man of Learning, with what briskness does he
attaque his Gravity; a Gnat is not more troublesome with its little sting and
buzz, than he with his small Sophistry. And though the Truant be no better
furnished than the Jews supposed the Carpenter's Son to have been, you shall
find him upon all occasions disputing with the Doctors and Rabbis of the
Temple. And he shall disperse all that heap and accumulation of Arguments that
the most learned of them is able to produce in defense of the Christian Faith
with any pitiful Repartee, that beside that it is void of all Reason, has
scarce Wit enough to tempt any Man to laugh beside himself.

Now it is in vain to convince such Men by downright dint of Argument, and
therefore seeing they have not Wit or Learning enough to be reasoned into Truth
and Sobriety, I shall take another course with them by shaming them into it.

Let us then turn the Tables, and consider a little how many strange and
incredible things those Men are forced to believe, that are resolved to
disbelieve the Gospel. And here immediately appear such vast numbers of horrid
and ghastly Incongruities, as are enough to scare any ingenuous Man into the
belief of any thing in the World rather than be troubled with such a monstrous
and unreasonable Infidelity. They must force their understandings to believe
numberless contradictions to the common reason and experience of all Mankind;
and they swallow not single absurdities, but every Article of their unbelief is
pregnant with swarms of extravagant and incredible conceits.

III. And for the proof hereof I fhall represent no more than the incredibility
of one, viz. that our Savior is not risen from the Dead. And herein I follow
his own wise and admirable Advice, to begin the demonstration of his Divine
Authority from the undoubted and undeniable evidence of his Resurrection. For
to that alone he refers us as the last and most satisfactory proof of his
Commission, and depends upon it as the clearest demonstration not only of his
Doctrine, but of all the other Arguments whereby he proved his Doctrine. And
for that reason it is that we find him so often injoining his Disciples not to
publish his other Works and Miracles till after his Resurrection.

Thus when his Apostles had declared to him the firmness of their Belief that
he was the true Messiah, he straightly charges them (Matt. 16. 20.) that they
should then tell no Man of it, and takes occasion thence to acquaint them with
his approaching Death and Passion, and prepare them for the belief of his
Resurrection from the Grave, Ascension into Glory, and Mission of the Holy
Ghost. By which great Miracles he was, as Saint Paul observes, (Romans 1. 4.) to
be declared the Son of God with Power, but chiefly by his Resurrection: for it
was (as the same Apostle elsewhere expresses it) the working of the might of
his Power, which he wrought in Christ, when the Father of Glory raised him from
the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19. And this probably was the meaning of those words
immediately added by our Savior to his forementioned Discourse, Verily I say
unto you, there are those here present that shall not taste of Death till they
see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom: (Matt. 16. 28.) In that he was as
evidently declared by this to be the Messiah or Son of God, as if they had seen
him solemnly enthroned in Heaven by the holy Angels.

So again when the Devils that he cast out were forced to confess him to be the
Messiah, he still commands them silence. He was not willing that there should
be too much notice taken of him before his Resurrection, because by that he
intended to give such a palpable proof of his Divine Authority, as should give
undoubted credit to all his former Miracles.

And so again when he had taken his three chief Disciples to behold his
Transfiguration, thereby to confirm their Faith against the time of his
Suffering, when he had done that, he charges them, saying, tell the Vision to
no Man until the Son of Man be risen from the dead: (Matt. 17. 9.) Because the
great evidence and certainty of that would give undoubted credit to this and
all their other Reports; whereas till then Men would be very difficulty
persuaded to believe such prodigious and unusual things; though after that, and
the undeniable power of the Holy Ghost in the Apostles who attested it, it
would be so far from being at all difficult to yield to their Testimony, that
it would be almost impossible to distrust it. And therefore accordingly the
first Preachers of the Gospel laid the whole stress of their Faith upon this
one Principle. This was the resolution of all their Disputes with the
unbelieving World; and when Men in those days enquired after the truth of the
Christian Religion, the only state of the Question was whether Christ were
risen from the dead. This alone without the assistance of any other proof was
thought such a forcible and convictive confirmation, that it superseded the
consideration of all other less evident and important reasonings; and where
this was not able to prevail upon the minds of Men, they despaired of any
success from any other Topics and Principles.

This then being so, I shall in this one Article specify according to the
method before proposed those wild, those extravagant, those incredible
absurdities that must be swallowed upon its disbelief.

IV. First then, they believe that the Apostles, Evangelists and Disciples of
Jesus, who pretended to have been eye Witnesses of it, both would and could
impose upon the World with a manifest lie, and in that they believe ten
thousand absurdities. For it is easily credible no doubt, that Men endued, I
will not say with Principles of common Sense, Reason and Discretion, (that is
more than I need suppose) it is enough to our present purpose only to suppose
them possessed with that natural Instinct, that they have in common with all
other Creatures, viz. Love of Life and desire of self-preservation; It is, I
say, easily credible that such Creatures as these would so willingly, so
wilfully forgo all advantages of Pleasure and Profit; so cheerfully expose
themselves to so many Hazards and Hardships, so many Reproaches and
Contumelies; and so undauntedly endure so many Tortures and Miseries, so many
Bonds and Imprisonments, so many Martyrdoms and Persecutions, only to bear
Testimony to what themselves knew to be a lewd and shameless Imposture. It Is a
likely thing that so many plain and simple Men should conspire together to the
manifest ruin of all their worldly Interests only to gain credit and belief
to a palpable Falsehood. That so many hundreds that pretended to be eye
Witnesses both of all our Savior's Miracles in his Lifetime and his
Resurrection after Death should lay down their Lives to attest a false Report;
and that no Torments, no nor the most cruel Death could ever prevail upon any
of them to deny or disown their Testimony.

It is possible indeed, though not very usual, that Men should lay down their
Lives for a false Opinion, because it is possible for them to believe it to be
true; but it is by no means credible that they should persist to Death for the
justification of a false Testimony; For if it were false, they knew it to be
so, and then if they will die in defense of its truth, they contradict the
first instinct of their own Natures, and throw away their Lives for nothing.
Especially when beside that there was no present advantage in the Lie it self,
so none could ensue upon it; For they could not possibly expect any reward of
Wealth, or Honor, or Power from the propagation of an extravagant and a
proofless Lie. Nay, they quickly found that they must either part with all that
was dear to them in this Life, and even Life it self, or forbear to spread and
divulge the Fable. Now that Beings endued with humane Nature should act and
suffer after such a rate for no design at all, nay, against the design of all
designs is a thing so cross to all belief, that I may challenge all the
Infidels in the World to assign any one thing that is more incredible.

If a great number of harmless and well-meaning Persons should offer their
Oaths to attest any matter of Fact, it justly commands and immediately
overrules our Belief. And yet it is an easy thing to suppose that a great
multitude would seal it with their Blood that they saw Jesus do so many
miraculous things, though they were conscious to themselves that they never saw
him do any one of them. They were certainly in a very pleasant humor, when
they covenanted among themselves to sacrifice both their Lives and Fortunes to
abuse the World with an unprofitable cheat; but yet however one would think
Racks and Gibbets would have spoiled the frolic. And it is highly credible
that any Men, but much more these Men, who have given us no ground to suspect
their integrity, because they could have no motive to forgo it, should
prevaricate after such an odd and extravagant manner with Mankind, yes and
themselves too. And when so many plain and simple Men, so apparently without
Craft, and without Design, without Advantage, without Interest, have given the
World the most unquestionable proofs that they were serious and in good earnest
as to the certain truth and reality of what they related, after all this what
wise and wary Man would not suspect the Forgery and disbelieve the Relation?

But this Argument I find prosecuted by Eusebius with extraordinary acuteness
both of Wit and Reason. Supposing, says he, that Domonst. Evang. L. 3. Sect. 3.
our Savior never wrought any of those Miracles that are unanimously reported
of him by his Disciples, we must then suppose that they entered into Covenant
among themselves after this manner: Men and Brethren, what that Seducer was
that lived among us the other day, and how justly he suffered Death for his vile
Imposture, we of all Men have most reason to know; and though others that were
less intimately acquainted with him and his ways of deceiving, might have some
opinion of his worth and honesty; yet we, that were the daily Companions of his
Conversation, saw nothing in him answerable to the greatness of his pretenses,
but that his whole design was by all the boldest Arts of Craft and Hypocrisy
to get a Name in the World, and therefore let us one and all join hands and
enter into solemn Covenant among our selves to propagate the Belief of this
impudent Cheat among Mankind, and to fain all manner of Lies for its
Confirmation; to swear that we saw him restore Eyes to the Blind, Ears to the
Deaf, and Life to the Dead; and though it be all impudently false, yet let us
confidently report it, nay, and stand too it to the last drop of our Blood. And
because, after all his great and glorious Pretenses of being no less than the
Son of God, he was at last executed as a vile Malefactor, with all the
circumstances of shame and dishonor, we must agree among our selves upon some
Lie to wipe off this disgrace.

Let us therefore resolve to affirm with an undaunted impudence, that after he
was thus dishonourably Crucified, the third Day he arose again, and often
conversed with us in the same familiar way, as he had always done before his
Execution. But then we must be sure to stand unalterably to the impudence of
the Lie, and to persevere to Death it self in its assertion. For what absurdity
is there in throwing away our Lives for nothing? And why should any Man think
it hard to suffer Stripes, Racks, Bonds, Imprisonments, Reproaches, Dishonurs,
and Death it self for no reason at all? Let us therefore unanimously and
vigorously set our selves to the design, and with one consent agree to report
such impudent Falsehoods, as are of no advantage either to our selves, or to
those we deceive, or to him for whose sake we deceive. Neither let us be
content to propagate this Lie only among our own Countrymen, but let us
resolve to spread it through all parts of the habitable World, impose new Laws
upon all Nations, overthrow all their old Religions, command the Romans to quit
the Gods of their Ancestors, the Greeks to renounce the Wisdom of their
Philosophers, and the Egyptians the pretended Antiquity of their Superstition.
Neither will we take the pains to overthrow these ancient Customs of the most
polite and most powerful Nations in the World by the force of Learning or Wit
or Eloquence, but by the mere Authority of our crucified Master. Neither will
we stop here, but we will travel to all barbarous Nations in the World, reverse
all their ancient Laws, and command their obedience to a new Religion, and this
let us resolve to go through with an undaunted courage and resolution. For it
is not an ordinary reward that we expect for our Impudence, nor is it for
vulgar Crowns and Trophies that we engage our selves in such hard and hazardous
enterprises. No, no, we are sure to meet with the utmost severity of the Laws
in all places wherever we come, and the truth is we deserve it for disturbing
the public Settlement only to establish a ridiculous Cheat and Imposture. But
for this who would not endure all the torments in the World, burning, hanging,
beheading, crucifying, and being torn in pieces by wild Beasts? All which we
must, as we will secure the honor of the Impostor, encounter with a cheerful
and resolved Mind. For what can be more praiseworthy than to abuse God and
affront Mankind to no purpose, and to reap no other benefit from all our
labors beside the pleasure of vain, foolish and unprofitable lying? And for
that alone will we blaspheme all the Religions that have been from the
beginning of the World to gain worship to a crucified Malefactor; nay, we will
lay down our Lives for his Reputation notwithstanding that we know him to have
been an impudent Impostor; and for that reason is it that we honor him so
highly, because he has put such a dishonorable abuse upon our selves. Who
would not do or suffer any thing for the sake of so vile a Man? Who would not
undergo all manner of Sufferings for a Cause that himself knew to be mere
falsehood and forgery? And therefore let us constantly to the last breath averr,
that he raised the Dead, cleansed Lepers, cast out Devils, and wrought all
manner of Miracles, though we are conscious to our selves of the gross falsehood
of the whole Story, that we have merely forged out of our own brains: And
therefore let us deceive as many as we can, and if people will not be deceived,
yet however we shall sometime or other enjoy the pleasure of suffering, and
perhaps of dying for an unprofitable Lie. It is no doubt credible that Men
should discourse and act after such an extravagant rate as this, or that humane
Nature that has above all other Creatures an high sense of the love of Life and
Self preservation, should thrust it self upon a voluntary Death without any
motive or any reward; or if they should, that when so great a multitude had
agreed among themselves to carry on such a frantic design, they should all
persevere in the Lie to the very Death, and not one of them be wrought upon by
all the threatenings and all the slatteries in the World to betray the Plot, and
yet this was the case of the Apostles if their Testimony were not true. So that
it is plain that there is no more required to demonstrate the truth of the
Christian Cause against Infidelity than only to suppose that the Apostles were
Men. And that certainly is as modest and moderate a Postulatum as can be
premised to any Question. And yet that only being granted it is evident from
the Premises that nothing can be more unaccountable than Insidelity from the
very Being and Constitution of humane Nature.

V. But to advance one step farther: Either we suppose that the Apostles were
endued with common Sense and Discretion or that they were not. If they were.
Then as we cannot suppose that Men possessed with the natural Instinct of
Self-love, so much less that Men endued with the least degree of Understanding
would ruin themselves and their Families, would encounter all kinds of Hazards
and Hardships, would endure Bonds and Imprisonments, would suffer Persecutions
and Martyrdoms, and all for no other than merely to win credit to a known
Falsehood. For still so it must be, if they were not really eye Witnesses of the
Resurrection. Yes, but you will say they did it for the sake of their Master
and their Religion. But then they either believed their Religion to be true, or
false. If true, then it is true that they saw Jesus do those Works that they
related of him; if false, then we are as we were, that Men of common Prudence
should do and suffer so much for nothing. And as for their Master, they were
so far from being under any obligation to do any thing for his Reputation,
that they were concerned more than any others to discover his Imposture. For
when he had enticed them to forsake all and follow him, when he had flattered
them with such magnificent hopes, when he had abused them into an opinion of
his being no less than the Son of God and Savior of the World, and when he had
promised them to rise again from the dead, and then to vest them with
wonderful Power and Authority, when they found all this to be grossly false, it
is very credible that they should after that think themselves obliged to endure
the sharpest Tortures and even Death it self for the Reputation of such a vile
and accursed Impostor.

But beside this, how could Men of ordinary prudence undertake a Design so
unlikely to succeed? For if Christ were not risen from the dead, how could they
expect to gain credit to a Lie that might be so easily contradicted and
confuted by exposing the Body to public View? For if he were not risen, he was
still detained in the Grave; and therefore when they presently divulged his
Resurrection in the very place where he was crucified, the Jews were concerned,
as they would clear themselves from being guilty of the Blood of the Son of
God, to discover the Imposture by exposing the Carcass. Which if they had done,
that must have forever overthrown and confounded the Testimony of the Apostles;
and if they could, but did not do it, they too must be supposed as much bereft
of common Understanding as the Apostles themselves.

And therefore seeing the Apostles cannot be supposed so foolhardy as to vent
a Lie, that was so easy to be confuted, and seeing the Jews were for very good
reason obliged to do it, and yet did it not, that is an evident Argument that
they were not able to do it; and that is a plain Demonstration that the Body
was not to be found in the Grave. But if we suppose that the Disciples conveyed
him away by Night, as the Jews ridiculously pretended to prove by the Testimony
of sleeping (that is for that time absent or dead Witnesses) yet still I
enquire to what purpose all these hazards for a Lie and an Impostor.

But beside that, how could they expect to succeed in so strange and bold an
Enterprise? For to say nothing of the shameful Cowardice, that they betrayed
at their Masters apprehension, and so supposing that they might have had
Courage to venture upon this Design, yet how was it possible that they could
any way expect to come off without discovery? For that they could not hope for,
unless they could first presume that all the Guard should fall asleep at the
same time, and then that themselves should come at the very same moment; and
lastly, that with all the noise which must be made by rolling away the Stone
and removing the Corpse, they should never awake so much as one of the
Soldiers. So many strange and lucky Accidents as these no wise Men could ever
promise themselves, and yet without them no wise Man could ever undertake the
Design. So that if Men of common prudence could not be supposed to make such a
wild and hazardous Attempt for no end, then it is evident that the Body was not
conveyed away. And if it were not, then it is evident that Men of common
prudence could never affirm its Resurrection, when they were so certain of
being convicted of Forgery. But lastly, if they were Men of common prudence,
how could they expect to gain belief to a Story that themselves knew to be
false, and in it self next to incredible, purely by the Authority of their own
bare and naked Relation? For what Story could be received with more difficulty,
and examined with more severity than this of a Man so miraculously raised from
the dead? Especially at that time, and in that place, i. e. of one that was but
the other day ignominiously executed for Treason and Blasphemy. If they were
not assured of some greater Assistance than barely the strength of their own
Testimony, they must be worse than Madmen to go about to publish so incredible
a Story with such a slender Authority. But if they knew it to be a mere Fiction
of their own, and yet could expect to gain any belief to it only by their bare
Affirmation, that must exceed all degrees and examples of humane Madness.

Nay farther, they must not only believe that the Apostles and first Witnesses
of this strange thing were frantic and infatuated Persons, but also that a
great part of Mankind both in that and the next following Ages were born
without the usual Sense and Understanding of Men. For how else is it possible
they should suffer themselves to be imposed upon with so prodigious a Tale
only upon the report of some foolish and frantic Fishermen?

We know very well that the belief of the Story was propagated with incredible
swiftness through all parts of the habitable World, not only without any
assistance of Power and Wit, but against all sorts of Opposition, whether of
Force, or Zeal, or Prejudice, or Interest, or Learning: And now that this
should come to pass without any other Proof or Evidence than the mere Relation
of a company of foolish or frantic People, is a thing so extravagant to
suppose, as exceeds all the folly of humane Nature. And yet it is much more so,
that they should work all ranks and conditions of Men, the learned as well as
the unlearned, to that height of Infatuation, as not only to win their serious
belief to such a wild and proofless Fable, but to prevail upon them so
prodigally to sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes in its justification. But of
this I shall treat more distinctly in its proper place; this may suffice at
this present upon this Argument as far as it concerns the Apostles and first
Preachers of Christianity. That if they were not absolute Fools they had never
undertaken it, if false; and if they were, they could never have proceeded with
any success in it.

VI. But, lastly, We must either suppose the Apostles and first Witnesses of
Christianity to have been in good earnest, or not. If they were, then the truth
of their Testimony is unquestionable. For the matter of Fact of which they
pretended to have been Eyewitnesses was no Magic Story, or any thing capable
of juggling Tricks and Illusions; but a plain and common Object of Sense, of
which they had the same Assurance as we have or can have of any thing that we
see or hear. And they had the same Evidence of our Savior's Refurrection as we
are capable of having of one another Conversation. And what is more, they were
jealous and incredulous, and suspected some Mistake or Illusion, and forced him
to appeal to the Judgment and convince them by the Testimony of all their
Senses.

And now it is likely when it was so impossible that they should be deceived
themselves that they would take so much pains and endure so many Miseries to
persuade the World to believe an impudent and an unprofitable Fable. Which if
they did, then we must suppose that they were not in good earnest; and if they
were not, then beside all the forementioned Abfurdities, this Supposition
labors under one very enormous difficulty peculiar to it self, viz. that such
profligate Cheats and Impostors should concern themselves with so much zeal as
they did for the credit and propagation of Virtue and Goodness in the World.

For that it is the design of Christianity to promote and advance the practice
of all true Morality, no Man, that understands what it is, can question; and if
it be, then they could be no other than good Men that labored as the Apostles
did in promoting of Christianity. But that, perhaps you will say; is a frequent
Artifice for Men of the worst Designs to make the best Pretenses. It is so, but
then they must have some Design to carry on under their Pretenses; whereas if
the Apostles very Pretense were not their real Design, they had none at all.
And that is the difficulty proper to this Supposition, that wicked Men, that
were conscious to themselves of their own Wickedness, should spend their Days
and loose their Lives for the interest and advancement of Goodness with out any
design or advantage to themselves.

And therefore as from the former Premises we have sufficient reason to
conclude the Integrity of the Men; and from the Integrity of the Men to prove
the Divinity of their Master's Doctrine; so in this place does the Divinity of
his Doctrine prove the Integrity of the Men. For as they pretended to have seen
the Works, so to have heard the Sermons of Jesus, and were not less zealous to
publish the one than the other to the World; nay, they divulged his Miracles
only for the sake of his Doctrines.

Now what was it that he taught and they recorded? Are they not the most
perfect Rules of Virtue and Holiness that were ever delivered to Mankind? And
as wonderful as his Actions were, his Precepts were scarce less admirable: The
Goodness of his Laws, if it does not outdoe, yet it equals the Greatness of his
Miracles; and their own innate Excellency is one of the strongest Arguments of
their Divinity. But of this I hope to give an Account in a Treatise by it self,
in which I shall make it apparent that he has commanded all the Laws of Nature
and right Reason, that he has not omitted any Instance of moral Goodness, and
that no Law nor no Philosophy can so much as pretend to a Morality so wise, so
good, so useful.

And now if the truth of our Savior's Doctrine and his Miracles rely upon the
same Testimony, and the same Persons who report that he did such mighty Works,
record also that he taught such excellent Laws, and that he wrought those Works
of God for a proof and confirmation of his Divine Authority; what can be more
probable than that the same Persons should in the same Design be guilty of the
greatest Virtue and greatest Villainy in the World; and at the same time
sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes to the Interest of Virtue and Holiness, and
the Credit of Blasphemy and Imposture? For if those things that they report
concerning the Miracles and Resurrection of our Savior are not true, then was
he as lewd and wretched an Impostor as ever appeared in the World, in bearing
out as if he were the Son of God and Savior of the World; and they as bold,
atheistical, and ungodly Wretches knowingly to abuse Mankind with such a
palpable and blasphemous Cheat.

Is it not then likely that Men should do and suffer after their rate for the
propagation of an accursed Imposture, that were so infinitely zealous for the
concernment of Truth and Integrity? How awkerdly do these things piece
together? What strange Contradictions are reconciled in this odd Supposition?
The same Men dye Martyrs to the worst Imposture and best Institution in the
World! To lay down their Lives to gain credit to what themselves knew to be a
notorious Lie, and yet dye to advance the credit of Uprightness and Integrity!
It Is none of the most conceivable things in the World that so many plain and
simple People should conspire together in the contrivance of so lewd a Forgery,
and then seal the truth of the Fable with their Blood; but how does the Prodigy
heighten, that such profligate Wretches should so easily foregoe their Lives
rather than their Innocence and Integrity? So that it is plain that their zeal
for the Interest of Truth and Goodness is a most undeniable Demonstration of
the faithfulness of their Testimony. And the more Men tumble and toss their
Thoughts about to raise jealousies and suspicions upon the Report, the more do
they entangle themselves in Absurdities and Contradictions. But I shall
prosecute this Argument no farther, because in truth, to say no more, he must
be a very odly conceited Man, that can but persuade himself so much as to
suspect that the Apostles were not in good earnest.

And now if we review these Circumstances of our Savior's Story as it was told
by the Apostles, it is favored with all the utmost advantages of Credibility. So
that if it be possible to suppose it an Imposture, yet had it been the Truth of
God, it is not to be supposed how it could have been vouched with stronger and
more enforcing motives of Belief.

There is no Satisfaction that Mankind can reasonably desire, which God in his
infinite Goodness and Wisdom has not given to the truth of the Christian
Faith. All Scruples and Exceptions are so fortunately prevented that there is
not any possible escape or pretense left for Insidelity.

For, first, We have all the Assurance in the World both of the Sufficiency and
Sincerity of the Witnesses.

Of their Sufficiency, in that they were Eyewitnesses of his Miracles and
Companions of his Conversation, and were themselves sufficiently suspicious and
incredulous, and refused to be convinced till their distrustful Minds were
overborn by evidence of Fact.

Of their Sincerity, not only from the agreement of so great a number of
honest and upright Men in the same Report, but from their readiness to seal the
truth of their Testimony with their Blood.

And what greater Assurances was it possible for them to have of the truth of
their Testimony than to be Eyewitnesses of what they reported? And what
greater Evidence is it possible for us to desire of the certainty of their
Report, than they have given us of their Fidelity? So that here to withhold or
deny our Assent, is first a direct affront to the Faith and Reason of Mankind,
it is to give the Lie to all the World, and suppose none worthy of any Belief
beside our selves. For unless we will distrust the truth of all manner of
Testimony, and believe nothing but by the immediate information of our own
Senses, there is no remedy but we must of necessity quit all degrees of
diffidence and suspicion in this Affair.

Secondly, We must believe that Men endued with the first Principle of humane
Nature, love of Life, should conspire to throw away their Lives only to gain
credit to an impudent Lie.

Thirdly, We must either believe that Men endued with the Principles of common
Sense would lose their Lives for a ridiculous Fable, or that a company of Fools
and Madmen could so easily persuade the World to believe such a wild Story
merely by virtue of their Report.

Lastly, We must believe that Men who made it their only employment to advance
Truth and Virtue in the World, should yet dye Martyrs to Falsehood and Villainy;
and that when they laid down their Lives for the sake of Jesus, they were not
in good earnest.

Now laying all these things together, and only supposing that there was at
that time such a Person as Jesus of Nazareth in the World, I will appeal to the
common Sense of Mankind, whether it is possible for any History or Report to
come attested with more various, more pregnant, more unquestionable motives of
Credibility, than his Actions, particularly his Resurrection, as published to
the World by his Apostles.

And thus having considered the evidence of their Testimony as given in by word
of Mouth, I come in the next place to consider their Testimony as recorded in
their Writings, and to show into what wild Absurdities we must again run our
selves, if we will not believe the truth of the Scripture-history.

VII. First then, We must believe either that the Gospels were written by those
Persons, whose Names they bear, or that they were not. If they were, then we
must believe that the things that they relate of their own knowledge were
either true or false. If true, then we believe the truth of the Christian
Faith. If false, then either for want of sufficient knowledge or sincerity. Not
for want of knowledge, for two of the Evangelists, Saint Matthew and Saint John
were immediate Disciples and constant Companions of the Person, whose History
they wrote, and so were present at his Works and Miracles and Eyewitnesses of
his Resurrection: Saint Mark and Saint Luke, if they were not Disciples during
our Savior's abode upon the Earth, they were intimate Associates with the
chief Apostles that were: So that if they wrote not from their own immediate
knowledge, yet however they wrote from the information of Eyewitnesses. And as
for the Acts of the Apostles written by Saint Luke, Saint Luke himself was
interested in the greatest part of, if not all the History. And so for the
Epistles pretended to be written by the Apostles; either they were, or they
were not; if they were, then their case is the same with that of the Gospel's,
that they had sufficient knowledge of the things they wrote of.

So plain is it, that if those Persons wrote the Books of the New Testament,
who go for their Authors, that we have no ground to suspect the truth and
certainty of their Reports for want of sufficient knowledge and information.

And then as for their sincerity, the case of their writing is the same with
that of their preaching, and so labors under all the forementioned
Difficulties, and one more peculiar to it self, viz. that when they had been so
wicked as to contrive a wilful Lie, and so foolish as to publish it to all the
World, they should meet with no contradiction in so gross and manifest a
Forgery. These things were written in a very short time after they were done,
and therefore if they were false, it is not possible that they should escape
discovery or obtain any the least belief.

For example, When Saint Luke reports that a Person born lame, and known to all
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem by his having begged daily for many years at the
chief Gate of the Temple was cured by Saint Peter only with invocating the
Name of Jesus; and that this Miracle was so very well known at Jerusalem, that
it immediately converted no less than five thousand Persons to the Christian
Faith: If all this had been a Fable, the mere publication of it had provoked
thousands of People, nay the whole Nation of the Jews, and especially the
Citizens of Jerusalem to discover the falsehood; and it could not but have met
with so much Opposition as utterly and for ever to disgrace and destroy it self.

And so again, When Saint Paul tells the Corinthians that our Savior after his
Resurrection was seen not only by the Apostles and himself, but by above five
hundred Persons at once, most of whom were then surviving: If this had been a
Lie, it had been a very foolish and impudent one, and too bold for any Man to
vent that was not lost not only to all modesty but all discretion; and if any
Man could have been so rash as to venture upon so lewd a falsehood, it is
impossible that he could ever have escaped the shame of discovery: Especially
when it was written to baffle some Fanatic Persons, who denied that there was
any such thing as a Resurrection; for as all others would be eager to enquire
into the truth of it for the satisfaction of their Curiosity, so would those
Men especially be concerned to examine it more strictly, if it were possible,
to confute their Adversary. So that it is equally incredible that Saint Paul
should be so weak as to vent so great a Lie that might be so easily
contradicted, and that when he had vented it, he should be so lucky as to
escape all manner of Contradiction from those who were concerned to oppose him.
For if he had been convicted of falsehood in it, all the Corinthians must
immediately have turned back to their Infidelity; and therefore when we find
the Christian Faith prevailing every where upon such appeals and challenges as
these, that is an evident Demonstration of their undoubted truth and reality.

And this may suffice for the proof of the truth of Scripture-history,
supposing the Books of it were written by those Persons whose Names they bear.

Though beside this, it is no inconsiderable proof of their Integrity, that
Eusebius Demonst. Evang. Lib. 3. Sect. 5.
has observed in their impartial way of writing.

Thus only Saint Matthew himself of all the Evangelists takes notice of his
own dishonorable Employment before his Conversion; and Saint Mark who wrote
his Gospel from the information of Saint Peter, is observably sparing in those
things that might tend to the praise of that Apostle, and so could not with
decent modesty be reported by himself; but more exact than any other of the
Evangelists in the description of his shameful Fall.

Thus when Saint Peter had so frankly owned our Savior for the Messiah, Saint
Matthew relates our Savior's Answer with a high Commendation of him: Blessed
art thou Simon Bar Matthew. 16, 17, 18, 19.
Jona, for Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which
is in Heaven. And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
I will build my Church: and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And
I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou
shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose
on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Then charged he his Disciples that they
should tell no Man that he was Jesus the Christ. Whereas in Saint Mark all
these magnificent Expressions of our Savior to Saint Peter are modestly
omitted, and all the Answer that is there made is no more than this: And he
charged Chap. 8. verf. 30.
them that they should tell no Man.

And so again, though Saint Mark in all his other Relations is more compendious
than any of the other Evangelists, yet in the Story of Saint Peter's denial of
his Savior, he is most of all circumstantial. And whereas Saint Matthew and
Saint Luke set off the greatness of his Repentance afterward by saying that he
wept bitterly, Saint Mark expresses it more modestly, only that he wept. Now
when Writers pass by such things as make for their own praise, and record their
own Faults and Miscarriages, that without their own discovery might never have
been known to Posterity, they are of all Men least to be suspected of
falsehood, and give the strongest proof in the World of their love to Truth and
Sincerity.

So again, granting that they would not stick at any falsehood to advance their
Master's Honor and Reputation, yet to what purpose should they forge Lies of
his Disgraces and Sufferings, especially all those shameful Circumstances that
they have recorded of his Condemnation and Execution? Now if we believe them in
the black and tragical part of the Story, why not in all? For if they only
designed to set off their Master's Greatness, why do they so carefully acquaint
the World with the History of his Misfortunes? Why do they tell us of his great
Agony before his Passion, of his scourgings and Mockings, of his purple Robe,
and reeden Scepter, of the Contumelies and Reproaches that were thrown at him
whilst he was hanging on the Gibbet, of his being forsaken by all his
Followers, of his being abjured by the most zealous of them all, and that
without the application of Racks or Torments? These things if not true, to what
purpose should they invent them? nay, if true, why should they not do what
they were able to stiflle them, if the only design of their Romance had been
to gain Honor to their Master? So that if they were honest and faithful in
those sad Relations concerning him, why not in those that carry Triumph and
Reputation in them? For if they had designed to lie for his Glory, they must
have baulk't every thing that might any way offend the Reader. And if they had
designed a Romance, instead of that plain Story that they have recorded to
Posterity, they would have told us that Judas had no sooner given the
treacherous Kiss, but he was turned into a Stone: that the Hand that struck
him, was immediately withered; that Caiphas and his Accusers were struck blind;
that the Soldiers who supposed they had apprehended him, had only seized a
Phantasm, whilst he vanished away; that his Judges were befoold in all their
fantastic Process against him, whilst he stood invisible among them despising
their Mock-solemnity. In short, was it in all humane Accounts much more
becoming the grandeur and dignity of that Person, that he pretended to be, that
he should not have been obnoxious to the common Miseries and Calamities of
humane Life, but that when by his Divine Power he had established his Kingdom in
the World, he should have returned back to Heaven without any suffering and
with all the Ornaments of Glory and Triumph. This certainly had been much more
proper matter for a Romance, if they had designed nothing but their Master's
Greatness, than to have feigned those mixed Actions that are recorded of him in
the Gospels, and those that would have believed their other Reports, would not
have disbelieved these. And therefore seeing they would not corrupt or suppress
the Truth in the unpleasant part of the Story, we have no ground to suspect
them of the least falsehood in any other part of it, howsoever in it self
strange and miraculous, when it is so evident that their design was real Truth
and not their Master's Greatness.

VIII. But if we believe the Books of Scripture were not written by those
Authors, whose Names they bear, then we must believe that either they were
forged in their days or afterward: If in their days, then they either owned
them as true, or not. If they vouched them, they gave them the same Authority
as if they had been indicted by themselves: If they disowned them as containing
Reports that they knew to be false, then they themselves were obliged to
discover the Imposture; which having never done, that is an undeniable evidence
that, if they were written in their time, either they themselves writ them or
at least approved of them. But if they were written afterward, how came they
to meet with such an early and universal reception in the Christian Churches?
We find them always owned as the undoubted records of the Evangelists and
Apostles in the most ancient Writers, that lived after them, nay, some with
them. Now how is it possible that Books that contain in them matters so strange
and wonderful, if they had been counterfeit and spurious, and thrust upon the
World after the death of those Persons whose names they pretend to bear, should
command such a catholic and unquestionable reputation? If indeed they had
pretended to have lain obscure for some time, and to have been afterward
retrieved, there might have been some ground of suspicion. But when they are
owned as the most ancient and undoubted records of the Church, when they are
quoted as such by those Persons that lived next and immediately after them, and
have passed from the very first Age through all Ages downward with an
unquestionable Authority, there is no possible account to be given how they
should first come by it, and then for ever after retain it, unless they were
for certain the Works of those Men whose names they bear.

Thus particularly Saint Matthew's Gospel is quoted by Clemens of Rome, a
Familiar of Saint Paul, by Ignatius, by Policarp, by Papias the Disciples of
Saint John; not to mention Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Irenaeus, and all the
other Writers of the Age next after the Apostles.

Now if this be so:

Then, first, Either this Gospel was written in the Apostles time, or it was
not. If not how could it be cited by those that were their Contemporaries?

Secondly, The things reported in it were either true or false; if true, then
so is the Gospel too; if false, then it had destroyed its own credit by
publishing known falsehoods. For though it is easy to forge a Story acted in
former times without discovery and contradiction, yet to make a Forgery of so
wonderful a transaction, as was the History of Jesus of Nazareth, so near the
time, in which it was pretended to have been acted, and that without control
or contradiction, nay, with full credit and undoubted Authority, as appears by
these Apostolical Men's unanimous Testimony, is, if any thing in the World,
absurd and incredible enough to make up another Article of Infidelity.

Thirdly, Either this Book was written by Saint Matthew, or it was not. If it
was, then it was the Testimony of an eye Witness, that converst with our
Savior both before and after his Resurrection. If it was not, then how could
it be thrust upon him in his own Age, and gain so unquestionable an Authority
with those Men that conversed either with him or with his Companions? And now
if we gain the Authority of this one Gospel, that alone is a sufficient proof
of the Divine Authority of the Christian Faith; in that the main Foundations of
it are here recorded, viz. The Life, Death and Resurrection of our Savior,
which being believed as they are here recorded, are an infallible demonstration
of his Divinity.

The same account I might give of almost all the other Books of the New
Testament, in that they were received from the beginning as the most
unquestionable Records of the Apostles. But that were only to repeat the same
Argument so many times over; and therefore supposing the same ancient Testimony
concerning them as we have concerning Saint Matthew, I shall leave the Reader
to apply the same Argument that I have urged concerning him. Neither do I this
only to avoid needless Repetition, but because it has been often done by other
hands, particularly by Eusebius of old, and Huetius of late, who have vouched
every Book by it self from the Testimony of the earliest Antiquity. And
therefore as for the truth of the matter of Fact I had rather refer to them
than transcribe them, though that being supposed, the Argument is of the same
force in every one as it is in Saint Matthew's Gospel.

IX. It is true that some few Books were for a good time doubted of, as the
Epistle to the Hebrews, the Second of Saint Peter, the Second and Third of
Saint John, and the Apocalypse.

But then, first, Suppose their Authority was still questionable, the Christian
Faith can subsist very well without them, by the remaining Authority of those
that were never questioned. And though they are very useful and excellent
Discourses, yet have they little peculiar in them that is not to be found in
the other Apostolical Writings. And if we understand the matter aright, though
they are written by Divine Inspiration, yet are they not of the Foundation of
the Christian Faith, but only pious Discourses proceeding upon the supposition
of it. Being written occasionally, either to exhort us to an effectual belief
of those things that are recorded in the Gospels, or to encourage us against
Trials and Persecutions, or to allay Schisms and Contentions, or to confute
Errors and Heresies, or to reform Abuses and Corruptions; so that though they
had never been written, the Foundations of our Faith were before firmly laid in
the History of our Savior's Life, Doctrine, Passion and Resurrection. And
therefore the Authority of all the rest is at last resolved into that of the
historical Books, that is, the four Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles; which
being supposed true, they warrant both the Reason and Authority of the
Apostolical Epistles, that only deduce those proper and natural Conclusions
that flow from their Premises.

Nay farther, it is not primarily necessary to Christianity to believe that the
Books of the New Testament were dictated by an infallible Spirit, but it is
sufficient that the historical Books are good and authentic Records of the
Life of our Savior and the design of his Errand into the World, and that the
Writings of the Apostles are pious Discourses consonant with and conducing to
the Ends of Christianity. The Foundation whereof seems to lie in this one
thing, that Jesus Christ was sent into the World for the Work he pretended to
come about by Divine Commission. For God having set several Hypotheses of
Providence on work in the World to bring all things to their end and
perfection, at last designed this as the most complete model of all Virtue,
Goodness and Morality. So that if the History of those things which Jesus both
did and taught be truly recorded by the Evangelists, that is a sufficient
evidence of his own Divine Authority. But as for his Historians, that comes in
upon another score, in that we know that the Authors of all those Writings
were inspired and directed by the Holy Ghost, but then that we know only from
the Writings themselves, and therefore their Truth must be supposed antecedent
to their Divine Authority, and that being supposed our Savior's Divine
Authority is thereby proved, and that being proved, that alone is a full
demonstration of the Divinity of the Christian Religion.

But, secondly; If those few Books were so long debated before they were
admitted into the Canon, that is an Argument of the great care and caution of
the Church in its belief, in that it would not lightly receive any Book till it
was fully satisfied of its being Authentic; and therefore its long
doubtfulness and disputation about these Books, clears it from all suspicion of
rashness and credulity as to those that she always owned with a full and
unanimous Approbation.

Thirdly, The Controversy concerning the disputed Books relates not so much to
their Antiquity as their Author, and they are not brought in question, because
they were not written in the Apostolical Age, but because it seemed uncertain
by whom they were then written. Thus the Epistle to the Hebrews some attribute
to Saint Paul, some to Saint Luke, some to Barnabas, some to Clemens; but if it
were written by any of them, it is not much material, so it were written by
some of them; and that it was so, is very evident from Clemens his Epistle, who
has borrowed diverse passages out of it word for word. And to the same purpose
is the Controversy concerning the Revelations; all allowing it to have been of
Apostolical Antiquity, only some will have it to have been written by Saint
John the Apostle, others by Saint Mark surnamed John, others by Saint John
called the Elder; but whosoever it was that wrote it, it was written in the
Apostolical Age, and that is enough. Though it is moreover sufficiently
attested that Saint John the Apostle was the Author of it, both by the
Testimony of Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, who lived very near the time of its
writing.

Lastly, Those that were at first doubted of, were not afterward rashly
admitted into the Canon, but were admitted upon careful enquiry, mature
deliberation and unexceptionable Testimony. For as they were at first owned by
some, and disputed by others, this became a matter of debate in the Church; and
that obliged them to make farther enquiry after the evidence of their
Authority; and by that means the whole Church was at last satisfied of that,
which at first only a part of it was able to prove. And this might come to
pass after this manner: the Apostles directed many of their Epistles to
particular Churches, so that it is possible that some of them might be known to
some Churches, and not to others; who therefore doubting of them put those who
asserted them to have been true Apostolical Writings to prove their Assertion,
and they it seems brought such evident proof of their Tradition, as gained the
consent of the whole Church to their Authority. And this probably they did by
producing the Originals written under the Apostles own hands, and reserved in
the Archives of the several Churches; For that many such there were Tertullian
informs us, even in his time, and to them refers the Men of his own Age for
their full satisfaction.

. X. And therefore it is but a very slender Witticism of Mr. Hobbs in
derogation of Leviath. Chap. 33.
the Authority of the holy Scripture, when he has acknowledged that the Writers
of the New Testament lived all in less than an Age after Christ's Ascension,
and had all of them seen our Savior, or been his Disciples, except Saint Paul
and Saint Luke; and consequently that whatsoever was written by them is as
ancient as the time of the Apostles, yet were they made canonical Scripture
only by the Authority of the Church, that is, the Council of Laodicea, which
first collected the Canon of the Scriptures, and recommended them to us as the
Writings of those Apostles and Disciples under whose Names they go; hereby
wittily intimating, or rather broadly asserting, that these Writings were not
canonical Scripture till that Council, that is, till the year 364.

But, first, Supposing that it is not the Author but the Authority of the
Church that makes a Book Canonical, then were the Books of the New Testament
made so long before the Council of Laodicea, in that we find them enumerated in
the Apostolical Canons, which though they were not compiled by Clement, as was
vulgarly supposed, yet were they the Decrees of Councils in the first and
second Ages succeeding the Apostles. So that upon this account they were
stamp't Canonical almost as soon as they were written.

Secondly, The Testimony of the Church neither is nor can be any more than a
proof or an argument of the Original and Divine Authority of the canonical
Books, as any other Testimony is or may be. Thus when we cite Clement of Rome,
Ignatius, Policarp, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, yes and
Celsus himself, that lived either in or near the Apostles times, as giving in
Testimony to their Writings, no Man can, without very wilful impertinence,
thence infer that it is they that give the Books their Divine Authority; when
it is so evident that they are only made use of as competent Witnesses to
attest that they were no forged Writings, but were penned by those very Persons
under whose Names they go; and if they are, then they themselves make good
their own Authority. For Authority is nothing else but the right or power of
binding our Assent, which unless it be done by the Author himself, it is
impossible to be done by any other; and all the Councils in the World can never
give Divine Authority to any Book, if it had it not before. All their Office is
to bear testimony to their Authenticalness, and it is no inconsiderable
Evidence of it when so many grave and learned Men of the first Ages of
Christianity, upon mature deliberation of the whole matter in Council, declare
that upon the strictest enquiry they are fully satisfied that those Books were
written by those very Authors whose Names they bear. But from hence to infer,
as the Leviathan does, that their canonical Authority, that is, their being the
Law of God, depends entirely upon the Decree of the Church, as if it could give
or take it away at pleasure, only becomes Mr. Hobbs's Logic and Modesty; and
them it becomes equally, for it is very hard to determine whether the
Conclusion be more impudent or more impertinent.

XI. And now beside this direct demonstrative proof of the Apostolical
Antiquity and Authority of the holy Scriptures, which alone is a full
demonstration of the Divinity of the Christian Institution, there is another
more remote way of proving the truth of the History, insisted upon by learned
Men, that is, by the concurrent Testimony of foreign Writers, Jews or Heathens,
who lived in or about the same time; but this Evidence is so weak in comparison
of that which I have already produced, that I shall not prosecute it as an
Argument in my Cause, but rather consider it as an Objection against it: viz.
That if the History of our Savior were so known and notorious as is pretended,
how comes it to pass that so little notice is taken of it by any Authors but
only such as were his own Disciples? There were many other excellent Writers,
especially Historians, about that time, so that if his Actions had been so
great and remarkable as his Disciples tell us they were, it is scarce credible
that they should pass him over with so slender a regard, and scarce any mention
of him.

In answer to this I shall, in the sequel of this Discourse, give a
satisfactory and rational account of the Infidelity both of Jews and Heathens,
notwithstanding Christianity brought along with it all that Evidence that we
pretend it did. But beside this, I shall here show that the best Writers of
that time concur with, and so confirm the main strokes of our Savior's
History, and by consequence all the rest that is interwoven with them;
especially when what they write is purely to deliver matter of Fact without any
design to serve the cause of Christianity. For when all things in the Gospel,
that other Historians are concerned to record as well as the Christians, are
exactly true, that is at least a very fair probability that the Christian
Writers were faithful in those other Relations that are peculiar to their own
History. And this is all that can be expected from foreign Testimony; for if
such Writers had been exact in the Records of our Savior's Actions, they had
then been Christians, and not Jews or Heathens: Supposing them therefore, as
they were, no Friends to Christianity, they have given in all that suffrage to
it that can be reasonably demanded from them.

And now as for the proof hereof it had been much more easy than it is, had it
not been for the pride and vanity of some of our modern Critics, who care very
little what becomes of the truth or falsehood of things, so they can show their
censuring Faculty upon words; and particularly they have in this case set
themselves with their utmost critical Severity to disparage or destroy the most
eminent Testimonies, cited by the Ancients out of foreign Writers, in behalf of
Christianity. Scaliger, the Father of them all led the Dance, upon what motive
I cannot imagine, unless it were out of Envy to the Fame and Glory of Eusebius,
against whom he particularly set himself and his endeavors; but however the
design looking like a Novelty, and carrying in it an ostentation of Learning,
for that reason alone he could not want a great number of Followers among that
sort of Men. But to what little purpose they have spent all their pains and
peevishness I now come to represent.

And here, first, Josephus the Jew, who was contemporary with the Apostles,
agrees all along with the Evangelists in the History of that time. He gives the
same account and description of John the Baptist as we read in the Gospels. He
gives us the same narration of Herod the Tetrarch, and particularly of his
marrying his Brother's Wife. He mentions the Tax of Cyrenius. He records the
Acts of the several Governors of Judaea, Pontius Pilate, Felix and Portius
Festus, and describes the succession of the several High priests, Caiaphas,
Joha and Alexander, the death of Herod Agrippa, and of Saint James the Brother
of our Lord; nay, he gives not only a just History but an high Character of
our Lord himself. All which our learned Men are willing enough to pass as
certain and warrantable History, excepting only that passage concerning our
Savior. Only there is one difficulty in the Tax of Cyrenius, which Saint Luke
says was about the time of our Savior's Nativity, but Josephus not till after
the Banishment of Archelaus, which happened at least nine years after the Death
of Herod, so that which way to reconcile this difference learned Men have been
much puzzled, and toward its solution have started variety of Conjectures. And
therefore, though it is of no very great concernment, I shall give some account
of it before I proceed to the Testimony concerning Jesus.

XII. And first of all Baronius tells us plainly that Josephus is mistaken, but
then Appar. n. 82, etc.
this is to cut the Knot, not to untie it, for our business is to reconcile him
and the sacred History; but if we utterly reject him, instead of answering the
Objection we grant it, viz. that there are irreconcilable differences between
him and the Evangelists. Though here I cannot but wonder at the unusual
disingenuity of Casaubon, Exerc. 1. n. 28.
who, whereas Baronius affirms that Josephus does in many things of Chronology
contradict Saint Luke, and therefore if we must stand to his Authority, that
will enforce us to reject the Evangelist; he, I say, inveighs and declaims upon
this as if it were Baronius his Assertion and not his Argument, and rates him
severely as if he had positively affirmed that the Testimony of Josephus was
sufficient to oblige us to quit that of the Evangelist. Whereas he only makes
use of it as a forcible Objection against appealing to Josephus in any matters
wherein he contradicts the Scriptures, for in such cases, says he, we cannot
admit him without rejecting them. Now, I say, from hence to infer that Baronius
affirmed that we were obliged so to do became not the ingenuity of a learned
Man. But the truth of it is (to observe once for all) Casaubon was little less
partial toward one Extreme than Baronius toward the other. For as it was the
custom of that learned Cardinal. and the Writers of the Church of Rome to rake
together every thing that might serve their Cause, embracing the forged and
spurious as well as the true and undoubted records of Antiquity. So Casaubon
and the learned Men of his way have been as diligent to weaken the Authority of
all the most ancient and most authentic Writers; so that there is not the
least slip in any of the Ancients that they have not observed in their critical
Notes upon them, and beside that they reject whole Books of the best and
earliest Antiquity. But by this means they have between them both done this
great service to the Christian Church, that as they have discovered the fraud
of supposititious Books, so they have confirmed the Authority of the true and
genuine. And it is by occasion of their disputes that we are come to a certain
knowledge of all the sincere records of Antiquity. So that at last the Epistles
of Ignatius and the Apostolical Canons that have been most of all opposed,
have, by those great endeavors that have been employed to destroy their
Authority, gained and will for ever keep as undoubted a credit as the most
unquestioned pieces of Justin Martyr or Irenaeus.

The next guess is that of Beza, which is followed and variously emproved V.
Scal. in Eusebius. Chron. p. 174. Grot. in Luc. c. 2. v. 2. Casaub. Exerc. 1. n.
28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
by Scaliger, Casaubon, Grotius, and others, viz. That Cyrenius was employed by
Augustus to take two several Musters of the People, one with a Tax, and the
other without it, and that was it that was made at the time of our Savior's
Birth. For Augustus designing that compendious Account of the Roman Empire,
which Historians so often speak of, and which he left as a guide and direction
to his Successors in the Empire, sent several Officers through the several
Provinces to take an exact account of the number and condition of the
Inhabitants; and for this purpose though Quintilius Varus were then Prefect of
Syria, Cyrenius was joined in Commission with him, as a Person that was, by
reason of his residence in Syria and his Wars in Cilicia, exactly acquainted
with the Affairs of the East; as afterward he was sent with C. Caesar on the
same Errand; and when Judaea was reduced into the form of a Province after the
Banishment of Archelaus, and the first Tax to be imposed immediately by the
Romans upon the People, he was particularly singled out as the Person most able
to manage it. So that it is not unlikely that he might be employed in this
business, though not himself, but Quintilius Varus was then Prefect of Syria.
And if this be so, then this difficulty is cleared, in that there were two
Musters of the People, both made by Cyrenius, one under the Government of
Quintilius Varus without any taxing; the other, some years after, under his own
Government with a severe Tribute; which made great tumults and commotions among
the People, and occasioned the sedition of Theudas Gaulonites; and this is the
only Tax or Census that is mentioned by Josephus, as containing in it
something remarkable to the History of his Country; whereas the other is wholly
passed over in silence by him, in that it contained nothing memorable as to
that, but was transacted merely for the Emperor's own private use and
information. And this conjecture of a twofold Muster is not a little favored
by Saint Luke himself, who says that this taxing was first made when Cyrenius
was Governor of Syria, whereas it ought to have been rendered this first taxing
was made, etc. which implies that there was a second, otherwise that could
never have been called the first.

But, first, This is no more than a mere conjecture without any ground of
Story, for that Quirinius was employed in any Tax before the death of Herod,
there are no footsteps in the Roman History; so that if the guess be true yet
it is altogether precarious, and invented merely to solve a difficulty that was
not otherwise to be avoided.

And then as for the little Criticism that this was the first Tax made when
Cyrenius was Governor of Syria, though it may be so interpreted, yet the
interpretation is as natural and more common, that this Tax was finst made when
Cyrenius was Governor; and if so, the Text of Saint Luke gives not the least
favor to the conjecture of a double Tax.

But, in the last place, Supposing that Quirinius was sent into Syria in the
time of Quintilius Varus for the management of the Tax, yet this will not piece
with Saint Luke's story, who expressly affirms that this Tax was made when
Cynenius was Governor of Syria; now it is very odd if Quintilius Varus were
(as it is certain he was) then Governor of Syria; that another Person that
then acted under him only by virtue of an extraordinary Commission should be
styled by the Title of Governor. And though Casaubon bestir himself to prove
that this Title was given to others that were only extraordinary Commissioners
and not standing Presidents of Provinces, yet it is very plain that this was
only done when there was no President resident before their coming, and they
were commissioned with as full power for the time as if they had been ordinary
Prefects. But that when there was a settled Governor any extraordinary
Commissioner should be honored with that Title is a case without Precedent.

Thirdly, Others conjecture, and that much more probably and to much more ^.
Vales. Annot. Eusebius. l. 1. c. 5.
purpose, that Augustus Caesar designing to tax the whole Empire, did in the
first place take an account of the number of Persons in each Province, thereby
the better to direct himself for the equal levying and proportioning the
several divisions of the whole Tax. Now a work so great must be a work of no
small time; so that though he might begin the Muster at the time of our
Savior's Nativity, yet he might not finish the Tax till the Prefectship of
Cyrenius. And he being then Prefect when the Tax was actually gathered, both
the Tax it self and all that was done in order to it, might reasonably enough
be attributed to the time of his Government.

But the most probable and natural Conjecture of all is that which was first
started by Ludovicus Capellus, and has since been more Hist. Jud. comp. p. 107.
Demonst. Ev. p. 391.
largely prosecuted by Huetius; that there has been some mistake in the
Transcriber writing (...) for (...), a mistake very easy to be made, the
difference between the names being very small; but when once made, much more
easy to be continued; in that the Tax of Cyrenius was so very famous, it being
the first that was immediately imposed by the Romans themselves upon the Jews
after they were reduced into the form of a Province; and therefore when Saint
Luke calls the Muster at our Savior's Birth the First Tax, it was very obvious
for the Transcribers, that came after, to mistake it for the Tax of Cyrenius,
that being commonly called The Tax, and so we find Gamaliel expressing it, Act.
5. 37. In the days of the Taxing. And now this small mistake of a Letter or
two, that might be so easily run into, being supposed, it clears the whole
matter; in that it is certain that Quintilius Varus was President of Syria at
the time of our Savior's Nativity, his name therefore being only restored
instead of that of Cyrenius, the whole History runs clear.

And indeed the exact Agreement of both Histories in all particulars saving
this one circumstance is no small ground for the conjecture that there must
have been some such mistake. And such literal mistakes as these are unavoidable
to all the Books in the World, and if it have happened here, the circumstances of
things themselves direct us to the true Reading. For when we are certain, as we
are, that Quintilius was then President, it is easy and rational to conclude
that Quirinius was put in afterward in his stead, because of that famous Tax
that was vulgarly called by his name. And it is not a little countenance that
is given to this Conjecture by Tertullian, who affirms that this Census or
Muster of Augustus was made under the Prefectship of Sentius Saturninus; and
for the proof both of that and of the time and place of our Savior's Nativity,
he often refers to the Register it self in the Roman Archives, and this was not
only extant in his time, but in Saint Chrysostom's, who refers to it, as we
might do to a Parish Register.

Now though the Census of the Eastern part of the Empire was begun under
Saturninus, as Tertullian observes out of the Roman Tables; and he being in a
small time removed from his Office, as we know he was, and succeeded by
Quintilius Varus, the Successor went on in the work where the Predecessor
ended. So that the work, as it was managed in Judaea, fell out in the time of
Quintilius Varus, in the time of whose Presidentship our Savior was born.
Which is so much the more likely, because Saturninus residing in Syria would
first finish the design near home, before he would undertake to go about it in
remoter parts; especially in Judaea that was then under the Kingly Government
of Herod, and so was only mustered in order to the settlement of the future
state of the Empire. So that though this Census were begun under Saturninus,
and so according to custom entered under his name in the Roman Register, as
Tertullian assures us it was, it is certain that the greatest part of it was
taken under the Government of Quintilius.

Now though this be no very material circumstance, and though the mistake I
have suggested be so very easy, and though there might be an hundred other
ways of solving it, that we cannot know at this distance, yet I could not
lightly pass it over, because it is the only material difference between
Josephus and the Holy Scriptures. For though he passes by some remarkable
things that are there recorded, yet in all other cases, where he happens upon
the same thing, he makes the same Narration. For the only place beside in
which he may seem to differ, is in the Death of Herod Agrippa, which he says
happened at the appearance of an Owl, but Saint Luke by the invisible stroke of
an Angel. And that an Owl might then by chance appear is possible, but that the
mere sight of it should affect him after such a wonderful manner is not
credible, notwithstanding a German Soothsayer had foretold that it should be
the certain Omen of his Death. That indeed might not a little disturb his
Fancy, but it could not naturally in a moment putrify his Bowels into worms
and rottenness. But it is too manifest that Josephus, through the whole course
of his History, too much endeavored to imitate the Greek and Roman Historians,
whose constant custom it was to ascribe all extraordinary Calamities to some
portentous Omen. Otherwise it is not conceivable that so strange and unheard of
a misery should all on a sudden seize upon a Man in the height of all his
Glory, and in the very act of so great a Blasphemy, without some miraculous and
invisible Power. So that there is scarce a greater Instance upon Record of an
immediate Divine Infliction than in the miserable Death of this profane Man.

And thus having cleared the Parallelism between Josephus and the Evangelists,
as to the most material passages of the Histories of their own times, I now
proceed to that particular passage of his concerning our blessed Savior: which
is so full a Testimony of the Truth of the Gospel History, that our learned
Critics think it too great for a Jew to give, and for that reason principally
suppose it to have been soisted into him in after times.

XIII. But upon what just grounds this surmise is built let us now consider,
and first let us set down the passage it self, which is to this purport: At
this time lived Jesus a wise Man, if yet it be lawful to call him a Man; for
he wrought many wonderful Works, and instructed such as were willing to
entertain the Truth, and drew after him great numbers both of Jews and
Gentiles. This was Christ, who being accused, by the Princes of our Nation
before Pilate, and afterward condemned to the Cross by him, yet did not those
who followed him from the beginning, cease to love him for the ignominy of his
Death. For he appeared unto them the third day after, as the Divine Prophets
had foretold the same, and diverse other wonderful things of him, and to this
day the race of Christians, as they are called after his name, continue.

And now here, first, It is excellently observed by Huetius that it is very
strange that so diligent a Writer as Josephus should never make the least
mention of the History of so famous a Person as Jesus of Nazareth, for if he
has not done it here, he has done it no where. And yet whatever he was, it is
certain that under the Government of Pontius Pilate there was such a Man that
pretended to be the Messiah, that drew great numbers of Disciples after him,
that instituted a new Sect of Religion, that occasioned great commotions in
Judaea, that was reported to have taught such peculiar Doctrines, and to have
done so many and so great Miracles.

And now after all this how is it credible that Josephus should never hear of
so remarkable a Person, or not think him worthy so much as to be taken notice
of in his History? For whatever Opinion he had of him, whether good or bad, it
is not to be supposed that he could wholly omit to mention him in the History
of that time, especially when he has not omitted any of the false Pretenders to
the Messiahship; so that though he had thought him an Impostor, he could not
have wholly baulk't some mention of his History. Nay, when he gives so exact a
description of John the Baptist, and of Saint James, whom to make the better
known he describes by being the Brother of Jesus, who is called the Christ, how
is it possible that he should never give any account of Christ himself? So that
how much soever it may appear incredible that Josephus should make any
honorable mention of him, it is much more so that he should make none at all.

And now when after this we come to weigh the Objections against this
Testimony, that have made so much noise and talk of late in the World, they are
so very trifling as scarce to deserve (I am sure not to need) any Answer. For
beside some Grammatical Observations, in which the Critics exercise an
arbitrary Power, and from which they make what determinations they please, some
for the Affirmative and some for the Negative: the whole force of the Objection
is resolved into this one Principle, that Josephus in this Paragraph spoke his
own sense, and wrote not as an Historian but as a Confessor; whereas it is
evident from his own story that he was a Man of no very settled Principles,
according to the humor of the Age and of the Place that he lived in, and so
was no otherway concerned in any Controversy than barely to deliver matter of
Fact. So that whereas he seems to assert that Jesus was the Christ, they might
as rationally conclude that Pontius Pilate believed him to be so too when he
crucified him, because he put this Title upon his Cross, Jesus of Nazareth the
King of the Jews; and when he was solicited by the chief Priests not to write
the King of the Jews, but that he said I am the King of the Jews, he would not
yield to their importunity, but answered them peremptorily, What I have written
I have written. From hence, I say, our learned Critics might after their rate
of drawing conclusions infer that Pontius Pilate seriously believed him to be
the King of the Jews, that is, the Messiah. Whereas it is evident in it self
that he only used the common form of speech, when he gave him that Title which
he pretended to: And of the same nature is that expression of Josephus, when he
says, (...), This was the Christ, that is, this was he that was called the
Christ, a Title so appropriated to him in common speech, that it was familiarly
given to him by his greatest Enemies. And therefore we do not make use of this
Testimony of Josephus, as if we designed to gain any credit or authority from
his Opinion, but only to prove from it that there was such a transaction then
on foot, and that there was a party of Men in the World at that time who
attested the truth of all those things that were reported concerning Jesus; and
if they did so, we have in the Premises sufficiently proved the validity of
their Testimony. And that is all the use that we can pretend to make of these
foreign Witnesses, to evidence that there was such Testimony then given, and if
there was, then its being given in such circumstances as it was, is more than
enough to maintain it self without their farther assistance.

Now this being premised in vain does Tanaquil Faber insist upon it that the
most Epist. 44.
zealous Christian could not speak more magnificently of Christ than this
unbelieving Jew. For what wonder is that, when the unbelieving Jew only
reports the sense of the zealous Christian? In vain does he urge that Josephus
was of the Sect of the Pharisees, which Sect of all others bore most spleen and
hatred to our Savior. For of what Sect soever he was, he was far from being
any of the greatest Zealots, and as far from being a serious Jew as a good
Christian, how else could he have been so profane as to apply all the
Prophesies of the Old Testament, concerning the Messiah, to the Person of
Vespasian, an Heathen and an Idolater? But beside this our Author forgets
himself in objecting Josephus his being a Pharisee, when a little after he
informs us out of Josephus himself, that he had passed through all the Sects of
the Jews, and had at last entered himself into the Discipline of Banus, a
Disciple and Successor of John the Baptist. And it is no wonder that a
Disciple of that Institution should speak favorably of Jesus; so that if we
should suppose him in good earnest in his Character of our Savior, it would be
no very hard supposition: but that he should describe him by those Titles that
his own Disciples gave him, he could not avoid it, of what Sect soever he were,
as he would quit himself like a faithful Historian. And though, after his
entering himself into the Discipline of Banus, he joined, as himself informs us,
with the Sect of the Pharisees, yet that was only in outward show and upon a
political account; they being then the most powerful Party among the Jews, so
that by their assistance he first preferred himself to public Employment, and
at last obtained the Government of all Galilee, which he was so far from ruling
like a Jewish Zealot, that in all things he behaved himself like a Roman
Gentleman, and the main thing objected to him by his Enemies was his
indifferency and unconcernedness as to the Ceremonies of their Religion.

Again, in vain does our learned Critic aggravate that Jesephus should give
our Savior the Title of God, when that is more than the Jews themselves
believed of their Messiah. For it is evident that he only uses a very common
and almost proverbial form of speech, nothing being more frequent with the
Greek and Latin Writers (whose schemes of speech Josephus every where
endeavors to imitate) than to give the Title of Gods to all Great and
extraordinary Persons; so that when Josephus gives our Savior this Title, it
is the same thing as if he had styled him Hero, or something that though a Man,
yet by his miraculous works seemed greater than a Man.

Lastly, in vain does he urge that if Josephus had believed our Savior to be
the Messiah, he would have explained to the Greeks, for whose sake he wrote in
their Language, what was the Nature and the Office of the Messiah. So probably
he would if he had been an Apostle, and designed to convert the World to
Christianity, but when he writes of him only as an Historian, what concernment
had he upon that occasion to run into so great a digression? He told the plain
Story as he had it from the Disciples of Jesus, and left it to the Reader to
judge of its truth or falsehood.

But still our Critic is much more severe in his next Injunction, when he
requires of the Historian, that if he believed Jesus to be the Messiah, to have
given an account of John the Baptist's being his Forerunner. For whether he
believed it or not, I cannot see what reason or obligation he had for so doing,
unless it is not possible to give a compendious Character of a Person without
setting down every particular circumstance of his Life and Actions.

But now our learned Author advances from his Arguments to his Authorities.

And first of all Origin expressly asserts that Josephus did not believe Jesus
to be the Christ. And I know no body that affirms he did; but yet could he not
give him that Title that was so familiarly given him, unless too he asserted
the justice of the Title? All that he affirms, is only that this was the Man
that was at that time called the Christ, though he happens to express it by
saying this was the Christ, a very common form of speech among the Greeks to
put (...) for (...), was for was called. And if so, I hope an Historian might
relate the Opinion that was had of him without declaring his own.

In the next place, Justin Martyr and Tertullian (says our Author) wrote
against the Jews, and if this passage had been extant in Josephus in their
times, it is searce credible that they should altogether overlook so remarkable
a Testimony. This is the hard condition that our Critics have of late put upon
all Authors, to quote all that ever they read, and to think of every thing
that is pertinent to their Cause; but this seems too severe an imposition upon
the memories of Mankind. And yet supposing these Fathers were not ignorant of
this passage of Josephus, to what purpose should they have alleged it? when it
is their evident design to dispute against the Jews purely out of the writings
of the Prophets, and by them alone to prove Jesus to be the Christ. And if so,
what does the Testimony of Josephus signify to confirm the truth of that which
they had already proved by the Testimony of God himself? So that these Authors
were so far from being obliged by their Cause to hale in this passage, that
they could not but have brought it in very impertinently. In short, it is
enough that in those Writings they appeal only to Divine Authority, and then
it is no particular neglect of Josephus, if he be past by as well as all other
Authors of his rank and condition.

And thus have I given a full and exact account of all those weighty Objections
that have been levied against this passage of Josephus, and so leave it to all
wise Men to judge whether our learned Critics might not have better employed
themselves than to raise so much noise against it to so little purpose.

And now having dispatched this great Testimony of Josephus, I might add to him
Suetonius, Tacitus, the younger Pliny, Seneca, who give us the same relation of
the great pretenses of Jesus, and the greater prevalency of his Religion. But
their Testimonies have been so often recited, and are so vulgarly known, that
it were labor in vain to give my self or the Reader the trouble of their
Repetition. Especially when they prove no more than what no Man can doubt of,
viz. That there was at that time such a Man as Jesus of Nazareth, and that in a
short time he drew great numbers of Disciples after him. The first is certainly
past question, and the second is as evident merely from the History of Nero's
Reign, under whom what vast multitudes of Christians suffered both Civil and
Ecclesiastical Historians unanimously agree. And therefore I shall pass over
these more general Records, and only suggest two or three particular
Narrations that relate not only to the existence of our Savior's Person, but
to the veracity of his Pretenses.

XIV. The first is that known History of Phlegon, Gentleman to the Emperor
Adrian, in his general History of the Olympiads, concerning both the Eclipse of
the Sun and the Earthquake at our Savior's Passion. And it is a Testimony so
exactly agreeing with the Evangelical History both as to the year and the very
hour of the day, V. Huet. Prop. 3. Sect. 8. Grot. in Luc. c. 27. v. 45.
and the most material circumstances of the thing, that had it not been for the
vanity of Critics, it could never have met with dispute or opposition. But
those Men will not stick to move the Earth from its Center, rather than loose
the honor of being the Father of one Criticism; otherwise certainly this
passage, so considently appealed to by the Writers of the Christian Church, as
agreeing with the public Records of the Empire, together with that of Thallus
another Heathen, cited by that accurate Chronologer Africanus, could not but
have escaped their censuring severity. And yet it must come under their lash,
because (say they) Phlegon speaks of it as a natural Eclipse. But this they say
out of their own heads; for he only records the matter of Fact, but whether it
were natural or praeternatural concerns not him either as a Courtier or an
Historian. And though it is demonstrable that if it happened at that time that he
says it did, it was praeternatural, and though himself expressly affirms that it
was such an Eclipse that never the like happened; yet waving all this, it is
enough that he affirms that such an Eclipse happened at the same time even to the
very hour of the day; and so it is rationally urged by Tertullian, Eodem
momento dies medium Orbem Apol. c. 21.
signante Sole subducta est, deliquium putaverunt, qui id quoque super Christum
prozedicatum non scierunt, and tamen eum Mundi casum relatum in Archivis
vestris habetis. At the very moment of our Savior's Crucifixion the Sun was
darkened at midday, and though they supposed it only an Eclipse, that knew
nothing of its relation to the Passion of Christ, yet this strange accident, be
it what it will, you may find registered in your public Records. And if that be
true, it is all that can be desired in this case from an heathen Historian to
vouch the truth of the Story. And yet this is more, for if it be true, it is
from thence evident that this Eclipse was miraculous and praeternatural, in
that it happened at the full of the Moon.

XV. The next heathen Testimony is of an higher nature, and relates more
immediately to the Divinity of our Savior; and that is the Opinion of Tiberius
concerning him, upon that Account and Narrative that he had received of his
Life, Death and Resurrection out of Palestine, and that from Pilate himself.
Thus Tertullian tells the Apol. c. 5. and 21.
Governors of Rome in his Apology, that Tiberius, in whose time the Christian
Religion came into the World, having received an account out of Palestine in
Syria concerning the truth of that Divinity that was there revealed, brought it
to the Senate with the Prerogative of his own Vote, but that it was rejected by
the Senate, either because themselves had not in the first place according to
form of Law approved of it, or rather out of flattery to the Emperor, because
himself had refused that honor when offered to him by the Senate; for the
words, quia non ipse probaverat, are capable of either sense; but though they
denied this Title to our Savior, upon what account soever, whether of State or
of Courtship, our Author tells us expressly that the Emperor himself continued
of the same mind.

Now though Tertullian be a Christian Writer, yet he durst never have presumed
to impose upon the Senate themselves with such a remarkable Story as this, if
he were not able to prove it, and that he was is evident from Justin Martyr,
who often Apol. 2.
appeals to the Acts of Pilate concerning the History of our Savior, and
requests the Emperors to satisfy themselves from their own Records concerning
those things that were reported of him. For it is a known Custom among the
Romans, for the Governors of Provinces to transmit an account of the most
remarkable things that happened under their Government to the Senate of old time,
and of later times to the Emperor. And that Pilate had done so is evident from
this Appeal of Justin Martyr; for if there had been no such Acts, scarce any
Man, much less such a Man as Justin Martyr could have been so foolish or so
confident as to affirm a thing, in which it was so very easy to convict him of
falsehood. And if such Acts there were they are a great Evidence of the truth of
our Savior's Miracles, when the Experour, that was none of the best Men nor
very apt to listen to such Stories, was so surprised with the strangeness of
them, and that upon no less information than of Pilate himself; and when
Pilate, upon a more full enquiry than it seems he was able or willing to make
concerning the Works of Jesus at his Condemnation, was so abundantly satisfied
as to the truth of those strange things that were related of him, as to think
himself obliged to acquaint his Master with a Story so strange and wonderful.

But here Isaac Casaubon endeavors to shrivle and criticize these Acts of
Pilate into Exerc. 16. n. 154.
as little Authority as possibly he can, and tells us that Justin Martyr does
not call them the Acts of Pontius Pilate, but the Acts under Pontius Pilate.
Though it is an undoubted thing that the Acts under Pilate reserved in the
Imperial Archives were the Acts of Pilate, that is, they were compiled either
by himself or by his command, but transmitted by himself, for the Emperors
received no other Acts but from the Governors themselves; and therefore the
learned Man might have spared his Grammatical Criticism, when it is certain
from the thing it self that the public Acts under the Government of Pontius
Pilate, must be transmitted by Pilate himself, and so must be the Acts of
Pilate.

Now that Pilate should give such an Account after our Savior's Resurrection;
cannot seem strange if we consider his circumstances. For setting aside the
Relation of the Evangelists concerning him, that he would if possible have
rescued our Savior from the fury of the Priests and the tumult of the People;
that he was satisfied of his Innocence, as he declared upon the Bench; that he
gave Sentence upon him, I will not say against his Conscience (for being an
Atheist he had none) but against his own Judgment and Opinion. I say, setting
aside all this that happened before the Passion, the truth of our Savior's
Resurrection proved it self upon him by so many lucky circumstances of the
thing it self, that it could not but perplex his Mind which way to avoid its
Evidence. For he was certain that Jesus was Crucified, Dead and Buried, that
the Sepulcher was sealed with a great Stone and guarded with a Watch, and yet
in a very short time after, it was preached up and down publicly by his
Disciples that he was risen from the dead.

Now whether Pilate himself were upon this so curious or so concerned as to
search the Sepulcher it is certain the Body was gone, otherwise it would have
been produced and publicly exposed by the Jews to disprove the immediate
report of his Resurrection. So that there could remain no other imaginable
pretense against its Truth but the idle Tale of the Soldiers, that his
Disciples came by night and stole him away, whilst they slept. This was an
admirable contrivance, and worthy the sage wisdom of the great Sanhedrin, to
appeal to the Testimony of such Persons, that could not tell their story
without contradicting and defeating their own Evidence! For were they not
doubty Witnesses of a thing that was done whilst they were fast asleep?
Questionless our Governor was wonderfully satisfied with this subtle Answer,
that really carries no other sense in it, than if they had deposed, That they
saw his Disciples convery him away whilst they slept. But if they slept they
saw it not, and if they saw it not, they were no more competent Witnesses than
if they had been upon the Emperor's Lifeguard; and had they hired Knights of
the Post, that were at that time at as great a distance as Rome from Jerusalem,
it had not been more absurd and ridiculous than this contrivance of producing
sleeping Witnesses.

Beside this, he could not but farther reflect with himself how likely a thing
it was that Men so timorous should have courage enough to venture upon such a
daring Attempt. What wretched cowardice they betrayed from the time that their
Master was apprehended he very well knew, and therefore could not but think it
very improbable such faint spirits should so soon undertake such bold and
difficult Enterprises. But suppose they should, it is strangely lucky that all
the Guard should fall fast asleep at the same instant of time, and more so that
the Disciples should have the strange fortune as to come at that very moment,
and most of all so that with all that noise that they must of necessity make by
removing the Stone that was rolled upon the mouth of the Grave, they should not
awake so much as one of the Soldiers.

But beside all these difficulties that he could not but observe in the action
it self, it was obvious for him to reflect, that if they who affirmed that
Christ was risen from the dead, knew that he was not, to what purpose they
should take all this pains and run all these hazards for an Impostor, that had
abused them with romantic Tales and Promises? This is past my comprehension,
for though it is possible for simple Men to throw away their Lives for a false
or mistaken Opinion, yet that a number of Men should do it to ratify a
Testimony that they knew to be false, without any prospect of advantage either
to themselves or others, as it has no precedent in all former Ages, so it is
incredible to any Man that in the least understands the Constitution of humane
Nature. And therefore from these and the like Premises it is no wonder if he
concluded that there was something more than ordinary in this business, or as
Tertullian expresses it, Ea omnia super Christo A^^l. c. 21.
Pilatus, and ipse jam pro sua Conscientia Christianus, Caesari tunc Tiberio
nunciavit.

XVI. The last Instance I shall give of this kind of Witnesses is the Story of
Agbarus King of Edessa lying beyond Euphrates, who being afflicted with some
chronical Distemper not curable by humane Art, and hearing such prodigious
reports concerning the Miracles of one Jesus in Judaea, that he made the Blind
to see, the Lame to go, cleansed the Lepers, restored the long diseased to
Health and raised the dead to Life: He therefore dispatches a Letter to him by
a special Messenger, requesting him to take the pains to come to Edessa and
cure his Malady, and the rather, because he heard the Jews designed to do him
mischief, to take up his Residence there in safety, where he might live with
all accommodations of Life, and, if he pleased, share with the Prince himself
in the Government.

To this courteous Letter our Savior immediately returns a brief and pithy
Answer, and that probably by the same Messenger, in which he informs him That
all things touching his Message were to be fulfilled in Judaea, and then he was
to return to his Father, but after my Assumption I will send one of my
Disciples, who shall cure thy Malady, and restore Life to thee and to all them
that be with thee. Which was accordingly done by Thaddaeus; the manner of whose
address and procedure is particularly and largely described by Eusebius. L. 1.
c. 13.
In all which I cannot find any thing that may in the least shake or impair the
credit of the Story. Nay, the contents of our Savior's Letter agree so exactly
with the whole design of his Life in the Gospels, as by that alone to give it
self considerable Authority, viz. to put off the exercise of his Power, and
obscure the reputation of his Glory as much as he could till after his
Resurrection.

Now if this Epistle were forged, either this passage was put into it by chance
or by design. If by chance, it was a very lucky chance that so odd and yet so
apt a passage should be dropped into it. And yet it could not well be out of
design, for though this observation be obvious enough in it self, I do not
remember that there are any footsteps of it to be found in any of the Ancients.
Neither is it at all strange that all the Evangelists should be utterly silent
concerning it, when it is manifest that it was their design to confine their
whole History to Palestine, and probable too that they were altogether
unacquainted with this particular Transaction, in that our Savior might with
privacy, as his custom was, dispatch his Reply by the same Messenger that
brought the King's Letter, and by that means the business might pass wholly
unobserved. And it is much less to be wondered at that none of the Ancients
before Eusebius should make any mention of it, when it was locked up both in
the Records of that City and the Syrian Tongue, to which Language the ancient
Greek and Latin Fathers were altogether strangers, and if they had not, yet
they might easily be ignorant of so remote a Register. But that there were such
Records we have all the Faith of Eusebius at stake, who positively vouches it
that he found them enrolled in the public Registry of Edessa, and faithfully
translated them out of the Syrian into the Greek Tongue. Not to mention Saint
Ephraem, who lived before the time of Saint Austin, and was a Deacon in the
City of Edessa, who makes the same honorable mention of these Epistles with
Eusebius, though that is a pregnant Testimony by it self, but much more so from
its exact agreement with Eusebius his Relation; but passing by that, and much
Aug. Ep. 263. more the Epistle of Darius to Saint Austin and of Theodorus
Studita to Pope Paschal, V. Baron. An. 31. n. 60.
because it is possible they might rely wholly upon the Authority of Eusebius,
I shall lay the whole stress of the Testimony upon him alone: whom we cannot
suppose guilty of such a gross and mere forgery, as to have framed the whole
story only out of his own Brain.

I will grant that he may sometimes seem partial and favorable to his own
cause, and be apt to make more of a Testimony than the Testimony it self will
bear; but that he should forge and falsie a public Record, and that in a
matter of this weighty nature, he has given us no reason to entertain so hard
and unkind a suspicion of him. For he is a stranger to Eusebius that knows him
not to be as nice and curious in examining the credit of his Authorities as any
the most critical Authors whatsoever; and for this reason he has rejected many
excellent passages that might have been very serviceable to his Cause merely
because of their doubtful Antiquity, allowing nothing as Authentic that he
cannot vouch by the Testimony of ancient and contemporary Writers. Now that
such a Man should be guilty of such a gross and groundless Lie as this, is past
the ill nature of Mankind to suspect.

Nay farther, though some of our late Masters of Censure are very forward to
observe the slips and mistakes of this great Man, and charge them smartly upon
him as if done out of mere design, yet the whole matter being impartially
weighed, we have more reason to impute them to haste and inadvertency. For
though sometimes he may seem to improve Testimonies, yet does he as often
lessen them, which plainly shows that he trusted too much to his memory. But
still he is ever in the right as to the main of the Story. and fails only in
circumstances and that chiefly of Chronology, by confounding sometimes one
Story with another; but otherwise he tells no false Stories, and only makes
some mistakes of memory upon true ones, and as many of them to the disadvantage
as to the advantage of his Cause, as might be shown if it were worth the while,
by comparing all particulars. But for the present this is sufficiently
exemplified in the very last passage that we insisted upon, viz. The Testimony
of Pilate concerning our Savior, in which the chief thing, as it is set down
by Tertullian, is our Savior's Miracles, and yet it is left out by Eusebius
when he transcribes the rest of the Testimony. And though it is possible that
he might follow the Greek Translatour of Tertullian, yet however we see he is
as easily drawn into a lessening as a magnifying mistake; and it is much more
likely that Eusebius should through haste clip the Translation, than that the
Translatour should clip the Original, for he only consulted the passage
occasionally, and so might in his hasty transcribing overlook a part of it; but
for the other who made that Translation his particular business, it was not
easy to overlook so material a passage.

In short, Whatsoever faults Eusebius may be guilty of, no Man can suspect him
of mere Forgery without the forfeiture of his Ingenuity. Neither, in the last
place, is the date of the Record an inconsiderable circumstance to prove the
Record it self; for Eusebius tells us that at the bottom of it was subscribed,
These things were done the 340th. year. Which though it has heretofore puzzled
learned V. Vales. Not. in l. 1. c. 13.
Men, is excellently cleared by the Epoch of the Edessean Computation, who
began their Account from the first year of the 117th. Olympiad, when Seleucus
began his Reign in Asia; now from that to the 202d. Olympiad, in which year,
being the 15th. of Tiberius, our Savior suffered, is just 340. years. So that
Thaddaeus was dispatched to Edessa in the very same year in which our Savior
arose from the dead; that great work, it seems, being once over, he would no
longer delay the good King's request.

These are all the foreign Testimonies that I think convenient to represent in
this place, though many more I shall be forced to observe, when I come to give
an account how it comes to pass, that though our Savior did those Miracles
that are recorded of him, and though there were all that evidence given of them
that we pretend there was, yet so great a part of the Men of that Age, both
Jews and Gentiles should live and dye in Infidelity.

XVII. Having hitherto demonstrated the impossibility of the falsehood of the
Apostles Testimony concerning the truth of Christianity from its contradiction
to the first Instincts of humane Nature, to all the principles of common
Prudence, and to their own design it self, and from the undoubted certainty of
their Records, and from the concurrent Testimony of foreign Writers; I now
proceed to the next part of the Argument, that, supposing the Apostles,
Evangelists, and first Disciples of Christ, would have endeavored to impose
upon the World with a palpable and unprofitable Lie against all the
forementioned contradictions to Nature, to Sense and to Themselves, to
demonstrate the impossibility that they could ever have prevailed so
effectually and so speedily as they did, upon the Faith of Mankind. And as many
thousand Absurdities as there were in the former Supposition, there are so many
ten thousands in this; for the inequality of the number of the Persons was not
less; the first Preachers of the Gospel being very sew in comparison of the
vast multitudes of their first Converts. And yet if Christianity were false,
all these must be guilty, not only of all that folly that we have represented
in the case of the Apostles, but much more, in that they did not only suffer
themselves wilfully to be deceived into the belief of the strange Story of
Jesus without sufficient evidence of its truth; for if it had sufficient
evidence then it was no Imposture; if it had not, then all that professed their
belief of it were wilfully deceived, i. e. They pretended to believe that to be
a Divine Revelation, though themselves knew that they had no sufficient ground
or motive for so strange a belief.

But beside this grand Absurdity of wilfully deceiving themselves to no
purpose, nay, against all the forementioned inconveniences, they must be so far
beside themselves that when they had abused themselves with a proofless Tale,
they should join their zcal to the first Impostors for propagating the Cheat,
to the manifest ruin of their Fortunes and hazard of their Lives; and that
such vast numbers of them should with such unheard of courage and constancy
endure the most exquisite Pains and suffer all kinds of Death either without
ever inquiring into the truth of the matter of Fact for which they suffered, or
suffering for it after that rate without any satisfactory Evidence of it.

Here, in short, we must believe that such a Doctrine as Christianity,
published in such a manner as it was, should find such an universal
entertainment in so short a time, without any the least rational proof or
evidence of its Divine Authority. A Doctrine, the truth whereof depended
entirely upon a matter of Fact, so that if it were false, it could not then
have escaped confutation, and unless it were undoubtedly true could never have
obtained any belief. A Doctrine so unkind to the vicious customs and practices
of the Age, so contrary to the prejudices of Men and the established Religions
of the World, so unpleasing to Flesh and Blood, so hated and so full of danger.
That when this Doctrine was published by such Persons, Men of mean Education,
void of Graft or Learning or Eloquence, they should without any other help than
barely telling a false Story persuade such vast numbers of Men to forsake the
Religions in which they were educated, and without any hope of profit, nay,
with a certain prospect of all the miseries of Life, yes and Death it self, to
embrace this new, this despised, this hated, this persecuted Forgery.

Lastly, That great numbers both of the most learned and wisest Men that lived
in the Ages next and immediately after it, should, after the strictest enquiry
concerning the truth of these things, not only suffer themselves to be imposed
upon by so late and palpable a Fiction, but hazard, nay, loose their Lives and
Fortunes in its defense. And yet this was the case of the primitive Converts,
as I come now to demonstrate by a review of particulars.

XVIII. Now as for the reality of the matter of Fact, the speedy entertainment
of Christianity in all parts of the World, that is a thing so unanimously
attested by all Writers, that it is rather to be supposed than proved. (...),
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 3.
The Gospel of our Savior like the Sun enlightened all the World at once, and
infinite multitudes of People both from Cities and Villages were by the
Apostles preaching brought into the Church like Corn crowded into a Granary:
And they who had been long enslaved to the Superstition and Idolatry of their
Ancestors were set at liberty by the preaching and miracles of the Disciples
of Christ; and renouncing that rout of false Gods that the merciless Demons
had introduced into the heathen World, returned to the worship of the only one
true God the great Creator of all things.

So when Celsus objects the novelty of Christianity, Origin answers that there
Lib. 1. p. 21, item 68.
lies the wonder, that in so short a time a new Doctrine should so strangely
prevail over all the World, conquer both Greeks and Barbarians, the learned and
unlearned, all ranks and professions of Men; and possess them with so firm a
belief of its Divine Authority, as to be ready to seal their Faith with their
Blood, a thing that was never done for any Opinion in the World before.

And so Justin Martyr, in his Conference with Trypho the Jew, affirms that
there is no p. 345.
part of Mankind, Greeks or Barbarians, nay, not those wild and uncivilized
People that were wont to live without Houses and Cities, amongst whom Prayers
and Supplications were not made to the Father and Creator of all things, in
the name of the crucified Jesus.

It is an excellent passage of Clemens Alexandrinus to the same purpose, at the
end of his p. 502.
Sixth Book of Collections: The Philosophers (says he) pleased the Greeks
alone, neither did every one please all; Plato followed Socrates, Xenocrates
Plato, Theophrastus Aristotle, Cleanthes Zeno, every Master had his own
particular School and Scholars; but our great Master's Philosophy was not
confined, as theirs was, to their own Country, within Judaea alone, but spread
it self over all parts of the habitable World, and was entertained by whole
Cities and Nations both of Greeks and Barbarians; it bore away whole Families
and Villages, and no single Person could resist its force, that would but give
himself leave to hear its Wisdom, insomuch that it gained over many of the
Philosophers themselves. And if any Magistrate did any where suppress the
Grecian Philosophy, it soon vanished; whereas our Institution from the first
publishing of it has been every where persecuted by Kings and Emperors and
Tyrants, by Presects of Provinces, by Commanders of Armies, and which is more
furious then all the rest, by the Multitude. These have joined all their power
and their malice utterly to extirpate our Religion, but still it flourishes
more and more, and does not wither away as it must have done had it been a mere
humane Invention, but it stands invincible as the power of God that nothing can
restrain or alter, and this notwithstanding that it was foretold by the Founder
of it, that all its Followers must suffer Persecution.

And Tertullian assures the Senate of Rome that the Christians had filled all
Places and Apol. c. 37.
all Offices; that they were of strength enough to master the Roman Empire;
nay, that so great were their numbers, that if they would but agree to retire
out of it, the World would stand amazed at its own solitude. And in his Book
against the Jews, he tells them that it enlarged Cap. 7.
its conquests beyond those of the Roman Empire; that it subdued those places
that were inaccessible to their Armies, and reckons up multitudes of People
from one end of the habitable World to the other, that were converted to the
Faith of the crucified Jesus.

And in the same manner does Arnobius challenge the unbelieving World.
Methinks, Lib. 2.
says he, this should not a little shock your unbelief to see the Authority of
this despised name to prevail in all places in so short a time, that no Nation
is so utterly barbarous and lost to all civility, whose manners have not been
reformed and polisht by this gentle Institution; nay, more than this, it has
mastered the great Wits, the Orators, Critics, Lawyers, Physicians and
Philosophers; and not only so, but all its Disciples are so serious and
sincere in their profession, that they will forgo all advantages of Life, even
Life it self rather than forsake the cross. So that notwithstanding all your
Laws and Interdicts, your Threatenings and Executions, your Hangmen and Dragg
hooks, and all your innumerable ways of torture they grow not only more
numerous but more vigorous in their resolutions. Can you think all this comes
to pass slightly and by chance, that Men do not consider what they are about
when they dye for their Religion, that there is a conspiracy of Sots and Madmen
all the World over to undo themselves and throw away their Lives, without so
much as thinking what they are doing?

It were endless to heap up all the Testimonies that might be collected out of
the primitive Writers upon this Argument, when it was so known and confessed a
thing even by the Enemies of the Religion: So that this was the ground of
Pliny's Letter to the Emperor concerning the Christians, the multitude of
Persons of all conditions, which he says was so great that the Temples and
Sacrifices were almost utterly forsaken. And Tacitus tells us of an Ingens
multitudo, that were put to death by Nero in Rome alone for firing the City,
which was not much above thirty years after our Savior's Passion, and in the
time of the Apostles, some of whom suffered in the Persecution; in short the
prevalency of the Christian Religion was so observable among the Heathens that
it was vulgarly styled (...) and the Christians (...), that the prevailing
Doctrine, and they the prevailing Sect; several Instances whereof are collected
by Valesius out of Damascius, Annot. in Eusebius. p. 62.
Porphyry and Julian.

And therefore I will add no more Testimonies to prove a thing so
unquestionable, but shall only rescue one that is more ancient than any of the
rest, from that violence that has been offered to it by some learned Men, and
that is the Testimony of Philo the Jew; for whereas in his little Treatise
concerning a Contemplative Lise, he gives a large description of a certain Sect
of Men and Women (that he calls (...) and (...)) that were at that time very
famous and numerous in the World, especially in Egypt and about Alexandria
where he chiefly resided, but most of all in the Mareotick Prefecture; this
Eusebius will have to be understood of the primitive Christians, and that for
this one very good reason, because it is such an exact description of their way
of Life, Worship and Discipline, that if Philo had designed to have done that,
he could not have done it more accurately; and the truth is, there is scarce in
all the Records of Antiquity a fuller account of the manners of the primitive
Christians, as to their renouncing the World for the love of Heaven, their
parting with their Estates for the benefit of the Poor, their great Temperance
and Chastity, their meeting every Seventhday for religious Worship, their
Love Feasts, their great Festivals of Easter and Pentecost, etc. All which as
they agree in every circumstance to the primitive Christians, so to no other
Sect, of which we find any other memory or mention in all the Records of
Antiquity; and that, one would think, were Argument sufficient to conclude that
Philo's description appertained to them and none else.

But Scaliger, according to his usual custom of quarrelling with Eusebius, will
not De Emend. Temp. l. 6.
have it applied to the Christians but to the Jewish Essenes; of which, he
affirms, there were two sorts, the Practical and the Speculative, and that in
the former Book Philo treated of those, of these in this. And the ground of his
mistake was Philo's transition from the first to the second Book, viz. That
having in the former given an account of the Essenes, who lived a practical
Life and conversed in Cities, he now came to treat, (...), of those that live a
contemplative Life, i. e. says Scaliger, of those Essenes; but that without any
ground from the words themselves, which being only general, of those Men that
live a contemplative Life, may with as much reason be understood of any other
Sect as appropriated to the Essenes. But what if Philo had called them Essenes,
and thought them so, yet there is no necessity they should have been so; for
seeing the Essenes were accounted Men of the strictest Lives among the Jews,
when Philo saw this Society of Christians, then newly founded by Saint Mark in
those parts, that so much resembled the Essenes in their Manners and
Discipline, it was easy for him to suppose them a branch of the same Sect, and
pass them under the same name. And yet after all, this is a distinction merely
of Scaliger's own framing to salve his own groundless conjecture; for Philo no
where calls them Essenes, which he would have done, if Essenes they had been of
what sort soever; and therefore constantly giving those in the former Book the
Title of Essenes and never giving it to these, it is plain that they were of a
different Sect from all Essenes. Neither are there any the least footsteps of
these two sorts of Essenes in all Antiquity; and Josephus, though he does more
than once give an account of this Sect, makes no mention of these speculative
Essenes, which so diligent a Writer could never have omitted, if they had been
so famous and so numerous in the World as Philo says these Therapeutae were.
Beside that there were no Essenes out of Judaea, as Philo himself more than
once informs us, and expressly in the former Book, whereas this Sect was spread,
as he affirms in this, through all parts of the World. Neither were there any
Women admitted among the Essenes, whereas both Sexes were indifferently entered
into this Sect, from whence it is evident that it must have been of a different
Constitution.

And for these reasons Valesius disagrees with Scaliger for understanding the
Essenes Annot. in Eusebius. p. 34.
here, yet agrees with him for not understanding the Christians, but upon
Arguments so weak and unconcluding, that he had as good gone through with him
in the whole matter, as leave him half way to so little purpose.

As, first, That these Therapeutae read the ancient Writings of the Authors of
their Sect, which could not be understood of the old Prophets, because they are
expressly distinguished by Philo from them; nor of the Evangelists and Apostles,
because himself lived in their time, and therefore could not term their
Writings ancient.

But, in answer to this, it is evident that Philo was not thoroughly acquainted
with the Principles of this Sect, but had only been present sometime at their
Assemblies, and from what he had there observed, had drawn up this description
of them. And therefore, finding that they had peculiar Books to themselves and
distinct from those of the old Prophets, he might easily think them more
ancient than really they were, especially when they were valued by the
Christians, or the Men that he speaks of, as the most authentic Commentaries
and Expositions of the Prophets themselves. But however, Antiquity is a
relative term, and therefore the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles,
being the first Records of the Church, might, nay, must be termed the most
ancient; and so Philo seems to expound himself when he adds that they were such
as were written by the first Authors of the Sect, and that they could be none
other is plain enough, because there were no other Books beside those of the
Old Testament peculiar to any Sect among the Jews.

But in the next place it is objected, That Philo affirms that his Therapeutick
Sect prayed only twice a day, whereas it is very well known that the primitive
Christians had their several other hours of Prayer.

Yes, and so they might have, and Philo not know it. However, their most solemn
seasons were Morning and Evening Prayer, when, as Philo tells us, they resorted
to their consecrated Chapels, and that being their public Devotion, he
therefore takes notice of that alone; whereas their other hours of Prayer were
rather set apart for private Devotion, which was more or less frequent
according to the zeal of the Votaries.

But Philo, says he, affirms that this Sect composed Hymns, and those in
various Measures, and yet this custom is very well known not to have been used
in the Christian Church till after the Reign of the Antonines.

It may be so, in the Greek and Latin Churches, but in a Church purely Jewish,
as it is certain this was, and is so agreed to have been by all hands, this
custom was used from the beginning. Neither was it any new Invention of the
Christians, but continued by them in imitation of the ancient Jewish Church.

But lastly, says he, The Men of this Sect, according to Philo's description,
were very numerous and scattered all the World over, whereas at that time there
was but a very small number of Christians.

And it must be confessed that so they were if compared either to the rest of
Mankind at that time, or to their own multitude in after-ages. And yet their
numbers were very great if considered, as they were by Philo, as a philosophic
Sect, and so at that time Christianity was more observable than any other Sect,
spreading every where so fast, and wherever it came prevailing so much.

But if this great and famous Sect that Philo speaks of were not Christians,
our learned Author would have done very well to consider, how it is possible
that such a peculiar Sect of Men, should at that time have been dispersed
through all parts of the habitable World, and never be so much as taken notice
of by any Writer of that Age but only in this little Pamphlet of Philo. At
least considering the exact agreement of the description it self to the
Christians, and the utter silence about any other Sect to which it might agree,
that seems to me no less than a demonstrative proof that it must be intended of
them, and of them alone.

And beside the evidence of the thing it self, the reason of the Name is
obvious enough; for though, as Eusebius says, it is not much material to
enquire whether Philo himself coind this Name, as most agreeing with the
manners of the Persons that he describes; or whether the Christians might not
have that Name given them in that place from the beginning, the Name of
Christians not being then used in all places, yet it is but a synonymous word
with that of Christians, especially when turned out of the Hebrew into Greek,
for the word Jesus indifferently signifies either (...) or (...), Savior or
Healer; and therefore it was easy for Philo, who was an Hebrew-Greek, to
interpret it by the Name (...) or Healer, especially considering its near
affinity both in sound and signification to the word (...) to heal, so that the
meaning of the Appellation is that they were the followers of Jesus, i. e. the
Healer.

And thus having recovered this ancient Church from the perverseness of learned
Men, I shall conclude this Argument with an excellent passage of Irenaeus, a
very early Writer in these Western Adv. Here Is. l. 1. c. 3.
parts of the World. Though, says he, there is a vast variety of Languages in
the World, yet the Tradition of the Christian Faith is one and the same in all
places, in Germany, in Spain, in France, in the East, in Egypt, in Lybia, in
the remote as well as in the middle parts of the World; and as there is but one
Sun in the Universe, so are all Men every where, that are disposed, enlightened
by the same Truth. Of the Unity of this Tradition I shall discourse in its
proper place, at present it is enough to our purpose that we have from hence a
very early Testimony of its Universality.

XIX. This then being so that the Christian Religion prevailed as never
Doctrine did, let us a little consider what extraordinary advantages it had to
recommend it self to the good Opinion of Mankind; and here it is at first view
apparent that it labored under all the possible disadvantages in the World,
excepting only its own naked and unassisted Truth; so that had it not been for
that undeniable evidence of proof, that it brought along with it of its Divine
Authority, it was impossible it should ever have gained one proselyte over to
its belief.

And here the first thing to be considered is that the whole frame of the
Christian Faith is built upon a matter of Fact, and that in it self so
incredible, that it could not have been believed, had it not been vouched by
some Testimony so unquestionable, as to surmount its own incredibility. For the
Story was plainly this, That under the Prefectship of Pontius Pilate there was
a poor young Man in Judaea, of mean Birth and no Education, who pretended to be
sent from God to cancel that Law, which God himself had established by Moses, to
reform all the World, to bring in a more perfect rule of Life, and a more
excellent way of Worship; and that for a proof of his Commission he pretended
to a power of working Miracles, and often cured the Blind, the Lame, the
Leprous, and sometimes raised the Dead; but by this means drawing great
multitudes after him, the Governors of the Jewish State grew jealous of his
designs, and so apprehended him as a disturber of the public Peace, and an
enemy to the established Religion; and for those crimes condemned him to the
ignominious death of the Cross, and that they took care that he should suffer
with all the aggravations of shame and disgrace, in sight of all the People of
Jerusalem; and yet notwithstanding that his heart-bloud was let out with a
Spear, whilst he was hanging upon the Cross, he rose again the third day,
conversed familiarly with his Disciples, and at last in the presence of great
numbers of them ascended up into Heaven.

Now this Story was in it self so strange and prodigious, so without precedent,
so full of appearing inconsistencies, so contrary to the prejudices of the Jews
and the opinions of the Greeks, and withal so public and so notorious, that
if it had not been certainly true, it could never have been believed, and if it
had been false, must have been demonstratively confuted. For the passages and
transactions of his Life were open and conspicuous to the World; he laid not
the scene of his actions in a dark, unknown or undiscovered corner of the
Earth, but he appeared in one of the most eminent places of all Asia; all his
Works were performed amidst his Enemies, and he chose the Jews, the most
jealous and the most prejudiced People in the World, for the Eyewitnesses of
his Miracles, and the Companions of his Conversation: But above all, Jerusalem
it self, the most famous City at that time in that part of the World, was the
scene of his most public Actions; there it was that he was put to death in the
presence not only of that City but of the whole Nation; there it was that he
rose from the dead, there it was that his Disciples first published his
Resurrection, and there it was that some of them wrought undeniable Miracles,
in proof of the Divinity of his Power and the Truth of their own Testimony.

And Origin has observed very well that the public Death of Jesus in the sight
of all the Lib. 2.
People of the Jews, was designed by the Divine Providence as an advantageous
circumstance to demonstrate the truth of his Resurrection; for if it had been
private and not notorious to all the Nation, though he had afterward risen from
the dead as he did, the obscurity of his Death might have been pleaded against
the certainty of his Resurrection. But beside the notoriety of the matter of
Fact among the Jews, the strange Stories that were reported of him in a little
time filled the World with noise and wonder. No Affair in that Age was more
talked of than the Story of Jesus of Nazareth, every body made enquiry into the
circumstances of his Actions, and they were exposed to the malice of the Jews
and the curiosity of the Philosophers.

There was never Man born (as Eusebius Hist. Eccles. L. 1. c. 3.
observes) upon whose account the whole World was so much concerned as upon
that of Jesus of Nazareth; Mankind being as it were at first divided concerning
him, so that the controversy is not improperly styled by Nicephorus (...), the
struggling and concussion of the World.

Now it is a likely matter and worthy our belief that a few simple and
illiterate persons should have the confidence, but much more the ability to
persuade the World into the belief of a Legend so palpable and so obnoxious to
contradiction. That they should be so impudent as to begin to publish the
strange Story of his Life and stranger one of his Resurrection, even in
Jerusalem it self, and amidst his most implacable Enemies, where, though it
were so easy to discover the bold and manifest cheat, if a cheat at all, that,
yet it should pass without any contradiction of the matter of Fact, and meet
with such prodigious and unparalled entertainment in the Minds of so many
thousands of its Inhabitants. Certainly they must have been puissant and
irresistible Arguments wherewith they could so briskly bear down and vanquish
Jewish stubbornness. Their prejudices were too strong to be overcome by any
weaker proof than evident and undeniable demonstration, and had they not
brought some such thing along with them, they might to as much purpose have
preached to the Stones of the Temple as to the People of Jerusalem. But that, I
say, is the wonder that they should first publish this strange story in the
very place where it was acted, and yet if it were false, not only escape being
convicted of Forgery, which it was impossible they should upon supposition of
its being false; but force great numbers of Persons against their most stubborn
prejudices to own and submit to the truth of their Relation, and from that very
place in a short time to propagate the belief of it all the World over. This is
the thing that I affirm not to be at all possible in the course of humane
Affairs, that a matter of Fact of such a nature and under these circumstances,
if really and indeed false, should ever gain so great a belief of its being
true. I will grant that Mankind may be imposed upon in matters of mere Opinion,
as much as any Man can require, but matter of Fact is of a quite different
nature, that depends not so much upon Men's Understandings as their Senses, and
the Senses of all Mankind are alike, here is no difference between the learned
and the unlearned. And though a false Story may for a while be imposed upon the
common People, yet unless it appear to prove it self true with an evidence
proportionable to its weight, it either dies and vanishes of its own accord, or
is convicted of Forgery by the more wise and judicious, when they come to
enquire into its grounds and pretenses. And yet this Story the more it was
enquired into the more firmly it was believed, and learned Men every where and
of all persuasions, when they came to examine into it, could not bring their
Minds to any issue concerning it, till at length they were forced to resign up
themselves to its full belief.

I have indeed heard some witty Gentlemen, as our fantastic Age very much
abounds with such shrewd persons, compare the first propagation of
Christianity in those parts of the World, with that of the late growth and
spreading of the folly of Quakerism in England, than which nothing could be
more enormously surmised; for setting aside a thousand other defects in the
comparison, it is notorious that that wild and enthusiastic Sect did not set
up upon the pretense of a new Revelation, but only pretended to raise some
foolish and fanatique conceits of their own upon supposition of the truth of an
old one. But if the leaders of that Rabble, when they first appeared about
thirty years since at York and Bristol, had pretended to have wrought in those
great Cities such kind of Miracles as are recorded of our Savior and his
Apostles, no Man can doubt but that they had been long since buried in contempt
and oblivion. And yet that is the case of Christianity, that such a matter of
Fact as that was gained such a firm belief in the place where it was first
published and acted too, and from thence all the World over only by the
undeniable evidence of its own Proofs and Miracles. For the Men of that Age
were every whit as cautious and incredulous as the Wits of ours, and, as I
shall show anon, their Minds were prepossest with stronger prejudices of
Atheism and Infidelity. How then could this Story of Jesus prevail so
effectually upon them but by the undeniable evidence of its truth and
certainty, and when it carried with it nothing in the World whereby it might
bribe their belief, nay, when it labored under all other objections but only
evidence of Truth, I will challenge any sober Man to frame any the least
tolerable Hypothesis how it was so much as possible that it should prevail, had
not its truth been vouched by the most undoubted and unquestionable proofs in
the World.

XX. This is the first invincible Impediment of Christianity, supposing it had
been false; but whether true or false it labored under many other great
disadvantages, that it could never have surmounted, but by the irresistible
evidence and certainty of its truth.

And the first is its contrariety to the Vice and Wickedness of that Age in
which it was first divulged. The World being at that time, as is evident from
the Records that are left of it, extremely debaucht both in its Manners and
Principles. For Julius Caesar having violated all the Laws of his Country, and
overthrown the old Government, that had always kept up a generous sense of
Virtue and Integrity, and by that means chiefly raised it self to that vast
Greatness, that afterward so much exposed it to the attempts of ambitious Men.
(For though that spirit began to work in the time of Marius, and passed down
through all the great Men, Cinna, Sulla and Pompey, all of them struggling for
the sole Sovereignty of so vast an Empire, the design was never completely
compassed but by the boldness and activity of Julius Caesar.) Now the success
of the Caesarean Faction, that were generally Atheists and Epicureans, against
the Patriots of the old State, that were as generally eminent for Worth and
Honor, Virtue and Integrity, and Zeal for the public Good, made the thriving
Principles and Practices quickly come into Fashion and Reputation with the
World. And after the Death of Brutus, we find no such thing as an ancient
Roman, but what he said in passion was seriously and universally embraced as a
great truth, That Virtue was nothing but an empty name. So that if we survey
the Roman History before and after the Usurpation of Caesar, it does not look
like the History of the same Nation; the former abounding with the bravest
examples of Gallantry and Magnanimity, whereas in the latter we are generally
entertained with no other politics than Fraud and Treachery. Even the admired
wisdom of the great Augustus himself was no better than craft and
dissimulation: And though his Successor, Tiberius, be particularly remarqued
for that Vice, it was only because he was not able to act his part so
artificially as his Predecessor had done, who dyed with that particular
comfort to himself that he had so skilfully played the Comedy of humane Life;
and certainly of all Princes upon Record he had the most subtle faculty of
appearing highly honest, without any design of ever being so.

In short, under his Reign all the Principles of Atheism and Impiety were
prevalent in the Court of Rome, that then prescribed Manners to the best part
of the then known World, neither were their Practices disagreeing to their
Principles; for as they cast off all restraints of Virtue and Modesty, so they
entirely devoted themselves to Luxury and Sensuality, and studied nothing else
than to improve their brutish Pleasures to the utmost extravagance of
Enjoyment. And as was the great Court of Rome, so were all the other lesser
Courts of their several Prefects and Governors. And that not only by
imitation but by the natural baseness of the Men themselves. Scarce any but the
worst of Men, that is, Epicureans and Vilains by Principle being preferred by J.
Caesar to Authority in the Empire; though things grew much worse under the
Tyranny of Mark Anthony, a Man kneaded up of Lust and Malice, and the only
reason why he was not more of each was because he was all both; for he would
never, unless for the sake of his Lust, quit his Cruelty; nor ever, unless to
satisfy his Cruelty, forsake his Lust: and as himself was made up of all
manner of Baseness, so he would advance none to preferment but such as had
recommended themselves to his good liking by their more than ordinary
Wickedness. And for that reason it was that Judaea and the parts about it, were
at that time more overrun with Vice and Debauchery than in any former Age; in
that Herod, one of the vilest Men that ever lived, had, by the patronage of
Mark Anthony, obtained their Government, and by a long Reign over them after
his Patron's Death under Augustus, had familiarised all manner of the most
licentious Wickedness to the People, even so much that one half of the leading
Men even among the Jews themselves, that had been so famous through all Ages
for their reverence to their Religion, were no better than open and avowed
Atheists.

Now how was it possible for such a Doctrine as Christianity, that consists of
Precepts of Chastity and Sobriety, of Truth and Honesty, of Kindness and
Charity, and of renouncing the Pleasures of this Life for the Rewards of
another, to make its way into such a wicked World as this? Men of atheistical
Principles are of all others the most stubborn and inflexible, they scorn all
manner of better Information, and will not endure to enquire into the truth of
any thing that might possibly undeceive them; so that there is no way to
overcome Persons so prejudiced and so conceited, unless we can by the mere
evidence of things force them into conviction. And as for Men of luxurious
Lives, they have neither Mind nor Leisure to attend to any thing that may
reclaim them. It is Pain to them to think of parting with their Pleasures, they
will labor to preserve them upon any terms, and as long as they are able to
resist, no information shall be able to fasten on them; and therefore when the
Christian Religion so suddenly reformed infinite numbers from all sorts of
Vices, it must have brought along with it a real Evidence equal to its
pretended Authority; for as it pretended to a Divine Commission, by virtue
whereof it required strict Obedience to all its Commands, so it must have
proved the reality of its Commission by such certain Evidence that it was not
possible for the most refractory Persons to withstand its force; and therefore
when we find such multitudes so wonderfully prevailed upon to quit their most
beloved Lusts and Vices, we have reason from thence only to conclude, that
they were more than convinced of the undeniable truth of its pretenses.

XXI. The next disadvantage of Christianity was its bold and open defiance to
the established and inveterate Religions of the World. For of all prejudices
those of Religion are the strongest, and the older they are, the deeper root
they take. And therefore when its Enemies could plead the antiquity of many
hundred years against it, it could not but be a very difficult task to persuade
them out of such an ancient Prescription. Its mere Novelty was an Objection of
no small force, but when a new and upstart Religion would not be content with
its own Authority, but must disgrace all the settled Religions in the World,
and refuse its own settlement, unless they may be utterly extirpated; this
could not but seem too saucy a demand, especially to Princes and great Men, to
require of them not only to give way to an upstart Sect, but to renounce the
Religion of their Ancestors, confirmed as well by their own Laws as ancient
Custom; and submit themselves and their power to the Authority of a few
Galilaean Fishermen; and this the Authors of that Age say was the main reason
why the Christian Religion was at all adventure rejected by the Roman Senate,
because it would allow none other beside it self.

And first as for the Jewish Religion, beside its very great Antiquity, it was
established by Divine Authority, and therefore with plausible appearance of
reason believed by the Jews to be of eternal Obligation, at least not otherways
reversible but with the same dreadful signs and appearances of the Divine
Presence, wherewith it was at first enacted; and therefore when a young Man
should take upon him to cancel the only true way of worshipping the only true
God, that design seemed so like to Blasphemy and Idolatry, that his very
pretending to it, without any farther enquiry, was, whatever he could say or
do, an invincible prejudice and an unpardonable crime. This is evident through
the whole History of his Life, that the Jews every where concluded him an
Impostor, because he set up against Moses, and then let him work what Miracles
he would, they would regard neither him nor them.

And particularly this was the case of the Controversy when he cured the Man
that was born Blind, when the matter of Fact was evident beyond all
contradiction by the Testimony of his Parents, and by the confession of all the
Neighbors, who knew him to have sat and begged in a certain place for many
years; yet notwithstanding all this the Pharisees concluded against his doing
any Miracles, because he was a Sinner, that is, as they thought, a Blasphemer
of Moses Law; and when the blind Man argues with them that it was such a
Miracle as had never been done from the beginning of the World before, it was
all one for that, they answer all with this peremptory Assertion, We know that
God John 9. 29.
spoke unto Moses; as for this fellow we know not from whence he is. So that
whatever Miracles he worked, they were not to be regarded, because he derogated
from the Authority of Moses.

And therefore Origin very well observes that the difficulty of our Savior's
Work Lib. 2. p. 92.
was much greater than that of Moses, from the great prejudices of the People
against his Undertaking. For Moses had to do with the Off spring of Abraham,
who had all along observed the Law of Circumcision, and those other Rites and
Customs that he had delivered down to his Posterity, and only undertook to
deliver them from a grievous Bondage, and bring them into that happy Land that
God had promised to their Forefathers. But our Savior was sent to a People to
command them to forsake that way of Worship in which they had been educated,
and to prescribe a new model of Religion against an old one that had been
settled by Divine Authority, and therefore instead of being complied with as
Moses was, he was sure to meet with all the fiercest contradiction both of Zeal
and Malice. And for this reason, says he, it was that it was so requisite that
he should do greater Miracles than Moses, or any of the Prophets were recorded
to have done, to convince them that God had given him greater Authority, and so
thereby obliged them to submit to his Discipline as they had hitherto done to
that of Moses and the Prophets. And as the Eternity of the Law of Moses was at
that time an insuperable prejudice against Christianity, so is it to this very
day, as may be seen in the Writings of the Jewish Doctors, who always lay this
supposition at the bottom of their Disputes against the Divine Authority of the
Christian Law.

But of the prejudices of the Jews I shall give a farther account, when I come
to show the reasons of their Infidelity, notwithstanding the Gospel brought all
that evidence along with it, that we pretend it did. And then as for the
Religion of the Gentiles, beside its proud pretense to the greatest Antiquity,
it now valued it self upon a much prouder title of being the Religion of the
Empire; and by reason of the vast extent of that, it was rooted in all parts of
it with more strength and unity than it could have been under several
Governments, and there is nothing that can make People more fond of their
Religion than to possess them with a belief of its Universality. Now when a
Religion so Catholic was settled by the Laws, was owned by the Emperors, and
was made the only Religion of Power and Interest in the World, its Votaries
could not endure to see it treated with scorn and dishonor by an upstart Sect
of Men destitute of all Power and Authority. And for this reason is it that
Pliny, Tacitus and Suetonius inveigh against Christianity with so much scorn
and indignation, not that they had any concern for Religion themselves being
professed Epicureans, and so inwardly as great despisers of Paganism as the
Christians could pretend to be. But they were angry that a Religion abetted by
the Emperors, and the great Statesmen, such as themselves were or pretended to
be, should be so dishonourably born down by a company of superstitious and
despicable Jews.

And that proved another very great disadvantage to Christianity, the force of
Laws and the interest of Government against its reception. In that Statesmen
are ever jealous of all Innovations in Religion as dangerous to the present
Government: so that though themselves look upon all Religion as a mere design
of State-craft, yet they are very zealous for that which they find already
established, as that by which they enjoy their present security, and therefore
vigilant against all alterations as naturally tending to the subversion of the
Civil State. So that it is none of their business to enquire into the pleas of
a new Religion, but its being new is with them a sufficient reason of
proceeding against it, as being Sedition, ipso facto, against the established
Law. And this was the main reason of most of those many severe Edicts and
Rescripts of several Emperors against the Christians, who looked upon their
numerous Assemblies upon pretense of Religion as dangerous Associations against
the State of the Empire: and particularly Trajan, a wise and politic Prince,
who, either because he would not give the Christians the advantage of pleading
Religion or suffering for it; or rather out of his particular jealousy and
fear of Tumults, put in execution against them the Law against the Heteriae,
which forbad all manner of numerous Meetings, upon what account soever, though
only of Friendship or Good-fellowship, for which those Heteriae were first
instituted, so that upon pretense of this Law he seemed not to proceed against
them upon the account of Religion, but as unlawful Riots and Tumults against
the State.

XXII. Now from the concurrence of all these mighty prejudices against
Christianity, it met with all the opposition that Mankind could make it; it was
forced to encounter the Fury of the Multitude, the Zeal of Superstition, the
Hatred of the Jews, the Contempt of the Greeks, the Power of the Romans, the
Pride of Philosophers, and the Policy of Statesmen; and by all these together,
that is, by all means possible was it everywhere harrassed with all the
outrage and cruelty of Persecution. No other party of Men in the World were
ever hunted with that keenness of Malice, or sacrifised with that cheapness and
contempt of humane Blood; and as the Enemies to Christianity supposed it to be
a new thing in the World, they resolved its Punishments should be so too;
invented new methods of Torment, studied all the arts of Pain, and were not
satisfied with the death of Christians, unless they might tire them out of
their Lives with length and variety of Tortures. In short, it wanted not the
utmost opposition that could be made against it by Men or Devils; if we suppose
(as we may for argument sake) that there are any such malignant Beings. And yet
notwithstanding all disadvantages it grew and flourished after such a rate all
the World over, as if it had met with all the contrary ways and methods of
encouragement.

Now what could be the reason of all this? There is no other imaginable account
to be given of it, but that irresistible force of evidence that it gave of its
Truth and Divine Authority. For when every thing else was against it, and yet
notwithstanding it prevailed so wonderfully by the power of its own truth, it
must be clear of all doubt and suspicion that could bear away the Minds of Men
with so great a force against all Arguments and Motives in the World beside.
For I do not urge this at present as an argument of God's Providence being
concerned in its propagation, but for the reasonableness of the thing it self:
viz. that a Doctrine laboring under all these mighty and unparalled
disadvantages should ever have prevaild with such sudden and admirable
success, had it not come attested with the clearest and most irresistible
Proofs. For is it not utterly incredible that an Institution so destitute of
secular Power and Interest, so uncouth to the Principles and Prejudices of
Education, so contrary to the Vices and Inclinations of Men, so contradictory
to the settled Laws, and (what was much more considerable) to the established
Religions of Commonwealths, so much opposed by all the Power, all the Wit, and
all the Zeal in the World, should yet so effectually bear away all resistance,
and force the struggling World in spite of all their opposition to yield up all
that was dear to them to the evidence of its Divine Authority? For seeing it
could have nothing else to recommend it to the World, nay, seeing it had all
other things to oppose it, and yet found such strange and otherwise
unaccountable entertainment, that alone, I say, is a demonstrative proof of its
infinite evidence and certainty. Neither am I ignorant that learned Men both
Ancient and Modern usually ascribe it to the Almighty and miraculous Power of
God overruling the Minds of Men: And the truth is, the thing was so prodigious,
that it is scarce accountable how it could be done without a Miracle.

But though I do not doubt of the secret and inward workings of the Spirit of
God upon the Minds of Men, yet I can by no means allow the reason of any thing
to be resolved into that alone; for if that be the only reason of any Man's
assent, then his assent is unreasonable, and all the account he can give of his
Faith is that he finds himself vehemently inclined to believe he knows not why.
But that is not a proper way of determining rational Creatures, and therefore
we cannot suppose that God would force the Minds of Men to a stronger assent
than the evidence of the thing assented to requires; for that instead of
helping the Understandings of Men would utterly destroy them. And therefore how
strong soever the influences of the Spirit of God were upon the Minds of the
Primitive Christians, as no doubt they were very extraordinary, yet the outward
and rational evidence that he gave them of the truth of Christianity was still
proportionable to that inward confidence that he wrought upon their Minds,
otherwise they had more confidence than they had reason for; and then all that
they had over and above was unreasonable.

Seeing therefore their Faith was so infinitely confident, I shall demonstrate
that the grounds and motives that they had for it were equal to their greatest
assurance, and they were chiefly these two, undeniable Miracles, and undoubted
Tradition; from both which they had so great an assurance of the Christian
Faith, that it was not possible for them to be deceived; and if they had so
much, they had as much as can be desired, because no Man can have more.

XXIII. I have already shown in the beginning of this Discourse the great and
unparalled credibility of the Apostles Testimony, taken by it self, as it
stands upon their own naked Reputation, in that we have all the evidence in the
World that they were sincere and serious in their Design, so that merely by
virtue of their own Authority they might justly challenge the Faith of Mankind.

But to the undoubted Integrity of the Witnesses, God was pleased to add a
more forcible Testimony of his own, by enduing them with a power of working
Miracles; and thereby demonstrating to the World that as they who pretended to
be his Ambassadors were serious and in good earnest in their Design, so was he
too. And in truth, unless he had endued them with this power from above, they
could never have had the courage so much as to have undertaken the work; but
instead of traveling into all parts of the World, to tell a Story to the
People, of which they could not understand one word, as being utter Strangers
to the Language in which they spoke, they must have concluded it a wiser course
to resolve upon mending their old Nets, and betaking themselves to their old
Trade. But this Eusebius has excellently represented to us in their own
Persons. In that when our Savior commanded them Praep. Evang. Lib. 3. Sect. 6.
to go and teach all Nations, they ought to have replied upon him, how is this
possible, that we who are unlearned Persons and understand only our mother
Tongue, should discourse in their several Languages to the Romans, Grecians,
Egyptians, Persians, Armenians, Chaldeans, Scythians, Indians, and all the
other numberless Nations of the barbarous World: And if we cannot (as without a
Miracle we cannot) to what purpose is it to travel from Pole to Pole, and tell
an unintelligible Story to the People. Nay, how can we so much as dream that it
is possible for us to persuade them to renounce their Country Gods, and to
worship a new and unknown Deity? What eloquence, what unheard of power of words
must we be inspired with, to encourage us to set about such an Undertaking, to
reverse all the ancient Laws and Religions in the World, and to introduce every
where not only a different but a contrary state of things? These things (says
he) if they should have objected, he could have returned them no other answer,
had he not prevented the Objection by the promise of his miraculous Assistance.
And therefore, when they were obedient to his command, it is evident that they
were already, by his Divine Works, convinced of his Divine Authority. For that
they believed in him must be granted in that they so readily obeyed him, in a
little time leaving their own native Country to instruct the World in the Faith
of Jesus, and soon saw the promise of his Divine Assistance not only made
good, but abundantly exceeded by their incredible success.

But when they went about such a Work as this, after what manner think you did
they address themselves to the People? Did they go into the Marketplace, and
there summon up an Auditory of all Passengers, or did they apply themselves to
particular Persons? Take which you please, I pray which way did they win their
Attention, when they began their Story at the most ignominious Death of their
Master, whom they set forth as the only Instructour of Mankind, the Son of
God, and Savior of the World? For if they had concealed that part of his
History that related to his Passion and Sufferings, and only trumpeted out his
great Virtues and much greater Miracles, it had been very difficult to overcome
the Faith of Mankind to a report so very strange and in it self incredible. And
yet if they had done this, they might have kept their Story within some bounds
of probability. But when they acknowledged that the same Person, whom they
magnified as a God, lived like a miserable Man, encountered perpetual Affronts
and Contumelies, and at last suffered the Death of the worst and most
ignominious Malefactors, who that heard them, would not laugh at the gross
contradiction of their own Story? Or at least how could any Man be so
credulous, as upon the bare report of unknown Persons to believe that a Person
so shamefully executed, should be so conspicuously risen from the dead and
ascended into Heaven, when he was not able to rescue himself from so
dishonorable an Execution? However who could have been so easy as to forsake
the Religion of their Country, and that way of Worship that had been used, as
they believed, from the beginning of the World, by the mere Authority of a
company of mean and ignorant Mechanics and a crucified Malefactor, who,
notwithstanding his contemptible Life and dishonorable Death, would bear
himself out as the only Son of God? While (says he) I revolve these things in
my Mind, and consider the improbability of the Story in it self, I cannot
imagine how it is possible merely by their own bare report to prevail upon the
Faith of any one Man. And yet when I reflect upon the strange Effect of their
Endeavors, and that such despicable Persons as they were in themselves should
prevail upon such innumerable multitudes of Men, and that not in barbarous and
obscure places only, but in the most famous Cities of Rome, Alexandria,
Antiochia; nay, in all parts of the World, Europe, Asia and Africa, I am forced
to enquire into the rational Account of so strange an Event, and find that
nothing could ever have brought it about but a manifest Divine Power, whereby
they were able when they pleased, as we find in their Records, to work
Miracles, and that alone was more than enough to vanquish and subdue the minds
of Men to their Authority. For when they saw their Miracles, they could not but
be concerned to enquire by what Means they wrought such Effects: And when they
were told that they were empowered by Jesus, and did whatever they did by
virtue of his Authority, that alone overruled their Minds, and without farther
proof commanded entire submission to his Doctrine. So that it was not the
evidence of the thing it self, nor the credit of their Testimony, but the
undeniable power of God discovering it self in their miraculous Actions, that
so easily subdued the World before them.

And it is impossible (as Origin observes) that the Apostles of our Lord
without these Contra Cells. l. 1. p. 34.
miraculous Powers should ever have been able to have moved their Auditors, or
persuaded them to desert the Institutions of their Country, and embrace their
new Doctrine, and having once embraced it, to defend it to the death and defy
all manner of dangers in its defense. But then, as it was impossible to have
wrought this wonderful change in the World without these miraculous Powers, so
with them it was impossible for Men to withstand so clear a demonstration of
Divine Authority. And therefore they did not so properly convert the World by
their Preaching as by their Actions, whilst they performed such things as
(though they themselves had never opened their Minds) proclaimed their Divine
Commission. And when People were once convinced of that, little persuasion
would serve the turn to engage them to the belief of that Doctrine, which by
their works they had already proved to be of Divine Authority. And this, if we
consult the Apostolical History, was the usual method of their proceeding,
first to show a Miracle and then to declare its meaning.

Thus the first time that they appeared in public, after their Commission to
preach the Gospel to the utmost parts of the Earth, was at the great Festival
of Pentecost, when Proselytes of all Nations resorted to Jerusalem, to whom
they preached in their several Languages; and this being noised abroad that a
few illiterate Fishermen were all on a sudden inspired with the gift of
speaking all the Languages of the known and habitable World, curiosity brought
great multitudes to hear them, and when the multitude was convinced of and
amassed at the Miracle, then was it a proper time for Saint Peter to begin his
Sermon of the Resurrection of Jesus, and prove it by their own Testimony. This
Jesus has God Acts 2. 32.
raised up, whereof we are all Witnesses. That is, we that are, as you see,
endued with this miraculous gift of speaking all Languages, in order to our
preaching in the name of Jesus to all Nations, do here assure you that we were
no less than Eyewitnesses of his Resurrection. And there lay the main strength
and efficacy of Saint Peter's Sermon, it was the Miracle that so soon converted
thousands to his Doctrine.

So again, when it was blazoned abroad that the famous Cripple, that was so
well known to every Boy in the City to have kept for so many years together his
begging stage at the chief Gate of the Temple, styled Beautiful, because made,
as Josephus informs us, of Corinthian Brass, was so De Bello Jud. l. 7, 12.
miraculously healed by one of the company only by a word speaking, this could
not but inflame their curiosity, and every Man was concerned to satisfy
himself in the truth or falsehood of a report so near and yet so prodigious. And
when they had (as it was an easy matter) assured themselves of its truth and
reality, this could not but provoke them to an eager enquiry after the meaning
of so strange a thing. And when they were assured that the Miracle was wrought
by the Followers of that Jesus, who was lately crucified, and that they
declared themselves Eye witnesses of his Resurrection from the dead, and
withal professed that they were endued with this power of Miracles from
Heaven, only for an undoubted evidence and confirmation of the truth of their
Testimony, they had not power to withstand the force of such a mighty and
astonishing demonstration. And it was this demonstration of the Spirit and of
Power (as Saint Paul styles it) rather than the strength of their Arguments, as
cogent as they were, that first baffled the unbelieving World into
Christianity, and forced in the assents of Men to the truth and Divine
Authority of its Doctrine. They did not put their Auditors to the trouble of
examining the validity of their Testimony, but prevented all enquiries by this
infallible confirmation. The evidence of their Miracles was such an
irrefragable Argument of the truth of their Testimony, as surmounted the power
of all other demonstration. And what rational Man would stay to expect any
other proof of a Divine Testimony, that has seen it unquestionably attested by
a Divine Power? Or who could doubt and dispute, after he had seen Devils
dispossessed, the Sick healed, and the dead raised? This was such an almighty
attestation to their preaching, that it upbraided away their Scruples, and bore
away their Understandings. And by this means it was that the Gospel prevailed
so easily and so speedily over all the World. Its first preachers converted
whole Cities and Nations in a moment, and founded new Churches upon one
undeniable Miracle; and nothing less, considering all circumstances of things,
and all the disadvantages under which it labored, could so soon have
propagated the Gospel over all the World.

And thus if we trace the Apostolical History, we scarce find any thing
transacted without a Miracle, insomuch that the People at length familiarly
resorted to them for the cure of all kind of Diseases, Acts 5. 12. And this
power was so vulgarly known at that time, that Saint Paul insists upon it as
the proof of his true Apostleship, Romans 15. 18, 18. 2 Cor. 12. 12. which had
been too absurd a thing to allege to his Followers in confutation of his
Enemies, if it had been a mere Fiction; for if it were they knew it to be so,
when he appeals to the Signs and Wonders he had already wrought among them, and
if he had wrought none they could not but convict him of falsehood. But though I
have already proved the certainty of the Records of the New Testament, and so
might from thence rationally enough make out the truth of these Apostolical
Miracles; and though I have in part proved the sufficiency of the Tradition of
the Church to attest both them and all things contained in them, and shall anon
more distinctly show the undoubted and uninterrupted conveyance of it from the
very Apostles themselves, so that if they had not been true, they could never
have gained belief; yet in this present Argument I will not build upon these or
any other suppositions: and indeed if I suppose them, this Argument would be
needless; for once granting the Scriptures to be true and authentic Records of
the Apostles actions, to what purpose is it to go about to prove that they were
endued with a power of Miracles, when the Record alone is an undoubted proof of
it? And therefore I only argue from the nature of the thing it self, viz. That
it is impossible the Christian Faith, lying under all those disadvantages above
represented, could ever have been propagated with that speed and facility that
it was all the World over, any other way than by this power of working
Miracles; and on the contrary, that supposing this evidence that they gave the
World by their Miracles, that then it was natural and almost necessary that
they should meet with the success they did. Here then lies the force of my
present Argument, that when it was impossible they should compass their design
any other way, and when it was natural, if they took this course, to succeed in
it, and when it is certain that they had such wonderful success, that is a
manifest Argument that they were endued with such a power of Miracles as is
reported of them. And therefore I did not produce those Testimonies of
Scripture but now alleged as proofs to justify the truth of the Argument, but
only as instances to exemplify the practice of it, v. g. how incredible it is
that 3000 People, when they heard the Apostles affirm at Whitsontide that the
same Jesus, whom they had seen so shamefully executed at Easter, was risen from
the Grave and ascended into Heaven, should so immediately believe them upon
their bare Report; but when they beheld that miraculous effect of the Holy
Ghost in them, whereby such illiterate Persons were enabled to speak all manner
of Languages, that alone could not but satisfy them of the truth of their
Testimony. So that I argue not from the truth of the Record but from the nature
of the thing it self, which could not have been done any other way than as it
is recorded to have been done.

I might here also confirm the truth of their Miracles by the confession of
their greatest Enemies, in that I do not find that ever any of them denied them
to have been done, but instead of that ascribe them to the power of Magic,
though how foolish that evasion is I shall show when I come to consider their
evasions to this Argument; at present this very surmise is a plain confession
of the reality of the thing it self, and that goes a great way as to evidence
when coming out of the mouth of an Adversary; but this having suggested, I
shall not farther insist upon it.

XXIV. Only there is one thing remaining that adds great force to the strength
of this Argument, viz. That this power was not merely confined to the
Apostolical Age, but was continued down to the next Ages of the Church; which
if true, it is an undeniable Evidence of the truth of the Apostolical Miracles
in particular, and of the Divinity of the Christian Religion in general. And
yet of the truth of these we have no one thing for which we have better
Records. It is unanimously attested by all Writers of those times, and that in
such a public and extraordinary way, as raises their Testimony up to certain
demonstration, for they do not barely report it, but they upbraid it to all
their Adversaries as a thing undeniable; they challenge Emperors, Proconsuls,
the whole Senate in their Apologies and public Writings to convince them by
experiment; they urge it in their Disputes with learned Men, and dare them to
contradict it; and not only offer to cast the whole Controversy upon this one
proof, but their Lives too.

Now all this they could never have been so foolish or so impudent to have
done, if it had not been true; or if they were, they could not have escaped
that disgrace that was due to their folly and impudence. And yet they were so
far from being ever convicted of forgery, that it was chiefly by virtue of
these challenges that the Christian Faith so wonderfully prevailed in all
places. Many and pregnant are the passages to this purpose in the Writings of
Just in Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Saint Cyprian, Saint Austin, Origin,
Arnobius, Lactantius, Minutius Felix, Prudentius, Firmicus, and indeed all,
that appeared in defense of the Christian Faith in the first Ages of the
Church: and though most of them have been often alleged by modern Authors,
yet being of a peculiar use as to my Argument, when joined to the Apostolical
Miracles, it will be very requisite to represent at one view the most material
passages to this purpose.

I begin with Just in Martyr, who lived in the next Age to the Apostles, who
tells the Apol. 1.
Emperor and Senate, that they may, if they please, inform themselves of our
Lord's power over their Demons by what was daily done under their own eyes,
when so many who had been tortured and possessed by them, throughout the whole
World and in the very City of Rome it self, whom all their several kinds of
Exorcists were not able to relieve, had been often cured by Christians through
the name of Jesus that was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and that at this
very time they still cured them. And the same thing he frequently upbraids to
Trypho the Jew in their personal Conference, which, had it been a mere Fable,
he could never have done with so much confidence; or if he had, he could not
have passed without confutation, especially when in a short time after he
published it to the World.

And in the same Age Irenaeus proves against the Heretics the right succession
of Adv. Haeres. l. 2. c. 56, 57.
the Catholic Church to the Apostles from their power of working the same
Miracles, as casting out Devils, foretelling things to come, curing the Sick by
imposition of hands, and raising the Dead, many whereof, he says, conversed
among them many years after; beside innumerable other Gifts, which the Church
throughout the World does every day freely exercise in the name of Jesus Christ
crucified under Pontius Pilate, for the benefit of Mankind.

But Tertullian, as his manner is, speaks Apol. c. 23.
very daringly, for having convinced the Heathens of their folly in worshipping
their Gods, by Argument, he challenges them to do it by matter of Fact. Set,
says he, before your public Seats of Judgment any person possessed, as you
suppose, by some Demon, and there let any Christian only command him to
confess what he is, and the Spirit shall as certainly acknowledge himself to be
a Devil, as at other times he confidently pretends to be a God. Nay, take any
person that you suppose inspired by any of your greatest Deities, be it Ceres
or AEsculapius, and if they do not confess themselves to be Devils, not daring
to lie to a Christian, let that foolish Christian, that undertakes it and fails
of doing it, pay for his confidence with his blood. What can be more evident
than this matter of fact? What more satisfactory than this kind of proof? The
certainty of the truth lies before you, its own power will maintain it self,
for it is a ridieulous thing to suspect that this can be done by any magic
tricks, believe not one word that I say, if your own Eyes and Ears do not force
you to it.

What a bold challenge is here to appeal to the Senses of their Enemies, and
that with the hazard and pawn of their Lives? It is such an height of assurance
as I think nothing can exceed, though his appeal to Scapula seems to equal it,
when he refers him to the Officers of his own Court, some of whose Servants had
been healed by Christians; but not to insist, says he, upon inferior People, I
could name persons of Quality and Reputation that have been so cured, and
particularly Severus the Father of the Emperor Antoninus Caracalla, who was so
cured by Proculus, whom he ever after highly esteemed, and entertained him in
his Court till his Death. And to this he subjoins the Testimony of M. Aurelius
concerning the Miracle of the Christian Soldiers in the German Expedition,
That when the Imperial Army was reduced to great streights, and ready to perish
through thirst, and in that extremity of weakness forced to Battle by the
Enemy, the Christians, by the power of their Prayers, immediately drew down
great showrs of Rain upon their own Camp, and Thunder and Lightning upon the
Enemies. This he here urges upon the President Scapula as a thing vulgarly
known; and in his Apology to the Senate proves it by the Letters that the
Emperor had not long before sent to themselves. Which certainly he could never
have been so presumptuous as to have done, had there then been no such Letters
extant: and yet Scaliger, Animad. Eusebius. p. 222.
to make it as doubtful as he can, has found out a very lean Conjecture, viz.
That Tertullian does not positively affirm the thing, but only says, Si
Literae M. Aurelii requirantur, If you make search after the Letter of M.
Aurelius, from whence he infers that Tertullian himself never saw it, because
of his hypothetical way of expression.

But it is a strange thing that so great a Critic as Scaliger should not know
that there is no one form of Speech more vulgar with all kind of Writers, than
when they are most assured of any thing, to express it hypothetically, and
thereby refer what themselves certainly know to the farther enquiry of others;
so that the most natural meaning of the words is this, viz. As to this matter I
need not take pains to satisfy you, which you may do your selves, if you
please, by examining the Emperor's own Letter to your own House. Neither is
his suggestion much more weighty when he infers that this Letter was not extant
in the time of Eusebius, because if it had, so diligent a Writer would have
preserved a Copy of it. And so it is very likely he would, had it been extant
in the Greek Tongue, but being written in the Latin to which he was a stranger,
it lay out of the compass of his diligence. Yes, but, says he, it was the
custom of Eusebius to translate Latin Monuments into the Greek Tongue, as he
has several passages out of Tertullian. One would think that Eusebius had
familiarly cited the Writings of Tertullian, whereas he never quoted but one
short Book of his, and that is his Apology, which it is very probable that
Eusebius himself did not translate, but made use of another's translation,
especially when it is plain by those few passages that he has made use of, that
it is very short of the usual care and diligence of Eusebius. So that though
Scaliger have proved the Letter now extant at the end of Justin Martyr to be
spurious, as is too evident from its unskilful inscription, yet that there
were such Letters then written is as evident from this Appeal of Tertullian to
the Senate it self not long after the thing was done.

However, as for the substance of the Story, that was so well known as to be
painted upon Tables, some whereof Themistius says he saw in his time, the
Emperor himself being drawn with his Hands and Eyes lift up, and the Soldiers
receiving the Rain in their Head-pieces. Neither is it less vouched by Heathen
than by Christian Writers, as Dion, Julius Capitolinus, Claudian, Lampridius,
who attribute it partly to the Emperor's own prayers to Jupiter, but chiefly
to the enchantments of Chaldean or Jewish Magicians, i. e. Christians, who by
the Heathens were looked upon as no other than Jews, and were at that time
generally esteemed Magicians for those strange things that were reported to be
done by them. So that these very Writers have unwittingly cast the honor of
this Miracle upon the Christians alone, in that only they, at least no other
Jews were at that time famous for Magic, by which these Writers suppose it to
have been effected. However the matter of Fact being put past question by so
unanimous an attestation of it, I leave it to the judgment of any Man of common
sense whether it were done by Magic or by Miracle.

But with as much assurance as Tertullian insists upon the Miracles of
Christians, Origin, if it be possible, out-does him, sending numberless
challenges upon this point. Here he begins both his l. 1. p. 5.
dispute and his triumph over Celsus. We have such a proof of the Divinity of
our Discipline, as your Greekish way of demonstration cannot afford, that which
the Apostle calls the demonstration of Spirit and Power, i. e. Prophesies and
Miracles; and of the truth of the latter beside many other Proofs we have this
assured evidence that we see Instances of it even at this day. And when Celsus
p. 7.
sets it at the front of his Calumnies that the Christians cast out Devils by
Diabolical Enchantments and Invocations, Origin insults over the Calumny,
because, says he, whatever they do, all the World knows it is done by
invocating Christ's not the Devil's name. Though beside that, this is a plain
confession from an Epicurean, who really believed there was no such thing as a
Devil, that the Christians did something so extraordinary, that no probable
account could be given of them, unless they were done by some power more than
humane. And so again Origin having asserted the certainty of the Apostolical p.
35.
Miracles, both from the wonderful success of their Doctrine and the undoubted
Records of them, he farther proves it by those many Instances and Examples of
it, that were to be seen at that time, of many whereof himself had been an
Eyewitness; and though Celsus and other such Skeptical and Atheistical
Persons, that are beforehand resolved to believe nothing of this kind, may make
themselves merry with it, yet God bears Witness with my own Conscience that I
do not endeavor by any falsehoods but by various miraculous Examples to
recommend the Divine Religion of Jesus. So that here he does not barely vouch
the truth of his Assertion, but burdens his Conscience with it, which is no
less than attesting it upon Oath. And in another place, when Celsus seoffingly
asks what wonderful things p. 80.
our Savior did at his Passion, Origin answers that he could tell him of a
great many both out of the Christian and Heathen Records, but yet quitting them
all, it is more than enough for the satisfaction of all that are ingenuous,
that at this day Diseases are cured only by virtue of his name. And again,
that himself had seen many, who by l. 3. p. 124.
having the name of God and Christ called over them, had been delivered from
the greatest Evils, Frenzy and Madness, and infinite other Distempers, which
neither Men nor Devils had been able to cure. And speaking elsewhere of the
Christians l. 7.
power over Devils, this, says he, is familiarly put in practice by the vulgar
sort of Christians, the grace of Christ thereby discovering the
contemptibleness and infirmity of the Devils, when there was no need (as your
Philosophers dream) of learning or any thing extaordinary in order to their
Ejection. I might add diverse other passages out of his Writings, but these are
enough, if not too many.

After him follows Minatius Felix a famous Advocate at Rome, who with the same
assurance appeals to the very Senses of his Adversaries. Every Man knows (says
he) and you your selves, that the Devils, whenever they are tortured and vexed
out of the Bodies that they possess, by the Prayers of Christians, are forced
to confess themselves to be but Devils; even Saturn, Serapis and Jupiter, and
whatsoever other Demon you worship are forced to confess what they are, and you
may be sure that they would not belie themselves especially in your presence;
and therefore we only desire you to take their own Testimony and their own
confession. For when they are adjured by the name of the only true God, it
puts them into tremblings and convulsion fits, and forces them to quit their
possession.

And in the same manner does Saint Cyprian challenge Demetrian, a stubborn and
a prejudiced Enemy, to come and see the Demons whom he worshipped how they were
as it were whipped by Christians out of the Bodies that they possessed, when,
weeping and howling they confess that the time of their Judgment is come, come
you and satisfy your self that what I affirm, is true. But there is no end of
these challenges in the primitive Writers of the Christian Church, and I am
tired with so often tranfcribing the same thing, and therefore if any Man
desire it, he may read it repeated in Eusebius contra Hieroclem, c. 1. in
Lactantius de Justitia, l. 2. c. 15. l. 4. c. 27. l. 5. c. 21, 22. in Firmicus
de Errore profanae Religionis, in Prudentius Apotheof. in Theodoret de curand.
Graec. affect. Sermon. 3.

And now after all, it is no doubt very credible that such a number of learned
and sober Men, that lived in such remote and distant places, should be such
impudent Sots and Fools, as to publish the truth of such things upon their own
certain knowledge, to appeal to the Senses of their greatest Adversaries, to
challenge them to convince them by trial and experiment, and to devolve the
issue of the whole cause upon the event, and that with the pawn of their Lives,
in the face of the Sun, in their public disputes with Philosophers, and
Apologies to Emperors and Proconsuls, it is likely (I say) that they should do
all this, had it all been a manifest and palpable Fiction.

XXV. This is that mighty demonstration of power, to which the primitive
Christians constantly appealed with the greatest assurance of Mind to the very
face of their fiercest Enemies. How then could they avoid its force? by denying
it? Never, nay they confess it as a thing undeniable. Thus Hierocles freely
grants our Savior's Miracles, Eusebius. adv. Hier. l. 1.
but then he says that they only proved him to be a Divine Man, but not what
he pretended to be, a God. But if they were true, then whatever he was, they
prove him to be what he pretended to be, and that is enough to our present
purpose against Paganism and Infidelity, viz. That he came from God, and after
that whether he were to be truly and properly to be styled God, or only
esteemed of as an Ambassador from him is a dispute that supposes his Divine
Commission. So that this very confession of Hierocles proves no less, because
we all know that he professed to teach and act by no less Authority.

In the next place the Emperor Julian does not deny but diminish the wonder of
our Savior's Miracles, in that there is nothing so very remarkable recorded of
him, unless to cure the Lame and the Blind, and to cast out Devils in the Towns
of Galilee may be reckoned among the works of greatest magnificence. But this
is objected rather like an Emperor than a Philosopher. For, as Huetius
Demonst. Evang. prop. 9. cap. 39. sect. 2.
very well replies to it, it is the greatest work of ambitious Princes to raise
Armies, to dispeople Nations, to erect prodigious Buildings, here to demolish a
great City, and there to reedifie a greater. But alas these are works within
the power of Art and Nature, and are to be wrought out by the wit or the
industry of Men, whereas those that were wrought by Jesus were quite of another
stamp, and such as could never have been effected by any power less than
Divine. These are works truly magnificent and becoming the greatness of the Son
of God, and therefore it was very weakly objected of a great pretender to
Philosophy that he did nothing so extraordinary, when to raise one Man from the
Grave proceeds from a power that infinitely exceeds that of Alexander or Caesar
in sending so many millions thither. But the most usual shifts made use of to
evade the force of this Argument, is either to ascribe all this train of
Miracles to the power of Magic, or to vye against them the wonderful works of
other Men, that never made any such lofty pretenses. And at this lock we find
Celsus at every turn, and whenever he is pressed hard, he still takes shelter
in one of these evasions, and for that reason we cannot avoid to take notice of
them.

And first as for the pretense of Magic, its own vanity is its own
confutation, for if he were such a Magician as is pretended, V. Eusebius. Them. Ev.
l. 3. 6.
then either himself was the first Inventour and Master of his own Art, or he
learnt it from others; if he had no Teacher, and yet acquired the skill of
doing things so extraordinary, that alone seems something divine and
wonderful, that a young Man without Learning, without Books, without Tutours,
without Instructions, should by the strength of his own Faculties arrive to an
higher degree of knowledge than all the learned Men in the World beside; for it
cannot be denied that the Actions recorded of him infinitely exceed the very
pretenses of all others. Yes but, say they, he had Masters in Egypt from whom
he learnt all those Magic Mysteries, by which he afterward made himself so
famous in Judaea. But why then do we hear of no such eminent Magicians at that
time either in Egypt or any where else beside himself? Why was there no fame of
them in the World before his Accusation? Why was there not any the least memory
of them preserved, whilst his Name is so universally celebrated? or when did
any Magician from the beginning of the World, either among the Greeks or
Barbarians do such things as he did?

But what need I say more, our Savior's works themselves are the fullest
confutation of this vain pretense, for whatever the powers of Magic may be, no
Man can ever believe that any thing less than a Divine Power could with a word
speaking cure all manner of Diseases, give sight to Men born Blind, recover
dying Persons at a distance, and raise the Dead themselves. To ascribe such
actions as these merely to Magic is a conceit so utterly extravagant, that it
were an affront to the understanding of Mankind, at least at this time, to
think it needed any other confutation beside its own impossibility. Though if
any Man will be so humoursomly credulous in his Infidelity as to pretend some
such suspicion, I shall only refer him to a smart Discourse of Lib. 1.
Arnobius in answer to it, who first pursues all our Savior's miraculous
actions and the manner of their performance, and then appeals to the common
sense of Mankind concerning each particular, how it was possible that they
could ever have been effected by any power less than Divine. But in my Opinion
this thing is so evident of it self that at this time it would be a very
needless piece of Industry to spend so much pains upon it, whatever it might
have been in his Age, when it was so easy, and indeed so usual a thing to
impose upon the superstitious vulgar with such vain Romances. Insomuch that the
Enemies to Christianity were not content to persuade them that Christ was a
Magician, but told them that he was a Teacher of Magic too, and writ a Book to
instruct his Disciples in the same Art, especially Peter and Paul to whom he
inscribed it. So ignorantly do these Calumniatours falsify, when it is so well
known that our Savior had left the World a considerable time before Paul
became his Disciple; but beside that the story is altogether groundless and
without proof; and if it were not, yet it confutes it self by its own silliness
and absurdity, viz. That the Apostles should learn to do those things that
they did by Rules of Art. But either these Men that tell us of this magic Book
have seen it, or they have not; if they have not, they speak at random; if they
have, why are they not able to do the same things themselves? why do they not
cure their sick Friends, or conjure them out of their Graves? As for the Fable
of the Jews, that our Savior had stolen out of the Temple the Shem Hamporash,
or the Name of God written in its proper Characters, which they say it was not
lawful for them vulgarly to do, and by virtue of that was enabled to work all
kind of Miracles, it is a Fable so very despicable, that I am ashamed to repeat
it, and therefore much more scorn to confute it.

XXVI. Their next evasion to this Argument is to vye other Stories with that of
our Savior and his Apostles, and thereby to abate either their wonder or their
credit; and this they chiefly do as to the Resurrection, especially Celsus,
who Orig. adv. Cells. l. 2.
has in this point more than any other shown the strength of his Malice and the
weakness of his Cause. And he is so weak as to fetch Testimonies out of the
fabulous Age it self, and to compare the descents of Orpheus and Hercules into
Hell, and of Rampsinitus, who went thither to play at Tables with Ceres, with
our Savior's Refurrection; but such trifles as these are to be laughed at, not
to be answered; and therefore in the next Book he pieces up these Fables out of
the Poets with some Examples out of Historians; but those so remote, so
obscure, so lamentably attested, and so altogether without any grounds or
motives of belief, that the Metamorphoses of the Poets are scarce more
incredible. And therefore Origin very well puts it to him whether he believes
the stories that he relates, or not; if he does not, then they are nothing to
his purpose; but if he does, then he shows his strange partiality that whilst
he rejects the story of our Savior, he believes things so ill-vouched in
comparison of it. For it is not the matter of the Narrative but the motives of
credibility that are the ground and reason of our Assent, and the same Relation
may either be a mere Fable or an undoubted Truth as the matter of Fact it self,
and the only thing that makes the difference is the Testimony wherewith it is
vouched, and that is the only difference between the story of our Savior's
Resurrection, that is so strongly confirmed by all that Testimony that I have
represented; whereas the Tales that they oppose to it, are destitute of all
manner of proof, and when pursued home to their original Authority appear no
better than poetic Fables.

The first and chiefest of them is that of Aristeas Proconnefius, who is
reported by Herodotus to have often died and lived again. But upon what
Authority? Nothing but an old-wives Tradition among the People. But to whom did
he appear? First to the People of Proconnesus, and between two or three hundred
years after to those of Metapontum. How then was any Man at that distance of
time able to affirm that it was the same Man? But as vain a Fable as it is, it
is not, as Huetius Demonst. Evang. c. 142. 6.
conjectures, without some ground of History, in that there was such a Man as
Aristeas of great Authority in the Town of Proconnesus about the Reign of
Cyrus; but beside him there was another in the fabulous Age, the Son of Apollo,
whom the Poets feigned to have taken a sudden flight to Heaven; now it was
easy to report of the one what was feigned of the other, especially by his own
Countrymen, it being the custom of the Greeks to apply the deeds of their Gods
to the honor of their own Citizens; and here they had an especial advantage
from the Identity of their Names, and that is the most natural foundation of
the whole story, that he was Namesake with one of whom these things had been
fabled of old time. Another is, that there was a Poem called Arimaspea falsely
ascribed to this Aristeas; where the Poet begins, as the usual manner of Poets
is, with the imagination of his being conveyed out of himself by Apollo to a
certain place where he might have the most convenient Prospect of what he was
to describe. Now what he thus spoke in a Poetic Scheme, they afterward
understood in rigor of Speech, and when once the mistake was raised, it easily
supported it self among the common People, from whom Herodotus, as himself
confesses, a long time after received it. Now is not this a worthy story to vye
with our Savior's Resurrection, when this has all the proofs in the World of
its truth and certainty; that not one, but on the contrary all the signs of
folly and fiction? And it were easy to give the same Account of Cleomedes,
Hermotimus, Epimenides, but the stories are so apparently fabulous, and so
utterly void of all original Authority, and so very like mere Mythology, that
seriously to confute them were to betray my own Understanding and affront my
Readers.

But beside these Romances of Antiquity they insist upon some few Miracles of a
later date, but those too so slenderly attested, that only to compare them is
enough to destroy them. Those of most seeming credit are the stories of
Vespasian and Apollonius Tyanaeus. As for Vespasian, he was strangely befooled
with the Ambition of being the Messiah, that is as he understood it, the
Monarch of the World, which some say was the first rise and occasion of his
Glory; for being naturally inclined to an easy belief of Prophesies and
Predictions, and there being at that time (as the Roman Historians attest) a
strong and unanimous Opinion among the Eastern People of an Universal Monarch,
that was foretold by some ancient Prophets about that time to come out of
Judaea, he first applies this Prophecy to himself and then applies himself to
fulfill it. Percrebuerat Orient toto (says In Vita Vespas.
Suetonius) vetus and constans Opinio, esse in fat is ut eo tempore Judaea
profecti rerum potirentur. And so Tacitus, Pluribus persuasio inerat antiquis
Lib. 5. Histor.
Sacerdotum literis contineri, eo ipso tempore ut valesceret Oriens,
profectique Judaea rerum potirentur. And this, he says, was the main reason of
the Rebellion and ruin of the Jews, the application of this Prophecy to
themselves, whereas it is evident from all circumstances that it marked out
Vespasian and Titus.

And then beside the Prophesies themselves, he was grossly abused (as vainglory
is sufficiently credulous) by the flatteries of Josephus, who accommodated all
the Characters and Descriptions of the Messiah to his Person and the
circumstances of his Affairs. And not only so, but he added great authority to
his Prediction by his great confidence, presevering in his flattery in spite of
Vespasian's unkindness; for when he had cast him into Prison, Josephus made
light of it, and assured himself and his Friends, that he should in a short
time be delivered by Vespasian himself, but that it should not be done till
after he was possessed of the Empire, Unus ex nobilibus captivis Josephus, cum
conjiceretur in vincula, constantissime Suet. in Vespas. c. 5.
asseveravit fore, ut ab eodem brevi solveretur, verum jam Imperatore. And it
seems he was so taken with this Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 12.
conceit of his Messiahship, that he is said to have searched after and slain
all that pretended to have been of the posterity of David, thereby to secure
the Title to himself against all Rivals and Competitours.

Flusht with these pleasing Omens in Judaea, but much more with some answerable
success, finding all his Competitours removed but only Vitellius, whom he
feared least of all, he repairs to Rome, and by the way visits Egypt to secure
those parts, or to fulfill a Sibyllan Prophecy; and here he was more abused
with the flatteries of Apollonius Tyanaeus than he had been before by Josephus;
for he was no sooner come to Alexandria (where that wandering Pedant happened to
be at that time) but he beggs of him his confirmation of those Omens that he
brought along with him from Judaea, begging of him upon his Philost. l. 5. c. 9.
knees to make him Emperor; to whom Apollonius with the state and authority of
a God, answered I have made thee so, viz. by my Interest with the Gods, and he
so far gratified the vanity of the Man, as to seem to receive the Empire at his
hands, and thus was he assured of his Empire by Men of greatest Reputation for
both Religions; for as there was no Jew at that time to be compared to Josephus
for knowledge and learning in the Antiquities of his own Nation; so Apollonius
was then the most famous and renowned Saint in the World for the Heathen
Religion: now whilst he stayed at Alexandria, a Blind and a Lame Man, being
warned so to do by the God Serapis, address themselves to him for a Cure, and
obtain it; so that considering the circumstances of the story by it self, it
looks so like fraud and flattery as to betray it self. For the report of his
having been abused into the conceit of being the Messiah in Judaea, being
probably come to Alexandria, where great numbers of Jews resided, it is likely
that they would not come short of their Countrymen in doing honor to the
Emperor, and so put these two counterfeits upon the design, and there are
enough of such dissembling Cripples to be had in great Cities; for it being
foretold that the Messiah when he came should among other Miracles cure the
Lame and the Blind, they thought it an acceptable piece of flattery thus to
way-lay his Ambition: or rather this design was set on foot by the Egyptians, a
fawning, crafty and flattering sort of People; but chiefly by Apollonius, for
the honor of that Religion for which he was so zealous, and therefore by this
artifice confirmed his own predicton of the Empire by the Authority of his
Gods, for they were sent on their Errand by Serapis. But whoever contrived it,
and however it pleased the Emperor's humor, it at first surprised him, so as
to move his laughter and scorn, and to refuse the attempt with a very great
deal either of seeming or real Reluctance; though at last he suffered himself
to be overcome by the great importunity of the bystanders and the assurance of
the Physicians that the thing was possible, and then performed it in public
with all imaginable pomp and solemnity, either as if himself had been
beforehand privy to the plot, or had now smelt out the design of the Complement.

Now what wise Man could compare this one theatrical piece of Court-flattery
with all the Miracles of our Savior and his Apostles? the mere suspicion of
these pretended Cripples being counterfeits, at least the absolute uncertainty
of it, destroys its credit; whereas the impossibility of suspecting any fraud
or flattery in our Savior's Miracles is an undoubted demonstration of their
reality. Beside that, the Emperor was assured by the Physicians that the Men
were not past a natural Cure, and so not to be compared with our Savior's
Miracles, most whereof were done upon Persons naturally incurable. But to wave
this, I cannot give so much credit to a story that smells so rankly of
imposture as to suppose the possibility of its truth, and therefore I shall
only desire the Reader to compare it as he finds it under so many
disadvantages of suspicion, with the credibility of all those motives of belief
that we have produced for the History of our Savior's Life, Death and
Resurrection, and then leave it to his own ingenuity to judge whether it be
reasonable to oppose one story so miserably suspicious to a thousand others
guarded with all the advantages of proof against all possible cavils and
exceptions.

XXVII. But the Man of Wonders is Apollonius Tyanaeus of whom they boast and
insult as the true Heathen Messiah; in that he wrought not, as Vespasian did,
one or two chance Miracles, but his whole Life was all prodigy, and equal to
our Savior's both for the number and the wonder of his Works. But here first
we have in part already shown what undoubted Records we have of the Life of
Jesus, whereas all the credit of Apollonius his History depends upon the
Authority of one single Man, who, beside that he lived an hundred years after
him, ventured nothing, as the Apostles did, in confirmation of its truth, but
only composed it in his Study, thereby, as appears from his frequent
digressions, to take occasion of communicating all the learning he had raked
together to the World. Nay, so far was he from incurring any loss by the Work,
that he was set upon it by a great Empress, whose religious Zeal in the Cause
would be sure to see him well rewarded. And though he made use of the
Commentaries of Damis, the inseparable Companion of Apollonius, yet he
confesses that Damis himself never published his own Commentaries, but that a
Friend of Damis communicated them to the Empress, which himself might probably
have forged (as is common in Courts) to pick her pocket. However, as for Damis
himself it is evident, from Philostratus his whole Story, that he was a very
simple Man, and that Apollonius only picked him up as a fit Sancho Panche to
exercise his Wit upon, so that upon all occasions we find him not only
baffling the Esquire in Disputes but breaking Jests upon him, which he always
takes with much thankfulness and more humility, still admiring his Master's
Wisdom but much more his Wit.

But after all, what the Story of Damis was, or whether there were ever any
such Story, we have no account unless from Philostratus himself, and therefore
we must resolve it all into his Authority alone. And there it is evident that
he was neither a God nor a Divine Man, as his Friends boasted, nor a Magician
or Conjurer as his Enemies imagined, but a mere fanatic and pedantick
Pythagorean, that for the honor of his Sect traveled, as many others have
done, into all parts of the World, and when he returned home told his
Countrymen that all Men renowned for Wisdom all the World over were of the
Sect of the Pythagoreans; and then for the advancement of their Authority told
strange and prodigious tales of their wonder-working Power. Though here either
he or his Historian has acquitted himself so awkardly as utterly to spoil the
tale and defeat the design. This Eusebius has shown at large in his Book
against Hierocles, by taking apieces all parts of the Story, and discovering
all its flaws and incoherences; but I shall content my self with proving the
vanity of the whole from the notorious falsehood of one particular Narration,
upon which depends all that extraordinary power that he pretends to, and that
is his conversation with the Indian Brachmans, from whom, if we may believe his
account of himself, he learnt all that he could do more than the common
Philosophers of Greece. And if this prove a Romance, all the rest of the
History must unavoidably follow its fortune; and for this little proof will
serve the turn, when most of the Stories are so very mean and childish as to be
more contemptible than those little tales wherewith Nurses are wont to quiet
little Children. For what could be contrived more unphilosophically than the
Bramans keeping Tubs of Rain, l. 3. c. 3.
Wind and Thunder by them, which they bestow upon their Friends as their
necessities require; And the swelling of the Earth like the Waves of c. 5.
the Sea only with the stroke of a Braman's Wand? Though the most pleasant
Scene of the whole Comedy was their Feast, in which there was c. 8.
no need of any Attendants; but the Chairs and the Stools, the Pots and the
Cups, the Dishes and the Plates understood every one their own Offices, and so
served in the Entertainment themselves, and run hither and thither as the
Guests commanded or their Attendance required. But of all Lies the Geographical
Lie is the most unhappy; for the matter of them being perpetual, and not, as
the actions of Men are, transient, they may be confuted in any Age. And yet in
this very thing he has outdone Sir John Mandevil himself for incredible
Monsters and Fables, describing Men and Beasts of strange shapes, that were
never seen by any Man but himself, as a sort of Women half Black, half White; a
Nation of c. 14.
Pygmies living under ground, Griffins, Apes as big as Men, Beasts with the
Faces of Men and Bodies of Lions, Wool growing like grass out of the Earth, and
Dragons as common almost as Sheep in other Countries; all which being so
vulgarly known c. 2.
at this day to be mere Fables, they cannot but overthrow the credit of the
whole Story. For either he really wandered as far as the Indies or not; if not,
then his saying that he did, is one Lie for all; if he did, then it is evident
from these particulars that he made no conscience of truth or falsehood, but
designed only to amuse the World with strange and prodigious reports of the
power of Pythagorism. And that is the most that I can make of the Story, though
I know that Huetius is of Opinion Demonst. Ev. c. 147. 4.
that all the substantial Miracles are stolen out of the Gospels and the Acts of
the Apostles, and that for the most part in the very words and phrases of Saint
Luke. And this he has endeavored to make good by a great variety of parallel
Instances, and then thinks it a manifest discovery both of the vanity of
Philostratus and the Imposture of Apollonius, when he is only adorned with
borrowed Feathers, but a great accession to the credit of our Savior, that
when his Enemies would frame the Idea of a Divine Man, they were forced to
steal their best Features from his Picture; so that, he says, it was no wonder
that Hierocles should so confidently compare the Miracles of Apollonius to
those of Jesus, when those of Jesus were with so little disguise clapped upon
Apollonius.

This were a pretty Discovery if it stood upon good grounds, but alas most of
the Parallelisms are so forced, or so slender, or so far fetched, that it were
easy to make as many and as probable between any other Histories whatsoever.
And indeed, in such a design as this of Philostratus, viz. To make up a Story
as full of strange things as he could well contrive, it is scarce possible not
to have hit upon some things like some of those Miracles that are recorded in
the Gospels. So that in some few of them there may be some resemblance, as
particularly there seems to be in that of the Gadarean Demoniack and the
Corcyrean Youth, yet it is very obvious to apprehend that this might happen not
by design but by chance. And whereas Huetius will needs have it that Pro^os. 1.
Sect. 5.
Philostratus has stolen not only the Stories but the very Words of Saint Luke,
I find no Instances of it but only in this one relation, where they both it
seems use the word (...), and this they might easily do without theft or
imitation, it being the common Greek word that signifies to torment, so that
they could no more avoid that in Greek than we could this in rendering it into
English. Nay, setting aside this one Story, I find so little resemblance
between the History of Philostratus and that of the Gospels, that I scarce know
any two Histories more unlike. For it is obvious to any Man that reads
Philostratus that his whole design was to follow the train of the old Heathen
Mythology, and that is the bottom of his folly by his Story to gain historical
Credit to the Fables of the Poets; so that it is a very true and just censure
that Ludovicus Vives has given of him, that as he had endeavored to imitate
Homer, so he had abundantly out-lyed him. For there is scarce any thing
extraordinary reported in the whole History, in which he does not apparently
design either to verify or to rectify some of that blind Balladsingers Tales.
But especially in conjuring Achilles out of his Tomb and discoursing with him
about the old Stories that were told of the Trojan War.

And yet after all, few of Apollonius his Miracles are sufficiently vouched
even by his own History, v. g. the last that I mentioned of the Apparition of
Achilles, that had no other Testimony but of Apollonius himself, who stubbornly
refused to have any Companion or Witness of the Fact; beside many other
absurdities in the Story it self, as his rising out of the Tomb five Foot long,
and then swelling to twice the length, his being forced to vanish away at
Cock-crowing, and the Nymphs constantly visiting of him.

And so again, he pretended to understand all Languages without learning any,
and yet when he came to the Indian King he was forced to converse with him by
an Interpreter. And whereas the Story tells us of the Devils being cast out of
a young Man by a Mandate from the Bramans, yet it gives us no account of the
event of it, only they pretended to do it, but whether it were effectually
done we do not find that either Apollonius or Damis ever enquired. But the
great faculty he pretended to was the understanding of the Language of Birds
and Beasts, which, he says, he learnt from the Arabians, and the Citizens of
Paraca in India, who acquired it by eating Dragons Hearts. Now all Stories of
Dragons are very hard of belief, but especially of his Indian Dragons, that, he
says, were as commonly hunted by the Inhabitants as Hares in other Countries.
But granting there were so great numbers of them in his time, though since that
they were never seen by any Man, it is very hard to believe that the mere
eating a piece of their Hearts should inspire Men with such an odd and singular
faculty. Though the great Miracle of all was his vanishing away at his Trial
before Domitian in the presence of all the great Men of Rome, but then though
our Historian be very desirous we should believe it, yet he faulters afterward
like a guilty Liar in his confidence; for whereas at first he positively l. 8.
c. 4.
affirms, (...), that he quite vanished away, at last he only says, (...), that
he went away, and this though he would seem to affirm that it was after a
wonderful manner and no body knows how, is a pitiful abatement to the bigness
of his former expression vanishing away. Though the truth is, if he had stood
to it, it must unavoidably have proved it self a Lie, for it is utterly
incredible that so strange a thing as that should have been done in so great a
presence as that, and yet never any notice be taken of it.

But in the last place the Historian would fain bid at something of his Hero's
appearing after Death, yet he does it so faintly, that in the conclusion of all
it comes to nothing, especialy when he tells us that the time of his Death was
altogether unknown, and that the uncertainty of it took in no less than the
compass of thirty years, and then they that were so utterly at a loss as to the
time of his decease, and that for so long a space, were likely to give a very
wise account of the certain time of any thing that he did after it. But how or
to whom did he appear? l. 8. c. 13.
Why, to a young Man, one of his Followers, that doubted of the Immortality of
the Soul for ten months together after his Death. But how or where? Why, the
young Man being tired with watching and praying to Apollonius that he would
appear to him only to satisfy him in this point, one day fell into a dead
sleep in the School where the young Men were performing their several
Exercises, and on the sudden starts up in a great fright and a great sweat
crying out, (...), I believe thee, O Tyanaeus. And being asked by his
Companions the meaning of his transport. Why, says he, do you not see
Apollonius? They answer him no, but that they would be glad to give all the
World that they could. It Is true, says he, for he only appears to me and for
my satisfaction, and is invisible to all others, and so tells them what he had
said to him in his sleep concerning the state of Souls. This poor account of a
Dream and a Vision of an over-watched Boy, is all that this great Story affords
to vye with our Savior's Resurrection.

And now, upon review of this whole History, it seems evident to me that this
Man was so far from being endued with any extraordinary or Divine Power that he
does not deserve the reputation of an ordinary Conjurer. For though Huetius has
taken some pains to prove him so, yet he gives no evidence of it beside the
Opinion of the common People; and if that were enough to make a Conjurer, there
is no Man of an odd and a singular humor (as Apollonius affected to be) who is
not so thought of by the common People. And therefore when he was accused for
it before Domitian the Emperor when he came to hear the cause, slighted both
him and his accusers, and dismissed him the Court for an idle and fantastic
fellow. And it is manifest from the whole series of his History that he was a
very vain Man, and affected to be thought something extraordinary, and so
wandered all the World over in an odd Garb to be gazed at and admired, and made
himself considerable in that Age by Wit, Impudence and Flattery, of all which
he had a very competent share. But for his Wonder-working Faculty which he
would needs pretend to, he fetched that as far off as the East Indies, that is
the farthest off as he thought from confutation. And yet the Account that he
has given of those parts is so grossly fabulous, that that alone convicts his
whole Life of imposture and impudence. And this may suffice to make good this
part of the demonstration of our Savior's Divine Authority from the certain
Evidence both of his own and his Apostles Miracles, and to set it above the
reach of all manner either of Objection or Competition.

XXVIII. But though the History of Jesus of Nazareth have this advantage of all
others, in that the Tradition, whereby it has been conveyed down to us, has
proved the truth of its own Testimony by plain and undeniable Miracles; yet if
we set aside this peculiar Divine Attestation, and consider the Tradition by it
self as merely Humane, and delivered down in the ordinary course of things; it
has been so constant, so catholic and so uninterrupted as to be its own
demonstration. For if there had been no such thing as the Story of Jesus of
Nazareth in that Age, there could never have been any such Tradition; or if
there were, it was so early, that if it had been false, it must immediately
have perished as a manifest Lie, in that when it comes so near the very time in
which the thing it self was acted, nothing but undoubted Truth could ever have
maintained its Authority. For though it is easy at a distance to tell strange
stories of the times of old, as we find by those many idle and incredible
Legends added to the History of the primitive Church in the after-ages of
ignorance and superstition; yet to raise a story so strange and remarkable as
that of Jesus of Nazareth and his Apostles, without any ground or foundation
for it, nay, against the certain knowledge of those who lived in the place
where it was first broacht, and to gain Proselytes to such a notorious Fiction,
is a thing not possible in the course of humane Affairs. For to pass by all the
other disadvantages that I have already represented, that this Tradition must
labor under if it rise not up to the very time that it pretends to, especially
that of its being a matter of Fact, which must unavoidably have destroyed it,
if false; that which I have already proposed and come now to prosecute seems as
insuperable as any of the rest, viz. That great numbers of learned and wise
Men, who lived in the Ages next and immediately after it, should, after the
strictest enquiry concerning its truth, not only suffer themselves to be
imposed upon by so late and palpable a Fiction, but lay down their Lives in
defense of it. This is not credible unless they were fully assured of the
undoubted certainty of the thing it self, and their assurance alone is to us a
sufficient demonstration of it. But though that be enough, yet I will undertake
more, viz. To give an account of the grounds and reasons of their Assurance, by
tracing up the certain Tradition of the thing it self to the very times of the
Apostles, and from them deriving it down to after-ages through the hands of
wise, learned and judicious Men; and that, as I take it, will make a new and
distinct demonstration of the infallible certainty of the Christian Faith.

Now this Tradition is conveyed two manner of ways, either by a succession of
Churches or of single Persons. First by a succession of Churches: and this way
of conveyance is insisted upon by the Ancients themselves in justification of
the Catholic Truth both against Heretics and Insidels. Thus the Apostolical
Tradition, says Irenaeus, is spread Adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
all the World over, and this every Man that pleases may find in every Church;
and we are able to reckon up all those that were appointed by the Apostles to
be their Successors and Bishops in the Churches of Christ down to our own
time. But because it would be too tedious in such a Discourse as this to
enumerate the Succession of all Churches, I shall only instance in those
great, ancient and famous Churches that were founded at Rome by those two
glorious Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, hereby to show the Tradition of
that Faith that was preached by the Apostles, to have been safely conveyed by
the Succession of Bishops down to our own time. And I choose to exemplify this
thing in this Church rather than any other, because of its great pre-eminence
and resort from all parts of the World, upon which account its Tradition must
needs be more public and better known.

The blessed Apostles therefore having laid the Foundations of the Church,
delivered the oversight of it to Linus, of whom Saint Paul makes mention in his
Epistle to Timothy, to him succeeds Anacletus, then Clemens, who familiarly
conversed with the Apostles, and had their Preaching still sounding in his
Ears, and their Tradition before his Eyes. In whose time there happened a great
Schism in the Church of Corinth, to allay which the Church of Rome directed an
excellent Epistle to them, in which she exhorts them to Peace and Unity, rubs
up their memory of the primitive Faith, and sets before them the fresh
Tradition of the Apostles themselves. To him succeeds Evaristus, to Evaristus
Alexander, and then Sixtus, Telesphorus, Higinus, Pius, Anicetus, Soter, and
now Eleutherius in the twelfth place from the Apostles. This is a clear and an
accurate account of the Apostolical Succession of that Church, so that it is
impossible to understand how there should ever have been a Bishop in it, unless
we begin the Succession from the Apostles, and then this is an undeniable proof
of the certainty of their Tradition, as in all other places, so particularly in
that great and populous City. And this very Argument Epiphanius insists upon
against Haeres. 27.
the Carpocratians: And let no Man wonder, says he, that I so accurately and
carefully set down every single Person in the Succession, because hereby the
undoubted truth, that has been from the beginning, will evidently appear. And
the truth is granting the Succession, it would be a pretty hard task to avoid
the Tradition, and yet against that there lies only one poor exception, viz.
That some ancient Writers place Clement in the first place, who here stands in
the third; but that (to pass by many other conjectures, and especially a very
probable one of Epiphanius) is cleared by one that is more than probable and
founded upon the Authority of the Ancients themselves; that there were at first
two Churches at Rome, one of the Circumcision, over which Saint Peter presided,
another of the Uncircumcision founded and governed by Saint Paul; who, as we
read in the last Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, left the obstinate Jews
to preach to the Gentiles, neither is this conjecture a little confirmed by
this very passage of Irenaeus, who speaks not of the Church of Rome as a single
Church, but as two distinct, and those eminent Churches from the beginning: so
that though Clement were immediate Successor in one of them, yet he might be
the third in the other, in that, surviving Linus and Cletus, and the difference
between Jew and Gentile being in a great measure worn away, both Churches might
naturally unite into one Body under his Jurisdiction. Others object to mudd the
succession that some Writers place both Cletus and Anacletus before Clemens, as
if they were distinct Persons. But this is a mistake of later Writers, who
sometimes finding these different names in the Copies of the ancient Books,
concluded them different Persons; but herein they go against the Authority of
all the ancient Writers themselves, and particularly of Eusebius, whose account
ought to be valued beyond all others, because he collected the succession of
Bishops out of the Archives and Diptychs of the Churches themselves, to which
he particularly refers in the Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 12.
succession of the Church of Jerusalem. So that here is no real difficulty or
labyrinth as to the succession, and all that seems to be, is only occasioned
by an easy and obvious mistake of some later Writers against the more ancient
and unquestionable Authority.

After the same manner does Tertullian triumph over the Heretics, by
challenging Praescript. Haeret. c. 32.
them to prescribe for their Opinions from the beginning, as the Catholics
were able to do for theirs. The truth, says he, will appear from its
Antiquity: that is true and delivered by the Lord himself that we find most
ancient, but that is foreign and false that was brought in afterward; and if
they shall dare to pretend to the Apostolical Age, let them produce the
Originals of the Churches, let them describe the succession of their Bishops,
and so derive it from the beginning, as that the first Bishop should have
succeeded to some Apostle or some Apostolical Man that conversed with the
Apostles. For in this way it is that the Apostolical Churches prove their
Original, as the Church of Smyrna will produce Policarp placed there by Saint
John, the Church of Rome Clement ordained by Saint Peter; and so for all other
Churches they show you the Men that were settled in their Episcopal Office by
the Apostles themselves, and conveyed down their Doctrine to Posterity. And
again, this is the only Testimony of the truth, c. 36.
its possession from the beginning, and for this you that are concerned to
enquire more diligently after your Salvation, may travel over the Apostolical
Churches, where the very seats in which the Apostles presided are still
remaining, where their own authentic Letters are still extant. Do you live in
or near to Achaia? go to Corinth. In Macedonia? to Philippi or Thessalonica. In
Asia? to Ephesus. In Italy? to Rome. And this certainly as it was sufficient to
prescribe to all the Innovations of the Heretics, so was it to demonstrate the
undoubted truth and certainty of the Christian Religion, when it was so clearly
and so uninterruptedly delivered down from the first Founders of it. And the
truth is, the succession of Bishops in the principal Churches was so accurately
recorded by the Ancients, that it had never been so much as called in question,
had not some Men been forced to it only to justify themselves in their
departing from it; it having been the custom of all but especially the most
famous Churches to keep an exact Register of the Names and the Deaths of their
Bishops, which they called Diptychs; and though it is objected that these
Records are now lost, (and so are the Tables of the Consuls) yet they were very
carefully preserved in those times, and as easily consulted by any inquisitive
Person, as any other public Record, and were so by all learned Men who made it
their business to enquire into them or to convey the account of them to
afterages; and particularly Eusebius, who, as he made use of many other helps
and had all the other advantages of information, would not want this that was
so easy and so satisfactory, as himself Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 12.
particularly informs us concerning the succession of Jerusalem, that he
transcribed it out of their own Archives. Though setting aside the information
that he received thence, the History of the succession is sufficiently
preserved by other Writers. That of Rome is already cleared, that of Antioch is
as clear, only some Men are willing to raise a dispute about the immediate
Successor to the Apostles, whether it were Euodius or Ignatius, probably it
might be both as it was at Rome; but if Euodius were the first, it is enough
that his Successor, Ignatius, was an Apostolical Man, and familiarly
acquainted with the Apostles, and that from him the succession runs clear and
undisputed down to the Council of Nice, to which Eustathius its then present
Bishop was summoned; and as he was a Man of eminent learning, so he bore a
considerable sway in it. As for Alexandria the succession runs so clear there,
that I do not find that the most skeptical Adversaries in this point dare so
much as question it; and indeed the succession of learned Men in that Church
was so early and so uninterrupted, that it was no more possible for them to be
ignorant of the succession of their Bishops, than it is for any learned Man now
not to know the succession in the Sea of Canterbury from the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth. To these it were easy to add many more if it were not too tedious,
but though I do not meet with any reasonable suspicion of an interrupted
succession in any eminent Church, yet I shall instance only in two, that, next
to those already mentioned, most deserve our notice, that is, the Churches of
Corinth and Athens; an account of whose succession we have from Dionysius a
learned Apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 23.
Man and Bishop of Corinth in the time of M. Antoninus, as indeed we have of
many other Churches in his Epistles to them; as for his own Church it were a
vain thing to demand a particular account of its succession, when himself was
so near the fountain head, and has withal accidentally let us understand his
knowledge of what was transacted there before his own time, and particularly by
his account of Saint Clement's Epistle. As for the Church of Athens he expressly
affirms that Dionysius the Areopagite was their first Bishop, and after him
mentions Publius and Quadratus, so that it was not possible there should be any
unknown interruption in so short an interval. This may suffice for a brief
specimen of the certain succession in the most eminent Churches from the
Apostles, and by consequence of their undoubted Tradition.

XXIX. The next part of the Argument is to prove its more particular conveyance
down from the very time of the Apostles through the hands of a great many wise
and learned Men: And for this reason it was that Clemens Alexandrinus after
Strom. l. 1. p. 201.
he had passed through the Discipline of several Masters and several Sects,
acquiesced at last, without any farther search, in the Christian Institution,
because they that preserved the Tradition of this heavenly Doctrine, received
it immediately from Peter, James, and John, and Paul, the holy Apostles, as a
Son succeeds a Father, and by the Providence of God have brought it down to us,
planting those seeds of Doctrine which they derived from their Ancestors and
the Apostles. And it is a very good reason and becoming the wisdom of that
learned Man, supposing the matter of Fact to be true; and that it is, is
evident from the succession it self, in that the first Witnesses of
Christianity next to the Apostles familiarly conversed with the Apostles
themselves or with Apostolical Men. As Saint Clemens Bishop of Rome, who wrote
an excellent Epistle to the Church of Corinth, received with great veneration
in the Christian Church, valued next to the holy Scriptures, and therefore read
with them in several Churches, but especially the Church of Corinth. And as it
was the most ancient next to the Apostolical Books, so was it the most
undoubted Writing of the Christian Hist. l. 3. c. 16. 38.
Church; it was, says Eusebius, (...), received without controversy. And it is
cited by Dionysius, Bishop of Corinth, a short time Apud Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c.
23.
after, who affirms that it was then read in that Church every Lord's Day; It
is magnified by Irenaeus not only for its Adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
own strength and piety, but for the primitive Antiquity of its Author, who,
he says, was conversant with the Apostles, received his Christianity from them,
had their preaching still fresh in his memory, and their customs and traditions
in his eye, as diverse others there were then living, that were taught by the
Apostles themselves. And Clemens Alexandrinus quoting this Epistle (as he often
does) Strom. l. 4.
gives him the Title of Apostle for his primitive Antiquity. But beside that it
was unanimously attested by the Ancients, it was never called in question by
any of our modern Critics, who though they have taken infinite pains to
destroy or impair, as much as in them lay, the credit of all the ancient
monuments of the Church, yet have passed this Epistle as undoubtedly genuine
with an unanimous approbation. Now this supposes the owning and the settlement
of the Christian Religion in the World, it asserts particularly the truth and
certainty of our Savior's Resurrection, and, beside several other Books of the
New Testament, quotes the first Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, in
which the Apostle proves its undoubted certainty by the Testimony not only of
himself and the Apostles, but of above five hundred Witnesses beside, most
whereof were then alive. Beside this he tells us of the great labors and
martyrdoms of Saint Peter and Saint Paul in asserting the Christian Faith, and
the great patience and constancy of vast numbers more for the same cause; and
this he speaks of as a thing present. Let us, says he, consider the generous
and worthy Examples of our own Age: through emulation and envy the faithful
Pillars of the Church were persecuted even unto a most grievous Death. Let us
place before our Eyes our holy Apostles; and so he proceeds to the acts and
sufferings of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Now how could this have been done at
that time if Christianity had been a mere Fable, or what more unquestionable
Tradition can we have of its truth, especially of the Resurrection, when he
quotes the Gospels in which it is recorded, the Epistle of Saint Paul in which
it is proved by such a number of Eyewitnesses, the Testimony of the Apostles
and innumerable others that lived at the same time, and laid down their Lives
out of that undoubted assurance they had of its truth and certainty? We may now
with much more reason doubt of what was done to his late Majesty in January,
1648. than they could at that time of the Testimony of the Apostles concerning
the Passion and Resurrection of Jesus. Neither did the current of this
Tradition stop here in the Corinthian Church, but as it came down from the
first Witnesses, so it descended in the same chanel to aftertimes: for as the
Apostolical Writings are owned by this Epistle, so is this Epistle by those who
could not but be certain of its Authority, especially Dionysius Bishop of that
Church to whom it was written; for as Saint Clement's Epistle was written not
long after the time of the Apostles, probably in the Reign of Domitian; so was
that of Dionysius written not at a greater distance from Saint Clemens; for he
flourished in the time of M. Aurelius, and had full assurance of its being
authentic, from its having been constantly read in the Corinthian Church. So
that the Tradition of the Apostles Testimony was as certain in that Church in
the time of that Emperor, who began his Reign about the year, 161. as it was
in their own time; so that if the Corinthians who lived in the time of
Dionisius had been contemporary to the Apostles themselves, they could not have
had a more satisfactory and unquestionable information of the truth of those
things that they preached, than was given them from so clear and uninterrupted
a Tradition: for that being so entirely free from all manner of doubt and
suspicion, the distance of time made no alteration as to the certainty of the
thing.

. XXX. To the Testimony of this Apostolical Man we may join that of Ignatius,
Policarp, Papias and Quadratus, as having all conversed with the followers and
familiars of our Savior. And first, as for Ignatius, he was educated under the
Apostles themselves, and by them constituted Bishop of the great City of
Antioch, where he sat many years, and governed his charge with extraordinary
zeal and prudence, and at last with infinite courage and alacrity suffered
Martyrdom for the Testimony of his Faith. There have been great Controversies
of late in the Christian World concerning his Epistles, though with how little
reason on their side that oppose them I have accounted elsewhere, and though I
shall by and by make use of their Authority and make it good too, yet our
present Argument is not concerned in that dispute; for whether these Epistles
that at this time pass under his name be genuine or counterfeit, it is certain
that there was such a Man and that he wrote such Epistles; and if so, then he
is another competent Witness of the truth of the Apostolical Testimony; and his
great sense of Immortality, and earnest desire of Martyrdom show his great
assurance of our Savior's Resurrection, upon which they were founded; so that
he is another undoubted Witness of the Apostolical Tradition, viz. That the
Christian Faith descended from the Apostles, and that they gave that proof of
their Testimony that is recorded of them in the holy Scriptures. And by his
Testimony of the truth of all that Christianity pretends to, is the Tradition
of the Apostles connected with the certain History of aftertimes, so as to
leave no dark and unknown Interval, wherein the Story, pretended to have been
formerly acted by the Apostles, might have been first obtruded upon the World,
but on the contrary to make it undeniably evident that there could never have
been any such Story, had it not first descended from the Apostles.

But though this be enough to my purpose for attesting the truth of the
Apostolical History by such a near and immediate Witness to make the Tradition
of the Church certain and uninterrupted, yet I will not wave that advantage
that I have from this glorious Martyr's Epistles, because they breathe so much
the genuine spirit of the ancient Christianity, especially as to the undoubted
assurance of a future Immortality, which shows what mighty satisfaction they
had of the reality of the thing, that they so firmly believed and so vehemently
desired. And as for the Epistles themselves they are so strongly and
unanimously attested by the Records of the ancient Church, that they had never
been so much as questioned but for their resolute Opposition to some Men's
Prejudices; for they being resolved in their own Innovation of
Church Government contrary to that of the Apostolical and primitive
Constitution, which these Epistles so zealously assert, and that as established
by the command of God, and thereby made necessary to the peace of the Christian
Church; they had no way left but stubbornly, I ought to have said impudently,
to reject their Authority. But alas that is so admirably vouched as if the
Providence of God had purposely designed to secure their credit for ever; And
particularly in the first place by his Friend Policarp, who sent a Copy of them
to the Church of Philippi with a Letter of his own, now Policarp's Epistle was
never questioned, nay, it was for some hundred years after publicly read in
the Churches of Asia, how then is it possible to avoid so clear and certain a
Testimony as this? they have no other way but only by saying that this
particular passage was foisted in, without any shadow of ground for the
surmise; nay, contrary to the common sense of Mankind, that an Epistle so
universally known to the learned and the unlearned should be so easily
corrupted, and the corruption never taken notice of, and when this counterfeit
passage was thrust into it contrary to the faith of all the public Books, it
should pass down uncontrolled and unquestioned to all after-ages. Nay, farther,
if it were forged, it must have been before the time of Eusebius, who gives an
account of it and believes it genuine, and yet himself affirms that it was at
his time publicly read in Churches, as Saint Jerome afterward that it was in
his; now it is a very probable thing that Eusebius would be imposed upon by one
private Copy contrary to the faith of all the public Books, or that he should
impose the mistake upon all that followed him, when the same Books were
preserved in the same public manner till the time of Saint Jerome.

But beside this they have another shift altogether as groundless and not less
bold, viz. That it is true that there had been such Epistles of Ignatius that
Policarp speaks of, but that a little before Eusebius his time the true ones
were lost, and a counterfeit Copy put upon the World; which as it is nothing
but mere conjecture for the sake of a desperate cause, and void of all pretense
of probability, so it is incredible in it self, and not possible in the course
of humane Affairs that such a famous Writing of such an ancient and apostolical
Bishop, of such an eminent and glorious Martyr, written at such a time, at the
very point of his dissolution, as his Legacy to the Christian Church,
communicated to several Churches, publicly and vulgarly known, attested by
Saint Policarp, Irenaeus, Clemens of Alexandria, and not long since by Origin,
it is not possible that all the Copies of such a Writing as this should be lost
about one and the same time, and that a false one should immediately rise up in
their stead, and that Eusebius, a Man so familiarly acquainted with the
choicest Libraries of that part of the World should embrace so late and so
gross a Forgery, and put the mistake upon all learned Men that followed after
him. The Man that can satisfy himself with such wild surmises and suppositions
as these, there is nothing so absurd but he may easily swallow its belief, nor
so demonstratively proved but he may withstand its evidence.

Now the Authority of these Epistles being vindicated (and I am apt to think
that they will never more be called in question) they are a brave and generous
Assertion of the truth of the Christian Faith, being written with that mighty
assurance of Mind, that shows the Author of them to have had an absolute
certainty or a kind of an infallible knowledge of the things that he believed.
In every Epistle his Faith is resolved into that undoubted evidence that he had
of our Savior's Death and Resurrection; and particularly in that to the Church
of Smyrna he protests that he could no more doubt of its reality than of his
own chains, and again positively affirms that he knew it to be true. And yet
not withstanding that all the ancient Copies and all the quotations of the
Ancients out of him agree in this sense, that he knew Jesus to be in the flesh
after his death, because in Saint Jerome's Translation (who excuses himself for
the haste and carelessness of the work) it is rendered that he saw Jesus in the
flesh, this is made use of by the learned Men of our new Church of Geneva as a
sufficient Objection to overthrow the Authority of all these Epistles. It is
possible indeed he might have seen Jesus in the flesh but it is not probable,
neither is it his design to affirm it in this place, seeing he proves its truth
from the Testimony of the Apostles as Eyewitnesses, and not from his own
immediate knowledge; but when he only says that from them he knew it to be
true, to put this assertion upon him that he saw it with his own eyes, against
the reading of all the ancient Books from a careless Translation, proves
nothing but the invincible stubbornness of prejudice and partiality. But the
truth is, these Men have been so zealous for their Faction as not to care how
in pursuit of it they endangered, nay, destroyed their Religion. For whereas
one of the greatest Pillars of the Christian Faith is the Testimony of the
Ancients in the Age next to the Apostles, in that it is hereby particularly
proved that it is no figment of an unknown time, and that the Records of it
were of that Antiquity that they pretend to be, yet because they do as
positively assert the original Constitution of the Christian Church, which this
faction of Men have happened to renounce, they have labored with indefatigable
industry utterly to overthrow all their Authority, but, thanks be to God, with
that ill success, that by their endeavor to shake our Faith, they have only
made it to take the better root; for by this occasion the most ancient
Tradition of the primitive Church has been much more inquired into and better
cleared, than if it had passed without any dispute or contradictition.

But to keep close to our Ignatius, what has been the bottom of all the zeal
and fury against his Epistles, but his earnest pressing all good Christians to
submit to the government of the Church as to the Ordinance of God, or rather
because he describes the Constitution of the primitive Platform so accurately
as to condemn their Discipline of folly and rashness in departing from the
prescription of God himself. And yet all the ancient Doctors of the Church
have done the same thing, laying as great a stress as he has done upon the duty
of Obedience to their Ecclesiastical Governors as set over them by Divine
Institution. For as there was nothing of which they were then more tender than
the Peace and Unity of the Church, so they thought it could be no other way
preserved than by submission to those Guides and Governors that Christ had set
over it. This it were easy to make evident out of their Writings, especially
Saint Cyprian's, who as he was a Person of very great prudence and discretion,
so is he full as peremptory in this point as Ignatius. But I shall only
instance in the Epistle of Saint Clement because of its greater Antiquity. For
if that assert a certain form of Church government established by our Savior
and observed by the Apostles, that prevents and confutes the groundless
conjecture of an unknown time immediately after the Apostles, in which the
whole power of the Church devolved upon the Presbyters, because they had
appointed no one particular and perpetual form of Government. And this Saint
Clement asserts in these positive words: The Apostles were appointed to preach
the Gospel to us from our Lord Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ from God himself:
Christ being sent by God, and the Apostles by him; the sending of both was in
an orderly manner after the will of God. For the Apostles receiving their
command, and having a full confidence through the Resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and faith in the word of God, with an assurance of the Holy
Spirit, went forth publishing the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, which was
erecting. They therefore preached the Word through diverse Countries and Cities,
ordaining every where the first fruits of such as believed, having made proof
and trial of them by the Spirit, to be Overfeers and Deacons to minister unto
them that should afterward believe. So that it seems they were so far from
neglecting to provide Governors for the future state of the Church, that they
were careful beforehand to provide Governors for future Churches. And this he
affirms the Apostles did because they understood by our Lord Jesus Christ that
strife and contention would arise about the Title of Episcopacy, for this cause
therefore, having absolute knowledge beforehand thereof, they ordained the
forenamed Officers, and for the future gave them moreover in command, that
whenever they should dye, others well approved of should succeed into their
Office and Ministry.

So that it is evident that the Apostles themselves by virtue of our Savior's
order observed and prescribed a particular form of Government to be continued
down to future Ages. And though our Author does not express the several
distinct Orders by the common names of Bishop, Priest and Deacon, yet he
describes them as expressly by allusion to the Jewish Hierarchy, under the names
of High Priest, Priest and Levite. However, it is evident from hence that the
Apostles settled a perpetual form of Church government, to which all Christian
people were indispensably bound to conform; and then, if that form were
Episcopacy, and if they settled that by our Savior's own advice with an Eye to
prevent Schisms and Contentions, the case is plain that Ignatius his pressing
all Churches so earnestly to obedience to their Bishop, was nothing else but a
prosecution both of our Savior's and their command.

And then, that it was Episcopacy is so evident from the unanimous and
unquestionable Testimony of all Antiquity, that it is positively asserted by
all the Ancients and not opposed by any one; but that would be too great a
digression from the present Argument, and therefore I shall not pursue it,
though I have gone thus far out of my way to show for what reasons some Men
have endeavored to impair the credit of the Records of the ancient Church, not
for any real defect and uncertainty that they found in them, but because they
give in such clear and undeniable Witness against their fond and unwarrantable
Innovations. And therefore I would advise these Gentlemen, as they value the
peace either of the Church or their own Consciences, that they would cease to
struggle any longer against their own convictions, renounce their Error, when
they can neither defend nor deny it, and not be so headstrong as rather than
part with a wrong Notion or confess a Mistake, endeavor what in them lies to
blow up the very foundations of the Christian Faith. Or, to bespeak them in the
Words of Saint Clement: Is there any one then that is bravely spirited among
you? Is there any one that has compassion? Does any one abound in Charity? Let
him say, if this Sedition or Contention or Schism be for me or by my means; I
will depart, I will go my way whither soever you please, I will do what the
Society commands, only let the Sheepfold of Christ enjoy peace with the Elders
that are placed over it. He that shall do so, shall purchase to himself great
glory in the Lord. Thus they do, and thus they will do, who lead their lives
according to the rules of God's policy.

This was the gentle and peaceable temper of the primitive Christians, but if
they thought it their duty to quit their Country, rather than occasion the
disturbance of the Churches peace, how much more to forgo a false or an
ungrounded Opinion? And therefore to deal plainly with them I shall load their
Consciences with this one sad and serious truth, that when Men have once rashly
departed from the Church that they live under, and persevere in their Schism in
spite of the most evident conviction, they have renounced together with the
Church their Christian Faith, and are acted merely by the spirit of Pride, i.
e. the Devil. And therefore I do with all compassion to their Souls request
such Men among us impartially to reflect upon themselves and their actions, and
if they are convicted in their own Consciences of having made causless Schisms
in the Christian Church (as I know they must be by those peevish pitiful
pretenses that they would seem to plead in their own excuse) with all possible
speed to beg pardon of God and his Church; and as they would avoid the Judgment
and displeasure of Almighty God against Pride, Envy, Peevishness, Contention
and Sedition, to make public confession of their fault to all the People that
they have drawn after them into the same sin, and with all humility and
lowliness beg to be admitted into the bosom and communion of this truly ancient
and Apostolic Church. But my tender Charity to these poor Men that I see
driving with so much fury, self-conceit and confidence to utter destruction has
again drawn me out of my way, to persuade them if it be possible to turn back
into the way of peace and salvation: however it is high time for me to return
to my Discourse.

XXXI. After this great and glorious Martyr, the next eminent Witness of the
original Tradition of the Christian Faith is his dear Friend and fellow
Disciple Saint Policarp; who as he was educated together with him under the
Discipline of Saint John, so he outlived his Martyrdom about sixty years, and
by reason of his very great Age was able to give his Testimony not only to
that but to the next period of time; so that as he conversed with Saint John,
Irenaeus conversed with him, and withal gives an account of his Journey to
Rome in the time of Anicetus, and of his Martyrdom under M. Aurelius, which was
not till the year 167. So that through the great Age of Saint John and Saint
Policarp the Tradition of the Christian Church was by them alone delivered down
to the third Century, for Irenaeus lived into the beginning of it, not
suffering Martyrdom himself by the earliest account till the year 202. And this
is the peculiar advantage of his Testimony beyond all others that as it was as
early as any, so it continued into the most known times of the Christian
Church, for it was under the reign of M. Aurelius that the greatest part of the
Christian Apologists flourisht, and beside that his great courage and constancy
in suffering for the Faith proves the great and undoubted certainty of his
Tradition. He was familiarly conversant with the Apostles and Eye witnesses of
our Lord, and therefore Ignatius recommended to him the care of his Church, as
knowing him to be a truly Apostolical Man, and so he continued his care of the
Christian Church for many years with great Faith and Resolution, and at last
sealed his Faith with his Blood. I shall not need to give a particular account
of his Life, it is enough that, as he declared at his Trial, he had faithfully
served his Lord and Master fourscore and six years; but among the Records of
his Life there is none more certain or more remarkable than his own Epistle to
the Church of Philippi, and the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna concerning his
Martyrdom, in both which is showed his great assurance of Immortality: In the
first, he bottoms his Exhortation to an holy Life upon no other principle than
the certain evidence of their Savior's Resurrection and firm belief of their
own; in the second, he cheerfully resigns up his last breath with the greatest
assurance of Mind concerning it in this short and excellent Prayer: O Lord God
Almighty, the Father of thy well-beloved and ever-blessed Son Jesus Christ, by
whom we have received the knowledge of Thee; the God of Angels, Powers and of
every Creature, and of the whole race of the Righteous, who live before Thee; I
bless Thee that Thou have graciously condescended to bring me to this day and
hour, that I may receive a portion in the number of thy holy Martyrs, and drink
of Christ's Cup for the Resurrection to eternal Life both of Soul and Body in
the incorruptibleness of the Holy Spirit. Into which number grant I may be
received this day, being found in thy sight as a fair and acceptable Sacrifice,
such an one as Thou thy self have prepared, that so Thou may accomplish what
Thou, O true and faithful God, have foreshewn. Wherefore I praise Thee for all
thy Mercies, I bless Thee, I glorify Thee, through the eternal high Priest,
thy beloved Son Jesus Christ; with whom, to thy self and the Holy Ghost, be
glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

To this eminent Martyrdom of Saint Policarp and the Asiaticks, I cannot but
subjoin that of Pothinus Bishop of Lions and his Companions, in that they
suffered under the same Prince, with the same Christian Courage and Resolution,
especially because Pothinus also was of a very great Age, and almost as near
the Apostolical times as Policarp, and probably sent by him into these Western
parts; and lastly, because it is attested by public and undoubted Epistles
sent from the Church of Lions by Irenaeus to the Bishop of Rome and the
Churches of Asia, of both which Epistles Scaliger himself has Animad. Eusebius. p.
221.
given this just and deserved Encomium, that as they are of the most ancient
Martyrdoms in the Church, so the reading of them cannot but so affect every
pious and devout Mind, as never to be satiated with it; and as for my own part,
says he, I do protest that I never met with any thing in all the History of the
Church, by the reading whereof I have been so much transported, as scarce to be
my self; and particularly of the Acts of the Martyrs of Lions, what can be read
more brave or more venerable in all the Monuments of Christian Antiquity? And
the truth is it is a very amazing Story, and one of the greatest examples both
of the Modesty and the Courage of the primitive Christians; for as they were
treated with new and unheard of Cruelties, so their behavior under all their
Torments was decent, and free from all appearance either of Vanity or Passion.

Now what can be the meaning of these things, that such Men as Policarp and
Pothinus (to whom I should have added Pionius, that suffered gallantly about
the same time) who lived so near the time of our Savior, who had such
opportunity to search into the truth of those things that were reported of him,
should thus frankly resign their Lives upon any less account than the full
assurance of the truth of those things that they believed? But though this be
sufficient to make good the Evidence of the first and apostolical Tradition of
the Church from the Testimony of these two eminent Martyrs, yet before I quit
it, it will be convenient to clear off one Objection, in which, as the ancient
Church in general, so Policarp in particular is concerned, and that is the
contradictory Tradition about the observation of Easter, both Parties
pretending to derive their different Customs from the Apostles; Policarp and
the Churches of the lesser Asia from Saint John, the Church of Rome from Saint
Peter. Now if this be so, why should it not destroy the credit of their
Tradition, when they make so little Conscience as to fasten contradictions upon
the Apostles themselves. Great use has of late been made of this Objection by
all the Enemies of the primitive Church: Mr. Hales in the time of his
peevishness and before he was reconciled to the Church of England has with
great scorn upbraided its grossness and folly. And it is one of Daille's
Topics against the use and authority of the Fathers, and how often it has been
since objected by others it is needless here to repeat. And yet when all is
done it proves nothing but that some Men have a very great Itch to be finding
fault, for otherwise this grossness and folly, this fantastic hurry in which
all the World were Schismatics, as Mr. Hales is pleased to speak of it with a
great many other good words, is a very remarkable instance both of the
faithfulness, the wisdom and the temper of the primitive Christians. For that
the custom of the Eastern and Western Church in this thing was different from
the beginning is evident from their different practice, and so must have
descended from the Apostles themselves, who might in this as well as other
things casually and without design prescribe different Usages, Saint John in
those parts of Asia where he resided continuing Easter after the manner of the
Jewish Passover; Saint Peter and Saint Paul in other places, to prevent too
much Judaising in its observation, making the same little alteration in its
time as was made in the Sabbath; and in this matter of complying with or
changing Jewish Customs, the Apostles varied their Orders according to
circumstances of time and place, sometime coming up closer to them, sometime
keeping at a greater distance, according to the judgment of their own
discretion. Now these different Customs about Easter being once casually
settled in the Church, in process of time they began to be matter of contention
among the People, as we know the common People are always zealous for their own
Customs, whatever they are. And therefore to stifle this fire that was broke
out among them, Policarp, a Man of the greatest Authority in Asia, undertakes a
Journey to Rome, if possible to allay and compose the Controversy: where, upon
debate between him and Anicetus, they conclude it the most proper course that
could be taken for the peace of the Church, that both Parties should retain
their own Customs, without any breach of Charity or Communion, and to declare
this to the World they communicate together at the holy Sacrament, Policarp
consecrating the Eucharist in the Church of Anicetus, and so they parted
lovingly, and continued ever after good Friends.

This is all the grossness and folly that I know of that these good Men were
guilty of in their management of this Controversy. Though it seems it was
afterward revived by the indiscretion of one Man, Victor Bishop of Rome, who
would needs take upon him to command the Asiaticks to conform to the practice
of his and all other Churches, under the penalty of Excommunication. To this
they return him a sober Answer, represent the inconvenience of changing so
ancient a Custom, disclaim his Power and Jurisdiction over them, and advise him
rather to consult the Peace and Unity of the Catholic Church, than to impose
upon them particular Customs contrary to the practice of their Ancestors.
Neither was this done by them alone but by almost all the Bishops of the
Christian World, though they were of his own way, unanimously condemning his
heat and rashness in so trivial a thing; and among the rest Irenaeus, having
convened a Synod in France, writes him a Synodical Epistle to this purpose;
That he agreed with him in his Observation of Easter but not in the Necessity
of it; that it was a very unadvised thing to think of excommunicating whole
Churches, for observing the ancient Customs derived down to them from their
Ancestors; that there was as little agreement among themselves concerning the
manner of the preparatory Fast before Easter, and yet this variety being of
long standing among them, no Man thought himself obliged to impose his own
particular conceit upon others in such an indifferent thing; and last of all
minds him of the prudence and moderation of his Predecessors, especially
Policarp and Anicetus, who did not so much as go about to persuade one another
to change the ancient custom of their Church. And the effect of these Epistles
from all places, especially of this of Irenaeus probably was this, that they
diverted Victor from pursuing his design. For we do not find that he ever
actually excommunicated the Asian Churches, but only that he threatened it. But
whether he did or did not, it is a worthy piece of ingenuity to charge the
folly of one furious and intemperate Man upon the whole Church, and that in
spite of their own protestation against it. And yet this is all the grossness
and folly wherewith our Innovatours have made so much noise against them. And
thus having removed this poor Objection, which I could not avoid, because it
has of late appeared among us with so much huff and confidence, I proceed to
the remaining Witnesses of our primitive Tradition.

And here I cannot pass by Papias, for though he were a Person of no great
Learning or Judgment, yet he was a Man of clear Honesty and Simplicity, and
living near the time of the Apostles themselves, did not search after their
Story in Books, but made it his particular business to enquire of their
familiar acquaintance after their Sayings and Customs. If any came in my way,
says he, that was Apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 39.
a follower of the Apostles, forthwith I enquired of him after the Sayings of
the Ancients, what Andrew, what Peter, what Philip, what Thomas, or James, or
John, or Matthew, or any other of the Lords Disciples, what Ariston, and John
the Elder (distinguished from John the Evangelist, and out of the Catalogue of
the Apostles) Disciples of the Lord were wont to say, for I did not think I
could profit my self more by reading their Books than by the more lively report
of those Persons who are still alive and heard their discourses. This is a
peculiar sort of Testimony given in to a matter of Fact by a Man plain and
simple, and yet curious and inquisitive, who informed himself of the truth of
the things so lately transacted, not only by reading the Narratives that were
written of them, but from the more lively information of such who received it
from Eyewitnesses. I will easily grant that he was, as Eusebius describes him,
(...), a Person of a small Judgment, and by consequence of little Authority as
to his Opinion, especially of the Millennium, of which yet himself was not the
first Author, but was betrayed into it by the Tradition of the Jews, who
generally believed that their Messiah should reign a thousand years upon Earth
in all manner of greatness and glory; and therefore it was no wonder if those,
who were converted from Judaism to Christianity, brought this Opinion along
with them, only understanding the Jews more gross and carnal Notion in a more
refined and spiritual sense; and this was the dispute in those early days
against the Jewish Heretics, particularly Cerinthus, who believed of our
Savior, as they had of the Messiah that they expected, that he should come
once more upon Earth, and reign at Jerusalem in all manner of pomp and grandeur
-- but be that as it will, Papias was ever thought of as a Man of a downright
and untainted Integrity, and had both the advantage of conversing with those
that conversed with the Apostles, and the curiosity of recording all the
Traditions, which they delivered to him by word of mouth; and lastly, was
satisfied in that way of information of the truth of all those things that were
registered concerning Jesus and his Apostles. To him ought to be ranked
Quadratus, who wrote an Apologetick to the Emperor Adrian, in which Apud.
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 3.
he positively avers that many of the Persons cured by our Lord of their
Diseases were alive in his time, and Aristides a Christian Philosopher at
Athens who at the same time presented a learned and eloquent Apology to the
same Emperor in behalf of the same cause.

XXXII. This is the first file of Witnesses next and immediately after the
Apostles, though I might have reckoned the following rank into the same
Catalogue, because they are twisted with them as they are with one another; for
as these that I have already mentioned are not all precisely of the same Age,
yet being of Antiquity enough to be competent Witnesses of the Tradition of the
Apostles, may be joined together into one complicated Testimony of it; so their
next Successors followed them by the same degrees as they followed one
another; for Succession is not conveyed down like a Chain by certain Links, but
like a Cord by the same continued interweaving, every part being some part of
the part above it; And though the Ages of the Church are distinguished by
Centuries, yet the Lives of Men are not, and the beginning of the next series
lived with some of the former as they lived with the first that lived with the
Apostles, so that there is no possibility of making an Interruption any where
between the Chanel and the Fountain head, wherever we find the Stream that
alone will certainly lead us up to its own Original.

But this will appear more distinctly by the degrees of its Conveyance; having
therefore brought the Tradition down to the time of M. Aurelius, that is a
considerable time beyond that of Trajan, to which time Scaliger and some others
are pleased to complain of a defect of Records, but with what reason we have in
part already seen, and shall now further discover by our following Witnesses,
who were not only able to testify of their own times but of the foregoing
Ages. Among whom Hegesippus deserves the first place, not only for his great
antiquity but for his manner of writing as an Historian, and so not concerned
merely to give an account of the Affairs of his own Age, but to make a diligent
enquiry into the Records and Transactions of former times. He wrote five Books
of Ecclesiastical History, which Apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 8.
he styled Commentaries of the Acts of the Church, wherein he has in a plain
and familiar style given an account of the Tradition of the Church and the most
remarkable passages in it from our Lord's Death till his own time, which was
about or rather before the Reign of M. Aurelius; for he says he came to Rome
and stayed there till the time of Anicetus, now Anicetus, according to the
latest computation, succeeded in that See at the beginning of the Reign of
Aurelius, but, according to the earlier account, under Antoninus Pius, so that
it is probable that he was at Rome before Policarp. And this description he has
given of his Voyage, that coming to Rome he met with many Bishops, and found
them all c. 22.
of one Mind, and teaching the same Doctrine, and having given some account of
Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians, he adds that the Church remained after
that in the pure and right Doctrine until the time of Primus Bishop there,
with whom, sailing to Rome, I conferred and abode many days; being come to
Rome, I stayed there till the time of Anicetus, whose Deacon was Eleutherius,
whom Soter succeeded, and after him Eleutherius. In all their Succession and in
every one of their Cities, it is no otherways taught than as the Law and the
Prophets and the Lord himself preached.

This is a singular Testimony of the sincere Tradition not only of one or two
or a few Churches, but of the Catholic Church. And as he described the
Ecclesiastical Succession every where, so has he the rise and birth of
Heresies, and particularly in the Church of Jerusalem. After that James,
surnamed the Just had suffered Martyrdom, his Uncle Simeon the Son of Cleophas
was chosen Bishop, being preferred by the unanimous Vote of all, because he was
the Lord's Kinsman. And hitherto that Church was called a pure Virgin, because
as yet it had not been deflour'd with any false Doctrines. But Thebalis being
displeased that he was not chosen Bishop secretly endeavored to debauch it,
from whom sprang those many Heresies that he afterward reckons up, and so
having elsewhere described the Martyrdom Apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 29.
of Saint Simeon he adds, until those times the Church of God remained a pure
and undefiled Virgin. For such as endeavored to corrupt the perfect Rule and
the sincere delivery of the Faith, hid themselves till that time in secret and
obscure places, but after that the sacred Company of the Apostles was worn out,
and that generation was wholly spent, that by special favor had heard with
their Ears the heavenly Wisdom of the Son of God, then the conspiracy of
wicked and detestable Heresies, through the fraud and imposture of such as
affected to be masters of new and strange Doctrines, took rooting. And because
none of the Apostles were then surviving, they published, with all imaginable
confidence and boldness, their false conceits, and impugned the old plain
certain and known truth.

At these passages I must stop a little, because, though they are a great
Testimony of the purity of the primitive Church, yet, I find them very
confidently made use of by Innovatours as unanswerable Arguments for rejecting
its Authority. Thus Gittichius, an eager Socinian, contending with Ruari Ep. 93.
Ruarus both concerning Grotius his way of writing, in making so much use of
citations, out of the ancient Fathers, in his Commentaries, and withal
concerning the primitive Fasts of the Church, which Schliclingius and some of
that party began to imitate, condemns it not only as altogether useless but
dangerous: De antiquitate in Religionis negotio statuo extra ipsas sacras novi
foederis literas, and in iis exempla Apostolorum, nullius omnino antiquitatis
habendam cuiquam Christiano ullam rationem. And then proves his Assertion from
this passage of Hegesippus, and the more ancient he says the Tradition is after
the time of the Apostles, so much the worse it is, because from the very time
of their dissolution the Church was overrun with Heresy and Superstition. So
peevish are Men against the honor and authority of the ancient Church, when
they are sensible of their own Apostasy from it. And the truth is, all our
Innovatours agree in this one principle, and that for this one very good
reason, because the ancient Church, if it were permitted to give judgment upon
them, condemns them all.

For these Men, finding errors and corruptions in the Church of Rome, instead
of reforming them as they ought to have done according to the Constitution of
the primitive Church, they fall to contriving new Models and Bodies of Divinity
out of their own brains. And among others Socinus disliking the Calvinian
Theology, as contrary, not only to the holy Scriptures, but, to the first
principles of natural Religion, sets up a new Divinity of his own contrivance,
without ever enquiring into the Doctrine and Discipline of the ancient Church;
and being advised of his flying so wide of it, he, together with his followers,
rather than part with their own fine new Notions, of which they had the honor
to be the first Authors and Abettours, will by no means allow of any such
thing as a true and uncorrupted Church ever since the time of the Apostles. But
with what vanity and arrogance it is none of my present task to enquire, only
in answer to this Objection I must reply, that it is a very wide, and I am sure
very far from a civil, Inference, to conclude that, because there were Heresies
in the primitive Church, there was nothing else. And they might with as much
reason have applied the Objection against the Apostolical Church it self,
because then, as the Apostles themselves complain, the Tares were sowing,
though it seems not so openly and so impudently as afterward. Nay, upon these
terms it is impossible their should ever be any such thing as a true Church in
the World; for as long as there are such things as Pride and Vanity among
Mankind, there will be such Men in all Societies as will be tainted with their
own idle dreams and conceits, and then rub their itch upon the common People.

But though there were Heresies in the primitive Church, which, I say, was not
to be avoided as long as it consisted of Men, yet they were never able to
prevail, but, after some struggling for admittance, were sooner or later
utterly stifled. And we have as certain a Tradition of the Birth, Growth and
Death of Heresies, as we have of the true Doctrines of the Church; and it is
very considerable that all the ancient Doctors of the Church overwhelm the
Heretics with this one Argument, by convicting them of apparent Innovation,
and deriving down their own Doctrines from the Apostles themselves. So that
though there were Heresies in the primitive Church, yet its Apostolical
Tradition was never mixed or tainted with them, but run down in a pure and clear
chanel by it self. And therefore it is a very childish as well as disingenuous
Objection against its Authority, that there were some Men in it that would have
been corrupting the purity of its Doctrine, but were never able to compass
their design; especially when they were so far from passing undiscovered or
uncontrolled, that we have as certain an account both of the Men, and of their
Opinions, and their inconsistency with the Apostolical Tradition, as we have of
the new fangled conceits of our own present Innovatours. And therefore there is
no more danger of our swallowing down old Heresies together with the Tradition
of the Church, than there is of sucking in their new ones whilst we adhere
faithfully to that.

And thus having, upon occasion of this particular passage of this ancient
Author, cleared the Authority of the ancient Church in general, it remains
that I make good the credit of his own Testimony in particular, that has been
assaulted by the great Scaliger with too fierce and concerned a keenness; for
though he is a very diligent reprover of Eusebius, yet he is much more severe
upon Hegesippus, for what reason I cannot imagine, unless that by reason of his
so very great nearness to the Apostolical times he was an unexceptionable
Witness of the primitive Tradition, for that seems to have been Scaliger's main
design, to weaken its Authority by picking out faults and oversights in its
Records; and for what end he has been so diligent in it is shrewdly to be
suspected, though perhaps it was not out of any bad intention, but only to
gratify his critical pride, which naturally delights in nothing so much as the
humor of correction.

The particular passage that he has culled out for the exercise of his critical
faculty is the Narrative of the Martyrdom of James the Just, l. 2. c. 23.
transcribed by Eusebius; in which, he says, beside extreme heedlesness, the
Historian is guilty of many absurd falsehoods. To which I first answer in
general, That the whole Story, as to the substance of it, agrees with the
account of Josephus, and that being (as it ought to be) passed by Scaliger for
authentic, is an evident proof of its reality. Secondly, It is possible that
Hegesippus might meet with the common fate of the best Authors, to be either
corrupted or interpolated, and though we could not discover it, yet the very
likelihood of it is enough to keep any prudent Man back from any such harsh
censure of such an ancient and venerable Author; and since Scaliger's time
learned Men have made several grammatical Emendations, which, if he had known
or observed himself, might have saved a considerable part of his pains.

As for his particular exceptions they are chiefly these; First, That out of
respect to the singular holiness of James the Just, he should be familiarly
admitted into the Holy of Holies, whereas, says Scaliger, it was not lawful
for any to be admitted thither but only the High Priest, and that, as every
one knows, but once a year. But this whole exception proceeds from a mere
mistake of Scaliger's: for Hegesippus does not say that he was admitted into
the Holy of Holies, but (...), the holy place, viz. That part of the Temple in
which the Mercy-seat, the Shewbread the Candlesticks and the Altar of Incense
were placed, where it was ordinarily lawful for the Priests alone to come, and
that they did in their daily ministrations. And this is it that Hegesippus
observes as a remarkable Testimony from the Jews themselves of the singular
holiness of this good Man, that purely out of respect to that, though he were
not of the priestly Order, yet in the worship of God he was admitted a place
among the Priests themselves, which was a very unusual dignity, and peculiarly
remarked as such by Hegesippus. To which I might add the observation of
Petavius that it was no unusual thing for the Ancients to give the title of
Holy of Holies to this place that was peculiar to the Priests Station, but the
former answer does so utterly blow up the foundations of the Objection as to
make this needless.

Secondly, to say nothing of James's wearing the priestly Habit, because that
is the same with the former Objection, Scaliger excepts against the Gentiles
meeting together with the Jews at the Passover as Hegesippus affirms, whereas
the Gentiles never resorted to that Feast. But here our learned Critic does
not only fall into a gross absurdity himself, but betrays manifest ignorance,
when every child knows that the Gentile Proselytes attended the worship of the
Temple as constantly as the Jews, and had a peculiar Court to themselves
erected for that purpose, and this he might have learnt concerning the Passover
from Saint John himself, And there were certain Greeks among them, that came up
to worship 12. 20.
at the Feast. Nay beside this express Text he might have been informed of it
out of his own Josephus, out of whom Valesius has Annot. in Eusebius. p. 40.
noted several Examples of it.

The third Objection is, That the twelve Tribes should be said to be present at
this action of the Martyrdom of Saint James at the time of the Passover,
whereas it is well known that there were but two remaining, the other ten being
long since lost in Captivity. But I am sure it is as well known that this was
then the vulgar phrase for all the People of Israel; for though the main Body
of ten Tribes were transported, yet many that were left behind and many that
returned back mixed with the two that remained, and so kept up the name and
title of the twelve Tribes, and therefore Saint James directs his Epistle to
the twelve Tribes, i. e. to all the People of the Jews: and Saint Paul, in his
defense before King Agrippa, pleads thus, And now I stand and am judged for the
hope of the Promise made of God unto our Fathers: unto which promise, our
twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and night, hope to come.

In the fourth place, It is objected that at Saint James's declaring Jesus to
be the Messiah, the People cried out Hosanna to the Son of David, which the
Critic says they were never wont to do unless at the Feast of Tabernacles.
But though that might be the first rise of this custom, yet it grew afterward,
as Io Paean among the Greeks, to be the common form of joy and exultation, and
so was used by the People at our Savior's entrance into Jerusalem. But this
Acclamation, says our learned Man, could not be given to James; though why he
might not be saluted the Son of David I know not, when he was so very near akin
to our Lord. But however to save our selves the trouble of answering this
little scruple, this Acclamation was not made to James himself, but to our Lord
upon his confession of him.

But in the next place, Hegesippus quotes a Text out of Esaias, that he ought
to have cited out of the Wisdom of Solomon, viz. Let us remove the just Man
because he is an offense or reproach unto us. But this at worst is but a slip
of memory, to which all our Authors are liable, and yet it is not so much, but
it is to be punctually read in the third Chapter of the Prophet Esaias, from
whom the Author of the Book of Wisdom borrowed it. But Hegesippus says James
the Just was a Nazarene and neither ate Flesh nor drank Wine, which, if true,
says Scaliger, he could not have eaten the last Supper with our Lord and his
Apostles. But this is as slender as all the rest, for though the Nazarenes in
their common course of life neither ate flesh nor drank Wine, yet they
abstein'd not from the rites and solemnities of their Religion, but ate the
Paschal Lamb as all other Jews did, in that it was indispensably enjoined them
by God himself antecedently to their Vow. But one of the Priests a Recabite,
says Hegesippus interposed to save James from the fury of the People. But this
says Scaliger could not be, for the Recabites were of the Tribe of Judah and so
incapable of the Priesthood. As if the Original constitution of either had been
exactly observed at that time, especially of the Priesthood when it is so well
known, that ever since the time of Herod the Great, those Offices even of the
High Priesthood it self were entirely disposed of by their Governors, who at
pleasure put them in and out as they did any other Officers of State.

But they placed him says Hegesippus on the Pinnacle of the Temple, whither
great numbers of the People went up to cast him down, which says Scaliger they
could not do, because it was, as Josephus tells us, so very thick set with
pointed Irons, as to keep the Birds from settling upon it. And so it is probable
the greatest and highest Battlement of all was, but it is very far from being
in the least probable that James should be placed there to Preach to the
People, when it was impossible to be heard from so great an height, or that he
should not be dashed apieces when he was cast thence, instead of falling alive
upon his Knees as the Historian reports. And therefore this (...), which
signifies any covering or Battlement, must have been some lower frame of
building, from which he might be most conveniently heard of the People.

Now as from these Objections, says Scaliger, we may learn what to think of
this Hegesippus; so say I from these Replies to them, may we learn what to
think of this Scaliger, that upon such poor surmises as these, will not stick
to destroy and villifie the best and most Ancient Records of the Christian
Church. And now the credit of this Ancient Author being fully Vindicated, it
does not only make good his own Testimony, but of all others that were Recorded
in his History between our Savior's time and his own; and to mention no more,
his account of the Bishops of Jerusalem goes a great way; For next to James the
Just he informs us that Simeon the Son of Cleophas and Cosen German to our
Lord succeeded in the Bishopric, and sat there till the Reign of Trajan, under
whom he suffered Martyrdom only for the old jealousy of Vespasian and
Domitian, of being of the Line of David, and so a Rival to the Empire. So that
here the Tradition of the Church was conveyed down to that time by as short a
Succession as we have already shown it to have been in the Church of Corinth,
from St. Paul to Clement, and from Clement to Dionysius; and in the Asian
Church, from the Apostles by Policarp to Pothinus and Irenaeus.

XXXIII. Next to Hegesippus follows Justin Martyr, though had not the other
been an Historian, he might, as being somewhat his Senior, have gone before
him, being converted to Christianity in the time of Adrian, about the end of
the First Century after our Savior's Passion, and within Eight years after
addressed an excellent Apology to Antoninus Pius in behalf of the Christian
Faith, and afterward a Second to M. Aurelius his Son and Successor. He was a
Person of Eminent Parts and Learning, the most judicious Philosopher of his
time, that had Surveyed all the Tenets of the several Sects, and studied all
kinds of useful Learning for the settlement and satisfaction of his own mind;
and having passed through the Schools of the Stoics, the Peripateticks, the
Pythagoreans, and the Platonists, of which himself has given a pleasant
account in the beginning of his Dialogue with Trypho, he was at last advised by
an unknown Grave Old Man, that met him in his retired Walks, to consider the
Christian Philosophy, to which he had no sooner applied himself, but he found
it the only certain and satisfactory Philosophy.

In short, he was such a Proficient in all kinds of Learning, that his own
Writings make good Photius his Character of him, that as he was admirably
furnished with all sorts of Reading and History, so he was arrived to the
Perfection both of the Christian and Heathen Philosophy, and therefore
immediately after his Conversion gave a Learned and Rational account of the
Vanity of the Gentile Religion. As afterward in his Apologies and his other
Writings he did of the certain truth and Divine Authority of the Christian
Faith, both from the undoubted Miracles that in his time were wrought for the
demonstration of it, and from the certain Proof of our Savior's Resurrection,
and the uninterrupted conveyance of it down to his own time. And the assurance
of his Faith he frequently avows with the greatest freedom and courage of mind,
and at last Sealed it with his Blood. And though he foresaw and foretold it,
not from any Spirit of Prophecy that he pretended to in it, but from the
probable course and most natural event of things, yet notwithstanding this, he
did not in the least slacken his Zeal for the Christian cause, but went on with
all assurance of mind in its defense, till it brought him to the encounter of
Death, which he did not only meet with his Eyes open, but with all Joy and
Alacrity, as being Arrived at the end of his hopes, and the beginning of his
happiness,

Next to Justin Martyr, Irenaeus follows in order, who lived much about or a
little after the same time; but of him I shall need to say the less, because I
have already shown the certainty of the Tradition that he had of the things
that he believed from Policarp and Pothinus, and his acquaintance with other
Apostolical men; only some few Remarks remain to make up his perfect Character,
and make out his perfect knowledge, and for this that excellent Epistle of his
to Florinus, deserves to be considered in the first place. This Doctrine of
thine (O Florinus) that I may frankly declare the truth, savoureth not of the
sincere Faith, disagreeth from the Church, and betrayeth such as listen to it
into extreme Impiety. This Doctrine no not the Heretics which were out of the
Church durst ever Publish, this Doctrine such as were Elders before us, and
Disciples of the Apostles never delivered unto thee. I saw thee when I was yet
a Youth with Policarp in the lesser Asia, living Gorgeously in the Emperor's
Palace, and mightily buisying thy self to get into favor and credit with him.
For I remember better the things of old than latter affairs; for the things we
learn in our younger years, sink deepest into our minds and grow together with
us. So that I particularly remember the very place where Policarp sat when he
taught, his going out, and his coming in, his course of life, the figure and
proportion of his Body, the Sermons he made to the People, the report he made
of his Conversation with John and others which knew the Lord; how he remembered
their sayings, and what he heard from their mouths concerning the Lord, his
Power, and his Doctrine, reciting his Commandments and all other things
agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, out of their very mouths (I say) who had seen
with their Eyes the word of Life incarnate. These things at that time through
the mercy of God which wrought in me, I diligently marked, and Printed, not in
Paper but my heart, upon which continually through the Grace of God I Ponder
and Meditate. And I am able to testify before God, that if that Holy and
Apostolic Elder had heard any such thing as you Teach, he would immediately
have disavowed it, and after his manner stopping his Ears cried out, Good God
into what times have thou reserved me, that I should hear and suffer such
Discourses! Yea, and would straight have quitted the Place where he had heard
them.

In short, this is evident from the Epistles which he wrote to Neighbor
Churches or to particular Brethren. And beside Policarp he frequently quotes in
all his Books Apostolical Ancients, though he does not mention their names.

He was a diligent Enquirer into the Records of the Church, and has
particularly described the order and occasion of the Writing of the Four
Gospels, to which might be added his knowledge of the Epistles of St. Clement,
Ignatius, the Books of Justin Martyr, his searching into the Records of the
most Famous Churches, his enquiring into the Writings and Traditions of the
most Eminent Doctors, and with this Argument putting to silence the Heretics,
by demonstrating to them, what was and what was not derived from the Apostolic
times. All which considered, how could we have a more sufficient Witness of the
Primitive Tradition? for allowing him some very few small slips and mistakes,
which must be allowed to all Humane Writers in the World, his knowledge as to
all the material parts of the Christian Doctrine was built upon the most
complicated and uninterrupted Tradition. And the certainty of his own knowledge
he has Recorded with all possible assurance, discovering in all his Writings a
vehement zeal and a Spirit highly prepared for Martyrdom, which he at last
suffered with the same Christian courage that appeared in all that went before
him. And that is a mighty accession to the weight of their Testimony, as if it
had been peculiarly designed by the Providence of God, that as they proved the
certainty of their Faith by undoubted Tradition, so they sealed its sincerity
with their Blood.

Though the Testimony of these Witnesses be so abundantly satisfactory, both
from their number, their quality, and their agreement, that I need produce no
more, and the truth is, I should have been very thankful for half so many, but
could never have had the confidence to ask for more; yet because a great number
beside offer themselves, we cannot in civility altogether refuse their
kindness, but that I may not be too tedious, I shall at present only give in a
List of their Names, that any man may examine them at his leisure.

About this time then there was beside those that I have mentioned, a great
concourse of Learned men, that were not only Confessors but Defenders of the
Christian Faith, as Athenagoras the Christian Philosopher of Athens, Theophilus
Bishop of Antioch, Melito Bishop of Sardis, Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis,
Tatian the Assyrian and Scholar to Justin Martyr, who all wrote in the time of
M. Aurelius. And in the Reign of Commodus, Pantoenus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Miltiades, Tertullian, who were closely followed by Origin, Minutius Felix,
Arnobius, St. Cyprian, all men of Learning, who diligently enquired into the
truth and falsehood of things, and have given their reasons of renouncing
Heathenism and embracing Christianity; in short, they have all maintained it
with their Pens, and most of them with their Blood. And most of their works
being still remaining, it were an easy task, were it not too tedious, to give
an account of every man's performance, but there is enough of that said
already, and to say more, were only so much needless repetition of the same
matter of fact upon the same Argument: And the most material passages of Record
extant in these Authors, I have either alleged already, or shall have occasion
so to do hereafter. Therefore all that is requisite to be done at present, is
only to suppose that there were such Writings of such men, and that I may
easily do, because they are so very common, and so very well known at this day,
and then upon that supposition to argue the certain conveyance of the Christian
Tradition through their hands, and that compleats the demonstration of its
truth and Divine Authority. For when I have proved the certainty of its
Original from the undoubted Testimony of the Apostles; and the Tradition of
their Testimony by the complicated attestation of others that lived either with
or immediately after them, and so downward from age to age, and that by very
short Periods of time into the Third Century (for beyond that it were very
impertinent to pursue the Argument) if I say this be performed in the premises,
I do not understand how any man can in reason or modesty demand a greater
Evidence, and more satisfactory demonstration of his Faith.

. XXXIV. But if Christianity came into the World attended with all this variety
and train of proof that I have represented, how came it to pass that such great
numbers of the men of that Age lived and dyed in Infidelity? If the evidence
were so full and free from all exception as is pretended, how was it possible
for any man that had eyesight enough to discern the midday Sun, not to submit
to its Conviction? Much less, how could such Creatures as men endued with
Rational faculties, be so utterly blind or extravagantly mad, that when
Almighty God had given such undeniable Proofs of his own Divine Authority, they
should hate, oppose and persecute this Religion? Mear stupidity or want of
Enquiry might have left men in Infidelity, though the State of things had been
as evident as we say it was, but when men concerned themselves with all their
Zeal and Power to root it up, they must understand what it was that they so
eagerly opposed. Neither was this done by the ordinary sort of Mankind alone,
but by the Wise and the Learned, who did not only reject it as an idle Fable,
but bestir'd themselves with all their might, to suppress it as pernicious to
the peace and quiet of the World.

This is an Objection in appearance very great, for it cannot but look very
strange, that men Learned and wise should be so foolish and so Ignorant as not
to perceive such evidence of demonstration, nay to scorn and to despise it. And
yet as big as this Objection is in show, it is in reality none at all, and if
it were any is abundantly answered by the Premises. For it is plainly
impossible that so great a part of the World, especially the Learned and
Inquisitive should ever have been prevailed upon to embrace such a Story, in
all those circumstances and under all those disadvantages that I have
described, if it had been nothing but mear falsehood and forgery. And yet by
reason of those very many and great disadvantages, let its evidence have been
never so bright, it is possible for men either not at all to see or to wink at
it.

So that at best this is but a Negative Testimony opposed to an Affirmative,
and in this particular case and under these circumstances, though it were in it
self not altogether useless, of no force at all. For unless Christianity were
true, it could never have been vouched as it is; and though it were as
certainly true as we pretend it was, yet there was no necessity imposed upon
all Mankind to yield to its belief. Especially when it had all the
disadvantages of present Interest to weigh against naked Truth; and Interest
alone, as is too well known by experience, has a more forcible influence upon
most men's minds than Integrity. So that here I might again run through all the
forementioned particulars, and show what force each of them singly, much more
all jointly might have to hinder men from believing or owning the Christian
Faith, notwithstanding all that Evidence that it gave of its Divine Authority;
and particularly I might declaim upon the wonderful power of prejudice in this
case, and make a long common place of it, to show the equality of its strength
to Truth it self.

But I shall make shorter work of it, and consider only the matter of fact and
the History of the thing, and show that whatever Opposition Christianity met
with in the World, was from unreasonable men, and upon unreasonable grounds.
And if that be proved no man can think the Opinion of such men ought to weigh
any thing by it self, but much less against all that evidence of Reason and
Record that we have laid together in the premises. And this I shall now make
good. But for our clearer method of proceeding, I shall divide my discourse
into these particulars. First to give an Account of the unreasonable Infidelity
of the Jews; and of this first as to the whole Nation, secondly, as to their
several Factions, first Saducees, secondly Pharisees. And then I shall proceed
in the second place to the Heathens, and show how all unbelief in them
proceeded merely from the blindness either of Atheism or Superstition, and this
I shall demonstrate both as to the public Persecutions and Private Oppositions
that Christianity met with; and thus when I have taken the Objection into
pieces, from the emptiness of each part, it will appear that there is nothing
in the whole.

And first the grand reason of the Infidelity of the Jews, notwithstanding the
demonstrative Evidence of the truth of Christianity, was their invincible
prejudice in honor of Moses, so that they would not care to hear any thing
that might derogate from him, much less our Savior that pretended to excel
him. And the truth is, this prejudice had some reasonable force in it self,
that when Almighty God had in such a miraculous way delivered the Law by Moses,
and by virtue of that Law kept up his own true Worship in opposition to
Idolatry, that prevailed every where but only in Judaea; and when it was
enacted with some expressions, that seem to imply its perpetual and unalterable
obligation, and lastly when it had flourisht so many years, and notwithstanding
all that opposition that was made to it by the Heathen World, it was so far
from abating its force, that it prevailed upon its Enemies, and brought over
great numbers of Proselytes from Heathenism to the Jewish Church. After all
which, at first sight it could not but appear very strange, that an obscure
Person, a Galilaean, a Carpenpenters Son, should without any Appearances of
Thunder and Lightning, take upon him so confidently to repeal this Ancient,
this Divine, this Venerable Law. The very pretense could not but seem an
unanswerable Objection to it self; for what could his design be in throwing
down the Law of Moses that was the only Bulwark against Idolatry, than to let
in all the Idolatry of the Heathen Nations upon them? Besides, if Moses acted
by Divine Commission, whatever was spoken to the disparagement of Moses
reflected upon God himself, so that this Person by pretending to enact a more
perfect Law than that, seemed to make himself wiser than his Maker.

Such Objections as these were so natural and so obvious to the prejudiced
People of the Jews, as to keep them back from so much as making enquiry after
such wild and Frantic Pretenses.

And this as I have already intimated from Origin, was the peculiar difficulty
of our Savior's work, and as appears from the whole History of his Life, was
objected against all his Miracles, as I have particularly shown concerning the
cure of the Man that was Born blind; so that though they saw the truth of the
Miracle, yet they would not believe it, because it was impossible that any man
should come from God, who could be so daringly Blasphemous as to prefer himself
to Moses. And this Objection our Savior confesses so forcible, as to
acknowledge that nothing could answer it but his unparalled Miracles, John
15. 24. If I had not done among them the works which never any man did, they
had not had sin: but now have they both seen, and hated both me and my Father.
That is, they had been excuseable in rejecting him and his pretenses of
Establishing a new Religion, if his Miracles had not exceeded those of Moses
and the Prophets, whom yet they believed to have been sent from God; but now
when they have seen me do such works as none but God can do, curing all manner
of Diseases, feeding thousands with a few Loaves, raising the Dead, and all
only by the power of a Word as God at first Created the World, after all this
if they reject me, it is plain that they affront him too. And so again when he
cured the man that was Blind and Dumb; because they could not deny the Miracle,
they Blaspheme it, and say, it was done by the help of the most powerful of all
the Devils, for who else could assist the man that opposed Moses, and therefore
our Savior having demonstrated by rational proof, that he acted not by the
power of Beelzebub, he tells them that it is evident from his Miraculous works,
that the Kingdom of God is come to them, that is, the Reign of the Messiah; as
it is called Daniel 11. 14. And adds that all calumnies are pardonable, but
only that against the Holy Ghost, that is, the Power of God, by which he
discovered his will to Mankind, by which they barred their minds against all
the means of Information, and if they would not acknowledge that, when they saw
it in his Works, it was not possible for him to make any impression upon them
as men, and so they thereby put themselves into a state of impenitence, and an
utter incapacity of Pardon.

Now it is plain, that this obstinacy of the Jews, though it was grounded upon
the Divine Authority of Moses's Law, was in it self very unreasonable, in that
as Almighty God had confirmed the Law of Moses by Signs and Wonders, so he
vouched all that our Savior either taught or pretended to beyond that, by
enduing him with a much greater power of Miracles, than was ever given to Moses
or the Prophets. And yet that they might be guilty of it, is obvious enough to
any man's apprehension, if we consider the strange power of religious
prejudices, and upon what plausible grounds theirs were bottomed, the natural
stubborness of the Jewish Nation, but most of all the pride and waywardness of
Superstition. For that as I shall show afterward in the case of the Pharisees,
was the bottom of all their rage and indignation against our Savior, in that
he so freely upbraided their degeneracy from the Law of Moses, and convinced
them of the folly and the childishness of those Superstitious conceits that
they had made out of it, upon the Observation whereof they so highly valued
themselves.

This is evident through the whole History of the Gospels, but in no one case
more than that of the Sabbath, which as it was at first commanded by God, so
they observed it with infinite Superstition. And for that reason our Savior
set himself to control them in it, and therefore wrought most of his Miracles
on that day, and yet they were so foolish as to think that a sufficient
objection against his Divine Authority. And though one would think no man could
be so absurd, when he had seen a Blind man cured only by commanding him to open
his Eyes, as to slight, nay, find fault with the Miracle merely because it was
done on the Sabbath day, yet this was the common case of the Jews, so
invincible above all other things is the power and prejudice of Superstition.

. XXXV. The Second was a very dazzling prejudice, and that was the magnificent
State and Glory, in which they expected their Messiah should appear. For the
whole World was at that time filled with expectations of a mighty Prince; all
the Ancient Prophesies concerning the Messiah were Glorious and Wonderful, and
their descriptions of his Kingdom seemed to exceed that of the Roman Greatness;
the Glory of Augustus was to be Eclips't by the Appearance of a Greater
Monarch; the Grandeur of his Court, and vastness of his Empire, were but
ordinary things in comparison to those that were foretold of this Prince's
Universal Government. The splendor of these great Prophesies flusht and abused
the ambition of the great Spirits of the Empire, and every hopeful and aspiring
Prince of the Family of the Caesar's pushed forward for an Universal Monarchy.
And every prosperous Commander of the Roman Armies, flattered himself with
hopes that it might be he, that was designed to be indeed, and not in Title
only, Lord of the whole World.

And particularly this as I have shown out of his own Historians, was the first
rise and occasion of Vespasian's Glory. And this was the thick conceit of the
Jews as well as the Gentiles, as Celsus discourses in the Person of a Jew,
(...), Orig. adv. Celsus l. 2.
That the Person foretold by the Prophets, that was to come, should be a mighty
King, a Leader of great Armies, Lord of all the Kingdoms and Nations of the
Earth. And after the same manner does Trypho the Jew argue against our
Savior's being the Messiah from the meanness Justin Martyr dial. cum Tryp. p.
249.
of his Condition, whereas the true Messiah was to be a mighty and Renowned
Person, and to receive from the Ancient of days a perpetual Kingdom. They
imagined their Messiah to be such another fighting Man as his Father David,
that should break the Power of the Romans, and by his Victorious Arms redeem
the People of God from Heathen Tyranny and Oppression. They hoped the time
would come, when a Circumcised King should keep his Court in Augustus's Palace,
and when the Sanhedrin should possess the Senate House, and there Issue out
Decrees for the Circumcision of all People, Nations, and Languages. And this
confidence in the Messiah seems to have been the great support of the pride and
ill nature of the Jews; for when he came they were resolved to take their fill
of Revenge upon the Gentile World for all those Insolences, wherewith they had
affronted Gods own People.

And this (as the Historians of that Age observe) was the ground of their
frequent Tumults and Rebellions about that time, and at last of the utter
destruction of their Commonwealth. They were grown impatient in the
Expectations of their Messiah, and were no longer able to endure the reproach
of being subject to the pride and power of uncircumcifed miscreants. And all
the Nation of the Jews were so fully and impregnably possessed with this Dream of
a Temporal Prince, that the Apostles themselves seemed at first to have
followed our Savior for hopes of present preferment; nothing less could serve
the Sons of Zebedee, than to sit the one at his right and the other at his left
hand in his Kingdom; to be the Grandees, and chief Favorites of his Court, his
Agrippas and Mecoenas'es, they were not content with being Heads of Tribes,
unless they might have the principal place next to the Royal Throne. And
perhaps St. Peter, till he understood better things, promised himself for a
reward of his zeal, no less Dominion than what his pretended Successors claim
from him; so that when upon his Confession of our Savior's being the true
Messiah, our Savior immediately declares the speedy approach of his death,
Mat. 16. 21. Peter remonstrates to that as inconsistent with the whole design,
and when our Savior continues from time to time to warn them of the set time
when he was to be betrayed, he very faithfully buys him a Sword to fight in his
defense, And St. John being so great a Favorite, could be no less than
Principal Secretary of State, and Judas no doubt expected no less office than
of Lord Treasurer. And the Women too counted to have no small share in the
Government, as appears by Old Zebedee's Wife. And as some were to manage
affairs at Court, so others were to have their Governments and Provinces
abroad, Herod and Pilate were to be displaced, and one was to be President of
Judaea, and another of Galilee; and if there were any one more modest than the
rest, it is likely he contented his ambition with being Lord Mayor of
Capernaum. And this conceit was so deeply rivetted in their Fancies, that all
our Savior's discourses were not able to dispossess it; and though he so often
Preached to them the Doctrine of his Death and Passion, in the plainest and
most Familiar words, yet they were so Drunk and Lightheaded with it, that they
understood him no more, than they did the Language of Moses and Elias at his
Transfiguration. For though he taught his Disciples and said unto them, the Son
of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him, and after
that he is killed, he shall rise the Third day, yet they understood not that
saying, Mark. 9. 3. One would think the saying were as plain as words could
make it, but though they understood the Grammatical sense of them, yet they
were so possessed with this Jewish Prejudice of his being a great Temporal
Prince, that nothing that seemed inconsistent with it could enter into their
heads; so that the meaning of those words, they understood not that saying, is
that they understood not how they could be reconciled to those Prophesies that
they had of the Kingdom of the Messiah. And therefore upon occasion of all such
Discourses, they still minded him of the recovery of his Kingdom, and when
those hopes were buried in his Grave, then all their expectations utterly dyed
together with him. Saint Peter thinks of returning John 21. 3.
to his old trade of Fishing. And we trusted, say the two Disciples, that it
had been he which should have redeemed Israel, Luke 24. 21. And after they were
assured of his Resurrection the very first thing they were sure to put him in
mind of was the interest of his Crown, Lord will thou not at this time restore
again the Kingdom to Israel, Acts 1. 6.

These were the big and swelling expectations of the whole Nation of the Jews
concerning their Messiah, but whilst they were eagerly gazing upon the outward
pomps and glories of the World, the Providence of God so orders it, that their
Prince should slip into it clothed in all the dresses of meanness and
humility, that he might have nothing to recommend him to Mankind but mere
evidence of truth. Every circumstance of his Birth, Life and Death was designed
cross to all the Grandeur and Vanity of the World.

Thus was he born, not at Jerusalem the Imperial City, but, at Bethlehem, the
least among the Cities of Judah; not in the Town, but in the Suburbs, in a poor
Cottage, not in the dwelling House but in the Stable among Beasts and Beggars;
Rags were his only Imperial Robes, and his first Throne a Manger. And instead
of posting away Curriers to the Courts of Rome or Persia, the Message of his
Birth is imparted to a few plain and honest Pesants; they were Shepherds, a
simple and innocent sort of People, that made the first Address, and did the
first Homage to this Infant Prince. And the whole progress of his Reign was but
agreeable to this humble Coronation, he was subject to his poor Parents, and as
some, who were no incompetent Witnesses, tell us, wrought at his Fathers Trade,
and got his living by making of Ploughs and Yokes. And after he entered upon
his Office and declared who he was, he chose for the principal place of his
residence Galilee, the most ignoble part of all Judaea, not only because it
lay most remote from Jerusalem, the place of their Court and Temple, but
because it was inhabited by a mixed sort of People, and thence commonly styled
Galilee of the Gentiles; partly in that lying next to them and having more
commerce with them, they were not so coy of admitting them into their Kindreds
as the other Jews, and partly in that it was inhabited by some of those Jews
that returned from the Captivity, who settled there among the Gentiles, that
had, during the Captivity, placed themselves in it; so that the Galileans were
looked upon as a sort of Mungril Jews, and a Galilean was little better than a
name of reproach, whence the Proverb Shall Christ come out of Galilee? And as
he chose the worst part of his Country for the chief place of his Residence,
though at times he showed himself in other places, but still under the
disadvantage of a Galilean, so he chose the meanest of his Countrymen for the
Ministers of his Kingdom, Fishermen, a poor and beggarly sort of People, and
yet they were made so much the poorer by being his Disciples. We have left all
(says Peter) to follow thee: and this mighty all was nothing but a few tattered
Nets, but yet with them were they able to get a small maintenance for their
Families, whereas when they left their Trade to follow him, they became perfect
Beggars, for the Foxes have holes, etc. Nay, what was still a greater
condescension, he conversed not only with the meanest, but, as his Office
required, with the worst of Men, Publicans and Sinners, the most hated and most
scandalous Persons, insomuch that his Enemies took advantage from it to
reproach himself as a Person that lived a Life of Looseness and Debauchery.

And thus he past on through perpetual Affronts, Reproaches and Calumnies, till
he purposely went up to Jerusalem to deliver up himself into the hands of his
Enemies; and with what Scorn, Insolence and Cruelty he was there treated, and
with what Meekness, Patience and Humility he there behaved himself I need not
here represent. They indeed put upon him a royal Robe, but it was in Derision,
they crowned him, but it was with Thorns, they bowed the Knee before him, b^^
it was in Mockery, and they writ him King of the Jews, but it was upon his
Cross, where he suffered himself to be executed with two Thieves, and that in
the midst of them as the greatest Villain of the three. All which as he
suffered for other weighty ends, so not least of all in order to his
Resurrection; partly, because that being designed as the groundwork of his
Religion, the Providence of God took particular care to make it stand upon its
own unassisted Evidence, and for that purpose not only laid it so very deep,
but cleared away every thing that might seem to give it the least Assistance:
partly, because being the most material Article of our Faith, and withal most
difficult to be believed, God was pleased to confirm its truth by sensible
Experience. As Arnobius has very well observed, Cumque novitas rerum, and
inaudita promissio audientium Lib. 1.
turbaret mentes, and credulitatem faceret hoesitare, virtutum omnium Dominus
atque ipsius mortis extinctor hominem suum permiserit interfici, ut ex rebus
consequentibus scirent in tuto esse spes suas, quas jamdudum acceperant de
animarum salute, nec periculum mortis alia se posse ratione vitare. When the
strangeness of the Doctrine, and the greatness of the promise of immortal
Happiness amazed Men's Minds and stumbled their Belief, the Lord of all Power
and Conqueror of Death permitted his humane Nature to be slain, that from his
Resurrection and those things that followed after his Death, they might be
assured of the truth of their Faith as to the future Salvation of their Souls.

Now this humble Appearance of Jesus being designed so utterly cross to the
proud and revengefull expectations of the Jews, who thirsted for the coming of
their Messiah, only to be avenged of all their Enemies, it did not only raise
their prejudice ^ut their indignation against him. But especially when he took
upon him the great Prerogative of the Messiah, and would have all their mighty
expectations fulfilled in himself alone, and yet disclaimed all temporal Power,
and taught that the Kingdom of the Messiah was not a Kingdom of this, but
another World; so strange a disappointment as this could not but work in them a
fierce and angry aversation both to his Person and to his Doctrine. For by this
very thing all their hopes of being delivered from the Roman Yoke were utterly
defeated, and yet that was the only benefit that they expected from their
Messiah. And therefore it is no wonder that they entertained him with so little
kindness, when, by his pretense of being the Messiah, he not only failed their
expectations of himself, but destroyed all their hopes for ever.

To all which may be added the extreme Wickedness of the Jews at that time;
their manners being universally debaucht under the Reign of Herod, and their
chief Men tainted with Principles of Atheism and Irreligion; but of that I have
partly discoursed already, and shall do so again under the next Head when I
come to treat of the Sect of the Sadducees, and therefore at present I shall
only refer to Josephus his History of that time, from whence it will appear
that they were fallen from all sense of common Humanity; that they were more
barbarous than Canibals or Banditi; and that no History in the World can equal
those Instances of Cruelty that were committed by the Jews among themselves at
the Siege of Jerusalem. Now such degenerate Brutes as these, whose delight and
trade it was to be cutting throats were very likely to give audience to the
merciful Institution of Jesus, and leave off their former highway practices
to take up his Cross and follow him.

XXXVI. These are the most general and obvious Prejudices that might bar up the
Minds of the Jews against the entertainment of Christianity, notwithstanding
all that Evidence that it brought along with it; The more particular Prejudices
are those that relate to the chief Factions and leading Sects among them, that
is, the Sadducees and the Pharisees, who beside the Prejudices common to them
with all other Jews, were blinded by some others peculiar to themselves. And in
truth these were the only Enemies that opposed themselves to the Doctrine of
Jesus; for it was they that made use of the forementioned Prejudices of the
People thereby to raise their rage and fury against him. So that whatever
opposition was made by them, proceeded not directly from themselves, but was
set a work and managed by these Men's instigation; and therefore if we would
find out the true ground of the opposition that was made to the Christian
Doctrine by the Jewish Nation, we must discover the reasons, motives and
designs upon which these leading Men proceeded. And they will appear so unjust
and so unreasonable, as that, instead of reflecting any disparagement upon the
cause they oppose, its being opposed upon such accounts will it self be no
small Evidence of its Truth and Goodness.

And first, as for the Sadducees, the case is plain that they were no better
than rank and avowed Atheists. For though they pretended to own some parts of
the Jewish Religion, yet that was only to pass a complement upon the common
People, that would not in former times endure any such thing as open and
downright Atheism. But otherwise to what purpose is it to talk of any such
thing as Religion whilst they deny the future state of the Souls of Men,
without which all pretenses to Virtue and Piety are mere contradictions to
themselves, false braggs and empty talk. And though Grotius In Matt. 22. 23.
will by no means suffer them to be reckoned with the herd of Epicurus, in that
they denied not the Providence of God in the Government of humane Affairs, but
only confined its Rewards and Punishments to this present Life. Which is the
same Doctrine with the Epicureans in other words: For they too allow of the
present Rewards and Punishments ordinarily annexed to Virtue and Vice as well
as these, so that as to that point they stand upon equal terms. But when they
seem to be parted, as they often are, what then is to be done, but that
whatever becomes of Virtue or Duty, both of them are alike concerned to take
care of their own present welfare. So that Immortality being once cashiered,
it is after that Vanity and Nonsense to talk of any Obligations to Justice or
Religion. And yet this was not only an Opinion entertained by the Sadducees,
but it was the fundamental Principle of their Sect. Upon this alone they
esteemed themselves wiser than all other Men, and this was their great point of
Controversy with the Pharisees; so that when our Savior so avowedly sided
against them in it, he was for that reason their Enemy, and they obliged by it
to endeavor his ruin. Now at the time of his Appearance they were the most
powerful Faction in the Sanhedrin, as appears not only from the Scriptures
but Josephus, the Highpriest himself and his Kindred being of that Sect. And it
is very observable that they were much fiercer than the Pharisees in
prosecuting the Apostles for attesting our Savior's Resurrection, and are
therefore more particularly mentioned than the others, Acts 4. 1. 5. 17. And
the reason of their fierceness was because all their hopes were in this Life
only, and therefore they were more careful to preserve the peace and quiet of
the World, and therein their own; and that made them the more zealous against
all Innovations or Alterations in Religion, for fear of public disturbances.
And then beside, if Jesus were risen from the dead, there was an end of their
Sect, and they must yield the Victory to the Pharisees in the great point of
Controversy between them. So that for the very honor of their Sect, they
would not endure to hear of it, and its very mention put them into choler and
passion. And by that alone did Saint Paul raise so great a dissension between
the two Factions, as to endanger a public tumult in the Commonwealth, Acts
23. 6, 7.

Now this Sect of Men being thus detein'd by this Principle, they were not
concerned to enquire into the truth of any matter of Fact that might overthrow
it. But their custom was to jeer and flout at it as a ridiculous Story, and
when they came to argue with our Savior about it, they seem to have designed
rather to make themselves merry, than to enter into any serious discourse with
him. Atheists are always proud and conceited People, and scorn to make any
enquiry after any thing that may convince them; they confute all with the
impossibility of the thing it self, and when Men once think themselves secure
of that, it is in vain to tell them any story against it, for without ever
enquiring into its truth or credibility, they are aforehand undoubtedly assured
of its forgery. And this was the particular case of the Sadducees, their main
Argument against a future state was the impossibility of the thing, and after
that when Men reported that to have been done, which they knew impossible to be
done, what followed but away with them for idle Cheats and Liars. And therefore
without ever examining them they thrust them into Prison with all manner of
scorn and indignation, Acts 5. 17, 18.

Secondly, as for the Pharisees, who were of the greatest power and reputation
with the People, they were a strange sort of ignorant, supercilious and
conceited Fanatics. And there is no temper of Mind so fixed and stubborn as
religious Pride and Self-conceitedness; it is of all Illusions the most
delightful to the minds of Men, and when they are once thoroughly possessed with
it, it bars up their Understandings against all Arguments, it takes away the
use of their natural Faculties, and to go about to convince them of their folly
and hypocrisy, is only to provoke their rage and choler. This was the state
of the case between our Savior and the Pharisees. They pretended to the
strictest Piety, and valued themselves at a mighty rate beyond all other Men
for the singularity and exactness of their devotion. And yet this they placed
not in any conformity to the Divine Laws, but in the observation of some vain
Customs and Traditions derived from their Forefathers. Now this being so gross
and so foolish an Imposture, our Savior set himself particularly to represent
its vanity, and took all occasions to convince them that they had utterly
forsaken the Law of Moses, for which they pretended so much reverence, and that
the Customs they were so fond of, were no part of his Religion, because no
where enjoined in his Law, but mere arbitrary conceits of their own devising.
And this it was that raised their displeasure against him to so great an height
of hatred and indignation, that a Person who pretended to so great an Office
and Authority as that of the Messiah, should represent them so contemptibly in
his public and constant discourses to the People. And therefore instead of
considering the nature and truth of his Doctrine, they all along set themselves
to trapan him in his Discourses, and minded nothing else but to pursue their
revenge against him, and never rested till they had wrecked all their malice
upon him as the mortal Enemy of their Sect.

Now it is no wonder that Persons of this complexion were so strangely blinded
against all that evidence that our Savior gave of his Divine Commission. For
none so blind as those that will not see, and none so wilful as those that are
in love with themselves, and no self-love so doting as that which is grounded
upon a false conceit of Sanctity and Religion. And yet notwithstanding this,
some of the more ingenuous among them, as Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea
were overcome by the Divinity of his Works, and afterward even Gamaliel himself
was startled at them. For the advice he gave to let the Apostles alone seemed
to have proceeded merely from the unsettledness of his own Mind, that was not
then thoroughly satisfied concerning the truth or falsehood of their pretenses.
And the truth is his advice took with the Sanhedrin not from the reason of the
thing but the authority of the Man, for otherwise it was but very foolish
Counsel, that if this Work be of Men it would of its own accord come to naught,
for by that principle they must give liberty to all the Impostors in the World
to disturb, as much as in them lies, the public peace and quiet of Mankind.
But when it was doubtful, as it then seemed to him, lest happily by punishing
Acts 5. 39.
the Apostles, they might be found to fight against God, upon this supposition
it was not only wise but pious advice to stay for a little farther trial of
the Cause, before they undertook its utter extirpation. And it is not a little
observable that though some of the Pharisees were shockt out of their
Prejudices, the Sadducees were all impregnable; for we no where read that any
of them were ever converted to the Christian Faith, and the reason is plain
because their first Principle supposed its truth utterly impossible, and then
they would not so much as enquire after it or hear any thing concerning it. But
the Pharisees, not lying under this invincible Prejudice, were, notwithstanding
all their other great hindrances, in some capacity of conviction. So that
though we find that notwithstanding they were at first the fiercest Enemies to
our Savior's Doctrine, yet afterward they were out-stript by the Sadducees in
their zeal and fury against it. For as in the Gospels the Pharisees are every
where noted as his most implacable Enemies, so in the Acts of the Apostles
after our Savior's Resurrection, the Sadducees are remarked as their most
bitter and vehement Prosecutors. And now this I think may be a sufficient
account of the Incredulity of the Jews, notwithstanding our Savior gave all
that Evidence of his Authority that we pretend he did. And it is obvious enough
to any Man, that understands humane Nature, to apprehend how easy a thing it
is for Men not only biased but pressed down by all these Prejudices to avoid
or neglect the force of all the Arguments and Demonstrations in the World.

XXXVII. And thus having described the several unreasonable Prejudices that
withheld so many of the Jewish Nation from embracing of the Christian Faith; we
proceed now in the last place to the grounds that the Heathens went upon in
their Opposition to it. And these were as much more absurd and unreasonable
than those of the Jews as was their Religion. For that the Jews had some
appearance of pretense against our Savior's alteration in Religion we have
already shown, in that it was owned by himself to have been established by
Divine Authority. But as for the War that the Heathen World raised against it,
they grounded it upon such false Principles, as, though Christianity it self
had been false, betray their own folly and absurdity. Atheism and Contempt of
God and all Religion was their master-objection against the Christians, and the
only thing they set up and contended for in opposition to it, was their own
wretched Idolatry and Superstition, both which are too great demonstrations of
an invincible prejudice and inflexible partiality. And they are both so very
absurd, that which is most so, it is very hard to determine. For whatever the
Christians were guilty of, it is certain that they were at the greatest
distance from Atheism of any party of Men in the World. And as for the Religion
of the Gentiles, it was so grossly wicked and foolish, that it was impossible
for any wise Man to embrace it without affronting both God and his own
Conscience.

This was the true state of the Controversy between them, they never entered
into the debate of the matter of Fact, or so much as once enquired into the
merits of the Cause, but for this reason alone they reputed all Christians as
vile and profligate Persons, because they would not join with them in their
Atheistical Idolatry. And this was the grand motive of all their persecutions
against them, in which they proceeded upon no other Article than that they
refused to sacrifice to their Gods. So that if the Heathen Religion were
absurd, and it is certain that nothing could be more so; and if all their
hatred to Christianity were founded merely upon their zeal to that, this gives
a plain account of the unreasonableness of their opposing the Christian Faith,
notwithstanding the undeniable evidence of its Divinity. And this I shall
endeavor to prove, as I have in the case of the Jews, from the matter of Fact
it self. And thereby it will appear not only that the Assertion is a probable
but a certain truth, and so will not only answer but confute the Objection, by
proving that all the reason that Men had to oppose Christianity was their being
grossly unreasonable. And this I shall make good, first as to public
Persecutions, secondly private Oppositions.

The first Persecution was raised by Nero, a Prince sufficiently branded for
all manner of Folly and Wickedness, but above all for his brutish and inhumane
Cruelty, and therefore it ought to be no wonder that a Person so barbarous to
all Mankind, even to his dearest Friends and nearest Relations, should vent
some of his fury upon the Christians. But as bad as he was, and I do not
remember any Prince unless Caligula more wild and extravagant in his manners,
and will allow the truth of that Character which Suetonius gives of him, It a
degenerasse a suorum Virtutibus Neronem, ut tamen Vitia cujusque quasi tradita
and ingenita retulerit, That he lost all the Virtues of his Ancestors and
retained all their Vices, yet for all that I cannot but think him to have been
painted a much greater Monster than he deserved. I will indeed grant his Folly
to have exceeded the ordinary rate of Madness, especially his Vanity of
Fidling, Singing and acting of Plays, for which he so highly valued himself,
and was so ridiculously flattered by others, and for the glory of it neglected
all Affairs of State, left Rome to show his skill in the Cities of Greece,
returned home with triumphal Pomp in the habit of a Player and with the shows
of all his Victories. In short, he was not so jealous of a Rival in the Empire
as of a skillful Comedian, and at his fall was much more grieved to be
upbraided with being a bad Fiddler than a bad Emperor. Neither was he less
exorbitant in his Lust than in his Vanity, and it was both together that so
much exposed him to the public scorn and hatred of the People.

But for the Vice of Cruelty, wherewith he is so severely charged, and of which
no doubt he was highly guilty, I cannot but think him overloaded by the
Historians. It was indeed a wild Paradox attempted by Cardan, though wittily
performed, to write an Encomium of his great Virtues, but above all, his
Clemency, in which he will have him to have excelled the best of the Roman
Emperors; yet that he was not so bloody as he is usually represented, appears
as by many other Acts of Mercy toward his Enemies, so particularly, as tender
as he was of his Reputation, by not punishing, as most other Emperors were
wont to do, the known Libellers against his Person and Government with capital
Penalties. And as for his other Severities, this at least is to be pleaded in
his behalf, the prodigious and unparalled Wickedness of the Age, that was so
universally debauched, that there was scarce a Man in it of reputation enough
to give Testimony against him: So that though he were both hated and condemned
by the Senate it self, yet the ground of the contention between them was who
should have the greatest Empire in Wickedness, and his restraint of their
Enormities, particularly their inhumane Extortion, is no improbable account of
their great displeasure against him. And for this reason the number of his
Executions is no proper Objection against his Government; for that might come
to pass not from his cruelty, but from their own wicked practices, and
therefore nothing can be determined from that against him but by inquiring into
the cause of those that suffered, and unless it appear (as it does not) that
they were falsely accused and unjustly condemned, their being executed proves
nothing either for or against him. And as for his cutting off so many of his
nearest Kindred, the question is, whether themselves forced him not to it in
his own defense, and if they did, then it was not choice but necessity. And
whatever he did for reason of State was, according to the practices of those
times, very allowable. As for the Death of his Father Claudius there is no
evidence that he had any hand in it; that was wholly the Wickedness of
Agrippina. And though he seemed too ungrateful to his memory by speaking
reproachfully of him, it is apparent that he was put upon it by the instigation
of Seneca, whom it seems that dull Emperor had disobliged. As for Agrippina,
she was a Woman of intolerable Pride and unheard of Cruelty; she had poisoned
her Husband to derive the Crown upon her Son, she had threatened to poison him
and transfer it to Germanicus; in short, she would not suffer him to enjoy any
share or any quiet in the Government. Now what was to be done with a Woman of
this temper? Indeeed to kill her, she being his Mother, how wicked soever, was
inhumane and unnatural, yet however her practices could not but force him to
some undecent severity. At least it is plain that at first he used her with due
respect, and bore her insolence with extraordinary patience, till he saw both
his Life and his Empire attempted, and then it was but time to secure himself,
though he ought to have done it some gentler way than by putting her to Death.
In short, if Agrippina were so bad as the Historians represent her to have
been, Nero was not, because his cruel usage of her was in a great measure
forced by her own wickedness. As for Germanicus, he must dye, not only as a
declared Rival to the Empire, but as the true and rightful Heir of the Crown.
And this practice was grown so familiar, that there was not an Emperor but
either got the Crown or secured it by murder. All which came to pass by the
prodigious dotage of Augustus, who, after all his great craft, instead of
securing the Empire to his own nearest Kindred, only obliged his Successors
to murder them for their own security. For when he passed over the right Heirs
to settle the Empire upon Tiberius, it was obvious that Tiberius could never
think himself secure in his Throne, till all that had an antecedent right to it
were removed out of the way. So that the blame of Tiberius his Cruelty is in a
great measure to be charged upon Augustus his Folly, who, by his preposterous
settlement of the Crown upon him, made it necessary upon reason of State, and
that he too well knew in his Court outweighed all other considerations. And
hence came that constant succession of Murders in the Empire, whereby all of
his own Family were in the first place cut off, and afterward all his Kindred.
So imprudent a thing is it to think of disposing of Crowns against the Right of
Inheritance, it certainly entails Murders upon the Royal Family and Civil Wars
upon the Kingdom.

But to return to Nero, these are the main Instances of Cruelty wherewith he is
usually branded, some others there are that I shall here pass by, and only
concern my self in that he is charged with against the Christians. Against whom
it is evident that he proceeded not either from any enquiry into their cause or
any voluntary cruelty of his own, but delivered them up to the Peoples fury,
only to deliver himself from it. For the City happening to be destroyed by a
sudden Fire, Nero's Enemies, to render him more odious, cast reports among the
People that he was the Author of the mischief, and the more to exasperate them
add that he beheld the sad sight from Mecoenas his Tower with no small joy and
pleasure, singing the destruction of Troy. Whether this report were true or
false it mattered not, the People were ready enough to run away with any thing
in their rage and anguish, and though it was, for any thing that appears,
altogether groundless and malicious, it was then believed and is so to this
day. And therefore Nero, to bring himself off, transfers the Odium upon the
Christians, whom he knew to be sufficiently hateful to the common Rabble, as
despisers of their Gods and their Religion, and by turning them loose to their
rage and cruelty, diverted, or at least somewhat assuaged, their fury against
himself. Neither does this seem to have been Nero's own device, but rather to
have been first prompted by the People themselves: for it is more than likely
that the Idol Priests, upon occasion of so sad a Calamity, should blow the
suspicion into the Peoples heads, that it came from the Christians, who as they
hated their Gods, hated their Temples too, and so would not stick to set the
City on fire on purpose to destroy them. And such a suggestion as this being
once kindled among the Common People, it would quickly prevail like the flames
themselves, and in the extremity of their anguish transport them to the utmost
excess of rage and indignation. And therefore, as the Historian observes, they
did not think simple punishment enough, unless they added scorn to their
cruelty, and so would not suffer them to be put to death in the shape of men,
but worried them with Dogs, in the skins of Wild Beasts. But whether Nero fired
the City or not; or whether he contrived this device to save himself, or only
made advantage of the folly of the People, it is certain that neither he nor
they proceeded against them upon any mature deliberation, but that they were
Sacrificed merely to the outrage of the Rabble.

And this is the plain account of the Neronian Persecution, in which the
Prosecutors were so far from entering into the merits of the cause, that it was
wholly managed by popular Tumult, that was raised by Calumny, and enraged by
Superstition. So that the Christians in it suffered not as Christians, but
only upon occasion of this accident, the People fell foul upon them as Enemies
to their Idol-Gods. And that was natural for the blind and furious Rabble to
do, whatever the Christian cause might be, for without enquiring into that,
they were only zealous for their old Superstition. And therefore their
Opposition to Christianity can be no objection against it, for though we
suppose its truth and Evidence, yet notwithstanding that, it could not have
avoided their displeasure. And yet in most of the other Persecutions it will
appear that they were both set on foot and carried on only by the folly and
fury of the Multitude.

. XXXVIII. The Second Persecution was raised by Domitian, the Second to Nero
for fierceness and cruelty, though neither did he proceed in it upon any
account of Religion, but purely out of jealousy of State. For as he exceeded
all other Princes in suspicion and ill nature, so upon the least shadow of
pretense he would never stick at any cruelty to secure himself. Thus he
Murdered Metius Domitianus for no other reason than because Sueton. in Domit.
c. 10.
he was Born, as the Astrologers affirmed, under an Imperial Horoscope: And
slew his own Uncle Flavius Sabinus, because when he was chosen Consul, the
Clark whose Office it was to declare the choice to the People, by mistake
pronounced him Emperor instead of Consul. And though it was commonly said that
he slew his Kinsman Flavius Clemens. whose two Sons he had adopted to succeed
him in the Empire, upon the score of Christianity, yet it is much more probable
that his displeasure was suddenly taken up upon some pretense of State, as
Suetonius expressly affirms, Repent ex tenuissima suspicione tantum non ipso
ejus consulatu c. 1,.
interemit.

And this, as we have the Story from Hegesippus, was the true Original cause of
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 20.
his troubling the Christians: Against whom he did not proceed in general as
Christians, but only against some of our Savior's Kindred, who were accused
before him as descending from the Royal Line of David, out of which the Messiah
or Universal Monarch was to come, of whom Domitian, says the Historian, was
not less jealous than Herod himself. But upon Examination, finding both the
Poverty and the Innocence of the Persons, he dismissed them, and by a Public
Edict for bad all farther Prosecution against the Followers of Jesus. Thus far
Hegesippus, and it is one would think a plain and an easy Story, and Recorded
by a Person that lived very near the time in which it was Transacted; and yet
our great Scaliger in pursuit of that Scholastic Authority, which he has taken
to himself of correcting Animad. Eusebius. Anno MMCXII.
the Ancients, but especially Hegesippus, is pleased not to pass it for so much
as credible, and that with so much Confidence and so little Reason, as too
grossly discovers his affectation of finding fault. For first he wonders that
there should be no more than two of the Posterity of David left, and those of
the Family of Judas the Brother of our Lord, as Hegesippus affirms. Whereas
Hegesippus affirms no such thing, but only says that two of the Posterity of
Judas the Brother of our Lord were accused before Domitian. But that they were
all that were remaining of the Family of David, he does not so much as
intimate, neither had Scaliger any ground for this surmise, unless from thence
to seize an Opportunity to give the World an account of his knowledge of the
History of the Jews at Babylon, where he tells us of many of the Posterity of
David in great honor. But granting the truth of his Story (though all the
Stories of the Jews after their dispersion, are altogether false and frivolous)
what is that to what happened at Rome? So that had there been never so many of
the Posterity of David at Babylon, there might have been no more than two found
at Rome. And therefore if Hegesippus had affirmed, that there were onlytwo, all
Scaliger's Stories of Babylon are to no purpose: But when he has affirmed no
such thing, but on the contrary gives us a distinct account of Simeon the Son
of Cleopas Bishop of Jerusalem, who lived there after the time of Domitian,
Scaliger could have no motive to make the Objection, but only to empty his
Common-place-book of two or three Rabinical Quotations. But yet his next
Exception is much worse, viz. that there was no such Person as Judas of the
Kindred of our Lord mentioned in the Gospels. But suppose there were no such
upon Record, it seems very hard dealing with an Ancient Writer, that lived so
near the times that he Writes of, and had opportunity of enquiring into the
Genealogy of the Family, when he affirms that there was such a Branch of it, to
deny the truth of the matter of Fact, only because it happened not to be
mentioned in the Gospels; whereas nothing is better known than that diverse more
material passages relating to our Savior's Family are there omitted, their
design being to describe his own descent from David, and not to give any
account of the several present Branches of the Family. And yet after all
Scaliger's confidence that there was no such Man upon Record, do we find him
expressly reckoned among our Savior's nearest Kindred, Mat. 13. 15. Is not this
the Carpenters Son? Is not his Mother called Mary? And his Brethren James, and
Joses, and Simon, and Judas? So blind is the humor of Criticizing, as to
overlook the most obvious passages rather than loose the Glory of one new
discovery.

This passage I have vindicated not because that it self was at all needful to
my purpose, but only to maintain the credit of Hegesippus; for if there were
no such Story, that saves our labor of giving any account of it; if there
were, then we must take it as we find it in Hegesippus, according to whose
account it was no Persecution for Religion, but only a jealousy of State.
Neither is it to be wondered at that Domitian (though of all men most
suspicious) should be so strongly tainted with it, when the same conceit had
for a long time been of so great force among his Predecessors. For it is very
obvious from the Histories of those time, that the Jewish Notion of their
Messiah had got deep footing in the Gentile World, from the Authority of the
Sybilline Oracles; in that the Old Books of the Sybils, that had been for many
Ages Religiously preserved in the Capitol were together with the Capitol it
self burnt about Eighty years before our Savior's Birth, and to retreive their
loss, three Ambassadors were about Seven years after when the Capitol was
rebuilt, dispatched into Asia, to gather together what Records they could there
find of those Prophesies, and brought back with them about a thousand Verses.
By whom they were first Composed I am not concerned to enquire, though it is
probable (as the Learned Isaac Vossius conjectures) that they were Collected by
the Jews out of the Ancient Prophets, as appears from their agreement with the
Holy Writings, and especially in the great Prediction of a Messiah or Universal
Monarch. Which it seems was so plainly foretold by them, that in a little time
it alarmed the Senate it self to forbid the reading of them, and that for very
good reason too. When they found every aspiring Spirit in the Commonwealth to
apply them to himself. For this was one of the Foundations of Catiline's
Conspiracy, as Tully informs us concerning Leutulus in his Third Oration
against Catiline.

And when Caesar had made himself Master of all, it was vulgarly believed to
have been the effect of this Prophecy, as the same Author Triumphantly tells
us in his Second Book of Divination, which was written immediately after
Caesar's fall. Cum Antistitibus agamus, and quidvis potius ex illis libris
quam: Regem proferant, quem Romae, posthaec nec Dii nec homines esse patientur.

The great thing that offended the zealous Commonwealths Man in them was the
name of a great King. And if we may believe Suetonius or his Author Julius
Marathus, the same year In Augusta c. 94.
that Augustus Caesar was Born, the Senate upon the account of this Prediction,
Regem populo Romano naturam parturire, that nature was then in labor with a
King of the Romans. Decreed nequis illo anno genitus educaretur. Not unlike the
practice of Herod, when he Murdered the Children of Bethlehem to secure the
Title of Shiloh to himself, which some of the Atheistical Jews of the Sect of
the Sadducees had flatteringly applied to him, and were for that reason styled
Herodians. And this conceit himself cherished with very great care among the
Jews, as the fulfilling of Jacob's Prophecy upon the departure of the Scepter
from Judah to himself, thereby to conciliate the greater reverence and
Authority to his Government. And this probably was the reason, as very an
Atheist as he was, of his building so magnificent a Temple, because the Jews
expected such a glorious work from their Messiah. Now this conceit being so
familiarly entertained in the minds of men in that Age, it is no wonder if all
that were in actual possession of Authority, (whether themselves believed it or
not) were so watchful against all pretenders to it, but much less in such a
suspicious Prince as Domitian, especially as to the Family of David, who by the
consent of the Jews, that were the great Masters of these Prophesies, had the
first Title to this great Prerogative. And yet it was not so much, but only as
far as appears by Story, they were presented by some flattering and officious
Informers to the Emperor, which occasioned some trouble both to themselves and
the followers of Jesus; but when the jealous Emperor came to enquire into
their Claims, he was so satisfied of the Innocence of the men, that he
immediately dismissed the Indictment as frivolous, and revoked all Edicts against
the Christians as Partisans in the same cause. This is the true account of all
his proceedings against them, though if he had proceeded upon other reasons,
all his reasons could be nothing but reasons of State, and all his executions
nothing but acts of Savageness and Cruelty. But whatever they were, there is no
evidence of his entering into the merits of the cause, and if he did not, his
brutal Tyranny can be no objection. Nay if he did, all that can be inferred, is
that Christianity was not pleasing to one of the worst of Princes, and that is
the best that can be made of his Persecution, and there we leave it, that as
Nero was the first so Domitian was the second Enemy to Christianity, and
conclude with Tertullian. Consulite commentarios vestros, illic reperietis
primum Neronem in hanc sectam cum maxim Romae orientem Caesariano gladio
ferocisse. Sed tali dedicatore damnationis nostrae etiam gloriamur. Qai enim
scit illum, intelligere potest non nisi grande aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum.
Tentaverat and Domitianus, portio Neronis de crudelitate; sed qua and homo,
facile coeptum repressit, restitatis etiam quos relegaverat. If you search your
own Records you will find that Nero was the first Emperor that imbrued his
hands in Christian Blood, but we glory in the hatred of such an Enemy as Nero,
for whoever knows the Man, cannot but know that it must be some very great good
thing, that Nero hates. And Domitian too a piece of the same cruelty made the
same attempt, but having in him either some little humanity or the inconstancy
of Mankind (for which of these Tertullian means by his qua and homo is
altogether ambiguous) he desisted from his design, and revoked his own
proscriptions.

XXXIX. The Third Persecution happened under the Reign of Trajan, and was set on
foot upon variety of designs, all which were very remote from any fair Inquiry
into the cause of Christianity it self. The first was the old jealousy of our
Savior's Kindred and the Line of David, and this as Hegesippus informs us, was
started by Apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 32.
the Jews and the Gnostics against Symeon the Son of Cleophas the Brother of
Joseph, then Bishop of Jerusalem, and that at a time when all the Royal Family
of Judah were sought after, and dispatched out of the way as pretended Rivals of
the Empire. And for this reason was this good Old man put to death in the
Hundred and one and twentieth year of his Age.

The Second motive of this Persecution was the Emperor's great jealousy of
those Societies called Heteriae, that had often created great mischief and
trouble to the Empire, and therefore for the prevention of such disturbances,
he strictly forbad all manner of associations and public meetings; and in this
point of Government he was so peremptory, that when Pliny moved him to erect a
Corporation of Smiths at Nicomedia, as a great convenience to the City, he
would by no means be induced to allow it.

Now the Assemblies of Christians being grown numerous, they fell under the
edge of this Law, and it was accordingly executed against them by the
Governors and Pro consuls in their several Provinces. It is commonly supposed
that this Edict against these Illegal Societies, was published on purpose to
ensnare the Christian Meetings, and it is possible it might be so; yet there is
no ground for it in History, but on the contrary it is manifest that this
Emperor was possessed with a particular jealousy against all kinds of
Assemblies, as appears in the forementioned case of the Smiths of Nicomedia.
And that he had no particular design against the Christians is evident from his
answer to Pliny's Letter, by which he informed the Emperor how he had executed
this Edict in his Province against them, and what numbers he had punished for
their obstinacy against the Law, but having made enquiry into the design of
their meetings, he was sufficiently satisfied of the innocence of the men, and
therefore desires directions from him after what manner he should proceed
against them, or whether at all.

The Emperor upon this account that he received of the peaceableness of the
Christians, takes off the severity of his Edict against them, and gives
instructions, that they should not be sought for as being really innocent, yet
if they were accused and Convicted, they should be punished according to Law,
that is, for the good example of Government. This seems to have been all that
Emperor's design in his Laws and Proceedings against the Christians, otherwise
certainly he would never have remitted the Execution of a Law, of which he was
so tender, only for their sakes.

But because this was the first Prosecution, in which we meet with any thing
like legal Proceedings against the Christians, I shall give an account of all
the unjust and unreasonable methods of procedure against them, both in this and
the following Persecutions; and so without troubling the Reader with a distinct
Narrative of every one, give him a true State of the grounds and reasons of
all, and from thence it will evidently appear that they proceeded not upon any
sober enquiry, but were merely driven on by brutish folly and madness. The
heads of their accusation then were either real or feigned, the feigned were
apparently the contrivances of malice, and the real were as apparently the
charges of folly, as I shall show in each particular.

The first and great charge of all was the Christians contempt of their Gods
and Religion. But here the cause of Paganism was so foul and brutish, that it
was the most dishonorable abuse that ever was put upon humane nature; and were
not the matter of fact undeniably evident, it would have been incredible that
Mankind should ever sink into such a senseless stupidity.

The Barbarous People whom the Greeks and Romans so much despised, Worshipped
only the Heavenly Bodies, but these Polite, these Civilized, these
Philosophical Nations deified the worst of things and the worst of men, and
replenisht Heaven with such a rout of Deities, as made it look more like a Jail
full of Rogues and Villains, than an Habitation of Gods; and they relate such
foul things of them, that one would scarce believe such ill reports of the
vilest of Men; and if their Enemies would have set themselves to have contrived
Stories, that might render them odious and contemptible, the blackest calumnies
they could have fastened upon them must have fallen short of the extravagance of
their own Reports. And as were their Gods, such was their Worship too, all
lewdness and Debauchery, and such things were acted in their Temples as were
not allowed in the public Stews. The foulest uncleanness were their highest
Devotions. How lascivious and obscene were the Ceremonies of Cibele, Priapus,
Flora, and Venus, who were Worshipped with nothing but the vilest Lust and
Wantonness? So foul and beastly were the celebrated Mysteries of Bacchus, that
the Senate of Rome it self was at last forced to banish them out of Italy, as
the foulest example of Lust and Debauchery.

In short, the prodigious Stories that they told of their greatest Deities,
Saturn, Jupiter, Ceres or the Mother of the Gods as much exceeded the
wickedness of Mankind, as Heaven is higher than the Earth. Though the truth is,
they represented them much worse than they were, whilst they made them work
Miracles to compass their brutish ends, for when all is done, they were neither
better nor worse than Mortal Men. Saturn and Jupiter were known Tyrants in
Crete, Apollo a common Fiddler, the Muses Servant Maids, AEsculapius a Tooth
drawer in Arcadia, Venus a known Strumpet to Cinyras King of Cyprus not long
before the Trojan War. These and like these were the Gods they Worshipped, and
how this folly first began it is not easy to imagine, but it must certainly
have been in the most Brutish and Barbarous Age of the World, and so afterward
gain Authority only by virtue of Ancient prescription. For otherwise it was so
monstrous and ridiculous in it self, that its most zealous Patrons could make
no better defense for it, and were at last forced to turn it into Allegories,
contrary to the Faith of their own Histories. And though the Primitive
Christians insisted very severely upon this Argument against the Heathens, of
Worshipping dead men for Gods, I do not find that any of the Heathens that
opposed Christianity, ever took upon them its defense, but all their Writings
against the Vanity of the Pagan Religion past uncontrolled, so incapable was it
of any defense, that no Man durst so much as undertake it. And nothing was done
for it, but only by force of Law and Government it was settled in the Empire,
and therefore must be complied with, and object what you please against its
Impiety, that concerns not Statesmen, the Laws must be preserved.

And now upon this account it chiefly was that the Primitive Christians
suffered, it was not so much for any thing that was charged against their own
Religion, but only for refusing to comply with the Heathen Idolatry. That was
their form of Trial, Will you Sacrifice to the Gods? If they did, that alone
absolved them; if they did not, that was certain death. Now if this were the
case of the Christians, what was to be done? to comply with the Heathen Worship
were in them downright Atheism, and if they would not comply, it was so in the
Opinion of their Enemies, and so they were vulgarly esteemed, and put to death
as Enemies to all Religion. But if this were the State of the Heathens
proceedings against the Christians, it is evident that they concerned not
themselves to enquire after the Christian pretenses, it was matter enough for
Condemnation, that they would not Worship their Gods.

XL. Neither were these Trials and Executions set on foot so much by the
Governors themselves, as by the rage and fury of the People, that for the most
part forced the Emperors and Pro-consuls to put the Laws in Execution. Romani
nec ulli magis depostulatores Christianorum Apol. c. 35.
quam vulgus. Plane coeteri Ordines pro Authoritate religiosi ex fide. Nihil
hosticum de ipso Senatu, de Equite, de Castris, de Palatiis ipsis spirat. It is
the Vulgar Rabble (says Tertullian) that are the vehement Accusers of
Christians, the other orders are civil and courteous in their respective
Offices, neither the Senate nor the Knights, nor the Camp nor the Court breath
out any hostility against us. And this was the meaning of Trajan's Rescript to
Pliny, that he cared not that the Christians should be sought for, but if the
People accused them, the Laws must be Executed.

And though his Successor Adrian, under whose Reign the next Persecution
Commenced, were as great a Zealot for the Grecian Rites, as he was a Pretender
to their Learning, and was himself initiated into their Eleusinian Mysteries,
yet he was rather the occasion than the cause of the Persecution. For that zeal
that he had shown to the rites of Greece, encouraged the Common People to fall
foul upon the Christians, and therefore Eusebius ascribes the beginning of this
Persecution, not to the Emperor but to the forwardness of some ill-minded men.
But the fury of the People run so high, that the Government was forced to give
a stop to it, in so much that Serenius Granianus Pro-consul of Asia, wrote to
the Emperor in behalf of the Christians, that it was very unjust that for no
Crime, but only at the outcry of the People they should be put to death. For
that was grown the common Custom to Sacrifice them to popular Tumults and
Meetings at the public Theater, which is the meaning of that Proverbial
saying, Christianos ad Leones, viz. that if the People asked it at the public
Shows, the Pro-consuls and Presidents were forced to yield to their demands, as
they did not only in this but innumerable other cases: Nothing being more
common both at Rome and in the several Provinces, than for the People to extort
what they pleased from their Governors at these Tumultuary meetings. And
therefore to prevent their Barbarity upon these occasions against the
Christians, the Emperor returns this serious and severe Answer to Minutius
Fundanus, that immediately succeeded Granianus. I received the Letters which
were sent me by the most excellent Serenius Granianus your Predecessor. Nor do
I look upon it as a matter fit to be passed over without due enquiry, that the
Men may not be needlessly disquieted, nor Informers have occasion and
encouragement of fraudulent accusations Ministered unto them. Wherefore, if the
Subjects of our Provinces be able openly to appear to their Indictments against
the Christians, so as to answer to them before the Public Tribunal, let them
take that course, and not deal by Petition and mere noise and clamor; it being
much fitter, if any accusation be brought, that you should have the Cognizance
of it. If any one shall prefer an Indictment, and prove that they have
transgressed the Laws, then give you sentence against them according to the
quality of the crime. But if it shall appear that he brought it only out of
spite and malice, take care to punish that Man according to the mischief of his
own Intention.

A Copy of which Epistle he sent to several other Governors of Provinces; from
whence it appears that the Magistrates themselves were so far from being
satisfied with any rigorous proceedings against the Christians, that they did
it only to gratify the clamours of the People, and interposed their Authority
to skreen them from their fury.

And Tertullian reckons up several Presidents to Scapula, who either avoided or
refused to proceed against the Christians and particularly Pudens out of regard
to this Reseript. But though it was able to check and bridle their fury during
that Emperor's Reign, yet it broke out again in the time of his Successor
Antoninus Pius, and extorted from him a more severe Letter to the States or
Common Council of Asia, Prohibiting all such Wild and Barbarous proceedings
against the Christians. But still. the Laws are in force, and ready to be
seized upon at all turns by public zeal or private malice, and so they were
under the succeeding Reign of M. Aurelius. For whilst himself was busy in his
Wars, several Persecutions were raised in several Parts of the Empire, at
Smyrna where Policarp, at Rome where Justin Martyr, and at Lions where Pothinus
suffered. Policarp was merely Sacrificed to the Out cry of the People. Away
with the Atheists, let Policarp be sought for, upon which being apprehended by
a Fanatic and hotheaded Justice of Peace, he was put to death by virtue of
the Law that commanded to Sacrifice to the Gods, and to swear by the Emperor's
Genius. Justin was Prosecuted by Crescens the Cynick Philosopher, a Man proud
and Ignorant, and according to the humor of his Sect ill-natured and
implacable, and as Tatian, who was very intimately acquainted with him and his
manners, describes him, given up to all manner of Vice and Wickedness.

Now it happened that Justin in public Disputes, had exposed the extreme
Childishness and Ignorance of this vainglorious Pedant, who to be revenged of
him, accuses him before the Prefect of the City, who after he had in vain taken
some pains to persuade him to renounce his Savior and to Sacrifice to the
Gods, pronounced this Sentence against him and Six more. They who refuse to do
Sacrifice to the Gods, and to obey the Imperial Edict, let them be first
Scourged, and then Beheaded according to the Laws.

The Persecution at Lions began at the Rabble, as it is plainly described in
the Epistle of that Church to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia. In the first
place (say they) they encountered with admirable courage and patience, all the
outrages and indignities of the promiscuous Rabble, as Tumultuous Outcries,
Scourgings, Draggings, Spoiling, Stoning, and Fettering, and whatsoever else
the Heady and Savage Multitude are wont to practice against their most hated
Enemies. And by them were they haled before the Governor's Tribunal, and by
him delivered back to their fury, which they Executed upon them with all the
Arts and Circumstances of Fanatic Zeal and Barbarous Cruelty.

This I say was the usual Method to Sacrifice the Christians to the outrage of
the Superstitious Rabble, and if at any time any Prince engaged himself in the
opposition of Christianity, it was because that opposed the Pagan Religion. But
that was such an exorbitant contradiction to the common sense of Mankind, and
to all the first Principles of good and evil, that it was impossible any Man
could be in love with it, after any fair and impartial enquiry about it. So
that what such Men acted against Christianity, proceeded not from any rational
and sober Counsel, but merely from vulgar custom and prejudice. And therefore
if M. Aurelius or any other Emperor, that ought to have had more wit and
temper than the Common People, showed any zeal against the Christian Religion,
their judgment is as little to be regarded in this case as that of the
multitude, because it is evident that they were acted merely by superstitious
zeal and folly. If indeed they had opposed Christianity originally upon its own
account, the reasons of it might have deserved some consideration, but when the
ground of all their displeasure against it was founded upon their love of
Paganism, the mere absurdity of that cause is too great an exception against
their understandings in this Controversy. Thus supposing that M. Aurelius
himself was as forward as the People in his zeal against Christianity, it is
evident that he was as wise too. For whatever he was beside, he was a great
Superstitionist, and to a degree of stupidity zealous for the Pagan Follies,
out of that vain affectation that had possessed him, to be accounted the second
Numa of Rome, which one conceit transported him to a more than childish zeal
for the old Rites and Ceremonies of their Religion. And this seems to have been
the case of Decius and Dioclesian in setting on foot the eighth and tenth
Persecutions, to which they were hurried by a vehement and unlearned zeal for
the Pagan Religion. This, in short, is the truest account that I can find of
all the Persecutions, by which it plainly appears that Christianity was not so
much opposed by its greatest Enemies for any thing they had to object against
it self, as because it so shamefully exposed the bruitishness of their Idolatry.

And yet as absurd as the Worship of the Heathen Gods was, the giving Divine
Worship to their Emperors was much worse. For though their Gods were nothing
better than dead Men, yet having lived in Ages remote and almost unknown, and
thereby gained the advantageous reverence of Antiquity, the common People were
not aware of their Original, but finding them in the possession of their
Divinity, they gave them the Worship due to that Title. But to give Divine and
Religious Worship to the Roman Emperors, whose Deaths and whose Vices were so
fresh in the memories of Men, was such an unmanly piece of flattery, as any Man
that had any sense of Generosity ought not to submit to, but every Man that had
any sense of God or Religion ought to defy. And yet so infinitely were those
Men besotted with Pride and Insolence, that they all had their Temples and
Priests dedicated to their own Divinity, excepting only Tiberius, who, being a
great dissembler himself, chose to refuse so gross a flattery, and would not so
much as permit his Statue to be placed among the Images of the Gods, but only
among the Ornaments of private Houses. But as for all the rest, they either
took to themselves all the Titles and Dignities of Divinity, or had them
conferred on them by their Successors: And when they were once advanced among
the Gods, all Men were required under pain of Death to pay them Divine honor.
Nay, as Tertullian too truly upbraids them, they were more religious toward
their Emperors than their supreme Deity, Majore formidine and callidiore
timiditate Caesarem observatis quam ipsum de Olympo Jovem. And all this though
it were scarce a greater blasphemy against God than an affront to Mankind, yet
so base and degenerate were the spirits of Men at that time, that they refused
not to submit to so dishonorable a flattery. Only the Christians, out of that
serious regard they had to the honor of their Creator, unanimously scorned it
with open and public defiance. And for their generous freedom herein they were
as familiarly proceeded against as for the contempt of their Gods. But now if
this were another ground of the Heathens acting against the Christians, it is
so far from being any reasonable pretense, that it is one of the greatest
shames of humane Nature. So that setting aside all that Evidence that is to be
produced in behalf of Christianity, the opposition made to it upon this or any
of the forementioned accounts, cannot reflect the least shadow of disadvantage
upon the truth or the goodness of its Cause.

XLI. These were the real Articles of accusation in their charges against the
Christians, but they were not so frivolous as their forged and counterfeit
pretenses were malicious. For the Heathen Priests thought it not enough to
inflame the rage of the People with fanatic Zeal, unless they fed their Malice
(as all Impostors do) with Lies and Calumnies. But when Men are once reduced to
this low and dirty Artifice in defense of any Cause, it is a sign they are
drawn down to the very dregs of Malice. For it is only for want of Argument
that they are forced to make use of Slander, which the natural ingenuity of
Mankind would scorn if they could support themselves and their Party without
it. So that in the true account of things, when Men betake themselves to this
Weapon against any Cause, it is a plain confession that it is liable to no real
exception. And if the Heathens had thought that they were furnished with matter
of sufficient Argument against Christianity it self, they would never have
loaded it with the pretended bad practices of its Professors, but for want of
more material Objections they were forced upon these indirect courses. For what
is it to the truth or falsehood of the Religion it self whether those that
pretend to it live not up to its Principles? If indeed the Principles
themselves were bad, then the Practices that follow from them were a pertinent
Objection against their entertainment; but otherwise if Men that own good
Principles live bad Lives, that concerns not their Principles but themselves.
And therefore if the Accusations against the Christians had been true, they are
of no concernment in the Cause of Christianity it self, and so deserve no
consideration in this Argument. Yet because they were made use of to blind the
Eyes of the People, by possessing them with an hatred of all those that might
convince them, I shall give a brief account of them, because that will be
another distinct reason for the unbelief of so many Men in the first Ages of
the Church, notwithstanding that evidence of demonstration that Christianity
brought along with it.

I shall say nothing of the outcry of Atheism, though that made the greatest
noise, because I have accounted for that already; only I cannot but observe
that the imputation of this crime to the Christians was not more absurd than
their method of convicting them was unjust. For their crime was so much taken
for granted, that they never so much as enquired after any proof, but the mere
name of a Christian was taken for a full conviction, and if any Man owned it,
that without any farther trial passed for a confession of Atheism. And this it
is that all the Christian Apologists complain of, that only the name should be
persecuted, and for that alone they should be exposed to all the malice and
cruelty of their Enemies. Though upon the vulgar supposition that the name of a
Christian was synonymous with that of an Atheist, it was crime enough, so that
in the result of all that absurd supposition was their only crime.

But beside this they charged the Christians with all manner of brutishness and
immorality, Thyestaean Feasts or eating their own Children at their private
Meetings, promiscuous Lust, Incest, and every thing that was beastly and
immodest. Things so incredible in themselves that they could never gain any
serious belief with wise Men; but any thing will serve turn to abuse the
Rabble, for great is the power of Lying, as we of this Age know by too sad
experience, that have not long since seen an established Church and State merely
belyed into confusion. But though the Adversaries of Christianity were ashamed
to make use of these Calumnies in their public Writings, yet they easily
served to transport the People into tumults against the Christians, and so
justify any illegal and barbarous proceedings against them. Thus when Justin
Martyr at the beginning of his Conference challenges Trypho the Jew, whether he
really believed that the Christians ate Man's flesh, and put out the Candles at
their Meetings to run together into promiscuous Lust: the Jew, being a
pretended Philosopher, scorns the mention of such wild stories as unworthy any
wise Man's regard, and yet notwithstanding that these very stories did the
business with the People upon all occasions.

Thus in that famous French Persecution, in which the People exceeded their own
usual bounds of Barbarity, they first raised these reports against the
Christians, and then rackt some of Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1.
their Heathen Servants till they vouched them, viz. That they used the Feasts
of Thyestes, and the Incest of Oedipus, with diverse other enormities that can
neither be thought of nor expressed with modesty, nor so much as be believed to
have been ever practiced among Mankind; and yet when these very things were
bruited abroad among the the People, they were with one consent so enraged and
incensed against the Christians, that those who, upon the account of
Neighborhood or Kindred, had before behaved themselves with some civility,
were hereby transported into the greatest excess of violence and outrage.
Neither did they design by these Calumnies to cheat the People only, but, as
Athenagoras complains in his Embassy to the Emperors, by the greatness and
horror of those crimes that were so vulgarly reported of them, they kindled
the hatred and displeasure of great Men, Princes and Governors. And that was
the main design of that excellent Apology to demonstrate that the Christians
were merely slandered into Accusations, and that the slanders wherewith they
were so confidently loaded, were as false as wicked.

And this was the unanimous petition of all the Christian Apologists, that the
crimes objected against them might be examined, and if any Man that pretended
to be a Christian were found guilty, that he might be punished with the utmost
severity of Law; but if they proved mere malicious tales without any evidence
of proof, that for the time to come the Government would be pleased to secure
them from such barbarous wrongs and injuries. We only beseech you (says Justin
Martyr) that those things charged Apol. 2.
upon the Christians should be enquired into, and if they be found to be so,
let them have their due punishment, nay, let them be more severely punished than
other Men; but if not guilty, then it is not reasonable that innocent persons
should suffer merely upon report and clamor. And to the same purpose do we
find Athenagoras, Theophilus, Tatianus, Arnobius, Lactantius and Tertullian
frequently complaining of such proceedings, and only requesting so much
humanity from them that they might have the favor that was allowed all other
Malefactors, to have their crimes examined and be proceeded against according
to evidence of Fact. Nay, Tertullian proceeds so far as to make himself merry
with the folly of their Tales, and tells them it would be a work worthy the
zeal of some officious President, to find out such a Lundsford Christian that
had already devoured at least an hundred fat Boys for his own share. O quanta
illius Proesidis gloria, si eruisset aliquem, qui centum jam infantes
comedisset. I know that the Fathers pleaded many other thingsin vindication of
their Innocence, but I would not stuff my Discourse with more quotations than
are necessary to my Argument, and this one thing that I have represented is a
manifest demonstration of the injustice and unreasonableness of their Enemies
in their proceedings against them, and that is the only thing that I am here
obliged to make good, viz. That all the Opposition that was made to
Christianity was made upon unreasonable grounds and by unreasonable Men.

XLII. This may suffice for the Grounds and Reasons of the public Persecutions
that were raised against Christianity; but as for that private Opposition that
it met with from Philosophers and pretendedly learned Men, it was so very
contemptible that it scarce deserves consideration. For though one would expect
to have found all the learned World engaged in a Controversy that concerned
the whole World, yet they were very few that concerned themselves against the
Christian Cause; and those that did so, only pelted at it with remote and
far-fetcht cavils, but never came up to the matter of Fact, which is the only
pertinent subject in this Enquiry; and if that stand firm, all other Opposition
falls short of the Argument, and breaks its own force upon it self, by
endeavoring to disparage the truth of a thing that it cannot deny, or to prove
the same thing to be false that it cannot but confess to be true. Nay, so far
were they from putting the matter of Fact to the question, that they were all
forced to take it for granted. Porphyry and Celsus impute our Savior's
Miracles to Magic; Hieroles and Trypho say only that the Christians make too
much of them, by making a God of a divine Man; Julian tells us that he did no
such great matters, but only cure the Lame and the Blind. So that it seems
none of them were at that time hardy enough so much as to think of controuling
the reality of our Savior's Actions for fear of too much disadvantage in the
Controversy.

Now after this it is easy to foretell with what trifling pretenses they must
satisfy themselves; and they were so very trifling, that it-will require but
very little pains to show their Vanity. All the Opposition then that was made
to it this way, proceeded merely either from gross Superstition or avowed
Atheism. The first is coincident with the former account of the public
Persecutions, and was nothing else than a mere fanatic zeal for the old Pagan
Idolatry. And this was chiefly managed by the Pythagoreans, the only
superstitious Sect among all the Philosophers, who were all along so zealous of
the Grecian Rites, that they may properly be styled the Monks and Friars of
that Religion. This humor they derived from their first Founder Pythagoras
himself, who having learned that part of natural Philosophy from Thales and
Anaximander, that explained the mechanical contrivances of Matter and Motion,
to which alone those Philosophers pretended, he quickly perceived, either by
the sagacity of his own Mind, or the instruction of Pherecides, that there was
some intelligent Being in Nature, that was the cause of the order and harmony
of Things. And it was this that so strongly possessed him with the notion of a
Deity, whom he defined to be a Mind diffused through all Nature, from whom all
things receive their Life and Activity. As not being able to understand how the
natural effects that are constantly and every where visible in the World, could
be brought to pass but by the present and immediate assistance of such a power.

And now having his Mind thus thoroughly touched with a sense of the Divinity,
and finding the Orphean Rites and Constitutions, at that time, the most sacred
Solemnities of Religion in the World, he grew very zealous of them as the most
religious Symbols of Divine Worship. Neither was his zeal satisfied with the
superstition of his own Country, but he traveled into all parts of the World,
to inform himself of their several ways of worshipping their Gods. And then
composed a Service of his own, partly out of the Orphean, partly out of the
Egyptian, partly out of the Chaldean, partly out of the Eleusinian, and partly
(to mention no more) out of the Samothracian Rites, which together with his own
theurgick Ceremonies must make up a complete Rhapsodie of all the Superstition
and Idolatry of the Heathen World. And though some of his Followers, Leucippus,
Democritus and Epicurus apostatised so far from his Institution, as to fall
into the rankest and most audacious Atheism, yet all that persevered in their
Master's Discipline, were sure no doubt to be most of all strict in his
Religion. And it was only this Sect of Philosophers (who were Men rather
devout than learned) that all along gave authority and reputation to the old
Heathen Idolatry. And therefore when Christianity began to bear it away, it
could not be expected but that they should appear the most forward Champions to
defend their Fanes and their Temples, their Altars and their Oracles against
the new and prevailing Religion.

The first and the ablest Champion was Porphyrie, a Man at that time eminent
for Wit and Learning, but so entirely eaten up with fanatic zeal for his
Religion, that he had not patience so much as to hear of any thing that opposed
it, and this set him all on fire against Christianity. For being by nature of a
fierce and angry temper, insomuch as he attempted to cut his own Throat (as he
describes himself in the Life of Plotinus) and withal very much inclined to
Austerity and Devotion, (for he was a very strict observer of the Pythagorean
Rules) this fixed him in his fanatic and superstitious zeal, than which there
is nothing more insuperable. Though when this happens to be joined with a
natural eagerness of temper, it grows into mere fury and outrage, and so
transports Men out of the use of their natural Understandings. And this seems
to have been the case of Porphyrie, not only from that description that he
gives of himself, and that account that his Friends give of his Life, but also
by that Character that is given of his Writings against the Christians, which
is described by the most impartial Writers as full of rage and bitterness.
Though how he performed what he undertook is not so certainly determinable, in
that not only his own Book, but all those that were written against it are
utterly perished. But by those fragments that remain of it in the Writings of
the Ancients, it does not at all appear that he ever ventured to deny the
matter of Fact of our Savior's Miracles, but granted them so far as to impute
them to the power of Magic. But how vain that pretense is we have already
shown, at least the whole of the Controversy depends upon the truth of the
matters of Fact, that are recorded of our Savior, none of which I do not find
that he ever undertook to control, and as long as that stands firm, all other
Opposition is but trifling.

However he was a Person so infinitely superstitious that his Opinion can be no
prejudice against the cause of Christianity, because he was at no liberty to
make any enquiry into the truth of its pretenses. And of the same Kidney was
Hierocles, especially if he were (of which there is little doubt) the same
zealous Person, that was first Judge at Nicomedia, and afterward Prefect of
Egypt under Dioclesian, and a great Agent in his bloody Persecution; however
he was a zealous Orphean, and extremely addicted to the old Pythagorick
Superstition. But whatever he was otherwise, his work against the Christians
was so contemptible, that it was slighted as none of his own, and made up
altogether of borrowed Feathers out of other Men's Writings, which he was not
ashamed to transcribe word for word into his own Rhapsodie, especially out of
Celsus, insomuch as Eusebius sticks not to affirm that there is but one passage
in all his Book, that was not answered aforehand by Origin. And that was his
parallel between our Savior and Apollonius Tyanaeus, but how evenly that runs
we have already considered. And therefore here I need say no more, only that
from hence it appears that he did not so much as question, much less deny our
Savior's Miracles; but only vyed the unvouched Stories of that pedantick
Impostor with the so well voucht History of Jesus. Nay, he was so far from
gainsaying their truth that he was forced to yield that he was a Divine Man,
and the only thing for which he was so much offended against the Christians
was, that nothing less would serve their turn unless he might be reputed a God
too. So that his whole Opposition to the cause of Christianity amounts to
nothing less than a clear confession of the truth of the matter of Fact; and
that is all that at present I am concerned to prove.

And then as for the Emperor Julian, as he was the fiercest of all the Enemies
to Christianity, so was he the most impotent too, being too angry and
passionate to make any just enquiry into the cause, and withal of a strange
lightness and vanity of Nature, which those Historians, that would most admire
him remark as the most predominant principle in all his actions, this hurried
him, according to the eagerness of his temper, against the Christians, because
their Doctrine brought contempt upon all the old Constitutions of Greece, of
which he was so fond. And this was the main of his Argument in his Book against
the Christians, that they disparaged the Heathen Gods and the Heathen
Philosophers. So that the bottom of all his zeal was nothing but pedantry and
superstition. For he valued himself not a little upon the Opinion that he had
of his skill in the Grecian Learning, and especially the mystical Philosophy of
Plotinus, lamblicus and the latter Platonists; but much more upon his zeal for
the old Superstition, of which he was so childishly fond, that it exposed him
even to the contempt of the superstitious Rabble it self, that flouted him as
if he designed the utter extirpation of Oxen as well as Christians. And as he
was so vain as to think himself Alexander the Great, according to the
Pythagorean Doctrine of the transmigration of Souls, which put him upon his
unfortunate Persian Expedition, as not doubting to return with the same honor
and success as he had done before; so was he most ambitious of imitating Marcus
Aurelius, as he was of Numa, in his zeal for the Worship of the Gods.

And it was this wild zeal lighting upon his temper, that was naturally hot to
a degree of madness, that transported him into all his extravagant attempts
against the Christians. But as he was not naturally capable of any sober
reasoning, so much less in this case, in which he was so much blinded with
pride and passion. And it is too evident with what little reason he opposed
Christianity, when the main thing that he always charged upon it was Atheism,
the very falsehood and disingenuity of which charge is a manifest indication of
his passion and partiality. And as for his Book that he wrote against it with
all possible keenness and indignation, he dares not so much as come near the
matter of Fact concerning our Savior's Actions, but plays aloof off against
the Jews of old and the Christians of his own time. But as for our Savior's
Miracles, upon which the whole Controversy depends, he does not so much as
undertake to contradict them, but only says that it was no such wonderful
thing in him to cure the Lame and the Blind. Seeing therefore he has not so
much as meddled with the main Argument of Christianity, the matter of Fact, the
evidence of that alone must of it self baffle all other Attempts. At least till
that is considered, all other considerations are short of the Argument, so that
this alone may suffice as an answer to all his Cavils, to refer him to the
matter of Fact, and if that prove it self true, he can prove nothing, but if it
do not, he need prove nothing, it sinks of its own accord.

XLIII. However, if they have any cavils that may seem to have any appearance
of reason in them, they are all raked together by Celsus the Epicurean, who, of
all the Enemies to Christianity, was both the boldest and the ablest, as
appearing with less folly and more malice. For being an Atheist, and so not at
all tainted with their superstitious conceits, he escaped all those
disadvantages into which they run themselves by their fanatic zeal. But being
an Epicurean too, he was the more exasperated against the Christian cause,
because that confuted all his wisdom by sensible experiment, which was the
only proof of things that they would admit of in their Philosophy. And
therefore when they had so bravely delivered all wise Men, that is, themselves,
from the fear of a Divine Providence and the care of a future State, it could
not but be a very grating provocation upon Men of their proud, peevish and
ill-natured Principles, to have so clear a baffle put upon all their wisdom,
and that in their own way. And as this was the main motive of the peculiar
displeasure of the Sadducees against the Apostles among the Jews, so no doubt
it wrought the same effect upon Men of the same Principles among the Heathens.

But of all others Celsus seems to have been most angry at the defeat, and
therefore lays about him to load it with all the cavil and calumny that wit or
malice can invent. And for the greater plenty of Objection, he takes upon
himself a double Person, of a Jew and of an Heathen. Though the truth is, he
personates the Jew full as awkerdly as the Ass did the Lion in the Lion's Skin,
his Epicurean Ears every where show themselves through his Jewish Livery. And
he is so eager in his pursuit of Christianity, that at every turn he forgets
the Person he bears, and falls as foul upon the Jews themselves as the
Christians. We shall engage him in both his shapes, and leave it to any
impartial, either Jew or Heathen, to judge of the reasonableness and validity
of his Discourse. His two great battering Engines, that he plants in all parts
of it, we have already dismounted, viz. His imputing our Savior's Miracles to
the power of Magic, and his vying the Resurrection of others in Heathen Story
with that of our Savior. And by this means we have already dispatched the
greatest part of our business; for being conscious to himself of the slightness
of most of his Cavils, he at every turn claps one or both of these upon them to
make up the Objection. And yet beside that they are a confession of the matter
of Fact it self, they are things of which he was obliged by his Principles to
entertain as little belief as of the Christian Faith. For the power of Magic
supposes some Spirits or Beings distinct from Matter and Motion, and the
Resurrection of Men from the Grave supposes Souls distinct from Blood and
Brains, both which are mere contradictions to the Epicurean Philosophy. And
therefore he could not design to oppose them to the cause of Christianity for
any truth that he supposed in them, but only thereby to intimate that as they
were Fables, so might that too. Which is such a slender way of arguing as only
betrays its own weakness; for when I have demonstrated the truth of a thing
with all the Evidence that any matter of Fact is capable of, is it not a poor
come off only to reply, That yet there are the same kind of Stories that
neither I nor perhaps any Man else believes. There are so, but then the
difference is this, that the Story that I believe is vouched with all the
Testimony in the World, and that is the reason of my belief; but the Stories
that I do not believe, are on the contrary destitute of all manner of
Attestation, and that is the reason of my disbelief; so childish is this great
and shrewd reflection of this witty Philosopher.

But beside these, there are several other passages that we have already
considered, and therefore shall not here repeat, neither is it fit to pursue
every bubble that he has blown up, but whatsoever is any way pertinent to the
matter of Fact, that is indeed to the Argument, though never so remotely, I
shall give it as much confutation as, and perhaps more than, it deserves. And
when I have done, that will make up a new demonstration of the truth of
Christianity, for thereby we shall see how little its greatest Enemies were
able to object against it.

The Cavils of his first Book then are such as these, viz. Their clancular
Meetings against the Laws; their being a barbarous Sect, as springing from the
Jews and not the Grecians, Moses not being so ancient as is pretended, the
World not being created as he relates, because eternal, and his teaching the
Jews to worship Angels; our Savior's being a Magician, himself being poor, and
his Disciples ignorant. First then they kept clancular Meetings against the
Laws. Against what Laws? Why against such as forbid the Worship of the only
true God, and in its stead injoin the Worship of Idols and dead Men. But as for
the public Laws against the Christians I have already given a sufficient
account of their Iniquity. Though, as Celsus has managed the Cavil, it needs no
reply, because it is a vain thing merely to urge the Laws, unless he had
vindicated their goodness and justice, in that there may be bad as well as good
Laws. And therefore unless he would have undertaken to make good the piety of
those Laws that command the Worship of their Heathen Gods (that himself knew to
be no better than very bad Men) he had much better have let the Laws alone.

But in the next place, the Christians are a Barbarous Sect, that had their
beginning among the Jews, not the Grecians. But it is no matter whence they
sprang, so they bring a good evidence of the truth of their cause, and of this
Origin tells him, they had from the very beginning to that very day, a
demonstration that exceeds all their pretended Learning, and that is the
demonstration of power, or the power of Miracles. But alas this objection of
Barbarity is nothing more than merely an Instance of the Pedantick pride of the
Greeks, who valued themselves above the common rate of Mankind, and looked down
with intolerable scorn and contempt upon all the World beside. But as for their
great improvements in learning above other Nations, of which they so much
boasted among themselves, I need here say nothing, though I must confess I find
nothing so valuable among their choicest Philosophers, but when I looked for the
reasoning of Men, I could find little better in any of them than Childish
tricks and sports of Sophistry. But however to pass that by, I am sure no
Nation in the World ever equaled the Greeks in the Barbarity of their
Religion, and though with this Celsus and his Companions were at that time
sufficiently upbraided, yet it is too well known that they could never be
prevailed with so much as to undertake its defense.

But in the next place, Christianity (he says) gives no Laws of Morality, but
such as the Philosophers taught and were common to Mankind before. To this
Origin replies, it is very true, in that there could be no exercise for the
Justice and Providence of God, or obligation of the duty of Men, without a
sense and knowledge of the Laws of good and evil. And therefore it was
requisite to have the Seeds of those Moral Notions, which God taught by his
Prophets and his Son, planted in the hearts and consciences of all Mankind,
that in the final judgment, every Man might be justly called to an account for
the faithful discharge of his duty. But beside, is not this a fit objection to
follow that of Barbarity, or their Ignorance in the Grecian Philosophy, that
the Christian Church agreed in all their main points and Doctrines with the
Schools of the Philosophers?

The next thing objected is credulity and contempt of humane Learning. But the
charge of credulity is already answered by those undeniable proofs that are
produced for the Divine Authority of the Christian Faith. And as for the humane
learning that they despised, it was nothing but the Pedantry of the Grecian
Philosophers, who whilst they pretended to the height and perfection of all
Wisdom, fell into the extremest ignorance and folly. And to mention no more,
what thinks he of the celebrated Founder of his own Sect, who with abundance of
pride and arrogance boasted, that he had rid the World of a God and a
Providence, but with such trifling reasonings as are below the Bablings and
Follies of Children. Let them therefore cease to upbraid the Christians with
the neglect of their Learning, when there cannot be a greater Argument of true
wisdom and a right understanding of things than to see through its folly.

And in the next place as for the Antiquity of Moses, he had as good have let
that alone too, when Porphyrie or any other Learned Man conversant in Histories
of Ancient times could have told him that nothing is more evident or undeniable
than that Moses lived many Ages before Linus or Orpheus, or any other the most
Ancient Writers among the Grecians. But it is the custom of Epicureans to be
confident upon the slightest Enquiries; Otherwise if he had taken never so
little pains in searching and comparing Ancient Records, he could never have
put such a trick upon himself, as to think of bringing down the History of
Moses below the known times of Greece. As for the Eternity of the World, which
follows next, I shall not answer him here, because if it were true as I have
elsewhere proved it false, it runs too far from the present Argument of the
truth of our Savior's History. And as for Moses his commanding the Jews to
Worship Angels, I scorn to answer it, because it is so impudently false, when
the great Commandment of his Law is to Worship one God alone, and when himself
had but a very little before objected this as a singularity in the Jews against
all the World beside.

And then as for our Savior's being a Magician, I hope I may now let that pass
too without being suspected as guilty of any Omission. And as for his Meanness
and Poverty, I think I have sufficiently accounted for that too already, in
that it was but suitable to the design of the Divine Providence, that he should
be sent into the World stripped of all Worldly advantages, that he might subdue
it purely by the power of Truth. And therefore that alone is to be considered
in this Enquiry, whether he wrought such Miracles in Confirmation of his
Doctrine, or not; if he did, the meanness of his condition is no objection
against the truth of his Miracles; if he did not, he is to be rejected for a
much worse objection. Nay this is so far from bringing any real disadvantage
upon the Christian cause, that it brings a considerable accession to its
demonstrative proof and evidence. In so much that without it, it must have ever
been liable to suspicion; for if he had appeared with Kingly splendor, and all
the advantages of earthly power, the strange and wonderful entertainment of his
Doctrine might have been imputed to Worldly Interest and not to the force of
truth, and Men would have followed him for politic Ends, and not for any
Conscience of Religion. And therefore to be secure of the Integrity of his
Disciples, he gives them no secular Encouragement, nay on the contrary ensures
to them all the miseries of humane life in their propagation of the Christian
Faith. His Institution was pure Religion, and conscience toward God was its
only Obligation, and therefore it was but agreeable to its own intention, that
it should carry along with it no other recommendation.

And thus I remember when Julian objects the meanness of our Savior's
condition, Cyril contra Jul. l. 6.
in that he was born a Subject of the Empire, which as he fancies was below the
dignity of the Son of God. St. Cyril answers, that if he had appeared with
Imperial Power, and by virtue of that, commanded the Obedience of Mankind, Men
must have submitted to him for Worldly Interest, and not out of any sense of
duty or Religion, and he had been just such another Deity, as Caligula and the
rest of their Emperors were, who forced Men in spite of themselves to give
them the show of Divine honor by their own Laws. And whereas you object (says
he) that he was subject to Caesar, what is that to the purpose, when he did
such things as neither Caesar nor any other Man ever did? He raised Men from
the Dead, did any of your Caesar's ever do so? What then if he were subject to
Caesar, it is evident from his Works that he was greater, and they alone
demonstrate him to have been the same Person that he pretended to be. So that
being the Son of God, he scorned all your outward pomps and shows of Majesty,
and would receive no honor but what reflected upon him from the glory and
greatness of his own Works. To which might be added Origen's reply, that it is
no wonder for Men that have all the advantages of Birth and Fortune to make
themselves considerable in the World, but this is the thing that is most
wonderful in Jesus, that a Person so obscure upon all Worldly accounts, should
raise himself to so great a fame and reputation; that a Man so poor and meanly
Educated, and never instructed in the arts of Eloquence, should take upon him
to convert the World to a new Doctrine, to Reform the Religion of the Jews, and
to abolish the Superstition of the Greeks: and yet that without any force or
Artifice, he should so speedily effect what he undertook, this, says he, is a
thing singular in him, and was never done by any Man, that I know of, in any
other Age. Nay farther beside the obscurity of his Life, and all other things
designedly laid to Eclipse his Glory, his ignominious death one would think
should have put it out for ever, and that even those that he had deluded in his
Lifetime, should then have been convinced of the grossness of the Imposture.
And therefore it is most wonderful of all, that if the Apostles had never seen
our Savior after his Resurrection, or had no assurance of his Divinity, how it
could ever come into their minds to leave their Country, and expose themselves
to all hazards and hardships, to publish and propagate the belief of a known
falsehood. So that we see that the meanness of that State in which our Savior
appeared, is so far from being any material Objection against his Divine
Authority, that upon several accounts in the last result of things, it lies at
the bottom of itsdemonstration.

In the next place he flouts at the Relation of the appearance of the Holy
Ghost and the voice from Heaven at our Savior's Baptism, as a thing in it self
absurd and incredible. But here the Epicurean forgets that he is a Jew, in that
there are many Relations of such appearances in the Old Testament, which yet if
this objection hold good, every Jew is bound to believe false and impossible.
But to treat with him as an Epicurean, why is it impossible? Because all
Stories of God's concerning himself in Humane affairs are undoubted Fables. An
admirable way this of confuting a matter of fact, only by saying that it is
impossible upon a precarious Principle of our own. So that the last result of
this rude objection against the Faith of the Evangelists is only this, that it
cannot be true, because there is no such thing as a Divine Providence. But he
adds that there was no witness of it, but only John the Baptist, his Companion
in wickedness. And this is another unhappy mistake of a Man that sustein'd the
Person of a Jew, when all the Jewish Nation, even the greatest Enemies to
Jesus, had a very great Reverence for John the Baptist. And yet it is not his
Testimony that we rely upon for the truth of the Story, but the truth of the
Evangelists that have Recorded it, they knew what Evidence they had of its
reality, and we know what evidence we have of their sincerity.

And now having discharged all his little Topics of Calumny against our
Savior's own Person, in the last place he falls foul upon his Apostles, and
that with the same unhappy success. For as little as he gained by objecting the
meanness of our Savior's condition, he gains just as much by insulting over
their Ignorance, that is but another enhancing circumstance of his Divine
Authority. For as it was a wonderful thing for so obscure a Person to make such
an alteration in the World, so was it much more so to effect it by such
contemptible Instruments. For no Man that ingenuously considers the prodigious
success of the Apostles, can ever impute it to any other cause, than either
some Divine and extraordinary Power, or the great and irresistible evidence of
the thing it self. In that by the Objection it self, it is plain that they were
destitute of all the Arts of Eloquence and Learning, by which it was possible
that they might persuade, or deceive the People into any belief: Whereas if
Jesus had chosen the Learned and the Eloquent for the propagation of his
Doctrine, he might have been justly suspected of the same design with the
Philosophers of erecting a new Sect by the Power of wit and Rhetoric. But when
a few Fishermen that wanted all the improvements of Learning and Education, as
the Evangelists Record, and Celsus objects, effected it with such prodigious
success, it is not conceivable how they should do it any other way than by
Miracle either in their words or actions. And thus all along the more they
object the contemptibleness of the means, the more the strangeness of the Event
returns upon themselves, so that if there had not been something more than
Humane in the design, it could never in the way, in which it was Prosecuted,
have taken any effect.

In the Second Book the counterfeit Jew first rates his Countrymen for
quitting the Laws of their own Nation to follow this Innovatour. But setting
aside the answer of Origin, that the Christians did by no means forsake the
Religion of Moses, but pursue and improve it. Still this is short of the
Argument, and comes not up to the reasons, for which they did it. If they had
none, their lightness was justly blameable; but whether they had, or had not,
it concerned not this Atheist to enquire. And then this becomes Celsus the Jew
and the Epicurean very well; that when the Epicurean had begun his discourse
with a disparagement of the Impostor Moses, the Jew should make this an
Argument against the Christians, that they renounced the Man, that his Friend
had proved an Impostor.

In the next place, when he objects our Savior's Cowardice, that he fled and
hid himself, and such other trash, it is equal malice and folly, without ground
or pretense; in that there was no History of Jesus extant beside the
Evangelists, who all affirm that he went up to Jerusalem purposely to deliver
up himself into the hands of his Enemies. Now, says Origin, I leave it to any
Man of common sense to judge, which is most reasonable to believe, these
unvouched and vagabond surmises, invented out of mere hatred to the Christians;
or to believe things as they are delivered by the Evangelists, who pretended
either to have been Eyewitnesses, or to have had a full information of the
matter of fact, and were ready to seal the truth of their Testimony with their
blood. This strange constancy and resolution even to death it self, is not like
Men who were conscious to themselves of having forged a false Story, but on the
contrary a clear and manifest Argument, that they were serious and very well
satisfied in the truth of the things that they Recorded. Is not this then an
ingenuous way of proceeding, to oppose the truth of their History with flying
Reports, that have neither Author nor Authority, and indeed such, that whilst
there is malice in the World, no true Story can escape? But, says Celsus,
though he was pleased not openly to show his Divinity before, yet at least he
ought to have done it, by vanishing miraculously from the Cross. No, no Celsus,
he had a farther design to demonstrate not only his own Divinity but Man's
Immortality. If he had only disappeared, you might have imputed that to a
trick of Magic, but when he arose from the dead, after he had been so
publicly executed, this was both an undeniable proof of his Divine Authority,
and a full assurance to Mankind of their capacity to subsist after Death. And
though there were other indispensable reasons, why he suffered himself to be
sacrificed upon the Cross, yet if it were for these alone, he had sufficient
reason to suffer what he did. Especially when himself had, through the whole
course of his Life, referred the proof of his Authority to his Resurrection, so
that if he had, according to Celsus his advice, withdrawn himself from the
Cross, he had apparently defeated his own design, that he had laid through the
whole History of the Gospel. But beside this by his Death, Passion and
Resurrection he has demonstrated to Mankind that the Divine Providence has
reserved the happiness of humane Nature to another Life, and cleared up the
future existence of Souls by an undeniable Experiment: And that is the thing
that so much frets the Epicureans, that he has put so clear a basfle upon their
Impiety.

But as for his next Cavil he is really to be pitied, when he asks, Why we do
not Worship all other crucified Malefactors? It is an Objection worthy the
wisdom and gravity of a learned Philosopher; but yet for his satisfaction it
is fit to let him know that we Worship all such Malefactors as our Savior
was, who owned himself to be the Son of God, and then suffered himself to be
murdered, to prove it by his Resurrection. But, he says, his Disciples forsook
him, and would dye neither with nor for him. They did so by sudden surprise,
but what did the same Disciples immediately after upon his Resurrection? They
that were but a little before seized with so much Cowardice, feared then no
danger to attest it to the World, and most of them dyed for the truth of their
Testimony. So that this Objection of Cowardice in the Apostles is just such
another advantageous circumstances to the cause of Christianity as that of
their ignorance and want of learning. For as it is an Argument of the great
Evidence of their Cause, when Men neither learned nor eloquent were able so
successfully to propagate it among Mankind, in that they could give it no more
advantage than it brought along with it: So when Men so timorous and cowardly
should afterward grow so very fearless in asserting it even to the Death, that
is an unquestionable evidence that they were abundantly satisfied in the truth
of what they attested.

But as for Celsus his insinuation that the Apostles only dreamed and fancied
that they saw Jesus after his Resurrection: as it may be applied to any matter
of Fact in the World, and turn even all the actions of his own Life into dream
and fancy; so if it be compared with all the peculiar circumstances as to this
thing, they prevent the folly of so ridiculous a surmise. And he has no ground
to bear him out in it, but only his Epicurean conceit that the Resurrection
from the dead is a thing impossible. But as for that we will not dispute it
with him at present, though it is evident that, according to the Principles
both of their own and all Philosophy, it is altogether as easy and conceivable
as the generation of a Man. The matter of Fact what has been, is the only
Argument of our debate, and we will not go so far about as to dispute its
possibility, when we have demonstrated its actual certainty. And yet in the
conclusion of all, Celsus, after he has taken so much pains, and that in the
Person of a Jew, to prove the impossibility of a Resurrection, is so wretchedly
sottish as to declare his own belief of the Resurrection even of the Body to
eternal Life, and that the first proof and specimen of it is to be given to the
World by the Messiah.

In the third Book he begins to dispute in his own Person, and first objects
that the dispute between the Christians and Jews was of no moment, in that both
believed that there was to be a Savior of the World, and only differed in
this, whether he were already come or were yet to come. And yet this, beside
the gross absurdity of the Objection it self, is a mere contradiction to all
the former Discourse by the personated Jew. For if the difference between the
Jews and the Christians were so small as he pretends, then all the sad
outcries and invectives of the Jew against the Christians were only clamorous
Nothings. But this is objected like an Atheist, that looked upon these and all
other differences about Religion as trifling Fooleries. And therefore Origin in
answer to it shows him the excellency of both in the Worship of the supreme
Deity, as opposed to the folly and impiety of the Heathen Idolatry.

But beside that, as for the difference between the Jews and the Christians
concerning our Savior, nothing but extreme ignorance could have objected its
Vanity. For is it nothing whether he were the promised Messiah, the Son of God,
the Savior of the World, the Judge of Mankind, as the Christians believed: or
whether he were a bold Impostor that pretended to these great Titles only by
virtue of magic Art, as the Jews believed? If the first were true, that
commands the obedience of all Mankind to his Laws, as the only terms of
Salvation; and if so, then nothing could more concern them than to be satisfied
in its truth and reality. So that it is so far from being a trifling
Controversy, as Celsus foolishly objects, that there was never any
Controversy started in the World of greater concernment to Mankind. But the
Epicurean's real meaning is that all Controversies about Religion are trifling,
because all Religion is a Cheat, and if it be so, then indeed it is but a
childish thing to contend about it. But otherwise, if there be a Providence
that governs the World, then certainly, if any thing in the World does, it
highly concerns all Men to inform themselves of those certain rules of Duty
that he has prescribed to their practice.

But against both Religions the Epicurean objects that they began in Sedition,
the Jewish against the Egyptians, and the Christian against the Jews. But in
the first he supposes the Jews to have been originally Egyptians, which,
because it is a vain and proofless presumption, can prove nothing. And yet it
is much more vain to charge Christianity with Sedition, because all Sedition
either designs or acts some violence against the Government, whereas it is
evident that our Savior allowed no Weapons to his Followers but Sufferings,
and has threatened no one offense with greater severity than endeavors of
disturbance to the civil State under pretense of Religion. So that it is plain
that if his Religion be true, it could not have been brought in more
inoffensively to the powers of the World: And therefore it cannot with any
ingenuity be charged with Sedition, till its truth or falsehood be first
determined. For that is the only Controversy in this matter, which if Celsus
and his Partisans had but the courage to undertake, they would have had no need
of these petty and remote reflections.

The next Cavil is that the Christians affected nothing but singularity. Very
likely this, when so many of them traveled into all parts of the World with the
extreme hazard of their Lives, to convert, if it were possible, all Mankind to
Christianity. But though they seemed to agree at first, they afterward divided
into Factions. But this is an objection against the levity of humane Nature,
not the truth or excellency of Christianity. For beside what Origin answers,
that there was never any thing of great reputation in it self, or usefulness to
the World, about which Men did not raise disputes and make parties: I would
only ask him, Whether, supposing the truth of Christianity, it was not in the
power of Men to raise Controversies about it; if it was, then their doing so is
no objection against it; if it was not, that is to say no Religion can be true
unless it bring a fatal necessity upon all that pretend to it to be both wise
and honest; which is such an awkerd condition of things, as destroys, not only
all the Principles of Religion, but of humane Nature it self. But, says he,
they scare the People with Fables and Bugbears. Tell what, says Origin, beside
future Rewards and Punishments. We indeed believe that there is a sovereign
Governor of Mankind, and that hereafter he will sit in Judgment upon all our
Actions. And in this belief we instruct the People out of the holy Scriptures,
and exhort them to live as they ought, that must give an account of themselves
to the great Governor of the World. These indeed are Fables to an Atheist and
an Epicurean, but not to any Man that believes any thing of the Providence of
God or the Obligations of Religion. And that is the thing that Celsus writes
against, not merely Christianity, only he is fiercest in his opposition to
that, because it is so full a check to his impiety, though otherwise the main
of his Objections, that he levels against that, aim as directly against all
Religion. And thus the Bugbears of a future State with which he here upbraids
Christianity, are common to all Mankind but only his own Sect. And though he
would make us believe that he would not for all the World take away the Opinion
of Rewards and Punishments in the next Life, this Vizor is too ridiculously put
upon an Epicurean, it is too gross a contradiction to himself, and he renounces
his first Principle to impose upon the People; but though they indeed may
easily be imposed upon by any thing (as they were by his Master Epicurus, who
frequented their public Sacrifices, to make himself sport at home with the
folly of their Superstition) yet he should never have been so foolhardy as to
publish it to the World, because he could not but expect that wise Men should
take notice of and expose his Hypocrisy. But whatever himself was pleased to
believe, I am sure if there be no future Rewards and Punishments, that then
there is no Religion; if there are, let Celsus tell if he can with what other
Bugbears Christianity scares the People.

From hence he falls into his old Stories of Heathen Miracles, for this Topic
makes up one half of every Book. But beside what I have already shown that they
prove nothing against Christianity, his insisting upon them with so much
stubbornness is an argument of nothing but his own confidence. For if he
believes them not, they are nothing to his purpose; if he does, he shows a
strange partiality in believing things so ill vouched in comparison of the
History of our Savior. But whether he does or does not, he plainly contradicts
either himself or his design. For when he tells us of several Miracles wrought
in several Temples of Greece; if he believes that some Demon or Herae, that
could do such things as exceeded humane Power, inhabited in those places, then
farewell to his Epicurean Doctrine, that there is no such thing as Demons or
Spirits. If he believes it not (as he does not) it is very ridiculous in him to
argue from the supposition of the truth of those Stories which he not only
supposes, but (as himself thinks) knows to be false. Though he is still more
and more unhappy, when he compares the Apotheosis of Antinous Adrian's Boy with
that of our Savior. All the Christian Apologists indeed luckily enough
upbraided the Heathens with this fresh Instance of their Idolatry, as an
exemplification of the rise and preferment of all their more ancient Deities;
and to this purpose they mind them of many horrid and foul Stories of Bacchus,
Venus, Cupid, Ceres, Proserpine, that exceeded all the lust and debauchery of
later times. But to compare this impure Beast, that was made a God to the shame
of Mankind, with our Savior, who if he were worshipped for a Deity, could obtain
that honor by nothing but his divine and miraculous Actions, very well becomes
both the modesty and ingenuity of an Atheist.

From hence he falls into his old Calumny (for now we have little but
repetition) that the Christians were Enemies to all Learning. But the ground of
this is their neglect of the dull and atheistical Philosophy of the Greeks,
that could not arise to the contemplation of any thing above matter. But as for
that true Philosophy that, from the contrivance of visible and material things,
leads on to the discovery of the Wisdom, Goodness and Providence of God, it
was most of all studied and emproved by the Christian Philosophers. The
remaining Calumnies, that, according to the Laws of Christianity, God accepts
only of bad Men and refuses the good, and that because it allows Repentance to
the worst of Sinners, it allows them too in the worst of Sins, they are so
apparently disingenuous, splenetick and malicious, that they only reflect back
shame and dishonor upon the Man, that blushes not to vent such impudent
forgeries in the face of the Sun.

And thus have I given a sufficient Specimen of this pretended Philosophers way
of disputing against Christianity, whereby the Reader may perceive that he
opposed it not with any rational or true philosophical Principles but mere
Cavils and Calumnies. And now being tired out with so much dullness, I shall
travel no farther in him, because all that follows is of the same Nature, and
for the most part the same materials too, so that there is very little new, and
that which is so, is either very remote or very trifling. And therefore I shall
here put an end not only to my engagement with him, but to my whole
Undertaking; and upon this true and impartial representation that I have made,
on one hand of all that variety of demonstration that accompanied the Gospel
into the World; and on the other of the weakness and impotency of all that
Opposition that could be made against it by Learning or Power, by Zeal or
Malice, by Wit or Prejudice, by Philosophy or Superstition, I leave it to the
Reader to think with himself which way it was possible for the Providence of
God, if he had intended to set such a design on foot, to have given a greater
assurance of its truth and authority to the World. Let him lay all the premises
fairly together, and then I once more leave him to his own thoughts to make his
own conclusion.

XLIV. And when he has done so, I must desire him to make one more, and that is
to govern the constant course and tenor of his Life according to the dictates
of his own Conviction. Though one would think that this consequence is so
unavoidable, that it were needless to put Men in mind of its force; and so the
Ancients thought, as Clemens Alexandrinus concludes his Exhortation to the
Gentiles, that if he could but once bring them over to the Christian Faith, he
was then secure of their Obedience to the Christian Law. For when all is done,
says he, As a Man's Thoughts or Designs are, so are his Words; as his Words, so
are his Actions; and as his Actions, so is the habitual course of his Life; so
that the whole Life of every Man that is seriously a Christian, cannot but be
conformable to the Laws of his Religion, i. e. universally good and virtuous.
For, considering the greatness of the Rewards and Punishments propounded in the
Gospel, it is not to be conceived how any Man, who seriously believes them, can
be in any doubt or suspense which way to determine his choice, much less that
he should be so strangely wild and extravagant, as peremptorily to prefer
Misery and Destruction before everlasting Happiness.

And thus Athenagoras, when he had described the great and eminent Virtues of
the Christians, gives this rational account of their Actions. This we do, says
he, because we are assured that there is a God who takes notice of the actions
of Men, and who created both us and the whole World; and because we know that
we must give an account to him of all the passages of our Lives, therefore we
choose the most moderate, humble, kindest, and, as may appear to the greatest
part of Mankind, the most contemptible course of Life. For we are peremptorily
agreed that no evil in this Life, not loss of Life it self can be great enough
to weigh against that unconceivable happiness, that we expect from the great
Judge of all Men, which he has promised to such as are of an humble, kind and
gentle deportment. And so it was supposed in those days that Mankind had so
much sense as to conform their Practices to their Principles, and the
supposition was thought so just and reasonable, that by the experience of its
truth the Christian Apologists gained the advantage of confuting all the
Slanders and Calumnies of their Enemies, viz. That those wicked Practices that
were charged upon them were too grossly inconsistent with the Principles of
their Religion, and so Athenagor as tells the Emperor plainly that it is no
less than impossible for a Christian to be a bad Man, unless he were an
Hypocrite and a mere Dissembler. And for a farther proof they still appealed to
the undeniable innocence of their own Lives and Conversations. They challenged
the strictest Trials of their Enemies, and even forced from them public
confessions of their Virtue and Integrity. And though they were strictly
religious toward God, yet they accounted that no Worship was acceptable to
him, but what is recommended by a just, an honest and an useful Life.

He that is careful to preserve his Innocence, says Minutius Felix, honors
his Lord; he that observes Justice in his dealings offers Sacrifice to God; he
that absteins from Fraud presents a Peace Offering; he that relieves his
Neighbor brings an ample Expiation; these are our Sacrifices and these the
Solemnities of our Devotion, and with us he passes for the most religious Man
that is the most honest. And thus they rated their Piety chiefly by the
usefulness of their Lives, and the first things they sacrificed to Heaven were
their own Lusts and Passions. They did not think it enough in those days to say
their Prayers, unless they lived them too, that is, unless their Actions were
conformable to their Devotions in a constant and uniform obedience to the Laws
of their Religion. In short they knew no other terms of Salvation but the
habitual practice of Piety and Devotion, of Justice and Honesty, of Mercy and
Charity, of Humility and Meekness, of Temperance and Sobriety, of Continence
and Chastity, of Obedience and Subjection to Government, of Unity and a
peaceable Disposition among themselves, but above all of Heavenly mindedness
and contempt of the World, and Courage and Constancy in suffering for their
Religion.

Now it is evident that these Men were serious and in good earnest in their
profession of the Christian Faith, and that may be added to all that
accumulation of Argument that I have laid together in this Discourse to
demonstrate the infinite truth of Christianity, that Persons who by their
nearness of Age to its beginning had so much advantage of enquiring into it,
were satisfied with an undoubted assurance of its Divine Authority, when it
made such a prodigious and otherwise unaccountable change in all parts of their
Lives and Conversations. And as by it they showed themselves sincere
Christians, so rational Men too in pursuing the natural consequence of their
Principles. For upon supposition of the certain truth of the Christian Faith,
it was infinitely reasonable, that they should give the exactest and most
punctual obedience to the Christian Laws. Nay, they then thought that it was
impossible to do otherwise, and though they made allowances for the lapses and
infirmities of humane Nature, yet they looked upon a Christian that was
habitually vicious as the grossest of contradictions; and the truth is, nothing
can be more apparently absurd and enormous, if we only consider the greatness
of those Rewards and Punishments wherewith the Laws of Christianity are
enacted. The most difficult Duty that it requires is that of Martyrdom, yet
even that whilst it is undergone within the prospect of Heaven and Immortality
is a very easy, not to say an eligible thing. And so the learned Clemens of
Alexandria discourses in the Fourth Book of his Collections. The Man that truly
loves our Lord, cannot but be very willing to be delivered out of this Life, so
as to account himself beholden to his Accuser as the cause of his escape,
because he gave him a lawful occasion, which he could not give himself, to
show his love to his Lord, and for it be welcomed by him into the place of
Happiness: and excellently to the same purpose does that wise, that pious, that
courageous Prelate Saint Cyprian discourse to the Epist. 15.
Confessors in Prison to prepare them for their Martyrdom. So far are you,
says he, from having any reason to fear Death, that you ought to desire it, as
not worthy to be weighed against the recompense of Immortality, where he that
overcomes shall be crowned with eternal Happiness, what vigor, what greatness,
what courage ought to lodge in such Breasts, that are filled with such heroic
thoughts? For where no lower Meditations are entertained than of the Laws of
God and the Promises of Christ, there can be no sense of any other design but
to do the will of God. And though you are still confined to this present state
of things, yet you do not live the Life of this World but of the World to come.
And how passionately does that brave Martyr Ignatius rejoice in the near
approach of his Martyrdom. O that I might come to those wild Beasts that are
prepared for me, how do I wish that I might instantly encounter them, I could
even invite and encourage them to dispatch me, nay, I could even provoke them
to it: I am concerned for nothing either seen or unseen more than to enjoy
Jesus: let Fire and the Cross and the fury of wild Beasts, breaking of Bones,
distortion of Members, tormenting the whole Body, yea, all the punishments
which the Devil can invent befall me, so as thereby I may come to the enjoyment
of my blessed Lord and Savior. This was the Courage and these the Resolutions
of those times. But alas, their brave Examples rather upbraid than instruct our
degenerate Age, and the height of their courage, instead of inviting, scares
our endeavors, it is almost pain to us to conceive the Idea of their Virtues.
Their flaming Spirits lie raked up in their own Ashes, not a spark of their
heavenly Fire glows in our Bosoms, there is nothing heroic left, all that is
brave and gallant has fled the World, and our Age produces no such Heroes,
whose actions may convince us that the Miracles of the ancient Faith were
possible things.

But what do I talk of the wonders of Martyrs and Confessors, the effects of
an extraordinary assistance for an extraordinary work, when it would be wonder
big enough for our degenerate Age, if we could but see the common fruits of
Christianity. But alas, we are entertained with a greater, at least a more
unaccountable prodigy than all the Miracles that have been represented for the
demonstration of the Christian Faith, when we daily see such vast numbers of
Men, that are seriously and passionately concerned to believe the Truth of the
Gospel, and yet so utterly unconcerned to obey its Precepts, for this can be no
less than a direct and barefaced affront to the Authority of God himself, to
own and yet disobey his Laws.

Our blessed Savior imputes it as an unpardonable sin of disingenuity to the
Scribes and Pharisees, that when they were convinced by the evidence of the
matter of Fact of the Divine Power of his Miracles, they yet disbelieved the
Divine Authority of his Doctrine. But how much greater violence do these Men
offer to the convictions of their own Reason and Conscience, that submit to the
Authority, and yet despise the Obligation of his Laws? This is more palpable
Blasphemy, and the Man that is guilty of it is so much worse than a professed
Infidel as Judas was worse than a common Pharisee. He in some measure believed
his Master to be the true Messiah, and yet betrayed him, and so is every
vicious Christian guilty of the same traitorous Wickedness: He believes our
Savior to be the Son of God and the Savior of the World, and yet behaves
himself toward him as if he really believed him a Cheat and an Impostor. This
Man sins knowingly against all the Obligations of his Duty and his Conscience;
and every act of disobedience is not only an Affront to his Reason as it was
in the Pharisees, but to his Faith as it was in Judas. What a strange
contradiction is a vicious Christian both to himself and his Profession? It Is
so great, that to me, I must confess, it is an unconceivable instance of
Sottishness, that any Man should in good earnest believe that the Divine
Providence should, after such a miraculous manner, engage it self for the
contrivance and procurement of Man's Felicity, and that to this purpose the Son
of God himself should come into this lower World to carry on the work of our
Redemption, and should suffer all the Agonies of an ignominious Death for the
expiation of our Sins, and when he had recovered us into a capacity of
Happiness, and put us into a condition of peaceable intercourse with his
Father, he should prescribe to us some Laws of Life to keep and continue us in
that state, into which he had redeemed us; and that (to secure all) he had
enforced them by the most powerful motives of obedience, and established their
obligation upon no less Sanction than the certain assurance of Happiness or
Misery in the Life to come. I say, to me it is an unconceivable brutishness
that any Person who seriously believes these things, should act so grossly
against his own Interest, against all the reasons of things, and against the
strongest inducements both of his Hopes and Fears, as to live in a daring and
habitual disobedience to any of the Laws of Christianity.

What an intolerable aggravation must it be of their Wickedness, whilst it is
committed against all the endearments of Love and Goodness, and all the
inducements of Interest and Ingenuity, i. e. against all the obligations, that
it is possible to lay upon the Minds of Men. And to this purpose the Apostle
discourses very appositely, Heb. 2. 3, 4. How shall we escape if we neglect so
great Salvation, which at the first was published by the Lord, and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing witness to them with
signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost? Here
lay the emphasis that aggravated the neglect of their Salvation, that God had
sent his own Son into the World to preach and to procure it: that he had given
us the greatest assurance of it by the undoubted Testimony of Eyewitnesses;
and that he had farther confirmed the truth of their Testimony by the
wonderful gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the undeniable power of Miracles.

After all these Motives and all this Assurance, if any Man can be so wretched
as to neglect so easy conditions of so great Salvation, how is it possible he
should escape the just reward of his desperate and incurable stupidity? For
what should prevail upon such Minds as are proof against such Motives? And yet
as strange as this appears, what do we find more vulgar? when a wicked Believer
is so far from being thought a Monster in our Age, that there is scarce a
greater Prodigy in it than an entire true Christian. The true spirit of our
Religion seems to be fled to Heaven with its primitive Professors, and there
is scarce any such thing as real Christianity to be found in the World, i. e. a
serious and habitual conformity to all its Laws, and whatever Men may do or
pretend without this, it may be Humor or Faction, or any thing but Religion.

No design (how great soever) less than this was worthy our Savior's Embasly,
and when the Son of God was sent on an Errand into the World, it could not be
of any less concernment than its Reformation. The last scope of all the mystery
of Godliness is only to oblige all Mankind to be good and virtuous, and the
Man that will not be so, defeats all the love and wisdom of Heaven in sending
the Holy Jesus into the World. And therefore let me challenge my Reader, as he
would not frustrate the whole design of our Savior's Birth, as he would not
baffle the truth of all those Prophesies concerning the innocence and the
purity of the Lives of Men under the reign of the Messiah, and as he would not
hereafter with that his Savior had never been born, nor himself neither, that
he would be careful for his own part to answer the end of his Incarnation, and
let him see by the virtue and holiness of his Life, that he was born to some
purpose and that he died not in vain.

Nay let me challenge all Christendom not to give him occasion to complain,
Have I deserted Heaven and all its glories, and exposed my self to all the
shame and misery upon Earth, have I wrestled with all the malice of Men and
Devils, have I lived and died in disgrace, and suffered all sorts of affronts
and ill usages, to restore the practice and reputation of Virtue to this lower
World? And is this all the Issue of the travel of my Soul, that I have only
founded a new Faction of Men in the World, that are not to be distinguished from
the rest of Mankind by any thing else than that they signalize themselves by
the name of Christians? Is this all the purchase of my Blood, to be only
followed by a few wicked and vicious Proselytes? I had as good have suffered
the World to continue in its degenerate state of Heathenism, as do and suffer
all that I have done only to give a new name to those parts of it called
Christendom, without reforming their old manners. I neither design nor accept
any other separation of my Church from other parts of Mankind than what is made
by the Virtue, the Innocence and the Holiness of their Lives. Without this all
their pretended Faith in and Zeal for my Institution is to me no better than
scandal and impudent Hypocrisy, and serves to no other purpose than to
aggravate their Impiety and increase their Punishment.

And in truth what can more provoke our Savior's displeasure than Christian
Wickedness? This brings disgrace and dishonor upon his Religion, and
prostitutes it to the scorn of Atheists and Infidels. It breaks through all the
best Rules of Duty and strongest Obligations to Obedience, it is aggravated with
all the circumstances that can heighten its baseness, it is without all plea of
excuse or palliation.

And this certainly is the true account of the unexemplified severity of the
Divine Justice against Christendom. For never was any part of the World
harass't with such remarkable Plagues and Judgments as this has been; in that
their biggest Impieties were but ordinary things if compared to the vileness of
our Apostasy. The times of their ignorance (as the Apostle discourses) God
winked at, but now that his wrath is so clearly revealed against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men, if they shall at any time persevere in
hardness and impenitence, they cannot but treasure up to themselves anguish and
tribulation and wrath against the day of wrath, and be still heaping up stores
of vengeance till some time or other the floodgates shall be opened upon them,
and overwhelm them in irrecoverable ruin and destruction.

At least to conclude with my believing Reader (for if he be an Infidel, I turn
him back to the premises of this Discourse) our Savior has a second coming,
when he shall, as he has said he will, once more rise up from his Throne of
Majesty, shall put on the Robes of Justice, and return accompanied with an
innumerable Army of blessed Spirits, to destroy the wicked and disobedient, and
take vengeance of his open Enemies, but much more of his disloyal and
treacherous Friends.

And if so, I shall only desire him to consider what horror and anguish must
then seize all guilty Souls; with what trembling and infinite amazement must
every careless and disobedient Christian appear before all this dreadful
Glory? And how will even their spirits dye away under an intolerable fear and
confusion of Conscience? Who can conceive the bitterness and the agonies of
guilty Minds, whilst they receive their last Sentence?

What a wild and stupid thing is Man, that can believe and yet forget these
things, and sleep careless under the expectations of a day of Doom? For it is as
certain that our Savior will once come to condemn the World as he once came to
redeem it; and if he be the true Messiah, it is then past question that he shall
be our Judge, and yet after all this, how do Men who seriously think that they
seriously believe these things, live as if they were secure that they should
never be called to any future account, careless and forgetful of all things
but a few vanishing pleasures and trifles here below, with slender regard or
total neglect of their eternal Condition.

In brief, the terrors of a future Judgment, and the different portion of woe
or bliss hereafter are so evidently declared in the Gospel, that for any Man,
who believes it, to live careless of them, is in truth a sottishness that I can
neither conceive nor express, much less load or upbraid with any higher
aggravation than barely its own folly; and therefore I shall only leave this
great Meditation upon the Minds of my Christian Readers, and conjure them all
to a serious and habitual practice of Virtue and Piety, as they hope for any
benefit from our Savior's first coming, and desire to escape the terror of
the second.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 4. from the end, in the Preface, for Vice 1. in Vice, p. 127. l.
1. for Sextus r. Saint, page 130. l. 3. for fearless r. fearful.

Books lately printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred Majesty.
(...): The Pourtraicture of his Sacred Majesty King Charles the First, of ever
blessed Memory; in his Solitudes and Sufferings, newly reprinted by His
Majesty's special Command: in Octavo.

Dr. Hammond's Annotations on the New Testament, in Folio, the Fifth Edition,
Corrected.

The Book of Psalms Paraphrased, with Arguments to each Psalm, in Two Volumes:
by S. Patrick, D. D. Dean of Peterburgh, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty. Octavo.

The Truth of Christian Religion, in Six Books, written in Latin by Hugo
Grotius, and now translated into English, with the addition of a Seventh Book:
by S. Patrick, D. D. etc. Octavo.

A Book for Beginners; or, A help to young Communicants, that they may be
fitted for the holy Communion and receive it with profit: by S. Patrick, D. D.
in 240.

Christ's Counsel to his Church; in two Sermons preached at the two last Fasts:
by S. Patrick, D. D. in Quarto, new.

The Established Church; or, A Subversion of all the Romanist's Pleas for the
Popes Supremacy in England: together with a Vindication of the present
Government of the Church of England, as allowed by the Laws of the Land,
against all Fanatical Exceptions; particularly of Mr. Hickeringill, in his
scandalous Pamphlet, styled NAKED TRUTH, the Second Part: by Fran. Fulwood, D.
D. Archdeacon of Totnes in Devon, in Octavo, new.

A Discourse of the Morality of the Sabbath: being an Exposition of Exodus 20.
v. 8, 9, 10, 11. Humbly offered to this present Age: by John Gregory,
Archdeacon of Gloucester, in Octavo, new.

The New Distemper; or, The Dissenters usual Pleas for Comprehension,
Toleration, and the Renouncing the Covenant, Considered and Discussed; with
some Reflections upon Mr. Baxter's and Mr. Alsop's late Pamphlets, published in
Answer to the Reverend Dean of S. Paul's Sermon concerning Separation: by the
late Reverend Dr. Tomkins, in Octavo.

The Lively Picture of Lewis du Moulin, drawn by an incomparable Hand: together
with his Last Words, being his Retractation of all the Personal Reflections he
had made on the Divines of the Church of England (in several Books of his)
Signed by himself on the Fifth and Seventeenth of October, 1680. in Quarto, new.

The daily practice of Devotion; or, The hours of Prayer, fitted to the main
Uses of a Christian Life, with Prayers for the peaceful re-settlement of this
Church and State: by the late Pious and Reverend H. Hammond, in 120.

Books printed for and sold by Richard Chiswell.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of foreign Parts.
Fol. Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers. Fol. Dr. Cary's Chronological
Account of Ancient time. Fol. Wanly's Wonders of the little World or History of
Man. Fol. Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. Fol Sir Rich. Baker's
Chronicle of England. Fol. Causin's Holy Court. Fol. Wilson's Complete
Christian Dictionary. Fol. Bishop Wilkin's Real Character, or Philosophical
Language. Fol. Pharmacopaeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis. Fol. Judge
Jones's Reports of Cases in common Law. Fol. Judge Vaughan's Reports of Cases
in common Law. Fol. Cave Tabulae Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum. Fol. Sir Will.
Dugdale's Baronage of England, in two Vol. Fol. Dr. Littleton's Latin
Dictionary. Quarto. Bishop Nicholson on the Church Catechism. Quarto. The
Complete Clerk. Quarto. History of the late Wars of New England. Quarto. Dr.
Outram De Sacrificiis. Quarto. Fowler's Defense of the Design of Christianity
against John Bunynan, 1 s. Quarto. Dr. Sherlock's Visitation-Sermon at
Warrington, 1659. 6 d. Quarto. The Magistrate's Authority Asserted, in a
Sermon, by James Paston. Quar. Elborow's Rationale upon the English Service.
Octavo. Wilkin's Natural Religion. Octavo. Hardcastle's Christian Geography and
Arithmetic. Octavo. Ashton's Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the
Clergy. Octavo. Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the House of
Peers in the case of Skinner. Octavo. -- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in
case of Appeals. Octavo. -- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of
Impositions. Octavo. -- Letter about the Bishops Vote in Capital Cases. Octavo.
Xenophontis Cyropaedia. Gr. Lat. Octavo. Duporti Versio Psalmorum Graeca.
Octavo. Grew's Idea of Philological History continued on Roots. Octavo.
Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice. Octavo. Several Tracts of Mr.
Hales of Eaton. Octavo. Dr. Simpson's Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws.
Octavo. -- His Hydrological Essays; with an Account of the Allum-works at
Whitby. Octavo. Dr. Gave's Primitive Christianity, in three Parts. Octavo. A
Discourse of the Nature, Ends and Difference of the two Covenants, 1672. 2 s.
Octavo. Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness, 1672. 1 s. 6 d.
Octavo. Lipsius's Discourse of Constancy, 2 s. 6 d. Octavo. Buckler of State
and Justice against France's Design of Universal Monarchy, 1673. Octavo.
Hodder's Arithmetic. Twelves. Grotius de Veritate Religionis Christianae.
Twelves. Bishop Hacket's Christian Consolations. Twelves. Valentine's
Devotions. 240. Trials of the Regicides. Octavo. Dangerfield's Narrative of the
pretended Presbyterian Plot. Folio. Guillim's Display of Heraldry, with large
Additions. Folio. Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of
England; in two Volumes. Folio. -- His Vindication of the Ordinations of the
Church of England. Oct. -- His Relation of the Massacre of the Protestants in
France. Quarto. -- His Sermon before the L. Mayor, upon the Fast for the Fire.
Quarto. -- His Account of Eve Cohan, a Person of Quality of the Jewish
Religion, lately converted to Christianity. Quarto. -- Some passages of the
Life and Death of the Right Honorable John, late Earl of Rochester; written by
his Lordship's own direction, on his Deathbed, by the said Gilbert Burnet, D.
D. Octavo. -- His Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, December. 22. 1680. --
His Translation of the Decree made at Rome, March 22. 1979. condemning some
Opinion of the Jesuits, and other Casuists. Quarto. Dr. Burnet's Sermon before
the Aldermen of London on the 30th. of January. 1681/81. In the Press Dr. Will.
Sherlock's Practical Discourse of religious Assemblies. Octo. Dr. Outram's
Sermons preached on several Occasions. Octavo. A Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet
of Separation. Octavo. Dr. Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion. Folio.
Herodoti Historia, Gr. Lat. cum Indicibus and Var. Lectionibus. Folio. Mr.
Williams his Sermon before the Lord Mayor, October. 12. 1679. -- His impartial
Examination of the Speeches of the five Jesnits, lately executed for Treason.
Folio. -- His History of the Powder Plot; with a Vindication of the
proceedings, and Matters relating thereunto, from the exceptions made against
it, by the Author of the Catholic Apology. To which is added, A Parallel
betwixt that and the present Plot. Quarto. Mr. Ja. Brome's two Fast Sermons,
1679. Dr. Jane's Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, April 11. 79. Quarto.
Mr. John James's Visitation Sermon. Quarto. Mr. John Cave's Fast Sermon, Jan.
30. 79. Quarto. -- His Assise Sermon at Leicester, July 31. 79. Dr. William
Cave's Sermons before the Lord Mayor, November. 5. 1680. Dr. Puller's Discourse
of the Moderation of the Church of England. Octavo. Dr. Saywell's Original of
all the Plots in Christendom. Octavo. Sir John Munson's Discourse of Supreme
Power and Common Right. Octavo. Dr. Edw. Bagshaw's Discourses on several Select
Texts. Octavo. Speculum Baxterianum; or Baxter against Baxter. Quarto. Mr.
Rushworth's Historical Collections, the Second Volume, in two Parts. Folio. --
His large and exact Account of the Earl of Strafford's Trial. Fol. The Country
Man's Physician. Octavo. An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason, by Matthew.
Clifford, Esquite. Twelves. The Laws against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, etc.
explained, by diverse Judgments and Resolutions of the Judges, and other
Observations thereupon. By Will. Cawley, Esquire Fol. Fowlis's History of the
Romish Conspiracies, Treasons and Usurpation. Folio. Seller's Remarques on the
State of the Church of the three first Centuries. Octavo. Bishop Sanderson's
Sermons, with his Life. Folio. Markham's perfect Horseman. Octavo. Mr. John
Cave's Gospel preached to the Romans. Octavo.
FINIS.

