The Meritorious Price OF MAN'S REDEMPTION, OR Christ's Satisfaction discussed
and explained.

1 By showing how the Sufferings and the Sacrifice of Christ, did satisfy Gods
Justice, pacify his Wrath, and procure his Reconciliation for man's Redemption,
from Satan's Head-plot.

2 By vindicating the Sufferings and the Sacrifice of Christ, from that most
dangerous Scripture-less Tenen^, that is held forth by Mr. Norton of New
England in his Book of Christ's Sufferings, affirming that he suffered the
Essential Torments of Hell, and the second death from Gods immediate
vindicative wrath.

3 By showing that the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ in relation to his
Office of Mediatorship, is a distinct sort of obedience, from his moral
obedience, in Chapter the third and elsewhere.

4 By showing that the Righteousness of God (so called in Romans 3. 21, 22, 26 in
Romans 10. 3, in 2 Cor. 5. 21. and in Phil. 3. 9.) is to be understood of God the
Fathers performance of his Covenant with Christ; namely, that upon Christ's
performance of his Covenant (by combating with Satan, and at last by making his
death a sacrifice) he would be reconciled to believing sinners, and not impute
their sins to them. And therefore 1. This Righteousness of God must needs be
the formal cause of a sinners justification. And 2. It must needs be a distinct
sort of Righteousness from the Righteousness of Christ, contrary to Mr. Nortons
Tenent. This is evidenced in Chap. 14. and elsewhere.

5 By explaining Gods Declaration of the combat between the Devil and the seed
of the woman in Genesis 3. 15. from whence (as from the foundation-principle) this
present Reply does explain all the after prophecies of Christ's Sufferings.

6 By clearing several other Scriptures of the greatest note in these
Controversies, from Mr. Nortons corrupt Expositions, and by expounding them in
their right sense; Both according to the Context, and according to sundry
eminent Orthodox Writers.

By William Pynchon Esquire; late of New England.

London, Printed by R. I. for Thom. Newberry, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Cornhil over against the Conduit near the Royal Exchange, 1655.

To the Honorable OLIVER ST. JOHN, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas;
Peace be multiplied.
SIR,
I Humbly present this ensuing Controversy to your Honor, because I deem you
to be an able Judge, not only in those Controversies that concern the common
Laws of this Land; but also in Divine Controversies, and especially in this
ensuing Controversy, because it has so much dependence on sundry sorts of
Scripture-Laws and Covenants, in all which you cannot choose but have a
judicious inspection, as well as into the Laws of this Land; and the rather,
because the Laws of England, have either in their rise, or in their use, some
relation to the said Scripture Laws and Covenants.

1 This ensuing Controversy has some relation to the moral Law of Nature, in
which Adam was created. And this Law, though I call it the moral Law of Nature,
yet I do not call it the Covenant of Nature, which God made with Adam touching
man's nature in general, as my Opponent does.

2 It has some relation to that special positive Law and Covenant which God
made with Adam (concerning man's nature) as he was ordained to be the head of
man's Nature in general; For God gave unto Adam two symbolical Trees, unto which
he annexed a Promise as well as a threatening, namely, That in case he did first
eat of the Tree of Life, then his Promise and Covenant (which was necessarily
employed) was, That he and all his natural posterity should be confirmed in his
created natural perfections for ever; But in case he did first eat of the Tree
of Knowledge of good and evil, then his threatening was, That both he and all
his natural posterity should die a spiritual death in sin.

3 It has some relation to the Laws of a Combat for the trial of the mastery;
for at the first the Devil thought that he had got the full victory over all
mankind by drawing Eve to eat of the forbidden fruit; but God told the Devil in
Genesis 3. 15. That he would put an utter enmity between him and the s^ed of that
woman which he had deceived and conquered, and that one of her seed should
combat with him, and break his cunning Head-plot, by continuing constant in
his obedience, through all his ill usage; until he had made his soul a
sacrifice of Reconciliation. And moreover, God told the Devil, that he should
have his full liberty to provoke his patience, and to hinder him in the course
of his obedience, by his ill usage, and that he should have so much power
granted him, as to pierce him in the foot-saols for a sinful Male factor on the
cross, to try if by any ill usage, either by fraud or force, he could provoke
his patience to make him sin against the Laws of the Combat. And God also
warned the Devil by his proclaimed Declaration, That in case he could not
prevail by all his ill usage to disturb the passions of the seed of the woman,
nor any other way to divert him in the course of his obedience, then this seed
of the woman (by the only weapon of his righteousness) should break his
Head-plot in pieces, and so should get the victory of the Victor; and rescue
the spoil from his power (or at the least the best part of the spoil) namely,
the Elect; and so it was prophesied of this blessed seed, in Isa. 53. 12. That
he should divide the spoil with the strong, namely with the strong enemy Satan.

4 It has some relation to the Laws of the Eternal Covenant, between the
Father and the Son for man's Redemption; for God could not have declared the
said Laws of the Combat for the Victory, except there had gone before hand an
eternal consent, decree and Covenant between the Father and the Son, for the
trial of this Combat, in order to the redemption of the Elect from Satan's
head-plot: Therefore from this declared combat, in Genesis 3. 15. it follows by
necessary consequence, that the second person did from eternity Covenant to
take unto him man's true nature from the seed of the deceived sinful woman, and
in that nature, as it was accompanied with our true infirmities of Fear,
Sorrow, etc. to enter the Lists, and to combat with Satan for the end
aforesaid. And 2. Hence it also follows by necessary consequence, That God the
Father did Covenant to and with his Son, that in case the Devil could not by
all his ill usage prevail to disturb his humane passions, nor could by any
other way divert him in the course of his obedience, until he had finished all
his sufferings, and until at last, in that obedience, he had made his soul a
sacrifice, then he would accept of the perfection of his righteousness and
obedience, both in his combat and also in the formality of his death, by his
own Priestly power, as a sweet smelling sacrifice, and thereupon would be
reconciled to the Elect, and receive them again into special favor, as Sons, by
Adoption. A learned Divine says thus,


The fundamental grounds of Christianity, do enforce us to grant, That in the
Divine nature (though most indivisibly one) there is an eminent Ideal pattern,
of such a distinction as we call between party and party, a capacity to give,
and a capacity to receive; a capacity to demand, and a capacity to satisfy
etc.

5 From this eternal Decree and Covenant between the Father and the Son, does
result the New Covenant with the Elect; For it pleased them to agree, That all
the Articles of the New Covenant, should be ratified and confirmed to the Elect
by the death of Christ, and from that confirmation by his death; It is now
styled the New Testament, Heb. 9. 15, 16.

6 Presently after the Declaration of the said Enmity and Combat in Genesis 3.
15. namely, in verse 19. It pleased God further to declare the Council of his
will to fallen (but now also converted) Adam, That he should return to the dust
whence he was taken, Genesis 3. 19.

And this is also further to be noted, That God denounced this judicial
sentence of a bodily death on him, as a just punishment for his original
spiritual death in sin; and this is also further evident by Romans 5. 12.

And secondly, The Apostle does also further tell us, That when God appointed a
bodily death to Adams sinful nature, that he also did at the very same time
appoint a judgment for each departed soul, Heb. 9. 27. namely,

First, That such as dyed in the faith of their Redemption by the seed of the
woman, should be judged to everlasting life; and so the sentence of their
bodily death should at the last be turned into a blessing to them.

But secondly, That such as believed nor their Redemption by this seed of the
woman, the sentence of their bodily death should bring a greater judgment to
them, because it should be an inlet to their eternal death in hell, Ioh. 3. 36.

7 Hence it also follows by necessary consequence, That when God proclaimed
this Combat and victory, he did exemplify the manner of the victory to Adam
by the death of some Lamb, which God commanded Adam to offer in Sacrifice (as I
have showed it more at large in my Treatise of the Institution of the Sabbath)
and ever after, God did exemplify the same to the Fathers, both before, and
after the Flood.

1 Before the Flood, it is said, That Abel did offer a better sacrifice than
Cain, because he offered it in faith, Genesis 4. Heb. 11. 4.

2 Immediately after the Flood, Noah is said to offer sacrifice for a sweet
savor of rest unto God, Genesis 8. 21. because such Sacrifices were ordained to
typifie Gods full rest, and sweet content in the perfect obedience of Christ;
first in his Combat, and at last in his Sacrifice, as it is opened in Ephesians. 5.
2.

3 After this, God is said to preach the Gospel unto Abraham, Gal. 3. 8, 16.
and how else did he preach the Gospel, but by declaring in what manner the Seed
of the woman should break the Serpents Head plot? and therefore when God
renewed his Promise and Covenant of blessedness to Abraham (by telling him that
this Seed of the woman should come out of his loins) He gave this Testimony of
Abraham, That he did obey his voice, and keep his charge, his Commandments,
his Statutes, and his Laws, Genesis 26. 5. And that he would teach his children
and his household after him (as all the godly Fathers did) to keep the way of
the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. namely, to keep the way of true Religion, or the way of
Redemption by the Seed of the woman, that was promised to come out of his loins.

4 After this, it pleased the Lord to separate Israel to be his peculiar people
in Covenant; And then at Mount Sinai he gave them the ten Commandments, as a
Covenant of Grace (as many learned Divines do of late rightly call it) for the
regulating of their faith and obedience, in the course of their lives, together
with certain other voluntary, ceremonial and typical Laws, and with certain
Judicial Laws (many of which were also typical) and these Laws in their outward
bodily use were called the first Covenant (of works) in respect of their lawful
and legal appearing before Gods presence in his Sanctuary, but the same Laws in
their mystical and spiritual use were given as a Covenant of grace, and as the
Law of faith, though after a while, the Jews under the New Testament, did
mistake Gods end in giving them, for they did rely upon their outward
obedience to them as Idolaters do, for their eternal justification and
salvation.

5 Besides these typical ceremonial Laws, It pleased God to ordain some other
voluntary, positive, ceremonial Laws (which were no way typical in relation to
our redemption by Christ as the former were) but were ordained only for the
trial of some particular man's obedience in some one particular act; and such
was the command of God to Saul to destroy the Amalekites utterly, without
sparing any thing, 1 Samuel 15. And such also was the command of God to David, to
hang up seven of Saul's sons to pacify his wrath, though some of them, if not
all of them, might be innocent of Saul's sin, 2 Samuel 21. And such also was the
command of God to the young Prophet, not to eat any bread in that place, nor to
return the same way that he came, 1 King. 13. 9. etc.

This ensuing controversy has relation often to some one or other of these
Laws and Covenants, as also to the Law of Suretiship for life, in the case of
capital crimes: In all which Laws and Covenants, your Lordship cannot but have
a deep inspection; and therefore I have the rather been bold to dedicate this
ensuing Controversy to your Honors judgment.

And now my humble Request to your Honor is,

1 That where you find any thing that does not accord to the truth in your
judgment, that you will be pleased either to vouchsafe me your
Animadversions, or else to lay it aside in silence, as you do other men's
Tenants that you like not.

2 That where you find any thing that does accord to the truth (which my soul
loves and longs after) that you will be pleased to vouchsafe it so much
grace in your sight, as to protect and defend it, according to God, whereof I
nothing doubt, as being verily persuaded that your Lordship does account it
your greatest honor to be every way serviceable to God, and his truth, as it
is in Jesus.

And that you may be still guided in the ways of truth and life, until you
obtain the end of your faith, even the salvation of your soul. It is the hearty
prayer of

Your Honors most humble servant, WILLIAM PYNCHON.

TO THE Considerate and Judicious Reader.
IN this ensuing Reply, both to Mr. Nortons Foundation-principles, and also to
his several Answers to the Dialogue (called, The Meritorious price of man's
Redemption) I do often conclude my several Replies with this entreaty to the
Judicious Reader, to judge between us, which of us does give the righ^est sense
of the blessed Scriptures in these ensuing Controversy.

Paul did much commend the Synagogue of the Bercans, for their better, more
noble, and more ingenuous disposition (beyond the Synagogue of the
Thessalonians) because they searched the Scriptures daily whether those things
were so or no, as Paul had taught in their Synagogue, Act. 17. 11.

For in two main points of Religion touching man's Redemption, which Paul taught
in their Synagogue) he differed much from their common received opinion:

For first, he opened and alleged from the Scriptures, That the Messiah must
needs have suffered (namely, that by the necessity of the eternal Decree and
Covenant, he must needs take on him our true humane nature from the Seed of the
woman, and that in that nature as it was accompanied with our true humane
affections and passions, he must needs enter the Lists and Combat with Satan
for the victory, for God had proclaimed an utter enmity between them in Genesis 3.
15.) and then he also told the Devil that he should have full liberty and power
to pierce this Seed of the woman in the foot-soals, as a sinful Malefactor on
the Cross,

And secondly, He opened and alleged from the Scriptures, That the Messiah
must also of necessity rise again from death to life on the third day, Act. 17.
3.

In these two main points, Paul differed much from the common received opinion
of the Jews; for their common received opinion was, That their Messiah should
come into the world as a stately conquering Monarch, to redeem them from the
Tyranny of the Nations of the world and to restore them again into their own
land, in a more glorious manner than ever before.

And secondly, it was their common opinion, that their Messiah should not dye
at all, but that he should continue alive for ever in his stately monarchy.

This was their common received opinion of Redemption by the Messiah, as it is
evident by Joh. 12, 23, 32. 34. and by Jonathans Paraphrase, and by their
Thalmud, which is cited by Maymony, and translated by Mr. Bro. in Eccles. p.
31. etc.

And therefore when Paul opened and alleged from the Scriptures that the
Messiah must needs have suffered from Satan and his Instruments for their
redemption, it was a great stumbling block of offense to the Jews in general, 1
Cor. 1. 23. and yet notwithstanding some few of their Hebrew Doctors held and
wrote otherwise, namely, That the Messiah must suffer much evil from the enmity
of Satan; For says Du Plessis in the Trueness of Religion, page 531. Some of
the Rabbis in the Thalmud say, That Christ should be distressed as a woman
that labors of a child, according as Jeremy says, He had great Anguishes to
suffer, but that he would endure them willingly to deliver man from sin. And
(says he) Rab. Hadarson says, That Satan should be an enemy to him, and to
his Disciples. And, says he, in the book of Ruth, where it is written, Eat thy
bread, and temper it with vinegar. This Bread (says the Commentary) is the
bread of the anointed King (or Messiah) who shall be broken for men's sin, and
endure great torments, as it is written in Isaiah. And says he, Rabbi Symeon
Ben Jochai writes thus, Woe worth the Murderers of Israel, for they shall kill
Christ; God will send his Son clothed in man's flesh to wash them, and they
will kill him: And says he, Whereas it is said, we be healed by his death (or
stripes) the ancient Cabalists understand it of Christ, and say that the Angels
had taught them, that the clensing away of sin should be done upon Wood. And
says Du Plessis in page 478. Rab. Hechadosh says, That the Messiah shall by
his death save Adams race, and deliver men's souls from Hell, and therefore he
shall be called, Savior.

And secondly, Some few of the Hebrew Doctors did also hold the Resurrection of
the Messiah; For says Du Plessis in page 532, 533. Rab. Hadarson, and Rab.
Hachadosh, and Rab. Jonathan the son of Uzziel, and others, do expound these
Texts of the Resurrection of Christ, Thou will not suffer thy holy One to see
corruption; And he shall be raised again within the third day, for it is
written, He will quicken us after two days, and in the third day will he raise
us up again: And say the Rabbis in Bresith Rabba commenting on Genesis 22. 4.
There are many a three days in the holy Scriptures, of which one is the
Resurrection of the Messiah, See Ains. in Genesis 22. 4.

These two points of Doctrine which was scoffed at by the wise Philosophers of
the Gentiles Act. 17. 18 etc. (which was held but by a very few among the Jews)
Paul taught to be the only truth in their Synagogues, and he opened and
alleged the Scriptures to prove these points.

But because these points of Doctrine were contrary to their now common
received opinion, Therefore the Church or Synagogue of Thessalonica (being
forest alled by their erroneous judgments) were enraged at it, and like mad
men, did teoth and nayl persecute Paul for it, but yet he was hid from their
rage, and he that held the truth was glad to obscure himself at the present,
and to haste away out of their Jurisdiction unto the Jurisdiction of the
Synagogue of Berea; But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge thereof,
they sent thither also, and stirred up the people against Paul, verse 13.
because he hold and taught the said Doctrine there.

But although at the first it seemed very strange, and new, to them of Berea,
as it did to them of Thessalonica, yet they did not persecute Paul for it,
because the chief Rulers there were of a more wise, temperate and noble
disposition than they of Thessalonica, and therefore they took a wiser course;
For they searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so or no: And
this is worthy of all due consideration, that they did not content themselves
with a superficial search of one day and away, but they made it their daily
work to search the Scriptures, neither did they trust only to the Expositions
of those Hebrew Doctors that were now commonly received, but they searched into
the Scriptures themselves, conferring what Paul had taught, and his proofs,
with the Doctrine of Moses, and the Prophets, held forth in the Old Testament,
2 Pet. 1. 19. concerning the promised Messiah where the first Scripture to be
examined is in Genesis 3. 15.

And first, By this means Paul's two points of Doctrine which seemed new to
them, at the first show, was found by them to be the only true Doctrine of the
blessed Scriptures; and by that means many of them believed the said points,
with many honorable women, which were Greeks, and of men not a few, verse 12.

Secondly, By this means Paul's new Doctrine (in show) escaped the odium of
Heresy in this place.

Thirdly, By this means the Synagogue of Berea escaped from being ranked by the
holy Ghost in the number of the other enraged zealous persecutors of the truth.

I do earnestly therefore entreat thee, Good Reader, as thou desire to escape
the odium of a Persecutor, and as thou desire to have the like commendations
with those of Berea, search the blessed Scriptures, not only superficially, and
by some common received Expositors, but search them deliberately, and search
them daily, and then thou shall be the better able to try which of us do give
the true sense of the blessed Scriptures, for as Peter says of Paul's Epistle
to the dispersed Hebrews, some things are hard to be understood, which they
that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also other Scriptures, to
their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3* 16. and therefore be diligent in thy search,
and the rather, because Interpreters give variety of interpretations, and
therefore look well to the Context, and look well to the force and use of the
original word, by comparing it with the Context, and with other Scriptures; for
when Paul went about to convince error, and to confirm the truth, he disputed
out of the Scriptures, Act. 17. 2. and so Apollos disputed out of the
Scriptures, Act. 18. 28. And our Savior said, Ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures, Mat. 22. 29. meaning thereby, that they did err, because they did
mis-understand the Scriptures; for though they knew the letter of the
Scriptures, and had them in great reverence, yet they did err because through
a superficial perusal, they took them in a wrong sense.

Now the first Scripture wherein the true Platform of our Redemption is first
declared, is Genesis 3. 15. In this Scripture God does first proclaim an utter
enmity between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the Serpent; and in that
Text God told the Devil, that one of the seed of that deceived sinful Woman,
should in his true humane nature try Masteries with him, and conquer him, and
he told Satan that he should have his full liberty to do what he could, either
by fraud or by force, to hinder this seed of the Woman from breaking his
Head-plot, and so from winning the prize of man's Redemption, and therefore God
gave him full liberty to use him as a sinful Malefactor, and to pierce him in
the Footsoals, to try if by any means he could disturb his patience; And in
this Combat Christ covenanted that his humane nature should strive lawfully,
and not suffer his patience to be disturbed, nor his obedience to be any ways
perverted, until he had finished the Combat with Satan, and then he also
covenanted in the perfection of that obedience to make his soul a sacrifice for
the procuring of Gods Reconciliation.

And hence it also follows, That God the Father had covenanted to, and with
Christ, that he would accept his Combat, and his Sacrifice as a valuable
consideration for the procuring of his Reconciliation to all the Elect.

And thus it was declared that the seed of the Woman should break the Devils
Head-plot, and win the prize, which was the Redemption of all the Elect from
Satan's spoil.

And first, From this Proclamation of Enmity, and from this first Declaration
of the Combat with Satan, and of the Victory by the seed of the deceived Woman
in Genesis 3. 15. must all the following Scriptures have reference for their true
Exposition.

And secondly, From this Scripture it is most evident, That all Christ's outward
suffering were by Gods appointment to be inflicted on him from the malice of
Satan, and his Instruments; and that all his inward sufferings in his vital
soul, were to be assumed and exercised from his own true humane affections and
passions (which he took from the seed of the Woman) in relation to his ill
usage from his Enemy Satan.

And thirdly, Neither in this, nor in any following Scripture, is there any
mention that Christ was to be made a sinner by Gods judicial imputation, there
is no such Court-language in the Scriptures, neither is the term Hell Torments,
nor the second death, nor the term Inflicted from Gods immediate wrath, applied
to Christ, neither in this, nor in any other Scripture, though Mr. Norton has
perverted most dangerously many of the blessed Scriptures so to speak.

Fourthly, When this first Declaration in Genesis 3. 15. is rightly understood,
and conferred with all the other Scriptures that speak of Christ's sufferings;
it will fully declare, That Mr. Nortons Tenants are most dangerously erroneous;
and it will confirm the truth of the Dialogue.

Fifthly, This Text of Genesis 3. 15. being rightly understood will be a general
Key to open all the other Scriptures that speak of the sufferings of Christ, in
their right sense.

Sixthly, In this Scripture is set out both the person and office of the
Mediator.

First, The term he relates to his humane nature from the seed of the Woman.

And secondly, The term he relates to his divine nature, or else he could not
have taken the seed of the Woman without original sin.

Thirdly, His office is declared to be a Combater with Satan in his humane
nature, as it was accompanied with our true humane affections and passions. And
it was declared, that Satan his envious Combater should have his full liberty
to do his worst to provoke his passions, to some distemper or other, that so he
might spoil his obedience, and so hinder him from making his soul a Sacrifice,
etc. as it is further declared in this Reply.

Good Reader, Let this eminent example of these ingenuous Bereans, make thy
spirit calm and deliberate, to search into the blessed Scriptures daily,
whether of us have given the right sense, that error may be avoided, and that
the truth may be embraced, and confirmed to thy soul, and to the Church of God,
when we are dead and gone.

Thine in the Lord, W. PYNCHON.

A Postscript.
AFter I had finished my Reply to Mr. Norton, and after a good part of it was
printed, I received a Book lately published by Mr. Anthony Burges, called, The
true Doctrine of Justification, the second Part, wherein I found that he has
opposed some things in my Book of the Meretorious Price; but yet with a
differing spirit from Mr. Norton, for he professes that he likes not to be so
deep in censuring, as he sees some others are.

1 In page 407. He does oppose the Dialogue, because it distinguishes between
Christ's legal and Mediatorial obedience; But in Chap. 3. and elsewhere, I have
justified the said distinction to be sound and good.

2 In page 426. He does oppose the Dialogue, because it makes the formality of
Christ's death and sacrifice to be supernatural, and in this point his answer is
almost in Mr. Nortons expressions, and therefore my Reply in Chap. 17. Sect. 3.
and elsewhere, is a sufficient Reply to him as well as it is to Mr. Norton.

3 H^ holds differing things in the point of Christ's Satisfaction not only from
me, but also from Mr. Norton, but I hope my whole Book is a sufficient Reply,
and a sufficient vindication of the truth.

4 There is one Scripture in my following Reply, which I have cited to my
sense, out of Mr. Burges in Vindiciae legis, namely, Mat. 5. 17, 18. which he
does now expound in a differing sense from what he had done in Vindiciae legis;
namely, That Christ came to fulfill the Law for our righteousness by Gods
imputation. This Exposition he did not give in Vindiciae legis; but yet I
perceived that he held it to be a truth in it self; but by his former
exposition I could not conceive that he ever intended to hold it from this
Text, and Context, or else I had not cited him, and now I would have left him
out, had I not been prevented by the Press; for the Exposition that I have now
given of that Text, in page 113. I believe is the truth, and it has the
approbation of other eminent orthodox Writers; And as for his two Reasons given
in page 357. to prove that these words of Christ's must be understood of his
Suretiship fulfilling, they prove it not, but according to the Context, they do
most fi^ly agree to Christ's Doctrinal fulfilling, as I have expounded that
Text. Thus much I thought fit to speak to the Reader.

5 Whereas it has pleased him to give the term of many Novelismes to my Book:
I reply, That every one knows, that when any one does labor to vindicate the
true sense of the blessed Scriptures from some long accustomed errors, that
such Expositors will be accounted to hold Novelismes by them that hold such
received errors, when our Savior did vindicate the spiritual sense of the Law
in a differing manner from the Scribes in Mat. 5. doubtless they censured him
for teaching Novelismes, for in Mark. 1. 27. they said, What new doctrine is
this?

But my earnest Request to the advised and deliberate Reader is, To make a
through search into what both sides say, and then to judge between us; such
Readers as these do well deserve the same commendations that Paul gave unto the
ingenuous Bereans: And so rests,

Thine in the truth of the Gospel, W. PYNCHON.

A Table of the chief Heads.
But some of these Heads that have this Mark * are not printed, therefore I
desire they may be added by the Readers pen, for the better observation of some
Points; and because some of them are too much for the Margin; there set only
the first sentence, and make a reference to the rest in the Table to the same
page.

CHAP. II.
THE Covenant of Works made with Adam, was not made in relation to his
obedience or disobedience to the Moral Law of Nature, as Mr. Norton holds, but
in relation to his obedience or disobedience to a mere positive symbolical
command, about things indifferent in their own nature, Page 3.

Add this Note to the Text in page 16. at the end of ninthly, and in the Margin
to p. 118.

The Ceremonial and Judicial Laws (after the time of Adams fall) is called the
First Covenant (of Works) and these Laws Moses wrote in a Book; and thereupon
they are called the Book of the Covenant, as Ainsworth notes in Psalm. 25. 10.
They are called also the first Covenant, in Heb. 9. 1. and 87. But the
Decalogue was wrote in stone by the finger of God, Exodus 24. 7. 2. with ver.
12. and with Heb. 9. 19.

Add this Marginal Note to page 15.

The outward observation of all the Economy of Moses, but especially the
outward observation of the Ceremonial Rites, Paul calls the Law of Works, (for
indeed the outward observation of them was ordained by Gods Covenant to purify
their bodies, and so to make them fit persons to appear before Gods holy
presence in his holy Sanctuary) Romans 3. 27. and 9. 32. and yet these very Laws
in their mystical sense, Paul does also call, The Law of Faith, to the
spiritual Jews; because in their spiritual use they guided their Faith to trust
only on Christ for Life and Salvation, Gal. 3. 2, 3. Romans 2. 26, 27. And so
the diverse conditions that belonged to these Laws, did by Gods Ordinance make
them to belong unto two differing Covenants, namely, both to the Covenant of
Works, and to the Covenant of Grace, contrary to Mr. Nortons Tenent, in p. 183,
184.

If Adams eating of the forbidden fruit had been a sin against the moral Law of
Nature, then Eve^ desire to eat had been a sin, before her act of eating, p. 7
Adam sonned not in soul, until he had first sinned in body, p. 8 The command of
God for Christ to die, was not from the moral Law as Mr. Norton holds most
erroniously; but it was from a mere voluntary positive Law and Covenant made
between the Trinity, as equal and reciprocal Covenanters, p. 9, 122, 293, 308
* Add this marginal Note to p. 9.

The death of Christ (says Grotius) was not determined by any Law (that was
given to man) but by a special Covenant. Cite this also to p. 297. l. 1.

The rectitude of Adams created nature was such, that he could not will to sin
against the moral Law of nature, p. 10. Adams ignorance of that positive Law
(as of the event) that was at the first given to the Angels (which was to serve
man, though in the event many of them refused, and thereby became Devils) made
him the more apt to be deceived, by the Devils temptations, p. 11, 159 Original
sin did not fall upon our nature through Adams disobedience to the moral Law,
but through his disobedience to a mere positive Law and Covenant in eating of
the forbidden fruit, which was in its own nature but a thing indifferent p. 13,
34 The moral Law of Nature was not ordained for Adams justification, but it was
ordained only to be the condition of his created perfections, and therefore it
should for ever have been the rule of his life, if he had but been confirmed by
his once eating of the Tree of Life in the first place, p. 14 No act of Adams
obedience was ordained to be imputed to his posterity for their obedience, but
his first act only in eating of the Tree of Life, because no other act of his
obedience, but that alone was constituted by Gods voluntary positive Law and
Covenant, to be for the confirmation of his created natural perfections to his
posterity, p. 14 It was con-natural to Adam to live in the continual practice
of moral obedience; therefore that kind of obedience was not ordained for him
to merit the confirmation of his created perfections, p. 21 * * Add these four
Sections to the Text in p. 22. just before the Conclusion. 1 The Image of God
in Adam was no true part of his essence. 2 Neither did it flow from his nature
essentially, as the Faculties do from the soul, for then it could not have
ceased to be without the destruction of the subject that did support it. 3
Therefore it was but a connexed appendix which the God of Nature con-joynec' to
his soul and body in his creation (as he con-joyned an admirable beauty to the
body of Moses at his birth, Exodus 2. 2.) which might either continue, or it
might be lost by eating some prohibited meat that might cause a distemper, that
might cause his beauty to consume as a moth, without the annihilating of his
body and soul. 4 The image of God in Adam was con-natural to his body, because
it should have been transmitted to his posterity by natural generation, if he
had but first eaten of the Tree of Life, for the confirmation of his created
perfections.
The death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. is limited by two circumstances, to our
spiritual death in sin only. Therefore first, That death must needs be the
Essential curse that is there threatened. Secondly, therefore it must needs be
no less than Blasphemy to affirm, as Mr. Norton does, that Christ was Adams
legal surety in the first Covenant, to suffer that cursed death in his room,
and place, for his Redemption, p. 24. chap. 16. Rep. 22. at Sixthly,
* Add this marginal Note to p. 31.

Bodily death was not threatened to be the immediate effect of Adams first sin
in eating the forbidden fruit, in Genesis 2. 17. neither was a bodily death
threatened till after Adams fall in Genesis 3. 19. (which was not until four verses
after that God had declared that Christ should be the seed of the woman, etc.)
as the proper punishment of Adams spiritual death in original sin.

* Add this Note to the Text in p. 33. at line 23. and in cha. 16. at Reply 22.
ult.

If it be granted that God denounced a bodily death, as the immediate effect of
Adams first sin in eating the forbidden fruit, then the Pelagians cannot be
convinced that Original sin is the cause of the death of Infants; for then the
Pelagians might reply, That seeing it is granted that bodily death is the
immediate effect of Adams first sin, it cannot be the immediate effect of
Original sin. But seeing it is evident by Romans 5. 12. that it is the punishment
of Original sin, in Infants, therefore no other death, bue a spiritual death in
sin, was at the first threatened in Genesis 2. 17.

Original sin is the essential death that God threatened in Genesis 2. 17. as the
proper passion of Adams first sin, though in the issue the Elect are redeemed
from it by Christ's undertaking to be the seed of the conquered woman, and in
that nature, (as it was accompanied with our true infirmities) to conquer Satan
by his constant obedience to the Laws of the Combat (notwithstanding Satan's
unlimited power to provoke and disturb his passions) and because at last (in
the perfection of his said obedience) he made his soul a sacrifice of
reconciliation, by breathing out his immortal Spirit by his own Priestly power,
p, 34, 63, 65 Eternal death in Hell is but an accidental punishment to the
first spiritual death in sin p. 36 Gods First Covenant with Adam, was not made
with Adam as a single person, but it was made with him as he was the head of
man's nature in general p. 25 The kind of life promised to Adam, and so to all
his natural Posterity was, the perpetuity of his life in this world in his
created perfections, p. 27 All the glory of Gods Creation had been confounded
at the very instant of Adams fall, if God, in his eternal Counsel and
Providence, had not ordained Christ to be ready at that instant to take on him
the Government of the whole Creation p. 28 Gods secret, and not his revealed
will, is the inviolable Rule of Gods relative Justice, p. 37, 35, and chapter 15.
CHAP. III.
The quality or kind of Christ's obedience, ex officio, as Mediator, was not to
the moral Law of Nature, as Mr. Norton affirms, but it was to the voluntary
positive Laws of a peculiar voluntary and reciprocal Covenant that was made
between the persons in Trinity, from Eternity. Secondly, Though Mr. Norton does
one while affirm, That the quality or kind of Christ obedience was legal, the
same in nature and measure, which we by the first Covenant stood bound unto,
yet another while he does contradict that, and says it was more also p* 42
Christ's obedience to the moral Law, is by eminent Divines rightly called
Justitia personae; But his obedience in his death and sufferings they do
rightly call, Justitia meriti, p. 44 Christ's obedience in his incarnation, and
in his death, was not his obedience to the moral Law, as Mr. Norton affirms,
but it was a special kind of obedience to the voluntary positive Laws of his
Mediatorship only, p. 45
* Add this Note to p. 45.

Dr. Willet in Dan. 9. p. 291. says, That Christ's Descention, Conception,
Incarnation, and his Miracles, are not imputed to us, because they were no part
of fulfilling the Law. In these words he does plainly contradict Mr. Norton,
for he denies that Christ's incarnation was any part of Christ's obedience to the
moral Law.

If the Incarnation of Christ (which was an act of his Godhead) had been an
act of obedience to the moral Law, as Mr. Norton affirms, then his Godhead had
been in an absolute inferiority to his Father, because the moral Law was given
by God as a supreme, which Tenent does fully maintain the Arrian Heresy, p. 47
* Add this Note to p. 99. and to p. 101.

Mr. Norton says in p. 123. That the Divine nature was angry, not only with
the Humane nature, but with the person of the Mediator, because of sin imputed
to him. And in p. 55. he says, That God charged Christ with sin, as the
supreme Lawgiver, and Judge, etc. In these words he makes the Godhead of the
Mediator to be in an absolute inferiority to his Father; which does also
maintain the Arrian Heresy.

* Add this Note to p. 47. and to p. 51. at 5.

Christ, as he was true man, was under the obligation of the moral Law, and as
he was a Jew he was under the obligation of the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws,
but as he was Mediator, and as he acted as Mediator, ex officio, he was above
the moral Law, for he said he was the Lord of the Sabbath, even as he was the
Son of man. And secondly, he showed himself to be above the Ceremonial Law, in
that he said, A greater than the Temple is here, Matthew. 12. 6, 8.

The Jews legal justifications (under the first Covenant) by their outward
observation of the works of the Ceremonial Law, was a true type of our moral
justification by the blood of Christ, p. 49, 51, 235, and p. 259
CHAP, IV.
THe order of men's legal proceedings in Courts of Judicature is no way suitable
to be alleged for an exemplification of the order of Gods proceedings in
Christ's sufferings (as Mr. Nortons way is) because it appears by Gods
Declaration of the Combat in Gen 3, 15. that his sufferings (as he was
declared to be the seed of the woman) was to be from the voluntary cause in the
trial of masteries, with his proclaimed enemy Satan and his Instruments; in
which Combat, in case Satan could have prevailed to disturb his patience, then
Satan had got the victory, but in case he could not by all his ill usage,
disturb his patience, nor any way subvert him in his obedience, then the
victory, and the rich prize of man's Redemption was to go on Christ's side, p.
55, 82, 96, 22, and chap. 13, and 14. Eternity is essential to the Torments of
Hell, p. 56 The distinction of essential and circumstantial Hell Torments,
thereby to make Eternity no more but a circumstance, has four inconveniences
attending it, p. 56 Sometimes Mr. Norton does affirm that Christ suffered the
pain of loss, in respect of the fruition of the good of the Promise, but
otherwhiles he says, it was but in respect of the sense of the good of the
Promisess By which wide differing expressions, he leaves the Reader in the dark
to gr^pe out his meaning, p. 58 Mr. Norton in his book p. 123 holds, that
Christ was separated both in body and soul from all participation of the good
of the Promise for a time, and so he comes up to Christ's total separation from
God for a time, p. 60 Sometimes again he makes the pain of loss, to be no more
but the want of the sense of the favor of God for a time, p. 61 Mr. Norton is
put to his shifts to maintain his poenal Hell in this life, for he is fain to
fly to Gods extraordinary dispensation to maintain it, p. 62 Death in sin is
the essential curse that God threatened in Genesis 2. 17. p. 63, 68, 34 Seeing the
Elect were in Christ vertually, before they were in Adam actually, it proves
that eternal death did not stand in full force against them, but a spiritual
death in sin only, p. 65 Death in sin, and other punishments also, which the
Elect do suffer since the revelation of the Covenant of Grace, in Genesis 3. 15.
are de jure, penal Justice, though de facto (in the issue) they are not, p. 69
* Add this Note to p. 69. Yea Mr. Norton himself does confess in his book p.
255. That Original sin is the penal effect of Adams sin.

Death is not from God as be did ordain nature, but it was inflicted as a
punishment for Original sin, and then he also ordamed a judgment to follow,
which will be a judgment to eternal death, to all such as die without Faith in
their redemption from Satan's Head plot by the promised seed, p. 70 Mr. Norton
does often contradict his foundation Principle, which is, that Christ made
satisfaction by suffering the essential punishment of the curse of Hell
Torments, p 72, 107, 113 291 Mr. Norton does by necessary consequence impute
the sin of unmindfu^^ ness to Christ, in the very time when he di^ execute his
Priestly office, p. 76. and p. 327
* Add this Note to p. 76. and to chapter 17. at Sect. 4.

Mr. Weams in his Portraiture p. 248. says as Mr. Norton does, That Christ was
forgetful of his Office, by reason of the Agony astonishing his senses. O
horrible Blasphemy! And though he does agree with Mr. Norton in the point of
imputing sin to Christ, yet he does contradict Mr. Norton in the point of
Christ suffering Hell Torments, for in p. 208. he denies that Christ suffered
Hell Torments; because (says he) some things were unbeseeming to the person of
Christ, as the torments of Hell, therefore (says he) the compensation of it was
supplied by the worthiness of the person.

Payment in kind does justify the Elect actually, as soon as ever they have
life in the womb. And this Tenent does justify the Antinomian Tenent, which
holds that the Elect are justified before they have any Faith, p. 76 Payment in
kind leaves no room for God to exercise his free pardon, and see P. Martyr in
Romans p. 382. ult. p. 77 Mr. Norton affirms, most dangerously, that Christ made
full satisfaction by suffering Hell Torments, before his death was completed,
and so he makes his death and sacrifice to be altogether vain and needless, as
to the point of full satisfaction, p. 79, 309. and chap. 17. Reply 24. To
affirm that Christ suffered the essential Torments of Hell, is all one as to
affirm that Christ's sufferings were from Gods hatred, p. 79. at the fifth
Reason, and p. 80 The true nature of all Christ's greatest sufferings, are
described by the word chastisements, in Isa. 53. 5. But the essential tormonts
of Hell are no where called chastisements, therefore Christ's greatest
sufferings cannot truly and properly be called the essential Torments of Hell,
p. 79. at Reas. 6. and p. 169.
CHAP. V.
THe Essential Torments of Hell are inflicted from Gods hatred, p. 80
CHAP. VI.
CHrist undertook all his sufferings from the voluntary Cause and Covenant, and
he underwent them as our voluntary combating Surety, for the winning of the
prize from his malignant combating Enemy Satan (even the redemption of all the
Elect) by continuing constant in his obedience to the Laws of the Combat, even
to the death of the Cross; and therefore be did not undergo his sufferings from
Gods vindicative justice, by imputing the guiss of our sins to him, and so
inflicting on him the essential Torments of Hell, according to the legal order
of justice in Court proceedings, p. 82, 83, 96, 102, 138, 55. Chapter 13, Chapter 14
God does impute the guilt of Adams first sin to all his natural posterity,
because it was his good pleasure (as he was the most absolute Supreme) to make
such a Covenant with Adam, as might really include all his natural posterity,
namely, That in case he did first eat of the forbidden fruit, then his nature,
as it was the fountain of all man's nature in general, should become dead in
sin; and so consequently he must impute the guilt of Adams first sin to them
all, as being all dead in sin by natural generation, p. 83 Christ could not be
Adams legal Surety to the first Covenant, for then be must have suffered the
vindicative curse of death in sin, which is blasphemy in the bigbest degree to
affirm: Therefore none but Adam as he was the head of man's nature by nature
generation) was under the obligation of punishment for the breach of the first
Covenant, p. 86, 150, etc. Christ may well be called our voluntary Surety,
because be voluntarily undertook our cause, namely, to be our voluntary
Combater against Satan to break his Head plot for our Redemption; but in no
sort can be he said to be our legal bounden Surety, in the same obligation with
Adam, p. 89. 205
* Add this Marginal Note to p. 89.

See also what Grotius says against legal Sureties for life, in capital crimes
p. 215, 216.

God ordained all Christ's greatest sufferings, in his long passion, to be for
his Priestly Consecration, before he could make his death to be a Sacrifice of
Reconciliation, p. 92, 309
CHAP. VII.
IT must needs be but a mere fantasy, to bold that Christ suffered the
essential Torments of Hell in this world, seeing Mr. Norton does acknowledge
that the very Devils are not in sull Torments, as long as they remain in this
world, p 105 If the humane nature of Christ had partaken of the essential joys
of heaven, before his death, (as Mr. Norton holds) then doubtless be had been
confirmed against the sufferings of death, p 107
* Add this Marginal Note to p. 107.

Mr. Rutherfurd on the Covenant says in p. 29, 30, 34, that Gods declarative
glory is not essential to God.

Mr. Norton does often fall from his foundation principle (which is, That
Christ suffered the essential Torments of Hell) to that which is equivalent, p.
107, 113, 72 The Metaphorical sense of Sheol and Hades, is opened, p. 108 It is
to admiration that Mr. Norton does interpret the same word in the same
Scripture first to signify Hell Torments; and then secondly, To signify only
the grave, p. 109
* Add this as a Marginal Note to p. 109.

In this Mr. Norton does contradict his own rule in p. 76. which is, That one,
and the same word (especially not being typical) is capable but of one sense in
the same place.

The word Psuche, for soul in the New Testament is most often put for the vital
soul, p. 111, 320
CHAP. VIII.
MR. Norton does often leave the point of satisfaction in an uncertainty,
because he does one while affirm, That Christ suffered the essential Curse, and
only that; and another while, that he suffered only that which was equivalent,
p. 113, 1^7, 72, 291 After Adams Fall, outward obedience to the Ceremonial
Statutes, and to the Judicial Ordinances, is called the First Covenant (of
Works) p. 11 8, and p. 16 The word Law in Romans 8. 4. is no proof that Christ
kept the moral Law for our righteousness by Gods imputation (as Mr. Norton
bolds) because it alludes chiefly to the Ceremonial Law, p. 119 and p. 238, 26
Add this Note to p. 121. 1. 2.

The Decalogue was given to fallen man as a Covenant of Grace, and therefore it
requires spiritual obedience to the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, as well as to
the Moral: Ainsworth on Number. 6. 12. faith, One little pollution of the Nazarile
at unawares, did nullify many days purity; For (faith he) the Law requires a
perfect observation, and curses him that continues not in doing all things
commanded, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 29. 12. Ja. 2 10. But this is to be
noted, that if the said Law had not comprehended the Covenant of grace under
it, it had not so cursed the non-observers: And faith Ainsworth in Deuteronomy 30. 19.
the life which Mofes set before them was by faith in Christ, etc. And see more
what he faith in D^u^. 6. 1. and 7. 17. And see what Rutherfurd (on the
Covenant) faith in p. 62. of the better Covenant.

The justice of the Law is sometimes satisfied by payment in kind, and
sometimes by that which is equivalent, p. 121, 256, 202, 167, 33 Christ did not
make satisfaction by fulfilling the Covenant made with Adam (as Mr. Norton
holds) but by fulfilling another voluntary Covenant that was made between the
Persons in Trinity from Eternity; namely, that he should ossame the seed of the
deceived Womon in personal union, and in that nature as it was accompanied with
our true natural infirmitie^, ^o combat with Satan for the victory, by
continuing constant in his obedience under all Satan's ill usage, and that at
last in that perfect obedience, he should make his vital soul a sacrifice, and
the Father covenanted that his death so performed, should procure his
reconciliation to all the Elect, p. 122, p. 9, 130, 162, 167, 55, 96, 182, 183,
256, 308
CHAP. IX.
THe ground of satisfaction, or of that price that merits Gods reconciliation
to the Elect, is from the conditions of the voluntary Covenant, p. 130. 139,
55, 82, 83, 96, 102, 122, 257 Perfect ohedience to the Articles of the
voluntary Covenant, and Combat, do merit the prize, p. 130
* Add this Note to p. 130.

When a prize is merited by an exact and righteous observation of the Laws of
the Combat, such a prize so obtained, may well be called the Prize (or the
Crown) of Righteousness, which the Righteous Judge will give, and cannot deny
to the lawful Victor, 2 Timothy 4 8. But Christ was such a Righteous Victor in his
(...)bate with Satan, notwithstanding his ill usage to distur(...) patience;
and therefore the Ancient Divines do often say truly, That Christ conquered
Satan by Rightteousness, as I have noted some of their speeches, in Chapter 16.

The difference in stating the voluntary Covenant betwixt Mr. Norton and my
self, p. 131
* Add this Note to p. 132.

A Covenant from the voluntary Cause does never yield to be overruled by the
supreme compulsary Cause (as Mr. Norton holds) as I have often instanced in the
Trial of Masteries.

Christ is Gods Mercy-seat in point of Satisfaction, p. 136 Christ's Sacrifice,
is called a Sacrifice of Atonement, because it does appease Gods a^gry face,
and procure his Atonement to all poor humbled and believing sinners, p. 137,
191, 251, 252, 259
* Add this Note to p. 1. ^7. at Heb. 9. 14.

Seeing the Altar was a type of the Godhead of Christ, the fire of the Altar,
must by the like reason be also a type of the Godhead of Christ; And therefore
when Isaiah cried out, I am undone, because mine eyes have seen the King, the
Lord of Hosts, namely, Christ in his glory, as John expounds it, Joh. 12. 41.
then faith he, One of the Zeraphims came slying unto me having a live coal in
his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from the Altar, and he laid it upon
my mouth and said, Lo, t^^^ has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken
away, and thy sin is purged, Isa. 6. 6, 7. or as the Hebrew is, thy sin is
expiated by Atonement procured, as Lev. 1. 4. and Romans 3. 25. this fire was a
type of the Godhead of Christ, which sanctified the offering, Mat. 23. 19.
Heb. 9. 14. 21 24. for Atonement to his lips.

The end why God declared his justice to be satisfied (in the faid obedience of
Christ) from his Mercy-seat; was first, That he might be just, according to his
Covenant made with Christ: And secondly, That he might be just, according to
his New Covenant made with the Elect: And thirdly, That he might be the
Justifier of believing sinners, p. 139 As the Greek word Dicaios [Just] is put
for one that is pious and merciful, so the Hebrew word Chesed [Mer(...) is put
for one that is pious and just, p. 141
CHAP. X.
THe death of Christ could not be a penal death from Genesis 2 17. because God
does threaten none with a penal death, neither in that Text, nor any other, but
sinners themselves, p. 145
* Add this Note to p. 145.

Rutherfurd on the Covenant p. 25. faith, You cannot show me in all the Old or
New Testament, any penal Law that was imposed on the Man Christ; where it is
written, If the Man Christ sin, he shall eternally dye: I tremble (says he) at
such expressions, and hence I infer, That then Christ could not be Adams Surety
in the same obligation to the Curse of the first Covenant.

The true nature of Christ's death was to be made a sacrifice by the power of
his own Priestly office, p. 145, 146, 309, 313, and chapter 17. ult.
* Add this Marginal Note to p. 147. at 1. 23.

As Christ assumption of flesh and spirit was not like ours, so his death in
the formality of it, was not to be like ours, but of a far differing nature.

A deseription of Christ's merit, namely, how he merited our Redemption, p. 146,
176, 130, 308 This speech of Mr. Nortons, Man sins, and the Man Christ dies, is
but a Paralogism, p. 150 Christ was not our surety in the same obligation with
Adam, p. 150, 86 Though it is supposed by Mr. Norton that the first Covenant
was made in relation to Adams obedience, or disobedience, to the (...)or all
Law of Nature; yet in that sense it is not a complete rule of Gods relative
Justice, p. 151 Genesis 2. (...) does not comprehend Christ within the composs of
it, p. 152
* Add this marginal Note to p. 152.

Adam before his fall might believe in the Trinity, but yet faith Mr. Weams (in
his Portraiture p. 91.) he could not believe the incarnation of the Second
person, for then he should have understood of his own fall, and then
consequently (says he) he would have been in a perpetual fear before his fall.
But faith he in p. 220. The first Adam had not any natural fear, as the second
Adam had, because there was no hurtful object before his eyes, as there was
before the eyes of Christ. And faith Vinditiae Legis in p. 129. he needed no
Mediator nor comfort because his soul could not be terrified with any. sin. And
so faith Austln in his Enchyrid. to Lawrence chap. 32. When Adam was made a
right man he needed no Mediator, but when sin did separate him from God, then
he must be brought into favor again by a Mediator, etc.

God does often dispense with his peremptory threatenings, p. 157 Gods voluntary
positive Laws were not engraven in Adams nature, as his moral Laws were, no
more than the time of the last Judgment was engraven in the Humane nature of
Christ, Mark. 13. 32. p. 159. 11 God does sometimes alter from the Rule of his
moral Commands, to the Rule of his secret Decrees, p. 160, 225
CHAP. XI.
CHrist bare our sicknesses, and carried our sorrows from us, not by bearing
them upon his own body, as a Porter bears a burden, but he is said to bear
them, because he bare them from us by the power of his divine command, p. 163
CHAP. XII.
MR. Norton does most dangerously make all the bodily sufferings of Christ to
be hell pains, p. 165, 169 Mr. Norton does often wrong the sense of the
Dialogue, p. 167, 296 The true nature of all Christ's greatest bodily sufferings
are described to be chastisements in Isa. 53. 5. therefore they cannot be
called the essential torments of Hell, inflicted on him from Gods vindicative
wrath, as Mr. Norton calls them, p. 169, 178, 266, 311, 344 Christ's sufferings
may justly be called punishments, such as the godly suffer, and yet not proceed
from Gods wrath, as their punishments do very often p. 171 None of Christ's
sufferings were inflicted on him from Gods immediate wrath, as Mr. Norton
holds, most dangerously, p. 172 Christ's Humane nature was often purposely left
of the Divine nature, not only in his natural and moral actions, that so it
might act according to physical causes, but also in his Office, because he was
appointed to combat with Satan in his Humane nature, that so he might be the
more deeply touched with the sense of our infirmities, p. 174 and 383 The true
nature of merit described; namely, how Christ did merit our re-demption, p.
176, 130, 146, 308, 256 The Judges imputation of any sin in the voluntary
combat, does cause such a Combater to loose the prize, p. 178 Punishments in
the voluntary Combat may be suffered from the opposite Champion, without any
imputation of sin from Gods vindicative wrath, p. 178 God did wound and bruise
Christ no otherwise, but as he gave Satan leave to wound hi(...)nd to do his
worst unto him, p. 178, 311 All Christ's greatest punishments, were suffered
without any imputation of sin from God, or else God could not have accepted his
death as a propitiatory sacrifice to bring us to God, p. 182 Christ was
eminently voluntary and active in complying with all his sufferings from his
Combater Satan, or else they had not been meritorious, p. 183
CHAP. XIII.
THe word [Sin] is often used in a metaphorical sense, for a sin-sacrifice,
because it was offered to procure Gods Atonement for sin, p. 190 Christ
attoned his Fathers wrath with the sacrifice of his body and blood. p. 191 It
is evident by Isa. 53. 6. and by Jer. 30. 21. that there passed a Covenant
between the Trinity from eternity for man's Redemption, p. 193 Christ put away
sin, as the phrase is, in Heb. 9. 26. or condemned sin, as the phrase is, in
Rom 8. 3. when he abolished the use of all sin (offerings) by his only true
sacrifice for our sins, p. 196 The imposition of hands upon the head of the
condemned person by the witnesses, was to testify their faith to the throwers
of stones, that the evidence they had given in against him was true, p. 198
Christ does still bear our sins in Heaven, as much by Gods imputation, as ever
he bare them when he lived here upon earth, p. 204
* Add this Note to p. 205. l. 20.

All such as hold that Christ was our bounden Surety in the same obligation
with Adam, must hold as Mr. Norton does in p. 239. that Christ was delivered
from his act of Surety-ship at his death: But all such as hold him to be no
other Surety, but as he is our voluntary Priest to intercede for the pardon of
sin, must hold him to be an eternal Surety, as they hold him to be an eternal
priest, and that he was not discharged of his Suretiship at his death, but that
he does still continue to be our Mediatorial Surety, for the procuring of Gods
daily pardon as long as we live in this world, p. 205, 89.

CHAP. XIV.
MR. Nortons palpable mistaking of the Righteousness of God, to mean nothing
else but the Righteousness of Christ in 2 Cor. 5. 21. is one main cause of his
erroneous Interpretation, p. 208 It is the righteousness of each person in
Trinity to perform their Covenants to each other, for the orderly working out
of a sinners Reconciliation and Justification, p. 211 No Scripture rightly
interpreted does make our sins to be formally imputed to Christ, namely, not by
Gods legal imputation, as Mr. Norton holds, p. 212 Man's Law does not allow
Sureties for capital crimes, p. 216 The imputation of our sins to Christ, as it
is asserted by Mr. Norton, is a doctrine but of late days, p. 222 Christ did
impute our sins to himself, to make himself a guilty sinner, as much as ever
his father did, ibid.
SECT. 4.
Gods forgiveness is the formal cause of a sinners righteousness, p. 228
* Add this Note to p. 231. at Romans 3. 26. in line 15.

And further says P. Martyr on the Romans, p. 318. as differentia makes the
nature or kind, so the righteousuess of God makes our Justification, for when
we are by him absolved from sin we are justified. And says he in p. 367. B.
God justifies in absolving us from our sins, and ascribing and ascribing and
imputing to us righteousness: and says he, this word Hitsadik, is a word taken
of the Law, and appertains to Judgments, and so to justify, is by
judgment. And says he, forasmuch as there are two significations of this word
Justify; namely, either indeed, or in account and estimation (for God is the
Author of either of them) whether of these two shall we follow in the point of
Justification proposed? Forsooth (says he) the latter, (namely, that God does
justify by account and estimation) and this, I suppose, (says he) is
sufficient touching the declaration of this word Justification: And, says he,
in answer to the Council of Trent in p. 388. b. The formal cause is the Justice
of God, not that Justice whereby himself is just, but that which he
communicates to us, whereby we are truly both counted just, and also are so
indeed; For Paul affirms that Justification does consist herein, that our
sins are forgiven us, and that they are no more imputed to us. And says he, in
p. 410 The disputation is not about any Righteousness that cleaves unto us,
but about Justification, which is the forgiveness of sins; But this
Righteousness (says he) has no place or seat in our minds, but in God only,
by whose will only our sins are forgiven us. These speeches taken from him on
the 10 and 11 chap. of the Romans, must needs be his last and most refined
expressions of the Formal cause; and he does also apply the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness to the meritorious cause, as I apprehend, by comparing
his whole drift together, or else he should cross his said definition of the
Righteousness of God.

Reconciliation has two parts, namely, Justification and Adoption; or thus,
Gods gracious pardon is the whole of Reconciliation, p. 233, in p. H hat 3. and
in p. 253 Sacrifices of Atonement and washings from legal uncleanness, were
ordained for their outward ceremonial Justification from their ceremonial sins
under the first Covenant; and so it was a lively type of our true justification
in Gods sight, under the Now Covenants, p. 235
* Add this Note to p. 239. at 5.

Dicaioma was used by the Seventy for the Jews outward justi^^cation in
observing their judicial Laws, as well as of their ceremonial Rites; And so
also this word Dicaioma is applied to the Heathen Judicials in Romans 1. 32. And
says Dr. Willet on that verse, this word Dicaioma is not there meant of the
moral Law (as some Interpreters do expound it) but of the judicial Laws of the
Heathens: and again it is sometimes applied as a proper word to denote either
their judicial Laws, or their religious (though idolatrous) Rites, as in 1 Mac.
1. 14, 51, and 2 Mac. 2. 21.

The Jews (after their Prophets ceased) abused the use of their typical and
ceremonial Justifications by the works of the first Covenant, to claim thereby
an eternal justification in Gods fight, p. 245 The material cause of
Justification disputed and explained, p. 248 Reconciliation or Atonement
described, both in the meritorious and formal causes, p. 251, 252, 255, 137,
191
* Add this Note to p. 252.

Mr. Ainsworth in Lev. 8. 30. (and in other places also) does agree with the
Dialogue, in making Atonement to be a term Synonima to justification (in the
formal cause of it) and so does Peter Martyr often, as in Romans p. 228. Herein
(says he) consists our justification to have our sins forgiven us, and to
be reconciled to God; And so Calvin speaks often, as in Inst. b. 3. c. 11.
sect. 11. They (says he) be judged right^ous, that be reconciled to God; the
manner how is declared, for that God justifies by forgiving; And (says he) in
c. 14. sect. 17. to touch it by the way, this righteousness stands of
reconciliation: And, says Tindal in his Prologue to Romans ult. by justifying
(says he) understand no other thing then to be reconciled to God, and to be
restored into his favor, and to have thy sins forgiven th^e, etc. These and
sundry others do accord with the Dialogue, that Reconciliation (which is the
same with Atonement) is the formal part of justification.

Price, That only ought to be called the full price of man's Redemption that was
constituted to be accepted of grace as the full and formal price by Gods
voluntary positive Covenant, p. 256, 221, 267, 77, 202
* Add this Note to p. 259. at the word Caphar (and also to p. 235.)

Gods Atonement procured, is said to sanctify the sinner, because it did
justify him from the guilt of all his sins, and so the word Sanctified must be
understood in Act. 26. 18. of being made extrinsecally sanctified, as it is in
Heb. 10. 10, 14. and so the word purified in Act. 15 9. must be understood of
their being purified from the guilt of their sins, or of their being made
right^ous by justification, as Peter Martyr on the Romans p. 392. and others do
explain it; for this Text is an answer to the question touching the necessity
of Circumcision, and of their other legal purifyings; for the false Apostles
esteemed the believing Gentiles to be unclean, unless they did observe their
legal purifyings, Act. 10. 14. 15. 24, 28. so likewise the word Cleansed in 1 John 1. 7. and in Tit. 2. 14. is put for their being cleansed from the guilt of
their sins by Gods Atonement, or for their being justified, and not for their
inherent sanctity (though it is also true that none are justified, or made
extrinsecally righteous and holy by Gods Atonement until they be first
inherently sanctified) Peter Martyr in Romans 1. 6, 7. on these words, Called to
be Saints, says, If we will search out the strength of the signification of
the word Sancti, that is, Saints or holy; It comes (says he) as Austin
teaches, of this word Sanctiom to Constitute; for that (says he) is called
Holy, which is constant and firm, and appointed to abide; but nothing (says
he) does more let us to abide for ever, than does sin, therefore it comes to
pass that holiness consists chiefly in the forgiveness and remission of sins;
and this exposition (in the same page) he does also apply to our being
sanctified by justification in 1 Cor. 6. 11. but this kind of justifying
holiness by Gods Atonement and forgiveness, which makes a sinner to abide for
ever righteous, just, and holy in Gods sight, Mr. Norton does damn for heresy;
And in p. 228. he calls this Atonement and forgiveness, A pestilent fiction
and abomination: O blindness (and blasphemy) extreme in the typical sense, and
use of the legal word Sanctified; purged, cleansed, purified, made righteous
and justified! was the Jews a holy Nation by inherent righteousness, or rather
was it not because of their constant practice to make themselves holy,
according to the first Covenant by their typical holiness?

CHAP. XV.
THe outward manner of Christ's death in being crucified on a Tree, was first
declared in Genesis 3. 15. by this phrase, Thou shall pierce him in the
Foot-soals. p. 263 Stoning to death, and hanging up of the dead body on a Tree
to be gazed on for a further infamy after his stoning to death, was accounted
to be the most accursed of all kinds of death, because of the infamy that was
contracted by hanging after he was stoned to death, p. 268
* Add this Note to p. 268.

When the Jews had killed the ten sons of Haman on the thirteenth day of Adar,
then Ester requested the King that their dead bodies might be hanged on a
Gallows all the fourteenth day for their greater infamy, reproach and curse, in
relation both to Hamans execrable plot, and also to Gods ancient curse upon the
Amalekites, for they came of the stock of the Amalekites that God had eminently
cursed, Ester 9. 12, 13, 14. Exodus 17. 16. 1 Samuel 15.

The time of the burial of the person hanged, might be done after Sunset,
provided it were done within the compass of the same natural day, which lasted
till midnight. p. 272 The latter Editions of King Jame' s Translation on Deuteronomy.
21. 23 is corrupted from the integrity of the first Editions, p. 273 The true
reason why he that was hanged must be buried the same day, in which he was
stoned to death, was, because his curse of infamy by hanging so long on a Tree
by exemplary Justice, had appeased Gods anger, and so consequently, because it
had now removed the curse that else would have fallen on the land, p. 275 The
whole land might be defiled by the Judges negligence, in suffering notorious
sinners to go unpunished, p. 277 The whole land was never defiled by any one
Ceremonial sin, p. 279 The rule of Gods relative Justice, is his secret Will,
which is sometimes contrary to his revealed Will, p. 281, 37, 100, 183 The
second death is defined by the Hebrew Doctors (from whom that term is borrowed)
to be a misery to the soul in the perpetual hatred of God, p. 286 All sorts of
death that men do suffer in this world, that is to say, both our spiritual
death in original sin, and our bodily death, are altogether called and
accounted (both by ancient and later Divines) the first death, in relation to
the term second death, because that is only suffered in the world to come, p.
287 Mr. Norton does sometimes hold satisfaction to be made by Christ's suffering
the essential curse of Hell Torments in kind, but at other times he does hold
an alteration to equivalency, p. 291, 72, 107, 113
CHAP. XVI.
CHrist did fear death regularly more than other men can do, because his pure
nature was not made subject to death by that curse in Genesis 3. 19. as the nature
of all other men is, p. 293 Christ did first effect his Combat with Satan in
his human nature and then he did effect his sacrifice (by his Priestly power)
in bo(...) his natures; and all this according to his Covenant, and therefore
h(...) was not made subject to death by Gods curse as ours is, p. 293, 297 308,
and p. 9 The excellent temper, and tender constitution of Christ's humane
nature, made him more sensible of shame, fear and pain, than other men can be,
p. 294 Christ feared his ignominious death, after the rule of fear, and not
after the example of this, or that man. p. 295 Christ's doath was not a natural,
but a supernatural death, p. 296, 333
* Add this Note to p. 297, at line 1. and also to p. 9. and p. 293.

The death of Christ was effected according to the Articles of the Covenant
between the Father and the Son.

* Add this Marginal Note to p. 298.

Christ did not pray to escape death, but only that his humane nature might be
confirmed against his natural fear of death, and so says Trap, Heb. 5. 7. he
was heard in that he feared, that is (says he) he was delivered from his
fear, for no sooner had he prayed, but he met his enemies, and said, Whom seek
y^e, I am he, p. 298.

Christ did voluntarily take ^^r passions to him, as they were a punishment
inflicted on mankind for Adams sin, p. 300 Christ had natural fear actually,
which the first Adam had not, because there was no hurtful object before his
eyes, as there was before the eyes of Christ, p. 300, 152 If there be any
Martyrs, to whom it is pleasant to dye, that they have from otherwhere, and not
from the nature of death, p. 301 When the pains of death have astonished
sanctified reason, then no man can express what conflict there is between their
nature and death, the destroyer thereof, which conflict was not in Christ, p.
302. Mr. Norton does in p. 153. most dangerously a^firm, That Christ suffered a
twofold death, namely, not only a bodily death, but also that God inflicted a
spiritual death upon his immortal soul, which he does also affirm to be the
second death, p. 307, 315 The only reason why the death of Christ was a death
of satisfaction distinct from Martyrdom, was the Covenant between the Trinity,
p. 308, 9, 122, 130 All the sufferings of Christ were as necessary to his
sacrifice, as the consecration of the Priest, was to his sacrifice, p. 309 The
Sacrifice of Christ, does properly lie in the formality of kis death, which
himself effected by his own Priestly power, namely, by the actual power, and
joint concurrence of both his natures, p. 309 315, 145 God did all the external
sufferings of Christ, by giving license to Satan and his instruments to do
them, and God did all Christ's internal soul-sufferings by appointing Christ to
assume our true humane nature and affections, and to use them at his own will
and pleasure, more or less, as objects did present, p. 311, 178, and Chapter 17
There is a sympathy between soul and body in sufferings, p. 313 The sufferings
of Christ's soul in Matthew. 26. 38. and in Isaiah 53. 10. must be understood
chiefly of Christ's vital soul, and not of his immortal soul, p. 314
Satisfaction was made by the true bodily death of Christ; and not by his
spiritual death, as Mr. Norton does affirm most dangerously, p. 315, 307 A true
description of the vital soul, and so consequently of the death of Christ's
vital soul (but not of his immortal soul) for our Redemption p. 320 A true
description of our natural fear of death, p. 321 Christ's soul-sorrows could not
be lethal and deadly (as Mr. Norton does affirm most dangerously) because they
were governed by right reason, p. 322
Add this Note to p. 322.

Disorderly and irregular fear and grief, does sometimes prove lethal and
deadly; but it is dangerous to affirm the same of Christ's regular fear and
grief. I find it recorded in the French Academy, p. 34. That Herennus the
Sycilian dyed with fear, for, he being found to be a Co-partner in the
conspiracy of Caius Gracchus, was so astonished and oppressed with fear in
consideration of his judgment yet to come, that he fell down stark dead at the
entry of the prison: And it is also recorded, that Plautinus dyed of grief, for
upon the sight of his dead wife, he took it so to heart, that he cist himself
upon her dead body, and was there stifled with sorrow and grief. But it is most
dangerous to make Christ's soul-sorrows to be lethal and deadly after this
manner; for says Damasen, His passions never prevented his (regular) will;
neither might his death be effected by natural causes, but by his own Priestly
power, or else it could not be a Sacrifice.

Christ was not fully amazed in his Agony, p. 323 By consequence, Mr. Norton
does impute the sin of unmindfulness to Christ, even in the very point of time
when he was in the execution of his Priestly office, p. 327, 76 Mr. Norton
stretches the word (very heavy) in Mark. 14. 33. beyond the Context, p. 328
Luke 22. 44. and Christ's Agony explained, p. 331 Natural death is the
punishment of original sin; but Christ's humane nature was not by that Justice
subjected to death, p. 333 296 Ainsworth, and others, do make the earnest
prayers of Christ in the Garden, to be a cause, in part, of his Agony, p. 334 *
Fervency of spirit in prayer, to be delivered from a natural fear and dread of
an ignominious death, may force out a bloody sweat, p. 335. A true description
of Christ's Agony, p. 336
* A Declaration of the Plot of the blessed Trinity for man's Redemption, p.
341. at line 18.

All Christ's greatest outward sufferings were by Gods appointment to be from
his Combater Satan, p. 344, 169, 178, 266, 311, 387 Satan did first enter the
Lists with Christ at his Baptism, when he was first ex^r^nsecally installed
into the Mediators office, though more especially in the Garden, and on the
Cross, p. 346 Christ did not enter the Lists with Satan in the glorious power of
his divine nature, but in his humane nature, as it was accompanied with our
true natural infirmities of sorrow and fear at his appoaching ignominious
death, p. 353 Some expressions of the Ancient Divines do clearly evidence, that
they could not hold any such imputation of sin to Christ as Mr. Norton does, p.
356
* Some few of the Hebrew Doctors writings (yet extant) do speak of the
sufferings of Christ from Satan's enmity, p. 357, at line 16.

Adams first sin, in eating the forbidden fruit, was the meritorious cause of
our spiritual death in sin, and then our spiritual death in sin was the
meritorious cause of Gods justice, first, in denouncing our bodily death, and
secondly, in denouncing a judgment to follow, to each departed soul, p. 357
The Pelagians cannot be convinced, That original sin is the cause of the death
of Infants, if it be gran^e^, that God threatened a bodily death in Gen 2. 17.
as the immediate effect of Adams first sin, p. 358 Christ, as man, was not able
to conflict with his Fathers wrath, though in that nature he was able to
conflict with Satan, and his instruments, p. 359 If it be true that Christ
sweat clods of blood (as Mr. Norton does affirm) then it must needs be a
miraculous sweat, and then no natural reason can be given as the cause of it,
p. 361
CHAP. XVII.
THe Hebrew word Azab has not two contrary significations, as Mr. Norton does
affirm, to amuse his Reader about the manner of Gods forsaking Christ upon the
Cross, p. 371 All Christ's greatest sufferings are comprised under the word
chastisement, p. 375, 169 Our larger Annotation on Psalm. 22. 1. does account
Mr. Nortons way of satisfaction to be but bare humane Ratiocination, which
(says the Annotation) is but mere folly and madness, p. 377 God forsook Christ
on the Cross, because he did not then protect him against the Powers of
darkness, as he had done very often in former times, p. 379 One main reason why
God forsook the Humane nature of Christ upon the cross, was, that so his Humane
nature might be the more tenderly touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
in all the afflictions that were written of him, p. 383, 174 The Humane nature
was no true part of the divine person, but an appendix only, p. 387
* Add this Note to the marginal Note in p. 387.

Zanchy, in his sixth and seventh Aphorisms to the confession of his faith, p.
280. says, That the Humane nature was no true part of the person of Christ;
and says he in his twelfth Aphorism, at 4. Though the nature taken (to speak
properly) is not a part of his person, yet at 5. he says, It is acknowledged
to be as it were a part of the person of Christ, because without it we cannot
define what Christ is, and because of them both, there is but one and the same
Hypostasie.

Though the Humane nature of Christ ever had its dependence and subsistence in
the divine, after the union; yet such was the singleness and the unmixedness of
the divine nature in this union, that it could leave the Humane nature to act
of it self, according to its own natural principles, p 388
* Add this Note to p. 389. at line 6.

In two things, says Pareus, this similitude of Athanasius does not agree; and
before him Zanchy said as much, for in his sixth Aphorism he says, It is
freely confessed by Justinus, and by other Fathers, that this fimilitude does
not agree in all things to this great mystery.

* The Geneva Annotation on Psalm. 22. 1. does say, That Christ was in a
horrible conflict between Faith and Desperation; and so by necessary
consequence, it makes Christ to be a true inherent sinner; and this blasphemous
Note has been printed and dispersed in many thousand copies, and yet where is
the Boanerges to be found that has vindicated Christ from this dangerous
Tenent? p. 393.

God did not so forsake the soul of Christ on the cross, as to deprive him of
the sweet sense of the good of the Promises, as Mr. Norton bolds most
dangerously, p. 394 Christ was often his own voluntary afflicted with
Soul-sorrows, p. 404, 178 Christ was the only Priest in the formality of his
own death and sacrifice; But yet it does not thence follow, that he was his own
Executioner, or Self murderer, as Mr. Norton does most unadvisedly thence
infer, p. 405 No full satisfaction could be made by any thing that Christ
suffered, before his bodily death was completed, because therein only lay the
formality of his sacrifice, without which no full satisfaction could be made,
p. 415. 309. 79 145, 315 Sometimes Mr. Norton does make Christ to die formally
under the sense of the wrath of God for full satisfaction; but at other times
he does cross that, and makes satisfaction to be fully completed before he
suffered his natural death; So uncertain he is in his foundation-Principles
touching Christ's satisfaction, p 416 There was a transcendent difference
between the manner of Peter's laying down his life for Christ, and the manner of
Christ's laying down his life, as a sacrifice, for the redemption of the Elect,
p. 417
* Add this Note to p. 417.

Mr. Weams on the Judicial Laws, p. 78. does observe, that though Peter said to
Christ in Ioh. 13. 37. Lord I will lay down my life for thy sake, yet Christ
(that knew his natural unwillingness better than himself) told him afterward,
that another shall carry thee whither thou would not; so that in the
conclusion, when Peter came indeed to dye for Christ, he was partly willing,
and partly unwilling, Ioh. 21. ^8. which kind of unwillingness was not in
Christ at his death, because he had by his prayers in the Garden obetained a
confirmation against his natural fear of death, when he came to dye on the
cross. Therefore Mr. Norton does deal very unadvisedly to compare the manner
of Peter's laying down his life, with the manner of Christ's laying down his
life for the Elect.

* Add this Note also to p. 417.

The power which Christ said he had to lay down his life, must not be
understood of a permissive power, to let Satan take it away formally, nor yet
of his absolute power as he was God, but of his derivative power in relation to
his Office of Mediatorship, as I noted it in page 46. and in p. 420. from Mr.
Ball; for his Fathers commandment or commission gave him a special power of
lawful authority to lay down his life, and therefore in verse. 18. he says,
this commandment, or this authority have I (as Mediator) received of my Father.

Christ's Priestly consecration by his sufferings, and his Sacrifice, by the
formality of his death, must not be confounded, but distinguished, when the
parts of his Priestly Office are explained, p. 427 No other act of a Priest
does make a Sacrifice formally, but such an act as God has appointed for the
taking away of the life of the sacrifice formally, p. 429, 408, 416, 309, 315,
345 The word Sanctify, or make Holy, in the Law, is frequently ascribed to
Gods Atonement and Forgiveness procured by Sacrifice; And therefore all those
sinners that are made holy by that means, are Justified, and Righteous persons
in Gods sight, p 431 These three legal Phrases, Pardon of Sin, Gods
Atonement, and a Sinners Righteousness, are the same thing, quite contrary to
Mr. Nortons long Discourse, in p. 209, 210, 211, 212, etc. See p. 432 What
other death can the Apostle mean did God ordain to Reconcile us to himself, but
by the death of Christ's flesh? and not by the spiritual death of his immortal
Soul, as Mr. Norton holds? p. 434 The death of Christ, as is was a sacrifice of
Reconciliation, was by Gods voluntary Covenant, the full price of man's
Redemption, p. 436
A Table of some Scriptures that are Expounded or Illustrated.
Genesis.
Chapter Verse. Page. 2 7 4 2 9 4, 154. 2 17 23, 59, 63, 112, 130, 144, 149, 152. 3
15 82, 89, 91, 96, 124, 135, 142, 167, 171, 176 178, 263 269, 297, 308, 310,
324, 332, 341, 344, 348, 400, 418. 3 19 30, 147, 334, 401, 419. 20 3 158 32 20
137, 191, 251, 252, 257.

Exodus.
22 31 235, 432. 23 5 371 24 7, 8 119 29 36, 37 190, 432 30 10 251 30 12 135,
255, 436 30 26 256, 436 32 10 335 32 27, 29 92 32 32 181

Leviticus.
1 4 133 4 20 233 6 26 213 6 30 233 7 15 272 10 17 194 11 44 432 15 31 50, 148,
234 16 30 433 17 4 87 17 11 315, 318, 320 18 5 17 20 15 216. To this Text see
our larger Annotation on the word cursed, in Genesis 3. 14.

Numbers.
5 8 251 14 19 233 19 11, 15 280, 282 25 4 268, 275 35 25 319

Deuteronomy.
6 24, 25 239 9 14 335 21 8 233, 257 21 23 262 27 26 119, 151 29 12 119 33 19
233, 252

Joshua.
7 12 276 8 29 272

2 Samuel.
21 1 280 21 9 276 22 5 327

1 Kings.
21 3 113, 131, 256

2 Kings.
20 1 157

2 Chronicles.
30 19, 20 158

Job.
1 21 179, 348 2 7 ibid. 19 21 ibid. 36 32 189 42 8 258

Psalms.
16 10 109 18 5 321, 327 22 1 59, 370 25 11 333 25 18 168 31 5 436 32 1 168,
258, 260 32 5 85 40 6 213 40 8 44, 187 40 16 270 49 7, 8, 9 94, 135 51 14 233
51 19 233, 252 65 4 137 69 7, 9 269 69 20 343 69 27 349 78 38 160 94 15 138 118
19 49

Proverbs.
7 9 272 28 13 197

Isay.
53 4 162 5 166, 178, 181, 266, 349, 375 6 167, 186, 193 7 181, 184 8 351 9 351
10 96, 124, 178, 211, 222, 223, 314, 348. 12 188, 220, 337, 344, 378, 399.

Jeremy.
30 21 187 33 8 50

Ezekiel.
18 4, 20 25, 94, 149, 217, 27 12, 13, 14-373

Daniel.
6 14 224 6 14 340 6 21, 23 429 8 14 49, 235, 260 9 7, 16 233 9 24, 27 48, 139,
196, 223, 233, and 233, 241, 250, 260 9 26 225, 352

Jonah.
3 4 158

Zachery.
13 1 190 13 7 347

Matthew.
4 1 346 5 17, 18 113 16 21 142 19 28 29 20 22, 33 305 26 28 260 31 346 38 173,
269, 270, 298 314, 321, 327. 39 9, 46, 305 46 335, 339 47 347 53, 54 184, 298,
384 27 39 270 45 179 46 59, 370

Mark.
10 39 305, 307 14 33 223, 338 14 24, 35 290 15 27, 28 220, 352

Luke.
9 28 107 9 31 121 10 40 374 12 50 183 22 28 170 44 100, 177, 331, 334, 336,
338. 53 184, 418 23 34 45 23 46 436, 414 24 25, 26, 44-143 24 46 95

John.
10 11 181, 344 10 15 181, 314 10 17, 18 46, 298, 314, 369, 409, 418, 426 11 33
337, 417 12 27 337, 404 14 30, 31 184, 346, 352 16 32 61 18 4, 6 184 18 11 179,
298 19 11 179, 351 ib. 28 75, 328 ib. 30 75, 90 ib. 33 415

Acts.
2 23 179, 312, 351 ib. 27 109 3 17, 18 142 4 28 179 13 27, 28 143 15 9 259, in
the Manusc. Note

Romans.
1 32 239 2 13 18 ib. 26 241, 260 3 21 223, 237 ib. 25 136, 233, 258 ib. 26
134, 140, 180, 228 ib. 27 15, 244 ib. 31 125 4 88 ib. 25 312 5 9 10 229 ib. 12
31 ib. 14 31* 153 ib. 16 240, and so it is translated justified in Syracides
14, 20. ib. 18 135, 211, 228, 233 240 ib. 19 16, 153, 211, 233 343 8 3 49, 226
237, and see the Dialogu p. 116 ib. 4 119, 237, 238, 260 ib. 23 29 ib. 32 95,
179, 312, 350 9 31 244 10 3 138, 232, 237 ib. 4 242 15 30 335

1 Corinthians.
1 24, 25 424 6 11 237, 259, 260 ib. 20 256 9 24 178, 340 15 29 306 ib. 30, 53
29

2 Corinthians.
5 21 207 13 4 423 3 13 262 ib. 16 342 4 4, 5 47 5 11 270

Philippians.
1 30 340 2 6 132, 139 ib. 8, 9 124, 344 ib. 9, 10, 11 177 3 9 120, 123, 233
Twice ib. 10, 11 370 4 3 340

Colossians.
1 21, 22 434 ib. 29 340 2 14, 15 124, 146, 344, 234, 419

1 Timothy
2 6 256 4 10 340

2 Timothy
2 5 178 4 7, 8 178, 340

Titus.
2 14 p. 50, 259 Philemon. v. 18 87, 219, and see Peter Martyrs Com. pl. part.
p. 4. 263.

Hebrews.
1 3 p. 252 2 10, 17 90, 92, 93, 344, 386, 427, 430 ib. 14 90, 294, 357, 419
ib. 17, 18 165, 170, 194 4 16 136, 140 5 6 169 ib. 7 299, 303, 334, 336 7 22
115, 118 ib. 21 426 ib. 28 90 8 3 430 ib. 12 139, 233, 258 9 110 49, 118, 235,
260 ib. 13 48, 51, 120, 214 235, 260, 432 ib. 14 90, 137, 214 43^ ib. 15, 16
90, 137, 181 420 4^8 ib. 18, 23 120 ib. 22 124 ib. 24 196 ib. 26 49 195 ib. 27,
28 147, 358 10 4 433 ib. 5 294 ib. 7 43 ib. 10 46, 122, 124, 237 259 ib. 32 340
12 2 146, 178, 269, 339 13 13 270

1 Peter
1 19, 20 132, 256 2 24 103, 181 3 18 184

1 John.
1 7 50, 259 ib. 9 133, 180

Rev.
5 9, 12 428

Christ's Satisfaction Discussed and Explained.
CHAP. I.
Touching the nature of Christ's Satisfaction.
Mr. Nortons first Proposition in this.
THe Lord Jesus Christ as God-man, Mediator, according to the will of his
Father, and his own voluntary consent, obeyed the Law, doing the Command in a
way of Works, and suffering the Essential punishment of the curse in a way of
obedient satisfaction unto Divine Justice; thereby exactly fulfilling the first
Covenant; which active and passive obedience of his, together with his original
Righteousness, as a Surety, God of his rich grace actually imputes to
believing Sinners for their Righteousness.

Reply. I deny several things in this Proposition to be true: But because all
the particulars are but barely affirmed here, though some proofs are hereafter
alleged; therefore I shall defer my Reply to the particulars to the places
where I shall find them repeated, with their proofs ann^xed.

In the mean time the Reader may please to take notice:

That I deny first, That Christ made any such Covenant by his voluntary consent
with his Father, as to be bound in the same obligation with Adam to fulfill the
first Covenant in a way of satisfaction.

Secondly, That the first Covenant made with Adam, was not touching his
obedience or disobedience to the Moral Law; but it was touching his obedience
or disobedience to a positive Law about things indifferent in their own nature.

CHAP. II.
And first the true Nature of the first Covenant is Discussed.

SECTION 1.
Where also Mr. Nortons second Proposition is examined, which is this.

GOD in the First Covenant (the substance whereof, is, Do this and thou shall
live, Lev. 185. But in the doy thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye, Genesis 2.
17.) proceeded with man in a way of Justice.

Mr. Norton proves by these two Scriptures that the nature of the first
Covenant made with Adam, was in relation to his obedience and disobedience to
the Moral Law of Nature; and he does make great account of both these
Scriptures, because he cites them very often to that sense.

And in Page 186. He affirms that God propounded the Law of Works to man before
his fall, with the promise of justification and life, in case of Legal
obedience.

And in Page 189. He says, That the sum of this Law is the two Tables (and
says he) it is called the Law of Works, in Romans 3. 27. because it required
personal obedience to life, Lev. 18. 5. And this Law, he calls Moral, positive,
the habitual writing whereof in our hearts by nature, together with its
obligation, were both from the first instant of the Creation; this binds
perpetually, and it is immutable.

And in Page 190. he says, The Transgression them of Adam in eating the
forbidden fruit was a breach of the said Law of Works, which was given to Adam,
and afterward to Moses.

Reply 1. In opposition to Mr. Nortons description of the nature of the first
Covenant, I shall labor to prove that the true nature of the first Covenant,
was in relation to Adams obedience or disobedience to a positive Law, about
things indifferent in their own nature, and not a^out the Moral Law of nature.

My first Reason is this.
If God made a Covenant with Adam, concerning his obedience The first Covenant
was not made in relation to Adams obedience or disobedience to the Moral law of
nature, but in relation to his obedience or disobedience to a positive Command
about things indifferent in their own nature.
or disobedience about his eating of the two Trees; the one called the Tree of
Life, and the other the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, (which was
indifferent to be eaten, or not eaten in their own nature) then the first
Covenant was not made concerning his obedience or disobedience to the Moral Law
of Nature; unless Mr. Norton will affirm that God made two Covenants of works
with Adam in his Innocence, of a differing nature, the one of positive, and the
other of moral Commands.

But it is absurd to affirm, that God made two Covenants of works with Adam of
such a differing nature.

Therefore one of the two must needs be null; But the Covenant concerning the
two Trees cannot be null; because that Covenant is expressed in the Text;
therefore hence it follows that the moral Law of nature was not propounded to
Adam as the first Covenant of works, with the promise of justification and life
in case of legal obedience, as Mr. Norton affirms upon Scriptures
mis-interpreted; and on this sandy foundation he builds the greatest part of
his Answer to the Dialogue.

The first Covenant was made with Adam concerning man's nature in general (as he
was the head of all mankind) and that Covenant was this, Eat of the Tree of
life in the first place (for I have ordained it as thou may perceive by the
name given to it) for the confirmation of thy created natural perfections to
thee, and to all thy seed for ever, as these places conferred together do
prove, Genesis 1. 29. Genesis 2. 9. Gen 3. 2. Genesis 3 22. and as I have also expounded
in my Book of the Institution of the In his descent into Hell, p. 163. and 172.
Sabbath: And says Christopher Carlisle, where you have this Hebrew word Cajim
in the dual Number, it signifies Immortality, as (Gnets Cojim) the Tree of
Lives, of which (says he) if Adam had tasted it would have brought
Immortality; and so when [Neshama^] has Caijm joined to it, it signifies the
soul is immortal, in Genesis 2. 7.

Secondly, Though this promise is not altogether so plainly expressed in the
Text as the Threatening is; yet seeing the Threatening (I^ the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely dye) is expressed plainly as the reward of his
disobedient eating: it follows by consequent, says Mr. Burges, that some good
thing is promised to obedience: And what else (say I) can that good See
Vindiciae legis lect. 13. p. 123. and Vindiciae Faederis, ^ 9. And Mr. Ball on
the Covenant p. 6* 8.
thing be, but the confirmation of his present mutable created perfections by
his obedient eating of the Tree of life? for in case he had but first eaten of
that Tree, that once eating should by Gods Covenant have confirmed his nature
in his present created persections to him, and to all his posterity for ever.

Thirdly, says Mr. Ball, the Lord having respect to the immutability of Adams
Nature, was pleased to try this obedience by symbolical Precepts: But when the
creature should grow to absolute perfection and unchangeablenesse, then such
symbolical Precepts, and outward Seals should cease as needless.

It is generally granted that the Command concerning the two Trees, was but for
the present trial of Adams obedience: And hence it follows that as soon as the
trial was made, (which was to be made in the very day of Adams creation, for
God had determined to finish all his Works, both of the visible and invisible
Creation, both of the earthly, and of the spiritual Creation, in six days, as
I have showed at large in the Institution of the Sabbath) then these symbolical
signs of the two Trees must cease as needless.

God was pleased to promise the confirmation of his present natural perfections
for one act of obedience; so that had Adam but once eaten of the Tree of ^^^e
(as doubtless in wisdom he would have done before any other fruit, if the
Devil had not suddenly circumvented him by his Serpentine subtilty) he had been
confirmed in his created perfections, and all his posterity with him for ever;
and then these symbolical Precepts should have ceased as needless, as we see
by experience they did cease upon Adams once eating of the tree of Knowledge of
good and evil; and so in like manner they should have ceased, in case he had
but once eaten of the Tree of life; for when a Covenant is once fulfilled, it
cease to be a Covenant any more; for the performer has the perpetual
fruition of the benefit of it; and so in like sort, the will of God was, that
the once offering of the body of Christ should merit the eternal salvation of
all the Elect, Heb. 10. 10. Heb. 7. 27. Heb 9. 28.

Fifthly, This was the first Covenant, says Mr. Clendon, wherein there is no
mention of obedience to the moral Law. In his Sermon of Justification
justified. p. 22.
Secondly, (says he) Adam was under the obedience of the moral Law, before God
made any Covenant with him, Genesis 1. 27. God created man in his own Image; and
this Image of God did stand in perfect Knowledge, Righteousness, and
Holiness, so that at the first instant of Adams creation, he was under the
obedience of the Moral Law (even before God brought him into Paradise, for he
was created out of Paradise, but the Covenant was not made with him till after
he came into Paradise) and being created perfect in knowledge, he did perfectly
know the eternal will of God, and accordingly he did perfectly obey it: And it
may well be called the Law of nature, but not a Covenant of nature, because no
promise of any reward was made to Adam for keeping the moral Law; therefore
perfect obedience to the moral Law, was not the condition of the first
Covenant; but it was a necessary condition of man's perfection, and a necessary
consequent of Gods perfection that man was so created.

S^xthly, It is not necessary (says Mr. Burges) to make it a question, whether
the breach of the moral Law would have In vindiciae leg^s p. 118.
undone Adam, and his posterity, as well as the transgression of the positive
Law; for all must necessarily think, that the moral Law planted in his heart,
And obedience thereunto, was the greatest part of Adams happiness and
holiness.

Mark that, he says, And obedience thereunto: In which speech he does fully
concur with Mr. Clendon, that Adam could not sin a moral sin.

Seventhly, Mr. Thomas Goodwin says, The Law given to the In his Book of the
heart of Christ in Heaven, p. 50, 51.
first Adam, non comedendi, was over and above the moral Law, not to eat of the
forbidden fruit: And a little after, he calls it, That special Law of not
eating the forbidden fruit, which wa^ unto Adam, praeceptum symbolicum (as
Divines call it) given over and above, and besides all the ten Commandments,
for a trial of his obedience to all the rest, And such (says he) was this Law
given to Christ the second Adam.

Eighthly, says Mr. Blake, The wicked Jews at their worst In vindiciae
Faederis p 60.
could observe the command of non licet meats: And the Command to Adam (says
he) was of a like nature.

But says Mr. Norton in Page 189.
As God at Mount Sinai, after the Decalogue, gave the Judicial and Ceremonial
Laws, which were accessory Commands, part of, and reducible thereunto, as
conclusions to their principles; So God at the Creation, having given the Law
unto Adam by writing it in his heart, Genesis 1. 27. After that, gave him this
accessory Command concerning the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2.
17. part of, and reducible thereto, as a conclusion to its principle.

And in Page 90. He concludes that the transgression of Adam in eating of the
forbidden fruit was a transgression of the same Law of works which was given
afterward by Moses.

Reply 2. This comparative Argument will not hold, because there is a great
difference between the moral Law of nature as it was written in Adams heart;
and the Decalogue as it was after given by Moses.

1 The moral Law written in Adams heart is therefore called the moral Law of
nature, because it was made connatural to him in his first creation. But the
Decalogue was given by Moses to fallen Adam, and it was given as a Covenant of
grace in Christ.

2 The Decalogue as it was given by Moses to fallen Adam, was given for the
most part by way of prohibition, to restrain man's corrupt nature: But because
Adam was created after God^ Image in moral perfections, it was not suitable to
be so given to him.

3 There is not the like Reason why indifferent things prohibited by a positive
Command should be reduced to the moral Law of nature, as there is why
indifferent things prohibited by a positive Command should be reduced to the
Decalogue; for the Decalogue was given as a Covenant of grace; and therefore
all the types of grace in Christ do appertain to it by virtue Gods positive
Command which forbids many things that are indifferent in their own nature.

4 The moral Law of nature did not enjoin Adam to observe every seventh day, as
a day of rest, as the Decalogue does.

5 The fourth Command, and some others in the Decalogue are partly of a moral
Constitution, and partly of a positive: See Trap on Mat. (...) p 132. and Dr.
Ames in Medul. c. 15. Sect. 12. and vindiciae legis. p. 62. 148. 213.
As for example, to observe some time for Gods special worship is moral, but
the determination of every seventh day is positive.

6 The moral Law of nature did not require faith in Christ, nor repentance for
sin as the Decalogue does; and therefore all the positive Commands concerning
typical purifyings, etc. must needs belong to it.

Seeing then there is so great a difference; This comparative Argument at large
will not hold to prove the prohibition given to Adam in Genesis 2. 17. was a part
of, and reducible to the moral Law of nature in Adam, as the Ceremonial Law is
to the Decalogue.

Reason 2.
If Adams eating of the forbidden fruit, had been a sin If Adams eating had
been a sin against the moral Law then Eves desire to eat had been a sin before
her act of eating.
against the moral Law, then the very natural desire of Eve to eat of it, had
been a moral sin, before her act of eating; for the Text says, It was a desire
to her eyes, and she saw it was good for food, and a Tree to be desired, etc.
Genesis 3. 6. And it is a received maxim of all that expound the moral Law, that
it binds the inward man, as well as the outward; and so says our Savior, He
that look^ upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery in his
heart, Math. 5. 28.

And in that respect, Mr. Norton does affirm it in Page 63. That we (in Adam)
first sinned in soul properly.

And hence it follows by Mr. Nortons Divinity, that there was a first sin in
Eve before her act of eating; And then her Adam sinned not in soul until he
had first sinned in body.
act of eating had not been her first sin, as usually it is esteemed and
called; and indeed as the very letter of the Text does plainly affirm, In the
day thou eatest thereof (and not in the day thou desire to eat) shall thou
dye the death; Therefore it is a palpable untruth to affirm, that we first
sinned in soul properly in Adam.

When the Woman saw that the Tree was good for food, and that it was a desire
to her eyes; yet if then she had but stayed her desire here, and had gone no
further, she had not sinned; For such positive Laws as this, do not bind the
inward man, but the outward man only.

1 Take this Instance; If a Jew had desired to eat Swines flesh to satisfy his
hunger, because it was good food by creation, and yet had forborne the act of
eating, he had not sinned against the prohibition of the positive Ceremonial
Law; and therefore that Law did not bind any such person to purify himself by
washing, in regard of his said inward desire to eat.

2 Take another Instance: It was a Ceremonial sin, by the Ceremonial law to
touch a dead Corpse, because it defiled the outward man only, and not because it
defiled the conscience; for it was a necessary duty that was laid upon the
conscience, at least upon some of his near relations, not only to desire, but
really to touch his dead Corpse, and to carry it to its burial.

3 Says Mr. Rutherford, The Law of God because it is holy In Christ's dying, at
Asser. 5. p. 141.
and spiritual, does require a conformity in all the inclinations and motions
of our soul, and the Law of nature; but an absolute conformity between all our
inclinations, and every positive command of God, such as was the Lords Command
that Christ should dye for sinners, is not required in the Law of God.

If Adam (says he) had submitted his natural hunger and desire to eat of the
forbidden fruit, and had not eaten, there had been no sinful jarring between
his will and Gods positive Law, Thou shall not eat of the Tree of knowledge of
good and evil.

And at Asser. 4. page 140. he says thus; A conditional and submissive desire,
though not agreeable to a positive Law and Command of God, is no sin; nor does
the Law (positive) require a conformity in our inclinations and first motions
of desire.

Gods Command to Abraham (says he) to kill his only Son, and to offer him a
sacrifice to God, was a mere positive Command; for it is not a command of the
Law of Nature (nor any other then positive) for the Father to kill the Son; yet
if Abrahim do still retain a natural inclination of love (commanded also in the
Law of nature) to save his Sons life, and does desire that he may still live,
this desire and inclination, though it be contradictory to a positive Command
of God, is no sin, because the fifth Commandment, grounded on the Law of
nature, did command it.

And Christ's desire that the Cup might pass from him was Mat. 26. 39. The
Command of God for Christ to dye, was not a moral, but a positive Command.
no sin, Mat. 26. 39. Luke 22. 42. because the Command that he should lay down
his life was not a moral Command (as Mr. Norton holds) but a positive command,
and that command (says he) did never root out his natural desire to preserve
his own life, seeing he submitted his desire to Gods will. And says he in page
217. The Articles of the Covenant between the Father and the Son are diversely
propounded; but at thirdly, says he, the Father bargains by way of work, or
hire, or wages, to give a seed to his Son, Es. 53. 10. When he shall make his
soul an offering for sin, he shall see his Seed, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hands.

But Mr. Norton in opposition to the Dialogue, affirms, That Gods Command to
Christ to lay down his life, was a moral Command, and that Christ's obedience
thereto was an obedience to the moral Law, in page 57. etc. And though he does
often cite Rutherford for him, yet in this he is point blank against him.

These considerations taken from these Ceremonial Laws, and sundry such like
which might be produced from sundry other positive Laws, do prove that Adam
sinned not in soul, but in body only, at first, by his actual eating of the
forbidden fruit, by which sinful bodily act, his body was originally defiled
with a contagious sinful nature, and then his soul was defiled with that
contagion, by reason of its personal union with his body; just in the same
manner as the infused souls of children are ever since. We say not (says Peter
Martyr) that the soul is corrupted of the body by a natural action; but for as
much as See P. Mar. in Romans 5. 18. and in his Com. Pl. part 2 cap. 1. Sect. 26.
and Zanchy Tract. Theol c 4. de peccato original.
the body is corrupt, it resists the soul, and the soul not being confirmed
with those gifts which it had in the beginning, obeys the inclination
thereof, and is governed by it; and therefore hence it follows,

First, That Adams sin was not a sin against the moral Law, for there is no sin
against the moral Law properly, till the soul consent.

Secondly, Hence it follows, That the guilt of Adams bodily sin was not imputed
to his soul, till his soul had first received the contagion of his sin from his
body, by virtue of personal union, and by virtue of Gods justice as a
punishment on him for the breach of Gods first Covenant.

Thirdly, Hence it follows, That Christ's soul could not be made guilty of Adams
first bodily sin by Gods imputation, except he had been under the same Covenant
of nature as all the rest of Adams natural posterity are; and so under the same
obligation to his punishment of original death by original sin.

Reason 3.
The frame and constitution of Adams nature was such, that he could not will to
sin against the moral Law of nature (in case See Blake on the Covenant. p. 19.
The perfection of Adams moral principles was such that he could not will to sin
against his natural moral principles. See Perkins on the Creed. p. 159, etc.
he had been tempted to a moral sin) as I noted a little before from Mr.
Clendon and Mr. Burges: It is too gross an imagination to think that Adam
being created after Gods Image in a perfect moral rectitude, could will to sin
against his moral natural principles; doubtless it was more con-natural to
Adam to forbear sinning against the moral law of nature, then it was to forbear
eating of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil.

Mr. Perkins moves this question, How could Adam, created after Gods Image,
will sin? For a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.

He answers thus; Freedom of will to that which is absolutely evil was not in
Adam in his innocence: But (says he, at fourthly) Freedom of will to things
that are good in their own nature, and which may become evil through
prohibition: This was in Adam before his Fall.

And Mr. Clendon says thus; The moral Law could not be the condition of the
first Covenant, because Adam could not In his Sermon of Justification
justified. p. 23.
break the moral Law; he could not sin directly against any branch of the moral
Law, because he was created perfect, both in his understanding, will, and
affections, as all confess; his understanding did perfectly apprehend the
nature of God, and did perfectly know the will of God in all things contained
in the moral Law, and his will and affections did perfectly follow the dictates
of his understanding, and therefore he could not sin directly against the moral
Law.

And presently after he says,

The liberty of Adams will did consist in this, That he could not will any
moral evil; and herein he was created after the Image of God (who is the most
free Agent) and therefore does always necessarily will that, and only that
which is good; But about things indifferent in their own nature, he had a
liberty to will or nill, to choose or refuse, etc.

And thus Mr. Perkins, and Mr. Clendon do concur with this reason; and so does
Mr. Burges in Vindiciae Legis page 118. aforecited.

Reason 4.
Adams ignorance of that positive Law which God had Adams ignorance of that
positive Law (and of the event) that was given to the Angels made him the more
apt to be deceived by the temptation.
given to the Angels, and of the Event thereof, made him the more apt to be
surprised by Satan's temptations concerning that positive Law which God had put
upon him.

For though Adam was perfect in the knowledge of all moral duties, yet he was
ignorant of that positive Law that was first given to the Celestial Spirits,
which was, that they as well as the visible creatures should attend upon Adam
and Eve into Paradise, as I have showed in the Institution of the Sabbath;
neither was Adam acquainted with the disobedience and fall of many of these
Celestial Spirits, for their refusing to attend upon Adam and Eve; neither did
Adam know that they had obtained leave of God to tempt him about things
indifferent in their own nature; in these things Adam might well be ignorant,
for their actings, being Spirits are not subject to be discerned by bodily
senses. B^t the Devil in the Serpent knew all these things experimentally, and
he knew also that Adam was ignorant of them; and therefore when the Serpent
talked with the Woman about the most excellent benefit of the forbidden fruit,
he was too cunning for her: Doubtless she thought that the Devil in the
Serpent was no other but a good creature of God, for she knew that God had
commanded all the visible creatures to attend upon her and Adam, as their Lord,
and to serve them for their best good, and she could not imagine that any
creature could be so wicked as to persuade her to do any thing that might tend
to her hurt.

In these and such like things her understanding was not enlightened (as it was
in the knowledge of all moral duties) and therefore in these things she being
as yet ignorant, might easily be swayed in her will and affections about things
indifferent in their own nature, and therefore she seeing that the Tree was
good for meat, and a desire to her eyes, and that it was to be desired to make
one more wise in the Theory of good and evil, more then she had by Creation,
she was persuaded to take and eat, and then with her hand she reached out some
of it to her husband, and he suspecting no hurt from her that was given to be a
meet helper to him, did take and eat, and then the eyes of them both were
opened, not only in the Theory, but also in the experience of evil upon
themselves; for now they saw and felt their present spiritual death in sin.

This I bring to show that Adam did not sin against the moral Law of nature,
but against a positive Law only, about things in their own nature indifferent;
and therefore that the moral Law was no part of the first Covenant with Adam.

If Adam had been tempted to a moral sin, his moral perfections were such, that
he would soon have found out the Fall of Angels; for Adams soul was as perfect
in the knowledge of all moral things as Christ's soul was; and therefore though
Christ permitted the Devil to tempt him for forty days together, yet when at
last the Devil saw he could not prevail with those temptations, he began to
tempt him to moral sins, namely to worship him, etc. But then Jesus said unto
him, Hence Satan, Mat. 4. 10. The like would Adam have said, if he had been
tempted to a moral sin.

At the first (says Peter Martyr) Adam could not by his reason In Appendix to
his Com. pl. p. 145.
know, that the Devil was fallen, or else his will had been governed by his
mind.

Conclusions from the Premise^.
1 Hence we may discern what was the true nature of the first Covenant, namely,
that it did not consist in Adams obedience or disobedience to the moral Law of
nature; But in his obedience or disobedience to a mere positive Law, concerning
his act of eating of the two Trees.

2 Hence it follows, That in case the Devil had first tempted Adam to a moral
sin, he had by that act discovered himself to Adam (as he did to Christ) to be
naught, and then the Devil had lost his labor in his temptation, for then
Adams will would have been governed by his inlightnedmind, and then such
temptations would have been loathsome to his pure nature, as they were to
Christ, and then he would have said to Satan as Christ did, Hence Satan, and
then Satan could not have prevailed afterward; for Adams wisdom was such
that he would not have delayed to eat of the Tree of life in the first place,
as the best food for his confirmation.

3 Hence it follows, That Adam did not first sin in soul, as Mr. Norton holds,
and as indeed he had done, in case he had sinned against any branch of the
moral Law of nature; but his sin was only against that positive Law, that did
only forbid his bodily act of eating, as the only breach of the first Covenant
of Works.

4 Hence it follows, That the arguing of the Dialogue in Original sin did not
fall upon us for the breach of the moral Law, but for the breach of a positive
Law and Covenant, about things indifferent in their own nature.
p. 188. is sound and good; namely, in affirming that the punishment of
original sin did not fall upon us for the breach of the moral Law, but for the
breach of such a positive Law, as is of a far. differing nature from the moral
Law.

5 Hence it follows, That if Adam had but once eaten of the Tree of life (as
his wisdom would have caused him to do in the very first place, if the Devil
had not so speedily circumvented him, he had thereby been confirmed in his
created perfections and all his posterity with him; they should have had a
propagated Righteousness, because God did enter into Covenant with Adam as a
public person, says Mr. Burges, and also generally all Protestant Divines.

6 Hence it follows, That the moral Law in Adams nature, was not ordained for
Adams justification (as Mr. Norton holds) The moral Law of nature was not
ordained for Adams justification; but as a condition only o^ his created
perfections, therefore it would have been the rule of his life, if he had but
first eaten of the tree of li^e.
but only as a necessary condition of his created perfection; for God could not
make man perfect, but by making him perfectly conformable to the moral Law.

But Mr. Norton says in page 231.
That four things were requisite to Adams justification by the works of the
Law. And at fourthly he says, That justification was promised to eternal
continuance in obedience.

Reply. From this Assertion it follows, That Adam might have continued Ten
thousand years in his integrity, and yet have failed at last, and so he should
never have been justified by the works of the Law, and then some of his
children should have been begotten after the Image of God in those Ten thousand
years space, and all the rest after that time after the image of Satan.

And Mr. Norton in Page 254. has another Paradox as strange as this, namely,
That upon supposition of Adams continuance in obedience, all the acts of his
obedience, even to the finishing of perfect Righteousness, had been imputed
unto his seed according unto the nature of the Covenant of works, unto their
attaining of justification by the Law.

And says he in Page 244, Adams justification consisted not in one act of
obedience.

This Assertion is directly contrary to the Tenure of the first Covenant; For
it is acknowledged by Bucanus (whom I No act of Adams obedience had been
imputed to his posterity, for their obedience, but his first act in eatting of
the tree of ^i^e, in case he had stood.
have cited with Parereus in Sect. 3.) that all the sins of Adam were truly
personal except the first, and that first sin (in eating the forbidden fruit)
was not so much personal, as natural, namely it was common to the nature of man
in general by virtue of Gods Covenant: And just the same must be affirmed of
the acts of Adams obedience: That upon supposition of his obedience in eating
of the Tree of life the first act only of his obedience, should have been
accounted as a common act of obedience to the nature of man in general by
virtue of Gods Covenant. See Vindicae Legis also in p. 1 19, 120.

Secondly, Hence also it follows, That in case Adam had first eaten of the Tree
of life, that act also had justified him no further, but from Satan's
accusa^ion; And therefore it is a great mistake in Mr. Norton to affirm, as he
does in Page 189. that the moral Law is called the Law of works in Romans 3. 27.
because it required personal obedience to life. But any man that has but half
an eye, may see that the word Law in Romans 3. 27. has relation to the whole
Economy of Moses, but especially to the Ceremonial Law: And indeed the
Ceremonial Law did Romans 3. 27.
teach an outward justification from their Ceremonial sins in respect of their
personal coming to the Sanctuary.

I grant that Adam in his innocence stood in need of a confirmation of his
created perfections; but he stood not in any need of justification before his
fall, except only of justification from the Devils accusation and temptation
(as I said before) for no doubt the D^vil had said to God (as he said
afterward against Job) that if he might have but leave to tempt Adam, then
Adam would disobey as they had done; But in case Adam had not yielded to
Satan's temptation, but had taken warning by the prohibition, and by the
threatening, and had not eaten of the forbidden fruit, but had first eaten of
the Tree of life, then he had been justified by that act against Satan's
accusation and temptation; but he needed no justification in respect of his
obedience to the moral Law of nature, whiles he stood in his created
perfections, and therefore Romans 3. 27. does not prove that the moral Law was
ordained to be the Covenant of works for, Adams justification, much less was
it ordained to that end for fallen man; For says Mr. Burges, God did not since
the fall of man ever transact with him in any other Covenant but that of Grace.
In Vindiciae ^l^gis, ^ect. 22. p. 113. 132. And Blake approves him. See also
Ball on the Covenant, p. 102. 130, 135, 166, 178.


The safest way, is, to hold That God did never ordain the moral Law, neither
in Adams Innocence; nor since his Fall, to be a rule of justification by works.
See Wotton de Recon. peccatoris part. 2. l. 1. c. 6, 7.

Seventhly, Hence it follows, That sinners cannot be justified formally by Gods
imputation of Christ's obedience to the first Covenant of works, unless it can
be proved that Christ did (...) make a voyage into the earthly Paradise of
Eden, there so not actually of the Tree of life, as our Surety in our room and
(...), to the end that God might impute his fulfilling of the first Covenant to
us, for our formal justification.

Such absurd consequences as these will often necessarily follow from Mr.
Nortons Doctrine of Gods imputing Christ's obedience to the first Covenant of
works for our justification.

Eighthly, Hence we may learn how to understand Romans 5. 19. namely, as by one
man's disobedience to a mere positive Law, the Romans 5 19
Many as well as the reprobate were made sinners; So by the obedience of one to
a mere positive Law in his death and sacrifice, shall the Many be made
righteous.

Ninthly, Hence it follows, That it is altogether untrue which Mr. Norton
affirms in his first Proposition, that Christ did covenant with his Father,
both to fulfill the Law of works, and to suffer the essential punishment of the
Curse, that thereby he might exactly fulfill the first Covenant in a way of
satisfaction to Gods justice for man's justification.

Tenthly, Suppose the first Covenant was made in relation to the moral Law,
(which is not granted, nor cannot be proved) yet in that sense there is an
answer ready in the words of Pareus, That God did never require such a double
fulfilling (as Mr. Norton lays down in his first Proposition) namely that
Jesus Christ did enter into a covenant with his Father both to do the Command
in a way of works, and to suffer the essential punishment of the Curse, that so
he might thereby exactly fulfill the first Covenant in a way of satisfaction
for our Righteousness.

It was never heard (says Pareus) that the Law did oblige In his Epist. to
Wbitgenstenius at the end of vrsinus Catechism p. 797.
both to obedience and punishment at the same time; but every Law obliges
(dis-junctively, and not copulatively) either to obedience, or to punishment;
for so long as obedience is performed, the Law obliges not to punishment; that
is, it pronounces no man guilty of punishment; But when obedience is violated,
then the Law obliges the sinner to punishment.

This is generally true (says he) both of divine and humane Laws.

Therefore their Suppositions (says he) which they do here assume, are untrue,
and repugnant to Gods justice, namely, that man after his Fall (and so the
Mediator for man) was obliged both to fulfill the Law, and to suffer punishment.

When obedience indeed is violated, the sinner is bound to make satisfaction by
suffering punishment: This being performed, he is no more a sinner, and he is
tied to obedience, not to that for the violation of which he has suffered
punishment, but to another new obedience, or if again he violate this, to a new
punishment.

I have cited this of Pareus for the sake of such as hold the true nature of
the first Covenant to consist in Adams obedience, or disobedience, to the moral
Law; and so hold as Mr. Norton does, That no satisfaction can be made to Gods
justice, except Christ be our surety to fulfill the first Covenant, by doing
the Command in a way of works, and by suffering the Essential punishment of the
Curse in a way of Satisfaction.

But I have described the true nature of the first Covenant to lie in Adams
obedience, or disobedience, to the positive Command only; and showed from the
Orthodox, that Christ's obedience in his Incarnation and Death, was not to the
moral law, but to a positive Law for satisfaction to Gods justice for our
Redemption and Justification.

SECTION 2.
The Examination of Lev. 18. 5.

I Will now examine how Mr. Norton does prove, That the first Covenant was made
in relation to Adams obedience, or disobedience, to the moral Law of Nature,
and that is by Lev. 18. 5. and Genesis 2. 17.

Reply. First, I will examine Lev. 18. 5. (This do, and thou shall live)
whether it have his sense or no; for he makes high account of this Scripture
for his purpose, because he does often ci^^, as in page 14, 140. 149, 189, 191,
225. etc.

But I must needs say, I cannot but wonder at his unadvised citing of this
Text, to prove the first Covenant of works to belong to the moral Law of
nature; seeing it is so clear a proof of the Covenant of Grace.

These words (says Mr. Ball) Do this and live, must not be interpreted as if
they did promise life upon a condition of perfect Lev. 18. 5. See Bell on the
Covenant p. 136.
obedience, and for works done in such exactness, as is required; But they
must be expounded Evangelically, describing the subject capable of life
eternal, not the cause why life and salvation is conferred; And by doing is to
be understood sincere, uniform, and unpartial obedience, not exact fulfilling
the Lawin every tittle.

Do this and live (says he) what is it more then this, If ye will obey my
voice, and do my Commandments, ye shall be to me a peculiar treasure, Exodus
19. 5. and to this purpose he cites Psalm. 119. 1, 2. Psalm. 106. 3. Psalm. 112.
1. James 1. 25. Romans 2. 7. Luke 1. 6. All these places (says he) are to be
understood of sincere and upright walking, to show who are justified, and to
whom the promises of life do appertain; but not why they are justified.

In like manner (says he) that speech of the Apostle, The Doers of the Law are
justified, Romans 2. 13. may be expounded Romans 2. 13.
Evangelically; not of them that fulfill the Law to be justified by their
works, but of them that soundly obey, who are justified of grace by faith: And
hence it appears what works the Apostle opposes to faith in the matter of
justification, not only perfect works done by the strength of nature (of which
sort there be none at all) but works commanded in the Law as it was given to
Israel, such as Abraham and David walked in after they were effectually called:
These works cannot be causes together with faith in justification.

2 It is evident that the Law was given to fallen man as a Covenant of grace:
And this Mr. Ball shows abundantly in page 102. 130, 135, 166, 178. etc.

3 Mr. Burges says thus, Paul describes the righteousness In Vindiciae legis
p. 233. Romans 10. 5, 6.
of the Law in Romans 10. 5, 6. from these words, Do this and live, which are
said to have reference to Lev. 18. 5. But says he, We find this in effect in
Deuteronomy. 30. 16. yet from this very Chapter the Apostle describes the
Righteousness which is by faith: and (says he) Beza does acknowledge, that
that which Moses speaks of the Law, Paul does apply it to the Gospel.

4 Mr. Burges does also abundantly show that the Law was given as a Covenant of
grace, in page 229. etc. and page 271. and there he does most justly blame Beza
and Perkins, because they affirmed that we attain salvation by fulfilling the
Law, Do this and live.

5 Mr. Baxter says, Do this and live, is a Gospel condition. In his Saints
Rest, p 9.


6 Dr. Barnes in his Answer to our Popish Bishops that held justification by
works, does give the clear sense of Lev. 18. 5. Dr. Barnes is joined with
Tinda's works, p 218. 240. Rule 293, 294.
and of Romans 2. 13. and of Romans 3. 31. according to the sense of the former;
his words I omit, because they are long.

7 Mr. Wilson in his Theological Rules for the right understanding of the
Scripture, cites this Rule from Luther; Precepts (says Luther) presuppose
faith, as where it is written, Keep the Commandments, that is by Christ, or by
faith in Christ; also, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
etc. that is in Christ, or by faith in Christ; also, Do this, and thou shall
live, that is, do it in Christ: and so of the rest of this kind.

8 Mr. Trap does thus expound Lev. 18. 5. As the creature lives by his food, so
the spiritual life is maintained by an Evangelical keeping of Gods
Commandments.

9 The true sense of Lev. 18. 5. compared with the Context, is this,

Do this and live, is a general command, and requires obedience to all the
three sorts of Laws in Moses, namely, to the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, as
well as to the Moral Law, as the Context does clearly evidence by naming all
the three sorts of Laws in these three terms, Judgments, Ordinances, and
Statutes, wherein they were commanded to walk, namely, in sanctified obedience,
and then the promise is added, Which if a man do, he shall live in them, Lev.
18. 4, 5, 26, 30.

The like Command and Promise is given for their obedience to the judicial
Laws, Deuteronomy. 17. 10, 11, 19. Deuteronomy. 21. 9. and to all their Laws in general,
Deuteronomy. 5. 1, 10, 31, 32. Deuteronomy. 6. 1. Deuteronomy. 7. 11, 12. Deuteronomy. 12. 1. 28. Deuteronomy. 30.
16. Luke 10. 28.

And this Command in this form of words is often used to urge them to the
observation of the Ceremonial Laws, as Deu. 12. 14 32.

Do the Feast of Weeks, Exodus 34. 22. so it is in the Hebrew.

Do the Sabbath day, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Exodus 31. 16. compared with verse. 13, 14.

Do the Passover, Deuteronomy. 16. 1. Mat. 26. 18.

Do the Feast of Boothes, Deuteronomy. 16. 13.

Do Sacrifice, Exodus 10. 25. 1 King. 12. 27. Jer. 33. 18.

Do thy Sin, That is, Do thy Sin Offerings, Lev. 9. 7, 22. Lev. 16. 9. Exodus
29. 36, 41, 42.

But because the carnal Jews looked no further in the doing of all this, but to
an outward conformity, their services were rejected; whence it is evident, that
the Lord commanded the doing of all these things in the obedience of faith, and
so the Lord did expound his mind and meaning to Cain, If thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? intimating that well-doing did not consist in an outward
form only, nor only in the excellent quality of his offerings which he
presented, but in the qualification of his heart, in the manner of his
offering, Heb. 11. 4. and because he wanted faith with his offering, the
Apostle concludes, that his works were evil, because his good sacrifices were
done in an evil manner for lack of faith.

So that Gods Command, Do this and live, implies, do it in faith and live, as
Christ faith in Matthew. 7. 21. He that does the will of my Father, namely that
does it in faith, and then the Promise is annexed, This is the will of my
Father, that he which believes in the Son, should have life everlasting, Joh.
6. 40. and said the Jews to him in verse. 28. What shall we do that we may work
the works of God? Jesus answered, This is the work of God, that ye believe on
him whom he has sent, verse. 29. The like Question and Answer is in Act. 16.
30, 31. and therefore believing is commanded in the Law as the chief work, 1
Ioh. 3. 23. Act. 17. 30. 1 These. 1. 3. unto which we must give obedience, Romans
1. 5. and there are no good works that can proceed from any that will be
accepted of God for good works, but from those that are created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, Ephesians. 2. 10.

Thus far I have made it evident that Lev. 18. 5. is to be understood of such a
doing of the Law as belongs to the Covenant of grace, and therefore it is no
proof that the moral Law of nature was the condition of the first Covenant.

But says Mr. Norton in his fifth Proposition in page 3. Adams obedience to
the moral Law was by Gods free Covenant ordained to merit life by.

2 Reply. If Mr. Norton had proved as well, as affirmed, that God had ordained
the moral Law by his free Covenant to merit life Adams obedience to the moral
Law of nature, was con-natural to him, and therefore it was not ordained to
merit life by.
by, then he had hit the nail upon the head; but his proofs hitherto have
failed, and I believe it is past his skill to give any clear proof of it.

True it is (says Mr. Ball page 133.) that the promises run upon this
condition, If ye obey my Voice, and do my Commandments.

But (says he) Conditions are of two sorts,

Antecedent, or

Consequent.

Antecedent, when the condition is the cause of the thing promised or given, as
in all civil Contracts of justice, where one thing is given for another. (The
like may be said of the first Covenant made with Adam; God by way of free
Covenant did condition to confirm him in his created perfections, for one act
of obedience, namely, in case he had but first eaten of the Tree of life: As I
have showed more at large in Sect. 1.)

2 There is a Consequent condition, when the condition is annexed to the
promise as a qualification in the subject, or an adjunct that must attend the
thing promised; And in this latter sense obedience to the Commandments was a
condition to the promise, not the cause why the thing promised was vouchsafed,
but a qualification in the subject capable, or a consequent of such great mercy
conferred.

Secondly, I do further reply thus; That the doing in Lev. 18. 5. is not the
same for substance with the first Covenant of works (as Mr. Norton affirms.)

1 Because it speaks only of the manner of obedience in the Covenant of grace.

2 It is not the same with the moral Law of nature in respect of duties; for
the moral Law of nature is not a complete rule for duties to us, with out some
supply from the Gospel; for the Law of nature does not command us to worship
God in Christ, as the Decalogue does; the moral Law of nature does not command
us to believe, to repent, ^and to yield subjection to Christ, as the Decalogue
does (as Mr. Burges has largely observed in Vindiciae legis) neither does the
Law of nature forbid sins against the Gospel, as unbeleef, impenitency, and
contempt of grace, as the Decalogue does; neither does the Law of nature
command us to sanctify every seventh day, as the Decalogue does: All these
things are added by the Covenant of grace to the Decalogue, more then was in
the moral Law of nature.

Therefore the Doing in Lev. 18. 5. is not the same for substance with the
first Covenant, neither in respect of justification, nor in respect of
sanctified walking.

Conclusion touching Lev. 18. 5.
From all these Premises it follows, that Lev. 18. 5. is not meant of doing by
way of merit; as doing the Command in eating of the Tree of life would have
been a meritorious act according to Gods free grace in the first Covenant, and
therefore the moral Law of nature, and the Decalogue (which comprehends the
Covenant of grace) is not the same for substance.

2 Hence it follows, that the doing of the moral Law by Adam, and the doing of
it by Christ, was con-natural to them, and therefore it was not ordained as the
inviolable rule of Gods Relative Justice for man's justification and life, as
Mr. Norton does propound it.

SECT. 3.
The Examination of Genesis 2. 17.

THis Scripture is alleged by Mr. Norton, to prove that the most principal
death there threatened (for the breach of the first Covenant of works) was
eternal death in hell, and says he, in his first Proposition, Christ (as the
Surety of the Elect) suffered the Essential punishment of this curse in a way
of obedient satisfaction unto divine Justice, thereby exactly fulfilling the
first Covenant. In his second Proposition, he says, That God in the first
Covenant proceeded with man in away of Justice. In his third Proposition he
calls it Relative Justice. In his sixth Proposition, he calls it, The Rule of
Gods proceeding between God and man. In his eighth Proposition, he says, That
God having constituted that inviolable rule of Relative Justice in Genesis 2. 17.
could not avoid, in respect of his power now limited, to proceed by this Rule,
namely, first, According to the recompense contained in the promise in case of
obedience; or secondly, according to the punishment contained in the curse in
case of disobedience.

We have already seen how much Mr. Norton is mistaken in the first part of the
Covenant; First, by opening the true nature of the Covenant in Sect. 1. And
secondly, by overturning his first proof in Lev. 18 5.

Now it remains to expound. Now the true nature of that death that is threatened
in Genesis 2. 17. shall be explained. And then we shall see whether it be the
inviolable Rule of Gods Justice, for Christ suffering in a way of satisfaction
for man's Redemption.



1 Reply. Genesis 2. 17. In the day thou eatest thereof, Thou shall dye the death.

The true nature of this death, I make to be a spiritual death in sin only.

This is evident by two Circumstances in the Text.

1 By the adjunct of time; In the day, or at what time soever. The death in
Genesis 2. 17. is limited by two Circumstances to our spiritual death in sin only,
and therefore that death is the essential curse there threatened; and therefore
2. Christ was not a Surety with Adam in the first Covenant, to bear that death
that is there threatened.
2 By the Antithesis of his death threatened, to the kind of life that was
promised.
First, No other death according to this adjunct of time was threatened to be
formally executed, but a spiritual death in sin only. And therefore first, no
other death was properly threatened in this Text. And therefore secondly, it was
a foul mistake in Ambrose to hold that bodily death only was threatened in this
Text, because said he, There was no day nor hour wherein our first Parents were
not morti ^bnoxii, subject to death.

But Dr. Willet in Romans 5. Q. 21. does thus answer him, The words of the Text,
in Dying, thou shall dye, seem to imply an actual death, which they should
then suffer, and not a potential only.

Secondly, I answer further, that if a bodily death were there only meant, or
chiefly meant, as others say, then where shall we find any other Text besides
this, wherein our spiritual death in sin is threatened? surely there is no other
Scripture that threatens our spiritual death in sin, but this Text only,
neither was spiritual death executed at any other time, but at this time only;
It was but once threatened, nor but once executed, and that was done in the day
or time of Adams eating; therefore that death only is the death that is
threatened in Genesis 2. 17.

2 The true nature of this death may the better be discerned by considering the
true nature of Adams sin; whether it was a sin against the moral Law, or
against a positive Law only,

1 I have already showed, That it was not a sin against the moral Law of
nature; and therefore Adam was not under the obligation to punishment by that
Law.

2 Neither was his sin the sin of a single person, for then Adam himself only
had been under the obligation to the punishment threatened.

3 Therefore it was a sin against a supreme positive Law only made concerning
outward things that were indifferent in their own nature; and I never heard
that eternal death was ever directly threatened for the breach of any outward
positive Law, but at first a spiritual death in sin, and ever after a bodily
death only; but yet for want of faith in Christ, eternal death will follow
after a bodily death.

4 It was a sin against the good of man's nature in general, because it was a
sin against that Covenant which God had made with Adam concerning the condition
of man's nature, as he was the head of man's nature in general, as I have showed
in Sect. 1.

If his sin had been a moral sin only, then he had been obliged to the
punishment of the moral Law; but I never heard that the moral Law did oblige
sinners to the punishment of death in sin, to make their nature in themselves,
and in their posterity, more sinful then it was by Adams sin; for by Adams sin,
all are alike sinners (in the same degree) of original sin.

Therefore Gods Covenant with Adam was by ordaining a special positive Law,
unto which he annexed a special positive punishment for the transgression of
that Law, which was a spiritual death in sin affixed to the very time of
sinning; and for the breach of other positive Ceremonial Laws after this, a
bodily death only is often expressly threatened.

Bucanus propounds this Question; If Adam had stood in his Bucanus in his 10.
Com. plac^.
original Righteousness, should it have been derived to all his posterity?

It should (says he) First, because it was the righteousness of man's nature,
and not the righteousness of a private person. Secondly, (says he) because
the contrary to it, namely original sin, was derived by Adam means to all his
posterity Christ only excepted.) Thirdly, (says he) because every like begets
his like in nature and kind.

And says Bucanus in his fifteenth Common place, The first sin was not so much
personal and proper to Adam as natural, The first Covenant was made in relation
to man's nature in general, and not with Adam as a si^gle person. Will in Romans
5. Q 19.
that is, says he, common to all man's nature which originally and naturally
was in his loins: but says he, The oth^^ sins of Adam were truly personal, of
which Ezekiel. 18. 20. The son shall not bear the iniquity of his father, but the
soul that sins shall dye.

And Perereus cited by Dr. Willet says thus, As the sins of Parents are not
now transmitted to their children; so neither were all Adams sins propagated to
posterity, but only the first; between which, and his other sins, there was
this difference, That by the first, the goodness of man's nature was lost, And
by the other, the goodness of Adams grace was taken away.

1 Hence it follows, that seeing Adams sin was not so much against his person,
as it was against man's nature in general (for it was against the Covenant that
God made with him, touching man's nature in general, he being the head of man's
nature) therefore the death threatened was such a kind of death as was to be
formally executed on man's nature in general at the very instant of Adams
sinning, and that was no other but a spiritual death in sin only; and this
death takes hold of all flesh as soon as ever they have life in the womb, none
excepted of them that are born by the ordinary way of generation; so then the
punishment of death which God first threatened and inslicted on Adams nature for
his sinful act against the first Covenant, by eating of the forbidden fruit,
was a spiritual death in sin, which is now become nature to us, because the
Covenant being broken, the punishment must fall on ou^ nature, as soon as we
have any being in nature; but bodily death was not then formally executed,
neither is formally executed on our nature in the womb, as death in sin is, but
after some distance of time; neither shall it be executed formally on all flesh
as death in sin is, for many shall escape a bodily death at the day of
Judgment; and therefore no other death was threatened, and formally executed on
man's nature in general, at the instant of Adams eating, but a spiritual death
in sin only. Yea Mr. Norton himself in page 116. does exempt many from bodily
death at the day of Judgment; Such as are alive (says he) at the day of
Judgment shall not formally dye by the separation of their soul from their
body; So then it follows by good consequence, that neither a bodily death, nor
eternal death in hell, was threatened to be formally executed on man's nature in
general, at the instant of Adams sinning, but a spiritual death in sin only.
And Dr. Willet says, That the death threatened seems to be an actual death
which they should then suffer, and not a potential only; not that Adams soul
(says Mr. Perkins) was now utterly abolished, but because it was as though it
were not, and because it ceased to be in respect of righteousness and
fellowship with God; and indeed (says he) This is the Death In the right way
of dying well, p. 490.
of all deaths, when the creature has subsisting and being, and yet is
deprived of all comfortable fellowship with God.

The second Circumstance that proves this death threatened to be meant only of
death in sin, is the Antithesis of the kind of life promised, to the death here
threatened.

Now the life promised to Adam by Gods Covenant, was the confirmation, and the
continuance of his created natural perfections, The life promised to Adam and
so to man's nature in general, was a perpetual life in this world, in his
c^eated perfections.
to him, and to all his posterity for ever, in case he did first eat of the
Tree of life; once eating should have merited the blessing, as once eating did
merit the curse; and this was signified by the name that was given to that
Tree, it was a name that did define the Covenant-quality of that Tree, and in
that respect God commended it to Adam as a symbolical sign of his Covenant: And
says Christopher Carlisle, where you have this Hebrew word Cajim in the duall
number, it signifies immortality, as genetes Cajim, the Tree of Lives; of
which says he, if Adam had tasted, it would have brought immortality; and very
many other Writers do agree that the life promised was the continuance, and the
confirmation of his natural perfections in See Ball on the Covenant, p. 6. 10.
and Vindiciae legis p. 139. And Crotius, and Camero, and Bre. in Eccl. and the
Hebrew Drs. cited by Ains. in Genesis 2. 17. And says Austin, Adam had the Tree
of life in Paradise, that age should not consume and end his life, Cited by
Marbeck in his Com pl p. 791
this world; this I believe is the truth: and thence it follows by way of
opposition thereto, that the death threatened must be understood of the
continuance of a spiritual death in this world only, and not of any other
death, till another death was threatened after this; for the first spiritual
death might have continued to Adam and to his posterity for ever in this world,
and that in the highest degree of all misery, according to the justice of Gods
threatening, without any bodily death, for any thing that was at this present
revealed to the contrary; and we know that hereafter a bodily life shall be
continued for ever to the damned, after the Resurrection, without any bodily
death, notwithstanding their spiritual death: for as bodily death is now
ordained to be the immediate effect of death in sin; so at the general
Resurrection eternal death in hell, is ordained to be the immediate effect of
death in sin without any bodily death.

And we know also that notwithstanding God did at the instant of Adams sinful
eating, execute on him this spiritual death of sin; yet it pleased God also in
a short time after, to Relax the rigor and outrage of this spiritual death to,
all mankind in general in this life. All the glory of Gods c^eati^n had been
confounded at the time of Adams fall, if Christ had not been foreor ain^d to be
re^dy at hand to take on him the Government of all.


And secondly, to alter it much more to the Elect; for God had ordained that
his Son Jesus Christ should be the Heir of all things, as soon as ever Adam
fell, and that he should at the instant of Adams fall, take on him the Rule and
Government of the whole Creation, now in rebellion and confusion by Adams fall,
and that he should uphold all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. and
in a special manner should rule over man's corruption, and Satan's malice; or
else if Christ had not been provided in Gods eternal Counsel and Providence, in
a readiness to undertake the Government of all this in this point of time, no
man can imagine what a hell would have been here on earth through man's
spiritual death in sin, and Satan's malice, if Christ Jesus had not been
prepared to interpose in the Government.

And secondly, It pleased God presently after the execution of his spiritual
death in sin, to declare his eternal Counsel and Providence for the redeeming
of Adam, and all his elect posterity from this desperate Head-plot of Satan,
and from this miserable death of sin, thereby altering the execution of that
heavy sentence in a great measure; or else if God in his eternal Counsel and
Providence had not found out a way to alter this sentence, there had been no
room left for the manifestation of the Covenant of grace by the promised Seed;
for till the time of Gods gracious manifestation, Adam and all his posterity
was extrinsecally under the execution of Gods vindicative threatening; but it
pleased the Lord of his rich mercy presently after to deliver him therefrom;
for God said thus by way of threatening to the devil, The Seed of that Woman
(whom thou have deceived) shall break thy Head-plot by his death and sacrifice,
and thou shall have a liberty of power to do thy worst to hinder it; And
therefore when he shall make his soul a sacrifice for sin, thou shall at the
same time have a liberty of power to pierce him in the foot-soals as a wicked
Malefactor, Genesis 3. 15. but yet so perfect shall be his patience, that no
ignominy nor torture shall disturb his patience, nor pervert him in his
obedience from accomplishing his death as a sacrifice, and by this means shall
thy cunning Head-plot be broken in pieces, and the Elect shall be delivered as
the Bird is from the Snare of the Fowler when it is broken.

Now to bring this work of Redemption to pass, a double change must be wrought
in fallen man, by the Mediation of this Promised Seed.

1 A change of our corrupt qualities by a Regeneration. 2 A change of our
present state, from being the children of wrath by nature, to be the children
of God by his grace of Adoption.
1 The alteration or change of our corrupt qualities is done by a twofold
Regeneration.

1 When the qualities of our souls and bodies are changed from bad to good
(which is done but in part whiles we live in this world) through the Word and
Spirit; For except a man be born again of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5. But this Regeneration, as I said, is done
but in part, for as long as we live in this world, this body of sin does still
in part remain, and therefore we can have but the first fruits of the Spirit
here.

2 The full degree of our Regeneration, is not till the day of the general
Resurrection, and then all those that have been in part regenerated here, shall
be fully regenerated after they have suffered a bodily death here, to fit them
for that full Regeneration; for without such a change of our corrupt nature by
death, flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither can
corruption inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 30. And in this respect (says
Christopher Carlisle) the Resurrection is called by Christ, A Regeneration, a
new Birth, a Renovation, a In his Treatise of Christ's descent into hell p. 31.
Rising from the dead, a Restitution from above, Matthew. 19. 28. Romans 8. 23. And
therefore such as are regenerate, and in part sanctified here, must suffer a
bodily death, that so at the Resurrection of all flesh they may be perfectly
regenerate in body, as well as in soul, and then this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 53. Ph. 3.
21.

Now therefore behold the Justice and Mercy of God in ordaining a bodily death;
for as soon as God had dispatched this gracious Declaration in Genesis 3. 15. he
did presently after, namely, in verse. 19. which is but four verses after the
promise, tell believing Adam (as he was the head of man's corrupt nature in
general) Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return; And thus from the order
of time when this threatening was denounced, It follows,

1 That a bodily death was not denounced, until after Christ was declared to
be the Seed of the Woman to break the Devils Head-plot (by purchasing a new
Nature, and a new Paradise for Adam, and as many else of his posterity as did
believe in the Promised Seed) but this threatening of a bodily death did imply a
further degree of misery to all the rest of his posterity that did live and dye
in the unbeleef of the Promised Seed; for when God did first appoint a bodily
death, he did then also appoint a day of Judgment, as Heb. 9. 27. does expound
the threatening in Genesis 3. 19.

2 This is also worthy of all due consideration; That this bodily death was not
threatened to be formally executed in the day of Adams sinful eating, as death
in sin was.

3 Neither was a bodily death threatened to be formally executed on any certain
day afterward.

4 Neither did God cease to threaten a bodily death, as he ceased to threaten a
spiritual death, after this time; but upon the committing of such and such
sins, he did still from time to time threaten, a bodily death: But after the
first threatening of a spiritual death in sin, God did never threaten that death
any more; he did but once threaten that death, and but once execute it.

5 When God denounced the sentence of a bodily death to believing Adam he
adjudged him and all his believing posterity no further then their bodies to
the earth, whence Christ should one day raise them, and by that means utterly
abolish from them all sin and corruption; but he adjudged his unbeleeving seed;
not only to a bodily, but also to an eternal death in hell.

6 From this appointment of a bodily death in Genesis 3. 19. and not from that
death in Genesis 2. 17. must all the Scriptures have reference that speak of a
bodily death.

7 Hence it is evident, that bodily death was not at first threatened in Genesis 2.
17. as the immediate effect of Adams first sin, but as an immediate effect and
punishment of original sin: and this Romans 5. 12. 1^.
is further evident by Romans 5. 12. As by one man (namely by one man's
disobedience, as it is explained in verse 19.) sin entered into the world
(namely original sin) and death by sin (namely a bodily death by original sin.)

And the matter is yet more plain by verse. 14. Nevertheless death reigned from
Adam to Moses, over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
trangression; that is to say, Death reigned over Infants from Adam to Moses for
their original sin, before ever they had sinned actually after the similitude
of Adams Transgression; and says Paul in verse. 21. Sin (namely original sin)
reigned unto death: Hence it follows, that the wages of Adams first sin was
death in sin, and the wages of hi^ original sin was a bodily death only to
believers, and eternal death to all unbeleevers, Romans 6. 23.

And it is evident, that this is an ancient orthodox Tenet, that bodily death
did first enter into the world by original sin.

Fulgentius de incar. and gratia Christi, chapter 12. says, Except the death of
the soul had gone before by sin, the death of the body had never followed after
as a punishment; and says he in Chap. 13. Our flesh is born with the
punishment of death and the pollution of sin; and of young children he says,
By what justice is an infant subjected to the wages of sin; if there be no
uncleanness of sin in him?

And says Prosper, de promiss. and praedict. part. 1. c. 5. The punishment of
sin which Adam the root of mankind received by Gods sentence (saying, Earth
thou art, and to earth thou shall return, Genesis 3. 19.) and transmitted to his
posterity as to his branches, the Apostle says entered into the world by one
man's sin, and so ranged over all men.

And Origin as I find him cited by Dr. Willet says, You may call the corporal
death a shadow of the other (namely a shadow See Dr. Willet* in Romans 5. Quest
21.
of our spiritual death in sin) that wheresoever that invadeth, the other does
also necessarily follow.

And Theophilu^ Reason does conclude as much: By the sin of Adam (says he) sin
and death invaded the world; namely by Adams first sin, original sin invaded
the world, and then bodily death invaded the world by means of original sin.

And says Peter Martyr, It is much to be marvelled at, how P. Martyr in Romans
5. 12.
the Pelagians can deny original sin in Infants, seeing they see they daily dye.

And says Maxentius in libello fidei c. 3. We believe that not only the death
of the body, which is the punishment of sin, but also that the sting of death,
which is sin, entered into the world, and the Apostle testifies that sin and
death went over all men.

And says Bullenger in Decad. 3. Ser. 3. By disobedience sin entered into the
world, and by sin death, diseases, and all the mischiefs in the world.

Many other Orthodox Writers do confirm this for a clear truth, That God
inflicted bodily death on man's nature in general as a punishment of original
sin; now if it were inflicted on man as a punishment of original sin, then it
was not threatened as the immediate effect of Adams first sin in Genesis 2. 17.

And the Hebrew Doctors, as well as Christian Writers, understand the death
threatened in Genesis 2. 17. of death in sin, and they make bodily death to be the
immediate effect of it.

1 By the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. Rabby Moses Ben Mamony understands a
spiritual death, that is to say, the Sea Duplessis in the Trueness of Religion
chapter 27.
death of the soul wounded with sin, and so forsaken of her life, which is God.

And other Hebrew Doctors say that bodily death is the effect of original sin,
Unto this world (say the Hebrew Rabbis cited by Ains. in Genesis 3. 19.) there
cleaves the secret filthiness of the Serpent which came upon Eve; and because
of that filthiness death is come upon Adam and his seed.

And says Ainsworth in Genesis 3. 15. The mystery of original sin, and thereby
death over all, and of deliverance by Christ, Rab. Menachem on Lev. 25. notes
from the profound Cabalists in these words; So long as the spirit of
uncleanness is not taken away out of the world, the souls that come down into
this world must needs dye, for to root out the power of uncleanness out of the
world, and to consume the same; and all this is because of the Decree which was
decreed for the uncleanness and filthiness which the Serpent brought upon Eve.

From these Testimonies it is evident that the ancient Hebrew Doctors held
bodily death to be the immediate effect of original sin; and they held original
sin to be a spiritual death, and to be the immediate effect of Adams first sin.

Chrysostom also says, We dye a double death, therefore we must look for a
double resurrection; Christ dyed but one kind Ch^ys. against Drunkards and of
the Resurrection.
of death, therefore he rose but one kind of resurrection; Adam (says he) dyed
body and soul, First, he dyed to sin; And secondly, to nature: In what day
soever ye eat of the Tree (said God) ye shall dye the death; that very day did
not Adam dye in which he did eat, but he then dyed to sin, and long after to
nature: The first is the death of the soul; the other the death of the body;
for the death of the soul is sin, or everlasting punishment. To us men there is
a double death, and therefore we must have a double resurrection: To Christ
there was but one kind of death, for he sinned not, and that one kind of death
was for us; he owed no kind of death, for he was not subject to sin, and so not
to death.

In these words we see that Chrysostom held that Adam first dyed to sin
according to Genesis 2. 17. And secondly, to nature, long after his death in sin.

This Exposition of Genesis 2. 17. I have laid down in true substance in the
Dialogue in page 10. etc. and from that Exposition, I inferred that Christ
could not possible suffer that kind of death in our place and stead, for our
redemption; and if this Exposition which I have now enlarged be sound, and
according to the Context, as I believe it is, then the inference that I made is
right and good.

But I confess that upon the receipt of some observations from a Reverend
Divine against that Exposition, I was much staggered; for, as I remember he
demanded this question. By whose means was it that Adam dyed this spiritual
death; was it inflicted on him by god, or rather did he not pull it upon
himself?

This speech in Genesis 2. 17. said he, is no other then if it were said,
whenever thou do wickedly, thou shall become wicked; for what is it else to
be spiritually dead, but to be devoid of goodness? or whenever thou killest
thy self, thou shall be dead; besides (says he) it is against the nature of
God to deprive a creature of Holiness and Righteousness, and so to make it
unholy, unrighteous, wicked, evil.

These considerations, I confess, did amuse me at the present, my conscience,
I bless God, being tender of truth, and not being able to satisfy my self at
the present to the contrary, I durst not oppose it, and therefore I did at that
present manifest my self to be convinced.

But since then, I bless God, I find sufficient light to satisfy me that my
first Exposition in the Dialogue was right: Though I confess I have found it a
point of great difficulty to find out the true nature of that death in Genesis 2.
17. and to distinguish it from bodily death; and I see that Mr. Baxter does
also make it a Query, Whether Adam cast away Gods Image, or whether God took it
away from him, in his Aphorisms, page 75. but in page 34. he seems to hold,
that after Adam had eaten of the forbidden fruit, he dyed spiritually by being
forsaken of God, in regard of holiness, as well as in regard of comfort; and
so he was deprived of the chief part of Gods Image; but so was not Christ,
says he.

And I was the more enlightened and supported in my Exposition of Genesis 2. 17. by
P. Martyrs Answer to Pigghius. See P. Martyr in Romans 5. 18. Original sin is the
essential punishment of Adams first sin though in the issue the Elect according
to Gods eternal counsel are redeemed from it by Christ.


Pigghius makes the corruption of our nature to be the natural effect of Adams
sin.

P. Martyr does answer thus; The ground and reason thereof, is rather taken
from the justice of God, whereby the grace of the Spirit and heavenly gi^^
wherewith man was endowed before his fall, were removed from him when he had
sinned; and this withdrawing of grace came of the justice of God; Although the
blame (says he) be ascribed to the Transgression of the first man, lest a man
should straitway say that God is the cause of sin; for when he had once
withdrawn his gift wherewith Adam was adorned, straitway vices and corruptions
followed of their own accord. Tindal also says in page 382. The Spirit was
taken away in the fall of Adam.

This of Peter Martyr, and sundry others to the same purpose did much sway with
me; then also I considered that Adams perfections were created to be but
mutable, until he should take a course for the confirmation of them by eating
of the Tree of life, and therefore they were but lent him for a trial; for in
case he should first eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, he should
dye the death, and so lose his created perfections; and therefore as soon as he
had sinned by eating that forbidden fruit, God in justice took them away.

But it has pleased God by his free promise to make himself a debtor to the
Elect, for the confirmation and continuance of their faith and grace, because
it was purchased for them by the blood of Christ to be of a lasting and
permanent nature; but God made no such promise to Adam when he created him
after his own Image; for he created him to be but of a mutable condition, and
therefore his graces were to be continued no otherwise but upon condition only
of his obedience in eating of the Tree of life in the first place; so that when
the condition was broken on his part by eating the forbidden fruit, it was just
with God to take away those gifts and graces wherewith he had endowed his
nature at first.

In like sort at the first, God gave unto Saul the Spirit of Government as a
new qualification added to his former education, 1 Samuel 10. 6. 9. But
afterward it pleased God to take away this Spirit of Government from him,
because he gave it no otherwise but upon condition that he should use it for
the doing of his will and command; And had he continued to use it for that end
and purpose, he should still have enjoyed it; but when he abused the same to
the fulfilling of his own will in sparing of Agag, then God took away this
spirit of Government from him, and then Saul grew wicked, 1 Samuel 16. 14. And
why might not God as well take away his created qualifications from Adams
nature, for his disobedience against his positive command, as well as from Saul
for disobedience to his positive command?

Conclusions.
1 Hence it follows, that in case this Exposition of the word Death in Genesis 2.
17. be sound and good, as I conceive it is, Then Mr. Nortons second
Proposition, and all his other Propositions, that affirm that the death
threatened in Genesis 2. 17. is the inviolable rule of Gods Relative Justice, do
fall to the ground.

2 Hence it follows, that the bodily death of the Elect, and Eternal death in
hell, is but an accidental punishment to the first plritual death.
both the bodily and eternal death of the Reprobate, are but accidental
punishments to the first spiritual death of man's nature in sin, and therefore
that the first spiritual death in sin was the essential and substantial curse
that was first threatened in Genesis 2. 17. or thus, Adams disobedience was the
meritorious cause of the death of man's nature in sin; and the spiritual death
of man's nature in sin was (afterward) the meritorious cause of bodily death,
though God was pleased to sanctify that punishment to all that do believe in
the Promised Seed, and now through faith they have hope in their death to
change for the better, but the said bodily death was ordained for a further
degree of misery to all that believe not in the Promised Seed; for when God
ordained death, he ordained judgment to succeed it, Heb. 9. 27. and this is
the distribution of his judgment, He that believes on the Son bath
everlasting life; and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life; But
the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. 36.

3 Hence it follows, that the inviolable rule of Gods relative Justice for man's
Redemption is not to be fetched from Genesis 2. 17. but from the voluntary cause
of Gods secret will not yet revealed to Adam till after his fall; and that
secret will (but now revealed) was that the formality of Christ's death in
seperating his soul from his body by his own Priestly power should be a
sacrifice, and the formality of all satisfaction, as it is explained in Heb. 9.
15, 16. and Heb. 10.

4 I desire the Reader to take notice that I defer my Examination of Mr. Norton
Exposition of Genesis 2. 17. to Chap. 10.

His fifth Proposition is this.
Merit is either absolute, so God cannot be a debtor to the creature no not to
Christ himself, or by way of free Covenant; so God in case has made himself a
debtor to man. Justice then consisting in rendering to every one their due, and
Gods will being the rule of Justice, it follows, that, and only that to be
the due desert, merit, or demerit of man which God has willed concerning him.

Reply. He says Gods will being the rule of justice; this is true, if it be
taken for his secret will; for it is his secret, and not his revealed will that
is the inviolable rule of his relative justice; God may, and often does free a
sinner from his revealed, threatened punishments, upon such account as himself
pleased to decree in the counsel of his own will, and yet he is just in so
doing, though his revealed will be contrary; and the reason is plain, because
he has ordained his secret will to be the absolute rule of his inviolable
relative justice, for God is often said to repent of his revealed threatened
plagues, as I have showed in Chap. 10. Sect. 4. and in Chap. 15. Sect. 2. at
Eighthly.

His sixth Proposition is this.
The demerit or desert of man by reason of sin, being death according to
relative justice; the rule of proceeding between God and him; Justice now
requires that man should dye (as God, with reverence be it spoken of him who
cannot be unjust) in case man had continued in obedience, had been unjust if he
had denied him life; so in case of disobedience be should be unjust in case be
should not inflict death.

Reply. Take this Proposition in relation to Adams mutable condition wherein he
was created, unto which the promise and threatening of the first Covenant has
immediate relation; and then experience tells us that the threatening in case of
Adams disobedience was executed, and so in case he had first eaten of the Tree
of life, God should have been unjust if he had not confirmed him in his present
created perfections.

But Mr. Norton it seems takes this promise and threatening chiefly to intend
either eternal life in heaven, or eternal death in hell; as if Adam had been
immediately under the threatening of hell torments, and that there is no other
way to redeem him from them, unless Christ stood as his Surety in the same
obligation with him to bear them. But the Reader may please to see my Reply to
his Exposition of Genesis 2. 17. In Chap. 10. and in other places I have often
Replied to Genesis 2. 17. as you may see by the Table to that Scripture.

But as touching Gods promises of salvation, and his threatening of damnation,
there is not the same reason of Gods performing promises and threatenings, for
man's happiness is contained in the promises, and therefore man performing the
condition, God cannot but will the reward; the same will that wills the making
of the promise must necessarily will the giving of the reward promised, the
condition being performed, otherwise it would be vain, and of no use for God to
make promises to man: But as for threatenings which concern man's destruction,
there is no such tie upon God (unless his threatenings be delivered with an
oath) and therefore man will not, and cannot complain if they be not executed;
and if God will rather glorify his mercy in remitting the punishment, upon
what account he thought best in the Counsel of his own Will, who can say he is
unjust? mercy herein rejoices against judgment. See also my note on Psalm. 94.
15.

His seventh Proposition is this.
The Elect then having sinned, the Elect must dye; if they dye in their own
persons, election is frustrate, God is unfaithful; if they dye not at all, God
is unjust, the commination is untrue: If elect men dye in their own person, the
Gospel is void; if man does not dye, the Law is void, they dye therefore in the
man Christ Jesus, who satisfied justice as their Surety, and so fulfilled both
Law and Gospel, etc.

Reply. My former Exposition of Genesis 2. 17. in Sect. 3. is a sufficient
confutation of this Proposition; But Mr. Norton goes another way in his opening
of that text, and of that threatening, and yet he does not prove, but beg the
question, and then he makes his inferences: The Elect then having sinned, must
dye; he takes not this death for death in sin, as the truth is, but he takes it
principally for eternal death in hell: I say, in that sense his Proposition is
not true; for God never willed that the Elect should dye an eternal death; (in
his fifth Proposition, he said, Gods will was the rule of his relative justice)
and yet he willed that the Reprobate should consequently die an eternal death in
the same threatening, in case they did not embrace the mercy offered by the
promised Seed. What God intended by that threatening is now evident to us by
experience, namely, that the Reprobate should dye a spiritual death in sin, and
after that a corporal, and after that an eternal death; and that the Elect
should dye a spiritual death in sin as well as the Reprobate, and that after
that they should have a new nature by the promised Seed, and after that should
dye a corporal death, but yet that the Elect should be freed from eternal death
upon such terms as were mutually agreed on betwixt the Trinity; and that the
remains of their spiritual death, and also that their corporal death, and all
other punishments that should be inflicted on them for sin, should by Gods
Infinite mercy and wisdom be turned to their good for the glorifying of his
free grace and rich mercy.

And it was just with God to do according to this his will, and therefore Mr.
Nortons conclusion of this Proposition (confutes his former part) as Gods will
is the rule of righteousness: So Gods will is the rule of the temperature of
righteousness. The plain English of it must needs be this, That in as much as
it was the will of God not to execute the threatening of eternal death strictly
upon the Elect, but to moderate it, and to suffer Satan to inflict something
only contained in it upon their Mediator, by piercing him in the foot-soals at
the same time when the seed of the Woman should break his Head-plot, by making
his soul a sacrifice for sin, as the price of their Redemption for the glory of
his grace. This being the will of God, it must needs be just, as well as it was
just for him to execute all that was contained in the threatening upon the
Reprobates.

His eighth Proposition.
Though God by his absolute power might have saved man without a Surety; yet
having constituted that inviolable rule of relative justice, In the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2. 17. he could not avoid, in
respect of his power now limited, to proceed by this rule; But man having
sinned, man must dye, and satisfy the Law that man may live, etc.

Reply. In that Christ did dye for the Elect, it did not come to pass from a
necessity of justice in respect of that first threatening; But because it
pleased God out of his infinite wisdom, and free grace in the voluntary
Covenant between the Trinity to will it, and to accept of his death and
sacrifice as the price of their Redemption, Heb. 10. 5. 7. Ephesians. 1. 7, 8. And
Mr. Norton himself in his answer to his first Query, does acknowledge that
vindicative justice has no necessary connection with the being of God, but is
an act of Gods good pleasure.

Secondly, He takes it often for grace (which is as often denied) that Christ
was Adams Surety in the same obligation to the first Covenant.

Thirdly, His conclusion that God could not avoid in respect of his power now
limited to proceed by this Rule; namely, that man sinned, man must dye in the
man Christ Jesus; I have showed in Chap. 6. and Chap. 10. that this kind of
reasoning is a mere Prologisme, namely, a deceitful Sylogisme, which seems
true when it is not.

CHAP. III.
The Examination of Mr. Nortons third Query in Page 5. which is this.

Wherein consists the sufficiency and value of the obedience of Christ as our
Surety?

Ans. In three things 1 In the dignity of his person obeying, 2 In the quality
or kind of his obedience, 3 In the acceptance of this obedience.



SECT. 1.
Reply 1 THere is no need to say any thing to the first branch of his Answer.

But to the second branch, touching the qulity or kind of his obedience, there
is need of examination; for Mr. Norton makes all the obedience of Christ to be
legal obedience, in opposition to the Dialogue that does distinguish between
his Legal and Mediatorial obedience.

In page 6. Mr. Norton says, His obedience was legal obedience, the same in
nature and measure which we by the first Covenant stood bound unto.

But I have showed in Chap. 2. Sect. 1. That the true nature of the first
Covenant did not stand in Adams obedience, or disobedience to the moral Law of
nature, but in his obedience, or disobedience to a positive Law, about things
indifferent in their own nature; and from Mr. Rutherfurd that the Command of
God for Christ to dye, was not from the moral Law, but from a positive Law only.

Reply 2. Mr. Norton does also contradict himself touching the quality or kind
of Christ's obedience; For first, he says, It The kind of Christ's obedience as
Mediator, was to a peculiar positive law. But Mr. Norton does 1 affirm that the
quality or kind of Christ's obedience was legal; and 2 he does contradict that,
and says it was more also.
was legal, the same in nature and measure which we by the firsT Covenant stood
bound unto. But secondly, he contradict^ this, for in page 201. he says, That
the will of God concerning the Mediator, was, that he should obey the Law of
Works, and more. This last word more is a contradiction of what he said
formerly: If his obedience was more then Legal obedience, then his obedience
was not the sAme in nature and measure, which we by the first Covenant stood
bound unto (for he understands the firsT Covenant to be made according to the
moral Law) and to confute himself the more manifestly, he brings in Pareus and
Rivel in the former page, to prove that Christ's obedience as Mediator, was more
then legal. Pareus asserting a special obedience imposed on the Mediator alone,
and Rivet, a singular command of laying down his life, from Joh. 10. 18.

Now let the Reader judge, especially such as are acquainted with Pareus
judgment, whether that special obedience which was imposed on the Mediator
alone, be no other then legal obedience, or whether it be the same in nature
and measure which we in the first Covenant stood bound unto, according to Mr.
Nortons sense of that Covenant.

And secondly, let the Reader also judge whether it be possible for Mr. Norton
to make a true description of the true nature of Christ's satisfaction, while he
is thus confounded in the nature of Christ's obedience as Mediator.

SECT. 2.
In page 140. He calls the Dialogues distinction of Christ's Legal and
Mediatorial obedience, A new Law, and a new Mediatorly* obedience conformable
to that new Law. And in page 108. He calls this distinction, An erroni^us, and
mis-leading distinction.

Reply. WHether Mr. Norton will own this distinction or no, the matter will be
the less with a judicious Reader, because it has the approbation of many
eminen^ orthodox Divines (besides Pareus and Rivet) who do ground the said
distinction, on these, and the like Scriptures, Joh. 10. 18. Joh. 14. 31. Joh.
17. 4. Heb. 10. 7, 9, 10. Psalm. 40. 7, 8. Romans 5. 19. Phil. 2. 8. Es. 53. 10.
Heb 10 7. In Vindiciae legis lect. 1. p. 13. See also Blake on the Covenant, p.
25.


1 It is disputed says Mr. Burges, Whether Christ had a command laid upon him
by the Father, strictly so called; and howsoever (says he) the Arians from the
grant of this did infer Christ's absolute inferiority to this Father; yet (says
he) our orthodox Divines do conclude it, because of the many places of
Scripture which prove it.

2 Mr. Gataker does place the merit of Christ's obedience and satisfaction
wholly in this kind of Mediatorly obedience, Bartho. Wegil. Sangalensis, ^n his
Ans. to the 5 Reason of the 13 Thesis.
and not in his legal obedience, for thus he answers to Bar. Wegiline (that
holds to Christ's legal obedience for merit as Mr. Norton does) Non est necesse
ut Christus legis moralis sive naturalis placita implendo, vel sibi, vel nobis
qui^quam fuerit promeritus, non magis quam ut Angeli, qua creatura rationalis
unaquaequae creationis ipsius nomine Deo creatori ex essicio debeat quicquid
lex illa a quiquam exigit. In English thus:


It is not necessary that Christ in fulfilling the moral and natural Law should
desErve any thing for himself, or us, no more then the Angels; seeing every
rational creature in the very name of its creation, ows all things on duty to
its Creator whatsoever the Law requires of any; and he does fully manifest his
judgment in his Elenchtick Animadversions upon Goma^us, p. 1. These. 1. p. 15.
These. 8. p. 17. These. 9. p. 19. These. 11. p. 25. These. 15. p. 49. These. 32. And
in his Animadversions upon the disputes betwixt Piscator and Lucius, in the
meritorious cause of our justification, Part is prmae Sect. 1. p. 2. 12. Sect.
4. p. 18. Sect. 6. numero. 4. p. 19. Sect. 7. numero 1. Partis secundae p. 57.
Sect. 2. numero 16. 70. Sect. 8. numero 6. And there he gives this reason,
because Christ performed moral obedience for himself, and not for us.

3 Pareus says, That those that ascribe the merit of righteousness De
Justi^i^ Christi activa and passi^a, p. 101, 102. and in his Epist. 10
Whitgensteni^^.
unto Christ's active obedience, or to his native holiness, do thereby derogate
from the death of Christ, and do undoubtedly make it vain or superfluous.
Pareus does often use this Argument, and Mr. Gataker does as often approve it,
not only in his disputation with Gomarus, but also in his answer to Mr. Walkers
Vindication, in p. 13. 91. 10^. 136. and when he had repeated Pareus his words
in p. 13. he speaks thus to Mr. Walker, Now would I gladly understand from Mr.
Walker what he thinks of Pareus, whether he count not him a blasphemous
Heretic as well as Mr. Wotton? The same question do I propound to Mr. Norton,
together with that cross interrogatory that Mr. Gatakar propounded to Mr.
Walker in p. 90. 91.

3 Mr. Thomas Goodwin says, That the Law which Christ In his Book of the heart
of Christ in Heaven, p. 50, 51, Psalm. 40. 8.
says was in his heart or bowels, Psalm. 40. 8. was that special Law which lay
upon him, as he was the second Adam (namely it was a positive Law) like that
which was given to the first Adam, non comedendi, over and above the moral Law,
not to eat of the forbidden fruit, such a Law was this (which was given to the
Mediator) it was the Law of his being a Mediator and a Sacrifice, over and
besides the moral Law which was common to him with us; and says he, as that
special law of not eating the forbidden fruit was unto Adam Praeceptum
Symbolicum (as Divines call it) given over and besides all the ten
Commandments, to be a trial or symbol of his obedience to all the rest, such
was this Law given to Christ the second Adam, and thus he expounds the word Law
in Psalm. 40. 8. of the peculiar Law of Mediatorship, just as the Dialogue does,
and not of the moral Law as Mr. Norton does.

4 Mr. Rutherfurd says, that Christ's obedience in laying down his life, was in
obedience to a positive Law, and not to the moral Law, as I have cited him more
at large in Chap. 2. Sect. 1.

5 Mr. Joh. Goodwin does cite diverse eminent Divines that do distinguish the
obedience of Christ into two kinds, the one they call Justi^^^a person^, the
righteousness of his person, the other Justi^ia meriti, the righteousness of
merit; and for this distinction, Christ's obedience to the moral Law, is called
by Divines, (...) per^ene; but his obedience in his death and sufferings, they
call Justi^ia meriti.
he cites Pareus, Dr. P^ideaux, Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Forbs, and Mr. Gataker, and
Justitia person^ they place in Causa sine qua non.

6 Says Mr. Baxter, many learned and godly Divines, of singular esteem in the
Church of God, are of this judgment. In his Pes. of Just. p. 53. and there he
names many, and, says he, in his late Apology to Mr. Blake, p. 115. I deny
not but that Christ as man was under a Law, yea and a Law peculiar to himself,
whereto no other creature is subject, even the Law of Mediation, which deserves
in the body of Theology a peculiar place, and the handling of it as distinct
from all the Laws made with us men, is of special use, etc.

SECT. 3.
But says Mr. Norton in page 192. The Death of the Mediator was in a way of
Justice, and was Legal obedience; And in the same page, he makes the
Incarnation of Christ also, to be legal obedience.

Reply 1. IT seems that Mr. Norton holds, That God had ordained Christ's
obedience in his Incarnation and Death, was not moral obedience, but
Madiatorial obedience to the special Law of Mediatorship.
no other way to take satisfaction, but first by our Saviors performing of
legal obedience for us, and suffering the essential punishment of hell
torments, for this way only he calls, The way of Justice: But in the former
Section, I have showed that sundry orthodox, whereof some of them do hold as
Mr. Norton does, that Christ made satisfaction by suffering hell torments, as
Pareus and Mr. Rutherfurd, and yet they deny that Christ's obedience in his
death was legal obedience, contrary to Mr. Norton.

2 I will add Mr. Ball to them, for he held that Christ made Ball on the
Covenant, p. 281.
satisfaction by suffering the wrath of God (though in page 290. he seems not
to hold that he suffered hell torments) and yet he also does exempt the death
of Christ from being any part of legal obedience. The Law (says he) did not
require that God should dye, nor that any should dye that had not sinned, nor
such a death, and of such efficacy, as not only to abolish death, but to bring
in life by many degrees more excellent then that which Adam lost.

And says Mr. Ball, Christ upon the Cross prayed for them See Ball on the
Covenant, p. 259.
that crucified him, Luke 23. 34. But (says he) that might be of private duty,
as man, who subjected himself to the Law of God, which requires that we forgive
our enemies, and pray for them that p^rsec^te us; not of the proper office of a
Mediator, which was to offer up himself a sacrifice, who was to interecede for
his people by suffering death. It behoved Christ as he subjected himself to the
Law, to fulfill all Righteousness, and to pray for his enemies, but that was
not out of his proper office as Mediator.

Hence the Reader may observe, that Mr. Ball makes Christ's obedience to the
moral Law to be out of private duty, as a man, and not ex officio, out of the
proper office of a Mediator, as Mr. Norton does make all his legal obedience to
be.

And says he in page 287. Christ was Lord of his own life, and therefore had
power to lay it down, and take it up. And this power he had (though he were in
all points subject to the Law as we are) not solely by virtue of the
hypostatical union (which did not exempt him from any obligations of the Law)
but by virtue of a particular Command, Constitution, and Designation to that
service of laying down his life. This Commandment have I received of my
Father, Joh. 10. 18.

3 Says Baxter, The Law of the Creature, and the Law of In Appendix to his
Pos. p. 128.
the Mediator are in several things different: The will of his Father which he
came to do, consisted in many things which were never required of us: And such
(says he) are all the works that are proper to the office of Mediatorship.

4 Mr. Gataker in his Elenchtick Animad. upon Gomarus, does thus Upon Gomarus p
25. Heb. 10. 10.
expound Heb. 10. 10. I come to do thy will; By which Will we are sanctified
through the oblation of his body, etc.

That Will (says he) is the Stipulation (or Covenant) of the Father about
Christ's undertaking our cause upon himself, and performing those things that
were requisite for the Expiation of our sins, therefore it comprehends all the
obedience of Christ which he performed to the peculiar Law of Mediation; for
this Law set apart, he was not bound by any other Law to the oblation of
himself. And hence it follows, that if Christ made satisfaction by his
obedience to another Covenant, then not by his obedience to the moral Law.

5 If God had commanded Christ to dye by the Justice of the moral Law, then his
desire, That the Cup might pass from him, in Matthew. 26. 39. had been a sinful
desire; But, says Mr. Rutherford, because it was a positive Law only by which
God commanded him to dye, therefore that desire was no sin, as I have noted his
words more at large in Chap. 2. Sect. 1.

6 Says Mr. Thomas Goodwin, The death of Christ was not manded by the moral
Law, but it was commanded over and besides the moral Law, as I cited him in the
former Section.

7 It seems that Mr. Norton has an art (beyond others) by which he can make
the miraculous work of Christ's Incarnation to be moral obedience, or else he
would never say, as he If the Incarnation of Christ had been an act of
obedience to the moral Law, then Christ's Godhead had been in an absolute
inferiority to his Fathers supreme Command.
does, That the Incarnation of Christ was an act of legal obedience, in page
192.

The Arians will be much beholding to him for this Tenent; for if his
Incarnation which was an act of his Godhead, was an act of his obedience to
the moral Law; then it follows, that the Godhead of Christ was in an absolute
subjection, and so in an absolute inferiority to his Father; for the moral Law
is supreme compulsory Law given to inferiors.

But Mr. Norton labors to prove, That the Incarnation of Christ was an act of
legal obedience, in page 192. by Gal. 4. 4. and in page 196. (says he) Christ
was subject to the Law not as man only, but as God-man Mediator, Gal. 4. 4, 5.
And says he in the same page, The Law whereto ^e was subject, is the Law
whereunto we are subject.

Reply. His proof from Gal. 4. 4. I will now examine, because he does cite it
to prove that the moral Law was given to the Mediator, as the Law of his
Mediatorship, as in page 103. 192, 196, 197, 200, 240, 267.

The sense of this Text must be sought out by comparing it with the Context;
the third verse runs thus, Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage
under the Elements (or Rudiments) of the world. Hence the Apostle infers, in
verse. 4. 5. That when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under ^he Law.

Any man that has but half an eye, may see that the Apostle in this place
speaks only of the ceremonial Law (by which it appears that Mr. Norton took but
little heed to the Context) and therefore it is sufficient to answer him in the
words of Mr. Gataker to the seventh Reason of Wigelin his 15. Thesis: This
place to the Galatians, says he, speaks of the Law of Rites, therefore it
comes not here to be handled (namely not in Mr. Nortons sense) for Mr. Norton
says, That the Law here whereunto Christ was made subject, is the Law
whereunto we are made subject. But Mr. Gataker, according to the Context, does
call it the Law of Rites, and Dr. Hammond does Analyze the Text to that sense
only; And so does Mr. Ball on the Covenant, page 141, and 166.

But for the better clearing of this sense, I will expound the several branches
of Gal. 4. 4.

1 When the fullness of time was come: This fullness of time, must be
understood chiefly of the time of Christ's death, though it does also comprehend
the time of his Incarnation, namely in order to his death; for until that full
time of Christ's death, the Jews were under ceremonial Types, as under Tutors
and Governors: And the exact period of this full time was foretold unto Daniel
by the Angel Gabriel, just four hundred and ninety years beforehand, for says
Daniel in Chap. 9. 21. The Dau. 9. 24. 27.
Angel Gabriel came flying swiftly, and touched me, as I was at prayers about
the time of the Evening Oblation; and in verse. 22. he said, O Daniel I am come
forth to give thee skill and understanding (namely of the fullness of time
appointed of the Father) therefore understand the matter, and consider the
Vision, for seventy weeks are determined (Dan. 9. 24.) upon thy people, and
upon thy holy City, to finish trespass (namely, to finish Trespasse-offerings)
and to end Sim See Broughtous Translation printed at Hanaw.
(namely, to end Sin Offerings) and to make reconciliation for
Unrighteousness, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, instead of
Ceremonial Righteousness by legal purifications, and by legal Reconciliations
and Attonements by the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer,
sprinkling the unclean to the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9. 13. this kind of
Righteousness was but a figure for the present time, that could not make holy,
concerning the conscience, him that did the service, Heb. 9. 9. For it is not
possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away (moral) sins, Heb.
10. 4. But the Sacrifice of Christ (which was typified by these Rites being
made in the fullness of that time that was fore-appointed of the Father) had a
true virtue and efficacy, by virtue of Gods Covenant with the Mediator to
cleanse the conscience from the guilt of moral sins, and to bring in a moral
Righteousness, and so then the ceremonial Righteousness must cease; and thus
the Angel Gabriel told Daniel, that the Messiah by his death should make
reconciliation for unrighteousness, and so bring in an Everlasting
Righteousness; and then says the Angel Gabriel in verse. 27. He shall confirm
the Testament for the many, the last Seven, when in half that Seven, he shall
end Sacrifice and Oblation; The words are thus opened by Paul, in Heb. 9. 26.
But now once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin, Heb 9 26.
namely to put away the Ceremonial use of Sin Offerings by the sacrifice of
himself; and in Romans 8. 3. God sending his own Son in Rom 8. 3.
the likeness of sinful flesh, and for his sacrifice for sin in the flesh, He
condemned sin, that is to say, the use of Sin Offerings; because his
Sin-offering was of efficacy sufficient to make an Everlasting Reconciliation,
and Redemption, and to bring in an Everlasting Purifying from sin, which Daniel
calls an Everlasting Righteousness. And thus in the fullness of time, God sent
his Son to fulfill the Ceremonial Law of Types, and then it follows, that all
Ceremonial Types must cease, etc. And thus Christ has redeemed us for our
moral sins, and from the moral curse; and this is worth the noting, that the
Levitical Ordinances are in Greek called Iustifications, in Heb. 9. 1. and
Carnal Dan 8. 14. Heb. 9. 1. 10. Legal justification was a type of our moral
justification.
Justifications in verse 10. because they represented our Justification, says
Dickson, namely such Justifications as were made by Ceremonial Cleansings, such
as I have formerly named in Heb. 9. 13. and also the cleansing of the Temple,
Dan. 8. 14. is called Tzedek, justified, and such Ceremonial Purifyings did
typifie Gods moral justification by his being reconciled or attoned to sinners
for the sake of Christ's sin-offering; and therefore when the Jews were cleansed
according to the purification of the Sanctuary, they said to the Porters of the
Temple, in Psalm. 118. 19. Open to me the gates of Righteousness, I will go in
to praise the Psalm. 118. 19.
Lord, called the gates of Justice, says Ains. because only the just and clean
might enter into them. And in verse 20. This is the gate of the Lord, into
which the righteous shall enter; namely such as are legally righteous by being
purified from their Ceremonial sins; which was a type of the true nature of our
moral jastification; And in this respect, the Temple is also called, The
habitation of justice, Jer. 50. 7. for such purified persons as came thither,
were, justified persons as to the outward man, yea all the Nation in this
respect are holy, Exodus 19. and therefore any of Israel, though never so vild
by moral sins, yet if they were but legally cleansed from their ceremonial
sins, they might lawfully appear before God in his Sanctuary, as justified
persons in regard of that place; but on the contrary, if any man, though never
so godly (and therefore morally justified) did but want this ceremonial
cleansing, they were unjustified persons in respect of their bodily appearance
in Gods Sanctuary, and were guilty of cutting off by death, Lev. 15. 31. Number.
19 13. so then, their outward legal cleansing from their ceremonial sins, the
Ordinances of the ceremonial Law, was but to typisie their true justification
by the death of Christ in the fullness of time, at the procuring cause of Gods
cleansing by his free pardon and forgiveness, as in Jer 33. 8. I will cleanse
them from all their iniquity whereby they have Jer. 33. 18.
finned against me, and I will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have
sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me. Here cleansing is put
for justification by forgiveness. And so in Ezekiel. 36. 25. Then will I sprinkle
clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your filthiness, and
from all your Idels will I cleanse you. And in verse. 29. I will save you from
all your uncleanesses. These places do allude to the ceremonial purgations
before cited from Heb. 9. 13. and in this sense the bloody death of Christ which
he offered in the fullness of time does purge us, Heb. 1. 3. and cleanse us,
Tit. 2. 14. 1 John 1. 7. and wash us from our sins, Rev. 1. 5. because it
procures God the Fathers Atonement, which does formally expiate sin, cleanse
it, purge it, and wash it away. See Ains. in Exodus 30. 10. Lev. 16. 30, 33.
Numb. 8. 7, 21. Numb. 19. 9. Psalm. 517. So that to them that are in Christ
there in no condemnation, Romans 8. 1.

2 The second sentence of this verse. of Gal 4. 4. is this: God sent forth his
Son.

This word sent, implies that there had a mutual Covenant passed between the
Trinity, or else the Father could not have sent him forth; for the Father had
no supreme Authority over his Son, because they are in nature equal, Job. 10.
30. and therefore can have but one will and consent, which may be called a
Covenant; I came down from Heaven (said Christ) not to do mine own (humane)
will, but the will of him that sent me, Joh. 6. 38.

3 Made of a woman; For according to Gen 3, 15. He was made of the seed of the
woman, by the mighty power of the Holy Ghost, Luke 1. 35.

4 Made under the Law: Being made of a woman, that was a Jew, he was made under
the Law of Types.

5 That he might redeem them that were under the Law: But he could not redeem
any from the boundage of Moses Rites, until he had fulfilled all the Types,
by his own blessed death and sacrifice, in the fullness of the time that was
fore-appointed of the Father; and by that act he has both redeemed us from the
bondage of Moses Rites, and also has redeemed us morally from the displeasure
of God, and from Satan's Head-plot.

It is true also that he fulfilled the moral Law as he was true man, and also
that he fulfilled the preceptive part of Moses Rites in his own practice, but
that he did as he was a Jew only: but he fulfilled the Types as he was a
Mediator only, by his death and sacrifice; and by that fulfilling he has
redeemed us, both from the bondage of Moses Rites, and also from Satan's
Head-plot.

And thus we may see, that the Types of the ceremonial Law, especially those
Laws of Priests and Sacrifice, were ordained to The ceremonial Types of
cleansing, especially of Priest and Sacrifice, did typifie our moral
justification or cleansing from all sin by Christ's Sacrifice in precuring Gods
Atonement. Heb 9. 13.
typifie the Law of Mediatorship, and our moral justification by him; Therefore
all such as are desirous to see more fully into the true matter and form of
that Covenant between the Trinity for man's redemption, let them study the
mysteries of Moses Ceremonies; for in them as in a glass they may behold the
several Articles of the Eternal Covenant for man's Redemption; and therefore
when Christ came into the world, he said, Sacrifice and offering thou would
not, but a body have thou prepared me (in place of Types) then said I, Lo I
come to do thy will, O God; by the doing of which will we are sanctified,
namely purged, purified, or cleansed from sin, as the legal phrase is explained
in Heb. 9. 13. Of which Ceremonial purifying, see Ains. in Exodus 29. 36. but
metaphorically it signified the expiation of all sin through the offering of
the body of Jesus Christ once for all.

To cleanse men from sins merely Ceremonial, the bloody sacrifice of brute
beasts was sufficient by Gods own Ordinance, Heb. 9. 13. and hence the Apostle
insers in verse. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ? This inference of
the Apostle does not consist simply in this, namely in the super-excellency of
this High Priest above the Legal-priest in verse. 11. nor in the
super-excellency of his blood, as verse. 12. but in the super-^xcellency of this
High Priest and his sacrifice united personally, as verse. 14. How much more,
etc. Suppose a Priest as excellent had been found, and also a Sacrifice as
excellent, in two distinct persons, yet that had not been effectual for
satisfaction, because it could not comprise the act of one Mediator; but the
admirable personal union of this High Priest and Sacrifice, did comprise the
act of one Mediator, for so says the Text, he offered himself by his Eternal
Spirit, namely by his Godhead, and for this cause he is the Mediator of the
New Testament, verse. 15. and hence it had its virtue to cleanse you from the
guilt of all manner of sin.

And secondly, hence it had virtue to confirm the Testament for the many, as it
is expressed in verse. 15, 16, 17.

Thirdly, I had almost forgotten to parallel that speech in Dan. 9. 27. with
Gal. 4. 4, 5. which lies thus.

He shall confirm the Testament for the Many, the last Seven, that is to say,
in the very end of the last Seven, which is most precisely called The fullness
of time, in Gal. 4 4.

Now where a Testament is confirmed, there must of necessity be the death of
the Testator; for a Testament is confirmed, and of force, after men be dead, it
is of no strength at all whilst the Testator lives, Heb. 9. 16, 17.

The next clause in Daniel, is this:

And in the balf of that Seven (which is three years and a half) namely in the
end of this last half of the last Seven, which also is most precisely called,
The fullness of time, in Gal. 4. 4. be shall end Sacrifice and oblation; and
this speech is directly parallel to that in Gal. 4. 4, 5. He shall redeem them
from under the Law; that is to say, by one and the same act of his Death and
Sacrifice, he shall end Sacrifice and Oblation; and by that act he shall redeem
us not only from the bondage of Moses Ceremonies, but also from Satan's Head
plot; or as it is in verse. 24. By his death, He shall finish
Trespasse-offering, and end Sin Offerings, and so make reconciliation for
unrighteousness, and bring in an everlasting Righteousness; for he shall
confirm unto us all the Legacies of the New Testament, by his death, where the
Spirit for regeneration, and forgiveness of sin for Justification, are the
general Legacies.

Thus have I showed (though not so compendiously as I could wish) that the word
Law, in Gal. 4. 4. must be understood of the ceremonial Law only; And
therefore first, All that Mr. Norton says touching Christ's subjection to the
moral Law, from Gal. 4. 4. as the proper Law of his Mediatorship there
intended, falls to the ground. And secondly, his charge of the second Heresy
which he proves from this Text, does justly fall upon his own head; for this
is certain, that if a Curse be not justly given, it shall not come on the
innocent, Prove. 26, 27. but it must return to the giver, Psalm. 109. 17.
Thirdly, Hence it follows, that Mr. Norton does again most grossly wrong this
Text to prove that Christ suffered the curse of hell torments in his death, in
p. 103.

The last branch of Mr. Nortons third Query is this:

In the Acceptance of this Obedience.
Reply 4. This Acceptance Mr. Norton takes for granted, which is denied.

He should have proved, as well as affirmed, that God accepted of Christ's legal
obedience, as our obedience (then he had showed his skill) and then it had
indeed been meritorious, and of such value and sufficiency; But because he
does but barely affirm it, therefore I shall pass it by without any further
examination here, because I have showed the contrary in the former Section, and
also in Chap. 2. Sect. 1.

His fourth Query is a bare Affirmation.

And the reason of the denial I will show, when I come to examine his
Exposition of Genesis 2. 17.

CHAP. IV.
The Examination of Mr. Nortons first Distinction, in Page 7. which is this:

Distinguish between the Essential or Substantial, and the Accidental or
Circumstantial parts of the punishment of the Curse.

And then he makes this to be the distinguishing Character between them.

The Essential part of the punishment (says he) is that execution of Justice,
which proceeds from the Curse considered absolutely in it self, without any
respect to the condition or disposition of the Patient.

The Accidental part of the punishment (says he) is that execution of Justice
which proceeds not from the Curse considered absolutely, but from the
disposition of the Patient being under such a Curse.

SECT. 1.
Reply 1. THis Distinction he takes for granted; for he shows not how, or in
what sense any of these accidental parts do flow from the disposition, or
condition of the Patient under the curse, further then by two Humane and Civil
Resemblances of his meaning.

But the Dialogue gave him a fair occasion, to clear his meaning, by objecting
sundry particulars of the Curse, and instead of a fair answer, he puts the
Reader off with this slight; The reasoning of the Dialogue is impertinent; The
dispute is about the Essential parts of the Curse, these are but Accidental,
because they proceed not from the Curse absolutely considered, but from the
disposition or condition of the Patient under the curse.

Now seeing he does thus hide his meaning, How can I, or the Reader judge what
weight of truth there is in his distinction? let the Reader judge whether such
unexplained distinctions be not rather evasions than explications.

SECT. 2.
YOu may see it, says Mr. Norton, exemplified in Civil punishments; in the
execution of death upon a Malefactor, the separation of the soul from the body
is of the essence of punishment: The gradual decay of the senses, impotency of
spirits, are ^ccidental parts of the punishment.

Or thus (says he) it may be further illustrated in the case of the execution
of imprisonment upon a Debtor; imprisonment is of the essence of punishment,
but duration in prison is from the disposition of the Debtor, namely his
insufficiency to pay the debt.

Reply 2. All the sufferings of Christ were to be performed The natural order
of proceedings in Courts of justice is not fit to exemplify the order of
proceedings in voluntary causes and Covenants.
from the voluntary cause, being founded in Gods good will and pleasure, and
agreed on by a mutual and reciprocal Covenant between the Trinity, and not from
the natural order of Courtproceedings; but Mr. Norton does exemplify all this
from the natural order of Court-justice: It is all one as if he should
exemplify the Incarnation and the Death of Christ by the natural order of our
conception and death: It is a known maxim, That paralleling of justice between
cases Divine and Humane, is dangerous, and from Humane to Divine is an unsafe
way of reasoning, and savors too much of prying into the secrets of God,
contrary to D^ut. 20. 29. and of too much boldness in giving a reason of Gods
eternal decrees, which is not modesty in the creature, Romans 11. 33.

But Mr. Norton seems to father this opinion and distinction on Dr. Ames in his
Answer to Bellarmine about the Eternity of Hell Torments in Christ's sufferings
(as his marginal Note shows.) But the self-same Dr. Ames in his Marrow, lib. 1.
c. 16. Sect. 4. 7. 9. does express himself to be of another mind touching
Eternity is essential to the Torments of Hell.
the Eternity of Hell Torments; he does there make the Eternity of duration to
be as Essential as the Extremity of pain, both in respect of loss and sense;
and in Sect. 5. he renders three Reasons of this Eternity. 1 Because of the
eternal abiding of the Offense. 2 Because of the unchangeablenesse of the
condition which that degree of punishment does incur. 3 Because of the want of
satisfaction.


Now compare Dr. Ames at one time when he does plainly lay down the grounds of
Divinity, with Dr. Ames at another time when he is pinched to answer
Bellarmines Argument, and then you may find him not well to accord with
himself.

Yea Mr. Norton himself gives another reason of the duration of Hell
punishments, besides inability to satisfy sooner.

The reason (says he) why eternal death is inflicted after the separation of
the soul from the body, is chiefly, because this bodily death puts a period to
our capacity of having any part in the first Resurrection, namely of
Regeneration, whereby only the second death is prevented, and I may also add,
whereby its eternity is prevented. This reason which Mr. Norton has here
given, makes Eternity essential to Hell Torments. The distinction of essential
and circumstantial Helltorments, thereby to make Eternity no more but a
circumstance, has four inconveniences attending it.


This distinction of essential and circumstantial Helltorments, whereby he
labors to make Eternity to be no more but a circumstance, has these four
inconveniences attending it.

1 It supposes that Divine justice in the execution of the legal curse admits
of a satisfaction, contrary to Psalm. 49. 7, 8 9. Job 36, 18, 19. 2 That
Eternity of Hell Torments is not absolute without some Ifs or Ands, but only
conditional, in case the damned cannot give satisfaction sooner. 3 To say that
Eternity is not an essential part of Hell, is to say that Hell may be Hell, and
yet not be Eternal. 4 If this part of the curse, viz. Eternity, may be taken
away from Hell Torments, then Mr. Norton may as well take away any other part
from it.
It is safest therefore (as I conceive) to say and hold, that eternity of
punishment, flowing from the Curse, is from the voluntary cause, or from the
free constitution of Gods good pleasure, as the due reward of sin.

Mr. Sam. Hieron says, That the extremity of Hell Torments are made known to
us two ways. See Hicrons works p 294.


1 By the Universality of them in every part. 2 In that they continue without
intermission after they are once begun.
But Mr. Norton opposes both these.

1 He dispenses with the Universality of the extremity of them in every part;
he says, That Christ suffered the torments of Hell in his body, but not in
full extremity; and therefore h^e says, what he wanted in his body, he made
it up in his soultorments, in page 121.

2 He dispenses with the eternity of continuance, and grants an intermission
contrary to the Scripture that tells us, That the worm dies not, and that
the fire never goes out.

The Torments of Hell (says Austin de Spiritu and Anima lib. 3. c. 56. as I
find him cited in Carlisle) are perpetual, terrible Terrors; fear without
faith; pain without remission; the Hangman strangling, the Hell Hounds
scourging, the worm gnawing, the conscience accusing, and the fire consuming,
or rather continuing without mercy, end, relaxation, or ease. See also at Reply
5.

These, and such like things propounded in the Dialogue, Mr. Norton answers
not, but puffes them away with this breath, They are circumstantial, and not of
the essence of Punishment.

SECT. 3.
The Essential Punishment of the Curse (says he in page 7.) is the total
temporal privation of all the sense of the good of the promise, called by some,
The pain of Loss.

Reply 3. IN this point of the pain of Loss, Mr. Norton is like to lose
himself, for he delivers himself variously, and contrariously, as may be seen
by comparing his expression in this place, with his various expressions in
other places.

In page 31. line 5. He calls it the privation of the present fruition of the
good of the promise: Here the word sense in Mr. Norton affirms that Christ
suffered the pains of loss in respect of the frution of the good of the
promise; but otherwhiles he says it was in respect of the sense of the good of
the promise by which wide differing expressions, he leaves the Reader in the
dark to grope out his meaning. See Dr. Ames in Psalm. 21. cited also in Sect 4.
left out.

In page 68. He says, That Christ had a taste of consolation at present in
the Garden; But, says he, his desertion was total in respect of Sense upon the
Cross.

In page 111. (he says) That the pain of Loss is the not enjoying of ought of
the good of the promises; and in page 112. he calls it The privation of the
good of the promises. In both these places the word sense is left out.

Now seeing Mr. Norton delivers himself thus variously, it may justly stumble
any judicious Reader how to understand him, whether he be to be understood
as leaving out the word sense, or taking it in; for that word left out or taken
in, does much alter the sense.

In page 118. He tells us in the Margin of Separatio quo ad substantiam, in
respect of substance, and quo ad sensum, in respect of sense and feeling.

Dr. Ames in Psalm. 22. says, We are not to understand that the desertion (of
Christ) was real, but only in respect of sense and feeling; and so must the
privation of the good of the promise be understood; either that Mr. Norton
does mean it is real, or in respect of sense and feeling only.

The former is a total privation; the latter is only partial.

The former is judgment without mercy, Iam. 2. 13.

The latter remembers mercy in judgment, though it may not be discerned at the
present.

Now if Mr. Nortons meaning be, that Christ suffered such a privation of the
good of the promise as is real, namely as it is contra-distinguished from
privation in sense and feeling, then the word sense might well have been left
out, because it being put in, does cast a mist before the eyes of the Reader.

But if he mean no more but such a privation of the good of the promise, as
consists only in sense and feeling, and as it is distinguished from the said
real privation, then it is very improperly called a total privation, and then
the pain of loss does contain much more in it than this; for a godly man may
meet with as much as this in his life time, as Spira did, if we suppose him to
be godly.

This Essential punishment (says he in page 8.) was that, and only that,
which Christ suffered.

Reply 4. I cannot but wonder at his various delivery of himself.

For in his 5 Did. page 10. He says, That Christ suffered the pains of Hell
due to the Elect, who for their sins deserved to be damned.

And in page 22. He makes it one branch of the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17.
to be separated from the sense of the good Genesis 2. 17.
things of the promise, and calls it total in Christ, and total in the
Reprobates, and all this flowing from the same Curse.

And in page 68. He calls it his total desertion in respect of sense upon the
Cross; and presently after he says, The pain of loss, and the pain of sense,
make up the full measure of the essential wrath of God; and they both met
together in full measure upon him on the Cross. Mark this, He does in both
these places hold, that Christ suffered the full measure of the pain of loss.

And in page 79. He says, That forsaking is either total and Psalm. 22. 1. Mat.
27. 46.
final; so God forsakes the Reprobate: or partial and temporal, as concerning
the fruition and sense of the good of the promise; so God forsook Christ. Of
his forsaking, Christ complains in this place, being a principal part of that
punishment which Christ (as the Surety of the Elect) was to undergo.

And presently after he says, That Christ suffered the guilt and punishment of
sin; a chief part whereof was this Divine penal desertion; and his following
words do imply, that this was the curse of the pain of Loss.

Mark, that in this place he holds only a partial forsaking.

And in page 80. He says, That Christ was forsaken ^^nally, yet partially and
temporally, not to any and finally. Here also he does hold no more but a
partial forsaking, and denies total.

And in page 118. He says, Though the separation of the damned from God, is
total and final; yet the separation or rather desertion of Christ was partial
and temporal, in respect of the sense of the favor of God, and only for a time.

And says he, There are two kinds of penal desertion, or forsaking; one is
only in part for a time.

The other is total and final; so the Reprobates are forsaken in Hell.

And in page 122. He says, That Christ was wholly forsaken in respect of any
participation of the sense of the good of the promise for a time, Matthew. 27.
46. Matthew 27. 46.


But in page 123. He says, That God forsook him with a temporal and partial
desertion, and presently after, The soul and body, being separated from all
participation of the good of the promise.

Here the word sense is left out, and in the former place he denies that he
had any sense of the good of the promise.

Now let the Reader judge, whether he can easily gather out of these various
and uncertain expressions, what Mr. Norton does distinctly affirm touching the
pain of Loss, that Christ suffered; for one while, he calls it, Total
separation; another while he says, It was partial; and then the fruition and
sense is put in also; one while he does limit his sufferings to the sense of
the favor of God as in page 118. another while he^ says that he was
separated from all participation of the good of the promise, in page 123. In
this last speech he leaves out the word sense, which implies the highest
degree of suffering; for it takes Mr. Norton in p. 123 holds that Christ both
in soul and body was sepa^ated f^omal participation of the good of the promise
for a time, and so he comes up to Christ's total separation from God for a time.
away the support of Gods Spirit to bear the pain of loss, which God does
often give, when the sense of his favor is wanting, and it also takes away
other communications of his love.

In this 123. page Mr. Norton does speak out his meaning plain enough.

Namely that the soul and body of Christ was separated from all participation
of the good of the promise for the while; and so he comes up to a Total (though
temporary) separation from God, and more then a partial, which he frequently
denied in the places above cited, and comes up to a real separation, which Dr.
Ames (above cited) does deny; and to separatio quo ad substantiam mentioned in
page 118. (and not only quo ad sensum) which Dr. Willet denies (as he there
cites him) and the plain words of the Scripture do also oppose him in Joh. 16.
32. I am not alone, the Father is with me. Now if the Father Joh. 16. 32.
was present with him, then he had communion with his Father all the while that
his Disciples did leave him alone; for that place does tell us, that these
words of Christ do refer to the whole time of his sufferings while his
Disciples should leave him alone; he told his Disciples that when the Shepherd
was smitten, they should be scattered, Matthew. 26. 31. Yea said Christ, Joh.
16. 32. The hour is now come that ye shall be scattered, and ye shall leave
me alone, and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me, in respect of
inward support.

2 On the other hand, if Mr. Nortons expressions do own that Christ suffered no
more in the point of the pain of loss, Sometimes Mr. Norton makes the pain of
loss to be no more but the want of the sense of the savor of God for a time.
save only the sense of the favor of God, and but only for a time as his
expressions are in page 118. Then he holds that Christ suffered no more in the
point of the pain of loss, than many a child of God does suffer in the work of
their conversion, who do notwithstanding at the very same time partake of the
good things of the promise, as Regeneration, Reconciliation, Justification, and
Adoption: And then also, if Mr. Norton hold that Christ in his desertion
suffered no more than this, he does crosseshins with his other Principle in p
123. That the execution of the evil of the Curse denies communion (but not
union) with God; but it is out of all controversy that Christ had communion
with God in other things, although Mr. Nortons supposition were true, that he
was deprived of the sense of his favor.

The Judicious Reader will soon perceive that the pain of loss in the
essentials of it, must needs produce greater sufferings then only the loss of
the sense of Gods favor for a time, and Mr. Norton himself does acknowledge as
much in page 113. The pain of loss (says he) consists not in the mere want of
the favor or love of God; The Reprobates, whether men or devils, are always
hated of God, etc. And secondly, says Dr. Ames, Privation is the loss of an
infinite good. And thirdly, These Scriptures rightly expounded, will put more
misery on the pain of loss (taken essentially) then only the In his Marrow c.
16. These. 2.
want of the sense of the favor of God for a time. Matthew. 7. 23. Matthew. 25.
41. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.

3 I will here produce one passage more from Mr. Norton, in Mr. Norton cannot
maintain his penal hell in this life, without Gods extraordinary ^^spensation.
page 120. The dispensation of God (says he) is either extraordinary or
ordinary; According to the ordinary dispensation of God (says he) the paints
of Hell cannot be suffered in this life; but according to the extraordinary
dispensation of God, Christ not only could, but did suffer the pains of Hell in
this life.

Reply 5. Ere while he said that the pain of loss was only the loss of the
sense of the favor of God for a time; if his sufferings were no more then so,
then it is evident, that God, in the course of his ordinary dispensation, does
suffer many of his children in this life to be wholly bereft of the sense of
his favor for a time: Therefore in this case, what need is there that Mr.
Norton should fly to Gods extraordinary dispensation, except he think that
the pain of sense, over and above the pain of loss, could not be suffered
without an extraordinary dispensation?

According to Gods ordinary dispensation, he grants that Christ could not
suffer Hell Torments in this life: But (says he) he suffered them by an
extraordinary dispensation, and yet according to Gods ordinary dispensation the
Saints have suffered the pains of Sheol.

Now let the Reader judge what a refuge he is forced to fly unto to support
his grand Maxim; and how far he yields the case unto the Dialogue, seeing he
cannot maintain what he would maintain, but by Gods extraordinary dispensation.

It is a poor piece of Divinity to maintain that for the only truth, and to
condemn the contrary for damnable Heresy, and yet have no better proof to fly
unto for the support of it, than Gods extraordinary dispensation.

Out of all doubt Purgatory, and the Miracles that are in the legend of Saints
may pass for current truth, if they may but fly to Gods extraordinary
dispensation, without demonstration of Scripture.

SECT. 4.
Mr. Norton goes on to explain his first distinction in page 8. in these words.

The Accidental part of the punishment of the Curse is all the rest of the
penal evil thereof, and befalls the Reprobate, not from that Curse simply, but
from the disposition of the Patient under that Curse. Of these accidental parts
of punishment (which if you please may well pass under the name of penal
adjuncts) are final and total separation from God, total and final despair,
final death in sin, duration of punishment for ever, the place of punishment,
etc.

Reply 1 THe Reader may please to take notice that (except Mr. Norton intend
more under this unlimited word etc.) here is instanced only such penal evils as
are competible to a sinner under damnation executed; But the precedent parts of
punishment that flow upon sinners from the curse in this life the Death in sin
is the essential Curse in Genesis 2. 17.
does not mention; and whether he hold any of them to be essential parts of the
curse, or no, he has not expressed his meaning; but in his vindication of Genesis
2. 17. he places death in sin as well as death for sin within the compass of
the term Death, equally flowing from the curse there mentioned; some
particulars of that death in sin may be thus instanced; 1 The loss of Gods
Image. 2 Corruption of nature. 3 Servitude under sin, and Satan.

4 Gods punishing one sin with another; These and the like are In mar. l. r. c.
12. These. 45, 46, 47.
reckoned up by Dr. Ames, and he does show four ways how they have the
respect of punishment.

Now if Christ bare all the essentials of the Curse, then he must bear this of
death in sin, as I have more at large opened the true sense of Genesis 2. 17. in
Chap. 2. Sect. 3.

But fear of manifest blasphemy will deny that Christ bare this essential
punishment of the Curse, and thence it will also follow, that either Christ
bare not all the essentials, or that death in sin is not essential, though it
flow essentially from the said Curse.

2 If Mr. Norton hold that the punishment of death in sin which does befall all
mankind in this life, is not (de jure, by due desert as it is a rule of
relative justice) of its own nature an essential punishment flowing naturally
and essentially from the said curse, but rather by accident; then let him show
how the said death in sin does not proceed from that curse simply, but only
from the condition of the Patient under the curse; but I believe it will
trouble his patience to make a clear Answer to this.

In his first Argument; in page 10. He says, this sentence (In the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall dye the death) was universal, given to Adam as a
public person, and holds all his posterity, Genesis 2. 17.
whether Elect or Reprobate, in case of sin, guilty of death; by death I
suppose he means death in the latitude of it, according to his exposition of
Genesis 2. 17. and there namely in page 20. he says, that the death there spoken
of is the wages of sin, Romans 5. 21. and Romans 6. 23. That is, all evil (the
evil of Adams sin excepted) in one word; therefore (says he) equivalent to an
universal comprehending all kinds of death.

Reply 2. From hence the Reader may take notice of these two expressions, 1
That he makes that word Death, to comprehend all kind of death. 2 That the
death there spoken of, is the wages of sin.

To me this is a piece of strange Divinity, that Mr. Norton should hold the
wages of sin to be either essential (namely such as flows from sin as the
proper wages thereof) or else such as is accidental, namely such as is not the
proper wages and desert of sin, but as it proceeds from the condition or
disposition of the Patient under the said wages, and due desert of sin.

SECT 5.
Mr. Norton still proceeds to explain his first Distinction, in page 8. in
these words.

Absolute separation, disunion, or dis-covenanting with God, is a consequent
of Reprobation, not of the essence of Punishment, because the Elect,
notwithstanding the commination stood in full force against them, yet they
continued elected, and in Covenant with Christ; The Elect were in Christ,
before they were in Adam.

Reply 1. I Suppose Mr. Nortons meaning is, That the Elect were in Christ
virtually before they were in Adam actually. Hence I infer, that in the same
sense they were elected in Christ, they were elected to be partakers of Christ,
and his Ransom; if so, then I cannot see how the commination could stand in
Seeing the Elect were in Christ virtually, before they were in Adam actually it
proves that eternal death did not stand in full force against them, but a
spiritual death only.
full force against them, seeing (according to that Election) they were by him
redeemed from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. Enmity slain, Ephesians. 2. 16. no
condemnation to them, Romans 8. 1. and the handwriting that was against them
taken away, Col. 2. 14.

2 I confess I am at a loss to find out the force of Mr. Nortons reason here
given; But it may be it will the better appear, when it is drawn into the form
of an Argument. And thus it may run.

If the Elect were in Christ before they were in Adam, and continued elected in
Christ though the commination stood in full force against them: Then absolute
separation, disunion, and dis-covenanting with God, is a consequent of
Reprobation, not of the essence of Punishment.

But the Elect were in Christ before they were in Adam, and continued elected
in Christ, though the commination stood in full force against them.

Therefore absolute separation, disunion, and dis-covenanting with God, is a
consequent of Reprobation; But not of the essence of Punishment.

Suppose the Antecedent part of the first Proposition were granted (though it
cannot be all granted) yet I cannot see strength enough in it to make good the
consequence.

It is no good way of reasoning to argue, what is essential, or not essential
in the Curse, from the event, namely from what de facto was executed, or not
executed on the Elect, seeing betwixt them, and the Curse, the Covenant of
grace does (and from eternity did) virtually interpose, by Christ and his
Ransom.

It is more proper to judge what de jure does essentially flow from the curse
to such as (being the proper subjects of the Curse) remain under it, without
any interposition of Christ, and his Ransom by the Covenant of Grace.

3 I propound this to consideration, from a passage of Mr. Nortons in page 117.
Gods rejection (says he) as it is the Antecedent, not the cause of sin; so it
is also the Antecedent, and not the cause of condemnation: Reprobation (says
he) is an act of absolute Lordship and Sovereignty, not of Justice;
Condemnation (that is, the judicial sentencing to punishment for sin) is an act
of Justice, not of Lordship; no Reprobate suffers the smart of his finger,
because a Reprobate, but because a sinner.

Here I might by way of Parenthesis insert this Query; Was Adam rejected? and
was that the Antecedent to Adams sin? And were not all mankind once in Covenant
with God in Adams innocence?

4. I say, that absolute separation, disunion, or dis-covenanting with God, is
a part of that condemnation and judicial sentencing unto punishment for sin,
Matthew. 22. 13. Matthew. 25. 41. Matthew. 7. 23. 2 These. 1. 9. See further also in
Dr. Ames his Marrow of Divinity, l. 1^^. 16. n. 7.

5 If total and absolute separation and disunion with God, etc. be a
consequent only of Reprobation, then it proceeds only from Gods Lordship and
Sovereignty (as Mr. Nortons words speak) but in Rev. 20. 12. it proceeds from
justice. The dead were judged according to their works, not according to Gods
Lordship, nor Reprobation. And says Dr. Ames, The hatred of Reprobation does
not inflict evil, but the desert of the In his Marrow (...). 1. 6. 25. n. 38.
creature coming between.

6 The same thing may be both a consequent of Reprobation, and a proper effect
of justice, as Mr. Norton himself also acknowledges in page 111. The legal
dis-covenanting (says he) of the probate for their sin which they have
committed, is the effect of justice; that being dis-covenanted they fall into
the bottomless pit, is also an effect of justice, but totality and finality of
their disunion with God without recovery by the Covenant of Grace, is a
consequent of Reprobation.

And why may it not be as truly said, That the legal discovenanting of the
Reprobates, and their falling into the bottomless pit, are consequents of
reprobation, as say, that totality and finality of disunion with God is a
consequent of reprobation? they are alike consequents of reprobation, not
proper effects of it, but rather effects of sin intervening, and consequently
proper effects of Vindicative justice.

SECT. 6.
But Mr. Norton does still explain his first Distinction, in these words, in
page 8.

Sin is not of the Essence of Punishment, because Essential punishment is a
satisfaction unto Justice for injury done; but sin is a continuing of the
injury, and a provocation of, not a satisfaction unto justice.

2 Says he, Essential punishment is an effect of justice, of which God is the
Author; But it is blasphemy to say that God the Author of sin.

3 Says he, The Elect suffer no part of penal punishment, yet are left unto
sin (for a time) This in the Parenthesis was in his Manuscript.

4 Says he, in page 118. The sinful qualities of the damned proceed not from
Hell Torments as an effect from the cause. The torments of Hell are an effect
and execution of justice, whereof God is the Author; Sinful qualities are a
defect, not an effect, therefore they have a deficient, not an efficient cause,
therefore of them God cannot be the Author.

5 Says he in page 118. Christ suffered the Essential punishment, but was
without sin.

These five Reasons Mr. Norton has given to prove that sin in fallen man, and
sinful qualities, are not Essential, but Accidental to the Curse.

His first Reason examined.
MR. Norton says, That sin is not of the Essence of punishment, because sin is
not a satisfaction to justice (but rather a provocation of it) for injury done.

Reply 1. But says Dr. Ames, Punishment is an evil inflicted on the sinner for
sin, In his Marrow l. 1. c. 12. n. 10, 11. This is a more proper definition of
punishment than Mr. Nortons.

Original sin, as it was from Gods justice, was an evil inflicted Death in sin
is an evil inflicted by God as the essential punishment of Adams sin, and was a
satisfaction to justice, till it pleased God to make an alteration by the
Covenant of Grace.
of God on man's nature in general, as a satisfaction to justice, and so it was
a vindicative punishment, till Christ was revealed; to difference the Elect
from the Reprobate by the Covenant of Grace, Sect. 1. Sect. 3.

2 Besides the punishment of original sin, God does often punish men's personal
sins with sin, which in some sort may also be said to be a satisfaction unto
justice; But as that sin does proceed from man's disobedience to Gods Command,
so it is a new and further provocation.

His second Reason examined.
Mr. Norton says, That Essential punishment, is an effect of justice, of which
God is the Author; But says he, It is blaspherry to say that God is the Author
of sin.

Reply 2. It is granted that sin, as it is sin, namely as it is a transgression
of Gods Law, is not from God as the Author of it; But yet when man does act
voluntarily without any compulsion from God (and to hold otherwise were
blasphemy) that sin as it is vindicative from God, is a fruit and curse of
former sin, carrying with it the respect of punishment; so taken it is neither
blasphemy, nor unsound Divinity, to say that God is the Author of it; And thus
original sin was from Gods justice inflicted on all mankind for Adams
Covenant-sin. And Mr. Norton himself says thus in page 118. in that
Proposition, God punishes sin with sin; the futurition of sin is to be
distinguished from sin it self: The infallible and penal futurition of sin is
an effect of justice.

The Reader will see cause to take his meaning to be an Essential effect of
justice; and for this see also Dr. Ames in his Marrow l. 1, c. 12. n. 45, 46,
47. And sundry others of the Learned do say, That God is not permissive, but
active also, as a just Judge, in some sins of men, from these and the like
Scriptures, 2 Samuel 16. 10. 2 King. 22. 22, 23. Romans 1. 26. Ezekiel. 14. 9.

His third Reason examined.
Mr. Norton says, That the Elect, though they suffer no part of penal justice,
yet they are left unto sin for a time.

Reply 3. I have said often that original sin was penal justice in The
punishments that the Elect suffer, are de jure penal justice, but in the issue
de fact^ are not.
Adam, till it please God to make an alteration by revealing the Covenant of
Grace.

And so also the punishments that the Elect do suffer since the Covenant of
Grace was revealed, are, de jure penal justice, though in the issue de facto
they are not. To be under the power of sin, though but in part, and so likewise
to be under temptations, afflictions, bodily death, etc. are the due wages of
sin, effects of the Curse flowing from it, as such in themselves, and by their
own nature, though God is pleased by the Covenant of Grace to alter the nature
of them to the Elect; and Mr. Nortons own words do testify that the Elect do
suffer that de jure, which is penal justice; for in Page 10. Argument 1. he
says thus, This sentence, namely Genesis 2. 17. was universal, given to Adam, as
a Genesis 2. 17.
public person, and holds all his posterity, whether Elect or Reprobate, in
case of sin, guilty of death.

His fourth Reason examined.
Mr. Norton says, That sinful qualities are a defect not an effect, they have
a deficient, not an efficient cause, and therefore of them God cannot be the
Author.

Reply 4. I may say, the same of natural death, it is a defect, therefore it
has a deficient, and not an efficient cause, and darkness also is a defect,
therefore it has a deficient, and not an efficient cause. Now let Mr. Norton
show how either of these have God for their Author, and when that is done, he
may see the weakness of his reason; If he be unwilling to answer, then Dr.
Ames does answer the former in these words; Death is not from God as he did
ordain nature, but it is from God as taking vengeance on sin; And Dr. Willet
does answer the latter; he first Death is not from God as he did ordain
nature, but it is from Gods justice as a punishment for original sin. The like
may be said of eternal death, it is from Gods justice, as a punishment of
original sin to such as do not repent and believe in the promised seed. See Dr.
Ames Mar. l. 1 c. 12. n. 31. Dr. Willet in ^o. 5. Q 22. in Ans. to Obj 2. Bar.
Traheron on Rev. 4. P. Mar. in Com pl. part 1. p. 190.
makes this Objection, If Death be the punishment of sin, then God should be
the Author of death, because he is the Author of punishment: He answers thus,
As God created light, darkness he created not, but disposed of it; so he made
not death, but (as it is a punishment) God as a disposer rather, and a just
judge, than an Author, inflicted it. And Bar. Traheron answers his Objecter
thus; Will you say, That death came into the world by the envy of the Devil,
ergo, it was not ordained of God? Did God, as Isaia^ teaches (Chap. 30. 33.)
ordain Gehenna from yesterday (that is to say, from eternity) and not death?
and so says he, Sin came not into the world besides Gods Ordinance. And to
this purpose speaks Peter Martyr of the Privation of Gods Image in Adam, and of
Original sin, as I have cited him in Chap. 2. Sect. 3. ult. So then sin, as it
is a punishment, has an efficient, as well as a deficient cause.

His fifth Reason examined.
Mr. Norton says, That Christ suffered the Essential punishment, and yet was
without sin.

Reply 5. Christ's sufferings do all arise from the voluntary cause, and not
from natural causes as ours do, namely from a voluntary positive Law, and not
from the moral Law. But whether Christ suffered the essential punishment or no,
is the great business of this dispute. The Dialogue denies it all along; let
the judicious Reader judge whether this be fair disputing to bring in such a
Proposition as is in controversy (and which he knows beforehand will be
denied) as a reason to confirm another doubtful point, this is no better than a
begging of the Question.

And now I leave it to the judicious Reader to judge whether his five Reasons
have weight sufficient in them, to prove, that sin as it is vindicative from
God, flows not from the curse Essentially; and his own words on Genesis 2. 17.
which I have cited in my former Reply to his third Reason, do affirm as much,
and his words also in page 37. Judicial punishment (says he) of sin with sin;
but in his Manuscript copy, it is, penal punishment of sin with sin, is an act
of vindicative justice. The Reader may understand him to mean it of the
essential part of justice.

6 I will examine that passage in page 118.

The sinful qualities of the damned (says he) proceed not from Helltorments as
an Effect from the Cause.

Reply 6. It is worth examination what he means by the sinful qualities of the
damned, whether such as they carry with them to Hell, or the multiplication of
sin when they come there, flowing from that sinful habit which they brought
with them thither.

The former may properly be called sinful qualities, the latter, sinful acts
proceeding from that sinful habit of original sin; And of these latter Dr. Ames
does tell us, That they have more respect of punishment, than sin. In like sort
the Sum of Divinity In his Mar, l. 1. c. 16. n. 10, 11.
set forth by John Downame, page 254. makes hatred against God (in the damned)
and final desperation, to be a great part of their punishment, as the Dialogue
does. See also Peter Martyrs Answer to Piggbius, in Chap. 2. prope finem.

SECT. 7.
Still Mr. Norton explains his first Distinction in these words.

Duration for ever, and the place of punishment, are adjuncts, as the nature of
them sufficiently shows.

Reply IT is beyond my capacity, I confess, to judge whether the eternal
estate both of Elect and Reprobate after this life, do come within the compass
of a Physical adjunct of time; all things are called Eternal that were before
the Creation of the world, because there is no setting of them out by any
measure of time; and why should we think of any Physical adjunct of time after
this world is ended? shall there be Physical bodies, and time then, as there is
now? I wish the Learned to resolve this point; Eternity (says Rutherfurd, In
Christ dying) is not such a particular duration, as time is, that has a poor
point to begin with, and end at.

Mr. Norton makes this point of duration to be an adjunct only to
Hell Torments, by a comparison taken from the inability of the debtor to pay,
and therefore he continues in prison. But to this I have already answered in
the second Section of this Chapter.

SECT. 8.
Giving some Reasons why Mr. Nortons Judgment cannot be sound in this Point of
Christ^ suffering of the essential curse.

Reason 1.
BEcause he does often confute and contradict his foundation-Principles.

For 1. whereas the Dialogue does propound this Quere, Did Christ suffer the
torments of hell in his Body as well as in his Soul, to redeem our Bodies as
well as our Souls from hell torments?

His Answer in page 120. is this; It is evident, that as Christ suffered the
torments of hell in kind in his Soul; so who can deny but he suffered also
bodily torments, equivalent to the torments of Hell, though not inflicted after
the same manner.

Reply 1. Any man may see that in this Answer he does plainly contradict and
confute his first principal Proposition, and also his Assertion in his first
Distinction; for in this and in other places also, he does affirm, That Christ
suffered the essential punishment of the curse, and in page 123. he says, That
Christ both in Soul and Body was separated from all participation of the good
of the promise for a time; but in his Answer he dares not venture to say, that
he suffered the torments of hell in his body in kind, as he did in his soul;
But instead of making a clear Answer to my Quere, he propounds another Quere,
Who can deny, says he, but that he suffered also bodily torments equivalent to
the torments of hell? His first groundwork was, that Christ suffered in a way
of exact justice the essential punishment of the curse of the Law, and now he
flies to the word Equivalent; all that know any thing of the strict justice of
the Law, do know that it will not alter one jo^ from the punishment threatened
in kind, to that which is equivalent; if Mr. Norton (being now put to a pinch)
to answer this Quere, will allow of so much alteration from the letter of the
Law to equivalency, then he does also affirm, that the Law was relaxed to make
a new Covenant for equivolency, and yet in page 146. and in page 174 he denies
acceptilation, and thus he crosses himself up and down, and stands not fast to
his first groundwork.

2 He crosses his first groundwork in page 121. It is sufficient, says he,
to integrate, and make up the execution of the full measure of wrath upon
Christ, that if his bodily torments were not equal to the bodily torments of
the damned, yet what was not executed on his body, was made up in his soul.

Reply 2. He that has but half an eye may see that in this Answer, he does
fully overthrow his first fundamental Proposition, and his first Distinction,
for in those places he has affirmed that Christ suffered the very Essential
Torments of Hell, in kind; but now he says it is sufficient to integrate, and
make up the full execution of the full measure of wrath, that what was not
executed on his body, was made up in his soul; first, he confesses that
Christ did not suffer the full essential Curse in his body, and then by some
Revelation he knows that what was not executed on his body was made up in his
soul; believe him that list, and yet he crosses this also in page 123* for
there he says, That Christ both in soul and body, was separated from all
participation of the good of the promise for a time; And thus he makes the
eternal Curse in Genesis 2. 17. one while to be executed in kind only, and another
while to be arbitrary, and to be suffered either in kind, or else in that
which is equivalent; he allows a less punishment to his body, and so much
more to his soul; doubtless he must know this by some private Revelation, for
he cannot find any Scripture that is rightly interpreted that will own it.

But yet Mr. Norton does labor to prove it thus:

The measure of Hell-pains (says he) is made up without bodily pains in the
Angels that fell.

Reply 3. What a deceitful kind of reasoning is this, for all men know that the
fallen Angels have no bodies, and therefore they must needs suffer the full
measure of Hell Torments, without bodily Torments.

And in page 122. (he says according to his fundamental Proposition) That
Christ was tormented without any forgiveness, God spared him nothing of the
due debt.

Reply 4. But Mr. Norton does plainly cross this Assertion also; for he said
formerly, that what was not executed on his body, was made up in his soul; here
he acknowledges that Christ had some forgiveness, in respect of his bodily
Torments.

And in page 122. He says, That Christ had not so much as the least drop of
water to ease him in the least particle of his suffering that was due to him
according to justice, but was wholly forsaken in respect of any participation
of the sense of the good of the promise for a time.

Reply 5. This he does also plainly cross, for in page 68. he does
acknowledge that Christ had a taste of consolation in the time of his Agony in
the Garden, so that he does sometimes give Christ a taste of consolation under
his Essential Torments, and sometimes not a drop of consolation; either he must
confess that Christ was not yet under the essential punishment of the Curse in
the Garden, or else he must confess that his Position in page 122. is not
true; But he does affirm, That Christ suffered the essential Cu^s^ in the
Garden, in page 70. in these words, He had clods, rather then drops, streaming
down his blessed body, a thing which neither was heard or seen, before, nor
since. And says he, The true reason thereof is, Christ dyed as a sinner
imputatively, pressed under the sense of the wrath of God, and conflicting with
eternal death. And in page 121. Christ suffered the Torments of Hell upon the
Cross, where he bare the moral Curse, Gal. 3. 13. and in the Garden.

Hence it follows, that by these two last places he does justify his former
Position in page 122. but still that is contradictory which I cited in page 68.
And thus Mr. Norton does confute and contradict himself; and being uncertain in
his principles, he leaves the truth of Christ's satisfaction uncertain to a
scrutinous conscience.

Mr. Samuel Heiron says in page 244. That the extremity of Hell Torments is
made known to us two ways.

1 By the universality of them, in every part. 2 In that they continue without
intermission, after they are once begun.
1 Mr. Norton does cross both these Positions; For first, he allows some ease
to the body of Christ, though he says, It was made up in his soul. And
secondly, He had also some drop of consolation to his soul in the Garden.

2 He also grants an intermission after Hell Torments were begun upon Christ;
for in page 68. Christ, says he, had his interims of respite, and in the
Garden an interval of consolation, otherwise, says he, He could not have
fulfilled that which is written of him. But if this reason be sound and good,
why he had an interval of consolation in the Garden, then by the same reason
he must have an interval of consolation on the Cross; for when he was in his
greatest Torments on the Cross, and ready to give up his soul, then he
remembered that something must be fulfilled that was written of him, for so does
John tell us, Joh. 19. 28. Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished,
and that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said, I thirst; Wherefore did he
say, I Joh. 19. 28.
thirst? the answer is, because he remembered that that Scripture in Ps. 69. 21.
must be fulfilled, and therefore he said, I thirst. When Jesus therefore had
received the vinegar (for the fulfilling of that Prophecy) he said, It is
finished, and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost: Therefore no extremity
of Torments did confound his memory Joh. 19. 30.
and will, from fulfilling of what ever was written; but though Mr. Norton does
allow some interims of respite to Christ in the Garden, yet otherwhiles he
says, That Christ (whiles he was in the Garden) began not merely to be amazed,
but also to be very heavy. The word (says he) notes Expavefaction, which was
such a motion of his mind, superadded to his consternation, whereby for the
time he was dis-inabled as concerning the minding of any thing else, being
wholly taken up with the dreadful sense of the righteous wrath of God; he must
have a better head then I, that can reconcile his former speech, and this
latter speech together; before he said, that Christ had his interims of respite
in the Garden, and an interval of consolation, or Mr. Norton imputes the sin of
unmindfulnesse to Christ in time of executing his office.
else he could not have minded the fulfilling of that which was written of him;
but now he says, that in the Garden, he was in such a motion in his mind,
whereby for the time he was disinabled as concerning the minding of any thing
else; It is strange that he should not be able to mind any thing else; and yet
in his greatest torments on the Cross, we see, he was able to mind that one
Scripture to be fulfilled, therefore he said, I thirst: Therefore I conclude
that this interpretation of Christ's fear and heaviness in the Garden, by
amazement, and by such a motion of his mind as dis-inabled him from the minding
of any thing else but the sense of the dreadful wrath of God, is a most
dangerous imputation of sin to Christ in the time of the execution of his
Priestly Office, as I have noted it in Mar. 1433. in Chap. 17. Sect. 4. And
though Dr. Williams does hold that Christ suffered both the pain of Loss, and
the pain of Sense, in page 437. yet in page 447. he says, In his seven golden
Candlesticks, p. 437. 4. 17.
That all the Divine comforts were not detained from him on the Cross, when he
said, My God, My God, Why have thou forsaken me.

Hence it follows that Mr. Nortons judgment cannot be sound, because he does
so often contradict himself, and that Scripture of Joh. 19. 28.

My second Reason why Christ did not suffer the Essential Torments of Hell.
Reason 2.

If Christ made satisfaction by suffering the Essential punishment Payment in
kind does justify the Elect actually as soon as they have life in the womb.
of the Curse in our stead; Then it does necessarily follow, that all the Elect
are actually justified as soon as ever they have life in the womb, and
therefore before they can have any actual faith: (This opinion of Mr. Nortons
does strongly support the Antinomian Tenent.)

But says Mr. Woodbridge, It is evident by Scripture, That none In his Sermon
of justification ^ay faith, p. 22.
are actually justified till they have faith; and the ground of this is (says
he) because the death of Christ was not solutio ejusdem, but tantidem, not the
payment of that which was in the obligation but the equivalent, being not the
payment of the Debtor, but of the Surety, and therefore it does not deliver
ipso facto, but according to the compact and agreement between the Father and
him, when he undertook to be our Surety. If a Debtor (says he) bring me what
he ows me, it discharges him presently; But the payment of a Surety is a
payment that is refusable in itself, and therefore it effects not the discharge
of the principal Debtor, but at the time, and according to the conditions
between the Surety and the Creditor, and that time agreed on, was not till
those that live to years of discretion have actual faith.

My third Reason why Christ did not suffer the Essential Reason 3.
Punishment of the Curse.
If Christ made satisfaction by paying our proper Debt, in kind, Payment in
kind leaves no room for the exercising of Gods free pardon.
then there is no place left for pardon; But it is evident that God does daily
pardon believing sinners of his m^er grace and mercy, yea according to the
greatness of his mercy, as the Dialogue shows, page 31. 154, 156, etc. And the
ground of this is because the death of Christ, was not solutio ejusdem, but
tantidem.

1 If in, and with Christ (says Mr. Wotton) we have formerly satisfied the
justice of God, then there is no place left for pardon; De Recons peccatoris
part. 2. l. 1. c. 21. Sect 8.
for the same man, for the same offense cannot be both punished and pardoned
by God, because pardon and punishment are directly contrary.

2 Says Mr. Baxter; If the proper Debt either of obedience or suffering be
paid, either by our selves, or by any other, then there is no place left for
pardon, for when the Debt is paid, we owe nothing (except obedience de novo)
and therefore can have nothing forgiven us; for the Creditor cannot refuse the
proper debt, nor deny an acquittance upon the receipt thereof. In his Apho: of
Just. p. 169


But Christ having paid the Tar^^ndem, and not the idem, the value, and not the
strict debt: This satisfaction the Father might have chosen to accept, or to
have discharged us upon Christ's suffering, which yet because he did freely
accept, therefore his gracious act is properly called, Pardon.

3 Says Mr. Baxter in page 143. By reason of the obligation upon us, we our
selves were bound to undergo the punishment, therefore Christ's punishment was
not in the obligation, but only ours, and so the Law was not fully executed but
relaxed; And whereas the satisfaction of Christ is called a gracious
acceptance, a gracious imputation, etc. How can any man, says Baxter call it
thus; If it were the same thing that the Law required that Christ paid? to pay
all according to the full exaction of the obligation, needs no favor to
procure acceptance.

4 The chief Argument of Grotius and Vossius (says Mr. Baxter in Appendix 39.)
is drawn from the Tenure of the obligation, and from the event. The obligation
charge punishment upon the offender himself (only) I^ the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall dye. Now if the same in the obligation is paid, then the Law
is executed, and not relaxed; and then every sinner must dye himself, for that
is the idem, and the very thing threatened; so that here, Dum alius solvit,
simul aliud solvitur; The Law threatened not Christ, but us. Besides, Christ
suffered not the loss of Gods love, nor his image and graces, nor eternity of
Torment.

5 Every seventh year was a year of releasing Debts, Deuteronomy. 15. 1. figuring the
year of Gods grace by Christ, by whom we have obtained of God the release of
our debts, that is, the forgiveness of our sins, Luke 4. 18. Mat. 6. 12. Mar.
11. 25. this figured, that we should be kind one to another, forgiving one
another even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4. 32. Col. 3. 12,
13. Luke 6. 35, 36. Now Releasements of a debt, and exact payment either by our
selves, or by our Surety, cannot possibly stand with kindness and mercy: This
overthrows Popish satisfaction, and quenches the fire of Purgatory, says
Marbeck, and say I, this does overthrow Mr. Nortons Tenent that will allow no
other satisfaction but the suffering of the Essential Curse, in kind, by our
Surety; and so consequently, he leaves no room for Gods gracious releasment of
our debts.

My fourth Reason is this.
Because it is exceeding derogatory to the infinite satisfaction of Christ's
sacrifice to place full satisfaction in Christ's sufferings of the Essential
Torments of Hell on the Cross, before the To affirm full satisfaction by
suffering Helltorments before the compleatment of Christ's death, does derogate
from the sufficiency of his death and sacrifice.
formality of his Death and Sacrifice, which was ordained to be the
compleatment of all satisfaction, and therefore full satisfaction cannot be the
final end of suffering Hell Torments as Mr. Norton makes it to be. For in p.
32. he says, That Christ suffered the essential penal wrath of God, which
(says he) does answer the suffering of the second Death, before he suffered
his natural death. Here the Reader may take notice that Mr. Norton makes the
final end of Christ's sufferings to be for full satisfaction, and to be
accomplished before his death, and so consequently, he makes Christ's Death and
Sacrifice to be altogether vain and needless as to the point of satisfaction;
such a poysonful assertion as this, may soon poison a great deal of Divine
Scripture-truth. But of satisfaction by the Death and Sacrifice of Christ, I
shall speak more hereafter, especially in Chap. 17.

My fifth Reason is in Chap. 5.
To affirm that Christ suffered the Essential Torments of Hell, is to affirm
that Christ suffered from Gods hatred, for the Essential Torments of Hell is
inflicted from Gods hatred. See Chap. 5.

Chap. 6. and almost every other Chapter, affords a distinct Argument against
Hell Torments, which the Reader will easily observe; But I will propound this
one at present for my sixth Reason.

My sixth Reason is in Chap. 12.
The true nature of all Christ's greatest sufferings are called Chastisements in
Esa. 53. 5. therefore they cannot be the Essential Torments of Hell from Gods
vindicative wrath.

CHAP. V.
His second Distinction examined, which is this, in Page 9.

Distinguish between the wrath of God, and the hatred of God.

Wrath is sometimes taken for Hatred; and then it signifies Reprobation, etc.
Though God in the second sense, not in the first, may be said to be wroth with
Christ, yet in no sense could God be said ever to hate Christ.

God bates both persons and sins of the Reprobates; he hates sin in the Surety,
and in the Elect, but he ever loved their persons.

With this compare another speech of Mr. Nortons in page 113. Then (says he)
the pain of Loss consists not in the mere want of the love or favor of God;
for the Reprobates, Men, or Devils, are always hated of God, Gods Love and
Hatred are Eternal and Immutable.


Reply 1. THough it be granted that the Hitted of God signifies Reprobation,
yet there is also a Hatred of God that reaches unto Eternity.

This cannot be Reprobation, for these two Reasons. The essential Torments of
Hell is from Gods hatred to affirm therefore that Christ suffered the essential
Torments of Hell, is to affirm that Christ suffered from Gods hatred.


1 The hatred of Reprobation, says Dr. Ames, in his Marrow l. 1. c. 25. n. 38.
does only deny good, but does not inflict evil, save only by the desert of the
creature coming between.

This hatred of God does inflict the evil of the curse upon the damned,
Therefore it is a hatred that is distinct from that of Reprobation.

2 This hatred is Eternal; for though Reprobation be from Eternity in God, yet
it is not Eternal; and the reason is, because the end of Gods Reprobation is
the manifestation of his justice, Romans 9. 22. and when Gods justice is
manifested, and the Curse executed; then the end is obtained, and so
Reprobation cease. See Dr. Ames in Marrow l. 1. c. 25. These. 32.

Reply 2. In propriety of speech, God is without all passions of anger, wrath,
hatred, etc. these things are ascribed to God after the manner of men, when God
does that which does make us think him to be angry, and to hate, because we do
so when we are angry, and when we do hate.

Hence it follows, that seeing Mr. Norton holds that God did execute the
Essential punishment of Hell Torments upon Christ, as they are due to
Reprobates, that God must do it in hatred to him, as well as to the Reprobates;
and so the Hebrew Doctors in Chap. 15. expound the term Second death (from whom
it is taken) to be a perpetual misery in the hatred of God; And so says Mr.
Ruthersurd in Christ's dying, page 35. 39. The Hell of the Reprobates is a
satisfactory pain, and 2 It flows from the hatred of God.

But says Mr. Norton, Though God did execute the Essentials upon Christ, yet
in no sense could be be said ever to hate Christ.

But how can it be avoided? perhaps Mr. Norton will say, because God did not
execute the accidental and circumstantial parts of the Curse upon Christ.

But may it not be more truly said, because Christ did not deserve the
Essentials? Let the unpartial Reader judge between us.

CHAP. VI.
Mr. Nortons third Distinction in Page 9. examined, which is this:

Distinguish concerning Imputation of sin.

Imputation of sin is either of the commission of sin, or of the guilt of sin:
guilt taken not for the commission of sin, but for the obligation to punishment
for sin committed; sin is imputed to Christ in the latter sense.


Reply 1. I Grant that Gods imputation of sin, is either of sin it self, or of
guilt, or rather of both, for they are correlates, and therefore Gods
imputation, whether it be understood of sin it self, or of sin and guilt
j^yntly, It does always in Scripture Language refer to the same subject.

But says Mr. Norton in Page 41. Guilt and Punishments are Relates.

Reply 2. I grant they are always Relates, according to the order of legal
proceedings in Courts of justice; and in this way and order of satisfaction
does Mr. Norton go all along.

But in point of Christ's satisfaction, I go all along in the All Christ's
su^^e^i^gs were from the voluntary cause and covenant, and not from the legal
Court-order of the guilt of our sins impu^ed.
way and order of Voluntary causes, and according to the way and order of those
causes the suffering of punishments is not a Relate to the imputation of sin
preceding: As for example, in the point of trial of Masteries, there the
suffering of punishments is merely and only from the voluntary Cause and
Covenant, both in the Lawmakers, and in the undertakers, and such were all the
sufferings of Christ, they were all from the voluntary Cause and Covenant, and
all his outward sufferings were from his voluntary undertaking (to enter the
lists with Satan, according to Gods declaration in Genesis 3. 15.) and not from
the imputation of the guilt of our sins, according to the order of
Court-justice.

I grant also, that when ever God does punish any one in See Burges on Justif.
p. 27.
anger, it is always from the imputation of sin in the subject; and so says
Mr. Burges, God afflicts none (namely in anger) but where there is sin in the
subject, and in that sense guilt and punishment are Relates; but yet from the
Voluntary cause and Covenant, punishments may be suffered without judicial
imputation, and so consequently without judicial anger. But of this, see more
in my Reply to 2 Cor. 5. 21.

The guilt of Adams sin (says Dr. Reynolds) is inseparable from In his si^
fullness of sin. p. 35.
the sin it self, being the proper passion of it.

Lo! in this short sentence, how he does connex guilt and punishment
inseparably to Adams first sin; he makes his guilt to be the proper passion of
his first sin. And hence it follows necessarily, according to Mr. Norton. That
the guilt of Adams sin being imputed to Christ, he must be spiritually dead in
sin, for spiritual death in sin is the proper guilt, and proper passion of
Adams first sin. This I hinted at in the Dialogue. And of this see more in
Chap. 2. in R. 2. ult.

If original sin had not been ordained in Gods justice to be the proper guilt
and punishment of Adams first sin, then it would follow that Adams eating of
the forbidden fruit had been no sin: And now compare Mr. Nortons distinction to
the guilt of Adams sin, Imputation of guilt (says he) is the obligation to
punishment: By this Doctrine it follows, that Christ did suffer the guilt and
punishment of Adams first sin, namely, a spiritual death in sin.

Truly it makes my heart tremble at this inference; God indeed God imputes the
guilt of Adams first sin to all men, because all mankind were true sinners in
Adam by virtue of Gods Covenant touching man's nature in general.
imputes the guilt of Adams first sin to all the natural posterity of Adam,
because Gods Covenant was made with Adam, and the nature of all mankind in
general, as I have showed in Chap. 2. And in this respect all men are true
sinners in Adam: and therefore truly guilty of the punishment threatened, but so
was not Christ, he was not of Adam by ordinary Generation.

Our guilt (says Mr. Baxter in his Preface to Mr. Air, page 7.) was Reatus
culpae and poenae propter culpam nostram ex obligatione leg is; Christ's guilt
is bat Reatus poenae propter culpam nostram ex voluntaria susceptione, Christ
was Obliga(...)s ad eandem the same in value) but noe E^dem obligatione; And in
his late Reply to Molianaeus, page 224. he does justly tax this kind of
Imputation to be the very root and master veyn of all Antinomianism. And in
page 225. says he, Be it known to you therefore, that Christ did obey and
suffer in the person of a Mediator, and not in persona delinquentis, though for
the sins of the Delinquent (being obliged to suffer by his voluntary
undertaking) and therefore his sufferings, or obedience, are none of ours, as
performed by him.

But M^. Norton in the point of imputing our sins to Christ, does go beyond his
said Distinction, as I apprehend.

For in page 79. ult. He says, That Christ was a notorious Malefact^r, having
upon him the guilt of the sins of the Elect by imputation, and that justly
before God.

In page 98. Whom we have already proved to be the greatest offender, as being
imputatively guilty of all the sins of the Elect, both hanged upon the Cr^sse,
and others.

In page 103. He was the greatest Malefactor imputatively, in Gods account.

Reply 3. In these and other like places he makes our sins as w^ll as our guilt
to be imputed to Christ. But says Peter Martyr, It cannot beshewed out of the
Scripture, that any man is called a In Rom 5. p. 121 b.
sinner, but either he has sin in himself, or else undoubtedly h^e has before
committed sin, unless we will say that God makes men guilty without any sin
committed by them.

P. Martyr, I confess, speaks this of Infants that dye before they have
committed any actual sin; but yet it is a four square truth in general, Turn it
on which side you will, and it will lie fast; he tells Pigg^ius, that God could
not impute the guilt of Adam^ sin to Infants, unless Infants had been first
truly guilty of Adams sin; and it is evident that all Infants, and all the
world are truly guilty of Adams sin, because all mankind were in Adam, not only
naturally, but also legally in regard of the stipulation and covenant between
God and him, as the head of man's nature in general; So that by the force of
that Covenant concerning man's nature in general, all mankind had an interest in
the good of the promise of that Covenant, in case of Adams obedience, and in
the evil of the Curse of that Covenant, in case of his disobedience; and
therefore seeing all had this equal interest in the Covenant of nature, it
follows, that we had an interest in his sin, as well as in his guilt, and
therefore the guilt of his sin is justly imputed to Infants as well as unto
others; and this example does st^ew us that sin and guilt are relates in the
same subject, and not in two distinct subjects, and this David did acknowledge
in Ps. 32. 5. I said I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin: Mark this, he does acknowledge that God did
not only forgive his sin, but the iniquity, guilt, or punishment of his sin
(namely, condemnation, but not all outward punishments) In these words I say it
is evident, that David does acknowledge that sin and guilt do cleave as close
together, as the skin and flesh do to the bones, and the like he does
acknowledge in Psalm. 41. 5. and therefore if the guilt of our sins was imputed
to Christ, then out of doubt sin it self was imputed to Christ also, and so Mr.
Norton does dangerously affirm just as the Antinomians do.

Secondly touching the point of Gods imputation, I believe it cannot be showed
out of the Scripture, that God does impute either guilt or any other thing to
any person, unless the thing imputed have first a real existence in the
subject; as for example, God did not impute says to Abraham for righteousness,
until faith had a real existence in him, as the subject, and the like must be
said of any thing else that God imputes, therefore if God imputed the guilt of
our sins to Christ, then it follows that he was indeed guilty of sin

So that by Mr. Nortons unadvised collections, either Christ was a true
inherent sinner, or else the Father was a true sinner in making a false
imputation; I wish that Mr. Norton may find sound light from the Scriptures to
get himself fairly out of this dilemma. But says Mr. Norton in page 33.


To impute, in Court-language, is judicially to reckon unto a person, either
that which is his properly, and not only as a legal Surety; so sin is imputed
to the offender, Lev. 17. 4. Or that which is not his properly, but as a legal
Surety only; so Philemon may put Onesimus debt upon Paul, ver. 18. Or by Way
of grace; so the word impute is rased ten times in Romans 4.

Reply 4. To impute in Court-language! I wonder where that Court-language is
used in Scripture about Gods proceeding with Christ in point of satisfaction:
Surely the blessed Scriptures have no such language; and therefore surely he had
need to get better proofs than any he has hitherto produced, to prove that
Christ was a Delinquent-surety in law, which I believe he will never be able to
prove, or else his Court-proceedings in point of satisfaction will fail him;
but I conceive I have sufficiently showed in Chap. 2. that Christ was not in
the same obligation with Adam in the first Covenant, and the matter is so
plain, that he that runs may read it in the very letter of the Text; In the day
thou ea^est thereof thou shall dye; Thou as the head of man's nature in general,
thou shall die, as I have showed in chapter 2, Sect. 3. Christ cannot be
comprehended as Adams Surety in this word Thou, unless Mr. Norton will make him
to be one of Adams natural posterity, according to the manner of other men;
Christ was not Adams Sure^y to the first Covenant; none but Adam as he was the
head of man's ^a^^^e in general, was in the first Covenant See also Reply 6.
(...) (...). 17. In his appendix to justif p. 143
besides, the threatening to be suffered is plainly directed to the sinner
himself in person; and therefore Christ was not in that obligation; and
therefore also Mr. Nortons Court-language of imputation of guilt to Christ, as
to our legal Surety, is no Scripturelanguage, it is but human language.

By reason of the obligation upon us (says Mr. Baxter) we our selves were
bound to undergo the punishment; therefore (says he) Christ's punishment was
not in the obligation, but only ours, and so the Law was not fully executed
but relaxed; and whereas the satisfaction of Christ, says he, is called a
gracious acceptance, a gracious imputation, etc. How can any man (says he)
call it so, if it were the same thing that the Law required that Christ paid;
to pay all according to the full exaction of the obligation, needs no favor
to procure acceptance.

This very acknowledgement that Christ's satisfaction was accepted of grace,
does clearly intimate, that Christ was not in the same obligation with Adam, or
else it had been no favor to accept it of him.

The Father (says Mr. Blake) might have refused his discharge from the hand of
Christ, and might have exacted it of the Sea Blake on the Covenant, p. 18.
principal, and Christ also might have refused to make such payment, because he
was not in the obligation; These Reverend Divines, and diverse others, do
plainly see and acknowledge, that Christ was not our Surety in the same
obligation with Adam.

Secondly, as Mr. Norton has found out one clear Scripture, namely, Lev. 17.
4. to prove that God does impute sin properly to the offender; so if he could
have sound out another Scripture as clear, to prove, that God does impute guilt
to one that is no sinner, then he had hit the nayl upon the head; But as for
that place he brings of Philemon, ver. 18. saying, So might Philemon Phil. v.
18.
put Onesimus debt upon Paul, it is not to the purpose, because it is but an
instance of a civil imputation (not divine) from the mere voluntary cause in
Paul, and not from the revenging justice of Pbilemon; of which voluntary offer
much question might be made in a Court of Justice, how far Paul was obliged to
suffer for Onesimus, whether any corpora punishment in kind, or whether a great
sum of money (seeing Paul had a good warrant from Gods Law to moderate in this
case, Deuteronomy. 23. 15.) Suppose that Philemon had demanded of Paul a thousand
pound damage, would Philemons imputing this debt of a thousand pound to Paul in
the behalf of the wrong done by Onesimus, have been accounted a just debt in a
Court of Justice? who is able to clear the intricacies of this instance? I
believe this is no clear instance for a Court of Justice to proceed by in such
like cases, much less is it fit for the present dispute; For our dispute is
about Gods imputing sin and guilt to man, or to the Mediator on man's behalf,
and not about one man's imputing to another, which is but humane and civil.

If Mr. Norton had given but one Scripture-instance of a divine Imputation in
the sense he pleads for, he had a fair opportunity to have done it, when he
cited the other two places.

But seeing he has not done it, neither there, nor any where else, I believe
he is not able to do it; and therefore for him to build so great weight upon
this of Philemon, to prove that Christ was our guilty Surety, on whom. God did
justly inflict the Essential Torments of Hell, is to run himself, and his
Reader, into a labyrinth of confused error.

That Preacher therefore says Tindal, page 170. that brings a naked
similitude to prove that which is contained in no text of Scripture, nor
followed of a Text, count a Deceiver, a Leader out of the way, and a false
Prophet, and beware of his Philosophy and persuasions of man's wisdom, as Paul
1 Cor. 2. says, etc. for the reasons and similitudes of man's wisdom, make no
faith, but wavering and uncertain opinions only; one instance of a divine
imputation of sin to an innocent had confirmed the point, but a hundred such
instances, of Philemons imputing of Onesimus debt to Paul, is nothing to the
point.

If (says Mr. Wotton) we take sin formally, then I deny that our sins were so
imputed to Christ. His words at large I have recorded in my examination of 2
Cor. 5. 21.

3 As for that Imputation by way of grace used ten times in Romans the fourth,

I cannot but wonder at the citing of this Text to explicate that manner of
Gods imputing our sins to Christ: surely Romans 4. can have no respect of
agreement to the Argument in hand; Therefore it is only cited to prove that the
word impute is used in Scripture, as if any one that reads the Scripture were
ignorant of it: but if any please to see the sense of the word Impute in Romans
4. let them read Mr. Wotton de Reconc. peccatoris part. 2. l. 1. c. 15. Romans 4.
But says Mr. Norton in page 25.


It is certain, that Christ was couched and comprehended in some part of the
revealed will of God, during the first Covenant: It is very probable (says he)
That the Tree of Life was a figure of Christ; And (says he) If Christ be be
not within the compass of the Text, the Text is not true; And (says he) Elect
sinners, not dying in their own persons, must dye in their Surety, or else the
Text should not be a truth.

Reply 5. It has been sufficiently showed, I think, that Christ was not Adams
Surety in the first Covenant.

2 Neither was Christ revealed to Adam as Mediator as yet; Had Mr. Norton but
consulted with Mr. Shepherd in his 178. and 133. Thesis on the Sabbath, he
might have been better advised, than to say as he does, that Christ was
comprehended in some part of the revealed will of God, during the first
Covenans, and that the Tree of Life was a typical figure of Christ; if he can
find no better Arguments to prove that Christ was our Surety in the first
obligation with Adam, he must be contented In vindiciae legis lect 14. p 133.
135, 136
with his liberty to be fond of his conceited notion.

3 Mr. Burges also does dispute against this Tenent of Mr. Nortons, and against
such as hold a necessity of Christ to Adam in the time of his innocence.

4 Mr. Ball does oppose it in his Book on the Covenant, page 9. 11. 13.

5 Mr. Blake on the Covenant says thus in page 14. The first Covenant was
immediate, no Mediator intervening; All the blessing of the first Covenant
(says he) flowed from the Trinity, as the creation it self did, without
respect to Christ incarnate; there was no Revelation of that high mystery to
man in innocence.

6 Mr. Burges says, That all those that hold a necessity of Christ to Adam and
Angels, must also necessarily maintain, that In vindiciae legis 13^.
though Adam had not fallen, Christ would have been Incarnated.

And this was the opinion of Osiander, That Christ had been Incarnate, though
Adam had not sinned.

And truly, Osiander might as well maintain his opinion, as Mr. Norton may,
That Christ was in the same obligation with Adam as his Surety in the first
Covenant; he says, That Elect sinners must dye in their Surety, or else the
Text should not be a truth; had he but said, or else I am mistaken, and have
not given the right sense of the Text, then he had spoken humbly and truly,
and then I had believed him.

Re. 6 Though hitherto I have denied that Christ was our bounden Christ was our
voluntary Surety, but not our bounden Surety in the same obligation with Adam.
Surety in the same obligation with Adam; yet this I do also acknowledge, that
presently after Adams fall, he was declared to be Adams voluntary Surety,
namely, to be his free Redeemer.

For it pleased God to declare the Decree of the eternal Covenant that was
agreed on between the Trinity for man's Redemption from Satan's Head-plot, in
Genesis 3. 15.

1 God by way of Threatening told the Devil (in the hearing Genesis 3. 15.
of Adam and Eve) That the seed of the deceived woman should over-match him at
last, and should break in pieces his crafty Head-plot; and he gave the Devil
leave to do his worst to hinder it, and for that purpose he proclaimed an utter
enmity between them, and bid the Devil pierce him in the foot-soals as a
wicked Malefactor on the Cross, to disturb his patience, and so to pervert his
obedience wherein the root of an acceptable sacrifice does lie, that so his
death might not be a sacrifice.

2 It is also manifest by the said Declaration, that Christ had Covenanted from
Eternity to take upon him the seed of the Woman, and the sinlesse infirmities
of our true humane nature, and in that nature, and with those infirmities to
enter the lists with Satan, and to continue obedient through all his
afflictions, temptations and trials, to the death, even to the death of the
Cross, Phil. 2. 8, 9.

3 It is also manifest by the said Declaration, That God the Father had
Covenanted, that in case Christ did continue obedient through all his
sufferings, temptations, and trials, that then his obedience through all his
temptations and trials should be accounted as the upshot of his Priestly
Consecration; which indeed must be completely finished before he might make his
soul a sacrifice; and it is out of controversy, that his sufferings were
ordained for the perfecting of his Priestly Consecration, by Heb. 2. 10. 17.
with Heb. 5. 9. and therefore, as soon as ever he Heb 2. 10.
had finished all his sufferings that were written of him, He said, It is
finished, Joh. 19. 30. and then as a complete Consecrated Priest he made his
Sacrifice, saying, Father, into thy hands I commend Joh. 19. 30.
my Spirit, and so he bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost. This last act was
properly and formally his Death and Sacrifice, and it was properly and formally
full satisfaction; and this powering out his vital soul, and rendering his
immortal soul into the hands of God, was the act of his Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.
14. Yea his Death and Sacrifice must be done by the joint concurrence of both
his natuesr, or else he had not been the Mediator of the New Covenant through
death, Heb. 9. 15, 16. and then the Devils Head-plot had not been broken; but
because he continued obedient through all his sufferings on the Cross, and at
last made his Sacrifice by his own Priestly power, even by the joint
concurrence of both his Natures, he has through that kind of death destroyed
him that had the power of death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. and all this
was declared unto Adam in Genesis 3. 15. and exemplified in the sacrifice of a
Lamb; the Law makes men Highpriests which have infirmities, Heb. 7. 28.
namely, sinful infirmities. But the word of the Oath (to David) which was since
the Law, makes the Son, who is consecrated for evermore, namely made perfect
by his obedience in all his sufferings, and so he had no sinful infirmity, but
continues a perfect High Priest for us for evermore.

But this kind of voluntary Sarety, does differ as much from Mr. Nortons
bounden Surety in the same Obligation with Adam, as a free Redeemer does differ
from a bounden Surety.

I grant therefore, that Christ was our Surety, as he was our free Mediator and
Redeemer, but no otherwise; and so in an unproper sense he may be called our
Surety, but not in a proper legal sense, according to Mr. Nortons
Court-language.

This way of satisfaction, first declared in Genesis 3. 15. is the foundation upon
which all after Prophecies touching satisfaction by Christ's death and
sufferings must have dependence; and as it was first exemplified to Adam in the
sacrifice of a Lamb, as I have showed in the Institution of the Sabbath, and
therefore all those positive Laws touching Priest and Sacrifice declared
afterward to Moses, are but the further opening of the manner of Christ's
satisfaction, and indeed those types were but the Picture of what was agreed on
in the Eternal Covenant to be performed in due time by the seed of the Woman.

4 It may hence be gathered, That God ordained no other affl^ctions for Christ
to suffer, but either from Satan's enmity in piercing him in the foot-soals,
meaning thereby his outward afflictions; Or else secondly, they were from
himself in the inward man; for as he was true man of the seed of the Woman, so
he must be inwardly touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and therefore
as often as objects of fear or sorrow, etc. did present, he was to be touched,
as our merciful High Priest, with a greater measure of these infirmities, than
any other man can be; but no Scripture does speak a word in Mr. Nortons
Dialect, that his soul was pressed under the sense of Gods immediate wrath; for
in case his Fathers immediate wrath had pressed those sorrows from his soul, as
Mr. Nortons term is, then those sufferings had not been voluntary from his own
will, but constrained; but say all sound Divines, nothing was constrained in
Christ by any supreme power, and therefore not by Gods immediate wrath; though
the Devil had liberry to use what force he could to his outward man, yet he
had no liberty to force his soul, but himself was the only voluntary Agent in
all the affections of his soul, he feared, he sorrowed, etc. when he would,
and as much as he would, and therefore was often touched with the feeling of
our infirmities in a larger measure than any other man's soul can be; and thus
he was our voluntary Mediator and Surety.

Mr. Norton still makes Christ to be our legal Surety, in the same obligation
with Adam: on the contrary, I do still affirm that Christ suffered our
punishments, not from Gods judicial imputation of sin; for then indeed he had
suffered from Gods wrath; but that he suffered our punishments, only from the
voluntary Cause and Covenant; and such sufferings might be and were undertaken
by Christ; both without any judicial imputation of sin, and also without
wrath^: as in the trial of masteries with Satan, Enmity upon Adams fall was
proclaimed, and the seed of the Woman was commanded (but not in wrath) to enter
the lists with Satan, and try masteries with him, and the Devil must do his
worst to disturb his patience, and so to pervert his obedience, and Christ must
exemplify the perfection of his obedience, by the perfection of his patience
even in that ignominious and painful death of the Cross, until he had
finished all his sufferings for his consecration to his Priestly office; and
then at last make his soul a sacrifice for sin. But this way of satisfaction
Mr. Norton dams for heresy: The Lord open his eyes to see better, and the eyes
of those that are misled by him.

5 It was ordained in the Eternal Decree and Covenant, that Christ should be
consecrated to his Priestly office (for the better making his death a
sacrifice) by afflictions, Heb. 2. 10. Heb. 5. 9. Heb. 2. 10. God ordained all
Christ's greatest sufferings in his Passion to be for his consecration to his
sacrifice.


To consecrate, is interpreted by the Seventy, to make perfect: As for example,
when the people had worshipped the Golden Calf, Moses, by Gods special positive
command in Exodus 32. 27. 29. commanded the Levites to consecrate their hands,
by doing perfect and exact justice upon the Idolaters, without respect of
persons, not sparing their own sons, or near kindred; and this act of theirs is
recorded to their praise in Deuteronomy. 33. 9. and by this impartial act of perfect
justice their hands were consecrated to God.

2 The consecration of Aaron and his sons to the Priestly office, was to be
effected by continuing seven days under the observation of certain particular
Rites before their consecration could be finished, Exodus 29. 9. and Lev. 8.
22. and then the very next day after, their consecration was finished, Moses
bid them draw near to the Altar to execute the Priests office, by offering a
sacrifice, both for themselves, and for the people, Lev. 9. 7. But Christ
needed not to offer any sacrifice for himself, and therefore it was only for
his people.

3 As Moses is said to consecrate Aaron and his sons through many particular
Rites exactly observed, whereof one was no small affliction (though willingly
born by them at the Lords appointment) namely, Ye shall abide at the door of
the Tent of the Congregation day and night, seven days, and shall keep the
charge of Je^ovah, that ye dye not, Lev. 8. 33. This exact watch, for that
space of time being separated from their wives and families, under the penalty
of death, was doubtless a time of affliction to them, though, as I said
before, willingly born at the Lords appointment.

4 It is said in Heb. 2. 10. It became him, namely, it became God the Father,
that he should consecrate the Prince of our salvation through afflictions. And
it is also said in verse 17. That it behoved Christ to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and a faithful high Sacrificer in things
concerning God, and that he might make Reconciliation for the sins of the
people.

5 In these two verses we may observe the execution of some of the Articles of
the Eternal Covenant touching Christ's Priesthood, both on the Fathers part, and
on Christ's part.

1 It is said of the Father, That it be came him to consecrate the Prince of
our salvation through afflictions; that is, to make his obedience perfect
through afflictions; or else if the Devil had not had full liberty to try his
obedience by afflictions, he would have objected thus against Christ; In case
I might have had full liberty to try his obedience, as I had to try Adams
obedience, this seed of the Woman would have been disobedient to God, as Adam
was; Therefore it became so perfect a Workman as God was, to declare that
Satan had full liberty to enter the Lists with the seed of the Woman, and to
do his worst to pervert his obedience, Genesis 3. 15.

And secondly, It behoved Christ, to be made like unto his brethren, and to
enter the Lists with Satan, not in his divine nature, but in our nature, and
to be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and therefore it is also
said, That it behoved Christ to suffer, Luke 24. 46. according to the Decree
and Covenant declared in Genesis 3. 15. that so his obedience being made perfect,
he might be fully consecrated to the execution of his Priestly office in
making his Soul an acceptable Sacrifice to make Reconciliation for the sins of
Gods people, and thus he became obedient to the death, Phi. 2. 8.

And thus it became God to consecrate, and Christ to be consecrated through
afflictions, and therefore presently after the Fall, God said to Satan, Thou
shall pierce him in the footsoals; and accordingly God is said not to spare his
own Son, but to deliver him up into the hands of Satan, for us all, to try the
combat, Romans 8. 32. So David said, The Lord bade Shemei to curse David: For
says Dr Preston In Gods All Sufficiency, There is no creature in heaven or
earth that stirs without a command, and without a warrant from the Master of
the house. God sent Satan to be a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs false
Prophets; God is without all causes, and the cause of all things; no creature
stirs but at his command, and by his providence, Eccles. 3. 14. And thus Herod
and Pontius Pilate, the Devils Agents, did unto Christ, whatsoever God had
before determined to be done, Act. 4. and thus God declared his will to Satan,
Thou shall pierce the seed of the deceived Woman in the footsoals, as a wicked
Malefactor; but yet for all this, he shall continue obedient, and at last break
thy Head-plot by his sacrifice of Reconciliation; flesh and blood could not
effect this way of consecration. The Father delivered Christ to death, says P.
Mart. not that the Father is bitter or cruel, he delighted not in evil, as it
is evil: But I may add, he delighted to see him combat with Satan, not for
the evil sake that fell upon Christ, but for the good of his obedience in his
consecration to his death and sacrifice. And all this was done not from the row
of causes, as in Courts of justice from the imputation of the guilt of our
sins; but from the voluntary Cause and Covenant only. But says Mr. Norton in
Page 13^.


The soul that sins shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. 20. Good (says he) man sinned,
ergo, man dyed; Christ was a sinner imputatively, though not inherently; And
the soul that sins, whether inherently or imputatively, shall dye.

Reply 7. It is a plain evidence that the Doctrine of imputing our sins to
Christ as our legal Surety, is a very unsound Doctrine, because it has no
better supports hitherto than Scripture mis-interpreted. The sense of this Text
is this; The soul that sins, i. e. the very soul that sins, namely, the very
same numeric^l and individual person, that sins formaly and inherently, shall
die; for the text speaks plainly of sin committed, and it argues that Mr.
Norton took little heed to the circumstances of the Text, that did not mark
that; and the Text shows the effect that sin has upon a sinner (that repents
no^) namely, he shall dye.

Now to this Exposition compare Mr. Nortons Answer; Man sinned (says he) (mark
his evasion,) for he does not speak this of man numerically taken, as the Text
does, but he speaks it of man generally, or of all mankind in Adam; Ergo, man
died (says he) here he takes the word man, not for the particular individual
sinner, as the Text does, but for the individual person of Christ; and so his
meaning amounts to this, Mankind sinned, and Christ died. By this the Reader
may see that his Exposition agrees with the Text, no better than Harp and
Harrow.

Therefore unless Mr. Norton do affirm that Christ was a sinner formally and
inherently, he cannot from this place of Ezekiel gather that Christ was to
suffer the second death; neither can he gather it from Genesis 2. 17. because both
these places speak of sin as it is formally committed, and not alone of the
effects of sin (as guilt.) Neither of these Scriptures do admit of dying by a
Surety; neither does the Law any where else admit of dying such a death as the
second death is, by a Surety, to deliver other sinners from that death, as
these Scriptures do testify, Ps. 49. 7, 8, 9. Job 36. 18, 19.

The Apostle says, the sting of death is sin, but his meaning is plainly of
sin inherent, and not of such an imputation of sin as Mr. Norton makes to be
the ground of Christ's suffering the second death.

Adams first sin, says Bucanus, was common to all men's nature; but his other
sins, says he, were truly personal, of which Ezekiel. 18. 20. the soul that
sins shall die.

But I wonder that Mr. Norton does cite Austin for the spiritual death of
Christ's soul from Gods imputing our sins to him, Austin (says he in p. 130.)
calls it a death, not of condition, but of crime; it is as evident as the
sun, that Austins meaning is this, Christ was not necessitated to die through
any sinful condition of nature, as fallen man is; but that he was put to death
as a criminal person by the Jews sinful imputations; and that Austin infers, it
was therefore just, that seeing the devil had slain him who owed nothing, the
debtors whom he held in durance, believing in him that was slain without cause,
should be set at liberty; See Austins sense more at large in Wotton de Recon.
^pec. par. 2. l. 1. c. 21. Austins sense is no more like Mr. Nortons sense,
than an Apple is like an Oyster. But says Mr. Norton in page 41.


If Christ had suffered death without guilt imputed, his death could not have
been called a punishment.

Reply 8. If Mr. Norton from the Voluntary cause and covenant should undertake
to strive with his opposite Champion for the All Christ's sufferi^gs were from
the v^luntary Covenant, and not from Gods judicial imputation of our sins to
him.
mastery, according to the Rules of the said voluntary Law, I believe that he
should by experience find that he must bear many a sour stroke, and brush, and
it may be, shed much blood, which I think would be accounted a true punishment
(though it be not a vindictive punishment from the sense of an angry Judge) and
yet all this without any imputation of sin from the Superiors in the voluntary
Covenant, unless he should disobey their Laws in the manner of trial; in like
sort, God told the Decree in Genesis 3. 15. that he would put enmity between
Christ Gen 3. 15.
and the Devil, and that the Devil should drive hard at him all the time that
he executed his Office, and that at last the Devil should prevail so far as to
pierce him in the foot-soals as a sinful Malefactor, and it pleased the Lord
thus to bruise him, and put him to grief, Is. 53. 10. even at the same time
when he should make his soul a sin. The Lord took much delight and pleasure to
behold the knowledge, and skill, the valor and wisdom of this his righteous
servant, in this conflict continuing obedient to the death, according to all
the Articles of the Covenant, until he had triumphed over all Principalities
and Powers on his cross, and so he won the prize, namely, the salvation of all
the Elect.

According to this way of punishment, Christ suffered our punishments; no
punishment was due to him from the imputation of sin; and therefore no
punishment was inflicted on him from Gods anger, as our punishments are: We
indeed do justly suffer, according to that Court-language which Mr. Norton has
expressed; but Christ's punishments, though they were as true punishments in
sense and feeling as ours are (and more sensible to his nature, than to us) yet
they were not inflicted on him from the same compulsory ground and Law as ours
are on us; but all his were from the voluntary Law and Covenant, as I have
before declared. And in chap. 12. at Conclus. 1. I have showed, that any
imputation of sin in the voluntary combat does lose the prize. But says Mr.
Norton in page 96.


Christ is expressly said to be made a curse, Gal. 3. 13. It will thence
unavoydably follow (says he) that sin was some way judicially upon Christ; for
we read of no curso inflicted according to the determinate and revealed way of
proceeding with the reasonable creature, but it presupposes sin; wherefore he
could neither have been made a curse, nor die; since the only cause of the
curse and death is sin, from which he was free, but because he had taken upon
him our sins.

Reply 9. Sin, says Mr. Norton, was some way judicially upon Christ; Why then
is it not proved and made manifest by Scripture? I find no other proof of it,
but Scripture mis-interpreted, as I have showed already; and as for Gal. 3. 13.
it does clearly fail him, as the Reader may see in my examination of his
Conclusions from the Text. But says Mr. Norton in page 55.


God charged Christ with sin as the supreme Lawgiver and Judge, Christ accepts
the charge as a Surety, and so subjects himself to the satisfaction of Justice,
which is the part of a Surety.

And in the said page, God cannot be just without a judicial imputation of the
guilt and punishment of sin unto the Surety.

And in page 34, 28, and 136. he says, It was requisite that Christ should be
made sin, i. e. that the guilt of sin should be legally imputed to him, 2 Cor.
5. 21.

Reply 10. These speeches, and others, do imply, that God could not impute our
sins to Christ, unless he had been first a legal Surety in the same obligation
with Adam; but that has been all along denied and disproved; and therefore
now, except Mr. Norton can more clearly prove, than hitherto, that Christ was a
true legal Surety in the same obligation with Adam, All that he has said
hitherto about Gods imputing our sins to Christ, will come to nothing: As for
his great proof, that Christ was such a legal Surety, from Heb. 7. 22. it shall
have a full examination and reply in my Reply to his third Argument, and
touching his many proofs of imputation from 2 Cor. 5. 21. See more there. But
says Mr. Norton page 70.


Through anguish of soul he had clods, rather than drops of blood streaming
down his blessed body, a thing which was neither seen nor heard before nor
since; The true reason thereof is, Christ died as a sinner imputatively pressed
under the sense of the wrath of God, and conflicting with eternal death.

Reply 11. Touching his sweating clods of blood I have replied, in Luke 22. 44.
if it were clods of blood, doubtless, it was miraculous, and if it were
miraculous, how is that a proof that it was caused from the pressure of the
sense of Gods wrath?

But I believe his Agony was from natural causes, namely, because his pure
nature did so much abhor that ignominious, and painful death, which he did
grapple withal in the garden; and I believe, if Mr. Norton had made his Agony
to proceed from the voluntary cause, conflicting in his earnest prayers with
Satan's temptations, and with the natural fear of death, until he had overcome
that natural fear, that so he might perform his oblation in all exact obedience
according to Gods positive Covenant, he had come far nearer to the true cause
of Christ's Agony, than by making his Agony to proceed from the compulsory
cause, Being pressed under the wrath of God; it seems his word pressing does
allude to that violent constraint that is used to press out the blood of
grapes; but yet it is also beyond it, because he makes the wrath of God to
press out clods of blood in Christ; it makes me tremble at such expressions of
violence from Gods immediate wrath against Christ. But says Mr. Norton in page
219.


As Christ was guilty of our sin, so also he was sensible of an accusing
conscience; and alittle after, says he, the question is not, whether Christ be
polluted with our sin inherently, but whether he may not be said to be polluted
with our sin imputatively.

Reply 12. In words Mr. Norton says, Christ was not guilty of our sins
inherently; but his arguing does prove him a sinner inherently; for his whole
drift is, to prove that Christ suffered the essential torments of hell and the
second death, and none can possible suffer the second death, until they be
first inherently guilty of the first death of sin.

2 If he was polluted with our sin by Gods imputation, as Mr. Norton holds,
then his death, and sacrifice must needs be abominable in the sight of God, But
says Mr. Norton in page 123.


The Divine Nature was angry, not only with the Humane Nature, but with the
person of the Mediator, because of sin imputed to him.

Reply 13. Mark the dangerousness of this Doctrine of imputing our sins to
Christ; for here Mr. Norton makes God to be angry with Christ because of sin
imputed to him as to our Mediator in both his Natures, and so all along he
makes Christ as God Man to be our Surety, and so sin to be imputed to him in
both his Natures. But Mr. Burges on Justific. p. 176. says, That Christ as God
Man, was not bound by any imputation of ourguilt; And he cites Zanchy for this.
The fore-quoted Author (says he) makes this objection to himself, How Christ
could be said to be freed from the guilt of sin who had no sin? He answers,
the person of Christ is considered two ways, 1. In it self as God Man, and so
Christ was not bound by any guilt; 2. as appointed Head, and so representing
our persons, in this respect God laid our iniquities upon him, Isa. 53. My
drift in citing this, is to show, That such learned Divines as Zanchy and Mr.
Burges is, do deny that the guilt of our sins were imputed to Christ as God
Man, contradicting Mr. Norton therein.

Christ in his obeying (says P. Martyr in his Ser. on Phi. 2.) became not less
than his Father, as touching his Godhead, he obeyed as a friend toward a
friend, and not as an inferior unto death: The Lord of life submitted himself
to death, and being immortal he died, How contrary is this of P. Martyr, to Mr.
Nortons kind of imputation? Surely by Mr. Nortons imputation of sin to the
Mediator in both his Natures, the Godhead of Christ did not obey as a Friend
to his Friend to the death, as P. Martyr says, but as a Delinquent to the
supreme Judge to the death, i^ not this kind of imputation good Divinity?

Now let the judicious Reader judge, whether some of these expressions do not
exceed the bounds of his said third Distinction; for there he makes the
imputation of guilt, to be the obligation to punishment: But in sundry of those
speeches of his, which I have repeated, he goes further, than I believe most
men could imagine, by his said Distinction; and he does all along make Christ's
sufferings to be from the imputation of sin, that so he might deserve ^ell
torments, and the second death, according to the exact order of Courts of
Justice in their proceedings in criminal causes.

Some Philosophers, says Mr. Traheron, do teach that all things come to pass
by the copulation of causes wrapped up one in another, In Rev. 4. p 49. Christ's
sufferings were not inflicted on him according to the natural order of justice
by imputation of sin. But from the voluntary cause.
and so they make God subject to the order and row of causes depending upon
each other. But (says he) we say, that all things come to pass, because God
through his secret will and purpose has ordered them so to be done as they are
done.

Ibidem, says he, the latter Schoolmen say truly, that all things come to pass
necessarily, not by the necessity of natural causes, but by the necessity of
Gods Ordinance, which they call necessitatem consequentis.

And says P. Martyr in Romans 5. p. 124. God is not to be compelled to order,
neither ought he to be ordered by humane Laws; But Mr. Norton does all along
put Christ's sufferings into the order of Justice, according to the order of
humane Courts and Laws, namely, by infliction of punishment from the imputation
of sin.

And says P. Martyr in p. 111. It is much to be marvelled at how the Pelagians
can deny that there is original sin in Infants, seeing they see that they daily
die; but (says he) here ought we to except Christ only, who, although he knew
not sin, yet died he for our sakes; But death had not dominion over him,
because that he of his own accord suffered it for our sakes. And the like
speech of his I have cited in chap. 10. at Reply 2. By which speechs it is
evident, that Peter Martyr could not hold the imputation of our sins to Christ,
as Mr. Norton does, but he held that Christ bore our sins, namely, our
punishments, according to the ancient Orthodox, and no otherwise, and that
phrase and sense is according to the Scriptures, 1 Pet. 2. 24. but that sense
is very far from the sense of Mr. Nortons imputation, for the first sort agrees
to the voluntary cause, but Mr. Nortons kind must be ranked with the compulsory
cause of Christ's sufferings, according to Courts of justice.

But I would fain know of Mr. Norton, what was the sin that God imputed to
Isaak, for which he commanded Abraham to kill his Son for a sacrifice, did not
God command it rather for the trial of Isaaks obedience, as well as of
Abraham's? for in that act of obedience Abraham was the Priest, and Isaac was
the Sacrifice, and in that act both of them were a lively type of the obedience
of Christ, who was both Priest and Sacrifice in his own death and Sacrifice;
doubtless, if Abraham had killed Isaac, it had not been from the imputation of
any sin to him, but in obedience to a voluntary positive command of God, and
not to a moral command from sin imputed, for then it had been grounded on the
copulation of causes wrapped one in another, as Mr. Norton would have Christ's
death to be; but the Scripture imputes no sin to Christ, but makes him the Holy
one of God in all his sufferings.

In our judging of the ways of God (says Dr. Preston, in his Treatise of God
without causes, p. 143.) we should take heed of framing a model of our own, as
to think, that because such a thing is just, therefore the Lord wills it; The
reason of this conceit (says he) is, because we think that God must go by our
rule; we forget this, That every thing is therefore just, because the Lord does
first will it, and not that God does will it, because it is first just; but we
must proceed in another manner, we should first find out what the will of God
is, for in that is the rule of Justice and Equity. So far Dr. Preston.

And it is now manifested, that the Rule of God from eternity, was, that Christ
should be the seed of the woman to break the Devils head-plot by his blessed
Sacrifice, and that he should be such a High Priest as is holy and harmless,
and separated from sinners, and that he should be a Lamb without spot and
blemish, and therefore without all imputation of sin in the sight of God, and
of his Law, and that he should be consecrated through afflictions, Heb. 2. 10.
and 5. 9. and 10. 20. and to this end should, as a voluntary Combater, enter
the Lists with Satan, etc. as aforesaid.

And all thi^ may be further cleared, if we consider what kind of cause Christ's
death is, to take away our sins it is (says M. Burges) a meritorious cause (in
his just. p. 190.) which is in the rank of moral causes, of which the rule is
not true, Pos^a causa sequitur effectus; This holds in natural causes, which
produce their effects; But (says he) moral causes work according to the
agreement and liberty of the persons that are moved thereby; as for example,
God the Father is moved through the death of Christ, to pardon the sins of such
persons for whom he dies; so this rule must be applied to the voluntary and
eternal Covenant, and also to the event, as from the voluntary cause.

CHAP. VII.
His Fifth Distinction Examined, which is this:

Distinguish between a Penal Hell, and a Local Hell, Christ suffered a Penal
Hell, but not a Local Hell.


Reply 1. THis Distinction makes two Hells, that have the same Essential
Torments, one Temporary, and the other Eternal; one for Christ alone in this
world, and the other for Reprobates in the world to come. By the like Reason
there are two Heavens that have the same Essential blessedness, the one
Temporary, and the other Eternal; for if Scripture may be judge, there are as
many Heavens for Essential blessedness, as there are Hells for Essential
torment.

I thin^ the judicious Reader may well smile at this odd Distinction; and yet
I do not see how Mr. Norton can maintain, that Christ suffered the Essential
Torments of Hell, without this Distinction.

This penal Hell was first devised, and is still maintained, for It is a mere
fantacy to say that Christ suffered the essential Torments of hell in this
world, seeing it is acknowledged by Mr. Norton, That the Devils are not in full
Torments here.
the sake of Christ's sufferings only; I never heard it used in Mr. Nortons
sense for any body else, no not for the Devils themselves as long as they are
in this world: For first, says Mr. Norton in page 124. the full Torments of
Hell are not inflicted upon the Devils before the day of Judgment. Secondly,
neither dares he affirm that any man in this life did ever suffer the Essential
torments of Hell: For in page 115. (he says) That the reason why Eternal death
is inflicted after the separation of the soul from the body, is, partly because
of the inability of the nature of man in this present state of mortality to
endure the wrath of God without separation of the soul from the body; namely,
to endure Gods penal wrath (as he does presently after call it) such as Christ
bare: And in Chap. 13. he says, There may be some doubt concerning the
capacity of a mere creature, to hold such a measure of Torment.

1 Hence it follows from his own confession, that no mortal man can suffer the
penal wrath of God, or the Essential Torments of hell in this life.

2 Hence it follows, that there is no such penal Hell for any other in this
life, but for Christ alone.

3 That none (but Christ) can dye the second Death, till they be first dead in
sin.

4 Neither dares Mr. Norton affirm, that Christ suffered the Essential Torments
of Hell in this penal Hell by Gods ordinary dispensation: For in Page 120. he
says, That according to the ordinary dispensation of God, the full pains of
hell are not suffered in this life: But (says he) according to the
extraordinary dispensation of God, Christ not only could, but did suffer the
pains of Hell in this life.

And truly, seeing this penal Hell has need of miracles to support it, it
shall have my vote to be matched with Purgatory, as a like fiction.

SECT. 2.
But Mr. Norton labors to confirm his said Distinction three ways.

1 By a compartive Argument. 2 By the Testimony of the Schoolmen. 3 By Psalm.
16. 10.
1 His comparative Argument is this; Christ might as well suffer the pains of
Hell out of Hell, as partake of the joys of Heaven out of Heaven. His words in
page 119. are these; As the Manhood of Christ was partaker of the joys of
Heaven out of the place of Heaven, as Luke 9. 28. (if not at other times, yet
after the Resurrection) so might it suffer the pains of Hell out of the place
of Hell.

Reply 2. HIs sense of Hell Torments must all along be remembered to be the
Essential torments of Hell; For according to his first Distinction in page 8.
he says, That the essential part was that, and only, that which Christ
suffered; Luke 9. 28. Who ever is pa^t^ker of the essential jo^es of heaven is
confirmed against the suffering of death.
In like sort he must be understood that Christ did partake of the Essential
joys of Heaven out of Heaven, by Luke 9. 28. and then I believe his body had
been glorified, and so consequently confirmed against the suffering of death,
for if his Manhood had partaken of the essential joys of Heaven, then he
must be clothed with such essential glory as himself does mention in Joh. 17.
5. Glorify me with thy self; and in verse. 24. That they may behold my glory
which thou have given me; or else he reasons imper^inently, and not to the
point in hand: And thus he has abused the sense of Luke 9 28.

If he had affirmed these suff^rings of Christ, and these glorious Revelations,
in a metaphorical sense, then he might have a^corded with the Scripture sense,
for great joys by an hyperbole may well be called the joys of Heaven, but
not the Essential joys; neither do I believe that the Manhood of Christ did
partake of the Essential joys and glory of Heaven, till he came there; neither
does that place in Luke 9. 28. nor any other Scripture, prove it.

2 Mr. Norton does labor to confirm his said Distinction by the Schoolmen;
For in page 120. he says, The sounder Schoolmen teach that Christ was in
such a penal Hell, namely, where he suffered the Essential torments of Hell
before his death; But in case the Schoolmen did not teach so much, then Mr.
Norton does wrong both them, and the Reader, to cite them to his sense. But
according to my learning they were far from Mr. Nortons Tenent.

But says Mr. Norton in page 39. The soul is understood by judicious Authors
properly; Hell metaphorically, for pains equivalent to the pains of Hell it
self.

Reply. I confess, I cannot but wonder that Mr. Norton does so often use the
word Equivalent, seeing his fundamental principle is, Mr. Norton flies from his
foundation principle of essential torments, to that which is equavalent.
That Christ suffered the very Essential Torments of Hell, and yet ever and
anon he is glad to fly to the word Equivalent in the point of satisfaction,
and yet he does oppose the use of it in the point of satisfaction in the
Dialogue. He said in page 8 That the Essential part of Hell torments was that,
and only that, which Christ suffered.

But here he is forced to leave that Principle, and to fly to that which is
Equivalent; sometimes he holds close to the very letter of the Law, as if God
could not alter one jot, because Christ was in the same obligation with Adam,
but presently after, he does admit of the word Equivalent; such uncertainty
there is in his foundation-principles.

2 The metaphorical sense of Hell may be thus considered, Sheol in the Old
Testament is always translated by the Seventy into Haides or Hades, except in
one place, and there it is translated The metaphorical sense of Sheol and
Haides.
Thanatos, death; the word in both languages is of large signification, and it
may be ranked into these senses; First, It signifies sorrows and afflictions.
Secondly, Death, to the person. Thirdly, The Grave, to the body. Fourthly, The
world of souls, to the souls departed; namely, to the godly soul, Paradise, and
to the wicked, Gehenna; for as Bucer says in Luke 16. neither does the word
Sheol or Hades signify the eternal estate of them that d^e, whether they be
faithful, and go to heaven, or unfaithful, and go to hell; but Hades is first
used for the hell of the damned, in Luke 16. 2. Secondly, For the penal hell of
the godly, in suffering persecutions and afflictions, in Matthew. 16. the Gates
of Haides shall not prevail against them.

3 It is used for soul-sorrows, when a godly soul is deprived of the sense of
the good of the promises for a time, as I have noted in the first Distinction;
one may be in the Hell of conscience (says Mr. Wilson in his mystical cases,
p. 188.) who shall never come into the hell of the damned; But says Mr.
Rutherfurd in Christ dying, page 35. 39. The hell in the soul of Gods children,
and the hell of the Reprobate, differ in Essence and Nature.

4 Bucer makes Christ's bodily death to be penal Hell, his Bucer in Mat. 27 53.
words, translated by Carliste, speak thus; The ancient Fathers make no mention
of Limbus or Purgatory; Let us (says he) let this pass as the inventions of
men; and let us rather give thanks to the Lord, who has thrust his own Son
into infernum, that is to say (says he) that willed him to dye truly, that by
his death we might be delivered.

Two things are observable in the words of Bucer.

1 That he calls the bodily death of Christ, Infernum, or Hell. 2 That he
ascribes our deliverance from hell, to the true bodily death of Christ.
5 I grant that Christ suffered the sorrows of Sheol and Hades in a
Metaphorical sense, but in no sense did he suffer the sorrows of Gehenna, and
that is the word that is properly meant of Hell torments; so that by Mr.
Norton, Christ must suffer the Essential torments of Gehenna, in a penal
Gehenna in this world. Of which see Mar. 9. 43. 45.

6. Mr. Norton by his distinction of a local and penal Hell, See Marbicks Com
pl. p 22.
does much favor the opinion of the Albanenses, whose fourth Heresy was this,
That in Hell there are no other pains than be in this world; and Mr. Norton
holds, that there are no other essential pains thanwhat Christ's suffered in
this world: The opinions are very near a kin, though in other matters I
esteemMr. Norton far before them.

SECT. 3.
3. MR. Norton labors to confirm his said distinction of a local and penal
Hell, by this Scripture, Thou will not leave Psalm. 16 10. Act. 2. 27. It is to
admiration that Mr. Norton does interpret Hell in the same Scripture, first to
signify Hell torments, and then only the the Grave.
my soul in Hell; this is cited in Psalm. 16. 10. and in Act. 2. 27. The soul,
says he, in page 39. is understood by judicious and learned Authors properly,
Hell Metaphorically, for such pains as are equivalent to the pains of Hell it
self. But yet Mr. Norton does fully contradict and confute, both himself and
his learned and judicious Authors; for in page 110. he says, That the word
Hades in the, Creed is doubtless to be interpreted according to some sense
wherein it is used in the Scripture; But says he in Acts 2. 27. It is taken
for the Grave. Here he affirms it is taken for the Grave, and yet in the place
forecited, he says, It is taken for the pains of Hell it self, by the
judgment of learned and judicious Authors. I confess I cannot but wonder
that he should make hell in one and the same text to signify such different
things; it is a manifest testimony of the uncertainty of his judgment.

2 If Haides in Greek, and Sheol in Hebrew, and Hell in English, signify no
more but the Grave in the said Scriptures, then I wonder how Mr. Norton can
interpret the word Soul properly, of the immortal Soul of Christ, as he does
with the approbation of learned and judicious Authors; Does the same Scripture
in the same words, affirm that Christ's immortal Soul did one while suffer the
pains of hell in this life, and another while lie buried with his body in the
Grave? Is not this to make the holy Scripture to be no better than a leaden
Rule to be bowed this way, and that way, after the fantasies of men at their
pleasures?

He tells me in page 258. That the Scripture lies not in the sound of words,
but in the sense; but in this he does halt of his own sore, and therefore I
retort his own words to himself, that most pestilent Doctrines have oftentimes
been communicated in the language of the Scripture, etc.

3 Says Mr. Norton in page 39. The soul in Psalm. 16. 10. and Act. 2 27. is by
judicious and learned Authors understood properly; If Mr. Norton do approve the
judgment of those learned and judicious Authors to the Reader, why then does
he in page 110. take Hell for the Grave; was his soul (properly taken) buried
in his Grave? Secondly, why does Mr. Norton blind the Reader, by saying that
learned and judicious Authors do take the word Soul properly? seeing he cannot
be ignorant that other learned and judicious Authors take the Soul there for
the vital soul only, that lives and dies with the body, and that soul might
be dislocated in his body when he dyed, and so it might be buried with his body
in the grave.

Mr. Ains. on the word Soul in Psalm. 16. 10. in his conclusion says thus,
Compare it (namely this word Soul) with the like in other places, as Psalm. 30.
4. Psalm. 116. 8. and Psalm. 89. 49. and 88. 4. and 94. 17. (all which places are
clearly meant of the vital soul) and then he makes application of this to
Christ: Christ (says he) gave his soul for the Ransom of the world, and
powered it out to death, Isa. 53. 12. Mat. 20. 28. Ioh. 10. 11, 15, 17. and 15.
13. and at the last he says thus, these words, Thou will not leave my soul in
bell, teach us Christ's Resurrection; as if he should say, Thou will not leave
me to the power of Death, or Grave, to be consumed. Mark this close of Mr.
Ainsworths, he interprets Hell to be Death, or the Grave.

2 Mr. Broughton, in his two Works defensive, expounds Psalm. 16. 10. thus, Thou will not leave my vital soul to Death; In these words he expounds Christ's soul
to be his vital soul, and Sheol, Hell, to be Death (as Bucer did at fourthly
above) Thou will not leave my vital soul to Death, and by a consequent (says
Bro.) nor my body in the Grave, nor my soul among souls, till my body see
corruption.

And in his explication of the Article of Descent into Hell, page 16. he says
thus, Peter and Paul both citing this 16. Psalm, do cite it to no further death
then that which all must feel.

3 Mr. Carlisle says thus on Psalm. 16. 10. Thou will not leave Nephes, my body
in the Grave, for indeed the vital soul is a part of In his book against
Christ's local Descent. p. 32.
the body; and thus speaks our larger Annotations on Psalm. 16. 10. I confess
it is to my admiration that Mr. Norton should commend that exposition of the
word Soul, for Christ's immortal soul, properly, and yet by Sheol, and Haides
does understand no The soul in the N. T. is often put for the vital soul.
more but the Grave in page 110. And thus you see that Mr. Norton has
confounded his own Distinction.

The Hebrew Nephesh, and the Greek Psuche, which we call Soul, says Ainsworth,
in Ps. 16. 10. has the name of Breathing and Respiring; and (says he) it is
the vital spirit that all quick things move by, therefore beasts, birds, fish,
and creeping things, are called Living souls, Genesis 1. 20. 24. and this soul is
sometimes called The blood, Genesis 9. 4. because it is in the blood of all quick
things, Lev. 17. 11. 2 Christopher Carlisle proves on the Article of Descent,
page 144. 153. that Nephesh is never used for the immortal soul in all the Old
Testament; and says Dr. Hammond in 1 These. 5. 23. Psuche, the soul, does
ordinarily in the New Testament signify The life; and says Carlisle in p.
155. Psuchee does signify the immortal soul but in three places, namely, in
Mat. 10. 27. 28. Iam. 1. 21. 1 Pet. 1. 9. and (says he) in the New Testament
it signifies for the most part that which Nephes does in the Old.

And secondly, he makes it to signify the fear of death in Christ's humane
nature, in Mat. 26. 38. Mar. 14. 34.

But thirdly, Though Neshemab does also signify the vital soul, yet it is never
used for the vital soul of the unreasonable creatures, as Nephesh is, but only
of man, and therefore the Hebrews do often understand by it the immortal or the
rational soul. See Aben Ezra upon Eccles. 3. 21. 7. 5. And says Carlisle in p.
162. Neshemah has its name of Shamaim Heaven, for that the immortal soul
comes from Heaven.

These things considered, I think Mr. Norton has but little ground to persuade
his Reader from his learned Authors, that the word Soul in Psalm. 16. 10. is to
be understood properly of the immortal Soul of Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
The Examination of Mr. Nortons eight Arguments.

His first Argument is this, in Page 10.
Either Christ suffered the Justice of God, instead of the Elect, denounced
against sin, Genesis 2. 17. or God might dispense with the Execution thereof,
without the violation of his Justice.

But God could not dispense with the Execution thereof without the violalation
of his Justice.


Reply 1. BOth Propositions are unsound. 1 The major, because he presupposes
from Genesis 2. 17. That Christ was included in the first Covenant, as Adams
Surety, in the same Obligation with him.

This has been denied and answered several times; and indeed the plain letter
of the text does directly outface it, both in Genesis 2. 17. and in Deuteronomy. 27.
Gal. 3. 10. Ezekiel. 18. 4. etc. All these Genesis 2. 17.
places do directly threaten the sinner himself only.

Yea some Divines that hold that Christ made satisfaction by suffering Gods
vindicative wrath, yet in this they do oppose Mr. Norton.

In the rigor of the Law (says Mr. Ball) the Delinquent himself See Ball on
the Covenant, p. 290.
is in person to suffer the penalty denounced, Every man shall bear his own
burden, Gal. 6. 5. And in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the
death, Genesis 2. 17. so that the Law, in the rigor thereof, does not (says he)
admit of any commutation or substitution of one for another; and so he
concludes, that satisfaction was made by another free Covenant.

2 The minor is unsound; for it affirms, that God could not dispense with the
excution of the (Essential) Curse, without the violation of his Justice; But in
this Tenent Mr. Norton 1 King. 21. 3. M. Norton leaves the point of
satisfaction in an uncertaintie, because he does one while say that Christ
suffered the essential curse, and only that, and another while that only
which was equivalent.
does sufficiently confute himself; for he does often say, that Christ suffered
pains equivalent to the pains of Hell: If they were but equivalent, then they
were not the same, and then God did dispense with the Essential pains in kind,
which is contrary to his minor, and contrary to his first Distinction.

Ahab offered unto Naboth that which was equivalent to the full worth of his
Vineyard, but yet Ahab could not accept it for satisfaction, because God had
determined in Lev. 25. 23. That the Land should not be sold for ever, and
therefore Naboth could not account any equivalent thing to be satisfaction, but
his Vineyard in kind only, 1 King. 21. 3. So changeable are Mr. Nortons
Principles, that they can have but little truth in them.

Reply 2. But Mr. Norton does labor to confirm his minor, by Matthew. 5. 18. Till
Heaven and Earth pass, one jo^ or tittle shall in nowise pass from the Law,
till all be fulfilled.

This Scripture Mr. Norton does cite several times, 1. To prove that Christ
fulfilled the Law by suffering the Essential punishment of the Curse for us, as
in p. 10. 104. 213.

2 He does also often cite it, to prove that Christ, as God-Man Mediator,
fulfilled the Law in a way of works for us, as in p. 152, 192, 197, 240, 267.

Therefore, seeing he does lay such great weight upon this Text, I think it
needful to examine the true sense of this Text, and then it will appear that
Mr. Norton does pervert the true sense of it to his corrupt ends.

This Text of Mat. 5. 17. 18. does speak of Christ's fulfilling Mat. 5. 17, 18.
the Law; but not in respect of his own personal conformity to it (as Mr.
Norton would have it to speak) but it speaks of his fulfilling it by filling up
the spiritual sense of it, which was suppressed by the Scribes and Pharisees;
he fulfilled, that is to say, he filled up the true Interpretation of it in its
latitude, for the regulating of the inward man as well as of the outward, in
the way of sanctified obedience: In this sense Matthew says, That Christ came
to fulfill the Law; and in this sense it did belong to his Mediators Office, as
he was the Prophet of his Church, to rebuke the Scribes and Pharisees for
destroying the spiritual sense of the Law, by their litteral and corrupt
Interpretations; But says Christ, I came to fulfill it, by giving the
spiritual sense and meaning of it, for the regulating of the inward man as well
as of the outward, as ver. 21, 27, 33, 38, 43. do plainly show; And then he
concludes with an exhortation in ver. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, as your
Father which is in heaven is perfect; namely, be perfect in Exposition and
Doctrine, for it is the perfect rule of an upright life and conversation.

Mr. Joseph Mead on Mat. 5. 17. says thus, Think not that I In his Diatribae
or discourses on several Scriptures.
am come to take away the obligation of the Rule of man's duty to God, and to
his Neighbor, given first by Moses in the Law, and afterward repeated and
inculcated by the Prophets; but to fulfill them, that is, to supply or perfect
those Rules and Doctrines of just and unjust contained in them, by a more ample
inetrpretation, and other improvement befitting the state of the Gospel. For
surely, says he, this must be the meaning of this speech of our Savior; if we
be more willing (as we should) to take a sense from the Scripture, than to
bring one to it, does not the whole context (says he) evince it? And in p. 55.
he cites Irenaeus to the same sense (our Lord says Irenaeus) instead Irenaeus.
of Thou shall not commit Adultery, commands not so much as to lust; Instead of
Thou shall not kill, not so much as to be angry; Instead of to tithe, to
distribute all we have to the poor, etc. all which, says he, is not of one
that dissolves the Law, but fulfilleth and inlargeth it.

Secondly, Mr. Bruges says, Although it be true, that Christ Vindiciae legis,
p. 177.
may be said to fulfill the Law diverse ways; yet I think he speaks here most
principally for his Doctrinal fulfilling of it; for he opposes teaching the
Law, to breaking the Law.

And in p. 253. he says thus, Christ is said to fulfill the Law in respect of
the Pharisees, who by their corrupt glosses, had evacuated it, and in p. 273.
lect. 29. He opens Mat. 5. 17. 18. to his former sense.

Thirdly, Tindal says thus, Here have thou, dear Reader, an In his Prolog and
in Mat. 5. 17, 18.
Exposition of Matthew. 5, 6, and 7. Chapters, wherein Christ our spiritual Isaak
has dug again the Wells of Abraham, which the Scribes and Pharisees had
stopped and filled up with the earth of their false Expositions; he restores
the key of knowledge.

And on verse. 17. he says thus, I came not to destroy the Law, but to repair
it only, and to make it go upright where it halteth.

And presently after, I do but only wipe away the filth and rotten glosses
wherewith the Scribes and Pharisees have smeared the Law.

And says he in verse. 21, 22. Christ begins not to destroy the Law, as the
Pharisees had falsely accused him, but to restore it again to the right
understanding, and to purge it from the glosses of the Pharisees.

And says he in verse. 48. This Text does not say ye shall be as perfect as
God, but perfect after his example: To be perfect (says he) is to have pure
Doctrine without false Opinions, and that thy heart be to follow that learning.

Fourthly, Dr. Barnes answers the Popish Justiciaries thus, Barns in Tindal p.
229.
Our Master Christ in Mat. 5. does there reprove the false interpretation which
they did set to the Law, but he teaches no new works, nor is a giver of any
new Law.

Fifthly, Marlorat on Mat. 5. 17, 18. says, The Law is destroyed or broken,
when it is made void and of none effect by false Expositions and traditions of
men, or else by a wicked life; but here he understands the destroying of the
Law after the first manner, namely, by false expositions, and therefore it
follows, that Christ came to fulfill it by filling up the sense, for the
regulating of the inward as well as of the outward man.

Sixthly, Mr. Blake on Mat. 5. 18. says thus, Christ indeed as In vindiciae
Faederis, p. 49. See also Dr. Hammonds Annot on Mat. 5. 17, 18 and in his
Practical Cat. p. 104, 105. in his 5. Edition.
soon as he publicly appeared in the work of Redemption, was charged that he
came to destroy the Law, but this he did utterly disavow, professing, that he
came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. and says he (presently after)
Christ asserts a necessity of a higher degree of obedience than the Scribes and
Pharisees taught or practiced, saying, Except your righteousness exceed, etc.
which must be understood of righteousness inherent, in conformity to the Law,
as it appears by the precedent words, and is more fully confirmed in the words
that follow; and upon this occasion Christ opens the Commandments of the
Law, and how far we must transcend them, if ever we come to the Kingdom of
Heaven.

And to this purpose does Mr. Ball expound Mat. 5. 18. on the Covenant. p. 111.

Seventhly, I will now conclude with Mr. Calvin.

Although (says Calvin) Christ might worthily have boasted that he came to
fulfill the Law with the perfection of his life, yet here, notwithstanding, he
treats of Doctrine, and not of his Life.

You see that Calvin does deny that Christ spoke of fulfilling the Law in
Matthew. 5. 18. in Mr. Nortons sense; he treates here, Calvin on Mat. 5 17, 18.
says Calvin, of Doctrine, and not of his life, much less of suffering the
essential punishment of the curse, as Mr. Norton would have this Text to speak
for the proof of his Assumption.

I may justly retort his own words against himself, in p. 145. Let not the
Reader be moved with the multitude of Scriptures which he has mis alleged
against the Dialogue: but know, the erring and private interpretation of them
to be but a very fallacy, of putting that for a cause which is not a cause;
namely, that which is not a divine Testimony, for a divine Testimony: The
letter of the Scripture alleged not according to its sense, is not Scripture.
No Heretics or Hetrodox, as such, ever cited the word of God.

His second Argument is this, in page 11.
Either Christ suffered the wrath of God, i. e. the punishment due to the sins
of the Elect, or else God is untrue in that commination, He that sins shall
die, because the Elect themselves do not suffer it.

But God is true, 1 Samuel, 15. 29. Tit. 1. 2.


Reply. This Argument is just like the former, they are both founded on the
same supposition, namely, that the essential curse of hell torments threatened
in the first Covenant, must either be executed on the Elect, or on their Surety
in their stead.

As for his proof of his Proposition, The soul that sins shall die, Ezekiel.
18. 20. This Text I have examined, and brought it from the Context, to speak to
another sense, in chap. 6. at Reply 9.

2 As for that in Genesis 2. 17. I have denied it in his sense, in the former
Argument.

But it had been more true, if he had framed his Argument thus.

Either the Elect suffered the spiritual death in sin, threatened on all
mankind, in Genesis 2. 17. or else God is not true; as I have opened the sense of
Genesis 2. 17. in Chap. 2. Sect. 3.

But God is true, etc.

His third Argument is this, in page 11.
He that was the Surety of the Elect, was bound to pay their debt, and
consequently to satisfy the Law for them.

But Christ was the Surety of the Elect, Heb. 7. 22.


Reply. I deny the major, for I have showed in Chap. 2. that if it were indeed
true, that Christ was a Surety in the same obligation with Adam, to pay his
debt of obedience, and to suffer the curse of his disobedience, according to
the conditions of the first Covenant, Then 1. Christ must go to the land of
Eden to eat of the tree of Life, that so he may truly perform that act of
obedience for Adam. And 2. He must be dead in sin, that so he may suffer the
curse of his disobedience, for his sinful act in eating of the tree of
Knowledge of good and evil. If Mr. Norton will say, that these things could
not be done and suffered by Christ; thence I infer, that Christ then was not a
Surety in the same obligation with Adam, to pay his proper debt of obedience,
and to suffer his proper curse in kind.

Secondly, I deny the minor; namely, that Christ was such a Surety; that place
cited to prove it in Heb. 7. 22. is miserably abused to his sense; and yet he
does often cite it to prove his sense of the word Surety; and he puts very
great weight on the word Surety in his sense, and therefore he does repeat it
above twenty or thirty times, and his proof is still from Heb. 7. 22. as in
page 85. 149, etc.

Therefore I will now examine the sense of the word Surety, in Heb. 7. 22. and
then it will appear to have a differing sense Heb. 7. 22.
from Mr. Nortons sense.

The Text speaks thus,

By so much was Jesus made a Surety of a better Testament, namely, by so much
as Gods oath is a more infallible assurance of the perpetual Priesthood of
Christ, above the temporary Priesthood of Aaron and his Sons, by so much is the
Priesthood of Christ to intercede for us more certain than theirs.

For when the Covenant of the Priesthood was conferred and See Aias. in Lev. 8.
36.
confirmed unto the Tribe of Levi, in Aaron and his Sons Lev. 8. (which
Covenant was life and peace, Mal. 2. 5. called also Gods Covenant of peace,
Numb. 25. 13. for God gave the office and maintenance to the Priests by
Covenant, Numb. 18. 7, 8. 1 Samuel 2. 27, 35.) they were made Priests without an
oath (because God would be at liberty to alter that Covenant) also they were
many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death.

These Priests served unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, offering
gifts and sacrifices, which could not make him that did the service perfect, as
pertaining to the conscience; for they were carnal Ordinances imposed on them
till the time of Reformation, that is, until the coming of Christ, who is now
sprung out of the Tribe of Iudab, and was made a Priest of God with an oath,
and a Surety of a better Testamental-Covenant, established upon better
promises; and because he continues for ever, he has a Priesthood that passes
not from him to another.

Secondly, Dr. Hammon does thus paraphrase upon Heb. 7. 20, 21, 22.

God snare, and will not repent, which (says he) is an argument of the
immutability and weightiness of the matter, and of the ternal continuance of
this Priesthood of Christ, and so of the pre-eminence of it beyond the
Aaronical, which was not established by God with an Oath; and so much as a
durable, immutable, and eternal Priesthood, is better than a transitory,
mutable, and final Priesthood (such as the Levitical, being fixed in mortal
persons, one succeeding the other, and as was it self mortal, not to last any
longer than till the coming of Christ) so much better was that Covenant,
wherein Christ was Sponsor and Surety for God, that it should be made good to
us on Gods part, confirmed to us by Christ in the Gospel; a better Covenant
than that of the Law, wherein Moses undertook for God to us.

This Scripture thus expounded, is so far from confirming Mr. Nortons sense of
the word Surety, that it utterly over-turnes it.

For this Exposition makes Christ to be Gods Priest, and Gods Surety to us; but
Mr. Norton makes this Surety to be our Surety to God in the same obligation
with Adam to the first Covenant.

The Priests in the Law were ordained by God, to make atonement for the people
for their ceremonial sins, by sprinkling the blood of their sacrifices on the
Altar for their atonement; but Christ was ordained by an oath first made to
David, Psa. 110. That be would raise a Priest out of his loins after the order
of Melchisedech, and that by his own blood he should make atonement, to assure
their conscience of the pardon of all their moral sins, and so he should be
Gods Surety of a better Testamental-Covenant, as Mr. Ainsworth translates is,
for the greek signifies both a Covenant and a Testament.

It is called a Covenant (says Mr. Ball) in respect of the manner of
agreement, and a Testament, in respect of the manner of Ball on the Coven. p.
196
confirming; a Covenant in respect of God; a Testament in respect of Christ,
who dyed as a Testator, and confirmed by his death the testamentary promise
made before (of God) for the obtaining of the eternal inheritance by the
remission of sins.

Hence I conclude, that this word Surety, in Heb. 7. 22. cannot be understood
of Gods making Christ to be our Surety in the same obligation with Adam to the
first Covenant.

Secondly, For his proof of the consequence of his Argument by Rom, 3. 31. I
refer the Reader to my Reply to his oighth Argument.

Thirdly, He confirms his Argument by this Reason, We are to know (says he)
that the Covenant of Grace it self obliges us to fulfill the Covenant of Works
in our Surety.

Thirdly, I grant that the Covenant of Grace does oblige us to observe the
moral Law as a Rule of our sanctified walking, as I have showed at large in my
exposition of Lev. 18. 5. in cha. 2. sect. 2 But the Covenant of Grace does not
oblige us to fulfill the first Covenant of Works given to Adam, for the
Covenant was about things indifferent in their own nature, and it was but
temporary, to last no longer than till the trial of Adams obedience or
disobedience was made by one act, as I have showed in Chap. 2.

2 In case the first Covenant had been made in relation to the De Reconc. pec.
p. 2. l. 1. c. 3. 11. 4. etc. 5. n. 7.
moral Law of Nature, yet in that sense Mr. Norton does answer such an Argument
as this, gathered from Illyricus and Hemingius, drawn from Romans 3. 31. and I
believe a judicious Reader will find more satisfaction in his reasoning, than
in Mr. Nortons. But faith Mr. Norton in page 11.


The word Better is not to be referred to either Covenant it self, but to the
manner of the despensation of the Covenant of Grace under the Gospel.

Reply. It is evident that the word Better is so be referred to the Covenant of
Grace, which is better than the outward, legal, ceremonial Covenant: But it
seems to me that Mr. Norton does not understand the Apostles comparative
Argument, how Christ was made a Surety of a better Covenant; but for the
Readers information, I will open my understanding of the word better Covenant.

First, Consider that God made two Covenants with his people Israel at Mount
Sinai. First, An outward, typical Covenant. Secondly, an inward, spiritual
Covenant; namely, a Covenant of Works, and a Covenant of Grace, and both these
are comprehended in the ten Commandments.

The Ceremonial outward worship is called the first Covenant, and to it did
belong Dicaiomata, Ordinances of Divine Service, Heb. 1. 9. which in Ver. 10.
are called carnal Ordinances, or Decrees, as M. Ainsworth expresses it in Ps.
2. 7. Some translate Dicaiomata, Justifications (as I noted before on Gal. 4.
4.) And in Dan. 8. 14. when the Temple was ceremonially cleansed, it is said to
be Tzedek, justified; and so likewise all such as were legally cleansed, were
justified as to their personal appearing in Gods Sanctuary; but Mr. Ainsworth
does translate it just Ordinances, or Righteous Statutes, in Numb. 31. 21. The
same word, says he, Paul uses, in Romans 2. 26. If the uncircumcision keep the
Ordinances, or righteous Statutes of the Law (namely, in the spiritual
signification) and in Romans 8. 4. That the Ordinance or righteous Statue of Note
that To. 8. 4. is no proof that Christ kept the moral Law for our righteousness
by Gods imputation, because it alludes to the Ordinances of the Ceremonial Law,
as Ains. and the Dialogue do carry it.
the Law might be fulfilled in us; And so in Deuteronomy. 4. 1. the word Ordinances
does there denote the ceremonial Ordinances, as Circumcision, the Tabernacle,
and all the other outward services of the Sanctuary, these are called the first
Covenant, in Heb. 9. 1. and the outward performances of these Services (though
they wanted faith to make a spiritual application) did ex opere operato
justify their persons in respect of their coming into Gods presence in his
Sanctuary; but this first Covenant was ordained but for their present
Tutorship, and therefore at the coming of Christ they are said to wax old and
to be ready to vanish away, Heb. 8. 13.

And by three things all Israel did enter first into this Covenant of Works. 1.
By Circumcision, Exodus 12. 48. 2. By Baptism, Exodus 19. 10. 3. By Sacrifice,
Exodus 24. 5. See Ains. in Genesis 17. 12.

This first Covenant was confirmed with the blood of Beasts, to assure them,
that if they did carefully observe the Ordinances of it, they should be
justified and cleansed from their ceremonial sins, and then they might freely
come unto Gods presence in his Sanctuary, or else they might not, under the
penalty of being cut off, as I noted before on Gal. 4. 4.

The Ordinances of this Covenant were written in a Book which is called the
book of the Covenant, 2 King. 23. 2. Deuteronomy. 24. 4, 7. See Ains. in Psa. 25. 10.

But this Covenant of Works did not disanull the Covenant of Grace that was
confirmed (430 years) before of God, in respect of Christ, Gal. 3. 17.

This Covenant was also confirmed by the blood and death of beasts, Heb. 9. 18,
19. and the people entered into an oath and a curse if they kept not this
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. 12. Nehem. 10. 29. And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled
is on the people, and said, behold the blood of the Covenant that Iebovah bath
stricken with you, concerning all these words, Exodus, 24. 7, 8. and thus the
first Covenant or Tement was not dedicated without blood, Heb. 9. 18, 23. and
this sprinkling of blood was done with scarlet-wool and Hysop, Heb. 9. 19, 20.
according to the manner prescribed in the Law, Levz 14. 6, 7.

But all these ceremonial cleansings, though they were effectual by Gods
Ordinance, ex opere operate, to justify the outward man, for their coming into
Gods presence in his Sanctuary; yet without Faith in Christ they had no power
to cleanse the Conscience from their moral sins; and therefore as soon as Paul
was brought home to Christ, he renounced all his former righteousness of the
Law, wherein he formerly trusted, Phil. 3. 9. And, says the Apostle, If the
blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; and if the blood of Birds, and
water, and hysop, and scarlet, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the
purifying of the flesh; How much more (says the Apostle) shall the blood of
Christ purge the Conscience from dead works? Heb. 9. 13, 14. Levit. 14. 7.
Psalm. 51. 9. Numb. 8. 7. Levit. 14. 8. Levit. 15. 5, 18. and 13. 22. with Heb.
10. 22.

These ceremonial Laws did not command that which was good, nor forbid that
which was evil in it self, and therefore says Weems in his second volume p. 4.
the ceremonial Laws are called Statutes that were not good, Ezekiel. 20. 25.

Now the Priests that did mediate between God and his people, for the
forgiveness of their ceremonial sins by the blood of beasts, were made Priests
after the Law of a carnal Commandment, and therefore their office must be
disanulled for the weakness and unprofitableness of it, and therefore those
Priests were made without an Oath, because they should be changed; but Christ
was made a Priest by an oath, after the order of Melchisedech, And by so much
was Jesus made a Surety of a better Testament, because God by his oath made him
a Surety, and an unchangeable Priest for our Moral Reconciliation, according to
the promises of the better Testament.

And thus have I opened the word Better Covenant. Mr. Norton makes the first
Covenant with Adam to be the old Covenant, but that is not suitable to the
Apostles Argument; and therefore I make the Ceremonial Covenant at Mount Sinai
to be the first Covenant in the Apostles sense in this place, and to be old,
and to be done away by the Mediator of the better new Testament by his death,
Heb. 9. 15.

His Fourth Argument examined, is this, in p. 12.
Either Christ suffered the punishment due to the Elect for sin, or the Law
remains for ever unsatisfied; for it is as true as Salvation it self, that
the Elect satisfy it not in themselves.


Reply 1. It is as true as Salvation it self, that all the Elect do in
themselves suffer that dreadful death in sin that was denounced to man's nature
in general, in case Adam as their head in the first Covenant did eat of the
tree of Knowledge of good and evil; and that death is the essential curse that
is there threatened, as I have showed in chap. 2. sect. 3.

2. In that the Elect do escape eternal death, which God ordained The Law is
satisfied either by payment in kind, or by that which is equivalent.
afterward as a consequent of that death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. it is from
Christ's satisfaction. It is not required by the Rules of Equity, whether Divine
or Humane, that satisfaction for wrongs done should always be made in kind, or
by way of counter-passion; as for example, in case a man in his rage should
beat his Neighbor, or butcher his Cattle, were it as good and as just
satisfactio for the supreme Magistrate to command the party wronged to exercise
the like rage and cruelty on his person, or live goods, as it is to award him
satisfaction by a valuable sum of money, or the like? But it is evident, that
the Law may be satisfied two ways, 1. Either according to the exact letter of
the Law, which requires Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Exodus 21. 24. and so for
him that steals one Ox, five Exodus 21. 24.
Oxen in kind, Exodus 22. 1. Or 2. The Law may be satisfied by suffering or by
paying that which is equivalent to the damage of the Eye lost: And so in case a
poor man steal an Ox, and not able to pay five Oxen for one, yet if his rich
friend will pay that which the owner shall accept for five Oxen, the Law in the
true intent of it is satisfied; and so the first born of man and of beast was
redeemed with money, Numb. 18. 15, 16. In like sort I find this sentence in the
learned, that that is to be held for satisfaction which was mutually agreed on
between the Father and the Mediator from Eternity, and to this very purpose
does Mr. Gataker cite that Proverb, Money is recompensed by the feet; and thus
Christ made satisfaction for the Elect; and this is acknowledged even by such
as hold that Christ made satisfaction by suffering the wrath of God. There is a
two fold payment of debt, says Mr. Ball, one of the things altogether the same
in the obligation; and this, ipse facto, freeth from punishment, whether it be
paid by the Debtor himself, or by the Surety Another of a thing which is not
altogether the same in the obligation, so that some act of the Creditor or
Governor must come unto it, which is called Remission; in which case
deliverance does not follow ipso facto upon the satisfaction; and of this kind,
says he, is the satisfaction of Christ.

Now if Mr. Nortons meaning be, that except Christ did satisfy the punishment
due to the Elect in kind, the Law does for ever remain unsatisfied, then I deny
the major; for the Law may be satisfied, though Christ did never suffer the
Curse in kind.

1 It cannot be in kind, according to the first Covenant made with Adam, as I
have showed often.

2 It is evident, that it was from another Covenant made between the Trinity,
according to the Council of their own will, which Covenant was revealed to Adam
presently after the fall, as I have opened it in some measure.

Mr. Gataker in his Elenchtick Animad. gives this exposition of Upon Goviarus
p. 25. Heb. 10. 10.
Heb. 10. 10. I come to do thy will, by which Will we are sanctified, through
the oblation of his body, etc.

That Will (says he) is the Stipulation (or Covenant) of the Father, about
Christ's undertaking our cause upon himself, and performing those things that
are requisite for the expiation of our sins: therefore it comprehends all the
obedience of Christ, which he performed to the peculiar Law of Mediation; for
this Christ did not make; satisfaction by fulfilling the first Covenant, but by
fulfilling another voluntary Covenant that was made between the Trinity.
Law set apart, he was not bound (says he) by any other Law, to the oblation
of himself.

Hence it follows, that if Christ made satisfaction by another voluntary
Covenant between the Trinity, then not by the first supreme Covenant, made with
Adam. And to this very purpose also, does Mr. Ball and Mr. Baxter speak, as I
have noted in Chap. 3. Sect. 3.

His fifth Argument examined, which is this.
If the Gospel save without satisfaction given to the Law; then the Law is made
void by the Gospel, and the Law and the Promises are contrary.

But neither of these are so, Romans 3. 31. Gal. 3. 21.

Therefore, etc.


Reply, If by satisfaction Mr. Norton mean such a satisfaction as he has
formerly laid down, namely, by suffering the essential torments of Hell in
kind; Then I deny the consequence: For first, The Gospel does save without
satisfaction in kind; And Secondly, without any prejudice to the Law, as I have
showed in my Reply to the former Argument, and shall reply further to Romans 3.
31. at the Examination of his eighth Argument.

His Sixth Argument examined, which is this.
If Christ suffered not the punishment due to the Elect; then the Elect must
suffer it in their own persons.


Reply, Niether of these is necessary; for the Gospel does tell is of another
price paid, and so consequently of satisfaction by that price (and therefore
not by suffering hell torments in kind) as in Isa. 53. 10. When he shall make,
or set, his soul a trespass, i. e. a Trespass offering, as Ephesians. 5. 2. Mat.
20. 28. and by his soul must be understood, his vital soul, as I have expounded
it in Chap. 7. Sect. 3. p. 68.

His seventh Argument examined, which is this.
If Christ did not suffer the punishment due to the Elect for sin; then there
can be no justification of a sinner, without his suffering the punishment due
to sin, i. e. his passive obedience; There is no reason to acknowledge his
active obedience (whence we are accepted as righteous) this being in vain
without that; if there be neither passive obedience, nor active, then there is
no remission of sins, nor acceptance as Righteous, and consequently no
justification.


Reply. The consequence of this Argument is built upon a very weak foundation;
neither do the reasons annexed sufficiently strengthen it.

First (says he) If Christ did not suffer the punishment due to the Elect for
sin, then there can be no remission.

This is but humane language, the Scripture does not say so; but that which the
Scripture says, is this, namely, That without shedding of blood there is no
remission of sin, Heb. 9. 22. God told the result of the eternal Decree to
Adam, that the Devil must persecute Christ, and shed his blood by peircing Heb.
9. 22. Esa. 53. 10. Genesis 3 15. Phi. 2. 8.
him in the foot-soal, and yet that the Seed of the Woman at the self-same time
should break the Devils Head-plot, by continuing obedient to the death through
all his temptations and trials; and then having finished all that was written
of him, he should set his soul a Trespass offering, which he did, when he said,
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit; and at that time he bowed his head,
and gave up the ghost, by his own Priestly Power, and not by Satan's power.

And without this combat with Satan, and without this shedding of blood,
there is no Satisfaction, and so no Remission.

But this Death and Sacrifice of Christ might be, and was, without any
suffering from the immediate wrath of God.

Though not without Gods appointment and permission to Satan to do his utmost
against this Seed of the Woman, to spoil his obedience if he could, in which
conflict Christ had his Foot-soal pierced, but the Devil had his Head plot
broken, Col. 2. 14, 15.
Genesis 3. 15. because he could not provoke Christ to any impatience, or turning
away back till he had spoiled the Head-plot of Principalities and Powers by his
obedient death on the Cross.

The Apostle does tell us, that we have Remission of sins by virtue of Christ's
satisfaction, namely, by his bloody death and sacrifice, sacrifice, Heb. 9. 15,
26, 28. Heb. 10. 10. 14. without any mention of his suffering of the essential
torments of Hell, in all the Scripture, though the blessed Scriptures are often
perverted by Mr. Norton to that sense.

The rest that follows is built but upon this sandy foundation, and therefore
it will fall of it self.

His eight Argument examined, which is this:
If justifying faith establish the Law, then Christ the object of faith, has
established, that is, fulfilled the Law, for otherwise the Law cannot be
established by faith.

But justifying faith has established the Law, Romans 3. 31. Therefore Christ
the object of faith, has fulfilled the Law.


Reply. 1. If by this conclusion, Christ the object of faith, has fulfilled
the Law, he means no more but this, namely, that Christ fulfilled the Law in
the Preceptive part of it, then he proves no more than the Dialogue, and all
good Christians do grant.

But if he mean that Christ fulfilled the vindicative part of the Law, by
suffering the punishment of the eternal Curse, which doubtless is the great
thing that he aims at, then any ordinary Reader, may easily see that his
Argument does not conclude so much.

This Argument therefore makes nothing to the point in hand, except it be to
fill up the number of Eight.

But yet I will examine the premises of his Syllogism.

1 I except against the consequence of his first Proposition; for though the
Text does expressly say, That justifying faith does establish the Law, yet it
does not thence follow, That Christ the object of faith has fulfilled it in
his sense.

2 Else the Law cannot be established by faith; this also is another Paradox,
for many Orthodox Divines do show how the Romans 3. 31.
Law may be established in other respects.

Reply. 2. I say, that Mr. Nortons exposition of establishing the Law in Romans
3. 31. is nothing near the Apostles meaning.

What though Beza and Pareus go that way that Mr. Norton does; yet Dr. Willet
(whom Mr. Norton does often much approve) does reject their exposition, and
that upon this ground, because the Apostle speaks there of fulfilling the Law,
by the members of Christ, and not by Christ the Head alone. And Beza in his
short notes does expound it as Dr. Willet does, [We^] sairh he, make it firm
and effectual.

But Calvin renders the text thus [It is] established and confirmed: And so
speaks Piscator in his Moral Observations on that text, refuting the
Antinomians.

Mr. Burges says, It is a Metaphor borrowed from corroborating In (...)iciae
legi(...)ct. 21. p. ^^9.
or strengthening a pillar that is ready to fall.

Peter Martyr accords with Calvin and Piscator, namely, that to establish is to
confirm, in opposition to abrogate or disanull.

And truly, seeing the latter part of the verse does run in opposition to the
former; it follows, that to establish the Law, must not be expounded to fulfill
the Law, as Mr. Norton does carry it, for says he, Christ the object of faith
has fulfilled the Law.

But because four of Mr. Nortons eight Arguments are grounded on his exposition
of this Text, and also because he makes this Text to be one of his great proofs
of Heresy against the Dialogue, Therefore I will labor to show the Reader
what the Spirit of God speaks in it.

1 I entreat the Judicious Reader to take notice, That the Question betwixt us,
is not, whether faith does establish the Law, or no, for the Text it self does
affirm it.

But the point in difference is, In what sense does faith establish the Law:
Mr. Norton says, That Christ does establish the Law by suffering the essential
curse of Hell Torments. But in that sense I deny it.

Neither will I tire out the Reader by relating the various apprehensions of
the Learned, but pitch upon such as I believe are sounde^t.

1 Take notice, that Peter Martyr on this place does copiously show how the Law
is established, several ways, and yet he has not a word in any of his
expositions that Christ suffered the essential curse of the Law; he comes
nothing near to Mr. Nortons sense.

2 Aretius shows, how the Law is established three ways by says, and yet he
has not a word of establishing it by Christ's suffering of the essential curse.

Mr. Wotton in his Answer to an Argument taken from this Text by Heningius,
shows, that the Apostle speaks of establishing De Recons. peccatoris, part. 2.
l. 1. c. 5 n. 7. p. 120. etc.
the Law as it is a Rule of Justice, which is in very deed the proper end of
the Law; and for this sense, he produces the Testimony of Augustine, Anselm,
and Primasius.

4 Mr. Burges brings in three opinions of the Orthodox, who In Vindiciae leg is
lect. 21. ult in p. 120, 121.
show how the Law is established by faith; But he rejects Mr. Nortons way of
establishing (as Dr. Willet did) and concludes with the judgment of Austine,
that the Law is established, because by the Gospel we obtain grace in some
measure to fulfill the Law; and in this he agrees with Mr. Wotton; and his
second Doctrine upon this Text is this, That the Doctrine of Christ and grace
in the highest and fullest manner does not overthrow but establish the Law.

5 Mr. Blake says thus, Paul foreseeing that this very thing In vindiciae
Foederis p. 50.
would be charged upon him, as it was upon Christ (namely, that he came to
destroy the Law, Mat. 5. 17, 18.) says, Do we make void the Law through faith?
yea we establish the Law, Romans 3. 31. our Doctrine is a confirmation, and no
abolition of it; and in other words he proceeds to show, that faith does
establish the Law as it is the Rule of sanctified walking.

6 Says Mr. Ball, The Apostle does not perpetually and abso. Ball on the
Coven. p. 115.
lutely oppose the Law and the Covenant of grace; for he teaches expressly,
that Faith establishes the Law, Romans 3. 31. for (says he) the Apostle
understood the force and sentence of the Law to consist in Faith; But because
the Jews, addicted to the letter of the Law, did pretermit the force and life
of it, Paul proves that the Law so taken and separated from Faith, to be the
cause, not of life, but of death, etc.

7 Tindal says, Faith only justifies, makes righteous, and In Tindals works
fol. 41.
fulfilleth the Law; for it brings the Spirit through Christ's deservings, The
Spirit brings lust, loses the heart, makes him free, and gives him
strength to work the deeds of the Law with love, even as the Law requires;
then at last, out of the same Faith springs all good works of their own
accord, and that means he in Romans 3. 31. for after he had cast away the works
of the Law, his speech sounded as though he would break and disanul the Law
through Faith; But to that he answers, We destroy not the Law through Faith,
but maintain, fur^her, and stablish the Law, that is to say, we fulfill the Law
through Faith, Romans 3. 31. and this Exposition he gives also in sol. 46. and in
other places.

8 Dr. Barns does thus dispute with the Popish Bishops, Then (says he) came
your overthwart Fathers and said to Paul, thou Dr. Barns printed with Tindals
works. fol. 238.
destroyest the Law, and teach that it justifies not: God forbid (says
Paul) we teach that the very way to fulfill the Law is Faith, and without which
all the works of the Law be but sin.

I could add more Orthodox writers to this sense, but because these that I
have cited are no Babes in Divinity, therefore I believe they will satisfy the
judicious Reader, of the true sense, and that Mr. Nortons Exposition is a
forced and erroneous Exposition.

From all the premises therefore, I may well conclude, That Mr. Norton has
not, nor cannot infer a concluding Argument from Romans 3. 31. to prove that
Christ fulfilled the Law by suffering the essential punishment of the curse;
and therefore his groundwork of censuring the Dialogue of Heresy from this
text, may justly be returned upon his own head. And now let the Judicious
Reader judge betwixt us.

CHAP. IX.
His Answer to the point of Christ's satisfaction, as it is stated in the
Dialogue, Examined.

The sum of his Answer is drawn up into this Argument, in p. 17. and it may be
called his ninth Argument.

Such meritorious Mediatorly obedience, a^ indebteth God in point of justice to
remit the just punishment of sin, without any violation of justice; nay, with
the establishment of justice, must needs be done in such a way of satisfaction
unto justice, as includes a suffering of justice.

But the meritorious Mediatorly obedience of Christ is such a meritorious
medatorly obedience, whereby God is indebted in point of justice to remit the
just punishment of sin, 1 John 1. 9. without the violation of Justice, Romans 3.
26. Yea, with the establishing of Justice.

Therefore the meritorious Mediatorly obedience of Christ was performed in such
away of satisfaction unto Justice, as includes also a suffering of Justice.

Reply, IF I had met with this Argument in another Book, wherein I had not been
concerned, I should have thought it but a silly Argument, for neither the
major, minor, nor Conclusion, are without their saults.

1 The Conclusion is faulty, because it comes not up in terminis to what should
be concluded and proved.

For the point of difference, as it is stated by Mr. Norton but five lines
before this Syllogism, speaks thus,

You know, that we affirm and defend, that Christ suffered the wrath of God,
and that in a way of satisfaction unto divine Justice: But in this Conclusion
of his Syllogism, there is never a word of Christ's suffering the wrath of God.
But bad he made his Conclusion so, the Scriptures cited in the minor will not
bear up such a Conclusion.

2 His major is unsound; for God may be indebted by the meritorious mediatorly
obedience of Christ, in point of justice, The ground of satisfaction to Gods
Justice arises from the condisions of the voluntary Covenant.
to rem^t the just punishment of sin, without any violation of Justice, nay,
with the establishing of Justice, and yet there is no nec^ssity it should be
done in such a way of satisfaction unto Justice, as includes such a suffering
of Justice, as must be executed upon him from the vindicative wrath of God, as
he affirms from Genesis 2. 17. And the reason is so plain, that he that runs may
read it: Namely, because the ground of satisfaction to Justice arises not from
the sufferings themselves, as they were threatened to the sinner for his
disobedience to the first Covenant, but from the conditions of the voluntary
Covenant, wherein all the Trinity were equally Covenanters, and all the
Articles of that Covenant were positive Laws, unto which as a voluntary
Mediator he yielded obedience, as I have showed in chap. 2.

The Father propounded his Terms to the second person, and the second person
covenanted to do what he thought fit to accept and perform, and the performance
of that was accepted by the Father, as fully satisfactory to his justice, as
payment in kind could have been

He that does voluntarily undertake to perform a combat Obedience performed to
the Articles of a voluntary Covenant does merit the prize.
with his opposite Champion, in order to the voluntary Laws and Covenants that
were made for the trial of Masteries; if he did strive and overcome his
opposite Champion, according to those Laws, did merit the prize, by vortue of
that free Covenant, and free performance; suppose it were for the redemption of
Captives that he had deserved death; Justice according to Covenant was as fully
satisfied by this performance, as if the Delinquent, or the voluntary Surety in
his place, had suffered full punishment in kind.

Again take another instance of a voluntary Covenant* a Pepper corn paid by a
Tenant to his Landlord, according to the conditions of a voluntary Covenant, is
current pay and satisfaction also, though not under the notion of a valuable
consideration, yet under the notion of a voluntary bargain and Covenant,
mutually agreed to by both parties.

These instances show that the ground of satisfaction to justice may arise as
well from the voluntary cause as from the order of natural causes. I hope none
is so weak as to think, that by this last instance, I value Christ's
satisfaction to a pepper corn, for his death and sacrifice was of infinite
value in it self, because it proceeded form his person that was infinite: But
it was therefore satisfactory, because it was ^ade satisfactory by the
conditions of a voluntary Covenant; and indeed, nothing of the greatest value
can be called a satisfactory price, until it be mu^ually agreed on between the
person offended, and the person offering to make satisfaction.

A^ab was a person of dignity, and he offered a valuable consideration to
Naboth for his Vineyard; for he offered as much 1 King. 21(...).
for it (...) it was worth, or as good a Vineyard in the place of it; but
neither this eminent person, nor this valuable consideration, could be a
sufficient price to purchase Naboths Vineyard; because Naboth did not, nor by
the Law could not consent to make it a price, as I have showed in Chap. 8.
Sect. 1. Even so, had not the Father Covenanted to accept of the person, and of
the death, and sacrifice of Christ for our redemption, it had not been a price;
but because God did voluntarily Covenant to accept it, therefore it is now the
only full price of satisfaction to Gods Justice.

But it seems the difference lies in the conditions of the Covenant; The
difference in stating the voluntary Covenant, betwixt Mr. Norton and my self.
for Mr. Norton holds that Christ Covenanted to do according to the will of his
Father, and that his Father willed he should obey the Law of Works, and suffer
the Essential punishment of the Curse, for the exact fulfilling of the first
Covenant, as our Surety (as his first Proposition speaks;) and hence he makes
all Christ's sufferings to be inflicted upon him from Gods vindicative Justice,
as from the supreme Lawgiver and Judge; because Christ was our Surety, and so
a sinner by Gods imputation; and so he makes the Rule of Gods proceedings in
justice against Christ, to be legal, according to the natural order of Courts
of Justice against Delinquents, and therefore he makes all Christ's obedience,
both in his incarnation, life, and death, to be all legal, and to be all
grounded on the moral Law.

But in Cap. 2. I have showed not only sufficient Reasons, but also the
concurrence of eminent Orthodox Divines, that I believe will sufficiently
satisfy a judicious Reader, that the whole order of Christ's satisfaction is
from the voluntary cause, and from other conditions in the voluntary cause, and
that the voluntary cause is never overruled by a supreme compulsory power, as
I have here and there expressed in sundry parts of my Reply. It is true, says
a learned Divine, That Christ merited, as well as satisfied for us; but (says
he) that by which he merited was not his never sinning, or perfect obedience
(for that was due to the Law under which he was born) but his free and
voluntary giving up himself to death, without any obligation to that duty lying
upon him, as man, so to do, according to that of Heb. 10. 7. and Phil. 2. 6.
Being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto
the death, even the death of the Cross; which (obedience) is there set as the
foundation of his merit (wherefore God that highly exalted him.) But all this
you see is quite another matter from his active obedience, or fulfilling the
Law, as being so imputed to us: But touching the difference of his mediatorial
obedience, from his humane legal obedience, See more in chap. 3.

I have also, I think, sufficiently showed, that nothing (though never so
excellent in it self) can be called a price, till it be made a price by a
mutual covenant and contract, and therefore when the blood and death of Christ
is called the price of our redemption, even before the foundation of the world,
1 Pet. 1. 19, 20. it is a sure and certain proof to our conscience, that it was
formally made to be the full price of our redemption, by a mutual Covenant and
Contract between the Trinity before ever the foundation of the world was laid.

3 His Minor is also faulty, as it is to be understood in his sense; but let
others of a differing judgment, take this sentence of his [in point of
Iustice] in their sense, and then such persons will not stumble at the minor;
But take it as Mr. Norton does expound the Justice of the first Covenant, in
Genesis 2. 17. and then the minor must be denied, and the Scriptures produced by
him to prove it, must be showed to be corruptly cited. And therefore for the
better clearing of the truth, I will search into the clear sense of those
Scriptures.

First, That of Romans 3. 31. has already been tried in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and found too light in his sense, in the eighth Argument of the
former Chapter.

Secondly, As for that in 1 Ioh. 1. 9. If we consess our sins, he is 1 John 1.
9.
just to forgive us our sins.

Reply 1. No man will deny that God is just in forgiving sins to such as do
truly confess them, because the Text in terminis does affirm it. But the great
matter of the dispute is, in what sense is God said to be just in forgiving
sins to such as do confess them.

Mr. Norton says, That God is just in forgiving, because he had the
satisfaction from Christ by suffering the same Essential torments of Hell that
were threatened to Adam in the word Death, in Genesis 2. 17.

But I have made a sufficient Reply to this in Chap. 4. Sect. 7. Reply 5.
namely, that full satisfaction in kind, and free forgiveness, cannot possibly
stand together, because they are contrary to each other.

But because the blessed Trinity, in their voluntary Covenant, did agree that
such a performance by Christ should be accepted of God for the procuring of his
Atonement or Reconciliation to such sinners, the Holy Ghost for Christ's
satisfaction sake did undertake to unite to Christ by faith (as the conditoinal
promises in the New Covenant do testify) Therefore God cannot but show himself
to be just according to his said Covenant with Christ, by forgiving the sins of
such sinners, and so cleansing them from all unrighteousness.

And thus God is just, both according to his Covenant with Christ, and also
according to his new Covenant to believing sinners, revealed to them from his
Covenant with Christ.

And this was clearly typified in the Law, by the practice of confession of
sin, and by laying their hand on the head of the sin offerings for the
procuring of their Attonements, in Lev. 1. 4. and 4. 29. etc. as I have rightly
explained the matter in the Dialogue, p. 32, 33, 35, 36, and 155, and in this
Reply also in Chap. 13.

So then the ground of Gods Justice whereby he has made himself a Debtor to
forgive the sins of believers, is his voluntary Covenant with Christ, namely,
that upon his undertaking to perform the Combat with Satan, without any
disobedience to the Laws of the Combat, and at last to make his soul a
Sacrifice, then he would be reconciled, and forgive the sins of such sinners as
did believe their Atonement thus procured through Christ's death and sacrifice,
as I have formerly hinted it in my Reply to his fourth Proposition in Chap. 2.

And this forgiveness (both as it relates to his Covenant with Christ, and to
his new Covenant with the Elect) is called God Righteousness in Romans 3. and in
2 Cor. 5. 21. for God must needs be as just and righteous when he performs his
Covenant of Forgiveness made first to Christ in reference to his satisfaction,
and so made also to all the members of his new Covenant, As when he does
execute his vindicative threatenings upon the impenitent; and therefore such
poor humble sinners may by faith call upon God to make them partakers of his
Righteousness, namely of his gracious forgiveness.

This Exposition, How God is just, has a more firm foundation in this Text of
1 Ioh. 1. 9. than Mr. Nortons Exposition has. The Examination of Romans 3. 26.


To declare at this time his Righteousness (or his Justice) That he might be
just, and the Iustifier of him which believes in Romans 3 26.
Jesus.

This Text Mr. Norton does put both in the Frontispiece, and also in the
conclusion of his book, and he does repeat it sundry other times also in his
book, as the mirror of his Tenent, as in page 4. 17. 40. 55. 213. 246. etc. and
he thinks that the very words of the Text do plainly confirm his sense,
because he has bestowed but little pains in his Exposition.

Mr. Norton makes God to be just in this Text, because he exacted such a full
satisfaction from Christ our Surety materially as he has threatened to sinners
in the moral Law, and therefore he makes the incarnation and the Death of
Christ, and all his sufferings, to be in obedience to the moral Law, which he
calls the inviolable rule of Gods Relative Justice.

Reply. I on the contrary do therefore make God to be called Just in this Text,
because he declared his Righteousness in forgiving believing sinners for the
satisfaction sake of Christ, which he performed according to the voluntary
positive Law and Covenant, as it was determined in Gods secret will, and
revealed only in his voluntary positive Laws (and not in his moral Law) for his
positive Laws do often differ, yea they are often contrary to his moral Law.
And in my Reply to his fifth and sixth Propositions in Chap. 2. and elsewhere,
I have showed, that Gods secret will declared only in his positive Laws (and
not in his moral Law) is the inviolable Rule of his Relative Justice.

2 It is acknowledged by many judicious, that there passed a voluntary Covenant
between the Trinity from Eternity, for man's Redemption, and that God did first
declare this counsel of his Will in Genesis 3. 15. namely, that he would put an
utter Genesis 3. 15.
enmity between the Devil in the Serpent, and the seed of the deceived Woman,
and that the Devil should have full liberty to deceive this seed of the woman,
and to pervert his obedience, if he could, by fraud, as he had done Adam, or by
force, in putting him to an ignominious violent death on the Cross by piercing
him in the Foot-soals; but God declared also, that this seed of the Woman
should not be deceived, but that he should break the Devils Head-plot by
continuing constant in his obedience to the death, and that he should make his
soul a sacrifice in the midst of his Tortures on the Cross, which doubtless
was exemplified The ground of full and just satisfaction to Gods justice is not
by paying our full debt materially, but formally, that God does accept for full
and just satisfaction, which was constituted so to be by the conditions of the
voluntary Covenant.
to Adam by the death and sacrifice of a Lamb (as I have showed elsewhere) as
full satisfaction to Gods Justice, and as the procuring cause of Gods
Reconciliation to all that should believe in this Promised seed; for what else
can be called full satisfaction, but that only that is so made by the
voluntary Covenant? for the half shekels in Exodus 30 12. was called the price
of the Redemption of their lives; but any man may see by Psalm. 49. 8. that
materially it was not a full price, until it was made to be the full price
formally only by Gods voluntary positive Law and Covenant. Of this see more in
Chap. 14. Sect. at Reply 8.

3 The performance of the said Combat and Sacrifice on Christ's part is in
Scripture phrase, called, The Righteousness of Christ, and the meritorious
nature of it was to bind God the Father to perform his Covenant on his part,
which was, that he should be attoned and reconciled to believing sinners, by
forgiving their sins, and receiving them into favor, and the performance of
this on God the Fathers part is often in Scripture Phrase called the
Righteousness of God (as I have showed in 2 Cor. 5. 21.) That so he might be
just, and the Justifier of him which believes in Jesus.

But for the better understanding of this 26. verse, I will propound, and
answer these two Queries.

1 How God declared his Justice at this time. 2 Why at this time.
1 Touching the manner how God declared his Justice, that must be fetched from
its coherence with verse 25. and there it Romans 3. 25.
is said, that God declared his justice in setting forth Christ to be a
propitiatory, through faith in his blood, for the remission of sins.

1 Hence it is evident, that God had covenanted to, and with Christ, that if he
would undertake to be the seed of the Woman, and in that humane nature to
combat with the Enemy, Satan, to the shedding of his blood, and would still
continue obedient to the death, and at last make his soul a sacrifice, then he
should be his Mercy-seat, and then he would be reconciled to all believers, and
forgive them their sins, through faith in his blood; and therefore as soon as
sinners are united to Christ by faith, It is Gods Justice or his Righteousness
to remit their sins that are past, as I showed before in 1 John 1. 9. and more
fully in 2 Cor. 5. 21. and Heb. 8. 12.

2 This very name His Propitiatory, whence God declares Christ is Gods
Mercy-seat in point of satisfaction. Heb. 4. 16.
his Justice in remitting sins, does plainly tell us, (but that we are dull of
hearing) that Christ's satisfaction was not Solutio ejusdem, but tantidem, by
virtue of the voluntary Covenant, or else what need is there that God should
declare his justice from his Propitiatory, or from his Mercy-seat, or from his
Throne of grace? as Christ by his Satisfaction is called in Heb. 4. 16. if
Christ's satisfaction had been solutio ejusdem, as Mr. Norton holds, then it
should have been more fitly said that God declared his justice from his
Justice-seat, and not from his Mercyseat; but because Christ's death and
sacrifice was (by the voluntary positive Law and Covenant) made to be the
Tantidem for believers, as it is evident by the former instance of the half
shekels, which was made to be the full price of the Redemption of their lives,
formally only, by Gods voluntary Covenant, therefore it is most fitly said,
that God declared his justice from his Mercy-seat.

3 This phrase (Caporeth) his Propitiatory, or his Mercy-seat, is first used in
Exodus 25. 17. And it is commonly used, says Ainsworth, to set forth Gods
merciful covering of sins, as in Psalm. 65. 4. where it is translated by the
Seventy, with the allowance of the Holy Ghost, in Heb. 9. 5. Hilasterson, that
is, a Psalm. 65. 4.
Propitiatory, or a Covering Mercy-seat; and says he, this is applied by the
Apostle to Christ, Romans 3. 25. See more of Gaphar in Chap. 14. Sect. 6. Reply 8.

The Hebrew Caphar, says Ainsworth, is applied to the covering of an angry
countenance, as in Genesis 32. 20. There Jacob is Genesis 32. 20.
said to cover Esau's angry face, or to appease his anger, by a liberal and
acceptable gift; and this word Caphar, says Ainsworth, is often used in the
Law, for the covering or taking away Christ's sacrifice is called a sacrifice of
Atonement, because it does appease Gods angry face, etc procure his Atonement
to believing sinners.
of offense, by pacifying Gods anger, by gifts and sacrifices, and typified
that Christ should give himself to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the
procuring of Gods Atonement whereby sin is covered, or passed by, Exodus 29.
36. Lev. 1. 4. Lev. 4. 20. 26. etc.

And thus Gods angry face was covered, or appeased, by the burnt offering of
Christ's body, as soon as he had finished all his sufferings; for he offered
himself by the holy fire of his eternal Spirit (so Dr. Tailor does once make
the type of Fire to speak in Noah's sacrifice) in Heb. 9. 14. for as the Altar
did signify the Heb. 9. 14.
Godhead of Christ, so the fire of the Altar must be alike type of the
Godhead of Christ also; and thus Christ was the Mediator of the New Testament
through this kind of death, Heb. 9 14, 15, 16. by which he procured Gods
Atonement or Reconciliation for the iniquity of the many, and so he became his
Mercy-seat; and after this manner God set forth Christ to be his Propitiatory
through faith in his blood, to declare his Righteousness by remitting sins.

4 Peter Martyr does open this phrase His Righteousness (or the justice of
God) in Romans 3. 21, thus, If a man do more narrowly consider this word, the
Justice or Righteousness of God, It is the mercy of God which he bestows
upon us through Christ.

And in Romans 10. 3. He calls the justice of God, Gods forgiveness; and says
he, I have in another place admonished, Romans 10. 3.
that the Hebrew word Tzedec, which our men have translated Righteousness,
signifies rather Goodness and Mercy; and therefore to this day the Jews call
Alms by that name; and says he, Ambrose on this place is of the self-same
mind; and see more how Peter Martyr does expound Gods Righteousness, in my
Reply on 2 Cor. 5. 21.

5 I have also showed in the Dialogue, page 118. that Tzedec, Justice or
Righteousness, is often translated by the Seventy, Goodness or Mercy, as in
Psalm. 24. 5. Ps. 33. 5. Ps. 103. 6. Es. 1. 27 Dan. 4. 27. Dan. 9. 16. Deuteronomy. 24.
13. and their Translation does well agree to the true sense of Ps 112. 4. 9.
and to Ps. 94. 15. where God is said to turn Judgment into justice, namely to
Psalm. 94. 15.
turn vindicative justice, into merciful justice; for indeed God has as exact
a way of merciful justice by the satisfaction of Christ, according to the
voluntary positive Law and Covenant to believers, as if the rigor of his moral
Curse had been executed on their Surety in kind, and better too, because the
first way was constituted to be the way, and the other is but imaginary,
according to the legal proceedings of Court-justice. And indeed, the Justice or
Righteousness of God the Father, wherein he is just, according to his Covenant
with Christ, to forgive them their sins that do believe in the death and
sacrifice of Christ, is an example of the highest degree of Mercy, Charity, and
Alms, that the world can afford.

6 God is said to judge the world in Justice, namely, in his merciful justice,
Psalm. 96. 13. Psalm. 98. 9. Psalm. 68. 5. Psalm. 146. 7, 8. And it is said in Act.
17. 31. That God has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in
Righteousness (some understand it of Gods vindicative justice on the
impenitent at the day of Judgment) but Broughton reads it in Mercy, or in
merciful justice, namely, by his Gospel of grace, declaring his merciful
justice in judging the world by it; for by his Gospel of grace, he does judge
the world in favor to their poor, blind, and captivated souls, as in Esa. 42.
1, 2. 3 4. and in Mat. 12 18. and in Joh. 12. 31. and Obad. verse. 21. and see
Broughton also in Job 37. 23.

By these, and such like particulars, we may see how God was just according to
his Covenant with Christ, to declare his righteousness by forgiving the sins of
believers for his sake; and from that Covenant with Christ, he has also
Covenanted with the Elect, mercifully to forgive their iniquities, and to
remember their sins no more, Jer. 31. 34. which is expounded thus in Heb. 8.
12. I will be pacified or reconciled to their unrighteousness; and this is
called God the Fathers righteousness, whereby he makes a sinner righteous.

Secondly, I come now to answer the second Question, Why did God declare his
Justice or his Righteousness at this time?

The answer is, that he might be just, and the Justifier of him that believes
in Jesus.

God declared the exact time when he would fulfill his Promise The end of Gods
merciful justice declared from his Mercy-seat in Christ's satisfaction, was,
that he might be just, and that he might be the justifier of believing sinners.
Dan. 9. 24. Gal. 4. 4, 5.
and Covenant, by his Angel Gabriel to Daniel; namely, that from his prayer, to
the death of the Messiah, it should be exactly Four hundred and ninety years,
and that then the Messiah by his death and sacrifice should end all legal
sin offerings, and finish all trespass-offerings, and make reconciliation for
iniquity, and (so by that means) bring in (or procure) an eternal
Righteousness, or an eternal Reconciliation, instead of their typical
Righteousness; for, by the language of the Law we are taught, that a sinners
righteousness does consist in Gods reconciliation, or in Gods forgiveness, and
receiving into favor, Dan. 9. 24. and in relation to this Paul says, That when
the fullness of the time. (spoken of by Daniel) was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, made under the Law (namely, under the Law of Rites, that he by
his death might fulfill those typical Rites) to redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons: So then, as Christ was just in
making satisfaction according to Covenant in the exact time foretold for man^
redemption; so God upon that performance covenanted to declare his Justice at
this time to all believers in all the Nations of the world, that he might be
just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus, by forgiving their
sins, and not remembering their iniquities, Heb. 8 12. See Ains. also in Psalm.
25. 11. and therefore Christ did now send abroad his Apostles, to beseech men
to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Secondly, I find that Dr. Hamon (and others) does thus paraphrase upon the
word (...), just, in Mat. 1. 19. Joseph being a just man, that is (says he)
being a merciful pious man, was not willing to expose or subject Mary to the
public and shameful punishment, which among the Jews belonged to those women,
whom the Husbands, when they first came to them, found not to be Virgins, was
willing secretly to dismis her, that she not being known to be betrothed to
him, might only be liable to the punishment of Fornication, viz. infamy, not
death.

And in his Annotations, he says thus, The word Just, in Greek, is answerable
to the Hebrew, and signifies ordinarily works of Mercy and Charity; of which
when Maymonides sets down seven sorts or degrees, the seventh is distinctly
Righteousness or Justice, and so Justice, in Deuteronomy. 24. 13. both according to
the context, and the 70 is Mercy. So when Rabbis say, There are two Thrones,
the one of Judgment, and the other of Mercy; the latter is so styled by the
Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 4. 16. and so Psalm. 112. 9. he has given to the
poor, and his righteousness, i. e. his bounty to the poor, So Isa. 58. 7, 8.
and Mat. 6. 1. where the vulgar reading is justitiam, and that for alms in
that place.

Proportionable to these acceptions of the word (says he) the righteousness of
Joseph shall here signify, not strict legal Justice, but peculiarly Goodness
and Clemency, in not bringing Mary to the capital punishment of stoning, for
her being with child, according to the I aw, in Deuteronomy. 22. but he thought to put
her away privately, and so to keep the betrothing private, that so she might
suffer no more but infamy for Fornication. In this point of clemency, is
Joseph's justice commendable.

But on Romans 3. 26. he says thus, The word (...), just, signifies, one that
is merciful or charitable, as has been showed on Mat. 1. 19. And accordingly,
it may be observed, that the word, seldom, in these books of the New Testament,
if ever, belongs, or is applied, to the act of vindicative Justice; But as
there, in the case of Joseph (who would not offer his wife to legal punishment,
and therefore is called (...), righteous) for the abating of the rigor of exact
Law, and bringing in moderation or equity, or mercy instead of it.

Accordingly (says he) it is here to be resolved, That this phrase being used
of God [That God may be just or righteous] it must be understood to denote his
mercy, and goodness, and clemency in pardoning and forgiving sins; that being
the thing looked on in the many foregoing expressions, as our being justified
freely by his grace, in ver. 24. The propitiatory, ver. 25. Gods righteousness,
I. e. his merciful dealing with men under the second Covenant, Verse 25, 26.
the remission of sins, and forbearance, Verse 25. And (says he) the word
(...), just (or righteous) being so commonly taken in the notion of
mercifulness, and so seldom in this of vindicative Justice, there is no reason
to interpret it thus in this place.

Though this of Dr. Hamon do not fully accord to my former interpretation of
Gods righteousness, yet his reasons are very solid to show that Gods Justice
here is not to be taken as Mr. Norton does, for vindicative Justice.

Fourthly, It is observable, that as the Greek word (...), just, is often put
for one that is pious and merciful, So the 70 put one that is pious, for
Tzedec, justice, in Isa. 24. 16. and so also the Hebrew word Chesed, mercy, is
put for one that is pious and just, and therefore the Seventy do often render
it justice, as in Genesis 19. 19. Genesis 20. 13. and 21. 23. and 24. 27. and in 49,
see Ains, and 32. 10. and Exodus 15. 13. and 34. 7. and Prove. 20. 28. and Isa.
63. 7. And the reason is plain, because Justice moderated is Mercy. And to this
purpose also do our larger Annotations speak, on Psalm. 22. 31. And says Mr.
Ball on the Covenant, p. 21. The demonstration of Gods revenging Justice,
springs not from the necessity of his nature, but from his voluntary
disposition.

By these particulars, I believe, it will be evident to the Judicious, that
none of all the three Scriptures which Mr. Norton has cited to prove his
Assumption, do prove it; namely, that Christ did satissie Gods Justice, by
suffering his vindicative Justice.

And therefore the point of satisfaction, as it is stated in the Dialogue, is
sound and good still, notwithstanding all that Mr. Norton has said, or can say
against it.

SECT. 2.
Mr. Nortons Answer to the several Scriptures cited by the Dialogue, to prove
the question stated, [Examined.]

The Dialogue says thus, in p. 2. Though I say, that Christ did not suffer his
Fathers wrath, neither in whole or in party, yet I affirm, that he suffered all
things, in all circumstances, just according to the Predictions of all the
Prophets, even to the nodding of the head, and the spitting in the face; as
these Scriptures do testify.

1. Peter told the Jews, That they bad killed the Prince of life, as God before
bad showed by the mouth of all his Prophets, that Christ should suffer, and he
fulfilled it, So Act. 3. 17, 18. Mr. Norton does Answer thus.


This may include (says he) but certainly excludes not the suffering of the
wrath of God.

Reply 1. He should have showed, that this Scripture did certainly include,
that Christ did suffer from Gods wrath; especially seeing it is cited for a
proof of the Question stated; but I have often showed, that God has showed
from all his Prophets, from Genesis 3. 15. that God appointed Satan to set all his
Instruments on work to persecute Christ, and to pierce him in the foot-foals,
with an ignominious and painful death, as a Malefactor, on the Cross, to try if
he could pervert him in the course of his obedience, and so to hinder Christ's
death from being a perfect sacrifice, by which means only the Devils head-plot
must be broken.

The second Scripture cited in the Dialogue, is in Mat. 16. 21. Christ told his
Disciples, that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders,
and Chief Priests, and Scribes, and be killed, and raised again the third day.
Mr. Norton Answers thus:


True: Yet, says he, Matthew does there show that he must not suffer the Wrath
of God.

Reply 2. If Matthew had known that such a Tenent would have been broached, he
would doubtless (if the Spirit of God had permitted) have showed, that he must
not have suffered the wrath of God; but it had been for Mr. Nortons honor, if
he could have showed, that Christ told his Disciples, That be must go to
Jerusalem to suffer many things there from the immediate wrath of God, as well
as from Satan's instruments, and then the Reader might have been satisfied.

The third Scripture cited by the Dialogue is in Luke 24, 25, 26, 44. 46. Mr.
Norton Answers.


Toese words (says he) conclude that Christ was to suffer: But the word All,
says he, in verse. 26. includes the suffering of Divine Justice.

Reply 3. In the two former Scriptures he could not find any particle for the
proving that Christ suffered divine Justice; but now in Luke 24, 26. he finds
it in the word All, and yet there is no All in that verse. Mr. Norton will
rather coin Scripturewords, than want a proof of Christ's suffering from Gods
immediate wrath.

The fourth Scripture cited by the Dialogue is Act. 13. 27, 28. He Answers thus:


The word All in this text (says he) is to be taken in a limited sense, for
all things that were written of him, to be fulfilled by the Romans and the
Jews, as the instruments thereof.

Reply 4. In this Answer he does but repent the full and true sense of the
Dialogue, and in so doing, he justifies the sense of the Dialogue.

Now let the Reader judge how well he has confuted the Dialogues proofs for
the stating of the case.

And whether this Answer of his be not rather a confused shuffling of an
Answer, than an Answer to satisfy any judicious Reader.

CHAP. X.
The Examination of Mr. Nortons Exposition of Genesis 2. 17. (in page 21.)

For the true understanding whereof, says Mr. Norton, consider these three
things;

1 What is here intended by Death, 2 The Distribution of Death, 3 The
Application of that Distribution.
SECT. I.
Says he, The Commination, Thou shall surely dye, is not particular concerning
some kind of death, but indefinite, therefore equivalent to an universal,
comprehending all kinds of Death.


Reply 1. I Have showed in Chap. 2. Sect. 3. from two circumstances in this
Text of Genesis 2. 17. that the death there threatened, is limited to a spiritual
death in sin only.

2 In his Distribution. And

3 In his Application of this Death, he brings Christ within the compass of it
two ways:

1 By separation of his soul from his body, which he makes to be a temporal and
penal death in Christ.

2 By the separation of his soul from the sense of the good things of the
promise, and the presence of the evil things in the commination, which he
calls Total, Temporal, and properly Penal in Christ.

Reply 2. I deny that the death of Christ, namely, the separation of his soul
from his body, was a proper penal death; for The death of Christ could not be a
penal death, because Gods Law threatens none with a penal death but sinners
themselves. In his Common places part 2. p. 244.
the Law of God threatens no man with a penal death, nor yet with any other
true curse, but sinners themselves.

Sin and Death (says Peter Martyr) is compared as cause and effect; But (says
he) here we must exempt Christ only, who notwithstanding he knew no sin, yet
for our sakes he dyed; But (says he) Death had no dominion over him, because
he of his own accord, did suffer it for our salvation. The like speech of his,
I have cited in page 54.

Had not Christ dyed voluntarily, says Bernard (ad milites Templi, cap. 11.)
that death had not been meritorious; how much more unworthily he dyed who
deserved not death, so much more justly (man) lives for whom he dyed; what
justice, thou will ask, is this, that an innocent should dye for a malefactor?
It is no justice, it is mercy; If it were justice, then should he not dye
freely, but indebted thereto, and if indebted, then indeed he should dye, but
the other for whom he dyed, should not live; yet though it be not justice, it
is not against justice, otherwise he could not be both just and merciful.

These Testimonies of the Orthodox (and more to this purpose I might bring) do
point blank oppose Mr. Nortons Tenent, that Christ's death was inflicted on him
from Gods penal justice, through the meritorious cause of sin, as our death is
on us. But it is no such matter, Christ's death is of another nature, The true
nature of Christ's death was to be a sacrifice.
because he undertook it from the voluntary Cause and Covenant only, upon
condition of meriting the destruction of Satan's Head-plot, and the redeeming of
all the Elect thereby; and in this respect his obedience, in giving his life,
was covenanted to be accepted by the Father as a free gift, and as the richest
Present that the world could afford; namely, as a sacrifice of Atonement or
Reconciliation, smelling like a most sweet savor in the nostrils of God; and in
this respect his death is the ground of merit; but had it been inflicted on him
from Gods penal wrath, as deserved, through the imputation of sin, it had
merited nothing, as Bernard speaks above.

When conditions are made by a voluntary Covenant for the winning or meriting
of a rich prize, he that will strive for the mastery, with his opposite
Champion, for the winning of the said Prize, must strive lawfully, that is to
say, in obedience to those Laws; and he must be willing to undergo all the
hardships that he must meet withal from his opposite Champion; it may be, to
the forcing of his body into an Agony, it may be, to the breaking of his body,
and to the shedding of much blood; all this he must do from the voluntary cause
and from the voluntary Covenant; for the Masters of the Game do not compel any
man to undertake these difficult services, neither do they out of anger and
wrath inflict any of the said punishments, though the opposite party may
happily do what he can in anger to pervert the Combaters obedience, and to
provoke him to some miscarriage, against the Laws of the prize, that so he may
not win the prize from him: Even so Jesus Christ, the author and finisher of
our Faith, for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising
the shame, and is now set down (as a Victor over Satan, and all his potent
Instruments) at the right hand of God, having first endured the cross, and the
contradiction of sinners; and has spoiled Principalities and Powers in it,
namely, in his death on the cross, which by Gods appointment did strive for the
mastery with him, and the Devil did in anger provoke him what he could, to
spoil his obedience, and so to hinder him from destroying his head-plot, and so
from winning the prize, namely, from the salvation of the Elect; and the Devil
proceeded so far in his rage, that he peirced him in the foot-soals for a
wicked Malefactor.

These things I bring to exemplify my meaning, that the death of Christ was
not a proper penal death inflicted from the wrath of God, as Mr. Norton does
make it to be in his distribution: But it was a death agreed on by the
voluntary Covenant, having A description of Christ's merit.
respect unto the curse accidentally; because his Combater Satan had a
commission from God to do his worst to make him a sinner, and so to use him as
a Malefactor, by putting him to an ignominious and cursed death, and so to
disturb his patience if he could: but because Christ continued constant in his
obedience, therefore he merited the redemption of all the Elect, from the curse
of the Law. And this is a true description of merit, whereby God made himself a
debtor to Christ.

But to affirm that the death of Christ did proceed from Gods penal curse, as
an effect from the cause (as Mr. Norton affirms) does utterly destroy the merit
of his death and Sacrifice, as Bernard said above, and as you may see further
in Chapter 12. at Reply 17.

It is appointed (says the Apostle) unto men once to die, Heb. 9. 27, 28. This
bodily death was not appointed till after Adams conversion, Heb. 9. 27, 28
for his conversion is set out in Genesis 3. 15. and his bodily death was not
threatened till four verses after, namely, in verse 19. This appointment was for
mankind that were guilty of original sin, and therefore the Apostle says, it
is appointed unto men once to die, namely, to men that were guilty of original
sin; but the Apostle does not say in Heb. 9. 27. that it was appointed for
Christ to die by that sentence; but he varies that phrase when he comes to
speak of the death of Christ, and says, So Christ was offered to bear the sins
of the many, thereby showing, that the nature of his death was to be a
sacrifice, and so to be of a differing nature from our compulsory death, and
that the end of it was to bear away the sins of the many, in procuring Gods
free pardon and forgiveness by his death and sacrifice.

So then I may well conclude, That as Christ's begetting was not like our
begetting, so his death, in the formality of it, was not like our death; for
though he suffered as a malefactor in his combating with Satan and his
Instruments from the voluntary Cause and Covenant; so also in the point of
separating his soul from his body, he did it as a Mediator, by his own Priestly
power, and not by Satan's power, as I shall show, God willing, more at large
hereafter, in my Reply to Psalm. 22. 1. and to Matthew. 27. 46.

2 I come now to speak to the second part of his distribution of death to the
soul of Christ, by separating it from the sense of the good things in the
promise, and by inflicting the evil things in the commination. But this I have
already denied, and given my Reasons, in Chap. 2. Sect. 3. (...) and in Chap 4.
And therefore now I will only propound three Questions to the consideration of
the learned, for the further clearing of this point.

Q. 1. Whereas Mr. Norton in p. 21, makes death in sin, and death for sin, in
their several branches (together with the evil of affliction) to flow from the
commination in Genesis 2. 17. (as an effect from the cause) as the proper wages of
Adams first sin, Romans 5. 21. and 6. 23.

My first Question from hence is this, Whether Mr. Norton be not all this while
to be understood, as speaking of sin, and the curse thereof, as it is to be
considered de jure, namely, of the due desert of sin?

Secondly, Whereas he does apply the several branches of his death, to several
sorts of persons, some to the Reprobates, and some to the Elect, in differing
respects; Whether he be not to be understood as speaking of sin, and the curse
thereof, as it is to be considered de facto, namely, in the event, and as it
fell out to be executed, and that in a various manner; namely one way on the
Elect, and another way on the Reprobate?

Quest. 2. In judging what kind of death is essential to Adams sin, as
naturally flowing from the curse, as an effect from the cause; Whether is it
more suitable to look at sin and the curse thereof, as it is to be considered
de jure, or as it is to be considered de facto, or as it is both ways to be
considered, seeing the curse, de facto, in relation to the Elect, was altered
by the Gospel interceding?

Quest. 3. In considering the several branches of death, which of them are
essential (and flowing naturally either from Adams first sin, or from our
Original sin) as a proper Effect from the Cause, and which of them are
accidental, not flowing from sin as sin, (as Mr. Nortons distribution speaks)
but rather accidentally, by means of some other thing.

If these Questions were rightly resolved, and rightly applied to the points in
agitation, the difficulties of this Controversy would be much easier. And I
conceive my exposition of the nature of the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. as I
have explained it in Chap. 2. Sect. 3. will give great light to the clearing of
these ^hree Questions.

SECT. 2.
NOw I come to examine his Exposition of Genesis 2. 17. more particularly. In p.
23. says Mr. Norton, the meaning of these words, In the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall die, Is this,

If man sin, man shall die, either in his own person, as the Reprobate, or in
the person of the man Christ Jesus, the Surety of the Elect, according to the
distribution above; so is the Text a full and universal Truth; Man sins, and
man dies.



Reply 3. The plain letter of the Text says, If thou sinnest, thou shall die;
and so the Text is a full and universal Truth; Ezekiel: 18. 4, 20.
for this Law was given as an universal Law to Adam, namely, as he was the head
of all mankind, in the first Covenant, which was made with him touching man's
nature in general, and therefore it holds all his natural posterity, whether
Elect or Reprobate, alike guilty of death, namely, of a spiritual death in sin,
though it pleased God afterward to make a difference by the promised seed, but
this difference was not made in the first Covenant, but in the second, in Genesis
3. 15.

Secondly, Therefore I deny that this Text did intend dying in the person of
the man Christ Jesus our Surety, for then he must have died our death in sin;
But his death was wholly founded in another Covenant, namely, in the voluntary
Covenant, as I have often said before.

But says Mr. Norton in the close of his Speech,
This Text is an universal and full Truth, Man sins, and man dies.


Reply 4. In this speech he confounds himself, for he takes the word Man
ambiguously.

1 Says he, man sins, here Man is taken specifice, for mankind.

2 Says he, Man dies, here the word man, as it relates to the Elect, is taken
numerice, and as it relates to Christ, so it must be taken for an individual
person, as I have noted formerly in answer to Ezekiel. 18. 4. in chap. 6.

And so this elegant speech, Man sins, and man dies, is not ad idem, It is but
a Paralogism, namely, a deceitful Sylogism, This speech, man sins, and man
dies, is but a paralogism.
which seems true when it is not,

But says Mr. Norton in p. 24.
This Text of Genesis 2. 17. is Gods judicial denunciation of the punishment of
sin, with a reservation of his purpose concerning the execution of the
execution of it (or as it was in his manuscript concerning the manner of the
execution of it) and truly, I cannot but wonder at his alteration from his
Manuscript, to such an uncouth expression, except it be to puzzle his Reader.


Reply 5. I would fain know, why this reservation of Gods purpose is mentioned;
It seems, it is for this purpose, to hook in Christ was not in the same
obligation with Adam, as his Surety to the first Covenant
Christ as a Surety within the compass of this Text, and so to make the curse
contained in it due to him, as it appears both by his answer to his fourth
Query in p. 6. (which has been already examined) and also by his daring
expressions in p. 25. If Christ, says he, be not within the compass of this
Text, then the Text is not true; and a little after, Because elect sinners, not
dying in their own persons, must die in their Surety, or else the Text is not a
truth. Modesty would rather have said, or else the Text is not truly expounded.

2 Had Mr. Norton said thus, This Text is Gods judicial deunciation of sin,
(and so had wholly left out his reservation of the execution of the execution
of it) I should have assented to him.

3 Take the commination for the present event of Adams sin, As Gen: 2. 17.
respects eternal death; so it speaks rather of the desert of sin, than of the
event.
and then it was the present death of the nature of all mankind in sin; but
take the commination as it respected eternal death, (as Mr. Norton takes it)
then it speaks only of the desert of Adams sin, and not of the event to Adam
and his elect posterity; for he was delivered from the event, by the
interposition of the promised seed, and so God was pleased to alter the event
of the commination of the first Covenant, by his grace declared in the new
Covenant, in Genesis 3. 15.

4 This reason makes it evident, that this Text has not any such reservation
(as above mentioned) Because the commination in this Text must accord with
other the like comminations, which do limit the curse threatened, to the same
numerical and individual persons that are inherent and formal sinners, as in
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. Ezekiel. 18. 4. Therefore to assert the suffering of
Hell torments from this Text, by one that never was a sinner inherently, would
have been held a paradox in Divinity to our forefathers; and to affirm that
Christ suffered the second death, from this Text, that never was guilty of the
first death, never dead in sin, can be no less I think than a monster in
Religion.

5 This reason also makes it evident that the first Covenant Though the first
Covenant be supposed to be made in relation to Adams obedience or disobedience
to the moral Law of nature, yet in that sense it is not a complete Rule of
relative Justice
could not contain a complete rule of Gods relative Justice (yea though it be
granted, that it was made in relation to Adams obedience or disobedience to the
moral Law of Nature,) because it neither takes in the sins against the Gospel,
nor yet the duties, nor the rewards of it, these are supplied by the Gospel in
the Covenant of Grace; God did add what his good pleasure was to add, when he
published the Gospel, which is comprised in Genesis 3. 15.

6 This commination in Genesis 2. 17. does hold all the Elect as well as the
Reprobate alike guilty of the death there threatened, in case Adam disobeyed by
eating the forbidden fruit. Or thus, both the Elect and the Reprobate are alike
guilty of Adams sin, and therefore they are alike under the guilt of original
sin, Romans 3. 19, 20. therefore de jure, they are both alike under the same
curse, though after a while, the Elect, de facto are not under the curse of
eternal death by means of the promise of Christ intervening, Genesis 3. 15. Rom 8.
1. Gal. 3. 13. Col. 2. 14.

1 Hence it follows, that the first Covenant was alterable by the Gospel.

2 Hence it follows, that in case this commination does speak of eternal death,
then it speaks of the desert, rather than of the event, of Adams sin in
relation to the Elect.

SECT. 3.
THis Text (says the Dialogue) does not comprehend Jesus Gen: 2 17. does not
comprehend Christ within the compass of it.
Christ within the compass of it; for this Text is part of that Covenant which
God made with Adam and his posterity, respecting the happiness they had by
creation.

Mr. Norton in p. 24. answers the Dialogue thus;
Though Christ does not fall within the compass of the Covenant of Works; it
does not follow that he is excluded the compass of the Text.


Reply 1. Though he grants that Christ is not within the compass of the
Covenant of works, yet (says he) he is not excluded the compass of the Text,
namely, of Genesis 2. 17. or else he answers not to the Dialogue; and he is also
most confident that Christ must be contained in that Text, or else (says he in
p. 23.) the Text is not true.

Now if Christ be contained within the compass of this Text of Genesis 2. 17. then
he must be contained either within the prohibition, or else within the
commination; But he cannot be contained in either of these, as I shall show by
and by.

But Mr. Norton proves that Christ may be within the compass of this Text, thus;
Damnation (says he) is no part of the Gospel, yet it is a part of that verse
wherein the Gospel is revealed; He that is baptized shall be saved, he that
believes not is damned.


Reply 2. If Mr. Norton had paralleld this sentence of the Gospel with Genesis 3.
15. he had hit the nail, but because he does parallel it with Genesis 2. 17. he
has mist it. But to speak more fully, the word Gospel must be considered two
ways.

First, Either strictly, for the glad tidings of salvation only.

Or secondly, More largely, not only for the glad tidings of salvation, but
also as comprehending other appurtenances belonging to that Covenant, as
Ceremonies or Seals, and so in case of neglect, or contempt, punishments; In
the first sense the threatening of Damnation is no part of the Gospel; but in
the second sense it is.

Now seeing Mr. Nortons scope in this Instance, is to make good his answer to
the Dialogue, namely, that though Christ does not fall within the compass of
the Covenant of works, yet that he was contained within the compass of that
Text that speaks of the first Covenant of works; even as Damnation, though it
be no part of the Gospel, yet is it contained within the compass of that verse
which reveals the Gospel.

I say, the scope of this Instance being brought to make good that Answer; The
judicious Reader will easily see that this Instance has not truth in it, and
therefore he has not as yet proved, that Christ was contained within that Text
of Genesis 2. 17.

But still Mr. Norton strives to make it good, That Christ was comprehended
within the compass of that Text; for says he, in page 24, 25. Adam in his
eating intended and prohibited, was a figure of Christ to come, Romans 5. 14.
Romans 5, 14.


Reply 3. Not properly in his eating intended and prohibited; But in the
effects that followed his eating prohibited; the typical Resemblance that is
between Adam and Christ, lies only in some general things, as thus; Adam was
the head of that Covenant, which God made with him concerning the nature of all
mankind, and so Christ was the head of the Covenant of grace, which God made
with him concerning the Regenerating of the nature of all the Elect; Adam by
his disobedience merited a corrupt nature to all his posterity, and Christ by
his obedience even to death, merited a sanctified nature to all his elect seed.
The Reader may fetch the parallel from P. Martyr, Dr. Willet, and others, on
Romans 5. 19. Romans 5. 19.


But what is the inference that Mr. Norton makes? namely, That Christ is
contained within the compass of this Text. I say, it follows not; for though
there may be a resemblance between the first and second Adam in many other
things, yet not in all things, and therefore in some things Adam was no figure
of Christ: as for example, He was no figure of Christ in bearing the essential
Curse. And that is the point which Mr. Norton does aim at in this Text. But
says Mr. Norton in page 25. It is certain (though Adam during the first
Covenant perceived it not) that Christ was couched and comprehended in some
part of the revealed will of God, during the first Covenant; It is very
probable, says he, That the Tree of life in Genesis 2. 9. was a figure of Christ,
who is called, and indeed is, the Tree of life, Rev. 22. 2. And, says he, If
Christ be not within the compass of the Text, the Text is not true.



Reply. 4. We may soon lose our selves in this dispute, if we keep not close
to the point of the Dialogue in hand, which Mr. Norton labors to confute.

The Dialogue says, this text of Genesis 2. 17. does not include Christ within
the compass of it, as liable to the death there threatened: But Mr. Norton
cites another text to prove it, namely Gen 2. 9. and yet he affirmed that
Christ was within the compass of this text of Genesis 2. 17. namely as the Surety
of the Elect, and that thereby he was made liable to suffer the death there
threatened; for says he, Man sins, and man dies (by virtue of this Text) either
in his own person, or in the Man Christ Jesus.

But how does all this that Mr. Norton has said, suit to the point in hand?
and how does it tend to disprove what the Dialogue affirms?

1 Says he, It is certain, that Christ was couched in this Text; but in his
proof he only says, It is very probable that the Tree of life, etc. in his
Proposition he affirms, It is certain; but in his proof he says, It is no
more but probable.

But let his words be a little further examined; Where is Christ couched?

1 One while he tells us, That he is couched, and intended in some part of the
revealed will of God, during the first Covenant.

2 Another while he tells us, That it is probable that the Tree of life in Genesis
2. 9. was a figure of Christ.

3 Another time he says, That Christ must be within the compass of this Text
of Genesis 2. 17. or else the Text is not true.

All these three considerations laid together, do prove that Christ is
contained somewhere, or no where, in some Text, or in no Text.

And now let the judicious Reader judge what his Proposition, and his Proof
does amount to.

2 Examine his Discourse a little further; The Dialogue affirms, that Christ
falls not within the compass of this Text in Genesis 2. 17.

The Dialogue does not meddle whether Christ was couched in any other Text.

2 The Dialogue denies that Christ was not within this text as liable to the
death there threatened. Now then let it be supposed that Mr. Norton could
produce some other text, during the first Covenant, wherein Christ was included
or prefigured: Suppose the Tree of life was a figure of him, though it be
denied both by Mr. Shepherd, and Mr. Burges, and others, as I have noted in
Chap. 2. yet except he can prove that Christ was comprehended in this text, and
that he was thereby liable to the death there threatened, he does but labor to
no purpose.

3 Examine his arguing a little further: The Dialogue contends that Christ is
not contained in the word Thou; Thou shall surely dye. Thou Adam in thine own
person; and thou Adam in thy Posterity (says the Dialogue) But not thou in thy
Surety shall dye; The word Thou shall dye, intends no more but the person or
persons with whom the first Covenant was made.

But let us consider the Argument that does arise from Mr. Nortons own words;
And it may be framed thus:

Christ falls not within the compass of the first Covenant of works, faith Mr.
Norton in page 24.

But thou shall dye (intending thereby the persons with whom the first Covenant
was made) falls within the compass of the first Covenant, as he affirms in
his second Proposition.

Therefore Christ falls not within the first Covenant of works, because the
word Thou, intends the persons only with whom the first Covenant was made.

And thus you see how Mr. Norton has confuted himself, by proving that Christ
was not comprehended within the compass of Genesis 2. 17.

SECT. IV.
IN my former brief Reply to his first Argument, I promised a morefull Answer
to his minor.

I will repeat his whole Argument as it is laid down in his 10 page. Either
Christ suffered the Justice of God, instead of the Elect, denounced against sin
in Genesis 2. 17. or God might dispense with the execution thereof, without the
violation of his Justice.

But God could not dispense with the execution thereof, without the violation
of his Justice.



Reply 5. I have sufficiently replied to his major, by proving that Christ was
not in the same obligation with Adam in the first Covenant, In Chap. 2. Sect.
3. and Chap. 6. etc.

2 I say also that his minor is unsound; for it affirms that God could not
dispense with the execution of the essential Curse, without the violation of
his Justice. What was sometimes spoken (says he) of the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, holds true at all times concerning the Law of God, that it alters
not.

Reply 6. 1 Take the death threatened for a spiritual death in sin, and then we
see by experience, that it was formally executed on all mankind, from that
instant, to every one that has life in the womb, even to the end of world,
though yet it has pleased God to mitigate the violent outrage of that death,
not only to the Elect, but also to the Reprobate, while they live in this
world.

2 Take the death there threatened for bodily death, and then we see by
experience, that it was not formally executed at that present; neither shall it
be formally executed on such as are alive at the day of judgment, We shall
not all dye, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.

3 Take the death there threatened for eternal death in hell, and then we also
see by experience, that it was not formally executed God does often dispense
with h^s peremptory threatenings.
on Adam; but this is certain, that what God has threatened against man for
sin, he may justly inflict, but he is not always bound to it (except his
threatenings be delivered with an oath) Threatenings declare what punishments are
due to man for sin, but not what shall infallibly be inflicted, as I have
showed in Chap. 2. Sect. 4.

2 We see also by experience, that God did often repent of his Threatenings, and
thereupon did alter them from what he had expressed in his revealed will; but
not from what he had decreed in his secret will.

As for example, God sent his Prophet Isaiab to Hezekiah, saying, Set thy house
in order, for to dye, thou shall dye, and not live. This threatening has an
addition to it more than is expressed in that threatening of Genesis 2. 17. for
here the threatening is delivered, first, Affirmatively, to dye, Thou shall dye,
that is, Thou shall 2 King. 20. 1^
surely dye. And secondly, It is delivered Negatively, Thou shall not live. And
yet Hezekiah did persuade himself that this threatening was alterable, and
therefore he went to God to wrestle it out by prayer, that God would spare his
life, and give him a son to sit upon his Throne, and God heard his prayer, and
altered his threatening, and yet this sentence seems to be a doubled definitive
sentence, more than that in Genesis 2. 17. and hence we see, that God does allow
his people to pray for the alteration of his revealed will, and for the removal
of threatened evils, 2 King. 20. 1. Jam. 5. 13. Ps. 50. 15.

2 Gods resolution is often hypothetical or conditional, and therefore we may
pray for those things that seem contrary to his revealed will, Ezekiel. 3. 17. 21.
Amos 4. 12.

3 God does often change his Comminations, for our prayers, Genesis 19. 21. Job.
3. 10. Es. 38. 25. and therefore David prayed for the child's life, after the
Prophet had told him positively that the child should dye, 2 Samuel 12. and so
Moses did the like, Exodus 32. 14.

4 God does often seem to will those things that indeed he wills not, only
to prove us, Mat. 15. 23, 24, 26. Luke 24. 28. Exodus 32. 10. Numb. 14, 10.

5 Though God does threaten all flesh with a bodily death, yet the Apostle
says also, That we shall not all dye, 1 Cor. 15.

Therefore God, we see, does often alter his peremptory threatenings.

2 Take another Instance, God told Abimelek in Genesis 20. 3. Genesis 20. 3.
saying, Thou art but a dead man, that is, says Ainsworth, Thou shall sarely
dye. This threatening (says Traheron on Rev. 4) seems to be as absolute a
threatening as that to Adam; and yet indeed says he, it had a secret condition,
which is after expressed in verse 7, Restore her now to her husband, if thou
restore her not (see the condition now expressed, which at first was reserved)
know, thou shall surely dye: But take notice of this, that when God told Adam,
If thou eat of the Tree of knowledge, thou shall surely dye; there could be no
such condition on man's part to alter the sentence of death in sin, for till
Christ was revealed, no repentance was ordained to alter Gods threatening;
neither is he tied to execute his threatenings, except they be delivered with
an oath. God has left that liberty to Parents and Masters, when they have
threatened a child or servant, that in case they commit such a fault they shall
be so and so punished; yet when the fault is committed, they may remit the
punishment when they see that thereby more advantage will accrue to themselves,
or the party offending, or to both, than if the punishment had been inflicted;
then who can deny that liberty to God himself, who is a most absolute Supreme?

3 Take another Instance, Jonah said, Yet forty days, and Niniveh shall be
destroyed, Jon. 3. 4. this threatening is absolute says Traberon (not declaring
Gods secret determination) what Jon. 3. 4.
should fall upon them; yet upon their repentance God altered this threatening.

4 Take another Instance in Lev. 15. 31. Thus shall ye separate the children
of Israel from their uncleanness, that in dying they dye not in Lev. 15. 31.
their uncleanness, when they desile my Tabernacle that is among them: This
threatening God did sometimes execute, and sometimes he did not execute it, but
did alter it at his pleasure, as we may see in the example of such unclean
persons as came to the Passover in the days of Hezekiab, 2 Chronicles. 30. 19, 20.
Some 2 Chr. 30. 19, 20.
of them were sick, and weak, and dyed, and others of them at the prayer of
Hezekiab were healed, and restored to health: And so death is threatened in Number,
18. 22. None of the children of Israel shall henceforth come nigh the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, lest they bear sin, and dye, yet God dispensed
with death to King Vzziah, and smote him with leprosy, and Saul dyed not,
though God was angry with him for meddling with the office of sacrificing.

But I entreat the judicious Reader, to take notice, that I produce these
instances in opposition to Mr. Nortons Tenent in his Assumption, where he
affirms, That God might not dispense with the execution of the essential death
and curse, but that it must be born either by Adam, or else by Adams Surety; In
reference to that I have given four Instances that this phrase, In dying, Thou
shall dye, is alterable, even to men that are not in Christ, upon their
temporary repentance, as in Niniveh and Abab.

SECT. V.
But says Mr. Norton, This threatening was in relation to the breach of the
moral Law; for be makes Adams sin in eating the forbidden fruit to be a sin
against the moral Law.


Reply 7. I Have showed in Chap. 2. Sect. 1. That the true nature of the first
Covenant stood not in Adams obedience or disobedience to the moral Law of
nature, but in relation to a Gods positive Laws were not engraven in Adams
nature, as his moral Law was.
positive Law about things indifferent in their own nature, as the eating of
the two Trees was; for Gods positive Laws were not engraven in Adams nature,
but reserved in Gods secret Decrec to be imposed on man, for an act, or acts,
for a time, as he pleased to appoint, and then to be annihilated again.

I grant, that the moral Law of nature did direct Adam to obey God in
whatsoever positives he should appoint: But yet by the Law of nature, he knew
not any of Gods positives, till they were particularly revealed; neither can
man, without a special revelation, know the reason of them, because they
depended only on the good pleasure of God, and therefore Adams moral
perfections could not prevent, but that the Devil might deceive him about the
reason of positives, as I have showed in Chap. 2.

2 I do not remember (and I pray let the Judicious consider it) that eternal
death is directly threatened for the breach of any outward positive Law, but at
the first death in sin, and ever after a bodily death (but eternal death is
often directly threatened for Unbele^f and Rebellion against the Law of Grace)
and therefore the threatening in Genesis 2. 17. may be exempted from that
threatening, though not from death in sin.

3 Let it be supposed, that the first Covenant with Adam was made in relation
to the moral Law (which is denied, and cannot be granted) yet it is evident,
that God does sometimes alter from See P Martyr in Com. pl. par. 1. page 190.
that Law; for he commanded Abraham to kill his only son, which was contray to
the sixth Commandment, and he commanded the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians
of their goods, Exodus 11. 2. and Christ bid the Impotent man, when he was
healed, to carry his bed on his back on the Sabbath day.

These examples show, that God is not tied to his revealed moral Laws, as we
are, but that he has a supreme power to, alter from that Rule to his secret
Decree; but when God is God does sometimes alter from the rule of his moral
Commands, to his secret Decree.
pleased to bind his promises or threatenings by an oath, then we may be sure
his will so revealed is unalterable, because his oath does always declare what
his secret Will and Decree is; And hence it comes to pass, that his word and
command which he delivers to us for our rule, is many times alterable, because
it is many times differing from his secret Decree. And hence it is, that when
his threatenings are annexed to his Laws, it is to show unto man what his sin
deserves, but not what God will certainly execute; for it is his good pleasure
sometimes to Relax his threatening, which is a forgiveness of temporal plagues,
Psalm. 78. 38. 2 Samuel 12. 13, 14. for as there are two sorts of punishments
threatened, so there are two sorts of pardon, Isal. 78 38.
one in relation to temporary, and the other in relation to eternal punishment,
and so in like sort there are two sorts of justification.

4 This sentence (as it relates to eternal death) in Genesis 2. 17. In the Right
way of dying well.
says Perkins, must be understood with an exception borrowed from the Gospel,
or Covenant of Grace, revealed to Adam presently after his fall: The exception
goes thus, Thou shall certainly dye whenever thou eatest of the forbidden
fruit, except I give thee a deliverance from death, namely, the Seed of the
woman to destroy the Devils Head-plot.

And says Vrsinus, after that sentence in Genesis 2. 17. there followed the
equity, moderation, and lenity of the Gospel; in his Ans. to Q. 40.

And says Baxter, How can it stand with the truth and justice of God, to
dispense with his threatenings? he answers thus to In his Aphora p. ^8. and in
Append. p. 122.
this Question, When threatenings are merely parts of the Law and not also
predictions of events, and discoveries of Gods purpose thereabout, then they
may be dispensed with without any breach of truth; and he gives two Instances
to explain his meaning, the last of them runs thus; when God says, Thou shall
dye the death, the meaning is, Death shall be the due reward of thy sin, so
that it may be inflicted at my pleasure, and not that he should certainly
suffer it in the event: And he cites Vossius, concluding that the Law was not
abrogated, but relaxed, dispensed with, and abrogate.

And to this sense says another learned Divine: The commination in Genesis 2. 17.
is like to some other of Gods threats against the Transgressors of his Law; but
it binds not God that he shall have power to release or mitigate, what, and
to whom it pleases him.

The Elect are called the children of wrath as well as others; De Recens.
peccatoris, par. 1 c. 1.
But says Mr. Norton, It may be answered, that the Holy Ghost in these, and
such like places of Scripture does signify what is due to sin, and sinners,
and what their estate must needs be in their own apprehensions (if they will
judge of themselves according to the light of true reason: for there is in sin
a certain naughtiness for which it justly may be, and indeed is odious unto
God) but it will not follow thereupon, that he cease to love them, Whom he
has predestinate unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 5.

All these Instances do evidence, that Gods threatenings in the event are often
alterable, and therefore that his threatening of eternal death in Genesis 2. 17.
(in case it be there threatened) is alterable, and does not bind God, neither to
leave the Elect under the power of their spiritual death in sin, nor yet to
inflict eternal death, neither on the Elect, nor on their Surety; and therefore
according to the liberty of his eternal Will and purpose, he ordained that the
conlfict of Christ with Satan, in continuing obedient to the death of the
Cross, and at last making his soul a sacrifice, should be a valuable
consideration, whereion he would dispense with the rigor of his commination,
and so let fall, or suspend, the pnealty of eternal death, in case it had been
the chief thing threatened in Genesis 2. 17. as most do hold, and therefore for
their sakes I have cited these Instances, though still I think my first
exposition of Genesis 2. 17. is sound and good, in Chap. 2. Sect. 3.

CHAP. XI.
SECT. I.
The Examination of Isa. 53. 4.
Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows.


Mr. Jacob interprets these sorrows, of Hell sorrows, which Christ bare in our
stead, or else we must have both them.

THe Dialogue in page 15. 16. makes this answer, The Evangelist Matthew has
expounded this Text to a quite contrary sense, Math. 8. 17. Matthew says this
Text of Isaiah was fulfilled, when Christ took away our infirmities, and bare
our sicknesses, from such as were infirm and sick; Not as a Porter bears a
burden, by laying them upon his own body, but by bearing them from the sick by
divine power.

Mr. Norton in page 35. does answer to the Dialogue thus:
The Prophet in this Text, by griefs and sorrows, intends sufferings due to us,
as it is plain (says he) from the Chapter, and the comparing of the comparing
of the fourth and fifth verses, with 1 Pet. 2. 24. and by bearing those griefs
and sorrows, be intends Christ's bearing them in our stead, etc.


Reply 1. He makes the Reader believe, that the scope of this Chapter does
speak to this one point, namely, That Christ did Christ carried our sorrows etc
sicknesses away by his Divine power.
bear such griefs and sorrows as are due to us, which in other places he calls
the Essential torments of Hell, and thence he insers that this speech in verse
4. He has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, does intend so much; but a
judicious Reader may easily see that the scope of this Chapter is to set out
the operations of the divine nature, as well as of the humane, and of several
other things that belong both to the Person and Office of Christ; and therefore
the simple Reader may easily be deceived by telling them thus, That the
Prophet in this Text, by griefs and sorrows, intends such sufferings by Christ
as are due to us, namely, Hell-sorrows, as is plain from the Chapter

2 He tells the Reader that this sense is plain, by comparing of the fourth and
fifth verses with 1 Pet. 2. 24. and thus he does wind in the fourth verse,
with the fifth verse, whereas indeed the fifth verse only does answer to 1 Pet.
2. 24. and so the Dialogue does parallel it, and explain; and thus he deceives
both himself and the Reader, by joining both these verses together in one
sense, which in the Dialogue are handled asunder in a differing sense; and the
Dialogue gives this evident reason for it, namely, because the bearing away of
our griefs in verse. 4. is expounded by Matthew of his bearing away of our
infirmities, and diseases, by the power of his Godhead; and to this very sense
Matthew does translate this verse of Isaiah, saying, That it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by Isaiah the Prophet, himself took our infirmities, and bare
our sicknesses; and besides, the Prophet himself does confirm this sense in the
last clause of this fourth verse, saying, Yet we did esteem him stricken,
smitten of God and afflicted. The Dialogue does open this clause thus, Though
the glory of his Godhead did shine in our eyes, (by his miraculous bearing
away of sicknesses and infirmities) yet we esteemed him but as a gross
Impostor, and therefore put him to death as a vild Malefactor, and then we
judged him (that had done so many miraculous cures) to be stricken, smitten of
God, and afflicted for his own deserved faults. And thus the Reader may see the
true sense of this verse to be cleared by the context, as well as by Matthews
translation. But if his bearing our sorrows, had meant that he bare our
Hell-sorrows, then the last clause must have run thus, And we did rightly
judge that he was plagued, and smitten of Gods wrath with Hellsorrows.

But Mr. Norton cuts off this last clause with these words, The rest (says he)
is either impertinent, or uncontroverted; so that it seems he makes his last
clause to be impertinent, for it is not uncontroverted.

And now let the judicious Reader judge of his Answer by my Reply.

SECT. II.
But Mr. Norton goes on to prove, That Christ bare our very sorrows, as a
Porter bears a burden, in page 35.
From the collation of the two Hebrew words used in this fourth verse: For
(says he) Though Nasa, he has born, be of more general use, and does
sometimes signify to bear as a Porter bears a burden, and sometimes otherwise;
Yet (says he) Sabal, he has carried, signifies properly to bear as one bears
a burden; This restrains the sense of the former word, and limits it to the
received interpretati^n.


Reply 2. BY this Exposition of Nasa with Sabal, Mr. Norton shows himself to
be a greater Scholar than the Evangelist Matthew; For (says he) Sabal
signifies properly to bear as one bears a burden; and therefore (says he)
this restrains the sense of the former word Nasa to the received
interpretation; by this, he tells the Reader, that Matthews interpretation is
not the received interpretation, but that Mr. Nortons interpretation is the
received interpretation. They may receive it that please, The blind will eat
many a fly, but I hope the Lord will help me to receive Matthews
interpretation before it.

But secondly, If Sabal does signify properly to bear as one bears a burden,
and does restrain Nasa to the same sense, then it follows, that either Christ
took the infirmities from the sick, and bare them upon his own body, as a
Porter bears a burden, or else that Matthew gives a wrong interpretation of
Sabal: And thus Mr. Norton has put himself into a Dilemma, and therefore now
he must either blame his own interpretation to justify Matthew, or else he
must still blame Matthews interpretation of Sabal to justify his.

3 I conceive that Mr. Norton had reasoned more like a Scholar, if he had
said, that though Sabal does ordinarily signify to carry as a Porter bears a
burden, yet sometimes, when it is joined with Nasa, it may signify lifting up,
or bearing away, as Nasa does usually. I am no Linguist, yet with a little help
from others, I do sometimes make use of Kirker^es Hebrew-Greek See Ainsw. in
Number 6, 26.
Lexicon, and there I see that Sabal is twice used with Nasa in Isa. 46. 4. in
a metaphorical sense, for Gods merciful delivering his people from Babylon (and
a metaphorical sense may be compared with the litteral in some respects, but
yet such comparisons must not always run on four seet) I find also that the
Seventy do there render Sabal by two differing Greek words, and neither of them
do signify to bear as a Porter bears a burden, and I find they do use it also
in other various senses; I find also that Sabel of Sabal is rendered by our
Translators the charge, in taking care for the well ordering of things, in 1
King. 11. 28.

But suppose that Nasa and Sabal do signify that Christ b^re our griefs and
sorrows, as a Porter bears a burden, as he did in his affections of
compassion; for it is after said, when they brought diseased persons to him,
That he had compassion on them; and in this respect, he took our nature with
our sin-less infirmities, that so he might be touched, and might thereby know
how to pity us, Heb. 2. 17, 18. But this bearing will not serve Mr. Nortons
turn, it is an amazing kind of bearing which Mr. Norton makes all the bodily
sufferings of Christ to be Hellpains.
Mr. Norton mantains, namely, That all Christ's bodily sufferings were born as
Hell-pains; For, says he, in page 107. the penal wrath of God, or Hell-pains,
were either outward, viz. such as he suffered in body, or inward, viz. such as
he suffered in soul.

Reply 3. By this Tenent of his, it necessarily follows, that Christ bare all
his outward sufferings, as a Porter bears a burden, from his birth to his
death, as Hell-pains.

It is just with God, that he that keeps not close to the Context, when he
does expound the blessed Scriptures, especially when the sense is already made
by conference of one Scripture with another, as Isaiah is by the Holy Ghost in
Matthew (which is a sure rule of true Exposition) that God should leave them to
wander after their own vain fantasies.

Sentences of Scripture (says Peter Martyr) must not be more largely
understood, than the place it self wherein they are written may bear, for
otherwise, says he, We may be soon lead into error, in his Com. pl. part. 1.
page 208.

It is equally dangerous (says another Reverend Divine) to add to the truth,
and to take from it; yet (says he) men do more generally offend in adding to
the truth, being naturally inclined to foster those brats which their own
fantasies have conceived and brought forth.

CHAP. XII.
SECT. 1.
Isa. 53. 5. Examined.
He was wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities. etc.


THese words (says the Dialogue) do plainly prove that Christ did bear diverse
wounds, bruises and stripes, for our peace and healing: But the Text does not
say, That he bare those wounds and bruises from Gods wrath. Mr. Norton
answers, true; But (yet says he) Christ was wounded not only by Satan, and
his instruments; God is the universal Efficient.



Rep. 1. All that he speaks to this point, namely, That God is the universal
efficient, is to little purpose, except it be to blind the Reader, to make him
believe that the Dialogue does make the Devil to be the universal efficient
without Gods appointment; but any one that pleases to peruse the Dialogue, may
see, that it makes all Christ's sufferings to be from Gods appointment, as the
universal efficient: for the Dialogue propounds this Question, Who did wound
him, and bruise him? and then it makes this answer, It was Satan by his
Instruments, according to Gods Prediction in Genesis 3. 15. for God said thus to
Satan, Thou Satan shall pierce him, thou Satan shall put the promised Seed
to Death, as a wicked Malefactor, by thy Instruments, the Scribes and
Pharisees, and the Roman Soldiers; thou shall pierce his hands and feet, by
nayling them to the Cross, according to the determinate Counsel of God, and in
this respect God may be said to wound him.

Thus far I have repeated the words of the Dialogue, and now I leave the
judicious Reader to judge whether Master Norton had any just cause to except
against the Dialogue, as if it did not make God to be the universal efficient
in all Christ's sufferings.

The like flourish he makes against the Dialogue in other Master Norton does
often wroug the sense of the Dialogue
points, thereby laboring to make the simple Reader believe, That the Dialogue
does hold that which it does abhor, as in Psalm, 103. 114. 130, etc. See my
Reply in Cha. 14. Repl. 4. so also in p. 40. after he had drawn a false
inference from the sense of the Dialogue, then he concludes with this scoff,
Sure you mistake your self in arguing out of this text from the word Nasa,
against concluding the Doctrine of imputation therefrom, because Nasa is not in
the text.

Repl. 2. The Dialogue does not say that Nasa is in that text of Es. 53. 6. but
the Dialogue does frame its Argument from the translated term in Es. 53. 6.
thus; If you will build the common Doctrine of imputation upon this translated
phrase, The Lord has laid our iniquities upon Christ (as many Interpreters do)
then by the same phrase you must affirm, That the Father laid all our
iniquities upon himself, by imputing the guilt of our sins to himself, for the
Father is said to bear our sins, (in Psa. 25. 18. and in Psa. 32. 1.) as well
as Christ, and Psalm 25. 18. Psa^. 32, 1.
Kirk^roes Hebrew and Greek Concordance tells me, that Nasa is in both those
places, and in many other places; and Reason tells me, that the term of laying
any thing upon a man's self, or upon another, is to bear it, and so the terms,
He has laid our iniquities upon him, Es. 53. 6. and He has borne our
iniquities, in Psalm. 32. 1. and Psalm. 25. 18. and Exo. 34. 7. etc. are terms
in English that are Synonima, and therefore the Argument of the Dialogue is
sound and good, against such as maintain the Doctrine of imputation from the
translated term in Es. 53. 6. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us
all, and I believe that any indifferent judicious Reader will judge it so to be.

The like un just quarrel Mr. Norton makes against the Dialogue about the word
Atonement, for says he in p. 260. The Dialogue throughout all its Discourse
concerning atonement, seems to understand pardon of sin by Atonement; but
here (says he) it seems by Atonement to understand Reconciliation.

Rep. 3. What can Mr. Norton mean else by this speech, but to make the Reader
believe, that I did not in all my Discourse concerning Atonement, till now,
make reconciliation to be meant by Atonement? the vanity of this unjust
quarrel the Reader may please to see by the words of the Dialogue in the
beginning, namely in p. 14. there I explain Atonement by Reconciliation, in
these words of the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself, or says the Dialogue (by way of explanation) making
atonement between the World and himself; and so in p. 32. I call the Judges
Atonement a reconciliation, but I pass over several other such like unjust
exceptions, because I will spend my time the more in the substance of the main
Controversy.

SECT. II.
The Conclusion of the Dialogue Discourses is this, That God did not wound
Christ as an angry Judge for our sins, but it was for the trial of his
Mediatorial obedience, and therefore he is said to learn obedience by the
things that he suffered, Heb. 5. 8.

IT seems that Mr. Nortons great exception is at this conclusion, for he
answers thus; Satan and men were Instruments of such a stroke, therefore it is
no stroke of Divine vindicative Justice. This (says he) is no good Consequent.

Rep. 4. It seems that Mr. Norton by this answer holds, that all Master Norton
makes all the bodily sufferings of Christ to be Hell paine^.
and every stroke of any Affliction that Christ suffered from the Devil and his
Instruments, was from the revenging Justice of God; and therefore hence it
follows, that when the Devil stirred up Herod to seek the Childs life (which
also did occasion his Parents to carry him into Egypt) it was from Gods
Vindicative wrath, although, to prevent it, God in mercy warned Joseph to take
the Child, and to fly into Egypt.

It seems by Mr. Nortons distribution of the Curse, in Genesis 2. 17. that he
holds this for a firm conclusion, That all the outward afflictions of Christ
were from Gods Vindicative wrath, and therefore he calls them the outward penal
Torments of Hell, as I formerly noted in Chap. 11.

But yet Mr. Norton in the same Page does acknowledge, That The true nature of
all Christ's greatest Sufferings was Chastisements, therefore they cannot be
called the Essential Torments of Hell from Gods vindicative wrath.
all the afflictions which God inflicteth upon the Elect from the same Curse,
are but Chastisements, and not Vindicative punishments, and so that affliction
of their flight into Egypt was but a Chastisement to Joseph and Mary, but it
was a Vindicative punishment to Christ: But I would fain know a little more of
Mr. Nortons skill, how he can call the Afflictions and Punishments which Christ
suffered, Hell Torments from Gods Vindicative wrath, seeing the Holy Ghost does
comprehend them all under the word Chastisement, in this very fifth Verse? for
the Prophet speaks here of all the greatest Sufferings of Christ, which he
endured in that long action of his Passion, from his Apprehension to his Death,
I say, all these sufferings he comprehends under the word Chastisements; but
it seems that Mr. Norton has an Art beyond the Holy Ghost to distinguish them
from Chastisements, and to rank them under Gods Vindicative Justice; let the
Reader judge if he do not undertake to be learned above the Holy Ghost in the
sense of the word Chastisement.

The Learned observe that the Hebrew word Musar, derived from Jasar, does
properly signify the correction of a Father toward his Son, as all these
places do testify, Prove. 3. 11, 12. Prove. 19. 18. Deuteronomy. 8. 5. Psalm. 94. 12.
Jer. 31* 18. and in Heb. 5. 6. Heb, 5, 6
the Apostle does concur with the Prophet Isaiah, That the true nature of all
Christ's Sufferings were but Chastisements, for he says thus, Though he were
the Son, yet learned he obedience by the things he suffered; his learning of
obedience is the subjection of a Son to his Fathers chastisement, and therefore
it follows necessarily, That seeing all his Sufferings were but Chastisements,
they were not inflicted on him from Gods Vindicative wrath, and I believe that
this is a sound truth, that will hold water if the Scripture hold.

Secondly, It is further evident that the Sufferings of Christ are far from
being inflicted on him from Gods Vindicative wrath; because all his sufferings,
and all the sufferings of the Saints are founded alike in Gods fatherly love,
and in that respect there is a reciprocal communion between Christ the Head and
all his members, in all their sufferings.

1 The Elect do partake with Christ in all his sufferings, I mean in respect of
the kind of them, as these Scriptures do testify, Phil. 3. 10, 11. 2 Timothy 2.
11. Col. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 4. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 21. Romans 6. 2 Cor. 1. 5. Mar. 10. 39.
Luke 22. 28. and therefore hence it follows necessarily, that if the sufferings
of Christ were from Gods Vindicative wrath, that then all the sufferings of the
Elect must likewise be from Gods Vindicative wrath, seeing they do communicate
with Christ in the kind of his sufferings.

Secondly, These Scriptures do testify that Christ the Head does communicate
with all his Members in all their sufferings, Heb. 2. 18. Heb. 4. 15. Es, 63.
1, 2. And hence it does necessarily follow, that if all the Sufferings of the
Members of Christ be but Chastisements, then the Sufferings of Christ must not
be ranked in any other form of Justice but where Gods Chastisements are.

Thirdly, It is evident, that all the Sufferings of Christ are called but
temptations of Trial, Heb. 2. 18. Heb. 4. 15. and Christ himself at the upshot
of his life does call all his former Afflictions but such temptations of Trial,
wherein his Apostles had been sharers with him, Luke 22. 28. and therefore it
does hence follow, that they were not inflicted on him from Gods Vindicative
wrath, unless M. Norton will prove that the Apostles also did suffer Gods
Vindicative wrath, which in another place he seems to deny.

SECT. III.
But it may be some will here object, That though Christ's Sufferings were but
Chastisements, yet they were inflicted on him from Gods Wrath, for even Gods
Fatherly Chastisements are inflicted from his wrath, 2 Samuel 24. 1. therefore if
Christ did partake with his people but in their kind of punishments, his
suffering must also be from Gods wrath.

Reply 5. IT does not follow, for Christ might truly partake with them in their
punishments, in respect of sense Christ's Sufferings may justly be called
punishments, such as the godly su^^er, and yet not from Good wrath, as theirs
is.
and feeling, and yet from a differing cause, and for a differing end, as for
example, The godly may suffer wounds in their body for sin inherent, in a
judicial way both from God and Superiors, and Christ also may suffer such like
wounds, and yet not in a judicial way from sin imputed, but as a voluntary
Combater with Satan and his Instruments, for the winning of the Prize, even
for the Redemption of the Elect and all this without any wrath from the
voluntary Covenanters and Masters of the Prize; and in this sense only Christ
did suffer wounds and bruises, namely as a voluntary Combater, for in Genesis 3.
15. God declared his Decree, that he would put an utter enmity between Satan
and the Seed of the deceived Woman, and that the Devil should have full liberty
to wound Christ, and to bruise him, and to pierce him as a Malefactor in the
foot-soals, and to do what he could to disturb his patience, and so to hinder
his death from being a Sacrifice; but because Christ continued obedient to the
death, even to the ignominious and painful death of the Cross, and at last
made his Soul a Sacrifice, he overcame Principalities and Powers in it, namely
in the manner of his death on the Cross, so that the cause of Christ's Wounds
was not from Gods judicial imputation of our sin and guilt, nor from Gods
judicial wrath, but from his undertaking to be a voluntary Combater with
Satan, for the breaking of his Head-plot by his constant obedience, even to
the death of the Cross for man's Redemption; so that the sufferings of Christ
do arise from a differing cause, and are for a differing end from the
sufferings of the Saints, and so consequently not from Gods wrath, as theirs
is, But I shall enlarge this point in the end of this Chapter, and often
elsewhere, because it has an undeniable foundation of truth in Genesis 3. 15. and
all the Prophets do but comment upon that declared Decree of God.

SECT. IV.
But says Mr. Norton, page 38.
The sufferings of Christ included in this text, are not only such wherein
Satan and men were instruments: But some of them (says he) were immediately
inflicted of God, without any second means as instruments thereof; Hence we
read of a wounded spirit, Prove. 18. 4. A wounded conscience, 1 Cor. 8. 12. A
broken and a bruised heart, Luke 4. 18. The plague of the heart, 1 King. 8. 38.


Reply 6. A judicious Reader may well smile at the unsuitableness of these
proofs to his Proposition: In his Proposition he says, That some of Christ's
sufferings were inflicted None of Christ's sufferings were inflicted on him from
Gods immediate wrath.
immediately of God without any second means as instruments thereof: But any
judicious Reader may soon see, that a wounded spirit, a wounded conscience,
etc. do come to be so wounded by second means, namely, by the sight of sin,
and the desert of sin: But suppose that God does in some cases inflict
punishments immediately on some men's souls, by his supreme power, without
respect of sin, yet that does not answer to the Proposition of the Dialogue,
for the Dialogue does not speak of men's souls, but of Christ's soul. The
Dialogue says, That Christ's soul is not capable of bearing wounds from Gods
immediate wrath: But all Mr. Nortons proofs are of men's souls that are sinners.

But says Mr. Norton in page 38. Satan being a spirit may have access unto,
and consequently both may, and does afflict the spirit, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Ephesians. 2.
12. 16.
Reply 7. What though Satan may afflict the spirit of a sinner, yet still that
does not prove his Proposition which he undertook to make good, namely, That
God from his immediate wrath did afflict the spirit of Christ.

But says Mr. Norton, If Satan cannot, yet God can.
Reply 8. What God can do is one thing, and what God did to the soul of Christ
is another thing; But still his Proposition to be proved is, That God did
inflict his immediate wrath upon the soul of Christ without any second means.

2 For a more full answer to both the former speeches of In his Child of Light
p. 52, 53. 120.
Mr. Norton, I shall refer you to Mr. Thomas Goodwin; he says that the soul
of Adam in his innocence, and the soul of Christ were privileged from all
inward suggestions from Satan, and that Satan could tempt them no otherwise
but by his outward temptations only; And I find other Divines to accord with
him.

3 He shows also, that God does not torment the souls of the damned by his
immediate wrath, but by second means; For (says he) though God is to be
feared, because he only can cast both body and soul into hell; Yet (says he)
this is not meant as if God were the immediate Tormentor of souls after the
great day, seeing they are to be tormented by that fire which God has
prepared in common for them and the Devils.

4 P. Martyr (in his Com. pl. part. 4. page 314.) says, It is the property of
God to command, and not to execute things commanded; And says Baxter in his
Saints Rest, page 275. God afflicts men's souls, not immediately, but by
instruments.

But says Mr. Norton in page 39.
Christ suffered not only in body, but in soul, Isa. 53. 10. When thou shall
make his soul a sacrifice for sin; My soul is exceeding sorrowful to the death,
Mat. 26. 38. Mar. 14. 34. His great Mat. 26. 38.
heaviness, sore amazement, agony, sweat as it were drops of blood, M^r. 14.
33. Luke 22. 44. cannot be looked at in a person that was Luke 22. 44.
God and man, as less than the effects of Soul-sorrows, Hell sorrows, Thou will
not leave my soul in Hell.


Reply 9. I have showed in Chap. 17. Sect. 3. and in Chap. 16. Sect. 3. That
the soul of Christ in these places quoted by Mr. Norton, are meant of his vital
soul, and not o^ his immortal soul.

2 That Christ himself was his own Afflicter with soulsorrows. Chap. 16. Sect.
2. and Chap. 17. Sect. 4. Reply 15.

3 When all these cited Scriptures are put together, they prove no more but
this, that Christ suffered much in his soul, as well as in his body; But where
does any of them say, That his soul-sufferings were inflicted on him from Gods
immediate wrath, without any second meant? which is the very point that Mr.
Norton undertook to make good.

But says he, His greatheavinesse, sore amazement, and sweat, as it were
great drops of blood, cannot be looked at in a person that was both God and
man, as less than the effects of Hell-sorrows, etc.
Reply 10. Does not Mr. Norton hold forth in these words that the humane nature
of Christ was a true part of his divine person? why else does he say, That his
great heaviness, sore Christ's humane nature was often purpos^ly lest of the
divine nature, that so it might be touched with the sense of our infirmities
more than ours can be.
amazement, etc. cannot be looked at in a person that was God and man, as less
than the effects of Hell-sorrows? as if Christ's humane nature was not able to
bear these sorrows, without the powerful assistance of his divine nature: It
seems to me, he thinks that his God head by virtue of personal union did
always cooperate to the assisting of his humane nature to undergo his
soul-sorrows, as our bodies are helped to bear our sufferings by our souls, by
reason of personal union: But I shall join with those Divines that reason
contrary; for both ancient and latter Divines do often say, That his divine
nature did often rest, that so his humane nature might be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities; and this the divine nature might do, because the
humane nature was no true part of his divine person (as our souls are to make
our bodies a person) but an Appendix only: The union of his humane nature to
his divine person, was such an ineffable union, that it cannot be exemplified
by any other union whatsoever: Indeed, if his humane nature had been a true
part of his divine person, as our souls are of our persons, then it must have
helped his humane nature to bear his sorrows; but I think it is no less than
heresy to hold so; but because it was but an Appendix to his divine person,
therefore the divine nature could put out his power to leave the humane nature
to its self, and to its own qualifications, to be touched to the utmost with
the sensible feeling of our infirmities; and therefore I say, That the
perfections of his humane nature, and the unction of the holy Spirit at his
instalment was sufficient to support him, and to regulate his soul-sorrows,
without the cooperation of his divine nature; and doubtless, as his humane
nature was most perfect in spirits, so it was to the utmost touched with the
sense of our infirmities, much more then our corrupt natures can be. But I
shall have occasion to speak more of this in the Passion of Christ; and in
respect of his ineffable union, his divine nature did leave his humane nature
to act in his moral obedience, and natural actions.

But says Mr. Norton in page 39.
The Curse is not only bodily, but spiritual, as we were delivered from our
sin, so be bare our sin; But we were delivered not only from the bodily, but
also from the spiritual punishment of sin. Therefore, etc.


Reply 11. I suppose that Mr. Norton by this speech, We were delivered from
the spiritual punishment of sin, does mean that Christ has delivered us from
the spiritual death of Hell.

But I have showed in Chap. 2. in Sect. 3. That the first death threatened to
Adam and his posterity, in case he did eat of the forbidden fruit, was a
spiritual death in sin; and that bodily death, and eternal death was threatened
after this as a just punishment for Adams death in sin; and hence I reason
thus* That seeing Christ has delivered us from our first spiritual death in
sin, without bearing it in kind, and from our bodily diseases, in Mat. 8.
without bearing them in kind, he may as well deliver us from our spritual and
^ternal death in hell, without bearing it in kind.

But says Mr. Norton in page 40.
Whilst you so often affirm, that obedience of Christ to be meritorious, and
yet all along deny it to be performed in a way of justice, you so often affirm
a contradiction; the very nature of merit including justice; for merit is a
just desert, or a desert in way of justice.


Reply 12. The way of justice is either the way of vindicative justice, or else
it is the way of justice according to the voluntary Covenant. The Dialogue
indeed does oppose the way of The true nature of merit, and how Christ did
merit our Redemption.
vindicative justice; but yet it makes all Christ's sufferings to be performed
in a way of justice, according to the order of justice in the voluntary Cause
and Covenant; but it is no marvel that Mr. Norton cannot see into this
ground-word of merit, because he is so much prejudiced against the Dialogue
scope, or else he could not have said, that it affirms a contradiction: Indeed
I should have affirmed a contradictioni, f I had at any time affirmed as Mr.
Norton does, that the meritorious cause of all Christ's sufferings and death,
was from Gods judicial imputing our sins to Christ.

But the Dialogue goes another way to work, it shows from Gods declaration in
Genesis 3. 15. That the Devil must combat against the seed of the deceived woman,
and that Christ in his humane nature, must combat against him, and break his
Head-plot, by continuing obedient to the death, and that therefore his
sufferings and death were meritorious, because it was all performed in a way of
justice, namely, in exact obedience to all the Articles of the voluntary
Covenant, as I have showed also in Chap. 10.

And it is out of all doubt that the Articles of the Eternal Covenant for man's
Redemption are comprised in that declaration of our Redemption in Genesis 3. 15.

1 God does there declare by way of threatening to Satan (doubtless in the
hearing of Adam, and for his instruction) that he would put an enmity between
him and the woman, and between the devils seed and her seed (he shall enter
the Lists, and try Masteries with thee) and he shall break thy Head-plot (and
to this conflict does the word Agony agree in Luke 22. 44.) And Thou Satan
shall bear an utter enmity against him; and thou shall have liberty to enter
the Lists with this seed of the deceived woman, and have liberty to do what
thou can to pervert his obedience, as thou had to pervert the obedience
of Adam, and in case thou can disturb his patience by ignominious
contumelies, or by the torture of a painful death, and so pervert him in his
obedience, then thou shall by that means hinder this seed of the woman from
making his soul a sacrifice, and so from the breaking of thy Head-plot, and so
from winning the prize, and therefore thou shall have free liberty to tempt him
to sin as much as thou can, and thou shall have liberty to impute as many
sinful crimes against him as thou can devise, and so to put him to an
ignominious and painful death, like to wicked male factors.

But in case he shall continue patient without disturbance, and continue
obedient to the death, without any diversion, and at last make his death an
obedient sacrifice by his own Priestly power, then I will accept his death and
sacrifice as full satisfaction for the sins of the Elect, and so he shall
break thy Head-plot, and win the prize, which is the salvation of all the
Elect; and doubtless this death and sacrifice of Christ was exemplified to Adam
by the sacrifice of some Lamb, presently after his Fall.

Lo, here is a true description of Christ's merit, according to the order of
justice, as it was agreed on, in the voluntary Covenant; For we may gather
from the threatening, First, That there was such a voluntary Covenant. Secondly,
That Christ did covenant to continue constant in his obedience through all his
temptations and trials. And thirdly, that upon the performance thereof, God
would reward him with the salvation of all the Elect, Pbi. 2. 9, 10, 11. Es. 53
10 etc.

Mr. Wotton De Reconciliatione peccatoris, part. 1. cap. 4. does thus explain
the meritorious cause.

That the meritorious cause of Reconciliation (says he) is a kind of
efficient, there needs no other proof, then that it binds as it were the
principal efficient, to perform that which upon the merit is due; As if a man
in running a race, or the like, so runs as the order of the Game requires,
by so doing, he meriteth the prize or reward, and thereby also he binds the
Master of the Game to pay him that which he has deserved.

This is a true description of the true nature of Christ's merit according to
the order of justice, in the voluntary Covenant, better and more agreeable to
the Scripture than Mr. Nortons is from the legal order of Court-justice, by a
legal imputation of sin; for the Scripture is silent in this way, and plain in
the other way.

And from this description of merit from the voluntary cause and Covenant,
These Conclusions do follow.

1 That the wounds, bruises, and bloodshed of such as did win the prize,
cannot be said to be inflicted upon them from the vindicative wrath of the
Masters of the Game, caused through the imputation of sin, and guilt against
their Laws; for none can win the prize that is guilty of any such transgression
against their Law, as the Apostle does witness in 2 Timothy 2. 5. and peruse also
Dr. Hammonds Annotations on 1 Cor. 9. 24. and on Heb. 12. 1, 2. Imputation of
sin in the voluntary combat does lose the prize.
and on 2 Timothy 4 8. and take notice, that the Greek in 2 Timothy 4. 7. is the same
by which the Seventy translate Genesis 30. 8. With excellent wrastlings have I
wrastled, namely, for the mastery and victory; and so also our larger
Annotations on 2 Timothy 4. 8.

2 Hence it follows, That the said wounds, bruises, and blood shed, ought not
to be accounted as any vindicative Punishments may be suffered without the
imputation of sin.
punishments from the Masters of the prize, but as voluntary trials of their
manhood, of their patience, and obedience to their Laws.

3 Hence it follows, That the wounds and bruises mentioned in Isa. 53. 5. 10.
etc. which Christ suffered, were no other but the very same that God had
declared he should suffer from Satan, God did wound and bruise Christ no
otherwise, but as h^e gave Satan leave to do his worst unto Christ.
in Genesis 3. 15. I consess that the Hebrew word for bruised or pe^rced in Genesis
3. 15. is different from the Hebrew word in Isa. 59. 5. 10. but yet in both
places, it is plainly spoken of the bruising of Christ by Satan and his
instruments; Isaia^ says, He was wounded and bruised for our transgiessions,
namely, by Satan at Gods appointment, and because Christ did voluntarily
undertake this combat with Satan, therefore God did also covenant that his
bruises should be for the chastisement of our peace, and for our healing; And
so in verse 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise hi^, and to put him to grief,
namely, according to Gods prediction in Genesis 3. 15. but God did not bruise him
by his immediate wrath, he was not pressed under the sense of Gods wrath, as
Mr. Norton affirms, for to be pressed under the sense of Gods wrath, is to be
forced to suffer by violence.

Job did acknowledge, when the Devil destroyed his cattle and children, that it
was the Lord that took these things from him, Job 1. 21. and says, when the
Devil smote him full of boyls, The band of the Lord has touched me, Job 19. 1.
and yet it was Satan that did smite him with boyls, Job 2. 7. So God is said
by Isaiah, To delight to bruise Christ, and to put him to grief, because God
delivered Christ into the hands of the Devils Instruments to combat for the
victory, Act. 2. 23. and so it is said, That God spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, namely, to Satan and his Instruments to combat
with him, Romans 8. 32. And so in like sort, God is said, To give power to Pilate
to condemn Christ, Joh. 19. 11. And so God delivered him into the hands of
sinners, Matthew. 27. 45. to do unto him whatsoever the council of God had
determined, Act. 4. 28. And his Father gave him the cup of all these
afflictions, Job. 18. 11. because he declared that Satan should have this
liberty and power, Genesis 3. 15.

Yea Christ delivered himself into the hands of sinners, Job. 18. 4. 8. And
Christ did often foretell his sufferings to his Disciples, saying, Behold we go
up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief Priests,
and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn him unto death, and shall deliver
him unto the Gentiles, and they shall mock him, and scourge him, and spit upon
him, and shall kill him, Mat. 16. 21. Mar. 10. 33, 34. Luke 18. 31, 32, 33.
Luke 24. 7. 25, 26, 44, 46. Act. 13. 27, 28, 29. And all this Christ did
undergo from the voluntary Cause and Covenant, as it was declared in Genesis 3.
15. and therefore not from Gods wrath.

4 This does clearly exemplify, how, and in what respect the obedience of
Christ in all his sufferings was meritorious.

5 This does also clearly exemplify, how all the sufferings of Christ may be
called punishments, without the judicial imputation of our sins to him by God.

6 This also does exemplify, how God is said to be just to sinners, in 1 Ioh.
1. 9. Romans 3. 26. namely, because he had from all eternity covenanted with
Christ the Mediator, that upon the performance of his combat with Satan,
according to the Laws of the combat, that then he should thereby obtain his
reconciliation to believing sinners; As soon therefore as Christ had performed
this combat, and made his soul a sacrifice, according to the eternal Covenant,
God is said to declare his righteousness in remitting their sins, that so he
might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 26.

But still Mr. Norton objecteth in page 41. thus: Had Christ suffered death
without sin imputed, his death could not have been called a punishment.
Reply 13. In the former description of punishment suffered from the voluntary
Cause and Covenant, he may see an instance to the contrary.

But Mr. Norton says in page 140.
Though the notions of a Mediator, and a Male factor, are clearly distinct in
themselves; yet your distinguishing between Christ's dying as a Mediator, and as
a Malefactor, is unfound.


Reply 14. Though it be unsound in Mr. Nortons sense, yet it is not unsound in
the Scripture sense; let the former Scripture in Genesis 3. 15. be judge in the
case.

1 He must dye as a Malefactor, for God had armed Satan with authority to use
him as a vild Malefactor, and to crucify him in the Foot-soals.

And yet 2 As soon as Christ had finished all those sufferings in obedience to
the Laws of the combat, he must make his soul a sacrifice of Reconciliation
(taught by the death of some Lamb) by his Priestly power, even by the joint
concurrence of both his natures, or else he could not have been the Mediator of
the New Testament, through death, if he had not (as soon as he had finished
all his sufferings) offered his vital soul for a sacrifice by his eternal
Spirit; both his natures did concur to make his death a sacrifice, and in that
respect only he was the Mediator of the New Testament through that kind of
death; As the Apostles argument lies in Heb, 9. 14, 15, 16. And thus the
Dialogue does make the notions of a Malefactor, and a Mediator, to be clearly
distinct.

7 Hence it is evident that all the outward sufferings of Christ, were from the
voluntary Cause and Covenant in entering the Lists with Satan (not in the power
of his Godhead, but) in his humane nature which he received from the seed of
the deceived woman, and as it was accompanied with our infirmities: And in this
respect he is said by Isaiah, to be wounded or tormiented for our
transgressions, and to be bruised for our iniquities. And thus Peter must be
understood, when he says, He bare our sins in his body on the Tree; that is to
say, Our punishments in his combat with Satan, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And thus Christ
was oppressed by his 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Combater Satan, Isa. 53. 7. when he suffered himself to be apprehended by a
band of armed Soldiers, and to be bound Es. 53. 7.
as a prisoner, and as a Malefactor; and in this sense Christ says I am the
good Shepherd that gives his life for his sheep, Joh. 10. 11. I will readily
venture my life in the combat with that roaring Lion Satan for the redemption
of my sheep; And thus Moses did offer his life to redeem the lives of the
Israelites when they had forfeited their lives into the hands of Gods justice,
by worshipping the Golden Calf, Exodus 32. Then Moses said, I will now go up to
the Lord, peradventure I shall make Atonement for your sin; and be said to
God, If thou will forgive their sin, and if not (but that they must still dye)
blot me I pray thee out of thy book which thou have written (called the Book of
the living, Ps. 69. 29. and called also the Writing of the house of Israel,
Eze. 13. 9.) And herein Moses (says Ainsworth) dealt as a Mediator between God
and men, and was a figure of our Mediator Christ, who laid down his life for
his sheep, Ioh. 10. 15. and redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when he was
made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. The intent of Moses, say the Hebrew Doctors
was, That he might dye instead of them, and bear their iniquity according to
that in Isa. 53. 5. He was wounded for our Trespasses: For (say the Hebrew
Doctors) The death of the just makes Reconciliation. Ex. 32. 32.
See Ains. in Exodus 32. 32. But in case Moses had been made guilty of their sin
by Gods imputation, doubtless he had not been a fit person to offer his life
as a Mediator for their lives. This resemblance, I grant, is but very weak,
because Moses did not offer to give his life as a Mediator for them, by a
mutual Covenant, but of his own head, and therefore his offer was refused; yet
that speech of the Hebrew Doctors, The death of the just makes Reconciliation,
may somewhat inlighten touching that place in 1 Pet. 3. 18. where it is said,
That 1 Pet. 3. 18.
Christ suffered, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God; for
he being just in Gods sight, engaged himself, acording to a mutual and
reciprocal Covenant, to enter the Lists with Satan, and to continue just
through all the malicious designs of Satan, even to the death of the Cross,
that so at last he might make his soul a sacrifice of Atonement, and so bring
us to God. Mark this, He is called the just in all his sufferings: But he was
not so called in the Jews account, for they put him to death as a sinful
Malefactor. Neither could he be said to be absolutely just in the sight of
God, in case God had imputed the guilt of our sins to him in a formal legal
way: But says Peter, The just suffered for the unjust, he that knew himself
to be every way just in the fight of God, and of his Law, he entered the Lists,
and suffered from Satan's enmity, and yet still he continued obedient to the
death, and so continued to be just. And hence we may see wherein the efficacy
of Christ's All Christ's sufferings were without any imputation of sin from God,
and therefore he was accepted, and so his obedience to the death does bring us
to God.
sufferings do consist, namely, in this, because in all his conflict with
Satan, his patience was not disturbed, nor his obedience perverted, but to the
very last, he approved himself to be most just and righteous in the sight of
God, and therefore he conquered Satan by righteousness (as the ancient
Divines do very often speak) because he strove lawfully, according to the order
agreed on by the voluntary Covenanters; And so he won the prize.

2 In his combat with Satan, his obedience was eminent, above the obedience
of any condemned delinquent that patiently submits his life to be taken away
by justice, because he put forth a voluntary act of compliance in all his
combating with Satan, and in all his sufferings, that so he might please him
that had chosen him to be the Captain of our salvation; and in that respect
his chastisements which he suffered from Satan's malice to provoke him to some
sinful distemper, are said to be for our peace and healing (by obtaining a
reconciliation for us) and so he does heal us, and bring us to God; and so say
the Hebrew Doctors, The death of the Just makes Reconciliation.

It is no evil in it self to be punished from a voluntary undertaking of a
combat, but to be punished in a legal way, through a legal imputation of sin
and guilt, that is a true evil indeed.

3 Take notice in some particulars how eminently active Christ was voluntary in
complying with all his sufferings, or else they had not been meritorious. See
also Chapter 6.
Christ was in his sufferings as a voluntary Combater.

1 He was lead by the Spirit, that lighted on him at his Baptism, into the
Wilderness, as soon as ever he was extrinsecally installed into the Mediators
office, on purpose to try Masteries with the Devils temptations (which no man
else in the world might presume to do, but this Captain of our salvation) and
in this respect all his sufferings may more fitly be called active sufferings,
or active passive obedience, rather than passive obedience, for he put forth a
ready and voluntary compliance with them, and that by way of anticipation,
according to Covenant, as a voluntary undertaker of the combat for our
Redemption; and this kind of obedience in his sufferings, made his
chastisements to be meritorious for our peace, and for our healing, as the
Dialogue shows in p. 49.

2 Take another instance of Christ's voluntary obedience, in entering into the
Lists with Satan as the Captain of our salvation, in all that long business
that is called his Passion.

1 He manifested himself to be continually mindful of that hour that God had
appointed to be for his apprehension and death, Luke 12. 50. Ioh. 12. 23, 27.
etc. Ioh. 13. 1. and in verse 2, 3. Supper being ended, and Jesus knowing that
the Father had given all things into his hand, namely, to order himself in
every circumstance of his sufferings, in his combat with Satan, according to
the Articles of the Eternal Covenant (for the Text says, That he knew from the
beginning who it was that should betray him, Joh. 6. 64. Joh. 13. 11.)
therefore he was active, and provoked Judas at Supper to go out, saying unto
him, What thou do, do quickly, Joh. 13. 27. and then says hoe, The Son of
man goes as it is determined (namely by a mutual Covenant) Luke 22. 22. and
then said he, The Prince of this world comes (to encounter with me, with more
armed violence than formerly) but says he, He has nothing in me, Joh. 14
30. he has no just ground to accuse me for breaking the Laws of the combat,
and therefore he cannot hinder me from winning the prize; and when Christ
arose to go to the Garden, where he knew he must be apprehended, he said
thus to his Disciples, As my Father gave me a Commandment (or Appointment) so
I do; Arise, let us go hence, Joh. 14. 31. It is my Fathers appointment, and it
is my Covenant that I should now arise to meet these armed Arch-Instruments of
Satan. And when Judas and the Soldiers came to apprehend him, he said to the
chief Priests, This is your hour, and the power of darkness (you have full
liberty to do your worst against me) Luke 22. 53. And when Peter went about to
protect him from their power by his sword, he would not be protected from
Satan's power, and therefore he bid him to put up his sword; for said he, If
I had a mind to be protected from their power, I could pray to my Father, and
he would give me more than twelve Legions of Angels; But how then (said he)
shall the Scriptures he fulfilled, that say, This it must be? Matthew. 26. 53,
54. for the Scriptures say, That I must be pierced as a Malefactor in the
Foot-soals, Genesis 3. 15. and so like wise in the hands, Psalm. 22. 16. And that I
must be oppressed by a band of armed Soldiers, Joh. 18. 3. 12. and brought as
a Lamb to the slaughter, Isa. 53. 7. Isa. 33 7.
And when he came to his Answer, he does not so much as plead for himself,
either before the High Priest, Mat. 26. 63. or afterward before Pilate, Mat.
27. 12, 14. But as a sheep before her shearer is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth. And because it was the appointed hour of the power of the Prince of
darkness, to exercise his utmost force against him, therefore he did not like
a faint-hearted Soldier, withdraw himself from them into some unknown place,
but he purposely went into a known Garden where he knew he must be
apprehended by Satan's Arch-Instruments (and be lead by them as a sheep to the
slaughter) Joh. 18. 1. And then because he knew all things, and what should
befall him, he went forth, Joh. 18. 4. namely, to meet the Devils Instruments
that came to apprehend him, Joh 18. 6. And as soon as he had but said unto
them, I am He (that must break the Devils Head-plot by my constant patience
and obedience) they all fell to the ground at his word speaking, and there he
kept them, for his Disciples sake, until they might have liberty to depart;
and if he would he might have departed as well as they, but instead of
departing, he put forth another act of his divine power to raise them up again,
that so he might be active in delivering himself unto their power, to be
apprehended, and to be bound as a Malefactor, and so to be carried before the
Elders of the people; And thus he was active to drink of the bitter Cup that
his Father had given him, for he had said but a little before unto Peter, Put
up thy sword (and protect me not against these furies of Satan) shall I not
drink of the Cup that my Father has given me? namely, by his appointment, and
by mine own agreement from eternity.

By these, and such like passages, it is evident, that Christ was eminently
voluntary and active in all his sufferings and combatings with Satan, as a
good Shepherd that does readily venture his life against the Lion and the Bear
for the safety of his sheep, he suffered nothing by constraint from his Fathers
wrath, through his judicial imputation of our sins, being pressed under the
sense of the wrath of God, as Mr. Nortons terms are, but God was pleased to let
Satan loose, to oppress him, to wound, and to bruise him, and to put him to
as much grief as he could, to disturb his patience, and to pervert him in the
course of his obedience, when his soul should make it self an offering, that so
he might prevent his sacrifice, by which means only, it was decreed that the
Devils Head-plot must be broken.

Conclusion.
Hence it follows, that seeing the Devil could not, neither by his fraudulent
temptations in the Wilderness, nor yet by his temptations of force in the
Garden, and on the Cross, provoke him to any impatience, or to any
disobedience, by his ignominious tortures, when his soul should make an
offering, but that still he continued constant in his obedience, and at last
did make his soul a sacrifice by his own Priestly power, according to the Laws
of the voluntary Covenant; his death and sufferings must needs be meritorious
for the obtaining of Gods Reconciliation, and man's Redemption from Satan's Head
plot.

CHAP. XIII.
The Examination of Isa. 53. 6.
The Lord has laid upon him the Iniquities of us all.


THe Exposition given by the Dialogue of this translated term [The Lord has
laid upon] is found and good Divinity, and not confuted by Mr. Nortons Answer,
he cannot hence mantain the point of imputing our sins to Christ, which is the
main thing controverted, and which I have already replied unto in Chapter 7.

But because I received some Animadversions from a Reverend Divine that gave
another Translation than formerly I followed, and from thence he also gave
another differing Exposition from mine, by means whereof I was put to a stand
for a time, though after serious seeking unto God by prayer, conference,
reading, and meditation upon the Context, I came at last to a more clear
apprehension of the meaning of the words, to my satisfaction; for upon the said
search, I could not find that the Prophet in this Text did speak of Gods
judicial imputing our sins to Christ, or that it spoke any thing directly of
Gods judicial inflicting our deserved penalties (namely Hell torments) upon
Christ, because no verse either before or after this verse, did conclude any
such thing; and therefore upon serious consideration, I durst not take this
verse in that sense.

I confess I am no Linguist, yet I love sometimes to search into Kirkeroes
Hebrew-Greek Lexicon, to see in how many various senses the Seventy do render
the Hebrew words; and sometimes in more difficult cases, I love to confer with
such as are learned in the Tongues. And by this means I find that the Hebrew
word Pagah in this verse does signify to Meet, and because it is in the
conjugation Hiphil, it does signify to Cause to meet; so then the words must
run thus, The Lord caused him to meet, namely, the Father caused the Mediator
to meet, to consult the way of fallen man's Redemption from Satan's Head-plot;
and in that meeting all the Trinity were equal Counselors and Covenanters; but
the Father is said to make or cause the meeting, because he is first in order,
yet because there is but one will in the Trinity, therefore in Jer. Jer. 30. 21.
30 21. the Father says thus in commendation of Christ, Who is this that
(has) engaged his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord? Now hence it may
fitly be demanded how Christ did engage his heart? the answer is, that he did
it by way of Contract or Covenant; and therefore the Hebrew word Gnarab, which
we translate engaged, does properly signify no more but a conjunction or
joining together, but in this place it relates to the conjunction of the Father
and the Son in a Covenant for man's Redemption, and accordingly it is sometimes
put for a conjunction of persons in a league or confederation, as I have showed
at large in my Treatise of Holy Time.

But thus the whole verse in Jeremy may be read and paraphrased, His excellent
one shall be of himself, and his Ruler shall go forth from the midst of him,
and I will cause him to draw near, namely, as a Priest, with an acceptable
sacrifice; for this Hebrew word is used in Lev. 1. 2. for offering an oblation,
or bringing near a gift; so then to bring near, or approach near unto God, is
to offer unto him, and to offer a sacrifice for sin, is to make Atonement: See
Ains. in Lev. 6. 26. and therefore one of these is used for another, as in 1 Chronicles. 16. 1. they brought near burnt offerings; for which in 2 Samuel 6. 17. is
written, David offered burnt offerings; so in Numb. 6. 14, 16, 17. The Nazarite
shall bring near his oblation, and the Priest shall bring them near, that is,
both the Nazarite and his sacrifice: And says God of Christ, I will cause him
to draw near, and approach unto me; for who is this that has engaged his
heart, or conjoined himself with me in a Covenant to do my will for man's
Redemption? And in answer to this Covenant, Christ says, In burnt offerings
and sacrifices for sin, thou have had no pleasure, then said I, Lo I come to do
thy will, O God, thy Law is in my heart, Psalm. 40. 8. Heb. 10. and says
Ainsworth in Psalm. 148. 14. Psalm. 40. 8.
Christ draws near unto God for his people, and there he cites this Text of
Jer. 30. 21. and so also through Christ's sacrifice we have boldness to draw
nigh to God, Heb. 7 19. Heb. 10. 22.

2 As these words (He caused him to meet) may be applied to the meeting of the
Trinity, for the constituting of the eternal Covenant, so they may be applied
also in speech of the execution of the said eternal Covenant, when Christ met
his Father with his sacrifice of Atonement, and then the words must go thus,
The Father made or constituted Him, namely, his Son, to meet him as a Priestly
Mediator, with his appointed sacrifice of his vital soul, to atone his wrath
for the iniquities of us all, that by nature had gone astray like lost sheep,
as it is expressed in the beginning of the verse.

And thus this meeting may be understood both of the eternal Council and
Covenant of the Trinity, and also of the execution of it.

3 The Learned say, that the Hebrew word Pagah in the conjugation Hiphil, comes
no more but six times in the Old Testament, namely, in Isa. 53. 6. Isa. 53. 12.
Isa. 59. 16. Jer. 15. 11. Jer. 36. 25. Job 36. 32.

Now the last five places are rendered both by Tremelius, and by our English
Translations, for such a meeting, as is by way of mediation, entreaty, or
intercession.

Though properly the Hebrew word signifies no more but to make to meet, or to
appoint some persons to meet for several ends; but yet in the said five places
it is applied to a meeting by way of intercession: As for example, in Isa. 53.
12. He made him to meet for Transgressors, namely, by way of intercession for
Transgressors, as our Translations do phrase it.

2 In Isa. 59. 16. He wondered that none was made to meet, namely, as an
Intercessor; the Geneva says, He wondered that none would offer himself; the
Seventy say, He wondered that there was none to deliver. But the first sense is
most full with the Hebrew.

3 In Jer. 15. 11. I will make, or cause the enemy to meet thee in the time of
thy affliction, or I will cause him to entreat thee well; The Seventy say, to
assist thee.

4 In Jeremy 36. 25. The three men (there named) had made to meet, namely, they
had made an agreement (as Jobs three friends did, Job 2. 11.) to meet the King,
as Intercessors, that he would not burn the roll; The Geneva say, They
besought him; But the Seventy say, They opposed or resisted him, namely, by
their intercession and entreaties.

5 In Job 36. 32. With clouds he covers the light, and commands it by that
which comes betwixt. Mr. Broughton reads it thus, He charge it, as men do
pray, namely, he charge the clouds, as men do intercede by prayer, and
Tremelius does concur to that sense; and that sense may cause us to remember
Gods promise in 1 King. 8. 35, 36. When they pray, I will give rain upon the
Lands; and it may also cause us to remember Deuteronomy. 11. 14. and Zach. 10. 1. etc.

Now seeing these five places in the conjugation Hiphil do signify to cause,
or make a meeting, and all of them by way of mediation or intercession,
Doubtless the first place in Isa. 53. 6. must in reason have the like
signification.

Mr. Norton says in page 48.
That the Hebrew word in the conjugation Hiphil, does signify to meet together
as upon a heap.


Reply 1. I apprehend that the word heap does but mislead the Reader, except
he can handsomely show that every meeting (caused by any) is a heap; I grant
that two or three meeting together, may be called (Kakal) a Church, Synagogue,
or Assembly, a: I have showed in the Jews Synagogue Discipline, but usually no
meeting, but a great multitude, is called a heap: But it appears by what I have
said, that this meeting of the Mediator caused by the Father, to mediate for
the Elect, cannot fitly be called a heap, though it may fitly be called a
meeting.

2 Says Mr. Norton in page 153.
The iniquities of us all, gathered together as in a heap, were laid upon him.
And thirdly, in page 93. he says, That all the curses of the Law were heaped
together, and laid upon him.


Reply 2. By this you see the reason why Mr. Norton does make Pagah to signify
to meet together, as upon a heap, namely, that he may make Christ to be both a
heap of sin, and a heap of curses, in a legal and formal sense.

3 Mr. Norton does also confound his Reader, by telling him That one Hebrew
root has contrary significations; Piaculum, says he, does signify both a
sacrifice, and a sinful deed.
Reply 3. If the Hebrew word for sin, be taken in a metaphorical Sin is often
taken in a metaphorical sense for a Sinsacrifice, that procures Gods Atonement
for sin.
signification, as well as in a proper, then there is no contrary sense, though
there is a differing sense; he that shall point to a Priest making a sacrifice
for sin, may say there is a sin; and he that shall point to Cain killing Abel,
may also say there is a sin; the word Sin therefore must be taken in each
place where it is used, as the Context shall direct, sometimes in a proper
sense, and sometimes in a metaphorical; And for the want of this observation, a
man may make a contrary signification of Piaculum, or else not.

The word Sin in Exodus 30. 10. is there put for the Sin-offering, and that sin
is by the Seventy called the purgation of sin, and in 2 Chronicles. 29. 24. they
render it the expiation of sin, and in Exodus 29. 36. the cleansing of sin, and
in Ezekiel. 43. 22. the Propitiation or Reconciliation, and in Ezekiel. 44. 27. the
appeasing for sins, and in Number. 19. 12, 13, 19. the Purification. And the
reason why sin is named by these several names, is, because the Sin-offering
was ordained to appease Gods anger, to expiate, to purge, and to cleanse the
sinner from his sin; yea the word sin is rendered by the Seventy, the change, or
the exchange in Zach. 13. 1. and that most fitly, because the sin (namely the
Sin-offering) does cause a true change in the sinner from unclean to clean, and
from enmity to Reconciliation. These and such like phrases given to sin by the
figure Metonymia, shows the word to have a differing sense, but not a contrary
sense, as Mr. Norton affirms, to amuse his Reader; the like happily may be said
to his other Instances: But for further light, See what I have replied to the
signification of A^ab; in Psalm, 22. 1.

4 I will now return to speak further of the Hebrew word Pagah; take it without
the conjugation Hiphil, and then it signifies only to meet; but the particular
occasions of every meeting, must be sought out by the circumstances of each
place where the word is used. As for example.

1 It signifies the meeting of the bounds of the Tribes in this or that place.

2 It may signify the meeting of time, as when the Forenoon does meet with the
Afternoon, or the meeting of words, or the meeting of persons for this or that
end, either in mercy, or in wrath.

3 Pagah to meet, is applied to Gods meeting with man, or to man's meeting with
God in his worship. Moses and Aaron, said unto Pharaoh, The Lord God of the
Hebrews has met with us, and commanded us to go into the wilderness to offer
sacrifices to him; therefore we pray thee, let us go three days journey to
sacrifice to the Lord our God, lest he meet us with Pestilence, etc. Exodus 3.
18. and Exodus 5. 3. So also in Numb. 23. 3, 4, 5, 15. 16. Balaam did me the
Lord with sacrifice, and the Lord was pleased to meet him with words of advice
what he should say to Balack: In these places Pagah is put for Gods meeting
with man, and man's meeting with God. And in Genesis 23. 8. Abraham said to the
people of the land, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead, meet with
Ephron for me; namely, meet him by way of entreaty; the Seventy say, Speak for
me: And so Ruth said to Naomi, Meet me not to leave thee, that is to say,
Meet me not by thy earnest entreaties to leave thee, Ruth 1. 16.

So Jacob met Esau, namely, with an acceptable present, to cover his face, that
is, to appease his anger, Genesis 32. 20. as we see it did in Genesis 33. 8, 10.
These Instances show that Pagah is used for a meeting in diverse respects.

And after this manner God ordained Christ to be our High Priest to meet the
Lord with that most acceptable gift of himself Christ attoned his Fathers*
wrath with the Sacrifice of his body and blood.
in a Sacrifice; for it is of necessity that every Priest that meets with God,
to mediate his reconciliation to sinners, must have such an excellent thing to
offer unto God, as he will accept, and therefore it must be that which is
constituted by a mutual Covenant, Heb. 8. 3. and the thing appointed was the
^est thing that Christ had to meet God withal, and that was his vital soul,
with his body and blood, offered in perfect obedience to Gods will,
notwithstanding Satan endeavored to disturb his obedience; with this present
Christ did meet his offended Father, that was most justly provoked by Adams
sin, and by our sins; and so according to Covenant, God accepted this Priest
and Sacrifice for the attoning, and the appeasing of his wrath, as the word
Atonement does signify. Of which word, see more in Chap. 14. page 142, 143.

In this sense, I say, the Father made, or caused the Mediator to meet him for
the iniquities of us all.

1 He met his Father in his eternal Council and Contract: And 2 In the
execution of it.

Pagnin renders this verse two ways, indifferently.

1 Occurrere fecit ei poenam. 2 Vel rogere fecit eum pro iniquitate.
And both these readings may well agree to the same sense.

1 He made the iniquities of us all to meet upon him, namely, he made him to
undertake our sins, as our Priest and Sacrifice, to make Atonement for them;
and in this sense the Dialogue has expounded this verse.

2 The Lord made him to meet for the iniquities of us all, or caused him to
meet him as our Priestly Mediator with the Sacrifice of his body, for the
iniquities of us all. And thus both readings do agree to the same sense; but
because the last is more exact according to the Hebrew, therefore now I follow
that.

The Chaldy Paraphrase of this verse speaks thus, And the So Mr. Clendon in
Justification justified, p. 11.
Eternal is well pleased to remit the sins of us all for his sake.

And Tindal translates it thus:

But through him the Lord pardons all our sins.

From these Translations and Expositions it follows,

1 That the Doctrine of Gods imputing our sins to Christ, in Mr. Nortons sense,
was not held forth by these Translators, neither can it be proved from this
verse, nor from any other, when the right interpretation is given, and Mr.
Norton himself consesseth thus much in general, That the guilt of ou^ sins
could not be imputed to Christ, unless unless he did first become our legal
Surety in the same obligation with Adam in Genesis 2. 17. But I have showed in
Chap. 2. and elsewhere, with the concurrence of sundry eminent Divines, that
Christ was not our legal Surety in the same obligation with Adam; and therefore
by his own consession, until he prove that Christ was Adams Surety, Genesis 2.
17. his Doctrine of Imputation is without a foundation, and thence it follows,
that it must needs be an unsound Assertion, to hold that God imputed our sins
to Christ as the meritorious cause of his death and sufferings: But yet though
I deny Christ to be our legal Surety, I do notwithstanding freely grant that
he undertook our cause as our voluntary Surety, according to the voluntary
Covenant, and that he took our sins on him thus far namely, to make expiation
for them, and to enter the Lists with Satan, and to suffer the punishments of
our sins, before he made his Sacrifice, as I have instanced in the punishments
that men do voluntarily undergo when they strive for the Mastery with their
opposite Champion.

2 Hence it follows by the right Translation and Exposition of Isa. 53. 6. and
Jer. 30. 21. that there passed a Covenant made between the Trinity for man's
Redemption, by the sufferings, It is evident by Isa. 53 6. and by Jer. 30. 21.
that there p^ssed a Covenant between the Trinity from Eternity, for man's
Redemption
and by the death and sacrifice of Christ. Mr. Rutherford of the Covenant
proves by eleven Arguments, in page 290. and by a twelfth Argument, in page
307. and by a thirteenth Argument in page 316. that there passed a Covenant
between the Trinity from Eternity.

The Dialogue says thus, in page 28.
The true manner how the Lord laid all our sins upon Christ (in Isa. 53. 6.)
was after the same manner as the Lord laid the sins of Israel upon the Priest
and Sacrifice, and no otherwise, as in Exodus 28. 38. and in Lev. 10. 17.

Mr. Norton does answer in page 43.
Whatsoever your words are, we presume your meaning is, That the Types
instanced in, did not typically hold forth any imputation of sin, to Christ the
Antitype.


Reply 1. The meaning of the Dialogue is plain, namely, that Christ bare our
sins, as the typical Priest and Sacrifice did bear the sins of Israel: And the
Priests are said to bear all their sins, because they offered public
sacrifices to procure a legal Atonement for the sins of all Israel; and so
Christ bare our sins, because he made his soul a Sacrifice by his Priestly
power, by which he procured his Fathers Atonement for all our sins formally.

2 In the Dialogue, in page 25. I have showed, how Christ may be said to bear
our sins several other ways, and yet not as a guilty sinner by a formal legal
imputation, as Mr. Norton holds.

But says Mr. Norton in page 44.
Put case you produce a Type which holds not forth bearing of sin by
imputation in the Antitype, except it may appear that the manner of Christ's
bearing sin, was thereby fully intended, you conclude nothing.


Reply 2. The Dialogues instances do make it appear plain enough to the willing
to be informed, That the manner of Christ's bearing sin, was thereby fully
intended; but to a biased spirit it is not easy to be done; Let the Reader
peruse the Dialogue, and then judge.

But says Mr. Norton in page 44.
It is very true, God laid our sins upon Christ as upon our Sacrifice, Isa. 53.
12. Therefore say we, by Imputation.


Reply 3. He does acknowledge it to be a truth, that God laid our sins upon
Christ as upon our Sacrifice, therefore say we, not by Mr. Nortons kind of
imputation, for his kind of imputation is not to be found in the typical
sacrifices; but the true manner of Christ's bearing our sins as our Priestly
Mediator may be found, because it was typified by the Priests eating of the
peoples Sin-offering (as Mediators) in the holy place, as the Dialogue has
truly expounded Lev. 10. 17. for their eating signified such a communion as
Mediators must have between both parties in the work of Atonement.

And secondly, The Lord laid all our sins upon Christ as upon our sacrifice;
and this is elegantly expressed by Isaiah, He poured out his soul to death,
and bare the sin of many, and made intercession for transgressors, Isa. 53. 12.
All these three terms, says the Dialogue, are Synonima's.

But says Mr. Norton in page 45.
Synonima's are diverse words signifying the same thing; but death, bearing sin,
and intercession, are doubtless diverse things, though they concur as
ingredients to the same Mediatorship.


Reply 4. I cannot find any thing in this answer to confute the Synonimas
expressed by the Dialogue; I think this answer is merely intended to amuse the
Reader, The Dialogue shows plainly that all these three terms are metaphorical
Synonimas, being all joined together in this Text, to declare unto us, the true
manner how how the Lord made Christ to bear all our sins as our Sacrifice.

1 His death is put for his sacrifice.

2 His sacrifice bears all our sins from us, because it procures Gods
Atonement.

3 By the eternal efficacy of his Death and Sacrifice, he makes continual
intercession for us, and so he does still bear our sins by his continual
interceding Gods Atonement: And thus all these terms are Synonimas; and to
this I shall speak more fully in Reply 18.

But says Mr. Norton in page 45.
The force of this Reason is, that Christ's sacrifice was effectual to procure
Atonement, therefore sin was not imputed to him: A mere non sequitur: Nay the
contrary consequence is true; Christ (says he) appeared, that is, Was
manifested in the flesh to put away sin, Heb. 9. 26. was once offered to bear
the sins of the many, verse 28. The Greek word here used by Paul, and elsewhere
by Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 24. signifies to take, carry, or bear up on high, and that
so as to bear away; and this is an allusion to the Rite of the whole
Burnt-offering.


Reply 5. In this Answer Mr. Norton labors to prove that Christ bare our sins
by Gods imputation, by Heb. 9. 26. 28. Heb. 9. 26. 28
Christ appeared, that is (says he) was manifested in the flesh; he little
minded the Context, in saying that his appearing here, did signify his
manifesting in the flesh, for it is easy to be discerned that his appearing
here, does signify his appearing before Dan. 9. 24.
God with his sacrifice for sin (and that was three and thirty years after his
first appearing in the flesh, as I noted Christ put away sin, namely all Sin
offerings by his being made the only true Sacrifice for sin.
from his approaching unto God in the beginning of this Chapter) by which he
put away sin, namely, all Sinofferings, according to that in Dan. 9. 24.
Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy City, to finish
Trespass (offerings) and to end Sin (offerings) and to make reconciliation for
iniquity (as the meritorious cause) and so to bring in an everlasting
Righteousness, instead of the ceremonial, as our money brings in our clothing;
and then it follows in Paul's next words, That Christ was once offered to bear
the sins of many; this Greek word to bear, here used by Paul, and elsewhere by
Peter (says Mr. Norton) signifies to take, carry, or bear up on high, and that
so, as to bear away; now apply his Rule in page 44. to what he says here, and
there he answers himself to what he reasons here; Put case (says he) you
produce a Type which holds not forth bearing of sin by imputation in the
Antitype, except it may appear that the manner of Christ's bearing sin was
thereby fully intended, you conclude nothing; So say I of this Text of Heb. 9.
28. except Mr. Norton can make it appear, That the manner of Christ's bearing
our sins was fully intended by this Text to be by Gods legal imputation, he
concludes nothing; he says that the Greek word here for bearing, and in 1 Pet.
2 24. is the same; I grant it, but yet it has a several sense in those two
places, as I have showed in the Dialogue.

1 I have showed that Christ in his conflict with Satan, bare our sins as a
Porter bears a burden, as it is in 1 Pet. 2. 24. according to Genesis 3. 15.

But secondly, in Heb. 9. 24. He bears our sins as our Priest and Sacrifice,
when he died formally by his own Priestly power, by this sacrifice he
procured Gods Atonement, by which our sins are formally born away from us; And
says the Apostle, Unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second
time without sin unto salvation; namely, He shall appear the second time,
without being made a Sacrifice for sin, unto salvation, which is thus opened by
the coherence of the Chapter in verse. 12. Neither by the blood of Goats, Bucks,
and Bulls, but by his own blood, he went once for all into the holy place,
having found eternal Redemption for us; and therefore he comes not the second
time to be offered in sacrifice for sins, but he shall come without a
Sin-sacrifice unto eternal salvation, as I have showed in Chapter 3. in expounding
Gal. 4. 4.

But says Mr. Norton in page 45.
The person that brought his sacrifice was to put his hand upon the head
thereof, yet living, Lev. 1. 4. as confessing his guilt, and putting, or
imputing it upon the Beast to be sacrifised. Compare Exodus 29. 10. Lev. 4. 4,
29. and 5. 5, 6. and 16. 21. By the like Ceremony of Imposition of hands, sin
was charged both for the testifying of the accusation, and the stoning of the
offender, Deuteronomy. 17. 7. Guilt thus typically imputed to the beast, it was slain,
and laid upon the Altar.


Reply 6. The Dialogue has clearly showed in page 33. That the act of imposing
hands on the head of the sacrifice, did typifie Prove: 28. 13.
the owners faith of dependence on the true Sacrifice, that he confessing and
forsaking his sins should have Gods mercy, namely, through the true Sacrifice
he should have Gods merciful Atonement and Reconciliation.

But says Mr. Norton in page 234.
It is disproved that their laying on of hands did typifie their relying upon
the Sacrifice of Christ for such Atonement.


Reply 7. I cannot as yet find it disproved, and I have showed in the Dialogue,
That the laying on of hands did typifie their faith of dependence in relying on
the Sacrifice of Christ, as the meritorious procuring cause of Gods Atonement;
If so, then it did not signify Gods imputing our sins to Christ; and therefore
that inference is a false inference, and no disproving of the Dialogue.

But says Mr. Norton in page 45.
By the like Ceremony of Imposition of hands, sin was charged, both for the
testifying of the accusation, and the stoning of the offender, Deuteronomy. 17. 7.


Reply 8. This is another false inference, for the accusation The Imposition of
hands upon the head of the condemned person by the witnesses was to testify
their faith, that the evidence they had given in against him was true. Deuteronomy.
17. 7.
was testified before his condemnation, or else he could not have been
condemned, and that was done without any imposition of hands; therefore this
act of the witnesses in laying on their hands on the head of the condemned
person, was rather to testify their own personal faith and confidence to the
Throwers of stoner, that the testimony they had formerly given was true. And
thus Mr. Nortons Instance is a strong confutation of his kind of legal
imputation, as to the point of condemnation; for this Imposition was not
ordained to signify the imputation of his sin before his sentence of
condemnation.

2 As for the Imposition of hands upon the Beast to be slain in Sacrifice,
together with confession of sin, It is clear by that confession that sin was
imputed to him that confessed it (and not to the Beast) and in that respect, he
presented his clean Beast to be sacrificed, to reconcile God to him for his sin
which he had confessed, and his imposition of hands testified his faith of
dependence on his typical sacrifice for the procuring of Gods Atonement for
his Ceremonial sins, and typified his faith of dependence on Christ the true
Sacrifice for the procuring of Gods Atonement for his moral sins. But I will
not enlarge further here, because the Dialogue is full in this point, where the
impartial Reader may find satisfaction.

The Dialogue says thus:
If you will build the common Doctrine of Imputation upon this phrase, The Lord
has laid all our iniquities upon Christ; then by the same phrase you must
affirm that the Father laid all our sins upon himself, by imputing all our sins
to himself, because the Father is said to bear our sins as well as Christ, in
Psalm. 32. 1. and Psalm. 25. 18.

Mr. Norton does thus answer in page 46.
This is but one place of very many, whereupon the doctrine of Imputation is
builded.


Reply 9. The Reader may please to take notice of this confession; but why then
does himself make so much use of this Scripture to prove his kind of
Imputation, seeing now at last he grants it to be no sure proof; for says he,
This is but one place of very many, whereon the doctrine of Imputation is
builded; and yet I find it as much used for that purpose as any Scripture,
except 2 Cor. 5. 21.

2 The Dialogue does not deny, but affirm, that Christ bare our sins, both as a
Porter bears a burden, in his conflict with Satan, according to Gods declared
will, in Genesis 3. 15. and also as our Priestly Mediator in procuring Gods
Atonement for our sins by his propitiatory Sacrifice.

The Dialogue also affirms that God the Father bears, or bears away our sins
as a reconciled supreme, by acquitting us of our sins upon satisfaction
received by the said propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ; But Mr. Norton makes a
wrong sense of the Dialogue in this point, as if the Dialogue held that the
Creditor paid the debt, because he is said to discharge the Debtor. But I refer
the Reader for satisfaction to my Reply to what Reconciliation is, in Chap. 14.
etc.

But says Mr. Norton in page 46.
Sure you mistake your self in arguing out of this Text from the word Nasa, for
Nasa is not in the Text.


Reply 10. I never said that Nasa was in this Text of Isa. 53. 6. I cited Nasa
only from Psalm. 32 1. and from Psalm. 25. 18. where the Father is said to bear
our sins; and from thence the Dialogue does reason to our translated term in
Isa. 53. 6. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all. And hence the
Dialogue does reason thus, If this phrase [of laying upon] and so consequently
of bearing, in Isa. 53. 6. does imply that Christ did bear the guilt of our
sins by Gods imputation, then by that phrase the Father must bear the guilt of
our sins also, for he is said to bear our sins in Ps. 32. 1. and in Ps. 25. 18.
This Argument is unavoidably true, by building the doctrine of Imputation upon
that phrase.

2 By this nimble catch of Mr. Nortons, he would have the Reader to believe
that the Dialogue holds that which it holds not; but I have more fully answered
to this cavil in Chap. 12. Sect. 1. and there I have showed how Mr. Norton has
wronged the sense of the Dialogue in other places also.

But says Mr. Norton in page 49.
There is a difference between an act typifying Gods imputation of sin unto
Christ, and an act testifying our faith concerning Gods imputation of sin unto
Christ; And says he, You should have produced your Expositors, for they do not
generally so speak.


Reply 11. This speech they do not generally so speak, is an acknowledgement
that some do so speak: And indeed many late Writers do say, That imposition of
hands, with confession of sin, did typifie Gods imputing our sins to Christ.
See Tailor on Types; and Weams on the Ceremonial Laws, says thus on the
Sin-offering, They were commanded to lay their hands upon the head of the
Sin-offering, Lev 4. to signify, that they laid over their sins upon the
Beast, which was a type of Christ, who was made (Asham) an offering for sin,
Isa. 53. 10. and was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. that is, The guilt of our
sins was imputed to him; he was not made a sacrifice only for our sins, but he
was made sin for us. In these words of Mr. Weams, and more also which I omit,
he has not a word of our faith of dependence, which was truly typified by
Imposition of hands, but he does only say that it typified Gods imputing our
sins. I could cite many others that run that way, on Exodus 29. 10. etc. but I
had rather (though they be obvious) cover their names, than publish them.

But the Dialogue in page 33. disproves their Exposition thus:
A private man's Imposition cannot represent Gods act; The Imposition of the
hands of the Elders cannot, because the Elders action represents the Churches
action; neither can the Imposition of the Priests, and the High Priests,
because they were types of Christ's Priestly Nature, and not of the Father.

Mr. Norton returns this Answer in page 49.
If these Reasons were good for what they are alleged, yet they are
impertinent, as not reaching the mind of Expositors, at least general upon the
place.


Reply 12 It is an easy answer to say they are impertinent, but the
indifferent Reader may see they are pertinent.

Says he, Expositors, at least generally, do not so expound; I wish that
fewer did: but I do also confess that I do not find (though I have made
diligent inquiry) that any of the Ancient Divines did hold, that God imputed
our sins to Christ, in Mr. Nortons sense, as I have showed in the next Chapter;
yea I find that many late Writers also have no such imputation, but too many
have, some I have named, and many more are obvious to the intelligent; and it
is evident, that generally the Antinomians do hold as Mr. Norton holds: I say
it is obvious to the intelligent, that many do make the imposition of hands on
the head of the sacrifice, with confession of sin, to signify Gods imputing
our sins to Christ; and therefore the reasons of the Dialogue abovenamed, are
found and good, for what they are alleged, namely, That imposition of hands by
the said persons, could not represent Gods action.

But says Mr. Norton in page 49.
There is nothing repugnant in the nature of the thing, but that the act of a
private person was capable (if God so pleased) to become a type of Gods act,
which is also true concerning the Elders and Priests.


Reply 13. It is well he has put in, If God so pleased, I say to him, as he
said to me, in page 103. if he should not put in that, he could expect no
other but utmost abhorrence, etc. But he had spoken more full to the point, if
he had proved, that God had ordained such persons in that act of Atonement to
represent God the Father; but because he does no more but barely say so, it
will not satisfy a doubting conscience.

But says Mr. Norton in page 50.
The act of an Israelite (though a private person) in letting his Hebrew
servant go free for nothing, either at the seventh year, Exodus 21. 2. or at the
year of Jubilee, Exodus 25. 40. figured, or represented, God the Fathers gift of
free Redemption by Jesus Christ.


Reply 14. Good reason there is for it, because God ordained it so to be, and
therein the Master being also a Father to his servant, in letting his servant
go free, was a type of the father of mercies in that case.

2 As to his instance of Cyrus, in making him both a type of Christ, in page
101. and also a type of the Father, in his 50 page, by his free deliverance, is
a very doubtful instance, for it is questioned by learned Divines whether he
were a type; but in case it were proved that he was indeed a type, yet it
reaches not to prove that all those that imposed hands on the head of their
sacrifice were types of Gods imputing our sins to Christ, which is the very
point on Mr. Nortons part to be proved, but he slides from that to instances of
by matters.

But says the Dialogue.
If you make the act of laying on of hands on the Sinoffering, to signify Gods
laying our sins upon Christ by his imputation, then the same act with
confession of sins upon the Scapegoat, must also signify that God did impute
our sins to Christ, as well after he was escaped from death by his Resurrection
and Ascension, as when he made his oblation here upon earth; And so by this
Doctrine, Christ is gone as a guilty sinner into heaven.

2 The Dialogue propounds another Argument which Mr. Norton skips over, and
that is this:

If you make this imposition of hands upon the head of the Sin-offering to
represent Gods laying the sins of the Elect upon Christ by his imputation, then
the same act of imposition upon the head of their sacrifices of praise, must
have the same signification; for every owner must impose both his hands with
all his might upon the head of his sacrifice of praise, with confession of his
particular mercies received: This act must needs signify the laying of their
persons by their faith of dependence on the sacrifice of Christ for the
procuring of Gods favorable acceptance of their praises, and therefore their
laying on of hands on the head of their Sin-offering, did likewise signify
their faith of dependence on Christ typified.

Mr. Norton does thus answer in page 51.
We have already said that we make not this act a type of Gods laying sin upon
Christ.


Reply 15. This is a good confession, and I wish that others would take full
notice of it, namely, that there is not a suffient ground from the typical act
of imposition of hands on the sacrifice with confession of sin, to typifie Gods
imputing our sins to Christ; and therefore it follows hence, that the
translated phrase, The Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all, in
Isa. 53. 6. is not a sufficient proof of it, though it be alleged for that
purpose.

2 Seeing Mr. Norton does at last make this confession, why then has he
labored to defend the imputation of sin from the said imposition of hands,
with confession of sin, as he has done?

But says Mr. Norton in page 51.
Sin was laid upon the Scapegoat, not after, but before its escape.


Reply 16. If sin was imputed at all to the Scapegoat, it is sure enough that
it must be done before its escape, for after it was escaped, it was too late
to lay on hands upon the head of it. But says the Dialogue, It escaped with
that act of imposition upon the head of it; and therefore that act of
imposition did typifie that Christ does still bear our sins by Gods imputation
in heaven, as much as on earth: But says the Dialogue, The Hebrew Doctors did
not understand this imposition to typifie Gods imputing our sins to Christ; but
on the contrary, they understood it to be a typical sign of their faith of
dependence, depending upon Christ's sacrifice for the procuring of Gods
Atonement for the sins they had confessed over the head of it, and so much the
prayer of the high Priest does import; for when he imposed his hands upon the
live Scapegoat, he said thus, O Lord, make Atonement now for the sins, and
for the iniquities, and for the trespasses of thy people Israel. See Ains. in
Lev. 16. 21. And in this sense, the Lord made the iniquity of us all to meet
upon him, because his once offering was sufficient to procure Gods Atonement
for all our iniquities.

Mr. Norton answers thus in page 52.
Mr. Ainsworth on this very place says, That this act showed how our sins
should be imputed to Christ; It is not likely therefore that he so understood
the Hebrew Doctors, otherwise we might well think he would have forborne a
needless citation.


Reply 17. The studious in Mr. Ainsworth cannot but take notice that Mr.
Ainsworth does often cite the Hebrew Doctors in a differing sense from himself,
and so leaves the Reader to his choice.

2 The Dialogue did not cite Ainsworth in Lev. 16. 21. for his own judgment,
but for the judgment of the Hebrew Doctors cited by him, as I showed in the
Dialogue page 39. and in the Epistle to the Reader page 3. I have showed that
Mr. Broughton (who was well read in the Hebrew Doctors) did often affirm that
the Jews generally do stumble at these two Positions of ours.

1 Because we make Christ to stand before God as a guilty sinner, by his
imputing our sins to him.

And secondly, Because we make the Messiah to suffer the vindicative curse of
the Law for our Redemption. But if the Hebrew Doctors had held that imposition
of hands, with conf^ssion of sins upon the head of the sacrifice, had typified
Gods imputing our sins to the sacrifice, they could not have so stumbled at our
said Tenants as they do; they despise the imputed tighteousnesse of Christ
(says Mr. Weams in his four Regenerations, page 318.) and they jest at this,
that one should be punished (in a legal way) for another fault.

3 It may be worth the while, for such as are able to search into the Hebrew
Doctors, to see how they do understand the signification of this Imposition,
with confession of sin.

4 Says the Dialogue, If Gods imputing the sins of the Christ does still bear
our sins in heaven as much by Gods imputation, as ever he bare them upon earth.
Elect to Christ was the (meritorious) cause of Gods extreme wrath upon him;
then by the same reason, Christ does still bear the said wrath of God, for
Christ does still bear our sins in heaven, as much as ever he bare them here
upon earth, according to the type of the Scapegoat.

Mr. Norton Answers thus in page 52.
Christ on earth suffered the wrath of God, that is, The execution of Divine
Justice, because he then stood as a Surety to satisfy the curse due for sin,
Isa. 53. 10. but having satisfied it, Joh. 19. 30. Col. 2. 14. the same Justice
that before punished him, now acquits him, Romans 8. 34. If the Debtor be
discharged, and the Bill cancelled, doubtless the Surety is free.


Reply 18. I shall not need to examine the particulars of this Answer at this
time, because it is no answer, but a plain evasion to the Dialogues Argument,
which is this:

Christ by his Intercession is still satisfying the justice of God for the sins
of the Elect, even as long as the Elect are under sin in this world; and thence
the Dialogue infers, that in case Christ bare our sins here on earth by Gods
imputation, then he does still bear our sins in heaven by Gods imputation; for
he does still bear away our sins by his intercession in heaven, according to
the type of the Scapegoat.

This Argument Mr. Norton has not answered, but evaded with a by-answer; but
says Mr. Norton, If the Debtor be discharged, and the Bill cancelled,
doubtless the Surety is free: I have often replied, That seeing Mr. Norton does
hold that Christ (as our legal Surety) has made full satisfaction in kind,
both by fulfilling the Law of Works, and suffering the eternal curse, thence it
follows, according to his own conclusion, That the Surety having paid the full
debt, and cancelled the Bill, the finner is free from all sin, ipso facto, and
so not liable to ask any pardon for sin at Gods hand, nor liable to any
temporal plague, no more than Adam in his innocence: But say I, because his
satisfaction was but the tantidem, therefore it is otherwise, even as I have
showed in Chap. 4.

2 This conclusion of Mr. Nortons, If the Debtor be discharged, and the Bill
cancelled, then doubtless the Surety is free, seems to be drawn from Col. 2.
14. (as he has cited it above) Blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances
that was against us, which was contrary to us, he took it out of the way,
nayling it to the Cross. I say, his conclusion from this Scripture, is a
gross abuse of this Scripture, for though Christ has blotted out the
handwriting of the Ceremoaial Laws that was against us, yet for all that the
moral Law does still continue against us, and does continually charge us with
the breach thereof, and therefore the debt of punishment due to us for sin is
not discharged in full, in respect of temporal plagues, though it be
discharged in full in respect of eternal condemnation to all that believe in
the Promisea Seed; I say, that till the Resurrection, all the godly do still
suffer for sin both in their life, in their death, and in their putrefaction in
their graves, and therefore they do still stand in need of the daily
intercession of Christ for the pardon of their sins by the satisfaction of
Christ continually presented unto God; and in this respect Christ does still
bear away our sins in heaven by his Priestly intercession, as much as ever he
did when he was here upon earth, as I noted before in Reply 4. And this does
plainly show, that the satisfaction of Christ was not Ejusdem, but Tantidem. If
Christ had been our legal Surety to pay the uttermost farthing in kind at his
death, then our Redemption had been perfect at once; but because his
satisfaction was but the tantidem, therefore it was agreed, that we should
have our Redemption but by degrees; and therefore we must still wait for the
full redemption of our bodies till the time appointed, as I have showed in
Chap. 4.

3 Hence it follows, that this legal Court-way, in making Christ a legal
Surety, and so liable to suffer the eternal curse from Gods legal imputation,
etc. is none of Gods way in point of satisfaction (as I have often noted, to
have it the better marked, and searched into) but it was the Devils way to make
Christ a legal sinner, and to that purpose he stirred up false witness to
make a legal proof of his sinful imputations, and then he stirred up Pilate to
proceed to a legal condemnation of him to the odious death of the Cross; and
hence some infer (to admiration) that when Pilate sat on his Tribunal, God
sat on his Tribunal to sentence Christ with the eternal curse; as if Pilates
Courtproceedings, were a type of God the Fathers Court-proceedings; but I have
often noted, that Gods way was to commissionate Satan to be Christ's Combater,
and to afflict him to his utmost skill, and that Christ was to win the victory
by his constant practice, and obedience.

Conclusion.
Hence it follows, that neither the phrase, The Lord has laid upon him the
iniquity of us all, in Isa. 53. 6. nor the phrase of imposing hands on the head
of the Sin-offering, with confession of sin, in Lev. 1. 4. Ex. 29. 10. Lev. 4.
4. and 5. 5, 6. and Lev. 16. 21. do prove that God imputed the guilt of our
sins to Christ as the meritorious cause of any of his sufferings, much less of
suffering Helltorments, as Mr. Norton does most boldly, and groundlesly affirm,
for all his Scripture proofs are but Scriptures perverted.

CHAP. XIV.
2 Cor. 5. 21. Examined.
Mr. Norton says in page 53.
That Christ was made sin for us, as we were made Rightousnesse, that is, says
he, by judicial imputation, without the violation, yea with the establishing of
justice.

2 That Christ was made sin, as he was made a curse, Gal. 3. 13. the Greek here
used, and there, are the same: But (says he) he was made a curse by judicial
imputation, because he was the Sin-offering in truth, therefore he was made sin
by real imputation, as the legal Sin-offering, was made sin by typical
imputation.


Reply 1. MR. Nortons first comparative Argument cannot hold firm for these
Reasons.

1 Because it is not framed to the words of the Text.

2 Because it is not framed to the sense of the Text.

1 It is not framed to the words of the Text, because he makes Christ to be
made sin for us by Gods imputation, in the same manner as we are made
righteous by the righteousness of Christ, for he means it of the
righteousness of Christ, and so he opens his meaning in page 230. and in
other places, that we are made righteous by the righteousness of Christ
imputed; but any one that has eyes in his head, may see, that the
righteousness expressed in the Text, is called the righteousness of God, and
not the righteousness of Christ, therefore his Argument is not framed to the
words of the Text.

And secondly, the righteousness expressed is not the righteousness of God
essentially, as Mr. Norton makes it to be in page 230. but the righteousness
of God the Father personally (and yet this nothing hinders but that the
justification of believing sinners is the work of the Trinity, because they
have an order of working in the several causes) and this is most clear and
evident, because the Apostle does plainly distinguish between God and Christ,
from verse 19, to the end of verse 21. For, says the Apostle in verse 19. God
was in Christ, thereby plainly noting two distinct persons. I grant that others
have The mistaking of the righteousness of God, for the righteousness of
Christ, in 2 Cor. 5. 21. is the cause of an erroneous interpretation.
mistaken the word God, for the word Christ, before him, but had he been well
advised, he might have followed some eminent Divines that have more narrowly
searched, not only into the words, but also into the sense of this Text, and
that have given their grounds for the differencing of the righteousness of
God, from the righteousness of Christ, and then he might have been better
advised, then to confound the righteousness of God with the righteousness of
Christ, as he does without distinction, in page 230. and elsewhere.

But thirdly, in case the righteousness of God in 2 Cor. 5. 21. and in other
places, had been meant of the righteousness of Christ, as Mr. Norton does make
it, then the Text should have run thus, God made him to be sin for us which
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of Christ in him; that is
to say, That we might be made the righteousness of Christ in Christ; and then
according to this interpretation, the word God must be blotted out of the
Text, and the word Christ put into the place of it: But I believe that Mr.
Norton will abhor to say that the word God must be blotted out to put the word
Christ into the place of it, and therefore by the same reason he should abhor
to expound the righteousness of God to be no other but the righteousness of
Christ, especially, seeing there is as much difference between them in the
point of a sinners righteousness, or justification, or reconciliation, as
there is between the meritorious and formal causes of a sinners justification
or reconciliation.

I grant, that Christ is our righteousness in the meritorious cause, Romans 5.
18. but I say also, that it is God the Fathers righteousness, that is the
formal cause of our righteousness.

4 Mr. Anthony Wotton does judiciously demonstrate that the Apostle did not
intend any comparison here; and he does also give two reasons, why the
righteousness of God cannot be meant of the righteousness of Christ in this
Text, to which I refer the Reader for further satisfaction, de Reconc.
Peccatoris, part. 2. lib. 1. cap. 18. Sect. 16. cap. 20. Sect. 5, 6.

SECT. II.
2 I Will now labor to show the true sense of this Text, by which it will
appear, that Mr. Nortons comparative Argument is not framed to the sense of
this Text: each clause in the Text lies thus:

1 [For] This word For is a causal particle, and implies for this cause.

2 He: namely, God the Father.

3 Made: that is to say, Ordained, Constituted, Appointed: but this could not
be without a mutual consent and Covenant between the Trinity from Eternity;
and so he was ordained, or constituted to be made a curse by his combating
with Satan, as it is declared in Genesis 3. 15.

4 Made Him: that is to say, Christ; These two words, He and (...) in the
former part of this verse, and God and Him, in the latter part of this verse,
must carefully be marked, as a clear distinction between the persons, as I
have also noted above.

5 To be sin for us: that is to say, To be a Sin-sacrifice for us, as it is
rightly and fully opened in the Dialogue; this phrase, He was to be made sin
for us (says the Dialogue) must not be taken in a proper literal sense, but
in a metaphorical sense, being borrowed from the Levitical Law, where the
sacrifices for sin are often called Sin in the Hebrew Text, though our English
Translations have added the word Sacrifice by way of exposition; as for example
in Exodus 29. 14, 36. the Hebrew says thus, It is a sin, but we translate it
thus, It is a Sin-offering, we add the word Offering to the word Sin, as the
Hebrew text also sometimes does, though very rarely, as in Lev. 6. 26. and Lev.
9. 15. the Priest that offers it for sin; this is very near the word
Sin-offering, but almost every where the Hebrew does call it a sin without any
addition, as in Ex. 29. 14, 36. Ex. 30. 10. Lev. 4. 3. 8, 14, 20, 21, 24, 25,
26, 29, 32, 33. Lev. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12 Lev. 6. 17, 25, 30. Lev. 7. 7, 27.
Le. 8. 2, 14. Lev. 9. 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 15, 22. Lev. 10. 16, 17, 19. Lev. 12. 6,
8. Lev. 14, 13, 19, 22, 31. Lev. 15. 15, 30. Lev. 16, 3, 5, 6, 9, 11, 15, 25,
27. Lev. 23. 19. Number. 6. 11, 14, 16. Number. 7. 16, 22, 28, 34, 40, 46, 52, 58,
64, 70, 76, 82, 87. Number. 8. 8, 12. Number. 18. 9. Number. 28. 15, 22. Number. 29. 11,
16, 19, 22, 25, 34, 38. 2 Chronicles. 29. 21, 23, 24. Ezra 8. 35: Ezra 10. 33. Ezekiel
40. 39. Ezekiel. 42. 13. Ezekiel. 43. 21, 22, 25. Ezekiel. 44. 29. Ezekiel. 46. 20. Hos. 4.
8. Hos. 8. 11.

In all these places the Sin-offering is called Sin in the Hebrew text; and
this Hebraism the Septuagint do follow, and the Chaldy Paraphrase, and the
Apostle Paul in 2 Cor. 5. 21. and in Romans 8. 3. and Heb. 10. 26. and the use
was to expiate moral sins done in ignorance; but chiefly it was to expiate
their ceremonial sins, as the places cited do witness.

These Scriptures do stare in the face of such as make Christ to be sin for us
by a judicial imputation, as Judges do when they impute sin to Malefactors, as
the meritorious cause of inflicting legal punishments upon them.

6 It is added [which knew no sin] namely, no sin formally, neither by inherent
corruption, nor by Gods legal imputation, and yet notwithstanding, though he
was every way free, God did let Satan loose upon him, as upon a Malefactor, to
combat with his humane nature, to ensnare him in some sin or other, and to
impute sin to him, and so to pierce him in the Foot-soals as a wicked
Malefactor on the Tree; and in this sense it is said by Peter, that God made
him to bear our sins in his body on the Tree; these punishments of sin Christ
suffered not necessarily (as we guilty sinners do) from Gods formal imputation
of sin, but voluntarily as a Combater with Satan, without any formal guilt or
desert on his part.

And secondly, He bare our sins as our Priest and Sacrifice, by procuring
Reconciliation, and therefore he is said in Isa. 53. 10. to make himself Asham,
a Trespass, or Sin, as the Septuagint translate it.

And thus you see, that Christ made himself to be sin, as much as God made him
to be sin, namely, to be a sacrifice for sin, and no otherwise, as I have
showed in the Dialogue in page 42.

7 The reason or the end why God made him to be sin, is It is the
righteousness of each person in Trinity to perform their Covenants to each
other for the orderly reconciling and justifying of the Elect. Romans 5. 18.
added in the next clause [That we might be made the righteousness of God] and
this does call to our consideration the Covenant between the Trinity for man's
Redemption, for the Text says, That God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, verse. 19.

1 Consider, that Christ covenanted with his Father to combat with Satan, and
at last to be made a sacrifice for sin as the meritorious cause, for our
reconciliation and justification. And hence it follows that as soon as he had
performed the said Sin-sacrifice, it is truly called His righteousness in Romans
5. 18. and this is the true and full interpretation of the word Righteousness
in that Text.

2 On the other hand the Stipulation or Covenant of the Father, was, that upon
the performance of Christ's sacrifice, he would be reconciled to believing
sinners, and the performance of this reconciliation on God the Fathers part, is
called the Righteousness of God in this Text; and in this sense the Argument
of the Apostle does run, from verse 19. to the end of this 21. verse.

8 In Him: that is to say in Christ; for as soon as sinners are in Christ, by
the work of the Holy Ghost, they are made partakers of Gods righteousness; for
according to his Covenant with Christ, it is his righteousness to be fully
reconciled to sinners, as soon as they are in Christ by faith, by which means
their fins are pardoned, and so they are justified from sin, or made formally
righteous by this righteousness of God the Father.

And thus have I opened the true sense of this verse, by which it does appear,
that Mr. Nortons first comparative Argument is not framed, neither to the
words, nor to the true sense of this verse.

SECT. III.
IN Chapter 6. I have made an examination of Mr. Nortons several expressions
about Gods judicial imputing our sins to Christ, and I little question, but
what I have said in that No Scripture rightly interpreted, makes our sins to be
formally imputed to Christ by Gods legal imputation, as Mr. Norton holds.
Chapter, and in Chap. 13. and what I say in this 14. Chapter, will satisfy
the judicious and unpartial Reader.

2 Consider the frame of Mr. Nortons Argument, and me thinks the very naming of
it should sufficiently show the dangerousnesse of it.

Christ says, He was made sin for us, as we were made righteous (by the
righteousness of Christ) that is (says he) he was made sin by Gods judicial
imputation, namely, a true sinner formally; And so in like sort he holds, that
Christ's righteousness is imputed unto us to make a real change in our
condition by making us formally righteous, and thus by his comparative
Argument, our sins were really imputed to Christ to make a real change in his
condition, namely, to make him a sinner formally by Gods judicial imputation,
that so God might in justice inflict upon him the essential punishment of
Hell Torments. Does not the very repetition of this Argument plainly enough
show the dangerousnesse of it?

3 Mr. Anthony Wotton shows, that it is a palpable mistake to assert the
imputation of our sins to Christ in the sense of Mr. Norton, in Reconcil.
Peccatoris, part. 2. lib. 1. cap. 18. Sect. 4. and to the end of the Chapter;
of which I shall speak more by and by.

4 Mr. John Goodwin in his Elaborate Treatise of Justification, does show from
the judgment of the orthodox, that nothing in 2 Cor. 5. 21. is there spoken
touching the imputation In Vindiciae fidei part. 2. p^g. 165.
of our sins to Christ; and (says he) of all the Scriptures that men take up
for the plea of the imputation opposed, Mr. Gataler has well observed that
this Text is most clear and pregnant against themselves.

But says Mr. Norton in page 54.
The Sin offering is so called, because sin was typically imputed to it; and it
is said (says he) to be for sin, because it was offered for the expiation of
sin.


Reply 2. Mr. Norton affirms it was called sin, because sin was typically
imputed to it, but he brings no Scripture to prove it, and therefore it must
pass for no better than a fiction.

2 The Dialogue shows in page 41. that Psalm. 40. 6. does call the Sin-offering
by no other addition but Sin; but the Dialogue says, that the Apostle in Greek
does expound it for sin in Heb. 10. 6. the Apostle does join the particle For
to the word Sin, by which means he does teach us, that the Sin-offering was
not typically made sin, by confession of sin, and by imposition of hands upon
the head of it; the particle For, is not suitable to that sense, and so the
Hebrew Text does sometimes explain itself by joying the word For, to the word
Sin, The Sin shall be killed before the Lord, it is most holy, Lev. 6. 25. and
then it is explained in verse 26. The Priest shall offer it for Sin; hence I
reason thus, if it had been made sin typically by Gods imputation, it Lev. 6.
26.
could not have been called, Most holy, neither had it been accepted as a
sacrifice for Sin, Lev. 6. 26. and so also the word For is annexed in Lev. 9.
15. Lev. 4. 14.

But says Mr. Norton in page 54.
If Christ be made sin for us in the same sense that the water of Purification,
and the Trespass money is called Sin, then Christ was made sin only
figuratively, consequently suffered for sin figuratively, not properly.


Reply 3. A biased spirit is apt to pick an exception against the cleerest
expressions; the Dialogue speaks plainly, that the water of Purification was
called Sin, Numb. 19. 9. not in respect of any sin that was typically imputed
to it, nor was it called Sin, because it was employed to any sinful use, but
because it was ordained in the prescript use of it, to cleanse the sinner, ex
opere operato from all such ceremonial sins as he was defiled with See Ains. in
Number. 19. 9, 12. etc. it was called Sin-water (as the Sin-offering was called
Sin) because it was the water of Purification from sin, and because it
sanctified the unclean to the purifying of the flesh, Number. 8. 7, 21. and
because it figured the blood of Christ, which only purges the conscience from
dead works, that is to say, from moral sins, Heb. 9. 13, 14. Now the Heb. 9.
13, 14.
Argument of the Dialogue is plain, namely, that as the water of purification
was called Sin, because it did truly cleanse the sinner from the outward
contagion of his sins, whether moral sins that were done unadvisedly, or
ceremonial sins, for which chiefly the Sin-water was ordained, that being
cleansed thereby, they might then approach to Gods presence in his Sanctuary, or
else not, upon pain of cutting off, Number. 19. 20.

The like Reply I might also make for the Levitical phrase taken from the
Redemption-mony that was employed (or part of it at least) to buy the public
Sin Offerings, and Trespasse-offerings, it was called Sin-mony and
Trespassemony, 2 King. 12. 16. Neh. 10. 32, 33. not because any sin or
trespass was imputed to the money, as if it had been sinfully gotten, or
sinfully employed, but because it was employed to buy the said Sin Offerings
and Trespasse-offerings; and in this sense, God made Christ to be sin, and to
be a trespass, not by imputing the sins of the Elect to him in a judicial way,
but by ordaining and constituting him to be the true Sin-offering, and to end
all Sin Offerings, and to finish Trespass (offerings) and to make
Reconciliation for iniquity by the Sacrifice of himself, and so by this means
to bring in an eternal Righteousness or Reconciliation, Dan. 9. 24. instead of
the Ceremonial. Secondly says Mr. Norton, Then Christ was only made sin
figuratively, and suffered for sin figuratively, not properly.



Reply 4. Christ suffered for sin properly, according to Gods declared Counsel,
Covenant, and Decree, in Genesis 3. 15. in entering the Lists with Satan, but at
last, he was the only Priest in the formality of his Death and Sacrifice, and
in this Sinoffering he bare our sins not really by Gods judicial imputation,
but figuratively only, he bare them from us by procuring Gods Reconciliation;
No Scripture says Reverend Mr. Wotton, does make Christ to be a sinner
properly.

But says Mr. Norton in page 131.
We distinguish between an inherent judicial guilt, and an extrinsecat
judicial guilt: If Thomas (says he) be judicially guilty of a capital crime
inherently, though Peter be guiltless thereof inherently, yet if he be guilty
thereof extrinsecally; il seems to be no injustice for the Magistrate (in
case of Suretiship) to put Peter to death for Thomas his crime, And after these
words, Mr. Norton does cite sundry instances to this purpose, and at last he
concludes thus in page 133. I dare almost say (says Grotius, a man excelling
in this kind of learning) That where there is consent, there is not any of
those whom we call Pagans, who would esteem it unjust that one should be
punished with the delinquencie of another.


Reply 5. By this last testimony of Grotius, Mr. Norton thinks that he has
knocked the nayl home on the head, and therefore he says that Grotius was a
man excelling in this kind of learning, and truly so he was, though I find him
to be very much out of the way in some things. But in vain does Mr. Norton
labor to make Grotius his abettor, for surely there is no greater opposite to
Mr. Nortons imputation than he is. For Grotius says thus; Some evil is
sometimes imposed upon one, or some good is taken away; By occasion indeed of
some fault; In his War and Peace, l, 2, c. 112 p. 398.
yet not so, that the fault is the immediate cause of that action, as to the
right of doing: He (says he) who by occasion of another debt, has engaged
himself, suffers evil: Sponde Noxs praeste est.
But the immediate cause of his obligation is his promise, as he who is become
surety for a buyer, is not properly bound by the bargain, but by his promise;
So also he who is bound for a Delinquent, is not held by the delinquency, but
by his engagement: And hence it is, that the evil to be born by him, receives
its measure not from the fault of the other, but from the power which himself
had in promising: Consequent whereunto is this (according to the opinion which
we believe to be the Truer) That no man can by his becoming surety lose his
Man's Law does not allow Sureties for capital crimes. Vide Panormitan. Rubri. de
side jussoribus, nor for judicial corporal pains. vide digest. l. 2. tit. it.
Si quis cautionibus, lege quotiens. And says Mamony, The Judges are warned
that they take no ransom of the Murderer, though he could give all the wealth
in the world, and though the avenger of blood should be willing to free him;
for the soul of him that is killed, is not the possession of the avener of
blood, but the possession of the holy blessed God. See Ains. in Number. 35. 31.
Ex. 21. 25. Lev 24. 19. Ps. 49. 8. None have a true legal power over their own
life but God, and the Magistrate, to whom God gives power over Delinquents.
life, because we determine no man has such right over his own life, that he
can take it from himself, or engage it to be taken away by another, though the
Ancient Romans and Greeks were of another mind in this matter.

But it seems the latter Romans saw the inconvenience of their Ancestors
Customs, and therefore they made other Laws in opposition thereto. Vide Codic.
lib. 9. Tit. 47. de poenis lege Sancimus.)

And says Grotius in the next page, what we have said of life ought to be
understood of members too; for a man has not right over them, but for the
preservation of the body.

But (says he) If exile or loss of money were in the promise, and by the
others fault the forfeiture was made, the Surety shall bear the loss, which
yet in him, to speak exactly, will not be a punishment, etc.

Ibidem, And (says he) because Beasts are not properly guilty of a fault; when
a beast is put to death (as in the Law of Moses for copulation with man, Lev.
20. 15.) that is not truly punishment, but the use of man's dominion over the
beast.

Then he proceeds to show in Chap. 113. that none is justly punished, (in
propriety of speech) for another fault.

None (says he) that is free from the fault can be punished for the fault of
another, because the obligation to punishment arises from merit, and merit is
personal, having its original from the will, that which nothing is more ours,
whence it is called (...).

And in Chap. 78. he does distinguish upon the word punishment, properly so
called (and improperly so called) punishment in general (says he) is the evil
of passion which is inflicted for the evil of action; To be kept from
Assemblies, or functions, are not properly punishments, although for a certain
similitude, and abusively they are so called.

Hierax defined Justice to be an exacting of punishment from offenders: And
(says he) punishment properly so named must be rendered to some Vide codic. l.
9. Tit. 74. de poenis lege Sancimus. There the Emperors Arcadius, and Hon^rius
say thus, We appoint that punishment shall be there where the fault is; let
offenses bind their committers, and let no fear of punishment extend further
than to such as are guilty of crime. And to this purpose speaks P. Martyr in
Jud. 2. Eze 18. 20.
offense. This is also noted by Austin: All punishment (says he) if it be
just, is the punishment of sin; and in Chap. 113. Grotius cites Austin thus;
God himself should be unjust, if he should condemn any one guiltless, Job 34.
23.

Ibidem: God indeed threatens to punish the iniquities of the Fathers upon the
children; But (says he) he has a most full right of Dominion, as over our
goods, so over our lives too, being his gift, which without any cause, and at
any time, he can take away from any one at his pleasure. But (says he) men may
not imitate that vengeance of God: The reason is not alike, because we have
said, God without regard of the fault has right over the life; men have not,
but upon some great crime, and such as is the persons own; Wherefore that same
Divine Law, as it forbids Parents to be put to death for their children, so it
forbids children to be put to death for the deeds of their Parents; which Law
pious Kings have followed even in the case of Treason, Deuteronomy. 24. 16. 2 King.
14. 6. And (says he) at ult. An heir that is liable to others debts, is not
liable to the punishment of the deceased; for though the heir does bear the
person of the deceased in respect of goods which are engaged, yet not in
respect of merits which are properly personal.

From these speeches of Grotius it follows;
1 That he did believe it to be the truer opinion; That no man can by his
becoming Surety lose his life, because no man has right over his own life; and
therefore those humane exaples of taking away the life of Sureties for the
faults of others, though they pass for good justice in Mr. Nortons opinion,
yet not in Grotius opinion being rectified, nor in the Scriptures, and
therefore Mr. Norton has labored in vain to make Grotius his abettor in this.

2 Hence it follows, that seeing Grotius held this as a principle, that the
obligation to punishment does arise from merit, and that merit is personal,
having its original from the will, that he could not hold (as Mr. Norton does)
that Christ was made legally guilty of our sins by Gods imputation.

3 Hence it follows, That the punishments that Christ suffered were not, in
true propriety of speaking, legal punishments, because true legal punishments
must be inflicted for personal faults; and therefore he could not hold that
Christ suffered any punishments from Gods vindicative wrath.

4 Hence it follows, That the punishments which Christ suffered, are so called
by a certain similitude, but not properly; the wounds received in the trial of
Masteries from the opposite Champion, are improperly called punishments; no
sufferings are properly punishments, but such as are legally inflicted for
Delinquency.

5 Hence it follows, That the punishments which Christ suffered, were not
inflicted on him from Gods legal and vindicative wrath; but he suffered them
from his voluntary combat with Satan, and his Instruments, as I have at large
showed in Chap. 16. and in diverse other places.

6 Hence it is evident, That Christ could not in true propriety of speech be
our legal Surety, in Grotius judgment, jointly bound with us to fulfill the
Law, and suffer the Curse, and so to pay our full debt in kind, as Mr. Norton
holds.

7 I grant, notwithstanding, that Christ may improperly be called our Surety,
because he did of his own accord undertake the combat with Satan, and his
Instruments, for our redemption; and by his constant patience and obedience to
the death, he overcame them all, and at last in the perfection of his obedience
he made his soul a sacrifice, by which he obtained the prize, even the
Redemption of all the Elect; and thus he broke the Devils Head-plot as our
voluntary Surety, but this kind of voluntary Surety, is as far distant from Mr.
Norton legal Surety as a free Redeemer, is from a delinquent Surety.

8 Hence it follows also, that in Grotius judgment, there is a very wide
difference between a Surety for mony-matters, and a Surety in criminal cases;
but these kinds of Sureties are confounded by Mr. Norton without distinction,
or else he would never have brought the instance of Paul's engaging to
Philemon, verse 18. to exemplify Christ's obligation to his Philemon v. 13.
punishments.

9 Hence it follows, That though a man may lay down his life for others, as
voluntary Sureties, in diverse cases (as Mr. Weams shows in his four
Degenerations, page 358. yet not as legal bounden Sureties.

But says Mr. Norton in page 223.
The Doctrine of Imputation, is not a doctrine of late days only; The Reader
that pleases, may be fully satisfied by the labors of Grotius, who at the
end of his defense of the Catholic Faith, concerning the satisfaction of
Christ, against Socinus, has gathered together the Testimonies of many of the
Ancients still extant to this purpose, from Irenaeus, Anno Christ. 180. until
Bernard, who lived 1120.


Reply 6. I cannot but wonder that Mr. Norton does cite Grotius, and the
Testimonies of the Ancient Divines for the defense of his kind of legal
imputation, seeing they differ from him, as much as truth does from error.

Mr. Anthony Wotton does learnedly dispute against that De Recon. pec. part. 2.
l. 1. 6. 18. Sect. 10.
kind of imputation which Mr. Norton holds, and yet he does approve of that
kind of imputation which the Ancient Divines held.

If (says he) any man say, That by accounting Christ a sinner, they mean no
more, but that God deals with him, as if he did account him to be a sinner
(this, though it be true, would not avail them; for thereby they overthrow the
foundation that they laid, That Christ could not be a sacrifice for sin, except
he were first made guilty of our sins) such an imputation of our sins to
Christ, I think no Divine will deny: I am sure (says he) it has warrant
enough from the Fathers.

And in Sect. 11. he cites some of the Fathers speaking thus, He suffered him
to be condemned as a sinner, and to dye as one accursed; For cursed is every
one that hangs on a Tree. Chrysostom. in Homil. 11. on 2 Cor. 5. 21. and
Thecphilact on 2 Cor. 5. 21. says, He made him subject to death for us, and to
dye, as if he had been a notorious offender.

And (says he) in Sect. 12. Other imputation than this I find none in the
Scripture; for whereas it is said in Isa. 53. 12. Isa. 53. 12.
He was numbered with the Transgressors. This does Mark expound of his bodily
death at the time of his crucifying, and it theweth men's dealing with him, and
not Gods opinion of him: And with him they crucified two Thieves, the one on
his right hand, and the other on his left; and the Scripture was sulfilled
which says, And he was numbered with the Transgressors, Mark. 15. 27, 28. Mar.
15. 17, 28


And (says he) in Sect. 13. Neither can any man find any other imputation in
the writings of the Ancient Divines, than that he took on him to expiate for
our sins, by his blood and sacrifice according to I Pet. 2. 24. Heb. 10. 10.
Therefore we may conclude, that our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
might be a sacrifice for sin, or dye as a sinner, although our sins were not
so imputed to him, that God accounted him to be guilty of them.

And (says he) in Sect. 14. This also may yet further appear, because his
sacrifice was such as might be without such imputation; for it was the price
of our Redemption, as I showed in part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10. n. 5, 6. But there
may well be, and ordinarily is, Redemption by a price, without any kind of
imputation; And you may also see what he speaks further to this point in Sect.
7.

In these words of Mr. Wotton, the Judicious may please to take notice, that
Mr. Wotton does confidently affirm these two things:

1 That there is no other imputation of sin to Christ in all the Scripture,
than such as he has cited out of Chrysostom and Theophilact.

2 That no man can find any other imputation in the wrirings of the Ancient
Fathers.

3 Let me add this Testimony of Mr. Wotton, both from my own knowledge, and
from the testimony of other eminent Christians, that Mr. Wotton was a man of
approved integrity, one that suffered much for Christ, through the iniquity of
the times, a man of great reading in all kind of Writers, both Ancient and
Modern, and a man of deep judgment; And his book of Reconciliation, was
printed in his old age, after much debate, and study, and revising; and
therefore what he says in this point of imputation, ought not, and will not
be slighted of the Judicious. The wise will understand.

4 Hence it follows, That the Reader that pleases, may yet he more fully
satisfied by the labors of Grotius, that this affirmation of Mr. Wottons is a
manifest truth, namely, That our sins were no otherwise imputed to Christ, but
as he bare our punishments in his body on the Tree, according to 1 Pet. 2. 24.

5 Hence it follows, That Grotius had good reason to produce such testimonies
from the Ancient Divines against Socinus, because (as I perceive by several
Writers) Socinus denied Christ's sufferings to belong to the meritorious cause
of Christ's satisfaction.

6 On the other hand, I do also believe that Grotius did as much oppose Mr.
Nortons kind of imputation, as he did Socinus Tenent; for I have showed in my
former Reply, that Gretins held the obligation to legal punishments to arise
from merit, and that merit is personal. Secondly, It is further evident, that
Grotius did oppose Mr. Nortons kind of imputation, because he does oppose the
imputation of Christ's righteousness in the formal cause of our justification;
for thus he says, The righteousness Grotius in his Appendix to God, and his
Providence, p. 8^. 96. and in his War and Peace, part. 1. chapter 36.
which they call imputative, the mere devices of men are thrust upon us,
instead of divine Dictates: And(says he) in his War and Peace, The death of
Christ was not determined by any Law, but by a special Convenant; But Mr.
Norton holds, that both the Incarnation, and the Death of Christ, was legal
obedience, qu^te contrary to Grotius.

These things considered, I cannot but stand and wonder what Mr. Norton will
now say to Grotius; surely if he will still hold to Grotius, then he must
first renounce his own Tenants, for Grotius does fully overthrow both Mr.
Nortons comparative Arguments, cited in the beginning of this Chapter.

7 Hence also it follows, that the imputation of our sins to Christ, as it is
asserted by Mr. Norton, is a Doctrine out of late The imputation of our sin^ to
Christ, as is asserte^ by Mr. No^ton, is a doctrine but of late days.
days (though now it is grown some what common) for as it is affirmed by Mr.
Wotton, it was not known in the days of the Ancient Fathers, and the Discourse
from Grotius formerly cited, assirms as much. But I will leave the Judicious to
inquire, further both into the antiquity and verity of it, that so the truth
may be preserved to succeeding generations.

8 The Dialogue does reason thus:

If you say, that God made Christ to he sin for us, by imputing our sins to
him; Then from the same kind of phrase you must also say, that Christ made
himself sin, by imputing the guilt of all our sins to himself; for I saiah does
tell us, that he for, made, or put himself, to be Asham, a Guilt, or a
Trespass for, us, so the Hebrew Text does speak in Isa. 53. 10. or as the
Septuagint translate it, He made himself to be sin for us; and therefore it
follows by the like consequence from this phrase, that he must in like sort,
in a judicial way, inflict upon himself all the curses of the Law, that are due
to our sins and trespasses.

To this comparative Argument drawn from the likeness of the phrase, Mr.
Norton does thus answer in page 55.
God charged Christ with sin as the supreme Lawgiver and judge; Christ accepts
the charge of a Surety, and so subjects himself to the satisfaction of justice,
which is the part of a Surety, but does not execute that justice which is the
part of a Judge.


Reply 7. And why does not Christ execute that vindicative justice upon himself
(that is the part of a supreme Judge) Christ did impute our sins to himself to
make himself a gu^l^y sinner as much as ev^r h^s Father di^.
as well as his Father, seeing he does impute our sins to himself, by the same
phrase cited, as much as the Father does?

But the judicious Reader may soon see that Mr. Nortons answer is but an
evasion to the Dialogues Argument.

For the Dialogue in the margent says thus; Christ did impute all our sins and
trespasses to himself as much as ever the Father did; for Isaiah does tell us,
That he set, or put himself to be Ashem, a Trespass, or a guilt for us, or to
be sin for us, as the Septuagint render it, and hence the Dialogue does make
this comparative Argument; If God made Christ to be sin for us by imputing all
our sins and trespasses to him as the obligation to his suffering of our curse
from Gods vindicative wrath; then from the same kind of phrase it does
necessarily follow, that Christ made himself to be Asham, a Trespass, a guilt,
or sin, by his legal imputing of our sins to himself; and so by the same rule
of Court-justice, he must likewise in a judicial way inflict the essential
torments of Hell upon himself from his vindicative wrath.

Mr. Norton makes no answer to this Argument, but instead thereof he says,
That Christ accepts the charge as a Surety, but did not execute that justice
which is the part of a Judge; but any man may see that by the force of the
Argument in the Dialogue, that Christ must impute sin to himself, and inflict
the curse as much as his Father; or in case an answer can be found to excuse
Christ from this vindicative act of justice, then the same answer will excuse
the Father from the said legal imputation of our sins, and from his vindicative
act of justice also; But if this phrase, God made him to be sin, does argue
that God made Christ a guilty sinner by his imputation; then this phrase,
Christ made himself to be sin, will argue that Christ made himself to be a
guilty sinner by his own imputation, and then he must execute as a supreme
Judge his own vindicative wrath upon himself, as well as the Father.

This absurd consequence says the Dialogue, you cannot avoid; And thus says
the Dialogue, by this kind of arguing you make Christ to be his own self
Accuser, and his own self Executioner.

But the truth is, says the Dialogue, Christ did no otherwise make himself to
be a Trespass, a a guilt, or sin, but as he made himself to be a
Trespasse-offering, and a Sin-offering, by which offering once for all, he
ended Trespass (offerings) and finished Sin (offerings) and thereby made
Reconciliation for iniquity (or reconciled God to believing sianers) and so
brought in (or pro^u^^d) an eternal Righteousness, instead of the Ceremonial
sanctifications, or justifications, which served to the purifying of the flesh,
Dan. 9. 29.

SECT. IV.
I Find also that other eminent Divines do agree with Mr. Wotton, and with the
Ancient Divines before cited, touching the manner how Christ was made sin for us.

1 That blessed Martyr Tindal says, That in Exodus 29. and See Tindals Works in
p. 449. and Frith in p. 131.
in Lev. 8. and almost every where (says he) The Beast offered for sin, is
called Sin; which use of speaking (says he) Paul uses in Romans 8 3. and in 2
Cor. 5. 21. he calls Christ Sin, when Christ is neither sin, nor sinful, but
an acceptable sacrifice for sin; and yet (says he) he is called our sin,
because he bare our sins on his back, and because our sins are consumed, and
made no sins through him, If we forsake our sins, and believe in Christ for
the remission thereof.

And says he on Romans 8. 3. Sin is taken for a Sin-offering after the use of
the Hebrew tongue: And says he in page 160. Christ is no sinner, but a
satisfaction, and an offering for sin: And says he, in page 439. Consider and
mark how the Kid or Lamb must be without spot or blemish, and so only was
Christ of all mankind in the sight of God, and of his Law.

Mark this last sentence, in the sight of God, and of his Law; this is point
blank against Mr. Nortons Tenent, as by the places cited out of him in Chapter
6. may be soon seen.

2 John Frith, and Dr. Barns, whose works are joined to Tindal, have no other
imputation of sin to Christ, but his voluntary taking of our punishments,
according to Mr. Wotton, and the Ancient Fathers.

3 Frith cites Fulgentius de side, thus, In those carnal sacritices in the time
of the Law, was a signification of the flesh of Christ, which he without sin
should offer for our sins.

4 Marbeck in his Common places, says, that Austin did well say, sed nostra
delict a sua delict a fecit, ut suam justitiam nostram justitiam saceret, that
is, says he, by way of Paraphrase, he was counted and deemed as a sinner,
because that in his unjust suffering, In his Com. pl. p 1026.
he might justly save sinners that believe in him. And says he, the most part
of the learned Expositors be of this mind, and he does not parsphrase on
Austins words, as some do, in relation to Mr. Nortons Tenent, but in relation
to the sense of the ancient Divines.

5 Jerome in 2 Cor. 5. says, The Father made Christ, who knew no sin, to be
sin for us; that is, as the sacrifice for sin, is called sin in the Law (as it
is written in Leviticus, He shall lay his hand upon the head of his sin) so
Christ being offered for our sins took the name of sin.

6 Primasius gives the same exposition on 2 Cor. 5. 21. that Jerome, and diverse
others of the Fathers do, and that exposition is the right exposition of 2 Cor.
5. 21.

But others both of the ancient and latter Divines say, He was made sin by
suffering our punishments, as Chrysostom and Theophilact before cited by Mr.
Wotton on 2 Cor. 5. 21. but if this exposition had been placed to 1 Pet. 2. 24.
it had been fitter there; yet there is the less fault to be found in placing
it to 2 Cor. 5. 21. because the Doctrine is sound and good.

These two ways do the Ancient Divines say, That Christ was made sin.

First, as he was made a sacrifice for sin.

And secondly, as he suffered our punishments in his body on the Tree; but
they do no where make him guilty of our sins by Gods judicial imputation, but
by the Devils cunning, sin was imputed to him, for he was counted among
transgressors, Mar. 15. 28. De verbis. Apo. Ser. 14.


7 Says Austin, Christ had the similitude of sinful flesh, because his flesh
was mortal, but utterly without any sin, that by sin for similitude he might
condemn the sin which is in our flesh through our iniquity; true iniquity in
Christ, there was none, mortality, there was; Christ took not our sin unto him,
he took the punishment of our sin, and taking the punishment without our fault
(or guilt) he healed both the punishment and the fault. See also in Austin
cited in Chap. 15.

8 Says Cyril, Him that knew no sin, God the Father made to In his Epist. ad
Acatium de capto Emisario.
be sin for us: We do not say (says he) that Christ was made a sinner, God
forbid; Mark, that he puts a God forbid upon such a speech.

9 Says Dr. Williams, Christ took all our blameless infi In his seven
Candlesticks, p. 352.
mities, and not our sinful infirmities; but Luther says he, makes him the
greatest Thief, etc. It is better (says he) to cover his nakedness as Sent
and Japhet did Noabs, then disclose it in Gath etc. But Mr. Norton is of a
contrary judgment; for in page 92. he does publish Luthers broad expressions
of imputing our personal sins to Christ with high commendations, because it
suits so well to his Tenent, and so does Dr. Crispses Sermons on 2 Cor. 5. 21.
agree well to Mr. Nortons imputation; for says he, the Apostles meaning is,
that no transgressor in the world was such a transgressor as Christ was, Have
thou been, says he, an Idolater, a Blasphemer; a Murderer, an Adulterer, a
Thief, a Liar, a Drunkard, etc. if thou have part in Christ, all these
transgressions of thine are become actually the transgressions of Christ, and
so cease to be thine.

Also another book of great esteem, called, The Sum of Divinity, set forth by
John Downame in page 317. does distinguish between sin and guilt, and yet at
last he concludes as Mr. Norton does, That God did impute both these to
Christ; First, Our sins; And secondly, Our guilt: And for the proof of this, he
cites 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Do not these things speak aloud to all that love the truth in sincerity, to
look better to the exposition of this, and other Scriptures? It is recorded
that one Augustinus de Roma, Archbishop of Nazaret, was censured in the Council
of Basil (and that justly, as I conceive) for affirming that Christ was
peccatorum maximus, the greatest of sinners.

10 Let Peter Martyr show his judgment how Christ was in the similitude of
sinful flesh, in Romans 8. 3. It means nothing else, says he, but that he was
subject unto heat, cold, hunger, thirst, contumelies, and death, for these
says he, are the effects of sin; and therefore, says he, the flesh of
Christ, might well be called the flesh of sin (and the next sentence runs
thus) Christ condemned sin in the flesh of sin; that is (says he) by that
oblation which was for sin. Sin in Romans 8. 3. is expounded a sacrifice for sin,
by Origin, Melancthoe, Bucer, Calvin, Percrius and Vatablus.
Sin (says he) after the Hebrew manner of speaking, is a sacrifice fot sin;
and says he, that exposition which we brought of the sacrifice for sin, is
agreeable to other Testimonies of Scripture; for Isaiah writing of Christ,
says, If he shall put his soul, sin, that is, for sin, Isa. 53. 10. and so he
which knew no sin, was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Thus far Peter Martyr.
And as yet I can find no other imputation in Peter Martyr, but such as the
ancient Fathers held, namely, that Christ took our sins upon him, meaning our
punishments in his body on the Tree, according to 1 Pet. 2. 24.

11 Gregory says, The Lord coming in flesh, neither took on In meralium l. 24.
c. 2.
him our fault by any infection, nor our punishment by any coaction, for being
defiled with no stain of sin, he could not be held by any condition of our
guiltiness, therefore treading all necessity under his feet, of his own
accord, when he would, he admitted our death.

In these words he says plainly, that Christ was no way guilty of our sins,
as the obligation to his death and sufferings, but that he admitted death from
the voluntary cause only. He does point blank oppose Mr. Nortons Tenent.

Ibidem, We all dye against our wills, because we are tied to the debt of
enduring punishment by the condition of our sin; but he that was entangled with
no fault, could not be bound to any penalty by necessity, yet because he
subdued our sin by reigning over it, in mercy and pity to us, he undertook our
punishment, as himself says, I have power to lay down my soul, no man takes
it from me, I have power to lay it down of my self.

In these words he contradicts Mr. Nortons kind of imputation, as if he had
purposely directed his speech against him.

12 Of our two deaths (says Bernard) whereof one was the Ad milites Templi c.
11.
desert of sin (namely our spiritual death in sin) the other the due punishment
(namely bodily death, as the punishment of original sin) Christ taking our
punishment, but clear from sin, whiles he dyed willingly, and only in body,
he meriteth for us life and righteousness.

He writes against Mr. Nortons imputation of guilt as the obligation to
Christ's suffering Hell Torments, as if he had seen his book.

Ibidem, Had not Christ dyed voluntarily, his death (says he) had not been
meritorious; how much more unworthily he dyed, that had not deserved death, so
much more justly (man) lives for whom he dyed; what justice, thou wile ask, is
this, That an Innocent should dye for a Malefactor? It is no justice, it is
mercy; if it were justice, then should he not dye freely, but indebted
thereto; and if indebted, then indeed he should dye, but the other for whom
he dyed should not live; yet though it be not justice, it is not against
justice, otherwise he could not be both just and merciful.

If the Reader please but to review the several speeches of Mr. Norton about
the imputation of our sins to Christ, as I have set them down in the sixth
Chapter, and compare them with these words of Bernard, he may see as direct an
opposition as is possible.

Hence I conclude, That the ancient Divines from Irenaeus to Bernard, which is
near a thousand years space, were unacquainted with Mr. Nortons kind of
imputing our sins to Christ, to make him guilty of his death and sufferings;
and therefore his kind of imputation is a doctrine but of late days.

SECT. V.
The second thing to be examined in 2 Cor. 5. 21. is touching the word
Righteousness, which Mr. Norton in his comparative Argument, does make to be
the Righteousness of Christ.

BUt I have already showed, that this word Righteousness, is not meant of
Christ's Righteousness, but of God the Fathers Righteousness, for God the
Father is righteous in keeping Covenant with Christ the Mediator for the
reconciliation of sinners, as well as Christ was righteous in performing the
Covenant on his part, which was to make his soul a sacrifice for their
reconciliation.

The Covenant between the Trinity was to redeem the Elect from Satan's
Head-plot. Christ undertook the office of a Mediatorial P^iest.

First, to comba^e with Satan. Gods forgiveness, is the formal cause of a
sinners righteousness.


And secondly, to make his soul a sacrifice of reconciliation, and the
performance of this is called his Righteousness in Romans 5. 18. And secondly,
God the Father covenanted to be reconciled, and so to pardon the sins of the
Elect as soon as they are in Christ; and his performance of this, is here
called, The Righteousness of God the Father. And thirdly, The Holy Ghost
covenanted to unite the Elect unto Christ, that so they might be the fit
subjects of the said Righteousness.

2 I grant, that the righteousness of God may be distinguished into many
other senses, as Mr. Wotton has showed, de Reconcil. pec. part. 2. l. 1. c.
20. n. 3. which several senses must be considered according to the context in
each place where it is used; but in this place, Gods reconciling the world to
himself, by not imputing their sins to them, as it is expressed in verse 19. is
called the righteousness of God in this 21. verse, because it is the
performance of his condition with the Mediator, for the completing of a
sinners righeousnesse that is in Christ.

The Reconciliation mentioned (says Mr. Ball) in 2 Cor. 5. 19. is explained by
the non-imputation, or remission of sins; at Ball on the Covenant, p. 219.
least (says he) it is one part or branch of Reconciliation, which is a
transient act conferred in time, and infers a change of state and condition
in the party justified, or reconciled, and of other reconciliation betwixt God
and man, the Scripture speaks not.

In these words the Reader may please to take notice, that Mr. Ball does make
the non-imputation of sin to be all one with justification, in the party
justified or reconciled; and so he makes justification to be the first part
or branch of reconciliation, as Mr. Wotton does.

And says Mr. Ball in page 219. The Apostle in Romans 5. 9, 10. puts
reconciliation by the death of the Son of God, and justification Romans 5. 9, 10.
by Christ's blood, for the same thing merited by Christ's sacrifice.

These observations out of Mr. Ball may advise us, that Gods righteousness
procured by the Sin sacrifice of Christ, in v. 21. is the same, or at least a
branch of the same reconciliation of God, which the Apostle has defined in
verse 19. by his not imputing sin, and the performance of that reconciliation,
or nonimputation of sin; on Gods part, for the sake of Christ's Sinsacrifice, is
called the righteousness of God the Father, in this 21. verse; and this
exposition of the righteousness of God, any indifferent Reader may see to be
clearly meant by the context, though I should say no more. But I will yet
further evievidence, that this exposition of Gods righteousness, is no new
upstart exposition, but that it has the concurrence, and countenance of other
eminent orthodox Divines.

1 Peter Martyr in Romans 10. 3. says thus:

Now rests to see what is the righteousness of God, and it may thus be
defined.

It is an Absolution from sins, by faith, through Christ.

And (says he) that we may the better understand the nature of this
Absolution, we must on the other side weigh the nature of sin.

Sin is a defect, or falling away, from the Law and Will of God; And to this
defect is necessarily annexed an obligation to eternal death and damnation.

Wherefore, when by the mercy of God this obligation and guiltiness is taken
away, A man is absolved from his sins.

Ibidem, Now by these things (says he) it is manifest what Absolution is, It
is an action of God (the Father) whereby he delivers and acquitteth us from
sins, that is, from guiltiness and obligation to eternal death.

But (says he in the second place) that we should not think that so great
benefit comes through our desert, therefore it is added, through Christ.

And (says he in the third place) that we should not be ignorant how the
sacrifice and redemption of Christ is, applied to every one of us, it is added,
by faith.

This definition (says he) is a great help to the right understanding of
justification; and this righteousness, Paul says, Is the righteousness of
God.

Ibidem, And (says he) the Commentaries which are ascribed unto Jerome, do
herein very well agree; They are not subject to the righteousness of God; that
is (says he) the absolution of sins.

(And lest we should in our thought^ mistake the true nature of this
righteousness of God, whereby he makes sinners that are in Christ, righteous,
he gives this special caution to be marked.)

Ibidem, By these things (says he) let us gather that this righteousness of
God is far distant from the righteousness (...) that is known by nature; for
neither Reason nor Philosophy knows any other Righteousness but that which
has its abiding in the mind; not that they were ignorant of absolution, or of
the pacifying of God, for that thing did their Sacrifices testify. But this
pacifying of God, they did not call our righteousness, neither ever understood
they the true pacifying of God, nor wherein it consisted.

Thus far P. Martyr in Romans 10. 3. he had spoken of the Righteousness of God
before this, in Romans 1. 17. and in Romans 3. 21. but not so clearly as here; these
meditations on Romans 10. 3. were his last meditations on that phrase, and
therefore his best; for by this time he had the advantage of more reading and
meditation to clear up his full mind and meaning. And see what he says further
of Gods Righteousness, which I have cited in the Exposition of Romans 3. 26.

Secondly, Mr. Norton, de Reconc. pec. par. 2. l. 1. c. 20. says at Sect. 4.
That 2 Cor. 5. 21, does comprehend the same Righteousness, which the Apostle
may well say, is the end or effect of the oblation of Christ; The Righteousness
of God. And (says he) it comprehends the righteousness which may be required
to the justification of a sinner. And in Sect. 5. (says he) in the second
place, I answer, That the righteousness of God in the places alleged, may fitly
and rightly enough be expounded of remission of sins; for it is plain enough
(says he) that in all these places is handled the formal cause of
Justification, which (says he) I have taught is contained in Rem^ssion of
sins, in par. 1. l. 2. c. 17. But remission of sins may well be called the
righteousness of God, because it is a righteousness approved by God. And indeed
Calv. Insti. l. 3. c. 11. n. 9. does so interpret the righteousness of God, to
be a righteousness that is approved of God.

Thirdly, Mr. Bale on the Covenant, in p. 72. calls the righteousness of God in
Phil 3. 9. and in 1 Cor. 5. 21. the remission of sins. By the Righteousness of
God (says he) understand remission of sins, and regeneration; and consider
what he says in the place immediately cited.

Fourthly, Sedulius, in Romans 3. 21. calls the Righteousness of God (there) the
remission of sins.

Fifthly, Tindal does thus open the Righteousness of God, in Romans 10. 3. The
Jews (says he) were not obedient to the Justice or Righteousness that comes
of God, which is the Romans 10. 3. See Tindals works, p. 381.
forgiveness of sin in Christ's blood, to all that repent and believe,

And (says he) in p. 30. By reason of which false righteousness, they were
disobedent to the Righteousness of God; which (says he) is the forgiveness of
sin in Christ's blood.

And Tindal in his Prologue to the Romans shows first, How we are justified by
the Righteousness of God the Father. Secondly, How we are justified by the
Righteousness of Christ. Thirdly, How we are justified by Faith. And in all
these he speaks just according to the sense expressed in the Dialogue.

1 (Says he) When I say God justifies us, understand thereby, that for Christ
his sake, merit, and deservings only, he receives us unto his Mercy, Favor,
and Grace, and forgiveth us our sins.

2 (Says he) When I say Christ justifies, understand thereby that Christ
only has redeemed us, and brought and delivered us out of the wrath of God,
and damnation, and with his works only has purchased us the favor of God, and
the forgiveness of sins.

3 When I say that Faith justifies, understand thereby that faith and trust in
the Truth of God, and in the Mercy promised us for Christ's sake, and for his
deservings only, does quiet the conscience, and certify her that our sins are
forgiven, and we in full favor of God.

And in p. 187. he abreviates the speeches thus, In his works, p. 187.


The faith (says he) of true believers, is, First, That God justifies or
forgiveth. Secondly, That Christ deserves it. Thirdly, That Faith and trust in
Christ's blood receives it, and certifieth the conscience thereof.

And in p. 225. he does again repeat it thus, God does justify actively, that
is to say, forgiveth us for full righteous.

2. Christ's love deserves it, And 3. Faith in the Promises receives it, and
certifieth the conscience thereof.

Thus you see that Tindal does fully express himself in the very sense of the
Dialogue. And this Doctrine has been generally received of the godly in the
days of King Henry the eighth, and in the days of King Edward the Sixth, by the
generality of the learned, and it has been often printed, not only in his
Books, but also in his Bible, in his Prologue to the Romans, and it has been
transcribed and printed by Marbeck in his Common places; though now this
ancient received Truth, is by Mr. Norton and some few others counted both for
novelty and heresy.

And thus have I showed from five eminent Orthodox Divines, that the
Righteousness of God the Father to sinners, it nothing else but his
reconciliation, as it is defined by the Apostle, by not imputing sin, in v. 19.
which is also called the Righteousness of God, in ver. 21. And therefore it
follows necessarily, that the true sense of the one and twentieth verse,
according to the context, is this,

1 That God the Father (from the voluntary cause and Covenant) made, or
constituted, Christ to be a Sin Sacrifice for us; namely, to procure Gods
Reconciliation for us.

2 That the performance of the said Sin-Sacrifice is in Romans 5. 18. called
Dicaioma (not Dicaiosune) the righteousness of Romans 5. 18.
Christ, because it was his obedience to Gods positive Law and Covenant, and
not because it was his moral obedience, as Mr. Norton does mis-interpret it in
p. 230.

3 That God the Father did Covenant on his part, to and with Christ, that for
his Sin-Sacrifice sake, he would be r^conciled to sinners (as soon as they are
in Christ by Faith) by not imputing their sins to them; and this performed on
God the Fathers part, is by the Apostle called the righteousness of God,
because he performs according to his positive Law and Covenant; and by this
righteousness of God, he is reconciled to all believing sinners, and so by this
means they are thereby made fully righteous in his sight.

4 From the said righteousness of Christ to Gods positive Law in making his
soul a Sin-Sacrifice, it follows, That as by one man's disobedience to Gods m^er
positive Law in eating Romans 5. 19.
the forbidden fruit, the many (as well as the Reprobates) are made sinners by
the meritorious cause of his disobedience; So by the obedience of one (namely
of Christ) to a mere positive Law in undertaking to combat with Satan, and to
continue obedient to the death of the cross, and at last to make his Soul a
Sacrifice, the many are made righteous, Romans 5. 19. for by this obedience of
his to the said positive Law and Covenant, he has merited not only their
conversion by the Holy Ghost, but also the Fathers reconciliation for their
justification, by not imputing their sins to them. So then the comparison that
is made between the first Adam and the second, lies in the meritorious cause;
for as the first Adam merited the death of sin to all his posterity, by his
disobedience to Gods positive Law and Covenant; so the second Adam merited the
life of Gods Spirit, and of Gods forgiveness, by his obedience to Gods positive
Law, in making his soul a sacrifice.

5 Hence it also follows, that the obedience of Christ to the moral Law, is not
here spoken of namely, not in Romans 5. 18, 19. and accordingly Mr. Wotton, Mr.
Forbs, and diverse other eminent Divines, do expound ver. 18, and 19. to relate
only to his positive righteousness in his death and sacrifice, and not to his
moral obedience, no otherwise but as it made him to be a Lamb without spot or
blemish, fit for sacrifice; And therefore Mr. Nortons proof of Heresy from
Romans 5. 19. in p, 268. does fail him, as well as all his other proofs.

6 My former Exposition of Gods righteousness to be his reconciliation in not
imputing sin, is further evident by the Romans 3. 25.
words of the Apostles in terminis, in Romans 3. 25. To declare his righteousness
for the remission of sins that are past. For the better understanding of the
sense of these words, I will propound these three Questions and Answers.

First, Whose righteousness does the Apostle say is here declared, but God the
Fathers?

Secondly, Wherein is God the Fathers righteousness declared, but by the
remission of sins that are past?

Thirdly, How else does God declare this righteousness of his by remission, but
by setting forth Christ to be his propitiatory (or his Mercy-Seat) through
faith in his blood? And thus you see that this Text does in terminis make Gods
righte^eousness consist in remission of sins, as I have expounded 2 Cor. 5. 21.

7 Daniel does make Gods righteousness whereby he makes sinners righteous, to
consist in his reconciliation by not imputing sin, in Dan. 9. 24. he says that
Christ by his death was to Dan 9 24.
finish Trespass (offerings) and to end Sin (offerings) and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in an everlasting righteousness. Mark
this, his death and sacrifice was to procure Gods reconciliation for iniquity;
and this reconciliation, he calls, an everlasting righteousness to sinners. And
thus you see that Daniel does make Gods reconciliation to be an everlasting
righteousness to believing sinners, as I have expounded 2 Cor. 5, 21.

8 David does also confirm this exposition of Gods righteousness, in Psalm. 51.
14. Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God, Psalm. 51. 14.
then my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

First, How else does he mean that God should deliver him from his
bloodguiltiness, but by his reconciliation, in not imputing that sin to his
condemnation? according to that desire and prayer, in Deuteronomy. 21. 8.

Secondly, What righteousness of God does he else mean, that his tongue should
sing aloud of, but Gods Atonement in not imputing his blood-guiltiness to him,
for the sake of Christ's Sin-Sacrifice?

Thus you see that the Exposition given of Gods righteousness in 2 Cor. 5. 21.
and so consequently of the same term in Romans 3. 21, 22, 25, 26. and in Romans 10.
3. and in Phil. 3. 9. is confirmed and strengthened by an eight-fold cord,
which I believe Mr. Norton will not be able to break.

But Mr. Norton in p. 260. stumbles at the Dialogue because it follows Mr.
Wotton in making Justification and Adoption to be the two parts of Gods
Atonement or Reconciliation.

And at last in p. 162. he opens himself thus.
But whether Justification precisely considered, be a part of, or a necessary
antecedent or means of reconciliation, it is freely left to the judgment of
the Reader: But (says he) the Leiden Divines say, it is rather a consequent
and effect of Justification. And then he concludes, that the Analogy of Faith
may as well bear an interpretation agreeable hereunto, as any other, thus, God
was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, How? By not imputing their
trespasses to them, so as, the not imputation of sin (says he) may seem to be
an antecedent and means, rather than a part of A^tonement, or Reconciliation,


Reply. 1. It is now apparent why Mr. Norton did stumble at the Dialogue, for
giving two parts to Reconciliation, according to Mr. Wotton, It was to
introduce his conjectures (quite contrary to Mr. Wotton) namely, that Gods
non-imputation of sin is an antecedent and means, rather than a part of
atonement or reconciliation. But because he expresses himself to be somewhat
uncertain in his notions in this point, therefore he cannot be thought to be a
fit Judge to censure the Dialogue, nor to determine this controversy. But the
Scriptures are most plain in this point, if they be not intricated by such
uncertain conjectures.

1 The Scripture speaks plainly, that when the Bullock for sin was offered by
the Priest to make atonement for sins of ignorance, then the promise annexed
says, It shall be forgiven him, Levit 4. 20. Any man from hence may see
plainly, that Gods forgiveness is not an antecedent, but a true part of his
atonement (if it be not the whole) The like is said of the Rulers sin, in v.
26. and the like is said of the sins of any of the people, in ver. 31, 35.
namely, that when Gods atonement is procured by their said Sin-Sacrifice,
then, thereupon their sin is said to be forgiven them.

2 The Burnt-offerings, And Thirdly, The Trespass-offerings were ordained to
procure Gods gracious forgiveness, as a part of his atonement, as in Levit. 5.
10, 13, 16, 18. and in Lev. 6. 7. and in Lev. 19. 22. and in Numb. 15. 25, 26,
28. In all these places Gods promise of his forgiveness by his atonement, did
openly proclaim in the ears of all Israel, and in the ears of all others that
have ears to hear, that when Gods atonement is obtained by sacrifice, then,
and not till then sin is forgiven, and then and not till then that person is
actually justified; either he is ceremonially justified, as a person fit to
stand before Gods holy presence in his Sanctuary, or else in case they have
Faith to look from the typical atonement to the mystical, they shall thereby
have an eternal pardon from their moral sins, and so an eternal justification
in Gods sight. Or thus,


Gods Reconciliation procured by an acceptable sacrifice, is not like the
Reconciliation of a Judge, that does but barely acquit a Malefactor, and so
leaves him; but it is like the Reconciliation of a merciful Father, that does
not only forgive his child, but together with that forgiveness, does also
receive him into favor; and in this sense these two terms, Gods Atonement,
and his gracious forgiveness for Christ's sacrifice sake, is the same thing: And
thus Gods forgiveness is the whole of his Reconciliation.

3 This sense of Gods forgiveness, as it is the whole of Reconciliation, is
evident by Gods promise in the New Covenant; for in Jer. 31. 34. the promise
runs thus, I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no
more. This promise is thus expounded in Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, Heb. 8. 1^.
and their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more; the first
expression, I will be merciful, is as much as I will be Reconciled or Attoned
to their unrighteousness, for the Greek word (...) is used by the Septuagint to
express the force of the Hebrew word Caphar in Deu. 21. 8. and it is there used
for Deuteronomy. 21. 8.
Gods Atonement or Expiation; and therefore this expression, I will be
merciful, may as well be translated, I will be pacified, or I will be
reconciled, or I will be attoned to their unrighteousness, and will remember
their sins no more; And says N^hemiah 9. 17. Thou art a God of pardons,
gracious, and merciful. And hence it is plain, that Gods forgiveness is not an
antecedent, or a means of Gods Atonement, but it is plainly a true part
thereof, if it be not the whole.

4 This is yet further evident, because the Septuagint do also use this Greek
word for the Hebrew word Nasa in Number. Number. 14. 19.
14. 19. where it is used to express Gods forgiveness by his bearing of sin
away, but the Septuagint express it by his being merciful, or pacified, or
reconciled, but yet in verse. 18. there the Septuagint translate Nasa by bearing
away.

5 The Septuagint do also use this Greek word (...) to express Gods repentance
toward sinners, by forgiving (and not punishing) their sin, as in Exodus 32.
12. Moses says thus to God, Repent of the evil to thy people, but the
Septuagint translate it be merciful, or be pacified, or be reconciled, or be
propitious to the evil of thy people, alluding in this expression to Gods
Propitiatory or Mercy-seat where (in type) God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself, by not imputing their sins to them, as I have opened the
Hebrew word Caphar, more at large in Reply 9.

6 This kind of forgiveness for the sake of Christ's sacrifice, does con-note a
state of favor that the subject is put into by means thereof, Psalm. 32. 1. as
reconciliation and justification does in 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. and therefore Gods
forgiveness, may well be called his merciful forgiveness, or his reconciled
forgiveness, as Mr. Ainsworth does open Gods forgiveness in Psalm. 25. 11. and
therefore it is not an antecedent, but a concurrent part of Gods
Reconciliation, or of Gods Righteousness, for Psalm, 25. 11.
they have but one and the same sense by the context in 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21.
though the terms be diverse; for I demand, how else are we made righteous by
the Righteousness of God the Father, but by his Righteousness in keeping
Covenant with Christ, which was to be reconciled to believing sinners for the
sake of his Sin-sacrifice in not imputing their sins to them; And thus you see
that these three terms, Gods merciful forgiveness, and his Reconciliation, and
his Righteousness in making sinners righteous by his said forgiveness, do all
con-note the same state of favor, that the subject is put into by means
thereof, and so forgiveness is not antecedent, but concurrent to Reconciliation
and Justification.

7 It is yet further evident that Christ was made sin, to reconcile God withal,
and so to procure his forgiveness for a sinners justification, by the Levitical
terms given to the Sinoffering, as the procuring cause of Gods reconciliation;
for it is often said in the Law, that God ordained the Sin-offering to Lev. 6.
30.
reconcile withal, as in Lev. 6. 30. 2. Chr. 29. 24. Exodus 29. 36. Exodus 30.
10. Ezekiel. 45. 15, 17. Number. 15. 30.

8 God ordained all sorts of sacrifices (as well as the Sinoffering) to procure
Gods reconciliation, by not imputing sin; and therefore in this respect they
are called sometimes Sacrifices of Atonement, as in Exodus 30. 10. and
sometimes sacrifices of righteousness, as in Deuteronomy. 33. 19. Psalm. 4* 5. Psalm.
51. 19. Deuteronomy. 33. 19. Psalm. 51. 19.
as I have showed in Reply 7.

And why else are sacrifices of Atonement called sacrifices of Righteousness,
but because in their legal use they did ex opere operato, procure Gods
reconciliation in not imputing their legal sins to them, and that was their
legal righteousness? For the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an
Heifer did sanctify to the purifying of the flesh; And hence the Apostle does
argue, How much more shall the blood of Christ be of force to procure Gods
reconciliation in not imputing sin, and so to cleanse the conscience from moral
sins for our eternal righteousness, and therefore answerable to the types, God
ordained Christ by his positive Law and Covenant to be our Burnt-offering, our
Peace Offering, our Trepass Offering, our Meat Offering, and our Sin-offering,
as the perfection of all the rest; For by his one offering once offered, he
ended the use of all Trespass (offerings) and finished Sin (offerings) and made
reconciliation for iniquity, and so brought in, or procured an everlasting
Righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. instead of their Dan. 9. 24.
Ceremonial reconciliation, which was their Ceremonial righteousness for Gods
holy presence in his Sanctuary. And to this full sense does Daniel speak in his
prayer, Dan. 9. 7. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, that is to say,
merciful forgiveness, Dan. 9. 7, 15.
or reconciliation; and in verse. 16. O Lord, according to all thy
righteousness, let thine anger be turned away: But the Septuagint render it, O
Lord, according to thy mercy, let thine anger be turned away; namely, according
to all thy accustomed types of making humbled and believing sinners righteous
by thy merciful forgiveness, and Atonement; Let thine anger be turned away,
and justify us to be thy people by not imputing our sins to us; and in this
sense the penitent Publican said, O Lord, be merciful to me a sinner; and so
he went away justified by Gods merciful atonement, and forgiveness, which was
the very thing he prayed for.

9 Sin, till it is forgiven, does cause an enmity between God and the sinner,
and till God is reconciled by the Sacrifice of Christ (it continues the enmity,
but) then, and not till then, sin is forgiven; and then, and not till then, God
is at rest, and is pacified and quieted: And for this cause all Sacrifices of
Atonement were ordained to procure a savor of a rest unto Jehovah, Exodus 22.
18, 25, 41. Levit. 1. 9. Numb. 28. 6, 8. Levit. 4. 31. Levit. 17. 6. Numb. 15.
3. Ezekiel. 20. 40, 41. But the Septuagint translate it, A sweet savor of rest,
and their phrase the Apostle follows, saying, Christ has given himself for
us an offering, and a sacrifice to God, for a smell of sweet savor, Ephesians. 5. 2.
But the smell of Sacrifices broyled in the fire, materially considered, was no
sweet smell; but formally considered, as they were ordained by Gods positive
Covenant, to procure his Atonement, and as they were types of Christ's
Sacrifice, so only are they said to be of a sweet smelling savor, because
they procure his pardon, and so they quiet Gods Spirit, as sweet smells do quiet
and rejoice our senses, therefore Gods forgiveness is not an antecedent or
means of Atonement, but a concurrent part of Atonement.

These Reasons (besides what others may be added) do sufficiently prove, That
Gods gracious forgiveness for the sake of Christ's sacrifice, is not an
antecedent, but a true part (if it be not the whole) of Gods Reconciliation.

And secondly, These Reasons do prove, That it is Gods righteousness to grant
his reconciliation to all believing sinners for the sake of Christ's sacrifice
for their formal and eternal righteousness.

And thirdly, Hence it follows, that Mr. Nortons conjectures, that
reconciliation is but a consequent of justification, is fallen to the ground.

8 This Righteousness of God being thus explained; It necessarily follows, That
such as hold Gods Righteousness in being reconciled to sinners (for the
satisfaction sake of Christ's Sin-sacrifice) to be the formality of a sinners
righteousness, must needs deny the imputation of Christ's moral righteousness to
be the formal cause of a sinners justification.

SECT. VI.
BUt Mr. Norton in p. 268. Does damn this formal cause for Heresy, and to make
good his charge, he cites Romans 5. 19. and Phil. 3. 9. intending thereby to
prove, that the active righteousness of Christ to the moral Law, is imputed to
us for our formal righteousness and justification.

Reply 2. I have but a little before given the true sense of Romans 5. 19. in a
differing sense from the point that Mr. Norton would prove by it. And secondly,
I will now examine his exposition of Phil. 3. 9. And truly, I cannot but wonder
that he Phil. 3. 9.
should cite it to prove the righteousness of Christ as our Surety to the moral
Law, seeing there is no righteousness of Christ expressed in this Text; but the
righteousness expressed is plainly called the righteousness of God, namely of
God the Father, just as I have opened the phrase, in 2 Cor. 5. 21. and
therefore this righteousness of God in Phil. 3. 9. must have the same sense as
I have expounded it to have, in 2 Cor. 5. 21. And thus you see, that hitherto
Mr. Norton proofs of Heresy have failed his expectation, and on the contrary,
they do make directly against him.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 211.
To say that pardon of sin is righteousness it self, is to confound the effect
with the cause.


Reply 3. If a mere natural Philosopher had said so, it had been the less
wonder, but that a learned Divine should say so, especially after so much light
both from German and English Divines, that have taken pains to make it evident,
that Gods gracious pardon is a sinners righteousness, is to my apprehensions
somewhat strange.

This righteousness of God, says P. Martyr (as I have noted him a little
before) is far distant from the righteousness that is known by nature, for
neither Reason nor Philosophy knows any other righteousness but that which
has its abiding in the mind, not that they were ignorant of absolution, or of
the pacifying of God, for that thing did their sacrifices testify: But (says
he) this pacifying of God they did not call our righteousness. Hence I infer,
that if Mr. Norton will but s^bmit his reason to that peculiar way of
justification, which God has constituted only for believing sinners by his
Covenant with Christ, and by his positive Laws, then he may soon see that God
has ordained a righteousness for believing sinner^, by his reconciliation
only, and not by the righteousness of the moral Law, as the principles of
natural Reason is apt to judge, for the principles of natural reason cannot
think of a righteousness for sinners by positive Laws, because it rests in
Gods will only to make such Laws effectual for that purpose.

Secondly, This way of making sinners righteous, is lively typified and
exemplified to us, by the Jews legal justifications, as I have in part noted a
little before, and also in page 110, but because it is of concerument, I will
speak a little more fully to this point.

It pleased God of his good will and pleasure to covenant with Abraham, that
his seed should be his peculiar* Chruch and people in the land of Canaan, and
in that respect he was pleased to set up the Tabernacle of his Divine presence
among them, and set Porters at the gates of the house of the Lord, that none
which was unclean in any thing should enter therein, 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. And when
the Jews were cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary, they
said to the Porters, in Psalm. 118. 19. Open to me the gates of Righteousness,
called the gates of Justice, says Ainsworth, because only the just and clear
might enter therein, and so ver. 20. and in Jer. 50. 7. The Temple is called
the Habitation of Justice, because of their ceremonial Justice: No unclean
person on pain of death might enter therein, Levit. 15. 21. and it was once a
year cleansed with the blood of the Sin-offering, Levit. 16. 16, 20. Neither
might any dare to have communion with God, in feasting on the holy flesh, in
the holy City, in their legal uncleanness, Levit. 7. 20. and 22. 3 9. And to
make them, and to keep them clean, God gave them not only his Moral Law, with
prohibitions of all that was contrary thereto, but also he gave them diverse
other positive Laws and Ordinances, for their legal justifications from all
their ceremonial sins, yea, and from their moral sins also, Levit. 5. 4, 6. as
to the outward man, when they were to come before Gods presence in his
Sanctuary, or when they were to feast with God on the holy flesh; and in case
any did presume to come in their legal uncleanness before they were qualified
according to the preparation of the Sanctuary, they were threatened to be cut
off (as some of Ephraim were) 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19. Exodus 12. 15, 19. Levit. 7.
20, 21, 25, 27. Numb. 19. 20. And sometimes such persons are threatened with
death, as I noted above from Levit. 15. 31. And for fear of Gods displeasure,
by transgressing these positive Ordinances, all Israel in general, were exactly
careful to observe these works of the Law (called Lev. 15. 31. Sacrifices and
washings were ordained for their typical justification under the first Covenant
from their ceremonial sins. Exodus 22. 31.
the first Covenant, in Heb. 9. 1. in relation to Heb. 8. 7. 8.) for their
justification, when they were to come into Gods holy presence in his Sanctuary,
or to feast on the holy flesh; and for their exact care herein, the whole
Nation (though many times there were but few that were truly godly among them)
were called men of holiness, Exodus 22. 31. Lev. 11. 44. Exodus 19. 6. and says
Ainsworth in Genesis 17. 12. By three things did Israel enter into Covenant. 1. By
Circumcision, 2. By Baptism, 3. By Sacrifice. And their Levitical cleansing and
worship, is called the first Covenant (as I have noted it also in p. 118.) That
had Ordinances or Justifications of divine service, Heb. 9. 1* and they are
called carnal justifications, in ver. 10. as Mr. Dickson, Mr. Trap, and others,
have well observed from the Greek word Dicaioma^a; for it pleased God by his
positive Laws Heb. 9. 1, 10.
to ^ordain that the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ash^^ of an Heifer
sprinkling the unclean, should be of force to sanctify them, to the purifying
of the flesh, Heb. 9. 13. namely, to justify them from their ceremonial sins,
and so to make them fit Heb 9. 13.
for communion with God in his Sanctuary, and in feasting with him on the holy
flesh of Passeovers and Peace Offerings; and it is yet the more manifest, that
this carnal cleansing did justify them, because the Temple (as soon as it was
ceremonially cleansed from the pollutions of Antiochus) is said in the
Septuagint to be cleansed, but in the Hebrew text it is said to be justified.
Dan. 8. 14. now it was justified no otherwise, but as it D^n. 8. 14.
was ceremonially cleansed by carrying out the filthiness of dirt and of idols,
as in 2 Chronicles. 29. 5, 15, 16, 17. and by the blood of the Sin-offering, Ezekiel.
45. 18, 19. Levit. 16. 16. and thus we see, that when persons and things are
legally cleansed from ceremonial defilements, they are said to be justified;
and therefore the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heiser
sprinkling the unclean under the first Covenant, to procure Gods atonement for
their ceremonial justification, did but typifie our moral justification by Gods
atonement, and forgiveness for the sake of the blood of Christ's Sin-offering
under the new Covenant, for nothing but Gods atonement, alone does cleanse and
justify a sinner, and so the Apostle does argue the case, in Heb. 9. 13, 14.
If (says he) the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the unclean, did sanctify to the purifying of the flesh; for by
this means only they procured Gods atonement and forgiveness, for their
ceremonial defilements (according to Gods appointment in the first Covenant of
works) for without Gods atonement procured by the use of the said legal Rites,
their flesh could not be sanctified in a fit manner for his holy presence in
his Sanctuary; and in this respect the Seventy do render the word Atonement,
by the word Sanctified, as you see it observed by Ainsworth in Exodus, 29. 33, 36.

And secondly, It is also further evident by the cleansing of the woman from
her unclean issue, for she was not fully cleansed until she had obtained Gods
Atonement by her Sin-Sacrifice, Levit. 15. 30. but as soon as that was
performed, then she had Gods Atonement, and then she is said, in ver. 31. to
be sanctified or separated, for her appearing before God in his Tabernacle, and
then she might come as a justified person, without danger of Gods anger, before
his presence in his holy Sanctuary.

And thirdly, The Hebrew Doctors do usually say (as I find them cited in
Ainsworth) that such persons as were ceremonially cleansed by washing, or by
the sprinkling of their sin-water, were sanctified; that is to say, they were
legally justified, as fit persons for Gods presence in his holy Sanctuary.

Fourthly, The blood of Bulls and Goats did sanctify, to the purifying of the
flesh, no otherwise, but as they procured Gods atonement; for blood materially
considered does not cleanse but defile the flesh, but as it was ordained by the
first Covenant, to procure Gods atonement, so it does formally cleanse and
justify.

Fifthly, It is further evident, that these legal cleansings did justify them,
by procuring Gods atonement for their ceremonial sins, because Gods eternal
atonement and forgiveness, in relation to their legal justifications, is
called washing, in Jer. 33. 8. and it is called sprinkling and cleansing, in
Ezekiel. 36. 25, 29.

And Sixthly, Such as are truly converted to Christ, in the New Testament (and
by that means have their sins forgiven them) are said to be Washed, Sanctified,
and Justified, 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 6. 11.
6. 11. And it is worth the marking, that these three figurative expressions
are Synonimous, and do all note the true nature of our justification.

And from these cleansings according to the first Covenant, the Apostle in
Hebr. 9. 14. does enforce his Argument thus, How much more shall the blood of
Christ purge (or sanctify) your consciences from dead works? that is to say,
from moral sins, for moral sins did as much defile the conscience, as the touch
of a dead person did defile the flesh ceremonially: And says he, though the
blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, had power by Gods positive
Covenant to cleanse to the sanctifying of the flesh, yet they had not power to
cleanse or justify the conscience from moral sins, Heb. 9. 9. and 10. 4. But
that power was given to the blood of Christ alone, and therefore he said, Lo I
come to do thy will, O God; by which will we are sanctified through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, Heb. 10. 10, 14. In these
words mark the conditions of the eternal Covenant for man's justification, as it
is expressed by Heb. 10, 10.
the Apostle, namely, that it was the will of God to be attoned to sinners for
the sake of Christ's sacrifice, and that atonement only does cleanse the
conscience from all moral sins, or it justifies the conscience.

And secondly, much after this manner does the Apostle reason touching our
justification, in Romans 8. 3, 4. What the Law could Romans 8. 3, 4.
not do, in that it was weak through the flesh (for the corruption and
infirmity of the flesh was such, that it could not keep it self pure neither
from moral sins, nor from ceremonial sins, as it is disputed in Col, 2. 14. and
in Heb. 7* 11, 16, 18, 19.) neither could the ceremonial justifications
justify the conscience from moral sins, Heb. 9. 9. Heb. 10. 4. But God sending
his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, (because he sent him to be our
Combater with Satan, and gave Satan power to use this seed of the woman as a
sinful malefactor, in Genesis 3. 15. in this sense he was in the likeness of
sinful flesh, because he suffered all kind of injuries from Satan, as a
sinner,) and for sin condemned sin in the flesh; in these words is set down the
ultimate end why God sent Christ in the similitude of sinful flesh, to suffer
as a Combater with Satan, and that was to break Satan's head-plot, by continuing
obedient to the death, and in that obedience to be for sin; that is to say, to
make himself a sacrifice for sin; By which means he did first condemn sin, that
is to say, the use of all the legal Sin Offerings (because they could not
justify the conscience from moral sins) because his was the perfection of them
all, and therefore it was perfectly able to procure his Fathers atonement and
absolution, to cleanse the conscience from all the dead works of moral sins.

Thus far of the Exposition of ver. 3. and then it follows in ver. 4. That the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; or, Romans 8, 4.
that the Justification of the Law may be fulfilled in us, as Tremelius, and
the Syriack, and the vulgar Latin, do translate the Greek word Dicaioma, that
is here used.

But here it may be demanded, what kind of Righteousness or Justification of
the Law does Dicaioma mean, should be fulfilled in us?

The Answer is, Not the righteousness of the moral Law, as Mr. Norton does
mis-interpret this Text in p. 233. but the righteousness that was typified by
the positive Ordinances of the ceremonial Law, for the Greek word here used is
(not Dicaiosune, which is the largest word for all kind of righteousness, but)
Dicaioma which is more restrained to the positive Ordinances, and which in
proper English does signify the just Ordinance or the righteous estate of the
Law, namely, either of the Ceremonial or Judicial Laws, but especially of the
Ceremonial Laws, as Mr. Ainsworth shows, in Numb. 31. 21. in Genesis 26. 5. in
Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 14. and in Psalm. 2. 7.

2 This is the true interpretation of Dicaioma, as it is further evident,
because the Apostle does use this word to describe the nature of their legal
justifications of divine Service, in Heb. 9. 1. 10. which he calls carnal
justifications, in verse. 10, as Mr. Dickson and others have well observed.

3 This word is also used by the Septuagint, for the righteous making of
things, as well as of persons, that were ceremonially unclean (for no dead
things, or unreasonable creatures are guilty of moral sins) but by Gods
positive Ordinance, they may be guilty of Ceremonial sins, Numb. 31. 19, 20.
21, 22, 23, 24.

4 Hence it follows, That this kind of positive ceremonial righteousness was
typical to such as had faith in the observation of these Statutes, to look from
the typical ordinances of cleansing and righteous making, to the positive
sacrifice of Christ, as the perfection of all the typical cleansings, for that
only was ordained to procure Gods eternal Reconciliation in not imputing sin,
for the cleansing of the conscience from moral sins; therefore such as did thus
keep the Statutes and Ordinances of Righteousness, as Zachary and Elizabeth
did, Luke 1. 6. should obtain thereby an everlasting Righteousness in Gods
sight, instead of the Ceremonial.

And this Doctrine is clearly taught and expressed in Deuteronomy. 6. 24, 25. I say
from these verses it is plain, that their outward Deuteronomy. 6. 24, 25.
and legal observations of their positive Statutes, did make them righteous, or
justify their bodies, as fit persons for Gods holy presence in his holy
Sanctuary, and for feasting with him (as their attoned God in Covenant) on the
flesh of their Passovers, and Peace Offerings, and so it typifies true
justification, and therefore their careful doing of these typical Ordinances
had an outward blessing promised, as to persons that were outwardly justified,
as well as they which had faith in Christ, had the promise of Gods
Reconciliation for their eternal justification.

5 This word Dicaioma is used by the Septuagint to express their outward
righteousness, or justification by their exact care in observing the positive
judicial Laws of Moses. And for this also see Ainsworth in Exodus 21. 1. Number.
15. 15.

But as I said before, it is chiefly applied to the positive Statutes that
concerned Gods worship in his Sanctuary, and so to the judicial positive
Statutes as they did chiefly respect their judicial trials about their
Ceremonial righteousness, and their justification thereby in his Sanctuary, as
these places do evidence; in all which the Septuagint use the word Dicaioma for
that kind of righteousness chiefly, as in Genesis 26. 5. Exodus 15. 25, 26. Lev.
25. 18. Numb. 27. 11. Numb. 30. 16. Numb. 31. 21. Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 5, 8, 14, 40, 45.
Deuteronomy. 5. 1, 37. Deuteronomy. 6. 1, 2, 17, 20, 24, 25. 2 King. 17. 13, 34, 37. Psalm.
18. 22. Psalm. 50. 16. Psalm. 98. 31. Psalm. 105. 45. Psalm. 119. 5, 8, 12, 16, 23,
33, 48, 54, 71, 80, 112, 117, 135, 145, 155, 171. Psalm. 47. 19. and Ezekiel. 26.
37.

6 This word Dicaioma, is by our Translators rendered Justification, in Romans 5.
16. and that most fitly, because it does in Romans 5. 16.
that place set out the true nature of our eternal justification in Gods sight
(by his gracious forgiveness) as being the truth of their legal and typical
justifications, for the Apostle does reason here about justification, in the
same manner as he did in Heb. 9. for there he reasons thus; If (says he)
the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heiser, sprinkling the
unclean, does sanctify to the purifying, or justifying of the flesh (namely,
by procuring Gods Atonement, as I have explained the matter a little before)
(then says he) How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your conscience
from dead works? (namely, by obtaining Gods Atonement for your moral sins, as
it is the truth of the typical justification.)

And just after this sort does the Apostle reason in Romans 5. 16. Romans 5. 16.
The free gift (namely the free gift of Gods gracious forgiveness) is of many
offenses to justification.

The tongue of Angels cannot express the true nature and form of our eternal
justification, plainer than in the words of this 16. verse; but for further
light, I will cite Tindals Translation, thus, And the gift is not over one sin,
as death came through one sin, of one that sinned; For damnation came of one
sin to condemnation, but the gift came to justify from many sins.

7 This word Dicaioma is by our Translators rendered Righteousness, in Romans 5.
18. By the Rightoousness of one; namely, by the righteousness of Christ in
obeying Gods positive Law and Covenant, by making his soul a Sin-offering (as
soon as he had finished his combat with Satan) according to his Covenant
with his Father; The ^ree gift (namely, the free gift of Gods gracious
forgiveness) of many offenses (as it is expressed in verse. 16.) came upon all
men (to righteousness, or) to the justification of life; So called, to
distinguish it from the legal justification: for our spiritual death in sin
entered upon all men by Adams transgression of Gods positive Law, verse 12. and
here, life from that death is procured by the obedence of Christ to Gods
positive Law in making his soul a Sin-sacrifice.

8 This is also worth our observation, that this word Dicaioma, is used by the
Apostle, to express both the meritorious cause of our justification, in verse
18. by the righteousness of Christ in his death, and the formal cause of our
justification, in verse 16. by Gods Atonement or forgiveness, procured
thereby, just according to the types in the Law: For first, there was the
meritorious cause of their legal justification, by washing, by sprinkling, and
by the blood of Bulls and Goats, and then followed the formal cause of their
legal justification, by Gods atonement procured thereby.

And this is worthy of all due observation, That the platform of our moral
justification in the meritorious and formal causes, was exemplified by Gods
positive Statutes and Ordinances, and therefore the Holy Ghost does most fitly
express it by this peculiar term Dicaioma. And

9 Daniel does in this order compare the true justificition, with the
ceremonial, in Chap. 9. 24. Seventy weeks Dan. 9. 24.
(says he) are determined for the death of the Messiah, to finish Trespass
(offerings) and to end Sin (offerings) and to make Reconciliation for iniquity,
and to bring in (or procure) an Everlasting Righteousness, instead of the
ceremonial; here you see that the death of Christ is put for the end and
perfection of all Trespass and Sin Offerings to make an eternal Reconciliation
for iniquity, instead of the legal, and so to bring in, or procure an eternal
Righteousness by Gods eternal Reconciliation instead of the legal, and in this
very order of causes does Paul argue, in 2 Cor. 5. 21.

10 This word Dicaiomata is by our Translators rendered the Romans 2. 26.
righteousness of the Law, in Romans 2. 26. namely, the Righteousness of the
ceremonial Law; If (says he) the uncircumcised keep (the Dicaiomata) the
righteousnesses of the Law (in the plural number) namely, if the uncircumcision
do instead of the outward observation of the Righteousnesses of the ceremonial
Law (by the blood of Bulls, and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling
the unclean, which procured Gods atonement for their legal sins) do by faith
look to the end of these things, namely, to the death of Christ, as the true
procuring cause of Gods eternal Atonement, and Absolution, for the purging of
their conscience from the condemning power of their moral sins; shall not their
un circumcision (in this case) be counted or imputed to them for true
circumcision, and so consequently for true justification? for he that does thus
keep the Law, shall live thereby, as I have expounded Lev. 18. 5. But the
heathen spiritual Christians do thus keep the law by faith; for it is
Prophesied of them, That in the days of the Messiah, they shall offer
sacrifices of a greater quantity, than those that were offered by the Jews
under the Law of Moses, Ezekiel. 46. 5, 11. and this they must do by faith, by
looking from the carnal types to the spiritual things that are typified
thereby: And in this respect, it is the prayer of all the godly in all Nations,
that they may be sound in Gods Statutes, Psalm. 119. 80, 112. which cannot be
till they have faith to look to the end of those things, which is typified by
the righteousness of those Ordinances and Statutes.

11 Dr. Hammond does also fully concur with Mr. Ainsworths exposition in Romans
8. 4. as I have formerly noted it in Chap. 8. though it is fit also to be here
again remembered.

12 As the word Righteousness, so the word Law in Romans 8. 4. and the word Law
in Romans 10. 4. (which I have expounded chiefly of the Law of Rites) is made
good and strenthened by Romans 10 4.
these considerations, and by these learned Expositors; namely, That Christ is
the end of the Law for Righteousness.

1 I believe that I have already sufficiently put the matter out of
controversy, that the Jews legal justifications by their washings and
sacrifices, did relate to his Death and Sacrifice as the end of them all, as I
showed from Dan. 9. 24. and it is further evident by Tit. 2. 14. there
redeeming us from iniquity, and purifying by Gods Atonement, is put together
as cause and effect; and thus Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness.
And I find that the word Law in the New Testament, as well as the Old, is to be
understood chiefly of the Ceremonial Laws; it is used thirteen times in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, and in all those places, except once, it must be
understood of the Ceremonial Laws; and so it is often used in the Epistle to
the Galathians, and most for the Law of Rites, or for the whole Economy of
Moses, having respect wholly to the Law of Rites.

13 It is also worthy of all due observation, that none of their legal
justifications did justify them by any actual kind of purity put upon their
flesh, that so it might be imputed to them for their justification, but their
righteousness was conveyed to them by Gods positive Ordinance, even by a
passive purity only, by washing and purging away their Ceremonial sins, and so
by the blood of Bulls procuring Gods atonement thereby for their Ceremonial
sins, for blood does not cleanse otherwise but by procuring Gods atonement and
forgiveness; Blood materially considered does not wash, but defile the flesh,
but formally considered, as it was ordained by Gods positive Law, to be a
sacrifice for the procuring of Gods Reconciliation, so only it has a cleansing
quality, and accordingly it pleased God by his voluntary positive Law and
Covenant, to ordain that the blood of Christ should much more cleanse our
conscience from dead works, because it was ordained to be the meritoriou^
procuring cause of Gods Atonement and Absolution; for it is Gods Atonement
(as I have often said, to have it the better marked) that does formally
cleanse, purge, and purify our conscience from dead works.

And this is that righteousness of sinners that is so much spoken of, and
typified in the Law; and therefore this kind of language touching a sinners
righteousness, though it may seem strange to some, yet it needs not seem
strange to any, that are but meanly acquainted with the language of the
Ceremonial Types, whcih is our Schoolmaster to Christ.

But says Mr. Norton in page 225.
Most vain is the shift of the Dialogue, endeavoring to avoid the strength of
this place (of Romans 10. 4.) by interpreting against Text, Context and
Scripture, these words, The Righteousness of the Law, only of the Righeousness
typified by the Ceremonial Law.


Reply 4. Most vain is the shift of Mr. Norton, endeavoring to avoid the
strength of this place, by interpreting the word Law, and the righteousness
thereof, of the righteousness of the moral Law, both against the Text, Context,
and Scripture, as it is evident by what I have already said, and as it is
further evident by the context; For the third verse has a close dependence on
Romans 9. 31, 32. Where the Apostle does blame the Jews for trusting to their
outward ceremonial works chiefly, though they trusted also to their outward
observation of the whole Economy of M^ses; Israel which followed after the Law
of righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness (namely, they
have not attained to the true righteousness, that was typified by their legal
righteousness) because with the works of the Law they did not couple Faith to
the Sacrifice of Christ, as being the end of the Law.

Tindal on the word Righteousness, in Romans 10. 3. says thus, in page 381.

The Jews seek righteousness in their Ceremonies, which God gave unto them, not
for to justify them, but to describe and paint Christ unto them; Mark, That he
makes the word Law, and the righteousness thereof, to relate to their
Ceremonies.

Ibidem, They go about to establish their own righteousness, and are not
obedient to the righteousness that comes of God, which is the forgiveness of
sin in Christ's blood, to all that repent and believe; This is the coherence
between the third verse, and Romans 9. 31. And from this coherence it follows in
this fourth verse, That Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness.

Secondly, P. Martyr on Romans 9. 31. says, of the former interpretation thus,
Romans 9. 31. In his Com. pl par. 2. p. 580.


Indeed, I dislike it not; and in his Common places he does expound the word
Law, and the righteousness thereof, not as Mr. Norton does of the moral Law,
but of the whole Economy of Moses, having respect chiefly to the ceremonial
Law, and And see Wotton de reconc. peccat. par. l. 1. c. 19.
Mr. Wotton treads in his steps, and Vindiciae fidei cites several other
Orthodox to that Opinion, par. 2. p. 160.

Thirdly, Grotius expounds the Law of works, in Romans 3. 27. Grotius in his war
and peace, p 24. Romans 3. 27.
of the Law of the carnal commandment, quite contrary to Mr. Nortons
exposition, for Mr. Norton does expound this word Law, in p. 177. and 189. of
the Law of Nature given to Adam in his innocence; but according to Grotius, and
according to truth, it must be expounded of the Law of Works given to the Jews,
for their legal justification from their ceremonial sins, when they appeared in
Gods holy presence in his Sanctuary; for it is most evident, that God made a
Covenant of Works with the Jews, for their outward Justification, when they
came into his holy Sanctuary, as well as a Covenant of Grace in Christ for
their moral justification in his presence, both here and at the day of
judgment.

But in time, namely, when the Prophets ceased, the carnal Jews abused this
Covenant of Works, as they did the brazen Serpent, by trusting to it, as well
for their moral as for their ceremonial justification in the sight of God; And
against this sort of justification by works does the Apostle Paul disput^ in
his Epistle to the Romans, and to the Galatians, etc.

Behold (say the Hebrew Doctors) it is said in the Law, ye shall keep my
Statutes, and all my Judgments, and do them. Our wise men have said, That
keeping and doing must be applied to the Statutes See Ains. in Lev. 5. 15.
(as well) as unto the Judgments, etc. Now the Judgments they are
Commandments; the reason (or meaning) whereof is manifest, and the good that
comes by doing of them is known in this world, as the forbidding to rob, and
to shed blood, and the commandment to honor Father and Mother. But the
Statutes (or Ordinances) are commandments, the reason whereof is not known,
etc. And all the sacrifices every one generally are Statutes (or Ordinances)
and our wise men have said, that for the services of the Sacrifices the world
does continue, for by doing the Statutes and the Judgments, righteous men are
made worthy of life in the world to come, and the Law sets the commandment
of the statute first, saying, and ye shall keep my Statutes and my Judgments,
which if a man do he shall live in them* Lev. 18. 5. By this, and such like
^estimonies which might be cited from the Hebrew Doctors, we may see as in a
glass how the carnal Jews understood the word Law; namely, of all the Economy
of Moses, but chiefly and principally of the ceremonial Statutes and
Ordinances; and in that respect they put their trust in their outward
observation of the said Ordinances, which were indeed given them for their
outward justification; and by this kind of righteousness Paul was made alive
until God opened his eyes to see his sinful condition, by the spiritual
application of the Law to his conscience, Phil. 3. 9. and then from the
typical, he saw his inward justification.

And secondly, This is worth marking, as I mentioned before, that in their
legal justification, no actual holiness was put upon them, but only their
ceremonial sins of uncleanness were purged from them, and that was their
justice or justification, when they stood before him in his Sanctuary, for it
is said, That the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the unclean, did sanctify to the purifying of the flesh; but that
kind of sanctification was obtained by their ceremonial purifyings, which did
procure Gods atonement in forgiving sin, and no other Sanctification was
ordained for their legal Justification.

Natural Philosophers, says Peter Martyr, cannot be persuaded that the
absolution of God procured by sacrifice did make men righteous, and therefore
they did not call it our righteousness; P. Martyr spoke these words in his last
explanation of Justification, and therefore though his former expressions do
somewhat differ, it is not so much to be stood on, as on what he says here in
his last meditations.
but you may see that Peter Martyr held (according to the ceremonial types)
that the pacifying of God, and the procuring of his atonement by the sacrifice
of Christ, is a sinners righteousness.

I say, this way of justification God was pleased to ordain by his voluntary
positive Law and Covenant with Christ, which was also typified by his positive
Covenant of Works, with the Jews.

1 It was his voluntary Covenant with Christ, that upon his undertaking to make
his soul a sacrifice for sin, he would be reconciled to believing sinners, by
not imputing their sins, to them; that is to say, he would justify them from
their sins by his gracious forgiveness; and therefore it is Gods Righteousness
according to his Covenant with Christ, not to impute their sins, but to
justify them formally by his non-imputation. I say it again, to have it the
better marked, That this kind of righteousness God has constituted to be a
sinners righteousness, from his voluntary Covenant with Christ, where the rul^
in all natural causes, posita causa sequitur effectus, is not to be observed;
for all voluntary Causes have voluntary Effects, according to the liberty of
will that is in the Covenanters; they by their positive Ordinance and Covenant
have constituted a righteousness for sinners by the meritorious cause of
Christ's Sacrifice, and by the formal cause of Gods reconciliation, as soon as
the Holy Ghost has united them to Christ by Faith.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 211. etc.
Pardon of sin cannot complete Righteousness, for Righteousness does not
consist in being sinless, but also in being just; the Heavens are sinless, yet
they are not just; the unreasonable creature is sinless (says he) in p. 209.
but not righteous.


Reply 5. Every mean person knows, that the Heavens, and such like unreasonable
Creatures, are a subject that is not capable of forgiveness, because they are
not capable of sin in a proper sense, and therefore also they are not capable
of this kind of righteousness: But the Dialogue speaks only of sinners that are
reasonable creatures; yea, and of such sinners as are in Christ; and therefore
it speaks of such creatures as are capable of pardon, and so they are fit
subjects of being made righteous by pardon.

But Secondly, Why cannot pardon complete righteousness? has not God a supreme
power by his voluntary Law and Covenant, to make it a sinners formal
righteousness, as well as he had to constitute a fruit tree (which he called
the Tree of Life) to confirm Adam in his created perfections, if he had but
once eaten thereof? We must not look to what is a perfect righteousness to our
senses; but we must look to Gods positive Ordinance; he could tell how to
ordain such a righteousness as will best fit sinners.

Thirdly, We see also, that by his own voluntary Ordinance, he made
unreasonable creatures that are not guilty of moral sins, to be guilty of
ceremonial sins, and to be capable also of ceremonial justification, as I
instanced before of the Temple, it was first polluted by Antiochus, and it was
afterward justified by sanctified Priests, in carrying out the filth thereof,
Dan. 8. 14. The like may be said of the defiled leprous house, and of the
cleansing of it, in Levit. 14. And see more for this in Ainsw. in Exodus 29. 36.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 212.
If you inquire after the essential matter of justification, among the The
material cause of Justification.
causes enumerated by the Author; behold the Dialogue is speechless, and
presents you with a form without matter, such a being as is neither created nor
increated. And he takes delight in this Irony, because he does so often repeat
it, as in p. 212, 217, 225, 237, etc.


Reply 6. Herein Mr. Norton does mock at Gods Wisdom and Work, in giving a form
to the Angels without matter. Mr. Ainsworth says, that the Angels have a form
without matter, and he cites Maymony to concur in that, in Genesis 1. 1. Yea, the
matter of man's body, and the form of Angels, may be united to do service to
man, and yet not be but one person, but may continue still to be both distinct
matter without form, and form without matter; As for example, when the Angels
assumed bodies, it was not to give that matter any natural form, but it was a
miraculous union, only for their present ministry to men: And hence you see
that the matter of man's body and the form of Angels may be united, and yet
remain two distinct things.

Secondly, Mr. Norton does not only mock at the Dialogue, but at sundry other
eminent Divines, who make no other material cause than the Dialogue does.

1 The Dialogue says, that the subject matter of Justification is believing
sinners; and in this the Dialogue follows learned Mr. Wotton.

And 2. Mr. Wotton does follow Peter Martyr, who makes See P. Martyr in Romans 3.
26.
no other material cause in Justification, but believing sinners.

And 3. Says M. Ball, It is to be observed, that the Apostle says, And Ball
on the Coven. p. 219.
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself; where (faith he) the world
is the subject or matter of reconciliation, and by the same reason he makes it
the matter of Justification, for he makes Justification to be a branch, at
least of Reconciliation, if not the whole, as I noted before.

4. Mr. John Goodwin does learnedly dispute against that kind of material
cause, that Mr. Norton contends for, and he also See Vindiciae fidei, par. 2.
follows Mr. Wotton for the subject matter.

5. Mr. Baxter, in his Aphorisms, p. 213. enumerating the causes, says, that a
material cause properly it has none; If, says he, you will improperly call
Christ's satisfaction the remote matter, I contend not. And in p. 217. he says
thus, Christ's righteousness cannot be the material cause of an act, which has
no matter.

And in his Reply to Mr. Air, p. 20. Sect. 4. He says thus.

First, As matter is proper to substance, so Justification being an accident
has no matter; are not you of the same mind?

Secondly, As accidents do inhere in the subject, so the subject is commonly
called their matter; In this sense also our righteousness or justification
passive is not in Christ's righteousness, but in our selves, and so our selves
are the matter; for I think it is we that are justified: and (says he) in
another place, if any please to make the blood of Christ the matter improperly,
I contend not. And to this I do also give my consent. But Mr. Norton makes
Christ's suffering of hell torments, and the second death, to be the matter, and
this matter I cannot consent to.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 222.
To speak after the style of the Dialogue; if righteousness for sinners be
purchased and procured by Christ's sacrifice of atonement; neither then can
atonement be a sinners righteousness: that which procures or purchases is
the cause, that which is procured is the effect; the cause cannot be the
effect.


Reply 7. 1 The style of the Dialogue is borrowed very much from the types of
the ceremonial Law, which were ordained to be our Schoolmaster to Christ; and
I believe, if more pains were taken to express the point of satisfaction, and
the point of justification, in that style, it would be much for the clearing of
the truth.

2 It seems that Mr. Norton will have no other righteousness for a sinners
formal righteousness, but Christ's moral righteousness imputed; for he makes the
Fathers righteousness in being attoned to sinners, of no account in the formal
cause; But, says Mr. Boxter in his Apology to Mr. Blake, p. 24. It must be
known, that the righteousness given us, is not the righteousness whereby
Christ's person was righteous (for accidents perish being removed from their
subject) but it is a righteousness merited, by Christ's satisfaction and
obedience, for us: And that can be no other, say I, but a passive righteousness
by Gods merciful atonement in not imputing sin, as I have exemplified it from
the types of Gods positive Statutes and Ordinances.

3. I have already showed, and I think it needful to repeat it again. First,
That it was Christ's satisfactory Righteousness to perform the Covenant on his
part by his death and sacrifice. And secondly, That it was Gods Righteousness
to perform the Covenant on his part, which was, to be reconciled to sinners, by
not imputing their sins to them, as soon as they are in Christ by faith; The
meritorious righteousness of the death and sufferings of Christ's combat with
Satan, performed on his part, did bind God to perform his said Reconciliation
on his part; and both these Righteousnesses, together with the performance of
the Covenant on the part of the Holy Ghost, which was to proceed from the
Father and the Son, to convert sinners, and to unite them to Christ's, that so
they might be fit subjects for the said righteousness; I say, this voluntary,
and reciprocial Covenant between the Trinity, does constitute all the causes of
a sinners righteousness; and in particular, the Covenant on the Fathers part
does constitute the formal part of it. This positive created Righteousness was
unknown to natural Philosophers, it is not framed from the moral Law of Nature,
but it is a Righteousness for sinners, created on purpose by the voluntary
positive Law and Covenant of the Trinity.

4. I cannot but wonder that Mr. Norton should so much plead for the moral
righteousness of Christ to be the matter, and the imputation of it to be the
form of our righteousness; seeing it did not formally constitute Adams
righteousness, as Mr. Norton himself does also acknowledge, in p. 261. and Mr.
Burges on Justification, p. 8. and indeed the reason thereof is very plain,
because God required that Adam should first eat of the tree of life, as the
meritorious cause for procuring the formality of his moral perfections, and
this tree had this efficacy from Gods voluntary positive Covenant with Adam. As
I have showed more large already, chap. 2.

The Dialogue says, that sinners in themselves, namely, as long as they
continue to be sinners, which is as long as they live in this body of sin, can
have no other righteousness than a passive righteousness, proceeding from Gods
merciful atonement, pardon, and forgiveness.

But Mr. Norton in p. 231. leaves out these words [in themselves] and then
makes a false Argument of the Dialogues sense.

But I dare say, no judicious Christian, that will but make through search into
all the types of legal Justification, shall find any other way of making
sinners righteous, but by Atonement, or Reconciliation in not imputing sin.
Reckon up the legal terms, by which Atonement is expressed, and that will
justify what I say; as by expiating sin, not imputing sin, mercifully
forgiving sin, purging sin, purifying, washing, cleansing sin, to the
sanctifying the flesh; these, and such like are abundantly used in the Law; but
never any for making righteous by imputing moral righteousness, which doubtless
would have been ordained to typifie the imputation of Christ's moral
righteousness in the formal cause of Justification, if any such thing had been
intended for the only formal cause.

5. It seems to me, that Mr. Norton does wilfully stumble at the style of the
Dialogue, because it makes a sinners righteousness to be procured by Christ's
sacrifice of Atonement; but any one may see that this phrase, the Sacrifice of
Atonement, (at which he stumbles) is a usual Scripture phrase, for the public
yearly Sin-Offering is called the Sin of Attonements, Ez^d. 30. 10. and the Ram
of Atonement, Numb. 5. 8. And all Sacrifices were ordained by Gods voluntary
Covenant, to procure Gods Atonement, and Justification from all their legal
sins; even Peace Offerings were sometimes offered to procure peace by Gods
atonement, and in relation to their typical use, the sacrifice of Christ may
well be called a Sacrifice of Atonement Reconciliation or Atonement described
both in the meritorious and formal causes.
for the procuring of Gods atonement for all our moral sins, and so
consequently for our moral justification; and this is most clear, because the
Apostle does define Gods reconciliation to sinners, by his not imputing their
sins to them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. for as long as sin is imputed it makes a jar
between God and the sinner; but when God does not impute sin, then there is no
more jar, but reconciliation with God: And therefore the sin of Atonement,
which was offered on Reconciliationday, is called by the Septuagint, the
Purgation of sins, because it procured Gods Atonement, by which only sin is
purged away, Exodus 30. 10. and this place the Apostle applies to the sacrifice
of Christ, Heb. 1. 3. namely, as it is the meritorious cause of Gods
reconciliation, whereby our sins are fully purged.

The Hebrew word for Reconciliation does signify to cover, pacify, or
appease, noting thereby the meritorious cause, Genesis Genesis 32. 20.
32. 20. Prove. 16. 14. and to be pacified, does note the formal cause; It does
also signify to satisfy, or recompense, noting thereby the meritorious cause,
2 Samuel 21. 3. Exodus 21. 30. Psalm. 49. 8. Genesis 31. 29. and to be satisfied,
does note the formal cause of Reconciliation, as in Mat. 3. 17. This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, satisfied or reconciled; and so in Psalm.
85. 1, 2. Lord, thou have been favorable, or well-pleased with thy land, Thou
have forgiven the iniquities of thy people, and covered all their sin; These
three several phrases are Synonimas, and do set out the formal cause of
Reconciliation or Justification; but whether the Psalmist is to be understood
of outward or inward Reconciliation, needs not now to be disputed, because the
outward is but an exemplification of the inward.

And hence it follows, that Christ's sacrifice may well be caled a Sacrifice of
Atonement, because it was exemplified by the legal sacrifices of Atonement,
and because it was ordained to procure Gods Atonement; and in this respect
also all Sacrifices of Atonement, are called Sacrifices of Righteousness,
Deuteronomy. 33. 19. Psalm. 51. 19.
Deuteronomy. 33. 19. Psalm. 4. 5. Psalm. 51. 19. not only because they were offered in
faith, as Mr. Norton does too unadvisedly restrain the sense of the word
Righteousness, in p. 208. but they are also called Sacrifices of Righteousness,
because they did legally complete a sinners righteousness, in respect of his
ceremonial sins, and so also they did exemplify how a sinners righteousness
should be completed by the meritorious and formal causes in respect of his
moral sins; sacrifices must be performed in righteousness, that is to say,
without spot or wrinkle, for then they were offered in righteousness, according
to Gods Law, and then God accepted them, and granted his Atonement according
to his Covenant, and that was his righteousness, and then when he was attoned
to sinners, it was their righteousness; this is suitable to legal
righteousness, by which God did exemplisi^ our moral righteousness.

Conclusion.
Gods Atonement or Reconciliation, has these two parts:

1 His not imputing sin.

2 His receiving into favor, or both these may be joined into one, namely,
Gods gracious pardon; and all this is the effect of Christ's sacrifice, for it
is for his sacrifice sake that God the Father does absolve or acquit a
believing sinner that is in Christ, from the guilt of all his sins, and so
receives him into favor by adoption; or thus, Gods Atonement for the sake of
Christ's Sacrifice, is not a bare legal forgiveness, as when a Judge acquits a
Malefactor, and so leaves him; but it is a gracious acquital, as when a Father
forgives his Son, and receives him into favor.

And this truth the Dialogue does fully express; and therefore Mr. Norton does
argue sophistically and absurdly against the rules of Logic, and his own
conscience; for he knows that in his antecedent, this phrase [By Christ's
Sacrifice of Attonement] is meant both of the cause and effect; Christ's
sacrifice being the cause, and Gods atonement the effect; and therefore seeing
the sacrifice of Christ is all along so plainly intended by the Dialogue, to be
the only meriting cause of the formal, namely, of Gods atonement, for a
sinners righteousness or justification, It follows, that the consequence which
Mr. Norton draws from it, viz. neither then can atonement be a sinners
righteousness, is a senseless non sequitur.

And now I leave it to the judicious Reader to judge whother Mr. Norton had any
just cause to thunder out such reproachful censures against this kind of
atonement in the Dialogue, as he has done in page 210, 223, 224, 237. and
says he in page 228. the atonement of the Dialogue is not Gods atonement,
but a pestilent fiction and abomination. My heart trembles at this high
blasphemy, the Lord in mercy open his eyes to see better.

And says Mr. Norton in page 210.
The Reader is desired to take full notice of the Dialogues corrupt sense,
being the Helena, etc.


Reply 8. The Reader is also desired to examine thoroughly, who has the truth
on his side, and also to take full notice whether he can find such an active
moral righteousness imputed, as Mr. Norton does substitute in page 210. for the
formal cause of a sinners righteousness; I have made search into the method of
righteous-making by the typical sacrifices, and cannot find any such
righteous-making, as Mr. Norton holds; examine therefore whether I have not
both in the Dialogue, and in this Chapter, rightly opened the types thereof,
both in the meritorious and formal causes.

But says Mr. Norton page 209.
The Hebrew translated Atonement, properly signifies to cover some thing, yet
not with a garment, or the like, which may be taken off again; but with some
cleaving and tenacious matter, as Pitch, Lime, Mortar, etc.


Reply 9. This exposition of the word Atonement, may (I conceive) mis-lead the
Reader as well as himself, because he restrains it to Pitch, or such like
tenacious matter that cannot be taken off again, and therefore I will open the
use of the word for the advantage of the Readers.

1 I find by Kirkeroes Hebrew-Greek-Lexicon, That the Hebrew Caphar does
signify to cover: This is the general sense of the word; But what kind of
covering is to be understood by the word, must be fetched from the
circumstances of each particular text where it is used; As for example, in Genesis
6. 14. it is used for such a covering as is made with Bitumen, Pitch, Tar,
Rosin, and such like cleaving things, because that kind of covering was only
fit to stop and cover the chinks and cracks that were in the Ark, to preserve
it from perishing in the waters (a figure of Gods Atonement in our Baptism,
that covers our sins, and so saves us) but says Ainsworth in Genesis 6. 14.
there are two other Hebrew words in Exodus 2. 3. which are the proper words for
Pitch and Plaster, and therefore Caphar is used for Pitch in Genesis 6. 14. but
in a metaphorical sense, and in that respect Tindal in 1 John 2. 2. does apply
it (and that most fitly) to mollifying Plasters, that are laid on angry fores
to molifie and assuage their angry pain.

2 This Hebrew word is also used for the Hoar-frost, in Ex^. 16. ^4. because
the Manna did lie upon, or cover the ground (after the dew was exhaled) just
like as the Hoar-frost does cover the ground. It is also put for the Hoar-frost
in Job 38. 29. and in Psalm. 147. 16. but there the Septuagint do translate it
Clouds; and indeed it is not unfit, because Clouds do cover the face of the
Sky, and do also scatter the Hoar-frost, Hail, and Snow, which do often cover
the face of the earth; but these kind of coverings are soon taken off again,
therefore it does not always signify such a covering as may not be taken off
again, and it is applied to Cypress trees, because it is a pleasant shady cover
against the scorching Sun, Cant. 1. 13.

3 Caphar is applied to the covering of an angry countenance by some acceptable
present; And thus Jacob did cover Eja^'s angry face, I will, said Jacob, cover
(or appease) his face with the present that g^eth before me, and afterward I
will see his face, Genesis 32. 20. And in this sense, a wise man will cover the
Kings angry face, Prove. 16. 14.

4 Caphar is put for a Bribe, because a Bribe does cover the eyes of the Judge,
and causes him to pervert Justice, Amos Exodus 30. 12. A further description of
Gods Atonement in respect both of the meritorious and formal cause^.
5. 12. but said just Samuel to the people, Of whose hand have I received any
present (namely, by way of a Bribe) to cover mine eyes therewith in the case of
Justice? 1 Samuel 12. 3.

5 Caphar is put for a price of Redemption, because it does cover the offended
face of the Supreme, and reconcile him, Esa. 43. 3. But jealousy says Prove.
6. 35. is outrageous, it will not regard the presence of any cover or ransom.
See also in Numb. 35. 31. and Psalm. 41. 81. and in Exodus 21. 30. and in Exodus
30. 12. They shall give every man the ransom of his soul, or the cover of his
soul, namely, half a shekel for every man to cover Gods angry face, that there
be no plague among them to take away their lives, as he had done from the
former Six hundred thousand.

But mark, this price which God appointed them to give for the That only is
the full and formal price of our redemption, that was constituted so to be by
Gods voluntary positive Law and Covenant.
ransom, or cover of their souls from death, which else would certainly have
fallen upon them, was but half a Shekel, which in humane reason (materially
considered) cannot be esteemed a sufficient price for the ransom of their souls
from death, as David shows, in Psalm. 49. 7, 8. yea, though it were paid
yearly during life: But formally considered, namely as it was ordained by Gods
positive Law and Covenant to be paid and accepted as the price of redeeming
their lives from death, so it was the full price of their lives, because Gods
positive Law and Covenant had made it to be a full price; if they had offered
many thousands of silver for the redemption of their lives, yet it had not been
a sufficient price without Gods positive Law and Covenant: As I have showed in
Chap. 8. in Ahabs offer to Naboth, in 1 King. 21. 3. Even so it was Gods
positive Law and Covenant, that made the death and sacrifice of Christ to be
the 2 King. 21. 3.
full price to cover Gods angry face, or to atone him for the ransom of the
many, Mat. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 6.


The said price of redemption is called the silver of Attonements, Exodus 30.
16. and with this money, or at least with part of See Ainsw. in Exodus 30. 12.
and Lev. 28. 4.
it, they bought the daily sacrifices, that were offered morning and evening
for the procuring Gods atonement to the whole Church of Israel, and with this
money they also purchased the public Sin Offerings and Trespass-offerings, and
therefore it was called sin-mony, and trespass-mony, 2 King. 12. 16. Neh. 10.
32, 33. but in Exo. 30. 16. is called atonement money, and by some Translations
redemption-mony, because redemption is obtained by procuring Gods atonement;
and hence we may see the reason why we are said to be bought with a price, 1
Cor. 6. 20. and why the blood of Christ is called a price, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
the phrase of a price given to the Sacrifice, and so to Christ's sacrifice, is
borrowed from the price that God appointed them to pay for the redemption of
their lives, and for the buying of sacrifices of atonement, for the procuring
of Gods atonement for the redemption of their lives, and so for their
justification in his sight.

Sixthly, Caphar is used for the covering of Gods angry sace from moral sins
that defile the Land, by executing impartial Justice upon Malefactors; And thus
Phineas, when he executed justice on the Fornicators, did by that means (cover
Gods angry face, or) make atonement for the Sons of Israel, Numb. 25. 17. In
like sort, when Gods angry face had been upon the Land by a three years famine,
for Saul's bloody sin, in slaying the innocent Gibbeonites: Then David said to
the Gibbeonites, wherewith shall I (cover Gods angry face, or) make atonement,
that ye may bless the inheritance of the Lord, 2 Samuel 21. 3. Then they Deuteronomy.
21. 8.
said in ver. 6. Let seven of his Sons be given, and we will ang them up to the
Lord; and so Gods angry face was covered and attoned.

It is also said in Numb. 35. 33. Blood polluteth the Land, and there shall be
no (covering of my anger, or) atonement made for the Land, but by the blood of
him that shed it; and in case of a secret murderer, yet by Gods Ordinance the
Land was guilty, till the Elders of the people had made atonement by the death
of a Bullock, Exodus 21. 8.

Seventhly, Caphar is used for the covering of Gods angry face from ceremonial
sins, by typical Sacrifices of Atonement, and from the moral sins of our
souls, by the true sacrifice of Christ.

And this kind of covering by Atonement does always denote Gods forgiveness
and receiving into favor, as Lev. 4. 20, 26, 31, 35. Lev. 5. 6, 10, 13, 16, 18.
And sometimes it is expressed by making clean, as in Numb. 8. 21. Lev. 16. 30.

Mr. Ainsworth in Genesis 32. 20. says, This word Caphar is often used in the Law
for covering or taking away offenses, and for pacifying anger by gifts, and so
making Atonement, as in Exodus 29 36. Levit. 14, 20, 26. and 5. 6, 10, 13.
Deuteronomy. 21. 8. And says he, in Psalm. 65. 4. Our trespasses thou will mercifully
cover them, namely, expiate, propitiate, purge away, and so mercifully cover
and forgive them.

And, says he, the Hebrew Caphar signifies to cover; and says he, the cover
of the Ark was called Caporeth, Exodus 25. 17. in Greek Hilasterion, That is,
the propitiatory or Mercy-Seat, Hebr. 9. 5. which name Paul gives to Christ,
Romans 3. 25. and he is the true propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 2. And
says he, in Psalm. 78. 38. He being compassionate mercifully covered iniquity.
And says he, in Psalm. 79. 9. mercifully cover our sins; he does most fitly add
the word merciful, to the word cover; because Caporeth is applied to the cover
of the Ark, called Gods Mercy-Seat, where he used to appear and to manifest his
favor, by the cloud of his presence, when he was attoned to his people, Lev.
16. 2. and so the word Merciful, or propitious, is added to Gods forgiving the
sins of his people, in Heb. 8. 12. and such as confess their sins have the
promise of Gods mercy, namely, of his merciful pardon, in Prove. 28. 13. By
these, and such like considerations, we may see the reason why David uses this
phrase, Blessed is the man whose sin is covered, Psalm. 32. 1. namely, by Gods
gracious forgiveness, for the sake of Christ's propitiatory sacrifice.

The use of the burnt offering, says Ainsworth, was to procure Gods atonement
or rem^ssion of sins, as it is evident, says he, by Job 42. 8. and so (says
he) the anger of God is (covered, or) appeased by the burnt offering of
Christ's, for he is the atonement or reconciliation for our sins, Dan. 9. 24. 1 John 2. 2. Heb. 10. 8 10.

Eighthly, After I had penned these meditations on the word Atonement, I met
with another excellent explanation of it in our larger Annotations, in 2 Chr.
6. 49. The Reader may please to confer that note with these meditations.

Ninethly, It is also worth the marking, that the Seventy do render the Hebrew
word Caphar, in various expressions. Some of them I will name.

1. The Seventy do render the word Caphar to sanctify, in Exodus 29. 33. There
our Translation says thus, Aaron and his sons shall ^at those things by which
atonement was made; But the Seventy say, by which they were sanctified. And so
in ver. 36. our translation says thus, Thou shall offer every day a Bullock
for a sin of Atonement; The Seventy say, for a sin, by which they shall be
sanctified; But I have opened this word sanctified before, in Reply 3. And so
it is said in Heb. 9. 13. That the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of
an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh,
for their legal Justification before God in his Sanctuary.

But when Christ came into the world he took away these legal sanctifications,
and these bodily justifications, by the blood of Bulls, etc. and according to
Gods will he established his own Sacrifice in the place of them; by which will,
says the Apostle, we are sanctified, namely, by Gods atonement and
forgiveness, Heb. 10. 10, 14. that is to say, we are justified from our moral
sins, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.

This exposition of the word Caphar, which is used to set out Gods covering of
sin by his atonement, is by the Seventy translated sanctified, and therefore
it does force us to take notice (but that we are dull of hearing) that a
sinners righteousness in Gods sight does stand in being sanctified or made
sinless by Gods atonement and forgiveness; This kind of sanctification is our
only justification in Gods sight; For according to the understanding of the
Seventy Interpreters, Caphar, the covering of sin by Gods atonement, did
denominate the Jews to be legally sanctified to the purifying of their flesh,
because by Gods atonement their impurity was removed, without putting any
active purity upon their flesh, by any positive Ordinance.

This kind of sanctification therefore was a lively type of our moral
justification, both by the meritorious cause of Christ's Sacrifice, and by the
formal cause of Gods Atonement.

2. The Seventy do render Caphar, to cleanse, as in Exodus 29. 37. and in Exodus
30. 10.

3. They render it to purge, in Deuteronomy. 32. 43. Exodus 30. 10. Isa. 60. 7. and
these three differing expressions do but explain the former word Atonement, in
our Translations, for in Exodus 29. 33, 36. it is in the same verses, it is also
explained by the word sanctified, as Synonimas to Caphar,

By these and such like terms given by the Seventy to Caphar, it is evident,
that they understood, that when Gods angry face was attoned by sacrifice, in
relation to their ceremonial sins, that they were thereby sanctified, to the
purifying of their flesh, Heb. 9. 13. and that thereby their persons were
justified in respect of their appearing before Gods presence in his Sanctuary,
or in regard of feasting with him on the holy flesh of the Passover, or
Peace Offerings; and in this respect they called such cleansings, Heb. 9. 1, 10.
justifications of divine Service, Heb. 9. 1. and carnal justifications, in v.
10. viz. Ceremonial, Ritual, and Typical, as Mr. Trap expounds it, or the
righteousness of the flesh, as I have more largely opened the matter a little
before; and so also when the Temple was ceremonially purged from the pollutions
of Antiochus, it is said in the Seventy, to be cleansed, but in the Hebrew Text
it is said to be justified, Dan. 8. 14. Dan. 8. 14.


Hence it follows by an unavoidable consequence, that their legal Ordinances by
which they obtained Gods atonement, for their legal cleansings, fanctifyings,
and justifyings, and for their legal righteousness, did typifie and exemplify
how sinners are cleansed, washed, sanctified and justified, as it is expressed
by these terms in 1 Corinthians. 6. 11. and how they are made righteous by the
righteousness of the Law, as it is in Romans 2. 26. and in Romans 8. 4. namely,
because the sacrifice of Christ is the fulfilling and end of all sacrifices,
and of all other legal cleansings, and therefore it is the only meritorious
and procuring cause of Gods atonement and forgiveness, for the formal
cleansing, washing, sanctifying, and justifying the conscience, from the
accusing and condemning power of all moral sins, by which means we may stand
before God as justified persons in his sight, when we come to put up our
requests unto him, or to feast with him at the Lords Table; for when we come to
the Lords Table, Gods forgiveness is the greatest and most precious dainty, for
which Christ shed his blood; and therefore, at his last Supper he said thus to
his Disciples, This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for the
many, for the remission of sins, Mat. 26. 28. according as it was promised in
Dan 9. 24. this dainty of Gods forgiveness, is the great purchase of Christ's
blood, which makes them blessed that have it, Psa. 32. 1. and makes them
eternally righteous in Gods sight that have it, Dan. 9. 24. This, and a new
heart, are the two great legacies of the new Covenant, Jer. 31. Heb. 8.

These things thus opened (me thinks) should so enlighten the eyes of our
understanding to see what the righteousness of God is, and to embrace it as a
most blessed truth, or at least, not to resist it, but to strive to understand
it better, but when Gods will is to darken the understanding of men with
erroneous conceptions, then the tongue of Angels cannot prevail with them to
hold the contrary.

And thus have I in some measure opened this phrase, The Righteousness of God,
by his Reconciliation or Atonement; and I have opened the word Atonement,
both in the meritorious and in the formal causes; namely, that Sacrifices for
sin did meritoriously cover Gods angry face, atone, pacify, reconcile,
expiate, propitiate, purge, sanctify, cleanse, and purify, or make righteous
a sinner, by procuring Gods atonement for his formal reconciliation,
righteousness, and justification.

And now methinks Mr. Norton may do well to consider his unadvisedness in
villifying this kind of atonement. And 2. In restraining it only to a covering
of pitch, and such like tenacious matter, whereby he confounds both his own
understanding and his Readers also.

The second part of Mr. Nortons comparative Argument, in page 53. is this.
Christ was made sin, as he was made a curse; but he was made a curse by
judicial imputation; therefore he was made sin by a real imputation.


Reply 10. In my examination of Gal. 3. 13. I have showed how Christ was made a
curse, and in the beginning of this Chapter, I have showed how he was made sin,
therefore I shall not need to make any further reply here to these things, but
refer the reader to those places.

2 The rest that he allegeth in p. 55. wherein he makes God to charge Christ
with sin as a supreme Judge, according to the judicial way of Court
proceedings, because it is no Scripture language in the point of Christ's
satisfaction, but devised terms to express his own erroneous conception,
therefore I shall not need to give any other answer to it here,

CHAP. XV.
The Examination of Gal. 3. 13. with Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law when he was made a curse
for us; For it is written (in Deuteronomy. 21. 23.) Cursed is every one that hangs
upon a Tree.


THe Cusre of hanging upon a Tree, which Christ suffered, the Dialogue does
expound of the outward curse which he suffered, in respect of the outward
manner of his death, by hanging on a Tree.

But Mr. Norton in page 93.
Does expound it, Of the inward and eternal Curse, which he suffered from Gods
immediate wrath, when he hung upon the Tree.

SECT. I.
Mr. Norton frames his Argument thus:
If not only the Malediction of every one that is hanged on a Tree is held
forth, but also Christ's Redemption of us from the Curse of the Law, by being
made a curse for us, is both held forth, and foretold in Deuteronomy. 21. 23. then the
Text in Deuteronomy. 21. 23. has not only a proper, but atypical signification.

But not only the Malediction of every one that is hanged on a Tree is held
forth, but also Christ's redemption of us from the curse of the Law, by being
made a curse for us, is both held forth, and foretold in Deuteronomy. 21. 23.

Therefore the Text in Deuteronomy. 21. 23. has not only a proper, but atypical
signification.

The minor says Mr. Norton, is the Apostles.
Reply 1. Mr. Norton does exceedingly abuse the Apostles meaning, to say that
his minor is the Apostles, and also in saying that the Apostle does cite Deuteronomy.
21. 23. to prove that our Redemption by Christ is both held forth and foretold
there.

But for the better finding out of the Apostles meaning in Gal. 3. 13.

There are two distinct clauses in the fomer part of the verse that are of
necessity to be well marked.

1 That Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law. 2 That he was made a
curse for us.
These two clauses the Dialogue has expressed thus.

1 Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law. 2 When he was made a
curse for us.
Now says the Dialogue, the Apostle cites Deuteronomy. 21. 23. only to prove the last
clause, namely, That Christ was made a curse for us in the outward manner of
his death, like unto other notorious Malefactors, even at the same time when he
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, by making the formality of his death to
be a sacrifice, by his own Priestly power.

2 It is further evident, that this sense is the truth, by the prediction of it
from the time of Adams fall, in Genesis 3. 15. Thou Satan shall pierce him as a
sinful Malefactor on the Tree, and yet he shall break thy Head-plot at the
very same time, by his The outward manner of Christ's death on the Tree, was
first declared in Genesis 3. 15.
obedience to the death; for in all his conflict with thy ignominious torturing
pains on the Cross, he shall not suffer his patience to be disturbed, nor his
obedience to be perverted, but he shall continue obedient to the death, even
the death of the Cross; and in that obedience, as soon as thou have done thy
worst to disturb it, and as soon as he has finished all his sufferings, he
shall make his death a sacrifice by his own Priestly power; And it is recorded
of him, that as soon as he had but said, It is finished, he bowed his head, and
gave up the Ghost, and that was the formality both of his death and sufferings;
And thus he brake the Devils Head-plot, had the victory and won the prize
which was the redemption of all the Elect, even at the same time when he was
put to death, as a cursed Malefactor, by the Devil, in hanging on a Tree.

This was the declared platform of the Trinity according to their eternal
Covenant for man's Redemption, as I have expressed it in the Dialogue, but have
often in this book amplified and enlarged it.

3 It is worth the marking, that the Apostle does not put the Article The, to
the word Curse, cited from Deuteronomy. 21. 23. but only to the first word Curse, as
it is cited in verse 10. from Deuteronomy. 27. But in case the latter word Curse had
included the moral Curse, as well as the former word Curse, then in reason it
should have had the Article [The] put to it, as well as it is to the former; but
because it is not put to the latter, therefore this may serve as another
Argument to prove the Apostle meant that Christ suffered no other Curse, but
such a Curse as his proof meant, namely, a cursed death in the outward manner
of it, just like unto those Malefactors that were hanged on a Tree, according
to Deuteronomy. 21. 23. and Genesis 3. 15. And to this sense does Chrysostom and
Theephilact expound the Curse that Christ suffered, cited in the former
Chapter, namely, that he suffered on a Tree as if he had been a sinner, for he
was put to death as a sinner by the Devils imputation, but not by Gods
imputation; if he had suffered as a sinner from Gods immediate wrath, and by
Gods imputation, then he must some way or other have had communion with our
guilt; For (says Grotius before cited) merit is personal; and therefore when
the Ancient Divines say, He suffered on a Tree, as if he had been a sinner,
they mean it only in respect of the likeness of his punishments unto other
cursed Malefactors, which punishment an innocent person may suffer as well as a
Malefactor: And so Austin (says well) that Christ received our punishment
without sin, that thereby he might dissolve our sin, and end our punishment.

And in relation to this sense the Dialogue does open the Apostles words thus,
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, even at the same time [When]
he was made (not that Curse in verse 10. But) a curse for us, according to
Deuteronomy. 21. 23.

But, says Mr. Norton, the word [When] is not in the Text, but it is of your
own putting in.
Reply 2. It is a usual thing with Mr. Norton, to censure the Dialogue with
some odious thing or other, without any just cause; But by his leave the
Dialogue is able to justify it self, by the concurrence of good Authors, for
this word When.

1 Mr. Perkins does use the word When twice over: First, In his translation of
this Text.

And secondly, In his Analysis.

2 Mr. Ainsworth does render this Text thus, Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, When he was made a curse for us, in Exodus 32. 32.

3 Mr. Calvin in his citation of this Text, does put in the word (When) just as
Mr. Ainsworth has done, in his Inst. lib. 2. Chap. 16. Sect 6.

4 The Prophet Isaiah uses the word When just in this very case, saying, in
Isa. 53. 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to Isa. 53. 10.
put him to grief (on the Tree) When he shall make his soul a Trespass,
namely, a Trespass, or a Sin-sacrifice, as the Septuagint render Asham.

5 The Syriak does translate it. And (or When) he was made a Curse for us; Van
in Syriak and Hebrew, is usually put for And, and yet it is sometimes also put
for When; and therefore Tremelius does render it in to Latin, Dum pro nobis
factus est execratio; and Erasmus does translate the Greek thus, Dum pro nobis,
which does answer to our English word When or While.

6 Tindal does translate Gal. 3. 13. by And, and not by Being.

7 The Greek word in Gal. 3. 13. is often put for When by our Translators, as
in Mar. 14. 3. and in Luke 22. 44. in these places it is translated into
Syriak, Vau, into Latin, Dum, and into English (When) he was in Bethany, and
When he was in an Agony, and therefore by the like reason, it may as well be
translated, When he was made a Curse for us.

8 It seems to me therefore that Mr. Norton does find faul^ with the Dialogue,
from no other cause, but because the word When does utterly spoil the visage of
the Argument, for it is no way suitable to his typical sense, on which the
foundation of his Argument does depend, and therefore it is no marvel, that he
does censure the Dialogue for putting it into the Text.

9 All Christ's greatest sufferings are comprised under the word Chsstisement,
in Isa. 53. 5. The Chastisement of our peace was upon him; namely, When he was
wounded for our transgressions, and when he was bruised for our iniquities.
But if the moral Curse had been upon him when he was thus wounded and bruised
on the Cross, then the word Chastisement had not been fit to express it, for we
cannot sind in all the Scriptures where the vindicative wrath of God, and the
torments of Hell, are called Chastisements.

If Mr. Norton had not been transported with a high conceit of his own
erronions Tenants, he would never have stumbled so as he does at the word When
in the Dialogue.

But Mr. Norton goes on in page 93. to prove his minor, by the causal particle
[For] by which (says he) the Apostle does prove the foregoing part of the Text.
Reply 3. But I demand which foregoing part of the Text does Mr. Norton mean
that the Apostle does prove, for I have formerly showed that there are two
distinct clauses in the former part of the verse.

1 It is said, That Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law.

2 It is said, That he was made a curse for us.

If he mean it of both these clauses, then I deny that the causal particle
[For] was so intended by the Apostle, for I have before showed, that the
Apostle did intend it only to confirm the last clause, namely, That Christ was
made a curse for us in the outward manner of his death.

2 Mr. Norton in page 94. proves his former exposition thus (...) If those
words in Gal. 3. 13. Cursed i^ every one that hangs on a tree, and that text in
Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree, have both but one and
the same sense, Then (says he) what binders, that the foregoing part of the
verse, namely, Redemption, etc.



Reply 4. What hinders (says Mr. Norton) he knows well that Interrogations
are no Arguments to prove what he affirms, he should have proved his
affirmative, and not demanded the question, What hinders? T^an which Inference,
says he, in page 94. what is more abominable, the typical reason excepted of
signifying (or typisying) Christ bearing the moral curse upon the tree.



Reply 5. The Reader must here take special notice that Mr. Norton does lay the
weight of all his Arguments on the typical sense, but you shall see ere long
that his typical sense drawn from Deuteronomy. 21. 23. will as much fail him (as his
typical sense of the Tree of life has done, as I have already showed in Chap.
2. Sect. 3.) and then all his Arguments that are built upon it, will prove but
groundless fantasies, or to use his own language, he will put an abominable
inference on the Apostle, and on the Spirit of God speaking by him.

SECT. II.
But says Mr. Norton in page 94.
There can be no sufficient or probable reason given, why hanging upon a tree
should infame and fasten upon the person hanged this special Curse; Whence
followed the defiling of the land in case the body continued unburied after
Sunset, above all other capital sufferings. And, says he, in page 96. in case
they be not buried before Sunset they shall def^le the land. And, says he, in
page 102. the principal scope of this text (of Deuteronomy. 21. 23.) is to give a Law
concerning him that is hanged, that he should in any wise be buried that day,
with the reason thereof annexed. And in page 95. he cites Junius to his
typical exposition.


1 I will give a reason why hanging on a tree is the greatest curse of all
death.

And secondly, that his not burial before Sunset, does not defile the whole
land.

Reply 6. The Dialogue has given a probable reason, yea a certain reason, why
the Malefactor that was hanged upon a tree, was infamed with a greater curse
than any other Stoning to death was counted the heaviest kind of death of all
deaths, in relation to the infamy of hanging up the dead body to be gazed on,
for their greater reproach, for the hanging of the dead body was usually
annexed to stoning to death.
death.

1 Says the Dialogue in page 68. Not every sinner that deserved death by
[Thou] the Sanhedrim is meant of this high degree of curse in their death, but
such sinners only as deserved to have their bodies hanged on a tree after they
were stoned to death; for God had given power to the Sanhedrim when they stoned
Malefactors to death, if the circumstances of their sin were of a high
consideration, to hang up their dead bodies on a tree, for their greater
reproach, shame, and ignominy, and to be a spectacle to others, as long as the
Sun gave light, but yet in any wise to bury him that day, and thus Calvin on
Deuteronomy. 21. 21. and Goodwin on Moses Rites, and Mr. Ainsworth on Deuteronomy. 21. 22. do
accord with the Dialogue that hanging is for the greater curse after stoning to
death.

2 Says the Dialogue, the rebellious Son in Deuteronomy. 21. 21. is brought as an
instance of this double punishment.

First, He was stoned to death.

And then secondly, His dead body was hanged on a tree to be gazed on for his
further reproach and insamy, and so for a higher degree of curse than his
stoning to death was; and from this particular instance, Moses does infer in
verse. 22. That if there be in a man (that is to say in any other man besides
the Rebellious Son) a sin (that is to say, any other capital sin) that is
^orthy of death (that is to say, of this double kind of death) And Thou
(namely, Thou the high Sanhedrim) do hang him upon a tree (that is to say,
after he has been stoned to death) his body shall not remain all night upon
the tree, but thou shall bury him that day, because he had satisfied the curse
of God.

3 It is manifest, That this kind of death was accounted not only of the Jews,
but of other Nations the most infamous of all kind of death; M^ses in Number. 25.
4. said, Take the Princes, and hang them up before the Sun; The Seventy
translate it, make them open spectacles of shame; for though other kinds of
death were dreadful, yet none so shameful as this kind of death, and the curse
of it is laid more on the shame than on the pain; for in all other kinds of
death, as soon as the life was taken away by the executioners, the body was
presently taken away out of sight, and covered from further reproach; but these
kind of persons that were first stoned to death, and after hanged on a tree,
were therefore hanged, that they might be a spectacle of further shame and
reproach. Or in case they were hanged alive, according to the Roman manner, and
left hanging a certain time after their death to be a gazing stock, a byword,
and a reproach, then that made that kind of death to be an accursed death above
all other kinds of death; For to be under the shame and reproach of men is a
great curse of God; and therefore shame, reproach, taunts, by-words, and
curses, are all joined together, as terms Synonimas, in Jer. 24. 9. in Jer. 42.
18. in Jer. 44. 8, 12. And for an innocent to bear these ignominious curses, it
must needs be a very dreadful thing to the outward man, though his innocence
may bear up his inward man, as it does in Martyrs, and as it did in Christ,
Heb. 12. 2. And seeing the Devil, by Gods declared permission, had power to put
Christ to this ignominious, and long lingering violent death, as it is
expressed, in Genesis 3. 15. therefore it was Gods will that Christ should be
sensible of it in the affections of his soul, and in that respect his humane
nature was often much troubled at the consideration of it, as in Psalm. 69. 7.
There Christ says thus, For thy sake have I born reproach, shame has covered
my face: It was thy declared will and command, in Genesis 3. 15. that I should
combat with Satan, with man's true nature and affections, and that he should
have power to use me as a malefactor, with the greatest ignominy that he could
invent, and at last pierce me in the foot-soals, as a most ignominious
malefactor, on the tree; and I must be sensible of all this, as I am true man,
of the seed of the woman. And therefore I say in ver. 9. The reproaches of them
that reproached thee, are fallen on me; and therefore I say in verse. 20.
Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness: These expressions of
his soul-sorrows, do tell us the true cause of Christ's fear, sadness, and agony
in the Garden, in Matthew. 26. 37, 38. Mark. 14. 34, 35. and says he, in Psa.
22. 6. (...). am a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and the despised of the
people. All that see me laugh me to scorn, they shoot out the lip, they shake
the head, saying, he trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him, let him
deliver him, seeing he delighted in him. These words do directly relate to the
shame of his death on the cross, as Matthew does open the sense, in Matthew. 27.
39, 43. and therefore his kind of death is called The scandal of the cross,
Gal. 5. 11. And his suffering on the cross without the gate is called His
reproach, Heb. 13. 13. and reproach is a dreadful thing to the Saints, and
therefore they pray in Psalm. 119. 22. Remove far from me reproach and contempt,
and in verse. 31. Put vie not to shame. And in Psalm. 89, 50, 51. Remember Lord,
the reproach of thy servants, wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O Lord,
wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed. And therefore
Christ, in Psalm. 40. 16. does imprecate this curse upon them that brought this
curse of shame upon him; Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame, that
say unto me, aha, aha; For says Christ, in Psalm. 109. 25. I became a reproach
unto them (on the cross) they lo^ked upon me, they shaked their heads.

And we see by experience, that men do account the shame of death to be worse
than the pains of death, and therefore Saul desired his Armor-bearer, rather to
kill him, than the Philistims should come and mock him at his death, 1 Samuel 31.
4. and Abimeleck willed his Armor-bearer to kill him, rather than men should
say, to his greater shame, that a woman had killed him, Judge. 5. 54. for the
more shame, the more curse of God is in any death. And the custom among the
Jews was not to put malefactors to death by hanging, but they used to hang up
the dead body after it was stoned to death, for the greater infamy to the sin
and sinner; therefore hanging among them was not used to denote the curse in
respect of the pains of death, but only to set forth the curse of shame and
reproach, and therefore hanging among them could not be a type of the pains of
the eternal curse.

But secondly, It was the custom of the Romans to put the basest sort of
Malefactors to death by hanging, and after death to let them hang for a time to
be a spectacle of ignominy and repreach, and therefore the pains of death was
in that curse, though, chiefly, the shame is intended by the Apostle in Gal. 3.
13. because it relates to the curse of hanging in Deuteronomy. 21. 23. mortis modus
morte pejor.

And the Hebrew Doctors say, they bewailed not him that went to be executed,
but only mourned inwardly for him; they bewailed him not that (so say they)
his disgrace might be his expiation; they it seems, accounted that the more
shame and punishment a condemned person suffered, the more it tended to the
expiation of his sin from the Land. See Dr. Lightfoots Harmony on the New
Testament, p. 71. And Christ told his Disciples of the ignominiousness of his
death by the Romans, that the Priests and Scribes should deliver him to the
Gentiles, to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him. And the story of the
Evangelists does at large set forth the greatness of the curse that was in his
death, by mockings and revilings.

1 They mocked his Prophetical Office, saying, Prophecy who it is that somte
thee, Mat. 26 68. 2 They scoffed his Priestly Office, saying, He saved others,
himself he cannot save, Mat. 27. 42. 3 They mocked his Kingly Office, saying,
Hail King of the Jews, Mat. 27. 28. and said, They had no King but Caesar, Joh.
19. 15.
These, and such like expressions, do set out the scandal of his cross, and so
the greatness of the curse, which Satan with all his might did multiply in a
transcendent manner upon him, if by any means he could disturb his patience,
and so pervert him in the course of his obedience, that so his death might not
be a sacrifice, and then Satan had got the victory* but because Christ
continued obedient to the death, even to the death of the cross, and at last
made his soul a sacrifice by his own Priestly power, therefore he broke the
Devils head, and got the victory, and so he won the prize.

And thus have I given a sufficient reason why those that were hanged on a tree
were infamed with a greater curse of reproach than was by any other sort of
capital death that was in use among the Jews or Romans.

Secondly, I come now to examine the time of their burial.

And thirdly, Whether the Land was defiled in case they continued unburied till
after Sunset.

For Mr. Norton says, That in case the body that was hanged, did continue
unburied till after Sunset, it caused the whole land to be desiled
ceremonially.
Reply 7. The time of the burial of the person hanged is not (by the Text,
Deuteronomy. 21. 23.) limited to sunset, as Mr Norton The time of the burial of the
person hanged might be after sunset provided it were done within the compass
of the same natural day which lasted till midnight.
does wrest the words of the Text to speak; But the time limited in the Text is
this, He shall not hang all night upon the tree, but thou shall bury him the
same day; Mark the phrase, He shall not hang all night; Hence it follows, that
he might hang some part of the night, so he did not hang all night; that is to
say, he might hang some part of the night, provided they did bury him within
the limits of the same natural day, for the words of the Text are thus, He
shall not hang all night, but thou shall bury him the same day: And I have at
large showed in my Treatise of Holy Time, that the same natural day was not
ended till midnight, and see more in Sect. 8. In like sort, the Peace Offerings
were commanded to be eaten the same day, in which they were offered, Lev. 7.
15. and yet they might be eaten after sunset, as the speech of the Harlot does
show, in Prove. 7. 9. and for this see Ains. in Lev. 7. 15, 18. and in Lev. 22.
30. Prove. 7. 9.


Secondly, in this particular case of hanging, we see that Joshua did permit
the King of Ai to continue hanging on the tree until the Sun was down. Josh. 8.
29. and therefore seeing he did not command his carcass to be taken down from
the tree until Josh. 8. 29.
the sun was set, it follows, that his carcass could not be buried before
sunset. And thus his crutch is fallen, and therefore all his conclusions that
are built thereon are fallen with it, sa his language is to me.

Thirdly, Though Mr. Norton do cite Junius to his typical sense, yet I find by
conference, that Junius not many lines before those words cited by Mr. Norton,
does plainly deny that the carcass See Junius parallel. l. 2. paral. 51.
thus hanged did defile the land, although it remained unburied after sunset;
he does rather place the defiling of the land in the act of the Judges, in case
they suffered the carcass to continue unburied that day, after the justice of
the Law was satisfied (which was ordinarily satisfied with that days infamy)
and to this purpose also does the Geneva note speak. But I will presently
produce another reason why the Judges were exhorted not to defile the land.

Fourthly, It is very probable by his words, in page 102. that Mr. Norton does
steer his judgment in this point, of defiting the Land, by following the sense
of a corrupt Translation; I mean by following the latter Editions of King
Jameses Translation; The latter Editions of King Jameses Translation of Deuteronomy.
21. 23. is corrupted from the integrity of the first Editions.
for the latter Editions are corrupted from the integrity of the first
Editions. It is most likely that some left handed person (that happily was of
Mr. Nortons judgment) did venture too boldly to alter the Translation from the
integrity of the first Editions, for the first Editions, both the Church Bible,
and some others do run thus, His body shall not remain all night upon the tree:
But thou shall in any wise bury him that day, for he that is hanged is accursed
of God.

At the end of this sentence [He that is hanged is accursed of God] they set a
colon, or two pricks; And then follows another distinct sentence, thus,

That thy Land be not defiled.]

But in the latter Editions, there is a great corruption made, for first, The
colon is omitted. And secondly, There is a parenthesis added to enclose the
former sentence thus,

(For he that is hanged is accursed of God.)

This sentence thus enclosed does quite alter the sense, and makes the
exhortation to the Judges to concur with Mr. Nortons sense, thus, Thou shall in
any wise bury him that day, that thy land be not defiled.

Now according to this corrupt Translation, and the only reason given why the
person hanged must be buried the same day, is, because else the land would be
defiled.

But put out the parenthesis, and put in the colon, as it was in the first
Editions, and then the words will have a quite differing sense.

I grant that the leaving out of the colon might happen through the Printers
oversight, but the enclosing of that sentence in a parenthesis, could not be
done by the Printers oversight, but doubtless that was done on purpose by some
left handed person, as I observed before.

I do therefore earnestly entreat the judicious Presbytery to make search into
this matter, and to cause a Reformation in the next Editions, according to the
integrity of the first.

Fifthly, Let the Text in Deuteronomy. 21. 23. be read according to the first
Editions, and then it will follow, that the only true reason why he that
hanged on a tree must be buried the same day, is, (not because else the land
would be defiled, but) because he that is hanged -- the curse of God; so the
Hebrew is translated in the margin: But there is in this sentence a defect, or
a want of some word, which our Translaters have supplied in the Text by the
word (is) and so they make the Text to run thus, He that is hanged (is) the
curse of God. But the Seventy, with Aquila, and Theodotian read it thus, He is
the curse of God See Torshel on Justif. p. 131.
that is hanged; and Symachus reads it thus, because for the blasphemy of God
he is hanged; And the Chalde paraphrase does render it thus: for because he
sinned before the Lord, he is hanged.

These several Translations and Expositions are considerable; But yet still for
all this, it is a question of some moment, in what sense he that is hanged is
called the curse of God? (...) he still the object of Gods curse upon the land,
as he was whilst he lived in the practice of his sin, before his hanging?
surely that cannot be, seeing justice was executed, and therefore it follows,
that he is now called the curse of God, because his hanging so long upon a
tree, to be gazed on as a visible curse, was to show their greater detestation
of his sin, and so to satisfy the curse of Gods Justice, and so to pacify his
wrath, and so to avert the curse, which else would certainly have been poured
out upon the land, in case the Magistrates had neglected this point of justice,
but because the visible curse of his sin was thus eminently put upon him by the
Magistrates, by hanging up his dead body on a tree, that he might be the
Spectacle thereof as long as the Sun gave any light; The Judges were
admonished, not to turn Justice into cruelty, by letting his dead body to
continue hanging upon the tree all night, but in any wise to bury him that day,
namely, before that natural day was ended (which ended at midnight, as I have
showed in my Treatise of Holy Time) and the reason is added, Because he that is
hanged -- the curse of God; namely, because he that is hanged has born the
visible curse, and thereby has averted the curse of God, which else would
certainly have been poured out upon the land, in case this malefactor had been
suffered to live still in his sin, and so justice being satisfied he must be
buried out of sight that day.

And hence it follows, that he was called the curse of God The true reason why
he that was hanged must be buried the same day, was because his stoning to
death and his hanging on a tree afterward bad appeased Gods anger, and so
removed the curse from the Land.
after that Gods justice was satisfied by the figure Metonymia, as the
sacrifice that was ordained to atone God for sin, was called sin.

So then the true reason, why the Judges were admonished not to let his carcass
that was hanged continue hanging all night, but to bury him the same day, to
cover and hide his carcass in the earth from further public shame and
ignominy, because he had already satisfied Justice, by hanging on a tree to be
gazed on, as long as the day light made him a spectacle, which at some time of
the year might be till it was near midnight, where the natural day ends: So
then the defect or want in the Hebrew Text may be supplied by any word or words
that do explain the true sense, as well as by (is;) As thus, thou shall in any
wise bury him the same day, for he that is hanged to be gazed on as long as the
day gives light to be gazed on, has appeased God, and born the curse from the
land, and thereby he has made atonement for the curse, and so procured Gods
favor to the Land.

And it is most evident by three remarkable examples, that the execution of the
visible curse upon such malefactors did procure atonement to the land.

First, The Lord himself commanded Moses to take the chief Ringleaders of them
that had coupled them to Baal Peor, and to hang them up before the Lord against
the Sun, Numb. 25. 4. Numb. 25. 4.


1 It must be done before the Lord, namely, openly by the public Judges, for
God is still with them in the cause and judgment, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Deuteronomy. 17. 1.
Psa. 82. 1.

2 It must be done against the Sun, namely in the open view of all persons, as
long as the Sun did give any light upon the face of the earth, and because
Phineas did execute judgment upon some of the chief of these sinners,
therefore in ver. 13. he is said to make a^tonement for Israel.

Secondly, David commanded the seven sons of Saul to be hanged up before the
Lord, 2 Samuel 21. 9. namely, by the sentence of justice, but the Gibeonites said
to David in v 6. We will hang them up to 2 Samuel 21. 9.
the Lord, namely, to appease his fierce anger against the land, and in that
respect their hanging is said in ver. 3. to make atonement; and to this sense
the Chalde paraphrase does render the sense of Deu. 21. 23. for because he
sinned before the Lord he is hanged, namely, to appease his wrath.

And all that are hanged before the Lord, that is to say, openly, by the
sentence of these Judges, are said also to be hanged up to the Lord to appease
his wrath, and so both phrases do demonstrate the same thing, and thus to do
Justice and Judgment upon sinners, is more acceptable to the Lord, to atone
his wrath, than sacrifice, Pro. 21. 3.

Thirdly, Achan was a cursed person in his death (though his dead body was not
hanged but burnt with fire) because he had sinned in the cursed thing, namely,
in the consecrated gold which God had cursed to any that did purloin it; and
therefore God said unto Joshua, I will be with you no more except ye destroy
that cursed person, Josh. 7. 12. For Israel has transgressed the Covenant
which I commanded them, ver. 11. But why does he say, that Israel transgressed,
seeing Achan alone sinned in a secret manner. The Answer is, Because it was
Gods will to make such a supreme voluntary Law and Covenant with all Israel,
that if but one man sinned in the excommunicate thing, it should involve all
Israel under the curse, Josh. 6. 18. until they had purged themselves by the
use of means to find out the transgressor, but as soon as they had found out
the transgressor, and had executed Justice, and buried his burnt body under a
heap of stones, the Lord was appeased to the people, and turned from his fierce
wrath, Josh. 7. 25, 26. and so the Camp was cleansed.

Hence I do once more conclude, that the only true reason why he that was
hanged, must be buried the same day, was (not because else the Land would be
ceremonially defiled, as Mr. Norton does argue, but) because one days open
hanging on a tree, as long as the light did last to be gazed on, did satisfy
Gods Justice, and pacify his wrath, and therefore the Judges are admonished
not to let his body hang all night, but in any case to bury him the same day,
because he that is thus hanged has born the curse that else would have fallen
on the land; and the Jews say, That as soon as a Malefactor had satisfied
justice by his See Trap on Gal. 3. 13.
death, then the tree whereon he was hanged, the sword, stone, or napkin,
wherewith such a one was executed, must be buried with them, that no evil
memorial of them might remain, to say, this was the tree, sword, stone, or
napkin, wherewith such a one was executed.

But still this must be remembered, that in some extraordinary cases, God
permitted the Magistrates to let some notorious Malefactors to hang on a Tree,
not only for one day, but also for many days together, and yet the land was
not defiled, but cleansed thereby; of which see more in n. 8.

6 Having now finished the former reason why the person hanged must be buried
the same day, namely, because in the ordinary course of justice one days
hanging on a tree, did satisfy Gods justice, and so remove the curse from the
land, as it is expressed in this sentence, He that is hanged (has born) the
curse of God: And at the end of this sentence, the Geneva and Tindal have made
a full stop, and the other Translations have made a colon, or a half stop, for
the time of his burial: Then Moses proceeds in the next sentence to finish his
former exhortation to the Judges (in verse 22.) That thy land be not defiled,
which the Lord thy God gives thee to inherit; the Context, verse 22. lies
thus, If there be in thee a man, namely, any other man (besides the Rebellious
Son, in verse 18.) that has committed a sin worthy of death, namely, by
stoning, thou shall stone him to death, and then if thou see cause, thou shall
hang up his dead body on a tree, that thy land be not defiled by suffering
such notorious moral sins, and sinners to go unpunished.

This is the only true reason according to the Context, why the Judges are
exhorted to execute exemplary justice on such The whole land might be defiled
by the Judges neglect in suffering notorious Malefactors to go unpunished.
notorious moral sinners; namely, that the land by their neglect of justice be
not defiled, for the Judges were the whole land Representatively (as I have
showed more at large in the Jews Synagogues Discipline.)

And it is evident not only by the Context, that this was the true mind and
meaning of Moses in his exhortation to the Judges, not to defile the land by
pretermitting the execution of exemplary justice on such notorious Malefactors,
but also it is further evident by comparing his exhortation here, with the like
exhortations to the Judges, to cleanse the land from moral defilements, by
executing of exact justice against such moral sinners, which else would defile
the whole land, yea or any other land as well as the land of Canaan, in case
the Magistrates thereof did neglect to execute impartial justice, and to
tolerate moral sinners. See Lev. 18, 24, 25, 27, 28. Number. 35. 31, 32, 33.
Psalm. 106. 38. Ezra 9. 11. Jer. 3. 1, 2, 9. Jer. 16. 18. Ezekiel. 36. 17. Psalm.
24. 5. etc.

But it came to pass, that when Phineas by his extraordinary zeal, did execute
justice upon some of the most notorious Malefactors in Number. 25. that the plague
was stayed, and then the land was cleansed; for by this act of justice (though
he was no Magistrate) yet being stirred up of God in an extraordinary way, to
execute the office of a Magistrate, he is said to make Atonement, or to
reconcile God to the whole land, Number. 25. 23. See Ainsworth also in Number. 35.
33, 39.

These, and such like instances, do evidence that the Judges (as they were the
Representatives of the whole land) might defile the whole land, and make them
guilty of Gods curse due to such notorious moral sinners, in case they did
connive at them, and not execute impartial justice upon them: And this is the
scope of Moses exhortation to the Judges, not to defile the land; and not as
Mr. Norton makes the exhortation to be, to bury the body before Sunset, that
the land be not defiled.

On the contrary, when the Judges were careful to execute exemplary justice on
such notorious Malefactors, they are said to cleanse the land from the objects
of Gods wrath, and to make Atonement for the Land. O that this Exhortation of
Moses might fit fast in the conscience of all Magistrates, both supreme and
inferior, to execute impartial justice against moral sinners, that so they may
cleanse the land of the Objects of Gods wrath, and that the land by their
neglect, might not be defiled!

And O that people would rightly use their liberty, when they have any hand in
the choice of Magistrates, to choose such as fear God, and hate sin!



7 It is most evident that the whole Land was never defiled, by any one
transgression against the Ceremonial Law; I wonder The whole land was never
defiled by any one ceremonial sin.
therefore at Mr. Nortons unadvisedness, in making the person hanged on a tree
to defile the whole Land, in case he was not buried before Sunset.

I grant that he, or any other might be deceived in their judgment, by
following the translation of Deuteronomy. 21. 23. according to the corrupt Edition, as
I have showed before, but the right translation, as it was in the first
Editions, will not afford any such Tenent, if the Context be well weighed.

2 I grant that a great part of the people might be ceremonially defiled; yea
at sometime the greatest part, but not by any one transgression of the
Ceremonial Law, but by sundry kinds of Ceremonial sins, as Ains. shows in
Number. 9. 12.

3 Suppose it could be proved (which cannot be) that the whole land might be
ceremonially defiled by some one person, or by some one act, then I hope it
will also follow by a necessary consequence, that God had ordained and provided
some instituted way for the ceremonial cleansing of the whole land, as well as
for particular persons and places; for doubtless God would not be wanting in
some instituted way of cleansing for all sorts of ceremonial defilements.

But I cannot find any such instituted Ordinance for the cleansing of the whole
land for any one ceremonial defilement; neither can I find any one ceremonial
defilement greater than that which happened by the touch of a dead person, for
he that touched a dead person, though he dyed in his bed, yea though he were
truly godly in his life time, was as much defiled by the ceremonial Law, as he
that touched the most notorious Malefactor after he was hanged on a tree; and
he that touched any dead person in the day time, was as much defiled by the
sentence of the Ceremonial Law, as he that touched a dead Malefactor in the
night time after Sunset, and he that touched but the limb of a dead child,
was as much defiled, as he that touched a whole dead child, all that touched
the dead, though never so many, were all alike defiled in the highest degree of
ceremonial uncleanness, until they had cleamed themselves according to the
instituted way of cleansing in Number. 19. 11, 15, 16 etc.

It is a vain conceit to think that the whole land might be defiled
ceremonially by permitting the person hanged, to hang on the tree after
Sunset, the whole land could not be defiled thereby, unless every person in the
land, did come one by one to touch his dead carcass, which is absurd to think
they would do, and yet it must be done, in case Mr. Norton do prove that the
whole land was defiled by the Malefactors carcass unburied after Sunset; And
by this it appears that his knowledge in the Ceremonial Laws, is very short of
what it ought to be, or else he would never have broached this fiction.

8 It is evident that the hanging of a Malefactor on a tree after Sunset, did
not defile the land ceremonially (see also n. 2.) for David, according to the
desire of the Gibeonites, which was ordered, doubtless, according to Gods
special positive direction, commanded that seven of Saul's sons should be given
to them to be hanged on a tree, and to continue hanging so long as until God
should manifest himself to be attoned and reconciled to the Land, by sending
rain to remove the present famine, for there was a famine in the days of David
three years together; And David inquired of the Lord, and the Lord answered, It
is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel
21. 1. therefore David said to the Gibeonites, in verse 3. What shall I do for
you, and wherewith shall I make the Atonement, that ye may bless the
inheritance of the Lord; They answered to the King in verse 5. (doubtless by
some special voluntary positive command from God) Let seven of his sons be
delivered to us, and we will hang them up unto the Lord, namely, to appease the
Lords wrath (that was so justly provoked by Saul's sin against the whole land)
for Saul was the Representative of the whole land, and therefore he ought to
have protected, and not killed the innocent Gibeonites, as he had done out of
his furious zeal, by which notorious moral sin of his, he defiled the whole
land; But by the hanging of his seven sons on a tree for many days together,
the land was cleansed from the guilt of Saul's moral sin, and not defiled
ceremonially; if it had been defiled ceremonially by their hanging on the tree
after Sunset, then doubtless it would have been recorded in what manner the
Land was cleansed again, but no such cleansing is recorded, therefore no such
ceremonial defilement did fall upon the land by their hanging many days after
sunset.

I grant that this act of Justice in hanging seven of Saul's sons, for his sin,
was done by Gods special direction, and by his supreme positive command, and
not by the written Law of God, for no personal crimes were laid to the charge
of these seven sons of Saul, by the Judicial Laws of Moses, and therefore
except some crime against the Law of Moses had been legally proved against
them, they could not by the justice of Moses revealed Laws have been put to
death, much less could they have been hanged on seven trees for their fathers
sin, whereof they might be innocent.

Conclusion.
1 Hence it does necessarily follow, That God has not revealed in the
Scriptures all the rules of his Relative Justice, but he The rule of Gods
Relative Justice is, his secret will, as well as his revealed will, Se^ cha. 2.
at Reply to the 5. Prop* and in P. Martyr on Romans p* 251. and see Rutherford on
the Covenant p. 26. etc,
does still keep a power of Relative Justice in his own hands, according to the
counsel of his own Will, as it is evident by this act of Gods special Justice
done upon the seven sons of Saul, that happily were innocent in the point of
Saul's furious slaughter of the Gibeonites.

Goubtless God gave some special supreme voluntary positive command both to
David and to the Gibeonites touching the hanging of the seven sons of Saul; and
after the same manner he gave a special positive command to Abraham to kill his
Son for a Sacrifice, or else it had been an extreme wickedness and gross
disobedience to Gods moral Law, to kill his Son; and the like wickedness it
would have been in David and in the Gibeonites to hang up these seven Sons of
Saul, without a special positive command from God.

I shall not with some (says Mr. Rutherford, in Christ's dying p. 139. at
Asser. 3.) affirm that (which in the general is true) a will contrary to Gods
revealed command and will, called voluntas signi (which is our moral rule to
oblige us) is a sin; but a will contrary to Gods decree, called voluntas been
placiti, which is not our Rule obliging (except the Lord be pleased to impose
it on us as a moral Law) is a sin.

Secondly, Hence it follows, that the Law of burying the person hanged the same
day, was in relation to the ordinary course of Justice.

Thirdly, Hence it follows, that in some extraordinary cases the supreme Judges
had power to increase the length of time in hanging on a tree; At for example,
David commanded that the hands and feet of Recbab and Banab should be hanged up
for many days together, now by the Levitical Law every member of a dead body
did defile as much as the whole body, See Ainsw. in Numb. 19. 11. And therefore
David knew that their hanging many days on a tree, would not defile the land
ceremonially, but that it would cleanse it from their moral defilement, 2 Samuel
4. 11, 12. See also our larger Annotations on ver. 12.

From these sundry considerations it is evident, That Mr. Nortons typical sense
of Dan. 21. 23, on which he does build all his Arguments, does fail him, and
therefore all his Arguments do prove no better but groundless falacies; or to
use his own language, he does but put an abominable inference upon the
Apostles, and upon the Spirit of God speaking by him.

The sum of what I have said in the two former Sections, may be drawn up into
this Argument.

That Act of Justice which does cleanse the Land from moral defilements,
cannot be said to defile the Land ceremonially.

But the hanging of malefactors on a tree by an act of Justice, till after
sunset, does cleanse the land.

Therefore, that act of Justice in letting such malefactors hang till after
sunset, does not defile the Land ceremonially.

SECT. III.
BUt Mr. Norton does still labor to prove, that the curse of hanging on a tree
did typifie, that Christ did bear the moral curse on the cross for our
redemption.

For says he in p. 95.
There were malefactors hanged before the giving of this Law of Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
Yet we read not that they were accursed, during the space between the giving of
this Law, and the passion of Christ, a malefactor hanged out of Judea was not
accursed; In Judea no person how great a malefactor soever, if not hanged, was
thus accursed. The person hanged was equally accursed, whether he was hanged
alive or dead, whether he was hanged after this manner or after that, Jewish or
Roman; whether his crime were more heinous or not so heinous; yea, for ought
appears, though he were innocent, yet if hanged judicially, he was accursed,
since the passion of Christ, hanging in Judea is not ceremonially accursed.


Reply 8. Some of these unsound notions I find in Weams third Volume on Dan.
21. and also in his four Degenerations, 327. where he pleads, to little
purpose, for the typical sense as Mr. Norton does: But from all Mr. Nortons
imaginary notions heaped up together, what is the inference, but this? That the
curse in Deuteronomy. 21. 23. did typifie that Christ was to redeem us from the curse
of the Law, by bearing the moral curse in our stead on the cross.

But I have sufficiently showed already that this inference is builded but upon
false premises, and therefore all the Arguments used to prove it do vanish to
nothing.

Secondly, But if his inference had been no more but this, That therefore the
Law in Deuteronomy. 21. 23. was peculiar to the Commonwealth of the Jews (and not
common to other Nations) it might have been granted to him. And the like may be
said of diverse other political Laws of Moses, that they were in force only in
the land of Canaan, and that neither before Moses time, nor after Christ's
death, they were in force, etc. I grant also that there were many Judicial Laws
that were partly civil and partly ceremonial, and so it may be granted that the
Law in Deu. 21. 23. had some ceremonial considerations about the burial of the
dead body, for it defiled all that touched it. But yet it will not thence
follow, that it defiled the whole land, in case it continued unburied till
after sunset, and therefore it did not typifie that Christ should bear the
moral and eternal curse on the tree for our redemption, which is the very point
that Mr. Norton has undertaken to make good from Deuteronomy. 21. 23. This Exposition
(says Mr. Norton in p. 95. 96.) in making the man that was hanged on a tree, a
ceremonial curse. And Christ hanged on a tree a moral curse; is both generally
received, and every way agreeing to the analogy of Faith, which is a rule of
interpreting Scripture.



Reply 9. It is not so generally received as Mr. Norton would persuade his
Reader, it is well enough known that there were and are many godly and
judicious ones, that dare not hold that Christ suffered the moral and eternal
curse for our redemption.

First, I do not find that Peter Martyr held that Christ suffered Hell
torments, or the second death.

It is objected, says Peter Martyr, that Christ for our sake In Romans 9. 1,
(...). in p. 240.
did not only give his life upon the cross, but also that he was made a curse,
and was also after a sort forsaken of the Father, when he cried, My God, my God
why have thou forsaken me?

And after a short Answer to another Objection; he Answers thu^,

The second doubt (faith he) is concerning Christ; for although he for our
sakes suffered death, yet was he not in very deed separated from God but his
humanity was helped when he suffered on the cross all extreme pains; he was
also made a curse as touching the punishment of the Law, which punishment he
suffered for our salvation sake, and he was counted as a blasphemer, etc, and
being as it were convicted of these crimes, he was condemned. But yet was he
not by eternal damnation separated from God.

In this Answer Peter Martyr has left his judgment upon record how Christ was
forsaken on the cross, and how he was made a curse by hanging on the tree; he
was made a curse, says he, as touching the punishment of the Law, in Deuteronomy. 21.
23. and, says he, he was counted as a Blasphemer, and an ungodly person; and
being, as it were, convicted of these crimes, he was condemned, but yet was he
not by eternal damnation, (namely, by suffering that, which to the creature is
eternal damnation) separated from God.

By this answer it is evident, That he held that Christ suffered no other curse
but the outward curse of hanging on a tree, just as Chrisostom and Theephilact
spoke, as I have cited them in the former Chap. in 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Mr. Norton said, ere while, that his exposition was generally received, but
here he may see two of the ancient Divine^, and Peter Martyr cited against him,
and Peter Martyrs Answer is to an Objection that was raised from such as held
as Mr. Norton does.

Fourthly, Bucer makes Christ to suffer no other (penal hell or) in^ernum, but
his bodily death, as I have cited him in Chap 7. Sect. 2.

Fifthly, I have also diligently perused all Tindals works, and the works of
Jo. Frith, and of Dr. Barns, being three godly Martyrs, and they do all oppose
the popish satisfaction, and by occasion thereof, they speak often of the true
satisfaction that was made by Christ, and I find not a word in any of them that
concurs with Mr. Nortons sense of Hell torments, but with the Dialogue sense of
satisfaction by his bodily death and sacrifice.

Sixthly, I find that others do cite Bullenger and Zanchy as not cleaving to
Mr. Nortons Tenent of Hell Torments. But I have not thoroughly searched them,
but in a great part I have, and can find no such thing in them; Let them that
please search them fully.

Seventhly, Mr. Broughton and his followers, which to this day are many, that
are both pious and learned; and they do reject the Tenent of Hell Torments on
the cross, as no Article of their faith.

I will cite only two passages out of Mr. Broughton, besides what I have cited
in the Dialogue.

1 (Says he) That assertion, that our Lord suffered Hell Torments, In his
positions on Had^s p. 13.
appears not true by any Scripture; true modesty (says he) would look to
Scripture phrases in the handling of our redemption.

2 (Says he) to say that our Lords soul tasted the second death, is the
highest degree of blasphemy against our Lord, and In his short Reply to Bilson
p. 22, 25.
(says he) in p. 25. The term second death used twice in the Apocalips, is
taken from the Thalmudistes, and therefore by them it must be expounded: And in
their sense (says he) it is The second death is a misery to the soul in the
perpetual hatred of God.
ever taken for a misery to the Soul in the perpetual hatred of God; and
agreeable to this, I have showed in chapter 5. that Hell Torments and the
second Death is always inflicted from the hatred of God. Onkelos has it in
Deuteronomy. 33. and Jonathan in Isa. 22. and Rabbis infinitely.

But says Mr. Norton (to avoid manifest blasphemy) Christ was never in Gods
hatred.
Therefore he might as well conclude, that he never suffered the essential
torments of Hell, nor the second Death, seeing they are not inflicted without
Gods hatred. And says Bro. in Rev^l. p. 301. N. N. missed most Atheanly, more
than ever any since the Devil deceived Adam, to say that our Lord was in the
second Death.

2 Mr. Ainsworth on Deuteronomy. 33. 6. says, the Chalde does thus expound it, Let
Ruben not die the second death. And says he, Jonathan in his Targum
paraphraseth thus, Let Ruben live in this world and not die with the death
wherewith the wicked shall dye in the world to come. And says he in Psalm. 49.
11. The Chalde says, That wicked wise men die the second death, and are
adjudged to Gehenna. And says he in his preface to Genisis p. 6. The second
death in Rev. 20. 8. is used by Jonathan in Isa. 65. 6. 15. and says he in
Genesis 17. 14. Mamony in Treat. of Repentance, c. 8. Sect. 1. Speaking of eternal
death says, And this is the cutting off written in the Law, as it is said (in
Numb. 15. 31.) That soul shall be cut off, he shall be cut off; which we have
heard expounded thus, cut off in this world, and cut off in the world to come.

3 Dr. Hammon in his Annotation on Rev. 20. 6. says, this phrase, the second
Death is four times used in this book, and it seems to be taken from the Jews,
who use it proverbially, for final, utter, irreversible destruction. So in the
Jerusalem Targum, Deuteronomy. 33. 6. Let Ruben live, and let him not dye the second
death, by which the wicked dye in the world to come.

4 Mr. Broughton says, That the ancient godly Hebrew Doctors that lived after
Ezra, seeing the increase of Sadduces, In his Reduct. on Dan 9.
they did frame diverse terms to express the world to come, both in relation to
the godly, and to the wicked Epicurean Sadduces, and those terms in their sense
does the New Testament approve, and follow; and they made the term,
Second-death, to express the immortal misery that belongs to the soul of the
wicked in the world to come, they made the spiritual death of the soul by
original sin, and the death of the body, to be the death of this world: And
Austin speaks just as the Dialogue does (as I have cited him in Chap. 16. Reply
20.) All sorts of death that men do suffer in this world, is counted but the
first, in relation to the Second death in the world to come.
That the spiritual death of sin, and the death of the body is the First-death,
because it belongs to all men in this world; and so does Zanchy in his Sermons,
page 162. and that the Seconddeath belongs only to the wicked after this life
is ended. But Mr. Norton opposes this division of death in page 115. and page
120. and makes a threefold death to confound the Reader about the term
Second-death in Rev. 14. and so he evades his answer, to the main scope of the
Dialogues Argument (against Christ's suffering of the Second-death) which is
this, namely, That the Second-death cannot be suffered in this life, where the
First-death only is suffered by Gods appointment. But on the contrary, he
labors to maintain that Christ suffered the Second-death in this world, by
Gods extraordinary dispensation. But I have formerly answered that the Papists
may in like fort maintain the Miracles that they ascribe to their legion of
Saints, if they may but fly to Gods extraordinary dispensation.

8 Mr. Anthony Wotton denied Mr. Nortons Tenent, though for some respects best
known to himself, he was sparing to publish De Recon. pec. par. 2. l. 1. c. 11.
n. 8. and more clearly in c. 18. n. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
his judgment; and yet he has left enough in print to witness what I say; and
it is also further evident in this, that he denied that God imputed our sins
to Christ as the meritorious cause of his sufferings, as I have showed in the
former Chapter.

9 I find by conference with such as have been well read in the Ancient Divines,
that nothing in them without wresting their sense, can be found that does
evidence, that they held that God did legally impute our sins to Christ, as the
meritorious cause of inflicting Hell Torments on him.

10 The Dialogue has cited some eminent Divines both for Learning and Piety,
that have denied that Christ suffered Helltorments (like the two witnesses of
Gods truth) even when that doctrine bare the greatest sway, as Mr. Robert Smith
that suffered much for the truth, being silenced through the iniquity of the
times, and Mr. Robert Wilmot, a man eminent for learning and the power of
godliness, and Mr. Christopher Carlisle, a judicious Expositor, and Mr. Nichols
a student of the Inne^-Temple. All which were far from siding with Popish
Tenants, as some (to blast the truth) are apt to say, that scarce any deny
Christ's suffering of Gods vindicative wrath, but Papists.

11 I have on Psalm. 22. 1. cited our larger Annotation, that goes quite
contrary to Mr. Nortons strain.

12 I have cited other eminent Divines in Chap. 2. Sect. 2. that do hold much
differing from Mr. Norton.

And it is a known thing among the Learned, that sub judice lis est, It is a
controversy not yet unanimously resolved, and therefore I presume, I shall
meet with some judicious Readers that will be able to judge, whether the
Dialogue, and the truth therein contained, has been rightly censured by Mr.
Norton, and by those that set him on work. This Proposition (says Mr. Norton)
in page 96. Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree: is a typical Proposition,
and contains in it these two truths:

1 That every one that hangs upon a Tree in Judea, from the promulgation of
that Curse, to the Passion of Christ inclusively, is ceremonially accursed, i.
e. All that are h^nged are so infamed, that the carcass of, uch, in case they
be not buried before Sunset, shall defile the land.

2 That Christ in testimony that he redeemed us by bearing the moral curse,
should be hanged on a Tree.



Reply 10. Neither of the two Propositions are true in themselves, much less
are they deducible from the Text in Deuteronomy. 21. 23.

1 I have sufficiently showed already, That this exhortation, defile not the
land, is not connexed, but separated from the former sentence by a colon, or by
a full prick as the Geneva and Tindal make it, and that it has reference to
the execution and exact justice upon Malefactors, as in verse 21 22.

2 That no Ceremonial sin did defile the whole land.

3 That hanging on a Tree longer than Sunset, did not defile the land; and
that sometimes hanging many days together, did not defile, but cleanse the
land from moral sins.

4. Therefore seeing all Mr. Nortons Arguments laid together, have not strength
enough to prove his first typical exposition of Deuteronomy. 21. 23. much less have
they strength sufficient to prove his second Proposition, which cannot be
true, unless the first be true.

But yet Mr. Norton makes a great show for his exposition, by citing Junius,
Piscator, Parker, and Mr. Ainsworth; as concurring with his sense, therefore I
will make a short Reply.
Reply 11. The two first (I perceive by conference with such as have perused
them) speak very moderately and sparingly, and not so full as Mr. Norton does;
but suppose they were fully of his mind, yet that could not prove no more but
this, That Mr. Norton is not alone in his exposition and collections, and so
much may the Dialogue say; but all that are judicious do know, that it is not
man's consent, but Scripture rightly interpreted, and Arguments drawn from a
right interpretation that must determine the point.

3 I have not yet examined what Mr. Parker says.

4 As for Mr. Ainsworth, he is a little too bold to make him full of his
judgment; let his mind and meaning be examined by conferring with his own
words in his Annotations in Genesis 3. 15. in Number. 21. 9. in Exodus 32. 32. in Lev.
6. 21. in Psalm. 69. 4. Besides, I received some letters from him in his
lifetime about this controversy, whereby I know that his judgment was not
thoroughly established one way or other; and I know by some expressions of his,
that he could not hold that Christ suffered Hell Torments, though he did hold
that Christ suffered the wrath of God in some degree; and I find that other
learned Divines do hold as he did, namely, That Christ suffered the wrath of
God in some degree, and yet they deny that he suffered Hell Torments, and the
Second-death, which is also directly contrary to Mr. Nortons fundamentals; for
he holds just satisfaction by a just suffering of the essential Curse of
Helltorments.

Dr. Preston says, That the curse of God does consist in four things.

1 When God does separate a man from grace, goodness, and In his Tre^tise of
Love, p. 176.
holiness. 2 When he is separated from the presence of the Lord; from the joy,
from the influence, and from the protection of God. 3 When he is cursed in
outward things. 4 When he shall suffer the eternal curse at the day of
judgment.
But now was Christ thus cursed of God?

Methinks it should make a godly man tremble to say so, and yet Mr. Norton
approves of Luther for saying so in page 92, 93. who durst allege this place,
says Luther, Accursed is every one that hang^ on a Tree, and apply it to
Christ. Like as Paul then applied this sentence to Christ, even so, may we
apply unto Christ not only the whole 27. Chapter of Deuteronomy, but also may
gather up all the Curses of Moses Law together, and expound the same of Christ;
for as Christ is innocent in this general Law touching his person, so it healso
in all the rest; and as he is guilty in this general Law, in that he is made a
curse for us, and hanged upon the Cross as a wicked man, a blasphemer, a
murderer, and a traitor, even so is he guilty also in all others; for all the
Curses of the Law, are heaped together, and laid upon him.

Hence it follows from Luthers words, approved by Mr. Norton, that the said
Curses mentioned by Dr. Preston, were laid upon Christ; or else Mr. Norton must
not approve of this speech of Luther.

Mr. Rutherfurd propounds this Question; How could Christ In Christ's dying. p.
560, 561.
be a Curse? There is (says he) a thing intrinsecally and fundamentally
cursed, and there is a thing extrinsecally and effectively cursed: Now (says
he) none but he that sins, is intrinsecally and fundamentally cursed; for in
this regard, it is a personal evil, Christ was not intrinsecally abominable,
and execrable to God, etc.

This distinction of extrinsecally and effectively cursed, was contrived only
for the sake of Christ, or else doubtless, he would have given some other
instance of his assertion.

I grant, That Mr. Rutherfurd did hold that Christ did suffer the moral Curse,
as Mr. Norton d^^h; But yet he held it arbytrary to the Lawgiver to execute the
curse on Christ, rather in the equivalency than in the proper kind of it; and
therefore he says, That some punishments may well be changed, the one for the
other, as Gods hating and abominating the sinner, was changed into Gods
forsaking of Christ, when he complained, My God, my God, etc.

And secondly, says he, Christ was not intrinsecally cursed as the sinner who
sins in person is; and then he concludes, that the kind of punishment which
Christ suffered, was arbytrary to the Lawgiver.

But Mr. Norton denies it to be arbytrary, for says he, in page 10. The
Omnipotent had so limited himself by his Law Mr. Nerton holds satisfaction by
Christ's suffering the essential curse in kind, and yet he holds alteration to
equivalency.
in Genesis 2. 17. that he could not alter; and says he in page 146. 143. though
in many typical redemptions, God accepted a price, and spared life, yet not so
in the Antitype; No price (says he) can dispense in the case of the Antitype:
And says he, in page 122. Christ was tormented without any forgiveness, God
spared him nothing of the due debt, he had not the least drop of water to ease
him of the least particle of suffering that was due according to justice: And
says he, in page 23. he suffered the whole, essential, properly penal death of
the Curse, that is, the whole essential punishment thereof, was executed upon
Christ.

By these fundamental Propositions, he must reject any alteration to the way of
equivalency; and yet he is sometimes forced to fly to equivalency, as I have
noted it in Chap. 4.

I confess, I cannot but wonder that Mr. Norton does keep no more exactly to
his principles of payment in kind, but that he is forced to fly sometimes to
equivalency.

The rest that follows in Mr. Norton on Gal. 3. 13. is but the same in true
substance that has already been examined, and confounded: And that which
follows about the Priesthood, and Sacrifice of Christ, I have examined at the
end of my Examination of Psalm. 22. 1. and Mat. 27. 46.

CHAP. XVI.
SECT. I.
Mr. Norton propounds this Question, in p. 56.
How do you prove this sorrow and complaint (of Christ) to have proceeded from
the fear of a bodily death?


Reply 1. THe Dialogue does prove it by two Reasons. First, Says the Dialogue,
do but consider what a horrid thing, to true humane nature, the death of the
body is, and then consider that Christ had a true humane nature, like to all
other men, except in the point of sin, and therefore why should not he be
troubled with the fear of death, as much as his humane nature could bear,
without sin?

Mr. Norton does Answer thus,
Because regular affections, such as Christ's were, moved according to the
nature of the object, so much therefore as bodily death is a less evil than
eternal death, so much the regular trouble of humane nature conflicting
therewithal, is less than that trouble which it is capable of suffering, in
case of conflicting with eternal death.


Reply 2. He says, That Christ conflicted with eternal death, and that the
regular trouble of his humane nature, was in relation to that death: They may
believe his bare word that please; and he knows that the Dialogue does all
along deny it, and I have also taken away his proof in other places; therefore
the reason of the Dialogue does stand good and firm still.

The second Reason of the Dialogue is this,

Do but consider that all mankind ought to desire and endeavor to preserve
their natural lives as much as in them lies, in the use of means, in obedience
to the sixth command, and therefore seeing Christ, as he was true man, could not
prevent his death by the use of means, he was bound to be troubled with the
fear of death, as much as any other man.

Mr. Norton in p. 57. does answer thus.
It is more than manifest that his trouble exceeded the trouble of any other
man, as concerning mere natural death.


Reply 3. It is more then manifest that he was to be troubled Christ did fear
death regularly more than other men can do, because his pure nature was not
subject to death as ^c^s is. In his War and Peace, chapter 36. an^ I have cited Mr.
^^all to this sense in chapter 17. at Reply 25. Christ both in his combat with
Satan, and also in the formality of his death, by his Priestly order, did all
by way of Covenant, and not by condition of nature.
with the fear of a bodily death more than any other man, because the
constitution of his nature and natural spirits, was more pure than the nature
of other men, and therefore he must manifestly abhor it more than other men,
for he was not made subject to death by nature as all other men are; all other
men by reason of original sin are born the bondslave^ of Satan, Death is their
Birthright, and therefore they abhor it not in a regular manner, but with a
dull slavish spirit, but because Christ's nature was conceived by* the Holy
Ghost without original sin, therefore he was not born the bondslave of death.
Death has no right (says Peter Martyr in Romans p. 121.) where there is no sin,
unless we will say that God does punish the innocent, and hence it follows,
that the pure constitution of his nature must needs be toubled with the regular
fear of his bodily death, more than other men can be.

His death says Grotius was not determined by any Law (as Mr. Norton affirms)
but by agreement, and as it were by special Covenant made with his Father, who
upon that condition promised him not only the highest glory, but a seed to
serve him for ever. This speech of Grotius is worth our marking. And in chapter 2.
I have showed more at large that the death of Christ was a death of Covenant,
and no^ o^ condition of nature, as ours is. And in relation to his Covenant,
and to the rich reward of his death by Gods Covenant, his rational soul did
always desire to die, but yet that desire did no way hinder his natural and
vital soul from fearing the ill usage of his pure nature by Satan and hi^
instruments.

Secondly, I find this to be a received maxim among the learned, that the
bodily pains which Christ indur^d, were See Mr. Burges on Just. p 82 and Dr.
Wil^iams in his seven Golden Candlestick. p 453.
more sensible to his nature, than the like pains can be to other men, because
of the most excellent temper, and tender Constitution of his body, and
therefore his vital and sensitive soul (which is the bond of union between the
immortal soul and the body) was quicker in operation than other men's spirits
can be, with the dread and fear of his ignominious death.

That speech of our Savior is emphatical, in Heb. 10. 5. A Heb. 10. 5. The
excellent temper, and tender constitution of Christ's humane nature made him
more sensible of fear, them, and pain, than other men can be.
body have thou prepared me, namely, by sending the Holy Ghost to prepare the
seed of the woman for my humane nature, that it may be of a more excellent
temper, and tender constitution than any other man's can be, and therefore that
it may be touched with the objects of fear, ignominy, and pain more eminently
than other men's can be: and therefore as it behoved God to prepare such a body
on purpose for him; so it behoved Christ to be made like unto his brethren, and
to be touched in an eminent manner with the sense of our passions and
infirmities, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, and so in
particular he must be eminently touched with the fears of death, Heb. 2. 14. 17.

And so it became God the Father to consecrate the Prince of our salvation
through sufferings, and how else did it become God to consecrate him, but by
making his obedience perfect through sufferings; and therefore said Christ to
God, A body have thou prepared me, thou have molded it, and organized it on
purpose to be touched with the tender sense and feeling of man's infirmities in
my sensitive soul, the better to exemplify the perfection of my patience, and
obedience through all my sufferings; It is no marvel then, that seeing the
constitution of his body and spirits, was thus transcendently tender, that his
soul-troubles are expressed by all the Evangelists, to be more than other men's
can be, as concerning their mere bodily sufferings and death.

But says Mr. Norton in page 57.
Other men conflicting with death by reason of sin, do not conflict only with
death, other men conflicting with natural death, conflict also often with
eternal death, Christ according to you conflicted only with a natural death;
how then do you say without any distinction, that he was bound to be troubled
with the fear of death as much as any other man?


Reply 4. I reply to the Interrogation that Christ's troubled fear of death was
wholly Regular, but other men's fear, is for Christ feared his ignominion^ death
after the rule of fear, and not after the example of this o^ that man.
the most part irregular; Christ's fear therefore must not be compared to this,
or that particular man's fear, as Mr. Nortons kind of arguing does import to the
less wary Reader; but his fear must be considered in relation to that disease
of evil which was opposite to the perfection of his nature; for by the rule of
Gods Creation, Adam and Christ were perfect in nature, and not subject to
curses, and therefore according to the Rule of Contraries, the more ignominy
and pains of death they must suffer, the more they must abhor it more than
other men that are the slaves of death by nature; the soul and body in the
first creation, were united in all perfection after Gods Image, and therefore
all ignominy, torments, and death must needs be an abhorring in an higher
degree than it can be to other men, and therefore it was most suitable to
Christ's regular constitution to manifest his exceeding troubled fear of his
ignominious, and painful lingering death, more than any other man can do in a
regular manner.

But says Mr. Norton in page 57.
Christ according to you conflicted only with a natural death, and he does very
often charge the Dialogue with this expression of a natural death, as in page
156, 158, 159, 164, etc.


Reply 5. This I believe is a false charge; I do not remember Christ's death was
not a natural death.
that the Dialogue does any where call the death of Christ a natural death; but
it does carefully shun that term, as altogether unfit, because the death of
Christ was supernatural. The Dialogue holds that Christ was not subject to a
natural death, as sinners are from the curse of original sin in Genesis 3. 19, as
I have showed a little before, and shall do it again toward the end of this
Chapter.

Secondly, But yet the Dialogue does often call the death of Christ a true
bodily death (in opposition to Mr. Nortons spiritual death) with this
explanation; that his death was such a kind of bodily death, that it was also a
mediatorial death and sacrifice.

If Mr. Norton had not been more than ordinary blinded with prejudice against
the Dialogue, he could not so often have mistaken the words and sense of the
Dialogue, as I have noted it also elsewhere, yea in page 153. he says, That
Christ suffered not only a natural, but a spiritual death.

But says Mr. Norton in page 57.
Christ's mere inability as man, to prevent death by the use of means, or other
men's inability thereto, and that at such times when they were not wanting on
their part; neither was it their duty to endeavor continuance of life, but on
the contrary, to give up themselves to death, such as was the present case of
Christ, and was long before the case of Isaak, and sometimes has been the case
of Martyrs, who notwithstanding have given up their lives with joy, cannot be
looked at as a reason of his, or their being bound to be so troubled with the
fear of death.


Reply 6. I shall speak the briefer to this inference, because I have already
showed in Reply 3. That the humane nature of Christ was privileged from death,
and from the fear of death, and from all other miseries by nature; But yet such
was his infinite and eternal love to the Elect that were fallen in Adam, that
according to the Council of the Trinity, he entered into a Covenant with his
Father, to take upon him the seed of the deceived woman, with our infirmities,
and to enter the Lists, and to combat with Satan that had a Commission given
him to pierce him in the foot-soals, with an ignominious death, and therefore
he covenanted to manifest the truth of his humane nature, in fearing and
abhorring such a kind of usage for the salvation sake of all the Elect: And
says Rutherfurd on the Covenant, page 342. God by a permissive decree,
appointed the crucifying of the Lord of life, but as touching his approving and
commanding will, he did neither will the crucifying of his Son, but forbids,
and hates it as execrable murder.

1 Then consider Christ's troubled natural fear of death materially, with all
the circumstances of ignominy and tortures from the Devil and his Instruments,
according to Gods declared permission in Genesis 3. 15. and then it was his duty
to stir up his sensitive soul to be tenderly, and eminently touched with a
trembling fear, and with a manifest abhorring of this kind of usage.

2 But consider his ignominious and painful death formally, namely, with the
reward that was annexed to it by Gods Covenant, which was that he should
thereby merit the salvation of all the Elect; and then I say, It was the duty
of his rational soul not to fear, but earnestly to desire to perform this
combat with Satan, and to suffer him to do his worst; and therefore in this
regard, he said, I delight to do thy will, O God, thy Law is in my heart, Heb.
10. And I desire to eat this Passover, this Type of my death, before I suffer.

3 Christ's humane nature knew perfectly by the revealed will of God, in Genesis 3.
15. that God had armed the Devil against him, with an express permission to use
him as a sinful Malefactor, and to pierce him in the foot-soals, and in this
combat, he knew it was the declared will of God, that he should encounter
him (not with the power of his Godhead, but) with his humane nature only, as
it was accompanied with our infirmities, of fear, sorrow, etc. and therefore by
his Covenant he was bound to express and manifest his troubled natural fear of
such an unnatural usage, and accordingly he declared it to his three Apostles
that he took with him to be witnesses, that he did then begin to be sorrowful,
and very heavy, saying unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even to the
death, Mat. 26, 37, 38, 39. Mat. 26. 38, 39.
and then he went a little further from them, and fell on his face, and prayed,
saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; and this
request he made three times over, because it was of absolute necessity that
that cup should pass from him, namely, the cup of his natural fear.

I have showed in the Dialogue, page 46. that the word Cup, is put for a
measure, or portion of any thing, either of joy and comfort, or of ignominy and
pain, or of fear and sorrow, and at this time he was very heavy and sorrowful;
and therefore the cup that he does so earnestly deprecate, is the cup, or
measure, or portion of his present natural fear.

He does not in this place (as I apprehend) deprecate his ignominious and
painful death, but the fear and dread which his sensitive soul had of it at
this present, and he was heard and delivered from his natural fear, or else he
could not have laid down his life by his own will, desire and power, as he had
covenanted, Joh. 10. 17, 18. But as soon as he had obtained a confirmation by
his sweating prayers against this his natural fear, then when the band was come
to apprehend him, he was fearless, and said unto Peter, Put up thy sword again
into its place, for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword;
think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give
me more Mat. 26 52, 53, 54.
then twelve legions of Angels? But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled,
that say, Thus it must be: The Scriptures in Genesis 3. 15. etc. say, that I must
be thus apprehended, condemned, and executed by the power of Satan and his
instruments, Thus it must be, I must be thus used, as you shall now see me to
be by these Arch-instruments of Satan; yea thus it must be of necessity, even
by the necessity of the voluntary Decree and Covenant, and therefore I must be
voluntary also in the performance of this combat, and not admit of any
obstruction to my Combarter by thy sword, he must by Gods declared permission,
have his liberty to do his worst to provoke my patience, and I must do my duty
by continuing constant in my obedience, through all his assaults: But John does
relate our Saviors Joh. 18. 1^.
words to Peter thus, Put up thy sword into thy sheath, the cup which my Father
has given me, shall I not drink it? namely, that portion of my ignominious and
painful sufferings which my Father has appointed me to undergo, as he has
declared it in Genesis 3. 15. Here you see that Christ did not now dread this cup
of his ignominious and painful sufferings, as he did the fear of this cup in
Matthew. 26 37. Then it was necessary before he prayed, that his natural
infirmities of fear and sorrow should appear, but now it was as necessary after
he had obtained his request, that his natural infirmities should not appear;
and therefore he said to Peter, Shall I not drink it?

4 I have showed from Mr. Rutherfurd in Chap. 2. that Christ's desire that the
cup might pass from him, was no sin, because the command of God to lay down his
life was not a moral command (as Mr. Norton unadvisedly does affirm) for if his
death had been required by a moral command, then his desire that the cup might
pass from him, had been a sin (and then his natural fear of death had been a
sin also) but Gods command was a mere positive command, and that kind of
command, says Mr. Rutherfurd, did never root out his natural desire to
preserve his own life, seeing he submitted his desire to Gods will; The like
instance he gives of Abraham's desire, when God commanded him to kill his only
Son for a sacrifice: And though Mr. Rutherfurd holds that Christ suffered
Hell Torments, Heb. 5. 7.
yet he denies (as the Dialogue does) that the word Fear in Heb. 5. 7. is to be
understood of his fear of Hell Torments; he expounds it (as the Dialogue does)
on the Covenant, page 362.

But still I rather think (as I said before) that Christ did not desire simply
at any time to be freed from death, for that had been to desire to be freed
from the performance of his Covenant; but only from the cup of his natural
fear, and from his present natural distrust of his ignominious usage by his
ignominious and painful death; and in this prayer and supplication of his, he
was heard and delivered, Heb. 5. 7. and this request was of necessity to be
obtained, or else he could not have fulfilled his Covenant, which was, that he
would lay down his life by his own free will desire, and power, even by the
active power, and joint concurrence of both his natures, Joh. 10. 17. 18. and
this command he could not fulfill until he had obtained a confirmation by his
earnest prayers in the Garden, against his natural fear of death: And hence it
follows, that seeing Christ could not prevent his decreed death, he was bound
by his Covenant to be troubled (at least for a time) with the fear of it, and
that in a transcendent manner, as much as his humane, tender, natural
constitution could bear without fin, namely, until he had by his earnest
prayers obtained a confirmation.

5 Says Zanchy, as touching Christ's divine nature, there was De Tribus Elo^im,
part. 2. l. 3. c. 9. And see Weams in his Portraiture, p. 191, 192.
always one and the same will of the Father, and the Son, concerning his death
and Possion; yea as Christ was man, he was always obedient to his Father; and
therefore he said, I always do the things that please him.

What meaning then (says he) has this, That he prayed to be freed from death,
and from the cup?

He answers: Naturally as man, Christ feared, abhorred, and shunned death, and
his natural horror of death he called his Will, when he said, Not my will be
done, to wit, this natural Will which I have as man; yet neither does this Will
of Christ resist his Fathers Will; for the Father would have Christ to be like
us in all things, except sin, and to that end would have him made man;
Therefore when Christ did naturally shun and desire to escape death, he did
not contradict his Fathers will, because the Father would have this (natural)
fear and horror to be in Christ as a So Weams in his Portraiture of the Image
of God in man p. 1 48. says Christ's Passions were a punishment, but not a s^n:
And says, Weams in p. 220. Christ had natural fear actually, which the first
Adam had not, because there was no hurtful object before his eyes, as there was
before Christ.
punishment of our sins; wherefore it is altogether salse that Christ's will in
this was diverse from his Fathers will. But (says he) if in respect of the same
end the Father had been willing that Christ should dye, and Christ had been
unwilling, or had never so little refused, then their Wills indeed had been
repugnant; but in reference to the same end, namely, our salvation, Christ
always had the same will that his Father had.

In these words Zanchy does show that it was absolutely necessary for Christ,
in regard of his true humane nature, to be inwardly touched with the natural
fear of his bodily death, and to evidence it out wardly; but he makes no
mention that Christ feared his spiritual and eternal death, as Mr. Norton does
most unsoundly from the same Text.

But says Mr. Norton still in page 57.
It has oftentimes been the case of Martyrs to give up their lives with joy.


Reply 7. Hence he thinks it was not beseeming for Christ to be so troubled as
he was with the fear of his bodily death: If there be any Martyrs to whom it is
pleasant to die that they have from other where, and not from the nature of
death.
But says P. Martyr in Romans 5. 12. All the godly do affirm that in death there
is a feeling of the wrath of God, and therefore of its own nature it drives
men into a certain pain and horror, which thing (says he) both Christ himself
when he prayed in the Garden, and many other holy men have declared: And (says
he) if there chance to be any to whom it is pleasant and delectable to dye, and
to be rid of their life, that they have elsewhere, and not from the nature of
death.

In these words observe that P. Martyr does make the bodily death of Christ to
be the material cause of his pain, and horror in the Garden, quite contrary to
Mr. Norton, he does never mention the Second death, and Hell Torments to be
the cause of his horror in the Garden, as Mr. Norton does.

2 Says he, If there be any (whether Martyrs or Christ) to whom it is
pleasant and delectable to dye, and to be rid of their life, that they have
elsewhere, and not from the nature of death.

3 The Dialogue gives good reasons in page 52. why Christ should show more fear
of death then any Martyrs, namely,

First, For the cleerer manifestation of the truth of his humane nature.

And secondly, For the accomplishment of the Predictions of his sufferings; and
therefore that mercy of his that made him to take our humane nature of the seed
of the woman, made him to take our natural infirmities, and to manifest them to
the uttermost in seasonable times, as objects did present the occasion.

But says Mr. Norton in page 69.
You make Christ not only more afraid of natural death than many Martyrs, but
to show more fear of death than any man; And, says he, Your reasons are but
deceptions.


Reply 8. If Christ had showed no more natural fear of death than some men do,
it might well have been doubted whether he had been true man or no, seeing
sundry Heretics have called it into question, notwithstanding he gave such
large testimony of it by his exceeding natural fear as he did.

I find this excellent Observation in our larger Annotations on Psalm. 22. 1. We
further briefly say, That Christ was pleased to yield to sense (or feeling) so
far,

1 That he might show himself a perfect true man; a thing not easily believed,
as appears by the multitude of Heresies about this matter, that sprung up soon
after the first plantation of the faith, there being no greater evidence to
ordinary judgment at least, of his perfect humanity, than his being subject to
the common infirmities of men.

Secondly, To keep us from fainting and despair in the greatest trials,
combats, and afflictions, whether spiritual, or corporal, when God seems to
forget us.

And thirdly, As for them that think unpassionateness the Aulus Gellius a known
ancient Writer, in his 19. book of Noctes Atticae, chapter 1. 12.
greatest evidence of magnanimity, I commend the Disputes of two famous
Philosophers recorded by Aulus Gellius. Thus far speaks the said Annotation.

Fourthly, this is observable, That though many Martyrs have, through the grace
of constancy, undergone the pains of death with joy, or with little sign of
their natural fear of death, When the pains of death have astonished sanctified
reason in Martyrs, then no man can express what conflict there is between
nature and death which conflict was not in Christ.
whiles they have had the use of their sanctified reason, yet afterward as
soon as their torments have astonished nature, and by that means deprived them
of the use of their sanctified reason, then the same soul that was so fearless
at first, does begin to show the terrors of nature at the dominion of death,
and then no man can express what conflicts of fear and horror there is in
nature against death; but the manner of Christ's death was far otherwise, for at
the utmost point of death, Christ's humane nature did not conflict with fear and
horror, as all Martyrs do: But he expressed his natural fear and horror of
death beforehand in the Garden as it were in private to three of his Disciples,
that they might record it as a proof of his true humane nature; for he did
manifest it,

First, By his speeches before he prayed.

And secondly, in the time of his prayers: but not after his prayers, there was
no mention of any more fear: for by his prayers he had obtained a confirmation
of his nature against the fear of his ignominious usage, and against the fear
of death; I say it once more, that it may be the better marked, that after his
prayers, he never showed any fear of death more; yea when he was at the very
point of death upon the Cross, he did not express any natural struggling or
striving with the pangs of death, for there was no pangs in his death, because
the formality of it was supernatural, and therefore his nature was not now
subject to strive with the pangs of death, as nature does in all Martyrs; the
formality of his death did far surpass the death of all Martyrs, because he had
obtained a deliverance, and a confirmation from his natural fear of death, by
his strong crying, prayers, and tears in the Garden, Heb. 5. 7. So that when
he came to breath out his soul in the open view of all men, both of his
persecutors, and of his godly friends, he did without Heb. 5. 7.
any trembling or struggling of nature, instantly, and quietly, breath out his
soul by his own Priestly power, even whiles he was in strength of nature, and
this I hope is contrary to the course of nature in the death of all Martyrs;
And by this last act of Christ in his death, he declared himself to be our
Mediator in his death, and to be our High Priest in his death and sacrifice.

Lord (says Cyprian) thou did profess thy self before thine Cyprian de Past
Christi.
Apostles to be sorrowful unto death, and for exceeding grief, did power
forth a bloody sweat: But (says he) I admire thee, O Lord, that being once
fastened to the Cross, amidst the condemned, to be now, neither sorrowful, nor
fearful, but despising the punishments, with thy hands lifted up, to triumph
over Amaleck. Here you see that Cyprians judgment was, That Christ was neither
sorrowful nor fearful for his death, when he hung upon the Cross, as he was in
the Garden, and therefore he held that Christ had overcome this fear and
horror of death by his prayers in the Garden.

And secondly, That in the Garden, he did power forth a bloody sweat, for fear
of his bodily death.

Thirdly, He held that Christ triumphed over Amaleck, that is to say, over
Satan, by his unconquerable patience on the Cross.

Conclusion from the Premises.
Hence it follows, that the two reasons of the Dialogue before cited, stand
stronger and firmer than they did, notwithstanding Mr. Norton has endeavored
to shake them to nothing by his windy reasoning.

But in Page 58. Mr. Norton does vindicate Calvin from the Dialogue sense to
his sense.

Reply 9. What the Dialogue cited out of Mr. Calvin touching Christ's troubled
fear of death, where his words run without any mention of Hell Torments, was at
the first useful to me, and I thought that the same speeches might be of the
like good use to others, especially seeing the Dialogue does annex unto the
former speeches of Calvin, his expressions of Christ's troubled soul-sorrows for
the death of Lazarus by his weeping and groaning in spirit, and troubling
himself, Joh. 11. 33, 35. In which soul-troubles so pathetically manifested, no
man can imagine that he suffered any thing in soul from Gods immediate wrath,
or from Hell Torments; and therefore why should we not likewise expound his
other soul-sorrows to be in relation to his ignominious and painful death?

But seeing Mr. Norton is not willing to accept his words, as I cited them, to
the sense of the Dialogue, let him take Mr. Calvin on his side; the truth of
the Dialogue I hope, may stand well enough without him, and in case he shall
except against any other that I have cited for illustration, I shall not much
pass, as long as I cite the Scripture sense according to the Context.

But for all this, it seems that Mr. Norton is not very well pleased with Mr.
Calvin's judgment; for in page 61. Mr. Norton does cite him on purpose to
confute him.

Mr. Calvin (says he) does affirm that Christ suffered in his soul the
terrible torment of the damned, and forsaken men.

But, says Mr. Norton, because the sufferings of the damned differ in some
things from the sufferings of Christ, latter Writers choose rather to say, That
he suffered the punishment of the Elect, who deserved to be damned, then that
he suffered the punishment of the damned.
Reply 10. This distinction may please such as had rather take man's word
without the Scripture sense, than take the pains to dig out the true Scripture
sense.

But I wonder what difference there is betwixt this speech of Calvin, that
Christ suffered in his soul the terrible torments of the damned, and forsaken
men; and this speech of Mr. Nortons in page 56. That Christ conflicted with
eternal death; and that speech in page 213. That Christ was accursed with a
poenal and eternal curse? For my part, I can find no difference in them, but I
will leave such nice distinctions to them that love them, and that can discern
the difference, for I cannot.

SECT. II.
Mr. Nortons Answer in page 62. to the Dialogues Exposition of Mark. 10. 39.
Examined. Mar. 10. 39. Mat. 26. 39. Mat. 20. 22, 23.


THe words in the Dialogue run thus in page 46. our Savior does explain the
quality of those sorrows which he suffered at the time of his death, unto the
two sons of Zebedeus, he tells them, They must drink of his cup, and be
baptized with his baptism, Mar. 10. 39. He tells them, That they must be
conformable to the quality and kind of his sufferings, though perhaps there
might be some difference in the degree of their sufferings, and he does
explain the kind of his sufferings by a twofold expression.

1 He tells them, They must drink of his cup, that is to say, of the same
bitter portion of death.

2 He tells them, That they must be baptized with his baptism, that is to say,
They must be put to death by the malice of Tyrants, as he must be; and this is
expressed by the metaphor of Baptism, for baptizing is a diving or drowning of
the whole body under water; and therefore Christ ordained Baptism as a typical
sign of drowning the body of sin in his blood; but the baptizing of Tyrants was
used for no other end, but to drown men's bodies to death; and in this respect
Christ says, I am entered into the deep waters, Psalm. 69. 2, 15. and in this
very sense the Apostle says, Else what shall they do that are baptized for
dead (namely, what shall they do that are baptized with death, as Martyrs are)
if the dead rise not at all, why then are they baptized for dead? 1 Cor. 15.
29. Godly Martyrs would never be baptized 1 Cor. 15. 29.
with death, if the hope of a better resurrection did not animate their spirits
to suffer death for the truths sake, being therein conformable to the death of
Christ, Pbil. 3. 10, 11.

By these two expressions (says the Dialogue) which are Synonima or
equivalent, our Savior does inform the two sons of Zebedee what the true
nature of his sufferings should be, namely, no other, but such only, as they
should one day suffer from the hands of Tyrants. And hence it follows,

1 That the troubled fear, which Matthew and Mark do ascribe unto Christ in the
Garden, must be understood of his natural fear of death, and not of his fear
of his Fathers wrath.

2 Hence it follows, that all the (outward) sufferings of Christ, were from
man's wrath and malice incited by the Devil, according to Gods decree declared
in Genesis 3. 15. Thou Satan shall pierce him in the foot-soals.

Mr. Norton in page 62. does thus answer to the Dialogues Exposition.
Herein (says he) is a fallacy, confounding such things as should be divided:
This Text, says Piscator, is to be understood with an exception of that
passion in which Christ felt the wrath of God for the Elect.


Reply 11. It is most evident, that Mr. Nortons distinction is a fallacy,
because it confounds things that differ, for it confounds the death of Christ's
immortal soul, with the death of his body, and so he makes Christ to suffer two
kinds of death formally, and so consequently he makes Christ to make two kinds
of satisfaction formally; But says the Dialogue, No other death but his bodily
death is to be understood by Mar. 10. 39. and our larger Mar. 10. 39. Mr.
Nor^on says that Christ suffered a twofold death in p. 155 70. 174, and he
makes his immortal soul to be spiritually dead in p. 159. and makes it the
second death in p. 115.
Annotation does fully concur with the Dialogues exposition on Matthew. 20. 22,
23. without any such exception, as Mr. Norton makes from Piscator: But I wonder
that Mr. Norton dares honor Piscator so much as to take this exposition upon
trust from him alone, seeing he makes the form of justification to lie only in
remission of sins, which opinion of his, Mr. Norton does damn for heresy, and
yet now he so much honors Piscator, as to cite his judgment above for his
exposition of this Text.

But for the better trying out of the truth, let us a little more narrowly
search into the sense of Mar. 10. 39. by a clear conference with the context,
which I account to be a good rule for the trying out of a sound exposition.

1 James and John the sons of Zebedee desired of Christ, that the one might sit
at his right hand, and the other at his left in his glorious Monarchy.

2 Thereupon Christ demanded of them, Can ye drink of the cup that I shall
drink of? they said, We can; then Christ replied, Ye shall indeed drink of the
cup that I shall drink of.

Hence it follows,
That seeing the cup of Christ was filled with the vindicative wrath of God, as
Mr. Norton affirms, then James and John must drink of the same cup; for said
Christ to them, Ye shall drink of the same cup that I shall drink of.

But I think Mr. Norton himself will say, that they did not drink of the cup of
Gods vindicative wrath, but of the cup of an ignominious and violent death only.

Therefore it hence follows by the like consequence, that the death of Christ
was of the same kind.

But says Mr. Norton in page 63.
Christ suffered both as a Martyr, and as a Satisfier; the sons of Zebedee
(says he) drank of the cup of Martyrdom, not of the cup of Satisfaction or
Redemption; James and John were asleep whiles Christ was drinking that cup.


Reply 12. I grant, that Christ suffered as a Satisfier; but the only reason
why the death of Christ was a death of satisfaction, was from the mutual
Covenant that was made between the Trinity, it was their agreement that made
the death of Christ to be a sacrifice of full satisfaction, or to be the full
price of The only reason why the death of Christ was a death of satisfaction
d^stinct ^^o^ Martyrdom was the Covenant between the Trinity.
our redemption, as I have showed also in Chap. 9. but because God made no such
Covenant with the sons of Zebedee, therefore though they drunk the cup of a
violent death as Christ did, yet it was not for satisfaction, it was no more
but the cup of Martyrdom in them: But as I said before, because the death of
Christ was a death of Covenant, it was not only a death of Martyrdom, but it
was a death of satisfaction also.

Secondly, I have often showed from the first declared Will and Covenant of the
Trinity, in Genesis 3. 15. that Christ covenanted to take upon him our nature of
the seed of the deceived woman, and in that nature to break the Devils
Head-plot by continuing obedient in his combat, notwithstanding Satan: foul
play to provoke him to some impatience, and in that obedience, he covenanted to
make his soul a sacrifice, which God covenanted to reward with the redemption
of all the Elect; and this was sully declared unto Adam by a typical sacrifice;
and God gave the Devil full liberty to do his worst to disturb his patience,
and so to spoil his obedience, and so to prevent his death from being a
sacrifice, and so to preserve his Head-plot from being broken; and this is
comprehended in that sentence, Thou Satan shall pierce him in the foot-soals;
but God could not have declared all this, both to the Devil, and unto Adam,
unless the second person had beforehand covenanted to undertake this conflict
with the Devil, and his instruments, and unless God the Father had also
covenanted, that the obedience of the seed of the woman, both in his conflict
with Satan, and in his death and sacrifice, should break the Devils Head-plot,
and so should thereby merit the salvation of all the Elect.

But thirdly, Observe this, that I do not say that the sufferings of Christ,
which he endured from the malice of Satan, and his instruments, were full
satisfaction without his sacrifice in the formality of his death; but on the
contrary, I say, that no sufferings, though never so great, can make
satisfaction without his sacrifice in the formality of his death, by the
separation of his soul from his body by his own Priestly power; and therefore
if it could be supposed that Christ had born the moral curse of Hell Torments
(according to Mr. Nortons Tenent) for a thousand years together on the Cross,
yet without this his last Priestly act of death and sacrifice, it could not
have been a sufficient price for our redemption; and the reason thereof is most
clear and evident, because God had ordained by his eternal Council and
Covenant, declared in Genesis 3. 15. that nothing should be accepted for full
satisfaction to break the Devils Head-plot, without the true bodily death of
the seed of the woman, made a sacrifice in the formality of it by his own
Priestly power; he must be the only Priest in the formality of his own death
and sacrifice, Heb. 7. 27. Heb. 9. 14, 25, 26, 28. Heb. 10 9, 10, 12.

Fourthly, Yet I grant, notwithstanding that all his sufferings from Satan, and
his instruments, were ordained for the trial of All Christ's sufferings were as
necessary to his sacrifice as the consecration of the Priest was to his
sacrifice.
his obedience, and so for his consecration to his Priestly Sacrifice, and in
that respect it was as necessary to his sacrifice, as the consecration of the
Priest was to the making of a sacrifice under the Law, I say, that both his
consecration by his ignominious usage, and by his long lingering tortures on the
Cross, and the formality of his death and sacrifice by his own Priestly power,
must be considered as two distinct Articles of the eternal Covenant, though
they must also be conjoined for the making of that sacrifice, that God
covenanted to accept for Heb 2. 10. Heb. 59. Ioh 19. 30. The sacrifice of
Christ does properly lie in the formality of his death by his own Priestly
power. See also further in Reply 13.
man's redemption; his sufferings as a Martyr from the malice of Satan was
ordained for the trial of his perfect obedience, and so consequently for the
perfecting of his Priestly consecration, as these Scriptures do witness, Heb.
2. 10. Heb. 5. 8, 9. Heb. 7. 28. And when Moses put the blood of consecration
on Aarons right Ear, Thumb, and great Toe, it figured, says Ains. on Lev. 8.
24. the sufferings of Christ, whose hands and feet were peirced; and then as
soon as his consecration was finished, which was finished by finishing all the
sufferings that were written of him; then he declared the same by saying, It
is finished, Job. 19. 30. And then at the same instant, without any delay, he
first bowed his head, and then he made his life a sacrifice by giving up the
ghost; and this was in a differing order from that death that comes by the
course of nature, for by the course of nature men do hold up the head as long
as life is in the body, and then as soon as the soul is departed, the head
falls; but Christ, while he was in the strength of nature, did first bow his
head, and then he gave up the ghost: And thus he performed his death as the
Mediator of the New Covenant by his own Priestly power in both his natures,
according to the eternal Covenant.

And in this last act by virtue of the said eternal Covenant lies,

1 The formality of his death. 2 The formality of his sacrifice: And 3 The
formality of all satisfaction, Heb. 9. 14, 15, 16. And therefore from hence it
necessarily follows, that till this last act was done, no sufferings that went
before (though he be supposed by Mr. Norton to have suffered the essential
torments of Hell) though never so long, and never so strong, could be
accounted of God for satisfaction for man's Redemption.
Fifthly, All this was made manifest to fallen Adam, by Gods declared decree,
in Genesis 3. 15. as I have formerly noted, and I think it needful to repeat it
again with some enlargement.

1 God proclaimed an utter enmity between Christ the seed of the Woman, and the
Devil in the Serpent, and in all other instruments of his malice.

2 He told the Devil (that he might arm himself as well as he could) that
the seed of that deceived Woman should break his Head-plot, by continuing
obedient to all the positive Laws of the combat, notwithstanding his foul
play, and his malicious stratagems to disturb him in the course of his
obedience.

3 He told the Devil, that he should have full liberty to use him as a vilde
Malefactor, and at last to pierce him in the foot-soals on the Cross to disturb
his patience, and so to spoil his obedience, and so to hinder his death from
being a sacrifice of satisfaction, if he could.

In this manner, I say, God declared the plotform of the eternal counsel and
Covenant of the Trinity for man's redemption; and therefore whatsoever is spoken
after this of the Messiah, and of the work of Redemption, it must have
reference to this first declaration; for all that is spoken after this is but a
comment upon this, and all Christ's sufferings are included in these two words,
1. He shall be the seed of the woman, and he shall be touched both inwardly
with the feeling of our infirmities in all his voluntary passions.

Secondly, Outwardly, Thou Satan shall pierce him in the foot-soals; And hence
it is plain, that all his outward sufferings were to be from Satan and his
instruments, and all his inward sufferings from himself. These things are so
plain in the Text, that he that runs may read them; and these soul-passions
with his outward sufferings were also ordained to consecrate Christ to his
Priestly Office, before he could make his soul a sacrifice.

Thirdly, Therefore the formality of Christ's obedience in his death and
sacrifice, must needs be the period of all satisfaction; and this is the last
victorious act of the Mediators obedience, that gives the fatal blow to the
Devils head-plot, and breaks it all to pieces, so that the Elect are thereby
delivered from his power, as a bird from the Fowler, when the snare is broken;
and all the positive ceremonial Laws touching Priest and sacrifice are but a
typical exemplification of this Priest and sacrifice.

Fourthly, Hence we may learn how to interpret all those God did all the
external sufferings of Christ by Satan and his instruments, and Christ did all
his internal soul-sufferings.
Scriptures that ascribe all Christ's sufferings both inward and outward to God;
God is often said to be a doer of them all; but this first Declaration of Gods
counsel to Adam tells us that God did all by appointing Satan to do all the
external sufferings, and that God did appoint Christ (as he was the seed of the
woman) to do all his internal sufferings; and thus God may be said to do all
his soul-sufferings, because he was first in the order of that Covenant, where
it was agreed on what Christ should suffer for man's redemption; He first
expounded to the second person, that he should take man's nature of the seed of
the woman, and man's infirmities, affections, and passions, that so he might be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, as our merciful High Priest, when
the objects of fear, sorrow, and heaviness should present. In this sense God
may be said to do all his soul-sufferings.

Fifthly, God is said to do all, because he delivered him into the hands of
Satan, that Satan might do his worst in his combat with him, Him being
delivered (says Peter) by the determinate counsel and sort-knowledge of God,
Act. 2. 23, 24. (who delivered him but Act. 2. 23, 24.
God? and to whom did he deliver him, but to Satan to combat with him?
according to Gods declared will, in Genesis 3. 15.) ye have taken him, and by
wicked hands have crucified and slain, whom God has raised up, loosing the
pains of death; namely, loosing or healing the soars and wounds that were
inflicted on his body by Satan and his instruments to put him to death; But no
soars were inflicted on him by Gods immediate wrath, no other soars were put
upon him, but such as God permitted the Devil and his instruments to inflict,
out of a design to provoke his patience (as he did to Job) that so he might
pervert him in his obedience, and spoil his death from being a sacrifice, and
so might prevent the breaking of his first head-plot, which was to subdue Adam
and all his posterity under the body of sin.

So in Romans 4. 25. He was delivered for our offenses; namely, God delivered him
into the hands of Satan, according to Genesis 3. 15. Romans 4. 25.
to try masteries with Satan, and in case Satan could disturb his patience,
then he should save his head-plot, but in case Christ did continue through all
the combat, obedient to the positive Laws of the combat, to the death of the
Cross, and at last in that perfect obedience make his soul a sacrifice, then he
should redeem us from all our offenses; And in this sense it was that Christ
was delivered for our offenses, and God raised him up again on the third day to
witness our Justification, that his death was accepted of God as a Sacrifice
for full satisfaction. And in this sense it is said, that God spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all. Romans 8. 32.

And thus I have showed how Christ drunk the cup of martyrdom for his Priestly
consceration to his sacrifice. And secondly, That the cup of satisfaction (by
virtue of the free Covenant) lies both in his Combat and Sacrifice; but
chiefly in Sacrifice, as the finishing act, and formal price of all
satisfaction.

But says Mr. Norton in page 63.
The sufferings of Christ's soul were not by way of sympathy; his soul suffered
properly and immediately, Isa. 53. 10. Matthew. 26. 37. The cause of his
sufferings required that his soul should suffer as well as his body; We sinned
in soul properly, therefore our surety must suffer in soul properly; the
greatest of the sufferings of Christ were spiritual, and such as immediately
seized on his soul.


Reply 13. To deny that Christ's soul suffered by way of sympathy, I suppose is
to deny a truth: for the immortal soul is There is a sympathy between the soul
and body in sufferings.
united personally to the body by the sensitive soul, and by virtue of this
conjunction there is a communion, by which means the soul may partake of the
sufferings of the body, by way of sympathy.

There are three things, says Irenaeus, of which the entire See Dr. Hammons
Annot. in 1 These. 5. 23.
perfect man consists, Flesh, Soul, and Spirit; The Soul, says he, is
betwixt the Flesh and Spirit, and sometimes following the Spirit, is elevated
by it; and sometimes consenting to the Flesh, falls into earthly concupiscences.

And says Jerome, The Soul consisting between the Flesh and And Jerome. in Gal.
5.
Spirit, when it yields to the Flesh it is called flesh. By this it appears
there is a communion by sympathy.

But now because Christ's humane nature was conceived by the Holy Ghost after
the image of God, we must say that his rational Will did cause his sensitive
Will to follow it, and therefore by his strong crying, and prayers, and tears,
in the Garden, he obtained that his sensitive will which naturally abhorred and
feared death, was at last made like unto his rational will, altogether fearless
of death, and therefore as soon as he had done praying, he said to his
Disciples, Let us go meet them, and then without any fear he went to meet all
his sufferings, and so by the perfection of his patience under them, he did
evidence the perfection of his obedience, and in that perfection of obedience
he finished all that was written of him, and then he made his death a sacrifice
by the joint concurrence of both his natures; and so at last without the least
fear or striving in his sensitive will, he breathed out his immortal soul. But
Mr. Norton confounds Christ's sacrifice with his sufferings, and he confounds
his sufferings from Satan, with his sufferings from Gods immediate wrath, in
page 153. 213, etc.

But says Mr. Norton in the former place of p. 63.
His soul suffered properly and immediately.


Reply 14. First, I have showed in Chap. 12. at Sect. 4. that The sufferings of
Christ's soul in Mat. 26. 38. and Isa. 53. 10. must chiefly be understood
Christ's vital soul, and nor of his immortal soul. Matthew. 26. 38. Isa. 53. 10.
Christ's soul did not suffer any thing at all from Gods immediate wrath.

Secondly, I have showed, that the word Soul in these places, is not in the
first place meant of Christ's immortal soul, but of his vital soul; for Nephesh
in Isa. 53. 10, and Psyche in Mat. 26. 38. (for it is not as Mr. Norton cites
it in v. 37.) is not meant of Christ's immortal soul, but of his sensitive soul;
as I have before showed in chap. 7.

Nephesh, says Carlisle, is never used in the Old Testament for the immortal
spirit, and Psyche is very seldom used in the New Testament for the immortal
spirit, but (says he) it is abundantly used for the sensitive soul; Paul said
to Epaphroditus, that for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not
regarding his Soul, Phil. 2. 30.

And (says Christ) The good Shepherd lays down his soul for his sheep, Joh.
10. 11. And says Christ, I am the good Shepherd, I lay down my soul, Joh. 10.
15. And therefore does my father love me, Joh. 10, 15, 17, 18
because I lay down my soul and take it again, Joh 10. 17. No man takes it
from me, I lay it down of my self, ver. 18. The Son of man came to serve, and
to give his soul for the ransom of many, Mat. 20. 28. He made his soul a sin,
Isa. 53. 10. and powered out his soul to death, Isa. 53. 12.

Thirdly, Says Fulgentius, The whole man (Christ) laid down his soul, when his
soul departed, dying on the Cross, Ad Transi. li. 3.
In this sentence you see that Fulgentius speaks of two souls in Christ. First,
Says he, Christ laid down his (vital) soul. And then secondly, says he, his
(immortal) soul departed dying on the Cross.

Fourthly, The soul that died in Christ for our redemption was this vital soul,
for this kind of soul has its seat in The death of satisfaction was by the
true bodily death of Christ, and not by his spiritual death.
the blood, Genesis 9. 4. and when Christ shed his blood, this soul of his was
powered out (and then his immortal soul departed) and this was typified by the
vital soul of the beast, that was in the blood, of the Levitical Sacrifices, in
Lev. 17. 11. and see Ains. also in Deuteronomy. 12. 23. the soul of the flesh is in
the blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar to make atonement for
your souls, for it is the blood that makes atonement for the soul (this I
noted in the Dialogue, page 94.) and this positive ceremonial type was given to
the Jews to exemplify their atonement and redemption by the shedding of the
vital soul that was in the blood of Christ; and our Savior did confirm this to
be a truth at his last Supper, saying, this cup is the New Testament in my
blood which is shed for you, and for the many for the remission of sins, Matthew.
26. 28. And he was the Mediator of the New Testament by this death, Heb. 9. 15.
And his death in ver. 15, 16, 17. is exemplified by the bodily death of men,
whose death does make the legacies of their testament to be valid; and so in
like sort, until Christ had powered out his vital soul, his Legacies of the New
Testament were not confirmed; but as soon as that act was done they were all
confirmed for the many, Dan. 9. 27. And by his death he is said to make peace
or atonement, Col. 1. 20. as Aarons incense did, in Numb. 16. 44. See Ains.
and by which we have redemption, Ephesians. 1. 7. and by which we are ransomed,
Matthew. 20. 28. It is this vital blood of Christ that cleanses us from all sin,
1 John 1. 7.

This vital blood of Christ was it that was ordained to procure Gods
everlasting atonement for all our moral sins, even as the blood of Bulls, etc.
was ordained to procure Gods atonement for their ceremonial sins, Heb. 9. 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. Heb. 10.

Fifthly, says P. Martyr, Because blood is the life, God P. Martyr in his com.
pl. par. 2. p. 581.
would signify that sin is not purged by sacrifice, unless it were by death.

Sixthly, Mr. Carlisle does thus paraphrase on Lev. 17. 11. I have appointed the
blood to be an expiation and purgation for you, even for your sins: for it is
this blood that purges you.

Seventhly, From the springing up of corn after it is dead in the earth, Christ
brings a similitude of his death, and of the fruit of his death, Joh. 12. 24.
None that I can find interpret this death of any other death but the true
bodily death and sacrifice of Christ.

Eighthly, Tindal says thus, Paul concludes in Heb. 9. 16, 17. Tindals works
p. 462.
that Christ must needs have dyed, saying, That wheresoever a Testament is,
there must the death of the Testament-maker go between, or else the Testament
is not ratified and sure.

But (says he) Righteousness and Remission of sins in Christ's blood is the New
Testament, whereof he is the Mediator.

Ergo, The Testament-maker must needs have dyed.

And (says he) he must, or it behoved him to die, for he took our very mortal
nature for the same decreed council, saying, It behoved that the Son of man
must die, Joh. 12. Tindal lays the whole weight of all the blessings of the
new Covenant on the bodily death of Christ; he makes no mention of the
spiritual death of Christ's soul. And says he in page 257. The offerings of
Christ's body and blood is the only satisfaction for our sins. And says he,
There is no other way to salvation but by Christ's death and passion, and he
speaks this of his bodily death. And says he, whosoever goes unto God, and
unto forgiveness of sins, or salvation, by any other way than this, the same is
an Heretic.

Here Tindal opposes his judgment of Heresy to Mr. Nortons judgment.

Ninethly, We die a double death, says Chrysostom (as I formerly cited him)
therefore we must look for a double Resurrection; But Christ, says he, dyed
but one kind of death, therefore he rose but one kind of Resurrection. Adam
dyed both in body and soul, he dyed to sin, and to nature, etc. The first is
the death of the soul, the other is the death of the body, for the death of the
soul is sin, or everlasting punishments.

To us men there is a double death, and therefore we must have a double
Resurrection.

To Christ there was but one kind of death, for he sinned not, and that one
kind of death was for us; he owed no kind of death, for he was not subject to
sin, and so not to death.

Tenthly, Theodoret in Dialogue 3. says, How could the soul of our Savior,
having an immortal nature, and not touched with the least spot of sin, be
possibly taken with the hook of death? In these words he does plainly and fully
deny the spiritual death of Christ's immortal soul, and therefore he is point
blank against Mr. Norton.

Eleventhly, Cyril de Rectafide ad Reginas, l. 1. says, If we conceive Christ
to be God incarnate, and suffering in our flesh, the death of his flesh alone
suffices for the redemption of the world.

Twelfthly, Fulgentius, and fifteen Bishops of Africa made this confession of
their Faith, The death of the Son of God which he suffered in his flesh alone,
destroyed in us both our deaths, to wit, the death of the soul and body. But
Mr. Norton holds this confession made in the Dialogue to be Heresy.

Thirteenthly, Fulgentius ad Transimundum, l. 3. c. 7. says, When the flesh
only died, and was raised again in Christ, the Son of God is said to have died.

Ibidem c. 5. The flesh dying, not only the Deity, but the soul of Christ
cannot be showed to have been dead also.

Fourteenthly, Gregory on Job l. 4. c. 17. Coming to us who were in the death
of the spirit and flesh, Christ brought his ONE DEATH to us, and loosed both
our deaths, his single death he applied to our double death, and dying,
vanquished our double death.

Fifteenthly, August. in ser. 162. says, But the immortal righteous Son of God
coming to die for us, in whose flesh, because there could be no sin, he
suffered the punishment of sin without the guilt thereof, wherefore he admitted
for us the second part of the first death, that is to say, the death of the
body only, by which he took from us the dominion of sin, and the pain of
eternal punishment.

And says he, in Ser. 129. There is a first and a second death; of the first
death there are two parts, one when the sinful soul by offending departed from
her Creator; and the other whereby the soul for her punishment was excluded
from the body by Gods Justice. The second death is the everlasting torment of
body and soul. This distinction of the first and second death Mr. Norton
disputes against. And in Epist. 99. He says, Surely the soul of Christ was
neither dead with any sin, nor punished with damnation, which are the two ways
how the death of the soul may possibly be understood. But Mr. Norton has found
out a third way for the death of Christ's soul by his penal Hell in this world,
which he makes to have the same essential torments that are in fiery Gehenna.

16. Beda in Homil. Feria 4. in Quadragesima says, Christ coming to us that
were in death of Body and Spirit, suffered only one death, that is the death
of the flesh, and freed us of both our deaths, he applied his ONE DEATH to our
double death, and vanquished them both.

17. Albinus in Quaest. on Genesis says, What is meant by this, Thou shall die
the death? It means a double death in man, to wit, Soul and Body; the death
of the Soul is, when God for sin forsakes it, the death of the Body is, when
through any necessity the body is deprived of the soul. This double death of
ours, Christ destroyed with his single death, for he died only in the flesh
for a time, but in soul he never died who never sinned.

18. Bernard ad milites Templi c. 11. says, Of our two deaths, whereof the one
is the desert of sin, the other the due punishment, Christ taking our
punishment, but clear from sin, whiles he dyed willingly, and only in body, he
meriteth for us life and righteousness. Had Mr. Norton lived in their days,
durst he have condemned this Doctrine for Heresy, as now he does? I trow not,
he might rather have expected a sharp censure from them.

19. Bullenger on Isa. 53. 10. Homil. 153. says, Whole Christ was the
expiation of our sins, though during that time neither his Divinity suffered,
nor his soul dyed, but his flesh, whereof the blessed Fathers Vigilius and
Fulgentius have religiously discoursed against Heretics.

20. No other death but a bodily death was typified, as I have showed from Lev.
17. 11. and this also was typified by the death of the High Priest, which was
ordained by Gods positive Law and Covenant for the redemption of the exiled
person that was exiled by the Law for unwitting murder: for by the Law he was
to continue an exile as long as the High Priest lived, but as soon as the High
Priest was dead (be it longer or shorter in time) then, and not till then the
exiled person was thereby redeemed from the avenger of blood, Number. 35. 25. and
this makes the reason of the type to be the more eminent, because in Numb. 35.
25.
all other Nations the unwitting Manslayer is freed at the first Sessions of
Justice; but by Gods positive Ordinance in Israel, he must continue an exile
till the death of the High Priest; he could not be redeemed sooner, nor by any
other way from the danger of the avenger of blood, but only by the death of
the High Priest; this is an evident type of our redemption by the bodily death
and sacrifice of our High Priest Christ Jesus.

21. The Reader shall find in several other Chapters several other Divines that
do accord with these.

Hence two Conclusions do follow.
First, That Christ's soul was not spiritually dead with the second death, as
Mr. Norton does unadvisedly hold for an Orthodox Evangelical Tenet.

Secondly, That his death was a true bodily death, namely, such a bodily death,
as in the formality of it was a Sacrifice.

But Mr. Norton in p. 70. says.
It is a fiction to assert any divine prediction that Christ should only
suffer a bodily death.


And says he in p. 59.

It had been of none effect if he had suffered only a bodily death, and to
this effect he speaks in p. 170, 173, 174. 160, 162, etc.

22. But for the better clearing of the true nature of Christ's death, I will
out of Christopher Carlisle describe the vital soul; See Carlisle in his descent
p. 144, etc.
Nephes (says Carlisle) is never applied to the immortal soul in all the Bible.

2 Says he, Nephes, which the Greeks have translated Psyche, A true
description of the vital soul.
the Latins animam, the English soul, has its name in Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek
and Latin, of breathing, because it cools and refreshes with respiring and
breathing, page 145.

3 Nephes consists in blood, breath, life, vital spirit, affections and
passions, etc. As for example.

1 Nephes is the blood, Lev. 17. 4, 10, 11. the life of every living creature
is in the blood; And this Nephes is mortal, and therefore it is called Nephes
Caja; but the immortal spirit is called Neshama Cajim, the spirit of lives;
This is immortal, and dies not as Nephes Caja does.

2 This Nephes is often put for the vital soul, as in Genesis 35. 18. Genesis 44. 30.
Exodus 4. 19. Jos. 2. 13. Isa. 53. 10, 11, 12. etc. in page 149.

3 Nephes is put for the mind, heart, and inward parts, Prove. 16. 24. Prove. 19.
18. Prove. 23. 6. Prove. 25. 12.

4 Nephes is put for the affections either of joy or sorrow, as in Psalm. 25. 1.
it is put for cheerful affections. See Ainsworth there, and in Psalm. 86. 4.

It is also put for the affections of compassion, in Isa. 58. 10.

It is also put for the affections of sorrow and sadness, 1 Samuel 1. 15. Psalm.
42. 5. Psalm. 62. 9. Lam. 2. 12.

It is also put for vexation of mind, Deuteronomy. 28. 65.

It is also put for the grief and pain which they sustained in captivity, as it
is expounded in verse. 64. 66. and 2 King. 4. 27. Job 7. 11. Job 10. 1. Psalm.
13. 2.

It is also put for the inward powers, Job 21. 23. Psalm 107. 26. Prove. 14. 1.
Likewise in the New Testament Psyche, the vital soul, is put


1 For a willing heart, Ephesians. 6 6. Col. 3. 23.

2 For one mind, Act. 4. 31. Phi. 1. 27.

3 For the heart, soul, and mind, Matthew. 22. 37. Toto tuo sensitivo, as Lyra
interprets; with all thy wisdom, diligence, and cogitation, as Chrysostom;
with all thy life, and with all thy mind, as Austin; with all thy will and
mind, as Glossa ordinaria; with all thy life which thou ought to yield up
for him, as Origin. See also Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Luke 10. 27. Mark 10. 45. Rev. 18. 14.

4 Psyche in the New Testament does signify for the most part the same that
Nephes does in the Old.

But says Carlisle, in three places it signifies the immortal soul, as in Mat.
10. 27, 28. Jam. 1. 21. 1 Pet. 1. 9.

And says he, This kind of soul was that soul of Christ that was so exceeding
sorrowful in Mat. 26. 38.

By nature, says Carlisle in page 155. All the parts of my body wherein there
is any life, do fear death, my will is unwilling, my mind vexed, my affections
moved, my heart is A true description of the natural fear of death.
wounded, my members shake, my breast pants, my legs faint, my hands tremble,
and my senses are amazed.

And says he, The flesh of Christ was so troubled, that he desired, if it
were possible, that he might escape death, Mat. 26. 38 Mar. 14 34. Joh. 12. 27.

2 Mr. Wilmot renders the word, (...) in Matthew. 26. 38. Mat. 26. 38.
(which we translate exceeding sorrowful) by rounded about with sorrow, for
fear of his approaching ignominious death, he was rounded about in every part
of his body according to the description above from Carlisle; and so David says
of his fear, The sorrows of death compassed me about, Psalm. 18. 5. And by this
expression it appears, that he was in every part of his sensitive Psalm. 18. 5.
soul, blood and flesh, in a quaking fear. Mr. Ainsworth does render it the
pangs of death, or the pains, throws, and sorrows as of a woman in childbirth,
and so does the original signify in Hos. 13. 13, Isa. 13. 8. Isa. 66. 7. And
so does the Chaldee explain it, Anguish compassed me as of a woman which
sits in the birth, and has no strength to bring forth, being in danger of
death; Methinks these emphatical expressions of the fear of a bodily death
should check such as slight them that expound the fear of Christ, of his
exceeding natural fear of his bodily death.

3 When our Savior at Supper told his Disciples that one of them should betray
him, they were exceed^ng sorrowful, Mat 26. 21, 22. namely, they were in ev^ry
p^^^ of their body, (...) surrounded about with sor^ow(...) Ch^^st does compare
their sorrows for his death (...)gs of a woman in travel, Joh. 16. 20, 21, 22.
The (...)2. and in verse 38. is the same, and the Syriak does translate them
alike, and Tremelius does translate the Syriack in both places with the same
Latin word.

So that the natural fear of an ignominious violent death does extend it self
to every part of the vital soul and body.

SECT. IV.
But says Mr. Norton in page 87.
His sorrow was lethal and deadly, both extensively and intensively, continuing
unto the last gasp: intensively killing of it self in time, had there been no
other causes, resolving and melting the soul gradually, as wax is melted with
the heat, Psalm. 22. 14.


Reply 15. In these words Mr. Norton does make Christ's body to be subject to
death by natural causes, not only externally, Christ's soulsorrows could not be
lethal and deadly, because they were governed by right reason.
but also internally from his soul-sorrows, as if he might now lose the
rectitude of his own pure humane affections.

His heart indeed, according to his voluntary Covenant to undertake our nature
and passions, did melt, for fear of his ignominious and painful death, in the
midst of his bowels, in his preparation to encounter it in the Garden, but
after a while by his strong crying and tears he did overcome that fear, and
obtained a confirmation of his nature against his natural fear.

But I wonder how Mr. Norton can say (as he does often) that Christ's sorrows
were lethal and deadly, and continuing to the last gasp, seeing all his
affections were regular, and conformed to right reason? can regular affections
admit of such a kind of sorrow, without sin? I think not, and yet I conceive
that the measure of regular sorrow may be so great, that it cannot well be
expressed by us, otherwise than in the Scripture phrases, which must not be
stretched by the conceptions of men, beyond the context: But to affirm that the
kind of his sorrow was lethal and deadly of it self, is as much as to say it
was excessive and beyond the rule of right reason, which must needs be sinful;
and it is worse to say that his lethal sorrows continued to the last; And
therefore Mr. Nortons kind of reasoning is most dangerous: All Christ's
affections says Martyr, were in him voluntary, they did rise in him when he
pleased to show them, and they appeared not when he pleased to suppress them,
but in us (says he) they are often involuntary, and rise in us whether we will
or no.

But says Mr. Norton in page 88.
Christ was amazed; He began to be sore amazed, Mark 14. 33. which signifies
an universal cessation of all the saculties of the Mar. 14. 33.
soul from their several functions; Physicians call it a Horripilation, we
usually a Consternation, like a Clock in kiltor, yet stopped for the while from
going by some hand laid upon it; That such intermission of the operations of
his soul, the effect of this formidable Concussion, might be without sin, is
evident to him that remembers Christ slept, sleep ordinarily implying cessation
of the exercise of the intellectual faculties.


Reply 16. The word translated Amazed (says he) signifies an universal
cessation of all the faculties of the soul from Christ was not fully amazed.
their several functions: I acknowledge, that the signification of the original
is of necessary use for the right expounding of the blessed Scriptures,
provided the original word be not stretched to a sense beyond the context, or
else there is great danger of abusing the Scripture to an erroneous sense, as I
have formerly noted from the large signification of Sheol and Hades in Chap. 7.
and from Nasa and Sabel, in Chap. 11. And the like I must say of this Greek
word Ethambeisthai; For

1 Ethambesen is used by the Septuagint in 1 King. 14. 15. to express the sense
of the H^brew word Ragaz, to root, namely to root up Israel out of that good
land.

2 The Septuagint put Thambos for a dead sleep, namely, for that dead sleep
that was fallen upon Saul and his men, when their senses were so bound up that
they could not awake, 1 Samuel 26. 12.

3 The Septuagint put Thamboumenos (to express the sense of Pac^az) for light
headed, or inconstant persons, in Judges 9. 4. This Hebrew word, says
Ainsworth, in Genesis 49. 4. does signify unstable, or light, and soon moved; And
this word (says he) is always used in the evil part, Zeph. 3. 4. Jer. 23. 32.

These three senses considered, who dares say (that is well advised) that this
Greek word Ethambeisthai, in Mark 14. 33. ought to be stretched to the utmost
sense of the word; these, and such like things, I find by conference with the
Septuagint in Kirkeroes.

2 I wonder why Mr. Norton says, That Physicians call it a Herripilation; does
he think that Christ was in such a dreadful distemper of mind and body, that
it made his hair to stand upright? why else does he bring a name for it from
that distemper of nature, which is called by the Physicians, a Horripilation; I
never heard that Christ's humane nature was subject to diseases till now: Truly
Mr. Norton seems to have too mean a conceit of the perfection of Christ's humane
nature in his Agony.

3 The Text does not say as Mr. Norton does, That Christ was fully amazed, in a
passive sense, but that he began to be amazed, in an active sense, and there
is as much difference between being fully amazed, and beginning to be amazed,
as there is between a sound sleep, and beginning to be asleep; when Peter
walked on the Sea to go to Christ, he began to sink, and yet he did not sink,
Mar. 14. 30. So though Christ began to be amazed, yet he was not fully amazed,
he voluntarily began to be amazed in consideration of that unnatural and
terrible evil of an ignominious and violent death on the Cross, which was now
at hand to be inflicted on him by Satan, whom God had armed with authority to
do it in the most ignominious and violent lingering manner that he could devise,
according to Genesis 3. 15. to provoke his patience.

But yet he was far from being so amazed as Mr. Norton Genesis 3. 15.
does make the word (according to its large sense) to speak: He says that the
original word signifies an universal cessation of all the faculties of the
soul from their several functions; what though the word in the largest extent
does signify so much?

Yet I say also, that Christ was not so amazed; he was not fully overcome with
fear, as men amazed are; for if all the faculties of his soul had now ceased
universally from their several functions (as Mr. Norton affirms) then how
could Christ at this very instant have behaved himself so Religiously and
advisedly as he did? for now he uttered words of reason, and understanding,
words of counsel and advice to his Disciples, even at the same time when he
began to be amazed, telling his Disciples in what manner he began to be
amazed, he said unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even to death, or
even to consider the manner of my usage in the time of my death, Mar. 14. 33.
34. or thus, I am surrounded with the sorrows of death, as I have opened the
Greek word a little before on Matthew. 26. 38. And then also he said unto his
Disciples (as one that had the use of his intellects) Tarry ye here and watch
me; or as Luke expresses it, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation, Luke 22. 40. and then he went a little forward, and fell on the
ground, and prayed, That if it were possible that hour (of his dread) might
pass from him, namely, his natural dread of that Satanical usage that was at
hand, verse. 34, 35.

Do not all these circumstances of his wise and religious deportment prove that
he was not amazed, though at first he did voluntarily begin to be amazed.
Methinks a judicious Divine should look as well into the circumstances of the
Text, as into the large sense of the word. Methinks a judicious Divine should
know and believe, that Christ had at this time all the powers and faculties of
reason, and understanding, in a far more excellent measure than any other man
whatsoever that is in his best senses, and that the faculties of his soul were
so perfect, that they could not cease universally from their several functions
in the time of executing his office.

All his passions were voluntary, and followed the rule of right reason, says
Damasen, and therefore he could not be so amazed as Mr. Nortons definition
does charge Christ to be.

4 Let us try the sense that is given to the word by other Translators, who
minded the sense of the Context more than the largest extent of the word.

1 Tremelius does translate the Syriack word, which is the same both in Mat.
26. 37. and in Mark. 14. 33. I say he translates the Syriack in both places
alike, though the Greek words do differ, he translates Mat. 26. 37. thus, Et
coepit moestus esse, and tristitia affici, and he translates Mark. 14. 33.
thus, Et coepit moestus esse and affici tristitia.

2 Tindal does translate Mar. 14. 33. thus, And he began to be abashed, and to
be in an agony.

3 The Geneva thus, he began to be troubled, and to be in great heaviness.

4 The Seventy render this Greek word by several Hebrew words, that signify
Frighted, Feared, Terrified, and the like, as Dan.8. 17. At the sight of the
Angel (says he) I was afraid, and fell on my face; In this his fear he used
the same gesture of reverence that Christ did in his prayers, and this gesture
was suitable to one that had the use of his intellects.

2 The Seventy use this Greek word to explain the Chalde word in Dan. 7. 7.
which we translate Terrible, and so terrible was the apprehension of an
ignominious violent death to Christ's humane nature.

3 The Seventy use this Greek word to translate the Hebrew word, which we
translate Haste; namely such a haste as arises from the sudden fear of death,
and of such like evils, as in 2 King. 7. 15.

This Hebrew word says Ainsworth, in Deuteronomy. 16. 3. implies a trembling, and a
hasty flight from the fear of danger, as in Deuteronomy. 20. 3. You approach this day
unto the battle against your enemies, let not your hearts fear, and hasten not
away, neither be ye terrified (namely, with the fear of death) because of
them. And this haste, says Ainsworth in Psalm: 31. 23. is through amazement or
fear, as the word commonly intends. And that David through the fear of death
did have away from Saul, is evident, by 1 Samuel 23. 26. But yet this is to be
noted, that his fear or amazement was not in such a degree as Mr. Nortons
definition does hold forth, for if all the faculties of his soul had now ceased
universally from their several functions, then David had not been capable to
contrive such a wise course for his safety, as he did on a sudden.

4 Ethambesan is used by the Seventy to interpret the Hebrew word Bagnab, in 2 Samuel 22. 5. which we translate fear, The floods 2 Samuel 22. 5.
of wickedness (says David) made me afraid. The former part of the verse runs
thus, The waves of death compassed me; the Seventy for compassed have (...), so
Christ was (...), exceeding sorrowful, compassed or surrounded about (in every
part of his body) with the fears of death, Matthew. 26. 38. And so David said
just as Christ said, The waves of death compassed me, the floods of wickedness
made me Ethambesan afraid; and so said Christ to his Disciples, I am rounded
about with the fears of death, Matthew. 26. 38. and the floods of wickedness make
me Ethambeisthai, very heavy, or afraid, as the Seventy by that word do Mat.
26. 38.
render the Hebrew word, in 2 Samuel 22. 5.

5 The Seventy use the same Greek word for fear or terrors as in Cant. 6. 4,
10. and in Cant. 8. 7. Eccles. 12. 5. Ezekiel. 7. 18.

The thing I aim at by citing all these Translations, is, to show that Mr.
Nortons definition of the word Amazed, in Mark. 14. 33. is larger than these
Translations above cited do make it to be, and larger than the context will own.

I do not think therefore that Christ was ever under such a degree of amazement
as Mr. Nortons definition holds forth.

6 Neither is his comparison suitable to express that Christ was so amazed; for
Mr. Norton compares the universal cessation of the exercise of all the
faculties of Christ's immortal soul from their several functions in his
amazement, to the cessation of the intellectual faculties in the time of sound
sleeping; any man may see that this comparison is no way fit: for though the
Intellects cease from exercise during the time of sound sleeping, yet that is
but to refresh nature for the better performance By consequence Mr. Norton does
impute the si^ of unmindfulness to Christ in the time of executing his Office.
of its office, but by Mr. Nortons definition of Christ's amazement he was
dis-inabled thereby from doing the proper duties of his office, in the very
time that he was to exercise his office; it was not now a time for all the
faculties of his soul to cease from their proper functions, as in the time of
sleeping, when there is no known danger at hand, as there was now. Doubtless to
affirm that Christ was so amazed at this time, is no less than to make Christ a
sinner formally, as I have showed in the opening of Joh. 19. 28, 30. in Chap.
4. Sect. 8. He could not be any further amazed than his perfect rational Will
thought most suitable to the conditions of his Covenant, which was to be
touched with a quick sense of our passions when he would, and as much as he
would; The Devil indeed did labor to deprive him of his reasonable soul, as it
is evident by his plotting of his ignominious and violent death, and he labored
to bring him into such amaze, as Mr. Norton speaks of, and if he could have
effected it, he had won the victory; but blessed be God, this wise servant was
never no otherwise amazed but as himself pleased to trouble himself, Joh. 11.
33. I confess, I find the same Doctrine in M. Weams portraiture, p. 248. He
makes Christ forgetful in his Office, as M. Norton does, by reason of the Agony
astonishing his senses; and thus this corrupt tenent does spread like leven,
but says Dr. Williams in p. 447. the passion of fear could not divert him from
his desire, nor darken his understanding, nor disturb his memory, nor any way
hinder him in the execution of his Office.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 88.
He began not merely to be amazed, but also to be very heavy, the word notes
expavefaction, which was such a motion of his mind superadded to his
consternation, whereby for the time he was disinabled as concerning the minding
of any thing else, being wholly taken up with the dreadful sense of the
righteous wrath of God, as the eye intrinsecally fixed upon some object, takes
no notice of any other object before it for the while.


Reply 17. As I said of the former word Amazed, so I say of this word very
heavy, it must not be stretched beyond the context; But I have showed that he
has stretched the word Amazed beyond the context; therefore seeing he does
stretch this word very heavy beyond the word amazed, It follows, that he does
also stretch the Greek word Ademonein beyond the context. Mr. Norton stretches
the word, very heav* in Mark. 1433 beyond the context.


Try it by some Translations. Tremelius does translate the Syriack
signification of this word Tristitia; And Tindal does translate it Agony; And
the Geneva, great heaviness; and Mr. Broughton, full of heaviness; And the
Seventy by this Greek word do translate the Hebrew word Shamam, in Job 18. 20.
which we translate, Affrighted, and the Geneva, Fear, and Mr. Broughton, Horror.

All these words in these translations do well agree to that great natural
fear and heaviness that Christ assumed at the sudden approach of his
ignominious and painful death, and the thought of it was much in his mind, as
it appears by his manifold speeches of it to his Apostles, in Matthew. 16. 21.
and 17. 22, 23. and 20. 18, 19, 24. and 21. 38. Job. 12. 27. and therefore his
mind was not dis-inabled at this time from thinking of it, and it was the main
request of his prayers to get a confirmation against his natural fear of it.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 88.
His mind was wholly taken up with the dreadful sense of the righteous wrath of
God.


Reply 18. These words do make it evident why he does stretch the exposition
of the two Greek words beyond the context, namely, for this very end, that he
may hook in the dreadful sense of the righteous wrath of God upon Christ's soul;
But I have said enough, I think, to confound this assertion.

And other Divines give another sense of Christ's soul-sorrows in the Garden.

Dr. Lightfoot in his harmony on the New Testament, p. 65. says thus, In an
Agony he sweats drops like blood; All the powers of hell being let loose
against Christ, as it never was against person upon earth before or since, and
that from the pitching of the field of old, Genesis 3. 15. thou shall pierce him
in the heel; so that it was not so much for any pangs of hell that Christ felt
within him, as for the assaults of hell that he saw enlarged against him, that
he was so full of sorrow and anguish. This testimony to the truth of Gods
Declaration in Genesis 3. 15. does fully accord with the Dialogue.

2 Mr. Robert Wilmot in his manuscript on Haides, says thus on the word
Always, in Act. 2. 25.

Always (says he) even in his forest agonies.

1 Before the sweaty Agony, his soul was troubled, yet then he called God
Father, Joh. 12. 27.

2 When he was in the Agony he could still call God Father, Luke 22. 44. and in
Joh. 11. 42. he says, he knew God heard him always, and therefore even then
he must needs have comfort.

3 When he began to be (...), most grievously tormented and (...), abundantly
sorrowful or rounded about with sorrow, yet then he could still call God
Father, Matthew. 26. 37, 38, 39, 42.

4 When the betrayer was come, and the Band had seized on him, yet then also he
uttered words of sure comfort and confidence, Mat. 26. 53. Think thou (said
he to Peter) that I cannot pray to my Father, and he shall set before me more
than twelve legions of Angels.

5 When he was upon the cross, and cried, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, Does not the very forefront of that speech ascertain us that he
had even then comfort in his God? Mat. ^7. 46.

6 Had he not strong comfort in God his Father at the giving up of the Ghost,
when he said, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit? Luke 23. 46.

If then through all his sufferings he could pray to his Father, as we see, and
knew his father heard him ever, then surely he had comfort in his Father ever;
yea, if through all his sufferings he called him by the fiducial and cordial
name Father, we cannot imagine but that he conceived and applied the comfort
contained in the name, when ever he did mention the name; else how conceive we
that his heart and mouth did go together?

These observations of Mr. Wilmots do evidence that Christ's mind was not wholly
taken up with the dreadful sense of the righteous wrath of God, when he began
to be amazed, and to be very heavy, as Mr. Norton does affirm.

SECT. 5.
Christ's Agony, and Luke 22. 44. Examined.

MR. Norton in page 63. does thus abbreviate the Dialogues words.

If the circumstances of this Agony be well weighed (says the Dialogue) it
will appear, that it did not proceed from his Fathers wrath, but from his
natural fear of death only; because he must be stricken with the fear of
death, as much as his true humane nature could bear; he must be touched with
the fear of death in a very great measure (as the Prophets did foretell)

Add to these pains of his mind, his earnest prayers to be delivered from his
natural fear of death; the fear of death does often cause men to sweat, and
earnest prayer does often cause men to sweat.

As he was man he must be touched with the fear of death, for a time, and as he
was Mediator he must fully and wholly overcome his natural fear of death by his
prayers; therefore there was a necessity for him to strive in prayer, until he
had overcome it.

Mr. Norton does thus answer in p. 64.
There can no reason be given, why the fear of death should be as much as the
humane nature of Christ could bear without sin, because the object of that fear
may be and is exceeded; penal spiritual death is a greater object of fear
incomparably.


Reply 19. I have already replied to this very answer in substance, in the
first Section of this Chapter: But yet I reply further with the Dialogue, That
the law of Mediatorship did require that he should take our nature, together
with our true natural (but yet sinless) infirmities, Genesis 3. 15. Heb. 4. 15.
and seeing he was conceived of the seed of the woman by the power of the Holy
Ghost, our nature and natural affections were transcendent in him, and
therefore according to those transscendent natural passions, he could not choose
but abhor death, more than any sinful man, and therefore he did often trouble
himself with the thought of it, as he made it evident by his speeches often
itterated to his Disciples about his ignominious death and sufferings at
Jerusalem; but at his last Supper, and in the Garden, when his death was nigh
at hand, he did more pathetically express his natural dread and abhorrence of
it, first to his Disciples, and then to God in his prayers, Matthew. 26. 37, 38.
for he knew by Gods declared will in Genesis 3. 15. that God had armed the Devil
with power to apprehend him, to condemn him, and to put him to that ignominious
torturing death of the cross, as a sinful malefactor.

I say the consideration of this usage could not choose but work a greater dread
and abhorring in the humane nature of Christ, than the like can do to us,
because of the pure constitution of his nature, as I have noted it in Sect. 1.
Our nature by reason of original sin is become the slave of death, Heb. 2. 14.
and therefore we cannot abhor it with so much true natural detestation, as the
pure nature of Christ might do and did, and therefore his natural fear of death
was transcendent to ours.

But says he, Penal spiritual death is a greater object incomparably, he takes
it for granted that Christ suffered a penal spiritual death, which is denied:
But in case such a Tenent were i^deed held forth in the book of God, then
methinks the blessed Scriptures should insist most upon i^, seeing it is held
to be the main matter of full and just satisfaction, but the contrary is
evident to me, namely, that the Scriptures do insist most upon his ignominious
torturing bodily death from Satan, and upon his sacrifice, as soon as ever he
had finished all his sufferings, and had evidenced his obedience to be perfect
through sufferings.

The Dialogue says thus in p. 49.
It is no marvel then that our Savior fell into such an Agony the night before
his death, seeing it was not an easy thing to alter the property of nature,
from a desire to live, to a desire to die, and that not for his own end and
benefit, but for the sake of the Elect only; and all this must he perform in
exact obedience to his Fathers will, he must observe the due time of every
action, and so on, as it follows in Mr. Nortons citation in page 64, 65.

Mr. Norton does answer thus in page 63.
Your mentioning other causes (though false) of Christ's fear, besides his
natural death only, is a secret acknowledgement that his fear of a natural
death only was not a sufficient cause of his exceeding sorrows before his
death.


Reply 20. The Dialogue shows plainly, that the approach of his ignominious and
painful death by his Combater Satan, was the main cause of his exceeding
natural fear, and so consequently of his Agony: But,

Secondly, in order to overcome that fear, the Dialogue does make his godly
fear in his rational soul by putting up strong prayers, with cries and tears,
for the overcoming of his natural fear, to be another ground that did increase
his violent sweat in his Agony.

And thirdly, I makes his pious care to perform all the sufferings that were
written of him, in exact obedience in all circumstances to the Laws of the
Combat, without any diversion by Satan's provocations, to be another
circumstance that did aggravate his zeal in his prayers, and so it was a
helping cause to increase his sweat in his Agony: But mark this, the Dialogue
does still make his natural fear of death to be the foundation of all this; and
therefore I know no just cause given why Mr. Norton should say, That my words
are a secret acknowledgement, that his fear of a natural death, was not a
sufficient cause of his exceeding sorrows before his death. Natural death is
the punishment of original sin, but Christ's humane nature was not by that
justice subjected to death.


2 I cannot choose but wonder that Mr. Norton does so often charge the Dialogue
to speak of Christ's natural death only, seeing the Dialogue does shun that word
as altogether unfit to express the formality of his death, as I have showed at
Reply 5. This is a plain evidence, That Mr. Norton does not understand the
drift of the Dialogue about the true nature of Christ's death; natural death is
that bodily death which was by Gods positive justice inflicted on fallen Adam,
as the punishment of original sin, in Genesis 3. 19. which is now natural to us;
this is a true description of natural death; But Christ's humane nature, was not
made subject to death by the curse of that supreme positive Law, because he was
free from orginal sin, and so free from the curse of that Law, for sin is not
imputed, where there is no Law, Romans 5. 13. But by another positive Law and
Covenant, wherein he was an equal and reciprocal Covenanter. Mr. Norton having
gone astray in his first foundation-proposition, he strayes further and further
from the true nature of Christ's death and sacrifice; first, he says, That all
the curses of the Law are heaped together, and laid upon Christ: And then in
page 83. and in diverse other places, he strayes further and further, till he
make the death of Christ in the formality of it to be his subjection to that
cursed bodily death that was inflicted on fallen Adam for their original sin in
Genesis 3. 19. But I hope I have sufficiently showed in Reply 3. and 5. a little
before, and elsewhere, That the death of Christ was not a natural death, but a
death of Covenant only, or else it could not have been a sacrifice for the
procuring of Gods Atonement to the Elect, which no other man's natural death in
the world is besides: And therefore the Dialogue does rightly argue in page 6.
that the death of Christ is not included in that cursed death that was
threatened to fallen Adam in Genesis 3. 19. But it was declared to be of another
nature, and exemplified to Adam by the death of some Lamb offered in sacrifice
for the breaking of the Devils Head-plot, four verses before, namely in Genesis 3.
15.

3 It is evident to all men, that his earnest prayers did increase Ains. does
make the earnest praye^s of Christ to be a part of his A^ony.
his sweat in his Agony, by the very words of the Text in Luke 22. 44. And
says Ainsworth, upon the word Incense [beaten small] in Lev. 16. 12. It
figured the Agony of Christ in his prayers before his death, which he offered
up with strong crying and tears, Luke 22. 44 Heb. 5. 7.

And says Trap in Mat. 26. 36. our Savior prayed himself into an Agony, to
teach us to strive in prayer, even to an Agony, as the word signifies, in Col.
4. 12. for earnest prayer is an earnest striving or wrestling it out with God,
Romans 15. 30. And so Jacob wrastled both bodily and spiritually with Christ for
a blessing, Genesis 32. 24. Heb. 12. 3, 4. Romans 15. 30. Deuteronomy. 9. 14. Ex. 32. 10.


And says Ains. in Genesis 32. 24. Jacob wrestled or combated with Christ, and so
Rachel wrastled or combated with Leah, Genesis 30. 8. And so Christ with excellent
wrestling wrastled it out with Satan; He fought the good fight and kept to the
Rule of obedience, in his fears and prayers; and such kind of prayers do often
cause men to sweat, though they have the Spirit but by measure; how much more
fervent then was Christ in his prayers in his Agony in the Garden, which had
the Spirit above measure (as the Dialogue does argue) it is no marvel then,
that his prayers which were uttered with strong cries and tears, did increase
his sweat in his Agony, until it trickled down like as it were great drops of
blood. Nature it self without the gracious actings of Gods Spirit, may strive
it self into a sweaty Agony, as the Physician that wrote the book de utilitate
Respirationis (among Gallens Works, Attribut. Tom. 7.) says, It sometimes
happens, that servent spirits do so dilate the pores of the body that blood
passes by them, and so the sweat may be bloody: Hence I reason thus; If a
natural man may be thus fervent in spirits till his sweat may be bloody; then
why might not Christ, that had his natural fervency increased Also in Reply 24.
you may see an example of a bloody sweat caused through the sudden fear of an
ignominious death.
in his prayers by the Spirit above measure, provoke a bloody sweat from his
body? and therefore the reasoning of the Dialogue is sound and good, which
runs; If the natural fear of death, and the striving of the Spirit in prayer
may cause men to sweat, then it might cause our Saviors pure humane nature to
sweat, much more, etc. as it follows in the Dialogue.

4 Consider how terrible to nature death is at sometimes; but at sometimes
again not terrible: After our Savior had finished his prayers in the Garden,
he said to his Disciples in Matthew. Mat. 26. 46.
26. 46. Arise, let us be going, namely, to meet that ignominious death, that a
little before was so dreadful to my humane nature, that it put me into an
Agony, but now I have obtained a confirmation to my nature against those fears,
and therefore See Dr. Hall in his Select Thoughts, p. 139.
now I say unto you, Arise, let us go meet it: Which till he had prayed (says
Trap) he greatly feared: And says Dr. Hall, the fear of death is natural, and
so far from being evil, that it was incident to the Son of God, who was heard
in that which he feared.

Observe, I pray, That Dr. Hall does speak this of Christ's natural fear of his
bodily death.

And secondly, This also is worthy of due observation, that Christ must
overcome his natural fear of death before he could make his vital soul a
sacrifice, according to Gods command, for it was Gods command, and his own
Covenant also, that he should not suffer any to take away his vital soul from
him.

But secondly, to lay it down of himself, namely, as a sacrifice, by his own
will, desire, and power; but this his humane nature could not do, until he had
overcome his natural fear; and he had no better way to overcome his natural
fear, than by his fervent wrestling prayers, as it is expressed in Luke 22. 44.
and Heb. 5. 7. He might not in this case use the power of his Godhead to make
his nature impassible, because he had covenanted to enter the Lists with his
Combater Satan, in the infirmities of our humane nature, and he had no better
way to get a confirmation (like Armor of proof) to his humane nature against
this fear of his unnatural ignominious death, than by his earnest sweating
prayers, in which he was heard, because of his godly fear.

But says Mr. Norton in page 87.
The word Agony in Luke 22. 44. signifies the sorrows of Combaters A true
description of Christ's Agony. Luke 22. 44.
entering the Lists, with the sense of the utmost danger of life. A metaphor
taken from the Possion of conflicting affections, in the greatest, eminentest,
and most sensible perils, and so holding forth the sharpest of the fears of men.


Reply 21. This description of the word Agony, I do acknowledge to be very
true and good: But in his explication of it to Christ, he does again spoil it,
because he makes the Agony of Christ to be his conflicting with his Fathers
vindicative wrath, and with eternal death, whereas according to the true sense
of Scripture: It was his natural fear conflicting with his ignominious
torturing death, which (by his own Covenant with his Father) he was to suffer
from his combater Satan; and in that respect he also covenanted, that his true
humane nature which he would assume from the seed of the deceived sinful woman,
should be eminently touched with the dread of his cruel and ignominious usage,
according to the true purport of Gods first declaration in Genesis 3. 15.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 87.
Luke expresses the nature of his passion in general by an Agony, in Luke 22.
44.


Reply. 22. I grant it was an Agony in general, but not from his sufferings
from Gods immediate wrath, as Mr. Norton holds, but from his sufferings from
the malice of his Combater Satan: and for the better understanding of the true
nature of his agony, I will rank it into two sorts.

First, Into his active agony in the Garden.

Secondly, Into his passive agony, or rather into his activepassive agony, from
the time of his apprehension to his death on the cross.

1 I will speak of his active agony; and that was begun in some degree before
his last Supper, as it is evident by Joh. 12. 27. with Joh. 13. 1. Now is my
soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father Joh. 12. 27.
save me from this hour, namely, from the dread of this hour (but not
absolutely from the hour of his sufferings, as the next words do evidence) but
(says he) for this cause came I to this hour. And though it is said by a
Sometimes the passive verb is put for the active. See Ainsw. in Deuteronomy. 31. 17.
and in Parcus reconciling the Greek in Romans 4 3. with the Hebrew in Genesis 15. 6.
he says, these two are all one, God imputed Faith, and Faith by God was
imputed; so also, he poured out his soul to death, Isa. 53. 12. is in the
Seventy, and in Romans 4. 25. he was delivered to death. And says Ball on the
Covenant, p. 60. Active verbs are expounded passively among the Hebrews. See
also Ains. in Psa 36 3. and 109, 13. and 40 15. and 122. 5. Genesis 20. 6. Lev.
26. 1, 11.
passive verb, my soul is troubled, yet Joh. 11. 33. he is said to trouble
himself.

And hence it follows by these two Scriptures compared, that his conflicting
affections were active; for his sensitive will was in an absolute subjection to
his rational will, in which he was the absolute Lord Commander of all his
affections, they did his will at his beck; and this excellent property belongs
only to the humane nature of Christ, it is his personal privilege; for our
natural passions in him were above our natural power, because nature in him did
never go before his will, as Damasen speaks in Reply 26.

2 The thought of his sufferings was much in his mind when he was at his last
Supper; and therefore while he was at Supper he bad Judas to do what he had to
do quickly, Joh. 13. 27. and when Judas was gone about his treachery, he did
manifest that he had very sad apprehensions of what evils he was to suffer; for
Supper being ended, and Jesus knowing that the father had given all things into
his hands, Joh. 13. 3. namely, knowing that the Father had given the management
of the whole combat into the hands of his true humane nature, as it was
accompanied with true humane passions, He knew it was his duty to stir up his
true humane conflicting affections, in a more eminent manner than other men, at
the approach of his ignominious and painful sufferings, according to the most
eminent and tender constitution of his nature, above the nature of other men.

3 It is also evident, that the expressions of the two Evangelists, Matthew and
Mark, do relate to the same agony that Luke does: and therefore Tindal does
translate [Ademonein] Mat. 26. 37. and in Mark. 14. 33. (which we translate
very heavy) by the word Agony in both places, just as he does [Agon] in Luke
22. 44. But as soon as Christ had obtained a confirmation against his said
natural fear, by his earnest prayers in the Garden, then his inward agony by
his conflicting affections had an end; I say, after he had by his earnest
prayers obtained a confirmation, he never had any more conflicting affections
in the consideration of those evils he was to suffer, as he had before he had
prayed, as I have formerly noted it: But as soon as he had obtained his request
by his earnest prayers, then he came to his Disciples and said to them (as a
resolved Champion) Come, the hour is come, Behold the Son of man is betrayed
into the hands of sinners. Rise up, let us go, Mark. 14. 41, 42. namely, let us
not Mar. 14. 41, 42.
rise up to run away through fear, but let us go and meet those
arch-Instruments of Satan, the sons of Belial, as Ainsw. calls them, in Genesis
13. 13. or as Trap says in Matthew. 26. 46. Rise, let us be going to meet that
death, which till he had prayed (says he) he greatly feared; Or, let us go
meet my Combater Satan. He speaks these words after the manner of a courageous
Champion that is going to strive with his Antagonist for the mastery; and the
sequel shows that from this time forwards he resisted his Combater Satan unto
blood; for it was counted a shame for such as undertook to be Combaters, to
yield before any blood was drawn; and indeed such combats as were undertaken
for the trial of the mastery, were seldom determined without blood. And
accordingly he that did overcome his Antagonist without transgressing the
voluntary Laws of the Combat, was reputed by the Masters of the game to be a
lawful victor, and he did thereby merit the prize; and unto this oustom the
Apostle does allude in Heb. 12. 1, 2, 3. Ye Heb. 1 2. 1, 2, 3.
have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin. Look therefore unto
the example of that Combater, Jesus Christ, who is the Captain and conservator
(as Ains. renders the word in Lev. 8. 22.) of our Faith, Who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is now
seated (with honor as a conqueror) at the right hand of the Throne of God; for
he endured (as the godly many times do) a great combat or fight of
afflictions, Heb. 10. 32.

Such voluntary Laws and Covenants, as were usually made by the Masters of the
Olympic, and Roman Combats, and such voluntary Combaters as did consent to
obey the said Laws and Covenants, do somewhat exemplify my meaning, when I do
so often speak of the voluntary Covenant between the Trinity, and of the
voluntary undertaking of the seed of the woman, to enter the Lists, and to
combat with the arch-enemy of mankind, in obedience to those positive Laws and
Covenants that were made between the Trinity for winning the prize of man's
redemption.

4 An agony may be either inward, by conflicting affections against the fear of
evil; and such was Christ's agony in the Garden, from the foresight, or
fore-apprehension of his ignominious usage by his cruel Combater Satan.

Or secondly, An agony may be outward, in conflicting with the smarting sense
of the blows of the opposite Champion.

Dr. Hammon in 2 Timothy 4. 7 8. says, That these two verses are 3 Tim. 4. 7, 8.
wholly Agonistical, (...) (says he) is any of the four famous Games Olympic,
etc. And (of that) as it signifies the suffering afflictions, See 1 These. 2. 6.
and there (says he) the 1 These. 2 2.
word (...), strife or contention, may be taken in an active or in a passive
sense, i. e. either for labor or sufferance, both in a high degree.

In the first sense (says he) Christ does command us to enter in at the strait
gate. And in the latter sense (says he) see Phil. 1. 30. Col 1. 29. 1 Timothy 4.
10.
Heb. 12. 1, 2. Phil. 1. 30. Col. 1. 29. where striving is bearing or suffering
afflictions, and so in 1 Timothy 4. 10. there the K. M. reads we combat, i. e.
suffer persecutions, and there is the combat of sufferings in Heb. 10 32. and
Phil. 4. 3. the women that Heb. 10. 32. Phil. 4. 3.
combated or contended, i. e. that suffered persecutions with me.

See more of the Agonistical Games in his Annotations on 1 Cor. 9. 24 25, 26,
27. And see Goodwin in his Roman Antiquities, l. 2, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27.
p. 100, 101, 103, 104. of the several sorts of combating, and he concludes
with a reference to Lipsius, who treats largely of the combat of Fencing.

And into this double kind of agony did Darius cast himself in Dan. 6. 14. He
labored till the going down of the Sun to deliver Daniel. Dan. 6. 14.
The Seventy translate this word labored, by Agonizomenos; that is to say, he
labored as those that strive or contend for the mastery, with Daniels opposite
Combaters, to deliver Daniel from the Lions Den; He so contended with Daniels
adversaries, as he did agonize himself to deliver him, till the going down of
the Sun; and this agony of his was not only extended to his outward laboring
with Daniels adversaries to get a Release of the Decree, but it was also an
inward agony with his own conflicting affections of sorrow and fear, for the
cruel death of his dearly beloved Daniel: And yet in verse. 16. he had some hope
that God would miraculously deliver Daniel, and when the King sealed the stone
with his signet, that the Decree should not be changed, he had some hope of his
escape, for he knew that the Lions did not presently seize upon his body, and
therefore after he was returned to his Palace, he remained fasting, and
suffered no instruments of music to be brought before him, and his sleep went
from him, verse. 18. all this does evidence the greatness of his inward agony
with his own conflicting thoughts and affections, of fear and sorrow, for the
great danger of Daniels life.

These, and such like instances, do somewhat direct us how to understand the
true ground and cause of Christ's agony; both of his internal agony in his
sensitive soul in the Garden, and of his external agony by his combat of
sufferings from Satan and his instruments, from his apprehension to his death
on the Cross; and how he was to conquer them by his constant patience, and by
his perseverance in all obedience to the positive Laws of the combat, before
he could make his soul an acceptable sacrifice.

5 I will yet more largely open Christ's agony, by opening the plot of the
Trinity for man's redemption, as it is declared in Genesis 3. 15. First, In
proclaiming enmity between the seed Genesis 3. 25.
of the Serpent, and the seed of the Woman.

And secondly, In declaring the victory to go on Christ's side by his obedience
to the Laws of the Combat, even when the Devil by his malicious stratagems
should pierce him in the foot-soals.

1 God told the Devil in the Serpent, in Genesis 3. 15. that he would put an utter
enmity between him and the seed of the deceived woman; and that he should have
his full liberty to use him as a sinful Malefactor, and (at last) to pierce him
in the foot-soals, and that he should have his full liberty to enter the
Lists, and try masteries with his humane nature, as it was accompanied with our
true natural infirmities, to the end that he might try the best of skill, if by
any means he could bring this seed of the woman into any disobedience to the
Laws of the Combat, as he had done with Adam in his Innocence.

But Mr. Norton in page 19. and in page 218. does spoil the true sense of this
word Seed of the woman (called He, and Him) in Genesis 3. 15. by interpreting it
in a collective sense of Christ, and his members; whereas it should be
interpreted only of the individual person of Christ, as he is the second Adam,
and public head of his Elect Church; as Mr. Ruthersurd on the Covenant, page
312. has rightly expounded the word Seed, in Gal. 3. 16. and his reasons there
alleged may serve to prove the like sense of the word Seed, in Genesis 3. 15.

Moreover God told the Devil, that he might look to himself as well as he
could, that this seed of the deceived woman, should by his perfect obedience to
the Laws of the Combat, conquer him in all his designs, and at last make his
soul a most perfect obedient sacrifice; by which perfection of his obedience,
both in his Combat and Sacrifice, he should break in pieces his first grand
Head-plot; for his first grand Head-plot was to entice Adam to eat the
forbidden fruit (contrary to Gods voluntary positive prohibition) and thereby
to inwrap him, and all his natural posterity into the same spiritual death of
original sin: But yet for all this, God told the Devil, that he would raise up
a seed from this deceived sinful woman, that should conquer him by his most
perfect and exact obedience to another voluntary positive Law, that should be
more hard and difficult to be performed than Adams was by infinite degrees, and
that was first to enter the Lists with Satan and his instruments, and not to
be disturbed in his patience, but to observe the laws of the Combat in all
obedience, and at last (when the Devil had done his worst) he should then make
his vital soul a sacrifice in breathing out his immortal soul by his own
Priestly power; and all this is comprehended in this sentence, He shall break
thy head: and by this speech, God did fully forewarn the Devil, that he might
use his best skill without any restraint, to do what he could to disturb the
patience of this seed of the woman, either by his sinful imputations, or by his
ignominious usage, or by his cruel tortures, and so might do his utmost to
interrupt his obedience, that so his death might not be a sacrifice, and that
so by this means he might save his Head-plot from being broken, and accordingly
the Devil did often stir up his Arch-instruments to disturb his patience, but
especially when he entered into Judas to fetch a band of armed men with swords
and staves to apprehend him as a notorious Malefactor, and stirred up the
Scribes to accuse him as a most sinful Malefactor, worse than the murderer
Barabas, and he stirred up Herod, and his Soldiers, to mock him, and Pilate to
condemn him to the most shameful cursed death of the Cross; and all this evil
usage is included in this sentence, Thou (Satan) shall pierce him in the
foot-soals.

And in this Combat this is chiefly to be marked, That the Devil did use all
the foulest play that he could devise to disturb the patience of this Seed of
the woman that was compassed about with our true natural affections and
passions, and with a tender sense of every evil, for the Devil knew that if he
could by all his foul play, but once have disturbed his patience, that then he
had perverted him in the course of his obedience, and then he knew that he
should have spoiled his death from being a sacrifice, and then he knew that he
should have preserved his first grand Head-plot from being broken; and then the
Devil would have triumphed over Christ upon the Cross, and over all mankind, as
he did when he first brought Adam to disobey Gods positive prohibition in
eating the forbidden fruit.

2 God was pleased further to declare, That it was the plot of the Trinity,
that the second person should take unto him the seed of the deceived sinful
woman; and that he should enter the Lists with his enemy Satan, in that nature,
as it was accompanied with true natural passions, and not in the power of his
divine nature, and therefore it was of necessity that he must manifest the
truth of his humane nature by his true natural affections and passions, in
fearing, and sorrowing, and abhorring his vilde ignominious usage by his
Combater Satan; and if it be marked, Christ does as much complain of his
shameful usage, as of his painful usage; and that he says in Psalm. 69. 20.
Reproach has broken my heart; and yet still, that, notwithstanding all Satan's
vilde usage, he should continue obedient to the very last, even to the most
shameful death of the Cross, and that he should then make his vital soul a
sacrifice of Redemption and Reconciliation for all the Elect. And thus as by
the demerit of Adams disobedience to a mere positive Law, The Many (even the
Elect as well as the Reprobate) were made sinners, so by the merit of the
obedience of the second Adam to Gods mere positive Law in his combat with
Satan, and in his death and sacrifice, The Many are made righteous, Romans 5. 18,
19. that is to say, Rom 5. 18, 19.
They are justified from the condemning power of sin by Gods Reconciliation for
the sake of Christ's obedience in his combat of sufferings, and in his death
and sacrifice.

And indeed how else could his humane nature be better proved and exemplified,
than by his fear and heaviness at the nigh approach of his ignominious and must
cruel unnatural death? and how else could his obedience be better proved and
exemplified to be most perfect, than by his most perfect patience under such an
ignominious and cruel usage, and therefore by his constancy in his patience and
obedience through the whole combat with Satan, he got the victory over Satan,
and won the prize that was set before him, by the Masters of the combat, Phil.
2. 8, 9. and this God declared first in Genesis 3. 15. He shall break thy
head-plot. In these words God declared that the Phil. 2. 8, 9. Genesis 3. 15. Heb.
2. 10. All Christ's greatest sufferings were by Gods appointment to be from his
combater Satan, as in Reply 12. and 6.
seed of the woman should be a victorious combater, and conqueror of his enemy
Satan, by his patience and obedience through the whole combat; And that
Christ's sufferings are set out by his combater Satan, it is the Scripture
phrase and language by which Christ's sufferings and his victory is described
and deciphered, as it is evident by Genesis 3. 15. and so in like sort by Heb. 2.
10. he is there called the Captain of out salvation, and it is there said, that
it became God to consecrate him, or to make him perfect (as he is our Captain
in the combat) through his victorious sufferings from his combater Satan; and
see also Exodus 32. 29. And Christ is called our Captain, because all good
Christians are called his Soldiers, 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. And therefore in Col. 2.
15. Christ is said to have spoiled Principalities and powers, and (as a
conqueror) to make a show of them openly, Col 2. 15.
and to triumph over them in it, namely, in his patient and obedient death on
the cross; and he is also compared to a victorious shepherd that ventures his
life to combat with the fierce Lion and the ravenous Bear, to redeem the poor
Lamb from his prey (as David did) in Joh. 13. 11. and in Isa. 53. 12. He is Isa
53. 12. Joh. 10. 11.
said to divide the spoil with the strong, because he poured out his soul to
the death, namely, because he ventured his life with his combater Satan, and
because at last when he had fulfilled all his sufferings, he powered out his
vital soul to the death, in the nature of a sacrifice, when he said, Father,
into thy bands I commend my spirit. And therefore says God, He shall divide
the spoil with the strong adversary Satan, for though Satan at the first got
the victory over Adam, and thereby inwrapped all mankind, under his power, as
his spoil; yet now at the last Christ by his constant patience and obedience,
notwithstanding all Satan's provocations, has got the victory again over Satan,
and by that means he pacified Gods wrath for the Elect, and rescued them from
being Satan's spoil; to be his spoil. And thus you see how Christ has divided
the spoil, as David did when he conquered the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30. and this
dividing of the spoil is always done with joy for the victory, as in Judge. 5.
30. Luke 11. 22.

These and such like Sciptures do fully declare unto us wherein the true nature
of Christ's agony does consist, namely, in his combat with his ignominious
answer from his malicious combater Satan, both his inward agony in the Garden,
when he was surrounded with great fear, and with great heaviness, it was in
relation to his outward agony by his combat of sufferings from Satan on the
cross; and also the true nature of his conquest is set out by that victorious
weapon of righteousness, his constant and exact patience and obedience, and no
Scripture does mention his sufferings to be from Gods Judgment seat, in the
way of legal proceedings from Gods immediate wrath, though the Devil took that
course to make him a legal sinner before Pilats judgment seat.

3 The Devil having had this open warning by Gods proclamation of an utter
enmity, namely, that the seed of the woman should by his patience and obedience
under all the difficulties of the combat, break his head-plot; he took the
warning, and therefore he neglected no time, but took the very first
opportunity to disturb the patience, and to spoil the obedience of the seed of
the woman, even as soon as ever he was intrinsecally installed into the
Mediators Office (which was done at his baptism) and then Christ also was led
by the Spirit of God (that anointed him, and installed him with gifts for his
Office) into the wilderness on purpose to try Masteries with the Devil; and
there the Devil continued to tempt him by all the sleights he could devise for
forty days together, and because he could not prevail in those forty days,
therefore when the said forty days were ended, he grew to be more desperate
(than formerly) in his temptations, and according to the grant of his power
(which was unlimited) over the body of Christ, he took it up, and carried it
alost to the Air, and set it upon the top of the Pinnacle of the Temple; and
truly, it is no marvel that the Divine nature would suffer his Humane nature to
be carried about by the Devil, seeing he suffered Satan did first enter the
Lists with Christ at his baptism, when he was first extrinsecally installed
into the Mediators office though more especially in the Garden and on the Cross.
his humane nature to be crucified by him. But still the Devil lost his labor,
because Christ's obedience was unconquerable, for by his patience and obedience
he resisted the Devil in all his temptations; and after the Devil had spent his
skill in these three notable temptations, he is said to leave him for a season,
Luke 4. 14. but it was but for a short season, for in verse. 16. when our Savior
came to Nazaret where he had been brought up, he went into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath day, and stood up to read; and at last he said thus to them, No Prophet
is accepted in his own Country, verse. 24. And then all in the Synagogue when
they heard these things were filled with wrath (for the Devil did now provoke
their corrupt natures thereto) and they rose up and thrust him out of the City,
and led him to the brow of the hill, that they might cast him down headlong,
verse. 28, 29. and ever after continually the Devil did nothing else but raise
up most vild slanderous accusations against him, and often moved the Pharisees
to take him and put him to death.

4 The Devil did yet more eagerly enter the lists with Christ, at his last
Supper, and so on to the Garden; for at his last supper he said thus to his
Disciples, Hereafter I will not talk much with you, for the Prince of this
world comes, Joh. 14. 30. For just now Joh. 14. 30.
he has taken away Judas from our society to fetch a Band of armed men from
the Highpriests to apprehend me as a sinful malefactor; and therefore I
fore-tel you that the Prince of this world comes now to assault me more
fiercely than ever heretofore, So that hereafter I cannot talk much with you,
as now I do. Of which more hereafter.

But because Mr. Norton does make this Agony of Christ to be his conflicting
passions with his Fathers vindicative wrath; therefore it is needful ere we go
any further to examine such Scriptures as are brought for the proof of it.

1. The first Scripture I will begin with, is in Mat. 26. 31. This Scripture
has been objected to me by some of note, to prove Matthew. 26, 31.
that God himself did smite Christ the Shepherd of the sheep, by his immediate
vindicative wrath.

The context lies thus, When Christ was at Supper with his Disciples, his true
humane nature was much exercised with the thought of his ignominious and cruel
usage, which Satan was ready to bring upon him; as it appear: by his speeches
to his Disciples, All ye (said he) shall be offended because of me this night:
For it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall
be scattered, Matthew. 26. 31. This [I] has been expounded to me by some of
note, to be God, and so it is; but withal they expound it to be Gods smiting
of Christ's soul with his immediate wrath. But this I deny, for these words must
be expounded from Zach. 13. 7. and then the case will be altered, Zach. 13. 7.
for the words in Zachary runs thus, Smite thou the shepherd, there the word
[Thou,] is put for the word [I] in Matthew, and this difference is observed by
Mr. Ainsworth in his preface to Genesis; so that in Zachary God says to Satan,
smite thou the Shepherd; Smite him as a sinful malefactor and spare not, do thy
worst to disturb his patience, etc. God speaks thus to Satan in Zachary, just
as he did in Genesis 3. 15. Thou Satan shall pierce the seed of the woman in the
foot-soals as a wicked malefactor. Weight the whole Text in Zachary, which runs
thus.


Awake, O Sword, against my Shepherd; That is to say, rouse up thy self O
Satan, and bring a band of men armed with swords and staves against my
shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, as we see he did in Mat. 26.
47. Smite thou the shepherd, for I have given thee full liberty without any
restraint, to use thy best skill to make him a sinful malefactor, and to smite
him as a sinful malefactor, that thou may disturb his patience if thou can,
and so may make him a transgressor, as thou did Adam. Or it may be read at
it is in Matthew, I will smite the shepherd; For I God have given Satan full
liberty to smite him, that I may see the proof of his patience and obedience.

And in this form of speech God is said to afflict Job, and therefore Job said,
The Lord has taken away my cattle, and my children, Job 1. In these words you
see that Job ascribes all the evils that fell upon him, to God, because God
permitted Satan to do what he did, and therefore says Job, in Chap. 19. 21.
The hand of God has touched me; In these words he called the Devil Gods hand,
because God gave the Devil leave to afflict him (so as he did) to try his
patience, and we see that Jobs patience in his first encounter with Satan was
not disturbed. And in this sense the word [I] must be understood in Matthew; I
will sinite the shepherd; that is to say, I God will give Satan leave to smite
the shepherd. This is the true sense of Matthew, and therefore this is no proof
that God smote Christ's soul from his immediate vindicative wrath.

The second Scripture to be examined is Isa. 53. 10. It pleased Isa. 53. 20.
the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief, when he shall set out, or
give his soul to be a Trespass Offering, or as the Seventy read it, a sin, For
this phrase set, see Ains. on Genesis 21. 13. and 27. 37. and in Psa. 8. 2. and
Genesis 9. 12. and 17. 5.

This Scripture being rightly interpreted, does not mean that God was pleased
to bruise Christ actively, and so to put him to grief by his immediate wrath;
But it means that it pleased the Lord passively to put, that is to permit and
suffer Satan to bruise him, and to put him to grief, and so speaks our larger
Annotation on these words, He put him to grief, or (as some says the
Annotation) he suffered him to be put to pain or torment, because this form
(says the Annotation) has often in it a notion of permission, as in Psalm. 37.
33. Psalm. 119. 10, 116. and Isa. 63. 17. and see more for this form in Reply
22. and in Ains. in Psa. 39. 9. and in Psa. 16. 10.

In this sense, I say, It pleased the Lord to bruise Christ, and to put him to
grief, and just so it pleased the Lord to put an utter enmity between the Devil
and the seed of the deceived sinful woman, in Genesis 3. 15. there the Lord
appointed the Devil by Genesis 3. 15.
his permissive Commission to combat for the victory with the seed of the
woman; and in case the Devil could prevail to disturb his patience, then the
Victory was to go on his side, but in case the seed of the woman did persevere
in his patience and obedience through all the Devils ignominious trials, and at
last in that perfect obedience did make his vital soul a Sacrifice by breathing
out his immortal soul by his own Priestly power, then the victory was to go on
his side, and then he was to have the prize, namely, the Redemption of all the
Elect.

And in this sense also is Isa. 53. 5. to be understood, He was Isa. 53. 5.
wounded for our trangressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: God may be
said to do this (though not from his immediate wrath) because he permitted
Satan to do all this, as I have expounded these words formerly.

And in this sense it is said in Psalm. 69. 27. They persecuted him whom thou
have smitten: God is here said to smite Christ, but yet not from his immediate
wrath, but by Satan and his Instruments, God permitted Satan to do his worst to
Christ, to manifest the perfection of his obedience for his Priestly
consecration to his sacrifice; but the Devils end was to disturb his patience,
and so to pervert him in his obedience, that so his death might not be a
sacrifice.

And thus it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and put him to grief, namely, by
Satan and his Instruments, and not by Gods immediate wrath; And this (...)
believe is the plain genuine sense of Isaiah.

And because I judge this interpretation to be of necessary consequence, I
will once more repeat it with some enlargement.

It pleased the Lord, according to the counsel of his own will (which he first
declared to us in Genesis 3. 15.) to permit Satan to enter the Lists with the seed
of the deceived woman, to deceive him if he could; and to that end he gave him
his full liberty to deceive him by fraud, or to provoke him by force to some
sinful disturbance or other: And thus it pleased the Lord to permit Satan to
bruise him, and to put him to grief, by an ignominious and long lingering
violent death, to disturb his patience and obedience if he could, even at the
same time, when his soul shall set, or give it self to be a Trepass Offering,
that so he might spoil his death from being a sacrifice if he could and
thereby might save his first grand Head-plot from being broken: And it pleased
the Lord also according to the counsel of his own will, to Covenant to, and
with the Mediator, that in case he held constant in his obedience, through all
Satan's malicious stratagems, and at last in that perfect obedience did give his
soul to be a Trepass Offering, then his obedience in his said sufferings
should be for his perfect consecration, and then his death should be accepted
as an acceptable sacrifice of Reconciliation for all the Elect, and then Gods
Covenant with him was that he should see his seed, and prolong his days, and
that the pleasure of the Lord for man's actual Regeneration, and Reconciliation,
should prosper in his hands.

But Mr. Norton does often torment this heavenly sense of Isaiah, with a
contrary, for he makes Christ to combat with Gods immediate wrath, and to
suffer as a legal sinner, and as our legal Surety from the judicial vindicative
wrath of God, even from his judicial vindicative Judgment Seat, as in page 55,
63, 85, 122, 143, 165, 192, 213, 39, etc.

The third Scripture to be examined is Romans 8. 32. God spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all.
Hence Mr. Norton infers in page 122. That Christ was tormented without any
forgiveness; God (says he) spared him nothing of the due debt, Romans 8. 32.
Romans 8. 32.



To this interpretation I Reply; That Gods not sparing his Son, but delivering
him up for us all, must not be understood of Gods delivering him up to his own
immediate wrath, as Mr. Nortons sense does carry it: But of Gods delivering him
up to his Combater Satan, that so Satan might have his full liberty to do his
worst unto him to provoke his patience, and so to pervert him in his obedience
by his ignominious and cruel usage, that so he might spoil his death from being
a sacrifice if he could, and that so he might hinder him from breaking his
first grand Head-plot: In this sense God spared not his Son, but gave him up
for us all, and in this sense, God gave Satan liberty to use Pilate as his
instrument to make Christ bear our sins in his body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
And therefore Christ said unto Pilate, Thou could have no power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above, Joh. 19. 11. For God gave
Satan leave to do his worst against Christ, by all the wicked instruments he
thought fit to employ; And Mr. Nortons sense, that God delivered up Christ to
be tormented by his own immediate wrath is confounded also by Peter's exposition
in Act. 2. 23, 24.

The fourth Scripture to be examined is Act. 2. 23, 24. and Act. 4. 27, 28.
Him being delivered (says Peter) by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge
of God, Ye (the Devils Arch-instruments) have taken, and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain, whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death.


Hence it is questioned what pains of death they were that God did loose?

The Answer is, Not pains of the second death, as some do most unadvisedly
expound it. But those pains of death, Which Ye by wicked hands have made by
crucifying and staying his body on the Tree; These are the pains of death that
were made by the wicked hands of his Crucifiers, and these pains of death were
they that God loosed and healed at his Resurrection.

And these wicked hands are thus described in Isa. 53. 8, 9. He was taken away
by distress (or restraint) and by judgment, Isa. 53. 8, 9.
and who shall declare his Generation?

Namely, Who shall be able to declare the extreme wickedness of that Satanical
generation, by whose wicked hands he was taken away as a wicked Malefactor,
and restrained of his wonted liberty, and brought as a Malefactor before the
judgment seat of the High Priest, and of Pilate, and of Herod, and again
before the judgment seat of Pilate, where he was sentenced to be crucified.

First, Some, I conceive, understand this Interrogation of his Godhead, Who
shall declare the Generation of his Godhead?

Secondly, Others understand it of the Generation of his elect number.

Thirdly, But I believe it must be understood of his wicked Satanical
Generation, for John Baptist did call them, A generation of Vipers, Mat. 3. And
Christ did call them, A wicked and adulterous Generation, in Mat. 12. 34, 39.
And so Dr. De Boat does expound Isa. 53. 8. And so Dr. Hammon does expound
Act. 8. 33. And History does report, That at this time the Priests and Scribes
were exceedingly addicted to converse familiarly with the Devil.

And then it follows in verse 8. For be was cut off out of the land of the
living, which is thus expounded in Act. 8. 33. His life was taken from the
earth.

And just according to this phrase Daniel says, That after sixty two weeks,
the Messiah shall be cut off; that is to say, He shall be executed by the
Devils Instruments for a wicked Malefactor, Den. 9. 26. But not for himself,
says Daniel, that is to say, Not for his own sinful nature, nor for his sinful
life: And to these two Scriptures do the words of Christ allude, when he said
to his Disciples at his last Supper, The Prince of this world comes (with a
band of armed soldiers to apprehend me for a Malefactor) but he has nothing
in me, Joh. 14. 30. no original corruption, nor no actual transgression against
the laws of the Joh. 14. 30.
Combat.

Why then was he taken by wicked hands?

God does answer by Isa. 53. 8. For the transgression of my people was he
stricken, wounded and bruised on the Cross: God would have his obedience
declared to be perfected by this means, before he would accept his death as a
sacrifice of Satisfaction and Reconciliation for the transgression of his
people; and then it follows in verse 9. That he made his grave with the wicked;
This Mark expounds thus, He was numbered with the wicked, Mar. 15. 28. and with
the rich in his death, for he was buried in rich Joseph's Sepulcher.

These Scriptures thus expounded, and many such like which might be alleged,
must have the same sense, namely, according to Gods first declaration in Genesis
3. 15. which will eminently show, how God is said to do all the afflictions of
Christ, namely, (not from his immediate wrath, but) because according to the
voluntary Covenant and Council of the blessed Trinity, he proclaimed a combat
of enmity between Satan, the arch enemy of mankind, and the seed of the
deceived woman.

And secondly, Because he gave the Devil a commission to do his worst to
disturb his patience, and so to pervert his obedience.

3 God may be said to do all the soul-sufferings of Christ, because he
appointed him to take on him the seed of the woman, and man's true natural
affections and passions, and so to be inwardly touched with the sense of Satan's
ignominious and unnatural usage, and to manifest it to his Disciples in a high
degree, according to the most excellent temper and tender constitution of his
nature above ours, and his obedience thereto caused his inward agony in the
Garden.

4 It is further evident that God would have Christ's soul to be affected with a
deep degree of the dread of his ignominious and unnatural usage by Satan (even
to an eminent Agony) because he appointed him to enter the Lists, and to
combat Christ did not enter the Lists with Satan in the glorious power of his
divine nature, but in his humane nature, as it was accompanied with our true
natural infirmities, dreading an ignominious death.
with Satan in his true humane nature, as it was accompanied with his true
natural infirmities of fear, etc. and not as it was sometimes accompanied with
the power of his Godhead.

For by Gods declared will, Christ might not take his utmost advantage against
Satan by arming his humane nature with the assistance of twelve Legions of
Angel; neither might he put forth his omnipotent and absolute power to destroy
or annihilate Satan, neither might he shut up Satan in his everlasting prison
to hinder him from his encounter, for if Christ had put forth such a power as
this against Satan, the odds had been too great, and such odds given to Christ
could not stand with the wisdom of the supreme Covenanters; and therefore in
Genesis 3. 15. God appointed Christ to take on him the seed of the deceived sinful
woman, and in that nature to enter the Lists with Satan; by the well managing
and ordering of which nature better than our first parents had done in their
innocence, he should prevalle against the stratagems of the old Serpent, that
had the power of death over our first parents; and doubtless the Devil made
full account to get the like power over the humane nature of Christ, as he had
done over Adams pure nature, and to that end, he did not cease to employ his
Instruments to tempt him, and often times he heaped upon him many grievous
accusations and sinful imputations, and at last he proceeded so far as to
apprehend him, condemn him, and crucify him as a sinful malefactor; But still
the deceiver was deceived, for indeed, Christ was such a wise servant; and such
a faithful Priest that he circumvented Satan and all his Instruments by his
righteousness in managing the combat according to the just laws of the
combat, for the Devil could not by all his stratagems prevail to make him a
Transgressor, and therefore he could not prevail to put him to death formally,
by forcing his vital soul out of his body by all his torments, and this is
evident, because Gods Justice had not ordained any thing else but sin only to
be the sting of death; and therefore unless Satan could have so far prevailed
as to make him a guilty sinner, he could not sting him to death formally; but
himself was the only Priest in the formality of his death, and therefore when
he was in strength of nature he did but say, Father, into thy hands I commend
my spirit, and then at that instant he gave up the Ghost, and that last act
being done according to Covenant, gave the formality, 1. To his Obedience. 2.
To his Death. 3. To his Sacrifice. And 4. To the full price of satisfaction to
Gods Justice for man's redemption.

And thus the seed of the woman conquered Satan, broke his first grand
Head-plot by his weapon of righteousness, and won the prize.

5 This is no new upstart doctrine, that Christ conquered Satan by
righteousness, in observing the Laws of the combat, and by entering the Lists
with the infirmities of his humane nature, which was most eminently showed both
in his internal and external agony, but this doctrine has been taught by the
ancient Divines, for.

1 Christ was made man (says Damasen) that so that which Ortho Fidei l. 3. c.
18.
was conquered might conquer; God was not unable (says he) by his mighty force
and power to take man from the Tyrant, but then that would have been a cause of
complaint to the Tyrant that had conquered man, if he had been forced by (the
power of) God; therefore God who pitied and loved us, willing to make man that
was fallen the conqueror of Satan, became man, restoring the like by the like.

2 Gregory says, When Satan took Christ's body to In mora ium l 3. c. 11.
crucify it, he lost Christ's Elect from the right of his power.

Ibidem, From Gods speech to Satan concerning Job, He is in thy band, but save
his life; he does thus declare Gods commission to Satan touching Christ; Take
thou power against his body, and loose the right of thy dominion over his Elect.

3 (Says Ireneus) Christ coupled and united man to God, for Iren l. 3. c. 20.
if man had not vanquished the enemy of man, the enemy had not been justly
vanquished.

4 Leo says, If the Godhead only should have opposed it De pass. Dom. Ser.
5. j
self for sinners, not so much reason as power should have conquered the Devil.

Ibidem, The son of God therefore admitted wicked hands to be laid upon him,
and what the rage of persecutors offered, he with patient power suffered.

This (says he) was the great mystery of godliness, that Christ was even
laden with injuries, which if he should have repelled with open power, he
should have only exercised his divine strength, but not regarded our cause
that were men; for in all things which the madness of the people and Priests
did reproachfully unto him, our sins were wiped away, and our offenses purged
(as Isa. 53. 5.) The Devil himself (says he) did not understand that his
cruelty against Christ should overthrow his Kingdom.

He should not (says he) have lost the right of his fraud, if he could but
have abstained from the Lords blood, but greedy with malice to hurt, whiles he
rusheth on Christ, himself falls; whilst he takes, he is taken, and pursuing
him that was mortal, he lighted on the Savior of the world.

And says he, in Ser. 10. Jesus Christ being lifted on the tree returned death
on the Author of death (Heb. 2 14.) and strangled all the principalities and
powers that were against him, by objecting his flesh that was passable, and
giving place in himself to the presumption of our ancient enemy, who raging
against man's nature that was subject unto him, durst there exact his debt,
where he could find no (a) sign of sin; therefore the These letters a, b, c, d.
do show that the ancient Divines held no such imputation of sin to Christ, as
Mr. Norton holds.
general and mortal handwriting by which we were sold, was torn, and the
contract of our captivity came into the power of the redeemer.

And (says he) in Sermon. 12. To destroy the Kingdom of the Devil, he rather
used the righteousness of Reason, than the power of his Might, for whilst the
Devil raged on him, whom he held by no (b) Law of sin, he lost the right of his
wicked dominion. Hence I infer, If the Devil did afflict him by no Law of sin,
then he was not a sinner by Gods legal imputation.

5. Theoderet says, Because thou who receivedst power against De Providen.
Ser. 10.
sinners have touched my body that am (c) guilty of no sin, forfeit thy power,
and cease thy Tyranny; I will free mine from death, not using simply the power
of a Lord, but a righteous power: I have paid the debt of mankind; owing no
death, I have suffered death; and not subject to death, and did admit death, no
way (d) guilty, I was reckoned with the guilty; and being free from debt, I was
numbered among the debtors; sustaining therefore an unjust death, I dissolve
the death that is deserved; and imprisoned wrongfully, I free them from prison
that were justly detained.

Ibidem (says he) Let no man think that herein we dally, for by the sacred
Gospels and Doctrines of the Apostles, we are taught that these things are so.

And says Leo, de passi, Dom. Ser. 17. He that came to destroy death, and the
author of death, how should he have saved sinners if he would have resisted his
pursuers?

6. Austin speaks very much to this sense, That Christ overcame the Devil by
justice (namely, by combating justly according to the Laws of the voluntary
Covenant declared in Genesis 3. 15.) and not by force (namely, not by the power of
his Godhead) any man may see that his discourse sounds to this sense; His
discourse is long, but Mr. Worton has abbreviated his method, De
Reconciliatione peccatords, part. 2. lib. 1. c. 21. and there he cites Bernard
also to the same sense, and thither I refer the Reader.

7. Says Dr. Willet, on Dan. 9. 26. the justice of Christ is meritorious of
eternal life for us, because by it he overcame death, and subdued the Devil,
none of all which Adams righteousness could do:

And it was one great part of the righteousness of Christ to agonize himself
with the dread of that ignominious usage which his Combater was to inflict upon
him.

And thus you see that the ancient Divines do agree, That Christ's greatest
sufferings were from Satan's malice by Gods permission; and I perceive by
conference with such as have been well read in the ancient Divines, that they
did not hold as Mr. Norton does, That Christ was a guilty sinner by Gods legal
imputation, nor that he was pressed under the wrath of God: but on the
contrary, they affirm that there was no sign of sin in him, and that the Devil
held him by no law of sin, and that he was no way guilty of sin.

8 Those few Hebrew Doctors that speak of the death of the Messiah, do speak of
his sufferings with his Combater Satan; as I have noted their speeches in the
Epistle to the Reader.

9 The Apostle makes a like kind of reasoning in Heb. 2. 14. For as much then
as the children are partakers, of flesh and blood, he Heb. 2. 14.
also himself took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is the Devil.

Here two Questions may be propounded, and answered.

1 How came the Devil to get the power of death? 2 How came his power to be
destroyed? Adams first sin caused by the Devil, was the meritorious cause of
our spiritual death by original sin, and that was the meritorious cause of Gods
justice in appointing a bodily death and judgment.

To the first Question, the Geneva Note does answer, because he was the author
of sin, none but the Devil was the author of Adams first sin, in causing him by
his deceitful reasoning to eat the forbiden fruit, which sin brought in the
spiritual death of original sin.

And then secondly, The spiritual death of original sin was the meriting cause
of Gods justice in denouncing a bodily death, in Genesis 3. 19. bodily death
therefore was not the immediate effect of Adams first sin, as most Expositors
do carry it (though I think they miss it) for if bodily death had been the
immediate effect of Adams first sin, then the Pelagians cannot The Pelagians
cannot be convinced, that original sin is the cause of the death of Infants, if
it be granted that bodily death was the immediate effect of Adams first sin.
be convinced, that original sin is the cause of the death of Infants; for they
may say, as most Expositors say, That bodily death was the immediate effect of
Adams first sin; and then the Pelagians may still hold that the death of
Infants is not the punishment of original sin traduced from their Parents.

But the Apostle does make the death of Infants to be the immediate effect of
original sin, in Romans 5. 12. and the Devil was the author of original sin,
because it was the immediate punishment of Adams first sin, whereof the Devil
was the author, and so consequently it occasioned God in justice to denounce
not only a bodily death, to all the fallen sons of Adam, but also to denounce
eternal death by necessary consequence to so many of the fallen sons of Adam as
did not believe their Redemption by the promised Seed; for when God did first
denounce a bodily death, he did at the same time implicitly denounce a
judgment, as the Apostle shows in Heb. 9. 27. and to this sense of death does
Austin speak, There is a first death, Heb 9. 27. See Austin in Ser. 129.
and a second death: Of the first death, says he, there are two parts.

One when the sinful soul by offending departed from her Creator.

The other, whereby the soul for her punishment was excluded from the body by
Gods justice.

And the second death (says he) is the everlasting torment of body and soul:
And thus the Devil got the power of death.

The second Question is this, How came this power of the Devil to be destroyed?
The Answer is, by the second Person, in taking upon him the Seed of the woman
in the fullness of time, and by entering the Lists according to his Covenant in
that nature, as it was accompanied with our natural infirmities, of fear,
sorrow, etc. and so by his constancy in obedience through all Satan's conflicts
he completed his victory; and it last he made his vital soul a propitiatory
sacrifice, which was agreed and covenanted between the Trinity to be accounted
for full satisfaction, for the redemption of all the Elect: And thus he
destroyed him that had the power of death.

The Devils plot was by some stratagem or other to make Christ a Transgressor,
as he had made Adam, but because this Seed of the deceived sinful woman,
continued obedient to the death, through all Satan's malicious stratagems, even
to the death of the Cross, and at last made his soul a sacrifice, therefore he
got the victory, and won the prize, even the salvation of all the Elect.

And thus through this kind of death, he has destroyed him that had the power
of death, that is the Devil.

But says Mr. Norton in page 70.
Christ (in his Agony) was pressed under the sense of the wrath of God, and
conflicted with eternal death.


Reply 23. This compulsary term of being pressed under the wrath of God, is no
way suitable to the voluntary obedience of a voluntary Covenanter. I have showed
in Chap. 9. that the voluntary cause is never overruled by a supreme
compulsary power: When grapes, or any other thing is pressed, it is therefore
pressed to force some thing from it: Is this a fit speech to be applied to the
voluntary Covenanters, and to the voluntary undertaker of obedience to the
Articles of the voluntary Covenanters; Satan indeed did labor to oppress him
to force him to impatiency, but not God by his immediate wrath.

And the like strange expression I find also in the Sum of Divinity set forth
by John Downame in page 317. By reason of the Christ as man was not able to
conflict with his Fathers wrath.
guilt of our sins (says he) there fell upon him sorrow, trouble of mind,
astonishment, and heaviness to death, Matthew. 26. 38. when he was to enter the
Lists, and to fight the great combat hand to hand with his angry Father.

Ibidem, in page 320. he calls the said combat, Handy gripes with his Father;
and his suffering on the Cross, he calls, The main battle, fought three whole
hours (with his Father) all which time ^ugging in the fearful dark with him,
that had the power of darkness to hide from the eyes of the world the fire of
his Fathers wrath, which in that hot skirmish, burnt up every part of him.

And says Calvin, We see that Christ was thrown down so far that by
inforcement of distress, he was compelled to cry Just. l. 2 c. 16. Sect. 11.
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

And thus instead of entering the Lists with the Devil, according to Genesis 3. 15.
he says, He entered the Lists to fight the great combat hand to hand with his
angry Father; and instead of the Devils wrath, they put in Gods wrath; and
instead of the Devils force, they put in Gods force to compel the humane nature
of Christ to suffer his immediate wrath: And let the Reader take notice of this
word Compelled, most unadvisedly used by Calvin, and others.

And now let the judicious Reader judge whether such descriptions of our
Saviors Agony, be suitable to the language of the holy Scriptures, whether he
was pressed and compelled by Gods immediate wrath: And whether his Agony and
Conflict were not rather from the pressure and compulsion of the Devil, and his
instruments, according to Gods declared Decree, in Genesis 3. 15. and judge if it
be not utterly unlike that the humane nature of Christ, as it was accompanied
with our infirmities was able to enter the Lists with his angry Father, and to
be pressed under his wrath, and to conflict with eternal death, as Mr. Nortons
phrases are, was his humane nature which was left by his divine nature on
purpose, that his humane infirmities might appear able to fight it out three
whole hours on the Cross with his angry Father? Perhaps you will answer, he
was able, because his humane nature subsisted in his divine: I grant that it
always subsisted in the divine, because the divine nature was never angry with
the humane; but yet it does not follow, that it was always assisted and
protected by the divine, for then it could not have suffered any thing at all
from Satan, and his instruments: I find it to be an ancient orthodox Tenent,
that the divine nature did often put forth a power to withdraw protection and
assistance from his humane, that the infirmities of the humane might appear;
and in this sense his infirmities in his sufferings were admitted by his divine
power: But let it be as the objection would have it, namely, that his humane
nature being assisted by his divine, was able to induce to be pressed under
his Fathers wrath. Then it will follow from thence, that his divine nature did
assist his humane nature against the divine? Is this absurd language good
Scripture-logick?

But says Mr. Norton in p. 123.
The divine nature was angry not only with the humane nature, but with the
person of the Mediator, because of sin imputed to him.


Reply 23. First, I have showed in p. 101. from Mr. Burges that sin was not
imputed to the Mediator in both his Natures.

Secondly, Was it ever heard that a Mediator, between two at variance, did
fight hand to hand with the stronger angry opposite party to force him to a
reconciliation? Can any reconciliation be made whiles displeasure is taken, and
whiles anger is kindled against the Mediator that seeks to make reconciliation?
These are paradoxes in Divinity, by which the clear Truth is made obscure. Such
Tenants are like the smoke of the bottomless pit, that darkens the Sun and Air
of the blessed Scriptures. The Lord in mercy open our eyes to see better.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 70.
Through anguish of his soul he had clods, rather than drops, of blood,
streaming down his blessed body, a thing which neither was seen nor heard,
before or since, the true reason thereof (says he) is, Christ died as a sinner
imputatively, pressed under the sense of the If it be true that Christ sweat
clods of blood, then doubtless it was a miraculous sweat, and then no natural
reason can be given of the cause of it.
wrath of God.


Reply 24. If it be true that Christ through the anguish of his soul had clods
of blood streaming down his blessed body, then doubtless it was a miraculous
sweat, and then no natural reason can be given as the cause of it; but I have
all along affirmed that his Agony was from natural causes, and that his sweat
was increased by his strong prayers and cries, and that his sweat was not from
the miraculous cause.

But I perceive that Mr. Norton himself is put in a wavering mind (in p. 66.)
whether the sweat of Christ in his Agony was from the natural or from the
miraculous cause; for when he had expounded his Query, he concludes thus,

We leave it to them that have leisure and skill to enquire. And (says he)
Though the Evangelist mentions it as an effect proceeding from a greater
cause than the fear of a mere natural death, notwithstanding (says he) our
Doctrine is not built only or chiefly upon this Argument. Hence,

1 Any indifferent Reader may easily perceive that Mr. Nortons answer to his
own Query is but a very wavering and confused answer; and therefore his bold
conclusion aforesaid is built but upon a sandy foundation, and therefore it is
not sufficient to satisfy a doubting conscience.

2 This speech of his, our Doctrine is not built only or chiefly upon this
Argument, is a plain acknowledgment that the Agony of Christ, and his sweat
like blood, is no sound Argument to prove that Christ conflicted with eternal
death, and yet in p 70, 39 68, 89, etc. he lays great weight upon his Agony,
as a true reason to prove that he died as a sinner imputatively, pressed under
the sense of the wrath of God, and conflicting with eternal death.

3 Mr. Norton is wavering in this, that he dares not affirm that Christ
suffered the Torments of Hell, but by Gods extraordinary dispensation, as I
have noted it in Chap. 7. Sect. 1.

4 Hence Mr. Norton might as well question whether the first touch or real
impression of Hell pains would not utterly have dissolved the link and bond of
nature (namely, of the sensitive soul) that is between man's mortal body, and
his immortal soul in a moment? Seeing he holds, that his death was caused by
the wrath of God; For he says, That his blood was shed together with the wrath
of God, because it was shed as the blood of a person accursed. For this is a
clear Truth, That the vital body of man cannot subsist under the Torments of
Hell, until it be made immortal by the power of God at the Resurrection.

5 Hence it may be propounded as another question of moment, whether the Greek
word for this bloody sweat be not stretched beyond the Context, as well as he
has done the word Amazed, in Mark. 14. 33. as I have showed before.

6 Hence it may be considered what a learned Divine says, There are some
(says he) that take Christ's bloody sweat in that grievous agony to be a
symptom of infernal pains. But (says he) from what grounds, either in
Philosophy or Divinity, I know not. If the pains of Hell, or hellish pains (so
some distinguish) be procured by the fire of Hell, (be that material or
immaterial) bloody sweat (says he) can be no probable effect, of the one or of
the other fire; nor is such sweat any (...), or demonstrative sign of pains
more grievous than may be inflicted or suffered by patience merely natural.

For (says he) however in cold Countries bloody sweats be as rare in men's
bodies as showers of blood in the Air. Yet as a good Philosopher has long ago
observed, To sweat blood Curaus.
is not usual to Italians, yet usual only, (as I take it) to men of that
Climat in some particular diseases.

The most remarkable instance which I have read of bloody sweat in a man, not
oppressed with any disease, is a Captain, an Italian (if I mistake not) who
being surprised by the sub^le^y of his Enemy, whom he had trusted too far upon
a Tristee of Parley; and thereby enforced either to yield up the Fort, which he
had stoutly maintained, or otherwise, to be presently hanged.

The consideration of this perplexity, wherewith (through his own folly) he had
entangled himself, did make such a deep impression into his generous spirits,
that it squeezed blood out of his veins.

(And as this sudden fear squeezed blood out of the veins of this Captain, so
in Reply 20. I have cited the speech of a Physician that says thus, It
sometimes happens that servent spirits do so dilate the pores of the body,
that blood passes by them, and so the sweat may be bloody.)

And says the former Author, our Savior (no doubt) as man had a more deep
touch of all the malicious disgraces, and cruel indignities which his enemies
could put upon him, than this Captain had.

The measure of his bodily sufferings, and personal wrongs were in number far
more, and for quality more grievous than ever were intended to this Captain, or
any other mortal man by their enemies; And though the death of the cross was in
it self an ignominious and cruel death, yet in our Saviors particular that was
most true, Of the ignominious manner of his death, and what I have said on 1 Samuel 31. 4. There Saul did so loathe to be put to a disgraceful death by the
mockings of the Philistims, that he prayed his Armor-bearer, rather to kill
him, as I have noted it in Gal 3. 13. at Reply 6. And Sampson, rather than to
live to be an ignominious mocking-stock to the Philistims, desired to die,
Judge. 16. 25, 26.
Mortis modus morte pejor; The manner of his Apprehension, of his double
Arraignment, and Conviction, of his usage before he was brought to the place of
Execution, and all the time whiles the malice of the Jew and Gentile was
wrecked upon him, was more grievous than the death of the Cross it self,
without these grievous concommitants, could have been.

7 I find that many Divines, though they hold that Christ suffered in soul from
the immediate wrath of God upon the cross; yet they do not hold that his Agony
in the Garden was from the sense of the immediate wrath of God upon his soul.

But his sorrow and dread there, they make to be in relation of what he was
afterward to suffer upon the cross; and the fear of that (say they) was the
cause of his bloody sweat.

First, Dr. Williams says, That the clear sight and considerstion Dr. Williams
in his seven golden Candlesticks, p 143, 144. Bradshaw on justific. p. 75.
of that cup which he was to drink, was the cause of his Agony.

Secondly, Says Mr. Bradshaw, Whiles he hung upon the accursed tree, he had
such a deep sense of the incomparable wrath of God; that the very apprehension
thereof (before it seized upon him) made him sweat drops of blood.

Thirdly, Says George Downham, The fear of Gods wrath In his Coven. of Grace,
p. 68.
when he was in his Agony, caused him to sweat great drops of blood, Luke 22.
44.

And (says he) the sense thereof on the cross made him cry, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me?

Fourthly, Says Mr. Wall, In his Agony in the Garden, he sweat drops not of
water but of blood, etc. and all this in Wall in his none but Christ p. 27.
expectation of what he should suffer, when no hand touched him, but his own
thoughts of what he was to suffer.

I could cite diverse others that speak to this purpose, But these are
sufficient to evidence thus much, that many of the learned do hold, that though
Christ suffered the wrath of God upon the cross, yet they deny he suffered the
wrath of God in his Agony in the Garden, and therefore his bloody sweat is no
certain reason to prove that he was pressed under the sense of the wrath of God
in the Garden, as Mr. Norton holds, though after he has affirmed it, he does
again leave it doubtful, which does not well agree to the property of a
Judicious Confuter.

Fifthly, Seeing such eminent Divines as I have above cited, do hold that
Christ suffered the wrath of God (not in the Garden, but) on the cross only,
once for all; It shows that Mr. Norton has not so many Divines on his side as
he intimates ever and anon, by us, and our, and we say, as in p. 44, etc.

8 It is also very considerable that there are sundry learned Divines that deny
that our Savior sweat blood, and therefore they do much more deny that he sweat
clods of blood (as Mr. Norton affirms he did) for the original word, they say,
his sweat was as it were great drops of blood. And first, So speaks the Greek
Text plainly. And secondly, So do our Translators interpret it; And thirdly,
Says Dr. Hammon in his paraphrase on Luke 22. 44. He sweat (as men in agonies
are wont) great glutenous drops, like those of blood when it drops on the
ground; and says he in his Annotation, That Christ sweat drops of blood is
not affirmed in this place, but only that he sweat drops of sweat of a strange
thickness or viscousness, and consequently as big as when blood is wont to fall
upon the ground; So says Justin Martyr, Theophylact, and Entymius.

(And truly I may well add this, That seeing his sweat was in the open air,
and in a cold night, it might well thicken as it ran down his body, and be
glutenous before it fell to the ground.)

And says he, (...), as, or as it were, does note some resemblance, as (says
he) the Spirit descended as it were a Dove, Matthew. 3. 16. somewhat resembling a
Dove; So the Manna was like Coriander-seed in shape and quantity, but not in
color.

9 Christopher Carlisle in his Descent, page 46. says, Was not Christ extremely
afflicted, when he for fear of death, sweat drops, in quantity, as thick as
drops of blood.

10 So John Frith the Martyr says thus to Sir Thomas Moore, See his Ans. to
Sir. Tho. (...), p. 34. as it is printed with Tindals works.
Christ did not only weep, but feared so sore, that he sweat like drops of
blood running down upon the earth, which was more than to weep. Now (says he)
If I should ask you, why Christ feared and sweat so sore? what would you answer
me? That it was for the fear of the pains of Purgatory; Forsooth he that should
so answer, would be laughed to scorn of all the world, as he were well
worthy: Wherefore was it then? Vetily even for the fear of death, as it plainly
appears after; for he prayed unto his Father, saying, My Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me, Mat. 26. 38, 39. So fearful a thing is
death even to the purest flesh. And (says he) the same cause will I assign in
Hezekiah, that he wept for fear of Death, and not of Purgatory.

In these words you see that Friths judgment was, That Christ's Agony was for
fear, not of a spiritual, but of a corporal death.

11 Tindal translates Luke 22. 44. thus, His sweat was like drops of blood
trickling down to the ground, and speaking of Christ's last Supper, he says
thus, The fear of death was the same hour upon him, neither slept he any more
after, but went immediately after he had comforted his Disciples, into the
place, where he was taken, to abide his Persecuters, where also he sweat water
and blood of very agony, conceived of his Passion so nigh at hand.

12 In Reply 18. I have cited Dr. Lightfoot saying, In his Agony he sweat drops
like blood.

These five last Authors you see are not for sweating of perfect blood, though
Tindal say, he sweat water and blood; yet that is far from pure blood, and
farther from clods of blood.

2 This is farther remarkable, that Tindal and Frith, do make the fear of his
bodily death, in the words cited, to be the cause of his Agony.

3. This is still farther remarkable, that neither of these two have a word in
all their writings, that he suffered any other death, but a bodily death;
though Mr. Norton is so bold as to condemn their judgment therein to be
heresy.

4 Says Mr. Norton in page 67. These Authors I not having by me, cannot
examine the Quotations, their words therefore rather better bearing the sense
of the Orthodox, than the sense of the Dialogue.
Reply 25. The Reader may please to take notice of Mr. Nortons unjust prejudice
of the Dialogue, for the Author of the Dialogue cites their sense to his sense,
which is so clear and manifest, that it stares him in the face; and yet their
words (cited in the sense of the Dialogue) he says is orthodox, and that the
sense of the Dialogue is heresy; Is not this plain partiality, to favor the
same doctrine in one as orthodox, and to condemn it in another for heresy.

And says he, Friths other writings call to have it so; namely, to mean it
according to Mr. Norton.
Reply 26. It is an open wrong to Mr. Frith, and to the Reader, to make Frith
of his judgment; the words of Frith, which I have truly cited him, do cry
shame upon him for saying so; and in all his writings, he makes the death of
Christ to be no other but a true bodily death.

12 I have cited Cyprian in Reply 8. to the sense of Frith, namely, to be
sorrowful unto death, and for the exceeding grief thereof to power forth a
bloody sweat.

13 Damasen says thus, Christ took unto him all blameless and natural
passions, for he assumed the whole man, and all that pertained to man, except
sin; Natural and blameless passions are those, which are not in our power; and
whatsoever entered into man's life through the condemnation of sin (namely of
Adams sin) as hunger, thirst, weakness, labor, weeping, corruption, shunning
of death, fear, agony; whence sweat and drops of blood: These things (says he)
are in all men by nature, Christ therefore took all these unto him, that he
might sanctify them all. Howbeit our natural passions were in Christ according
to nature, and above nature: According to nature they were stirred up in Christ
when he permitted his flesh to endure that which was proper to it: Above
nature, because nature in him did never go before his will; for there was
nothing forced in him, but all things voluntary; when he would he hungered,
when he would he thirsted, when he would he feared, and when he would he
dyed.

From this speech of Damasen touching Christ's Passion and Agony in the Garden,
we see he held,

1 That shunning of Death, Fear, Agony, whence sweat and drops of blood, which
are in all men by nature; and therefore, says he, Christ took all these unto
him, that he might sanctify them all.

2 That these were in Christ, not only according to nature, but above nature,
because nature in him did never go before his will.

3 That nothing in him was forced, therefore he was far from holding as Mr.
Norton does in page 70. that he was pressed under the sense of the wrath of God.

Conclusion.
When the fullness of time was come, that the seed of the woman, Christ Jesus,
was to be bruised and peirced in the footsoals, with an ignominious torturing
death by Satan, and his instruments, according to Gods declared permission in
Genesis 3. 15.

The divine nature might not protect the humane, but must leave the humane
nature to its self, to manage this conflict; in which conflict, he was to
manifest his true humane infirmities; and therefore when the Devil and his
Arch-instruments were to seize upon him; he began to be sore amazed, and to be
very heavy, and then he said unto Peter, James, and John, My soul is exceeding
sorrowful unto the death, or it is surrounded with sorrow, that is to say,
Every part of my body, wherein I have my vital soul, is in a quaking fear of
such an ignominious death, by such a malignant enemy, as is armed with power
and authority from God to execute it on me; and I do here manifest my true
humane nature, and the infirmities of it, that you may record it to all
posterity, that I have took part with them, that for fear of death, are all
their life time subject to bondage, that they may be assured I am a merciful
High Priest, and that I am truly touched with the feeling of their infirmities
not in a small degree, for then it might be doubted, whether I am so sensible
of their condition as I am, but in the highest degree, according to the most
excellent temper, and tender constitution of my nature above the nature of
other men.

But yet it is of necessity, that I must over come this natural fear, because I
have covenanted to lay down my life by my own will, desire, and power, Job. 10.
17, 18. and therefore my rational soul must betake it self to prayer, therefore
tarry ye here and watch, and pray, that ye be not overcome by the many
temptations that now are at hand to try you; and then he went a little from
them, and fell on the ground and prayed, That if it were possible, that hour
might pass from him, namely, that the dread of his ignominious usage might pass
from him; for so much the hour imports in Mark. 14 35, 41. And his Agony was so
great, that it caused him to sweat, as it were, great drops of blood falling
down to the ground. And when he had three times offered up prayers and
supplications to him that was able to save him from the natural dread of his
ignominious torturing death, he was heard and delivered from the natural fear
of his vital soul, because of his godly fear in his rational soul, and then he
was confirmed against his natural fear; and so he never feared more after this,
and then as soon as he had fulfilled all his sufferings, he did in perfection
of patience and obedience, make his vital soul a sacrifice of Reconciliation
for man's Redemption.

This Relation of Christ's Combat, and of his Agony in his Combat is every way
agreeable to the scope of the blessed Scriptures, and therefore Mr. Nortons
Tenent must needs be dangerous, because he makes this Combat to be between
Christ's humane nature, and his divine, being pressed under the sense of Gods
wrath, and conflicting with eternal death, and so forcing out clods of blood,
as wine is forced from the grapes, by Gods pressing wrath; such expressions of
pressing do utterly destroy the voluntariness of Christ's obedience in his
suffering, and do make him to be no less than an inherent sinner in his Death
and Sacrifice.

CHAP. XVII.
SECT. I.
The Examination of Psalm. 22. 1. with Matthew. 27. 46.

THe Dialogue cites Mr. Broughton, saying, My God, my God, shows, That Christ
was not forsaken of God, but that God was still his hope.

2 Says he, The word Forsaken, is not in the Text; But why do thou leave me
to the griess following (from the malice of the Jews) as they are expressed in
the body of the Psalms.

3 Says he, None ever propounded one matter, and made his amplification of
another: But Psalm. 22. has amplification of griefs caused by men, and not from
Gods anger; And therefore the Proposition in the first verse, is not a
complaint to God, that he had forsaken his soul in anger for our sins, etc.

Mr. Norton Answers thus in page 78.
The Hebrew (as also the Syriack used by our Savior in Mat. 27. 46.) and the
Greek word used here by the Septuagint, signify to leave another helpless in
their necessity and extremity, which appears not only in its frequent use in
the Scripture, but also in that this very word, per Antiphrasin (it being one
of those Hebrew words that have two contrary significations) signifiet, to help
up that which is down, and to fortine, Neh. 3. 8. and 4. 2. And such having we
usually express by forsaking, and accordingly it is read by Latin Expositors,
premiseuously, who do in effect say with Mr Ainsworth, there is no material
difference between leaving and forsaking, so as the meaning be kept sound.


Reply 1. He says that this Hebrew word Azab to leave, is one of those Hebrew
words that have two contrary significations; The Hebrew word Azab has two
contrary significations as Mr. Norton affirms to amuse his Reader, about Gods
forsaking christ
I wish he do not cast a mist in this speech as well before his own eyes as
before his Readers. Though I am no Linguist, yet I love and approve such, as do
labor to use the Originals to the advantage of the truth, and to the profit of
the Reader.

But as far as I can learn, this Hebrew word Azab is none of those that have
two contrary significations (if there be any such, when things are searched to
the bottom) but yet I freely grant that this word, as well as many others, have
several differing significations (but not contrary) namely, a proper
signification and a metaphorical.

But says Mr. Norton, It has two contrary significations. First, Because it
signifies to help up that which is down, as well as to leave or forsake.
Reply 2. I grant that Azab by a necessary consequence from the context does
signify helping up that which is down, and in this he alludes to Exodus 23. 5.
and there the words run thus, Exodus 23. 5.
If thou see the Ass of him that hates thee lying under his burden, and
would forbear to help him, thoushalt surely help with him. I grant that our
Translation does twice in this Text render Azab, to help, but yet in the Margin
they translate it to leave, in both places, according to the propriety of the
Hebrew, thus, and would cease to leave thy business for him, thoushalt
surely leave it to join with him; and hence it follows by a necessary
consequence, that if he must leave his business to join with his hater, whose
Ass lies under his burden, it must be to help him; and in this respect the
Translators may well render Azab to help; And to the like sense does Ainsworth
translate it in his Annotations, When thou shall see thy haters Ass lying under
his burden, then thou shall cease from forsaking him; and hence it follows,
that he that cease from forsaking his hater when his Ass lies under his
burden, must needs help him: And therefore in the next clause Mr. Ainsworth
reads it thus, Thou shall leaving leave (th^^e own business to be) with him;
thou shall not leave him, by passing away on the other side of the way, as the
Priest and the Levite did from the wounded man, but thou shall leave thy hatred
to help him, as the Samaritan did, Luke 10. 33, 34. And according to this sense
the Seventy render it thus, Thou shall not pass by the same (that is, thou
shall not leave his Ass under his burden) but shall raise up the same, together
with him. And the Chalde speaks thus, Thou shall leave what is in thine heart
against him; and hence it follows, That he that leaves what is in his heart
against his hater, when his Ass lies under his burden, must needs help him.

Therefore from hence I conclude, that the Translating of Azab to help, is more
from the sense of the Context, than from the proper sense of the word, and
therefore though it be translated to help up, yet that does not prove it to
have a contrary sense to leave, it only proves that Azab may be taken in a
various sense according to the circumstances of the Context, where it is used.

The like he affirms of a contrary sense in other words, p. 48, and he gives
three instances, To which I answer, that they are not contrary, though
different in respect of the metaphorical sense, and so the word Tzedec
Righteousness, is often put for a counterfeit righteousness, which in proper
speaking is untighteousness in Gods sight. And therefore the Seventy translate
it unrighteousness, in Ezekiel. 21. 3. Isa. 49. 24. But it is ironically called
righteousness.

Secondly, Says Mr. Norton, Azab, signifies to Fortify, Neh. 3. 8. and 4. 2.
Reply 3. I grant that to fortify is contrary to leaving and forsaking, in
case it can have no other sense in the place cited; But our larger Annotations
on Nehem. 3. 8. do rightly expound our Margin Translation (which is according
to the propriety of the Hebrew word Azab) of leaving off to fortify when they
came to the broad wall, because that was done in former times, and was still
standing undemolished as the rest was, and the like sense they give of Neh. 4.
2. and the like sense must be given of Azab, in Isa. 49. 25. and therefore as
yet there is no contrary signification of the word Azab, as Mr. Norton does
make his Reader believe; to bewilder his understanding, in the manner of Gods
leaving or forsaking Christ on the Cross.

But for the better finding out the truth, I will first give some instances of
the various sense of Azab, and then I will examine what sense it has in Psa.
22. 1.

1 It is used in a metaphorical sense for a Mart or Fair, Ezekiel. 27. 12, 14, 16,
19, 22. And it is also used for Wares of Merchandise, in Ez. 27. 27, 33. And
the reason is plain, because in Fairs and Markets there is an usual and
continual leaving of one thing for another by way of contract, as of money for
Wares, and of Wares for money, and of one sort of Ware for another. So in like
sort the Hebrew word Gnereb (which in propriety does signify the connection or
con-joyning of two or more things together) is used by Ezekiel by a Metonymia
for Fairs or Markets, and for Wares of Merchandise, Ezekiel. 27. 13, 17, etc.
Because of the connection and conjoyning of sundry sorts of Wares to sell, and
because of the sundry conjunctions between men, by contracts about Wares, as I
have showed at large in my Treatise of Holy Time.

2 As Azab is put for leaving one thing for another in Markets, so it is put
for any other kind of leaving, either by way of agreement or disagreement; As
for example, when it is agreed that two shall strive for the mastery, there all
friends must stand aside, and leave their friend alone to try the mastery, as
David was left of his friends, when he alone undertook to try masteries with
Goliath.

3 Leaving is put for leaving of a man's own business, to help another in his
necessity, as in Ezekiel. 23. 5. before expounded.

4 Leaving is put for forsaking, or leaving another that is helpless in their
necessity. Sometimes it is to leave in anger, as 2 Chronicles. 24. 25. And sometimes
not in anger but by necessity, 1 Samuel 30. 13. And sometimes willingly, and so
Mary left Martha to serve, whiles she attended to Christ's Doctrine, and in that
respect Martha complained to Christ, saying, Do thou not care that my Sister
has left me alone to serve, Luke 10. 40. There Sabactani is in the Syriack
just as it is in Psa. 22. 1. and in Mat. 27. 46.

5 Leaving, in Hebrew, is often used in mercy, favor and kindness, as in Ruth
2. 16. Jer. 49. 11. and so it is used in the Chalde, in Dan. 4. 15, 26. the
word Leave there is in favor, as ver. 26, shows.

6 Azab is applied to Gods leaving or forsaking of notorious finners in anger,
2 Chronicles. 24. 18, 20, 24. Deuteronomy. 31. 17. and 32. 36. 1 King. 14. 10 and 21. 21. 2
King. 14. 26. Yea, sometimes Gods hatred is joined to his leaving or forsaking,
as in Isa. 60. 15. But remember this, that God never forsakes any in wrath, but
such as do first forsake him by provoking sins.

7 Azab is used for leaving of a man's first love to the Truth, in Prove. 3. 3.
Let not Mercy and Truth leave thee, or forsake thee.

8 God left Hezekiah only to try his heart, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31.

9 Azab is put for a leaving of those that a man loves well, to cleave to that
which a man loves better, as to leave a Father for a Wife, Genesis 2. 24. Ruth. 1.
16.

10 A man leaves a thing because he is forced, Genesis 39. 12, 13, 15, 18.

11 A man often leaves that he loves through haste, Josh. 8. 17. 1 Samuel 30. 13.

12 He leaves a thing through fear, 1 King. 31. 7. 1 Chronicles. 10. 7.

13 Azab is to leave, or cease, or rest from complaining, and so the Divine
nature did often rest, or cease, or leave the Humane nature to his own natural
principles in his sufferings and combatings with Satan and his Instruments.

These several senses of Azab, and many such like, do show the various sense of
the word leaving.

14 And this is worth the noting, That though Azab does often signify such a
leaving as is a forsaking, yet it does not always signify forsaking as it
does leaving. For Azab is applied to sundry kinds of leaving, which cannot with
any fitness be called a forsaking, as in Genesis 39. 6. Potiphar left all he had
in trust in Joseph's hand. So in Genesis 50. 8. Their little ones, and their flocks
and their herds they left in the land of Goshen. And so in Exodus 9. 21. 2 Samuel
15. 16. and so in Ruth. 2. 16, Boaz commanded his Reapers to let fall some of
their handfuls, and leave them in kindness, on purpose for Ruth to glean them.
So Job 39. 14. The Ostritch leaves her eggs in the warm dust to hatch her
young ones. So in Jer. 49. 11. Mal. 4. 1. 2 Chronicles. 28. 14. Ezra 6. 7. And many
other places might be cited to prove that Azab cannot so fitly be translated to
forsake, as to leave. I grant notwithstanding, that the word leave is so large,
that many times it does most fitly agree to the word forsake in the largest use
of it. But ere long I shall show the particular sense of the word left or
forsaken, Psa. 22. 1.

But says Mr. Norton in the page aforesaid.
The meaning of the word leave or forsake, was kept sound with Mr. Ainsworth,
but with you is not.


Reply 4. I grant that Mr. Ainsworth did hold, that God forsook or left Christ's
soul in wrath, but yet for all that, he was far from holding as Mr. Norton
does; namely, that Christ suffered the Essential torments of Hell. I received
some Letters from him not many years before his death, about the point of
Christ's sufferings; And his Letters tell me that he held this as a principle,
that Christ suffered no other afflictions for kind, but what the Elect do
suffer in this life, though in a far greater measure (now seeing he held this
as a Principle, he could not hold that Christ suffered Gods penal and
vindictive wrath, except he had also held that the Elect do suffer Gods penal
and vindicative wrath in this life; But seeing all the punishments of the godly
are called but chastisements, even so the greatest of Christ's sufferings on the
cross, are also comprised under Isa. 53. 5. All Christ's greatest sufferings are
comprised under the word chastisements, in, Isa. 53. 58.
the word chastisement, Isa. 53. 5.) But yet I grant also that Mr. Ainsworth
held, that as the Elect do often suffer Gods wrath, so did Christ; and in this
last point I differed from him, for though I hold that Gods chastisements on
his own people are from his fatherly wrath, yet I also believe that Christ's
chastisements were not from Gods wrath for correction to amendment as ours are.
But from the conditions of the voluntary Burges says well that Jobs
afflictions were to him as a storm or tempest is to a skilful Pilot; or what a
valiant Adversary is to a stout Champion, on justif. p. 28. and such was the
nature of all Christ's chastisements.
Covenant, Christ was to suffer chastisements from the rage of Satan, for the
trial of the perfection of his patience and obedience; and because he continued
constant in his obedience through all his sufferings from Satan's rage,
therefore his sufferings have the condition of merit.

Besides this, in all Mr. Ainsworths five Books on Moses, and the Psalms, which
were published before this intercourse of Letters, I find nothing in any of
them that Christ suffered the Essential torments of Hell. And therefore Mr.
Ainsworth was not sound in the sense of these words, Why have thou forsaken me,
according to Mr. Nortons Tenent, though he was far more sound than Mr. Norton
is.

2 I can instance the like in several other eminent Divines that held
satisfaction by suffering Gods wrath in some degree, and yet were far from
holding as Mr. Norton does, that Christ suffered the very essential Torments of
Hell both of loss and sense, as Mr. Weams in his portrature p. 208. says thus,
Because some things were unbeseeming to the person of Christ, as the Torments
of Hell, the compensation of it was supplied by the worthiness of the person,
and to this purpose I could cite Ball on the Covenant, p. 200. and others also.

3 Our larger Annotations on Psa. 22. 1. speak thus, Christ, as man did suffer
partly in his body, and partly in his soul (but more in his soul than in his
body) more than can either be expressed by man, or be imagined. I do not see
how any reasonable man can question that reads the story of his passion, from
his bloody swear unto the end, and considers Christ's own expressions recorded
to us, that we might know how much he has suffered for us.

(But says the Annotation) I will not say that there was a necessity that he
should suffer so much, just so much, both in Body and Soul to make his
sufferings available to our Redemption, both of our bodies and of our souls.
This I dare not say, because I have no warrant for it in the Scriptures, and
bare humane Ratiocination in these things is meet folly and madness.

This wary and judicious Annotation is quite opposite to Mr. Nortons Tenent,
for Mr. Norton holds no suffering to be available to our Redemption but a just
satisfaction to (...), namely, Christ's suffering of the Essential
punis(...)ments both of loss and sense, both in body and (...) this Annotation,
I will not say there was a necessity (...) he should suffer so much, just so
much, both in body(...) make his sufferings available to our Redemption, (...)
our bodies and soul; This (says the Annotation) I dare not say, because I have
no warrant for it in the Scripture.

But Mr. Norton heaps up abundance of Scriptures to prove that Christ suffered
the very essential torments of Hell, both in Our larger Annotation on Psa 22.
1. does account Mr. Nortons way of satisfaction to be but bare humane
ratiocination, which is but mere folly and madness
body and soul, and therefore according to this Annotation they must needs be
wrested from their right sense; for this Annotation accounts all that can be
said for it, to be but bare humane ratiocination, and calls it mere folly and
madness. But Mr. Norton on the contrary does boldly damn this denial in this
Annotation to be Heresy, such an antypathy there is between his Tenent and
this Annotation. But the Lord has his time when truth shall prevail against
Mr. Nortons most dangerous Scripture-less Tenent.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 78.
Psalm. 22. has amplification of griefs caused by man instrumentally, and by
Gods anger as the efficient cause.


Reply 5. Mr. Norton affirms that Gods anger was the efficient cause of all the
griefs that Christ suffered from his Cradle to his Cross. But the Dialogue goes
in another strain, the Dialogue makes all Christ's sufferings to be founded
efficiently in the eternal Council, and in the voluntary Covenant that was made
between the Trinity for man's Redemption, and therefore he was to perform all as
a voluntary Covenanters (and was not to be overruled by Gods judicial
imputation of our sins to him, and by his supreme compulsory power in pressing
him under the sense of his immediate wrath;) namely, that Christ should take on
him the seed of the deceived woman, and in that nature should enter the Lists
and Combat with Satan, as I have often expounded Gods declared will, in Genesis
3. 15. for it pleased God to put an utter enmity between the Devil and the
seed of the woman, even from the foundation of the world, Genesis 3. 15. to try
masteries, and Isay foretold that Christ should by his obedience to the death,
get the victory, and divide the spoil, Isa. 53. 12.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 78.
Anger, in Scripture, is sometimes taken for the hatred of God unto a person;
sometimes, for the execution of vindicative Justice; in this latter sense God
was angry with Christ, not in the former.


Reply 6. In Chapter 5. I have showed from Dr. Ames, that the essential
torments of Hell are inflicted from Gods hatred; And thence it follows, That if
Christ did suffer the essential torments of Hell, then he suffered them from
Gods hatred.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 79.
Christ does complain in Psalm. 22. that God had forsaken him in anger for our
sin.


Reply 7. I shall not need to make any other Reply to this than his own words,
in p. 42. To complain against God, says he, is a sin and shows grudging.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 79.
Gods forsaking is either total and final, so God forsakes the Reprobate; or
partial and temporal, as concerning the fruition and sense of the good of the
Promise; so God forsook Christ, and of this forsaking Christ, complains in
this place.


Reply 8. The punishment of loss is variously and contrariously delivered by
Mr. Norton, as I have showed at large in Chap. 4. and therefore I refer the
Reader thither for a full answer to this place.

But I come now to open the word Forsaken, in Psalm. 22. 1. And I will open the
sense by answering these three Questions.

I. How did God forsake Christ on the Cross? II. Why did God forsake Christ on
the Cross? III. How did God not forsake Christ on the Cross?
Question I.
How did God forsake Christ on the Cross?


Reply 9. I Have in part showed how in the Dialogue, but I will add somewhat to
confirm it.

1 Therefore I say, that God forsook Christ on the Cross, by not protecting him
from the hands of Satan and his Instruments. God forsook Christ on the cross by
not protecting him against his crucisiers.


Or thus, God put enmity between the Devil and the seed of the deceived woman;
and it was agreed between the Trinity from eternity, that Christ in his humane
nature should try masteries with the power and policy of Satan and his
Instruments, and therefore it was agreed also, that God should leave the humane
nature of Christ alone to manage this Combat; and it was agreed also to permit
the Devil to use all his power and policy, to do his worst to disturb the
patience of the humane nature, and so to pervert him in his obedience, that so
his first Head-plot might not be broken. I say in this Combat the Godhead was
to leave the Humane nature to its own principles, and to permit the Devil to
use his utmost power and policy to encounter with his Humane nature, and
therefore he brought into the Garden a Band of Soldiers, armed with Swords and
Staves, to apprehend him, and to bind him like a Felon, and to carry him as a
prisoner, first before the Priest, and then before Pilat, and there to lay many
criminal accusations against him, and at last to crucify him for a notorious
malefactor with all manner of ignominy, and torturing pains; and in all these
injurious abuses God did not protect him, nor put out any power to deliver him;
And thus God forsook Christ on the Cross, and left him helpless, as a Combater
ought to, be in the trial of Masteries.

2 This exposition of the word Forsaken, must needs be the right
interpretation, because it agrees to the Context in Psalm. 22. whence it is
taken, and therefore I will make it appear by comparing it with the Context.

1 The next adjoining sentence to the word Forsaken, is this, Why art thou so
far from helping me? namely, against my envious Adversaries; his condition was
such that it needed some help from God to suppress them; but it had not been so
fit to call upon God to help him, to suppress his own vindicative wrath (if any
such thing had been) as Mr. Norton affirms.

2 The next sentence does also explain the former; Why art thou so far from the
words of my roaring? for though God had heard his earnest prayers in the
Garden, and had fully delivered his humane nature from the dread of the Cup,
yet not from the Cup it self of his sufferings; and it is also clear by verse
11. that God heard him in regard of inward support (though not in regard of
outwrd deliverance). Be not far from me, because trouble is near, and there is
none to help me; that is, be not far from supporting my inward man, for there
is none to help me in regard of my outward man: I know by thy revealed Decree
in Genesis 3. 15. that thou have given Satan power over my outward man, to put me
to death as a Malefactor on the Cross.

3 He prays again in verse 19. Be not far from me, O Lord, my strength, hasten
to help me, deliver my soul from the sword, my desolate soul from the power of
the Dog. In these words Christ does acknowledge God to be his strength, even
now in this time of his greatest passions: And hence it follows, that when he
cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, that he felt God to be his
strength in the inward man (at least) though at the same time God did forsake
him by leaving his outward man into the hands of Satan and his instruments, or
else his mouth, and his heart did not go together, when he did acknowledge God
to be his strength, and when he cried out, My God, my God: This appellation
shows that God was his strength in the inward man, though God left his outward
man to the power of Satan, and his Instruments, to crucify him as a
Malefactor; and therefore his next Petition is, Hasten to help me, that so my
body may also be delivered from the power of these Dogs, by my Resurrection on
the third day, according to his faith, in Psalm. 16. 10.

4 And lastly, This is remarkable, that Christ did not utter these words, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, until he had fulfilled all his
appointed sufferings from the Devils instruments, as it was declared in Genesis 3.
15. and as they are largely expressed in this Psalm, and therefore the word
Forsaken, does relate to Gods outward leaving him in the whole course of his
sufferings, from his apprehension to his death.

2 This interpretation of the manner how God did forsake Christ is strengthened
by the concurrence of sundry eminent orthodox Divines.
1 P. Martyr on Phi. 2. enumerating the calamities that Christ suffered, begins
thus; The first calamity (says he) is to lose estimation, the Thief was
preferred above Christ, Barabas was dismissed, and Christ was counted among the
wicked.

2 Says he, Another calamity was touching bodily deliverance, he was
destitute of Gods help; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: And he
cites Austin to his sense; But I pray take notice, that he applies this
speech, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, to his bodily deliverance:
How far wide is he from Mr. Nortons essential torments on Christ's soul; but for
want of due observation, Mr. Norton thinks, that all the Orthodox run on his
side, but upon better search, he may see the contrary.

2 Bucer in Mat. 27. 46. says, Christ here complained that he was forsaken (or
left) of his Father into the hands of the wicked, to endure all their rage.

3 Bullinger in Mat. 27. says, To forsake, in Christ upon the Cross, is to
permit; so that this was the meaning of Christ; Why do thou suffer me^^^o be
thus afflicted? Why do thou permit these things to mine enemies? When will
thou deliver me?

4 Dr. Lightfoot in his Harmony on the New Testament, page 72. says thus, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, not forsaken him as to the feeling of
any spiritual desertion; but why left to such hands, and to such cruel usage.

Ibidem, In his Commentary on Act. 2. 27. he says, Why should not these words,
My God, my God, be translated, Why have thou left me, and given me up to such
hands, shame, and tortures? rather then to intricate the sense with a surmise
of Christ's spiritual desertion.

5 Mr. Robert Wilmot in his Manuscript on Christ's Descent, on these words in
Act. 2. 25. He is at my right hand, says thus, God is at Christ's right hand
for support and comfort, as in this Text, and in Psalm. 109. ult. This by the
way, One would think (says he) evinceth, That the complaint of our Lord in
Psalm. 22. 1. and in Mat. 27. 46. imports not any total dereliction, or
desertion without all comfort, but a leaving of the holy One of God, Mark. 1.
14. to the extremities of wicked men, mentioned in that Psalm, and felt upon
the Cross.

Ibidem, Upon the word Always, he says thus, The ground of his gladness was
Always; for as much as he saw God on his right hand Always, therefore his
gladness thereon grounded, was Always: And hence it follows (says he) that
his gladness was never from him, no not when he said, My God, my God, why have
thou-forsaken me, or rather left me, namely, to the torments after mentioned in
the Psalm: And indeed (says he) My God, my God, how could it be spoken
especially doubled, and that of him who felt what he spoke, without the
apprehension of that sound joy and gladness that is couched under, and grounded
on those words? And yet (says he) I go not about to lessen his pains, I
tremble to do so, yea I tremble to think so; but as Job says, Chap. 13. 7, 8,
9. We must not speak untruly for God, nor talk otherwise than the thing is for
him.

6 Mr. Robert Smith (whom the Dialogue through mistake calls Mr. Henry Smith) a
Reverend Divine, though silenced through the iniquity of the times; he drew up
that Argument, that is prefixed to the Table of the Dialogue, against Gods
forsaking of Christ's soul in wrath.

7 Mr. Wotton has expressed to my self his dislike of their exposition that
holds that God forsook Christ's soul in wrath, and Mr. Smith abovesaid,
concurred with his judgment.

8 Jerome in Mat. 27. says, Marvel not at Christ's complaint of being forsaken,
when thou see the scandal of his Cross.

9 Bernard de verbis, Es. Ser. 5. says, This was the dereliction that Christ
meant in his complaint, there was a kind of forsaking Christ (on the Cross)
when there was, in so great necessity, no demonstrance of his power, no
manifestation of his Majesty (or divine power.)

10 Lyra in Matthew. 27. says, Christ was forsaken of God his Father, because he
was left in the hands of those that slew him.

11 I have cited Christopher Carlisle to this sense, and others, in the
Dialogue, page 60.

I could also cite more to this Exposition: But the judicious Reader will think
it needless, and therefore I forbear.

SECT. II.
Question II.
Why did God forsake Christ on the Cross?


THis indeed is the most proper Question to be answered, because Christ
propounded this Query with a loud voice, in the audience of a multitude both of
friends and enemies: As if Christ had said, I would have the cause why God has
left me into the hands of Satan's instruments, to be sought out, and understood
of all men. God forseek Christ on the Cross, because his humane nature might be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, in all the afflictions that were
written of him.


Reply 10. The cause in general was from the voluntary Contract and Covenant
between the Trinity, that so the humane nature of Christ might fulfill Gods
Decree; for if God had not forsaken Christ, or left him in the hands of the
Devil and his instruments; how could Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles, and the people of Israel, have done whatsoever Gods hand and counsel
had determined before to be done? Act. 4. 27, 28.

2 How could Pilate else, have had power given him from above to condemn him,
if God had not forsaken him, or left him to his power? Joh. 19. 10, 11. For who
is he that says, That any thing falls out, which the Lord commands not? So
Bro. reads Lam. 3. 37.

3 How else could the body of Christ have been passable, and subject to
tortures, if the divine nature had not left the humane to its infirmities
according to Covenant? for Christ was not subject by Nature, but by Covenant
only to suffer afflictions; and therefore the divine nature, did by Contract
and Covenant, leave the humane, that it might be passable, and that so his
obedience to the Articles of the Covenant, might have the condition of meriting.

Austin says in his 60. Tract on John, Christ was troubled, not through any
weakness of mind, but of power; Christ admitted the affections of fear, etc.
and the infirmities of man's nature, not for want of power to repress them, but
by voluntary obedience and humility, that in him they might be meritorious.

4 Christ told Peter, That he must not be protected at this time against the
Devil, and his Instruments; and therefore he bid Peter to put up his sword,
and not to use it for his protection, saying, Think thou that I cannot now
pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of
Angels? But (said he) how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that say,
Thus it must be? Mat. 26. 53. 54. I must fulfill all that is written of my
sufferings, Mat. 20. 54.
Act. 13. 29. Luke 24. 26, 46. Therefore neither my Father nor I, must
countenance the use of the sword for my protection; and therefore it is not my
Fathers will to give, nor my will to pray for twelve legions of Angels to
protect me from my sufferings, from Satan, and his instruments, for I have
covenanted to be the seed of the woman, and in that nature to enter the Lists
with Satan, and therefore there is a necessity for my divine nature to
withdraw, that Satan may do the worst he can to conquer the patience and
obedience of my humane nature, that so he may thereby preserve his Head-plor,
if he can, from being broken, namely, in case he can prevail to disturb my
patience and obedience.

5 With a loud voice Christ propounds this Query, Why bast thou forsaken me?
seeing formerly till now thou have ever protected me against the prevailing
power of Satan and his Instruments,

1 From the womb, Psa. 22. 9, 10.

2 From the cruelty of Herod when I hung at my Mothers breast, Matthew. 2. 13, 14.

3 From the manifold way-layings of the Jews to kill me, Matthew. 26. 55. Joh. 8.
59. and 10. 39.

The Answer is, That the Scriptures may be fulfilled, Matthew. 26. 56. that say
thus it must be, Matthew. 26. 54.

And therefore Christ told his Disciples saying, now the appointed hour and
power of darkness is come upon me, Luke 22. 53. according to Gods declared
decree, in Genesis 3. 15. and therefore take notice of the true reason why God
has forsaken me, For,

1 Else I could not be thus used by the powers of darkness.

2 Else I could not be touched so deeply with the sensible feeling of man's
infirmities, as I ought to be.

3 Else it could not be known that I am so sensible of them as I am, unless I
did express it by crying out as a man in misery, why have thou forsaken me?

4 Else it might well be questioned whether ever I had a true humane nature or
no, if I should not declare my sense of my present sufferings.

5 Else I cannot make it manifest that I am a true merciful High Priest,
except I make it manifest that I am eminently touched with a true sense and
feeling of man's infirmities.

6 Neither can I be a complete consecrated Priest except the perfection of my
patience and obedience be true and manifested through sharp and harsh
sufferings, Heb. 2. 10. 17.

7 Neither can I make my death to be a propitiatory sacrifice, until I am
completely consecrated by enduring afflictions.

Therefore that I may make it evident that my humane nature is thus qualified,
I must cry out with a loud voice at the end of all my sufferings, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? or left me to the prevailing powers of
darkness, to endure such an ignominious and painful death?

8 It is most evident that the last extrinsecal part of Christ's Priestly
consecration was ordained to be finished by his sufferings, from the malice and
enmity of his proclaimed enemy Satan, according to Genesis 3. 15. compared with
Heb. 2. 10, 17. and Heb. 5. 8, 9. And this is yet the more to be marked, Heb.
2. 10.
because God ordained that the consecration of Aaron and his Sons, should not
be finished without some trial of his obedience under some kind of affliction,
for God commanded them to keep a strict watch at the door of the Tabernacle for
seven days, and seven nights together, in all which space they were separated
from their Wives and Families, upon pain of Gods heavy displeasure by death;
and until they had manifested the perfection of their obedience under this
appointed measure of affliction, they might not offer any sacrifice for the
procuring of Gods Atonement, Levit. 9. 7. but as soon as they were thus
consecrated, then the very next day they were commanded to draw near to God,
and to offer sacrifices of Reconciliation. And to this purpose I have given
another hint from the words of Mr. Trap in Reply 27.

Hence I reason thus, If the Divine nature had protected the Humane nature of
Christ against the power of his proclaimed enemy, Satan, in this appointed
hour, for the Prince of darkness to exercise his utmost power against, as he
did in former times, from the prevailing power of Herod, in Matthew. 2. and from
the prevailing power of his Townsmen at the hill Nazaret, Luke 4. 29, 30. and
from his conspirators, in Joh. 8. 59. then he could not have fulfilled Gods
appointed and declared Decree in Genesis 3. 15. and his own Covenant, which was,
that he would enter the Lists in his Humane nature, from the seed of the woman,
with his combater Satan, and give him so much liberty as to pierce him in the
Foot-soals as a sinful malefactor, and yet that he would continue obedient
through all his greatest temptations and trials. And his Father covenanted that
his temptations and trials from his Combater, Satan, should be for his ultimate
extrinsecal consecration, and that then he should make his soul a sacrifice of
reconciliation for the breaking of the Devils Head-plot.

Therefore that he might manifest the perfection of his obedience through all
his sharpest sufferings from his malignant Combater Satan, his Divine nature
must forsake, or rest, or cease or leave his Humane nature, that so his humane
nature alone might undergo the combat from the malice of his proclaimed enemy,
and might manifest the truth of his humane nature, by evidencing that he was
eminently touched with the quick sense and feeling of our infirmities, and by
manifesting the perfection of his patience and obedience under all, before he
could make his soul a propitiatory sacrifice.

And to this sense do the Orthodox speak.

Ireneus says, That Christ was crucified and died, the word (namely, the
Divine nature) Resting, that is, says Bastingus, In his chap. of Christ's
sufferings.
not using his power, not putting forth his strength, to the intent he might be
crucified and die.

And hence we may take notice that this phrase, The Divine nature resting, is
the very same with Gods forsaking or leaving of the humane nature of Christ in
his combat with Satan; as it is expounded by sundry Orthodox, which I will
cite Because the humane nature was no true part of the divine person, but an
appendix only, therefore the divine nature could and did leave the humane nature
alone to combat with Satan, that so it might be touched with a quick sense of
all his ill usage, and might manifest the same by crying out, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me?
by and by.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 79.
If the pain of loss be not joined with the pain of sense, there can be no
sufficient cause given of so bitter and lamentable a cry from that person that
was God and man.


Reply 11. Though that person was God and man, yet that hinders not but that
his humane nature might make that bitter and lamentable cry from the sense of
the Devils ill usage; his being God and Man in personal union, did indeed
privilege his humane nature from sinful perturbations in his passions, and so
consequently from Gods coacted Justice, but it did not hinder him from his own
voluntary passions, nor from his voluntary sufferings from his malicious enemy
Satan, nor from manifesting his true sense and feeling of them, because his
humane nature was no true part of the divine person, for then it could not have
been left of his divine nature to suffer any thing at all, except Mr. Norton,
will say, That his divine nature was passible; But because it was no true part,
but an Appendix only to his divine person (as Zanchy shows in his. Appendix
to his Confession of the Faith) therefore the divine nature might, and did
rest, cease, leave, or forsake the humane nature to manage the combat alone
with Satan, that so it might be sensible of his sufferings (from Satan's power
granted to him in Genesis 3. 15.) more than other men can be, because of the exact
purity of his natural temper above all other men, and in these respects it came
to pass that he did make that bitter and lamentable cry, My God, my God, why
have thou forfaken me?

I say, that the union of his humane nature to his divine person, was so
ineffable, that the divine nature could, and did forsake, leave, cease, or rest
from protecting or assisting his humane nature, that so it might, undertake the
combat alone with Satan, and that so it might be touched with the quick sense
and feeling of our infirmites more than other men can be, and so it made him to
cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

But says Mr. Norton in page 191. Though the humane nature of Christ from its
first union had its dependence and subsistence in his divine person, yet such
is the singleness and unmixedness of the divine nature in this union, that it
could, and ^id leave the humane nature to act of it self, according to its own
natural principles.

As the humane nature of Christ did not subsist alone, so neither does it
perform any humane operations alone; dependence in respect of subsistence,
infers a dependence in respect of operations, etc.


In these words, Mr. Norton does argue more like to a natural Philosopher, than
to a judicious Divine; for though the humane nature of Christ did ever subsist
in his divine person from the time of the union, yet it did not subsist in his
divine person according to the order of natural causes, but after the ineffable
manner of the voluntary cause, of which the rule is not true, pesua cause a
sequitur effectus, for such voluntary causes do work according to the liberty
of the voluntary agreement of the persons in Trinity.

2 I say also, that the form of this union cannot be exemplified from any
natural or civil union, and therefore the operations that flew from this union,
may well differ from the operations that flow from all other unions.

I grant that Athanasius does in some respects fitly exemplify this union to
the union of our soul and body, making one See Pareus Notes on Athanasius Creed
Art. 4.
man, but yet in some respects it will not hold.

In two things, says Pareus, this similitude does not agree.

1 Because in man, by reason of the union of the reasonable soul and body, some
third thing specifically different is made up, to wit, man of matter and form,
neither of which alone is man. It is not so (says he) in Christ, because the
word, Assuming the flesh was God, and the same person both before, and after
the Incarnation, heretofore without flesh, and afterward clothed with it.

2 Says he, The soul of man receives into it the passions of the body, with
which it grieveth and rejoices, but God, the word, is void of all affection
and passion.

Therefore seeing this union is so unexpressible, the operations of each nature
may well differ from the operations of all other unions.

3 Seeing it was the will of the blessed Trinity, according to their agreement
in the voluntary Covenant, that the two natures of the Mediator should keep
each nature, and their properties distinct: Thence the Mediator might act
either as man only, or as God only, or as God and man jointly: And this
observation is of necessary use for the right understanding of many Scriptures,
as it is noted by the Dialogue from Mr. Calvin in p. 111. and to him I will
add Mr. Thomas Wilson, for in his Theological Rules for the right
understanding of the Scriptures, he says In his 111. Theological Rule, p. 164.
thus;

Some of the works of Christ were proper to his Godhead, as his miracles.

Secondly, Some to his Manhood, as his natural and moral works.

Thirdly, Some to his whole person, as his works of Mediation, in which each
nature did that which was proper to it (but Mr. Norton makes no good use of
this rule.)

And all these several operations do arise from the unexpressible nature of
this union, which does work according to the agreement of the persons in the
voluntary Covenant: And of this I have also given a touch before in page 174.

2 I have made it evident in the former Chapter, That the most excellent
temper, and tender constitution of Christ's humane nature, did make all his
sufferings to be abundantly more sharp and keen to his senses, than the like
can be to us that are by nature born the bondslaves of sin, corruption, and
death; for in that respect, our natural spirits are of a blockish and dull
sense, and therefore we cannot abhor misery and death, with that quick sense
and feeling, as the pure constitution of Christ's humane nature might, and did
do; and therefore we cannot cry out with such a deep sense of it, as he did.

3 In obedience to Gods declared Decree, in Genesis 3. 15. and in obedience to his
own Covenant to enter the Lists with Satan, with his humane nature, as it was
accompanied with our infirmities; It behoved his divine nature to rest and to
leave his humane nature to feel the power of Satan's enmity, because it was now
the very appointed hour for the powers of darkness to exercise their utmost
enmity, according to Gods declaration in Genesis 3. 15.

So then the operation of his divine nature in this appointed hour, was to
withdraw assistance from his humane nature, and not to protect it as it did at
other times, but to leave his humane nature alone in the combat, and to let
the Prince of darkness have his full liberty to disturb his patience, and so to
pervert his obedience, if he could, or in case he could not prevail, then it
was agreed that these trials should be for the consecration of him, as of the
Priest and Prince of our salvation to his sacrifice.

And to this sense do the Ancient Divines speak:

1 The Passion of Christ, says Austin, was the sweet sleep of his Divinity.

Mr. Rich. Ward in his Commentary on Mat. 27. 42. does thus paraphrase on these
words of Austin; As in a sweet sleep (says he) the soul is not departed,
though the operations thereof be for a time suspended; so during the time of
Christ's sufferings, his Godhead rested as it were in a sweet sleep, that so
the humanity might suffer in all points according to Gods Decree; and to this
sense also does Mr. Perkins speak on the Creed, fol. 121.

2 Theodoret on Psalm. 22. says, Christ called that a dereliction which was a
permission of the Divinity that the Humanity should suffer.

3 Isyehius in Lev. li. 5. chapter 16. says, Christ's Deity is said to depart by
withdrawing his own power from his Humanity, that he might give time to his
passion.

4 The Master of the sentences, says, the Divine nature did forsake the humane
nature. First, By not protecting it. And secondly, By withdrawing his power
that so he might suffer. And says he, in lib. 3. did. 2. the Deity severed it
self because it withdrew protection. And (secondly, says he) it separated it
self outwardly not to defend, but it failed not inwardly to continue the union.
If (says he) it had not withdrawn but exercised power, Christ could not have
died.

5 Leo de passi Dom. Ser. 170. says, That the Lord should be delivered to his
passion, it was his Fathers will as well as his own, That not only the Father
might leave him, but that after a sort he should forsake himself, not by any
fearful shrinking but by a voluntary cession (or resting) for the power of
Christ crucified contained it self from these wicked ones, and to perform his
secret disposition he would not use any manifest power, he that came to destroy
death and the author of death, how should he have saved sinners, if he would
have resisted his pursuers.

Ibidem, Christ (says he) cried with a loud voice, Why have thou forsaken me?
that he might make it manifest to all for what cause he ought not to be
delivered nor defended, but to be left into the hands of his persecutors, which
was to be made the Savior of the world, and the redeemer of all men, not by
any miserable necessity, but of mercy; not for lack of help, but of purpose to
die for us.

Ibidem, And says he, Let us leave this to the Jews, to think that Christ was
forsaken of God, on whom they could execute their rage with such wickedness,
who most sacrilegiously deriding him, said, He saved others himself he cannot
save.

These last words of Leo do most fitly agree to the Prophecy of Isay in chap.
53. 4. there Isay foretold the Jews, that though Christ did manifest the power
of his Godhead in healing sicknesses, and carrying away their manifold
infirmities from them, yet out of Satan's malice they would esteem him stricken,
smitten of God and afflicted, namely in Gods anger for his own sins; and thus
the Prophet does blame their gross mistake by imputing his sufferings to be
from Gods wrath for his own desert.

And thus much I think is sufficient to demonstrate the reason why the Divine
nature did forsake the Humane, and why the Humane nature propounded this Query
with a loud voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, it was, that so
the humane nature might suffer all that was written of him from his Combater
Satan, according to Gods declared Decree, in Genesis 3. 15.

SECT. 3.
Question III.
How did God not forsake Christ on the Cross?


Reply 12. IN two respects God did not forsake Christ on the Cross.

1 He did not forsake his soul in respect of the comfortable fruition of the
sense of the good of the promises.

2 He did not forsake him in the formality of his death, namely, he did not
suffer Satan and his Instruments to put him to death formally by the power of
their tortures.

First, I say that God did not forsake Christ's soul in respect of the sense of
the good of the Promises.

And for the better understanding of the word Forsaken, in Matthew. 27. 46.

Consider these six sorts of Dereliction.
1 By disunion of person. 2 By loss of Grace. 3 By diminution or weakening of
Grace. 4 In respect of assurance of future deliverance. 5 By withdrawing
protection. 6 By depriving his soul of the sense of the good of the promises.
Divines do generally account it a most impious thing to affirm that Christ was
forsaken of God, any of the four first ways.

1 They affirm that God did not forsake Christ in respect of union, they affirm
that the personal union of the two natures was never dissolved.

2 They affirm that he was never forsaken in respect of the loss of Grace.

3 They do generally affirm, That he was not forsaken in respect of diminishing
or weakening of any grace in him.

But yet some there are that do affirm that he was forsaken The Geneva note on
the word Forsaken, in Psa. 22. 1. does make Christ a sinner inherently.
by diminishing or weakening of the Grace of Faith in him; The Geneva note on
the word forsaken, Psa. 22. 1. says thus, Here appears that horrible
conflict that he suffered between faith and desparation, Is not this a
blasphemous note, to say that Christ was in a conflict with desparation through
the weakness of faith? is not this an imputation of inherent sin to Christ?

Mr. Norton tells me in p. 215. that the Geneva note which I there cited with
approbation to the sense of the Dialogue, must not be understood in the
Dialogues sense, but it must be interpreted according to the Doctrine of
Geneva; I would fain see how he by the Doctrine of Geneva can make a good
exposition of this note affixed to Psalm. 22. 1. if he mean by the Doctrine of
Geneva, the Doctrine of Calvin, then I find in Marlorat on Mat. 27. 46. where
he cites Calvin's words on the word forsaken, thus, He fought with desparation,
yet was he not overcome thereby; this Doctrine of Calvin and the Geneva note
agree together, and therefore in likelihood that Geneva note was taken from
Calvin at first, though his latter Editions are now somewhat reformed; and Mr.
Norton himself does censure Calvin to be unsound in this point, for in page 61.
he blames Calvin for saying, that Christ suffered the pains of the damned and
forsaken men.

Now if Christ was in a horrible conflict between faith and desparation, as the
Geneva note speaks, then it follows that he was a sinner inherently, for if
there be any conflict with doubting (which is less than desparation) it is a
sin, Mark. 14. 31. Jam. 1. 6. 7. Matthew. 21. 21.

Truly it is a lamentable thing that this note has been printed and dispersed
in so many thousand Bibles to corrupt men's minds, so that now many can hardly
have patience to hear any reasons to the contrary; but I must needs acknowledge
that our larger Annotation on Psalm. 22. 1. has made a good Reformation.

4 Divines confess that it was not possible that Christ should be forsaken in
respect of assurance of future deliverance and present support because he had
faith in the full Sea without any ebb.

5 That Christ was forsaken by Gods withdrawing of outward protection (and not
delivering of him from the rage of Satan and his Instruments until they had
executed on him all their rage) is acknowledged by the Dialogue, and by many
Orthodox lately cited.

6 The last sort of forsaking is that which is affirmed by Mr. Norton, namely,
That God forsook Christ's soul in anger, as concerning the fruition and sense of
the good of the promises. But in Chap. 4. I have showed that he does oftentimes
leave out the word sense, and makes Christ to be forsaken concerning the
fruition of the good of the promise. And this last kind of forsaking is
suitable to his main Tenent, laid down in his foundation-Proposition.

Reply 13. This last kind of forsaking as it is asserted by Mr. Norton, is
opposed by sundry eminent Divines.

1 By Mr. Robert Wilmot, whom I have cited before in this Chapter at Reply 9. 2
Our large Annotation on Psalm. 22. 1. which I have cited at Reply 4. 3 I cited
Mr. Robert Smith, and diverse others, at Reply 9. 4 I will now examine the word
forsaken, once more with the Christ was not so forsaken in his soul, but that
he still had the sweet sense of the good of the promises on the Cross.
context, for doubtless that is a sure Rule of a right interpretation.
1 Christ does interrogate in Psalm. 22. 1. Why have thou forsaken me? Is there
not good reason that the Divine nature should forsake the Humane, in respect of
outward protection? as I have showed in Answer to the second Question, but yet
he did not forsake the inward man by any weakening of Grace, nor in respect of
the comfort of that Grace; and this is evident by what I have cited in my
Answer to the first Question from v. 11. and 19. And also I shall now add
another reason by conferring it with v. 24. There Christ does exhort all the
seed of Jacob to praise God, he has not hid (or turned away) his face from
him. Hence it follows by good consequence, that when Christ said, my God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? he could not mean that God had hid (or turned
away) his face from his immortal soul, for then he could not have exhorted the
seed of Jacob to praise God, because he had not hid (or turned away) his face
from him; This very Argument is also used by our larger Annotation, on Psalm.
22. 1. though I did not see it, till I had first made use of it for this
exposition.

2 Seeing it is generally acknowledged that Christ was not forsaken in regard
of any diminution of Grace; Thence it follow^ that these words, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? must not be understood of any inward forsaking of
his soul, for (says Mr. Rutherford) these words, My God, my In Christ's dying
p. 150,
God, was spoken with the greatest Faith that ever was, a doubled act of
believing, My God, my God.

2 Says he, It is a word relative to the Covenant between the Father and the
Son: My God (says he) is a Covenant expression, that the Father will keep what
he has promised to his Son, and relates to the infinite faithfulness of the
Covenant maker.

Object. But here it will be objected as it was about Mr. Calvin's words, That
Mr. Rutherford held, That Christ suffered the pain of loss in his soul.

Answ. I grant it, yet I say also that that Tenent, and these expressions do
cross one another.

4 I do once more propound to consideration what I have cited before out of Mr.
Wilmot, at Reply 9. and in Sect. 4. And to that I will adjoyn a fourth Argument
from him, from his Exposition of the word always, in Act. 2. 25. where Christ
says thus, I foresaw the Lord always before my face.

Always, that is says Mr. Wilmot, Even in his forest Agonies.

1 Before his sweaty Agony his soul was troubled, yet then he called God
Father, Joh. 12. 27.

2 When he was in the Agony, he could still call God Father, Luke 22. 44. and
prayed to him by the name Father: And in Joh. 11. 42. he said, he knew God
heard him always, and therefore even then he must needs have comfort.

3 When he began to be (...), most grievously tormented (...) i. (...),
abundantly sorrowful, or rounded about with sorrow, yet then he could still
call God Father, Matthew. 26. 37. 38, 39, 42.

4 When the betrayer was come, and the Band had seized on him, yet then also he
uttered words of sure comfort and confidence, in Matthew. 26. 53. Think thou
that I cannot pray to my Father, and he shall set before me more than Twelve
Legions of Angels.

5 When he was upon the Cross, and cried, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? does not the very forefront of that speech ascertain us, that he
had even then comfort in his God? Matthew. 27. 46.

6 Had not he strong comfort in God his Father at the giving up of the Ghost,
when he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit? Luke 23 46.

If then through all his sufferings he could pray to his father, as we see; and
knew his Father heard him ever; yea, even through all his sufferings he called
him by this fiducial and cordial name Father, we cannot imagine but that he
conceived and applied the comfort contained in the name, when ever he did
mention the name; else how conceive we that his heart and mouth did go
together. Thus far Mr. Wilmot. This I have cited before in Chap. 16. But it is
never a whit too often to the considerate.

5 Seeing it is acknowledged that Christ was not forsaken in regard of any
diminution of Grace, but that he did always enjoy his Graces in fullness, even
as the Sun in its strength; How could he lose the light of Gods countenance, or
want the sense of the good of the Promises, seeing he enjoyed the full exercise
of all Grace?

He was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psa. 47. 7. and
above measure, Joh. 3. 34. That is, says Mr. Ball, he had the whole Spirit;
all the gifts of the Holy Spirit in higher degree In the Covenant, p. 310.
than any creature, men or Angels; in full abundance, for he that gives
bountifully or largely, does not measure or number what he gives, but pours
out copiously, or as we say, from the full heap with both hands. And in page
111. (says he) fullness without measure, is like the fullness of the light of
the Sun, or like the water in the Sea, which has an unmeasurable sufficiency
and redundancy, And therefore hence it follows, That seeing the oil of
gladness was always in him, in the highest fullness without measure, and
without the least diminution, that he could not possible be deprived of the
sense of the good of the Promises, in respect of his inward man, though he
might be, and was deprived of outward protection from the hands of Satan and
his Instruments, because it was so Decreed, Covenanted, and Declared in Genesis 3.
15. And therefore, it behoved the Divine nature to withdraw its protection, and
to leave him to try masteries with his Combater, Satan, in his Humane nature,
as it was accompanied with our true natural infirmities, that so he might
suffer from his Combater Satan, all that was written of him in Genesis 3. 15.

But this weakness of his (says Austin) was power, because the Divine nature
did exercise power to leave his Humane nature, that so his Human nature might
suffer in obedience to his Covenant.

But this is also to be well marked, that when the divine nature rested, or
ceased to protect and assist the humane nature, it did no way withdraw the
exercise of his inward graces, which he had received at his Incarnation, and at
his Baptism from the unction of the holy Spirit, above measure (as I noted
before) by which his soul was supported under all his greatest tortures on the
Cross; and therefore as Stephen, and many other Martyrs, had the joyful vision
of Gods countenance, and the sense of the good of the promises to support their
inward man, under their greatest outward tortures, so had Christ; though all of
them wanted the vision of outward protection as well as Christ, and in that
respect they might all say, as Christ said, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? And as John Hus and Amond de laroy said, as I have noted it in the
Dialogue, In Fox tom. 1. p. 50, 80 tom. 2. p. 130.
p. 58.

In the conflict (says Ball on the Covenant, page 284.) his Faith was most
firm, not shaken with any degree of unbeleef.

And says Dr. Sibs on Matthew. 27. 46. Christ was not forsaken in regard of
Grace, as if Faith, or Love, (or Joy in God) or any other Grace were taken from
Christ. O no (says he) he believed when he said, My God, my God. Unto these
words of his I put in the Grace of Joy in a parenthesis, because he had said
before in general, That Christ was not forsaken in regard of Grace, and thence
I infer, that then he was not forsaken of the Grace of Joy, in the good of Gods
promises (for that is one of the Graces, Gal. 5.) no not then when his
sufferings were most grievous to his flesh, his Joy in the apprehension of Gods
Fatherly love in his promises was not then interrupted, and therefore out of
that his never interrupted apprehension, or rather joyful view of the light of
Gods countenance, and of the good of his promises, he like a conquering
Combater endured the cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12. 2.

6 Seeing Christ's soul was as full of Grace, as the Sun is full of light,
without any eclipse, and as full of Grace, as the Sea is full of water, without
any ebb, as it is acknowledged by almost all Divines; how can it be true which
Mr. Norton affirms, that he was in the spiritual death of his soul when he
said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? For where there is any true
Grace, there the soul is spiritually made alive, and therefore true Grace is
called the Grace of life, 1 Pet. 3. 7. and where the Spirit of God abides,
there the soul is in life, and therefore the Spirit of God is called the Spirit
of Life, Romans 8. 2. and therefore Christ could not be in the spiritual death of
his soul, because he always had the Spirit of Grace in him above measure.
Abominable then to God must that doctrine needs be which Mr. Norton has
published, that makes Christ's soul to be under the power of a spiritual death.
Some learned Divines do say, That none can die the second spiritual death in
soul, before they die the first death in sin, therefore Mr. Nortons Tenent must
needs be a Paradox in Divinity, that makes Christ's soul to be spiritually dead
under the pain of loss and sense; for by that Doctrine, he does also
necessarily make him to be devoid of all Grace, and so consequently to be
spiritually dead in sin, which is horrible blasphemy.

2 His Tenent in making Christ's soul to be without the comfort of a promise, at
the very instant when he made his soul a sacrifice, does make Christ to be a
blemished Priest, and so consequently, it makes his death and sacrifice to be
an abomination to God; for a Priest that is a mourner in soul, is a blemished
Priest, therefore a Priest must not be a mourner in soul at the time of
offering any sacrifice, Lev. 10. 19. and 21. 12. for the time of offering
sacrifice is a time of procuring Gods Reconciliation, and Gods Reconciliation
procured is a matter of rejoicing, Number. 12. 14. Lev. 10. 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 16. 11,
15. Neh. 8. 9. doubtless therefore all Christ's soul-sorrows and sadness in the
consideration of Satan's ill usage was fully over, as soon as he had done his
prayers in the Garden; and yet I grant also, that when he hung upon the Cross
he was under most grievous tortures and pains to his senses; but yet I say
also, that those pains born with perfect patience did not hinder the sweet
sense of his inward joy, that had both conquered Satan and made reconciliation
with God, and that now had recovered the Elect, and so had divided the spoil
with the strong adversary Satan; which act of dividing the spoil is always done
with joy, 1 Samuel 30. 26. Heb. 12. 2. Isa. 9. 3. Judge. 5. 35. Isa. 53. 12. I
will divide, says God, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong.

7 Take Mr. Nortons words into consideration in p. 89. Christ (says he) knew
that God was his, Mat. 27. 46. fully understood the glory of the blessed, and
that his soul presently upon his dissolution should be in Paradise, Luke 23.
43. Does not Mr. Norton in these words prove, that Christ was not totally
deprived of the sense of the good of the promises? For now in his greatest
torments on the Cross (he says) he promised paradise to himself, as well as to
the penitent thief; and thus at last Mr. Norton has confuted his own Assertion.

SECT. 4.
Secondly, I come now to show that God did not forsake Christ on the Cross, in
the formality of his death.


Reply 15. I Grant that God by his declared permission to Satan in Genesis 3. 15.
did allow him so much power as to pierce Christ in the foot-soals, namely, to
crucify him as a sinful malefactor with the soars of death, just like to other
malefactors that were formally killed thereby. But yet for all this, I say
also, that God did not give the Devil so much power as to put Christ to death
formally, because he had ordained Christ to have a Priestly power, in the
formality of his death, by his unchangeable oath, to the end that he might make
his death a sacrifice of Reconciliation, according to Covenant. But in case he
had been put to death formally by the power of Satan and his Instruments, then
his death could not have been a sacrifice (unless he will say that God ordained
the Devil to be a Priest) it could have been no more but a death of Martyrdom.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 83.
The Scripture mentions no other death then what is inflicted justly for sin.


Reply 16. In this speech M. Norton does much wrong the sense of the blessed
Scriptures, for in Job. 10. 17, 18. Christ says, This commandment have I
received of my Father, to let none take away my life from me (formally) but to
lay it down (or as Tendal translates it, to put it from me) of my self. Hence
it is evident that the blessed Scripture does make a plain difference between
the formality of Christ's death, and the death of all other men, as I shall more
at large expounded this Scripture by and by.

2 His death is called a sacrifice, and none could make it to be a sacrifice
but such a Priest as was called of God, to be the Priest, and no other act
could make it to be a sacrifice, but such an act of such a Priest as did
formally take away the life of the sacrifice, Therefore he must be the only
Priest in the formality of his own death, Heb. 9. 26, 28. and 10. 12. and no
other man's death is called a sacrifice, formally, but his.

3 All other men die by co-action, because they are sinners in Adam, but Christ
was no sinner, therefore his death was not co-acted by Gods Justice as other
men's is: But his death was a death of Covenant only, and that Contract and
Covenant made it to be the meritorious price of man's redemption. And to this
sense I have cited diverse Orthodox Divines, in chap. 2. and in chap. 3. and in
chap. 16. at Reply 3, 10, 12. But Mr. Nortons foundation-Tenent taken from
Court. Justice, namely, that God did legally impute our sins to Christ, has so
beguiled the eyes of his understanding, that he cannot see the difference which
the Scripture makes between the formality of Christ's death, and the death of
other men that are inherent sinners. More easy it is (says Origin) for a man
to put off any other customs; how much so ever he is affixed to them, than to
lay aside his accustomed opinion,

But says Mr. Norton in p. 83.
Mr. Ainsworth, whom the Dialogue often cites, seems to understand death to
be laid upon Christ, according to the sense of Gen, 3. 19. Genesis 3. 19.



Reply 17. Mr. Ainsworth does not explain himself touching the manner of
Christ's death by this verse. But in Numb. 19. 2. he does thus explain himself;
Christ (says he) was without yoke, as being free from the bondage of sin and
corruption, and as doing voluntarily the things appertaining to our redemption:
From these words of his, I reason thus; If Christ was free from the yoke of sin
and corruption, and did all things voluntarily that appertained to our
redemption, then his death was not co-acted by Gods Justice like to the death
of all other men, that are sinners; his death therefore must be considered as a
voluntary act from the voluntary Covenant; for as he was an absolute Lord in
Trinity, so he was a reciprocal Covenanter.

1 To take our nature, and in that nature to enter the Lists with Satan, and to
suffer him to do his worst to provoke his patience, and so to spoil his
obedience (as he did Adams) if he could.

2 He covenanted that as soon as he had fulfilled his utmost sufferings from
his Combater, Satan, he would send forth his Spirit as the only Priest in the
formality of his own death, that so he might make his death to be a sacrifice
of reconciliation for man's Redemption from Satan's Head-plot; both these acts of
his voluntary obedience he performed exactly according to the Articles of the
voluntary and eternal Covenant for the meriting of a great reward, namely, for
the meriting of the Spirit for Regeneration; and for the meriting of his
Fathers Reconciliation, and eternal Redemption of all the Elect.

But says the Dialogue, I will distinguish upon the death of Christ, for God
appointed him to die a double kind of death, 1. As a Malefactor. 2. As a
Mediator, and all this at one and the same time.

1 He died as a Malefactor by Gods determinate Council and Covenant, and to
this end, God gave the Devil leave to enter into Judas to betray him, and into
the Scribes and Pharisees, and Pontius Pilat to condemn him, and to do what
they could to put him to death (as a cursed Malefactor) and in that respect,
God may be truly said to bring him into the dust of death, Genesis 3. 19. as the
Dialogue does open the phrase in Psa. 22. 15.

2 Notwithstanding all this, Christ died as a Mediator, and therefore his death
was not really finished by those torments which he suffered as a Malefactor,
for it was his Covenant to be our Mediator in his death, Heb. 9. 15, 16. and
therefore he must separate his soul from his body by the power of his Godhead
(namely, after his Manhood had performed his conflict with Satan) all the
Tyrants in the world could not separate his soul from his body, Job. 19. 11.
no, not by all the torments they could devise, till himself was pleased to
actuate his own death, by the joint concurrence of both his natures.

Mr. Morton in p. 84. does thus Answer.
The plain meaning of the Author in this distinction is this; Christ died as a
Malefactor, only (though unjustly) in the Jews account, but not as a Mediator;
as Mediator only, in Gods account, but not as a Malefactor.

This distinction (says he) in name, but in truth a Sophisme is used as a
crutch to support the halting of the non-imputation of the sin to Christ.


Reply 18. This distinction it seems does somewhat trouble Mr. Nortons
patience, because it agrees not to his legal court way of making satisfaction,
from Gods judicial imputing our sincs to Christ, and from his inflicting Hell
torments upon him, from his immediate vindicative wrath, and therefore in
contempt he calls it a Sophisme, namely, a false kind of arguing.

2 To the same purpose Mr. Norton does thus repeat another speech of the
Dialogue; Christ's death as Mediator (says the distinction) was not really
finished by those Torments which he suffered as a Malefactor; the Jews are said
to put Christ to death, because they indeavored to put him to death, but did
not separate his soul from his body; in that sense they did not put him to
death. So (says he) is the distinction expressly interpreted in the Dialogue p.
100.

Mr. Norton in p. 84. does thus Answer.
If Christ's death was a suffering, then the formal cause thereof was not that
active separation of his soul from his body, so often mentioned in the
Dialogue, otherwise Christ should have been his own afflicter.


Reply 19. I have often warned that the death of Christ is more largely or more
strictly taken.

1 The pains of death are often called death in Scripture, though they prove
not, in the issue, to be death formally.

2 The Dialogue does all along affirm that Christ's death was a suffering, and
that he was active in his compliance with all his sufferings, for he delivered
himself into the hands of Satan and his Instruments, that they might use their
best skill to try if by any means they could disturb his patience, and so spoil
his obedience (as he did Adams) that so he might put him to death, formally,
as he did the other Malefactors.

3 It is also evident that Christ was more entirely active in all his
soul-sufferings, than in his outward sufferings, for the Text says, He
troubled himself at the death of Lazarus, Joh. 11. 33. and he sighed deeply in
spirit for their infidelity, Mark. 8. 12. and Christ was often his own aflicter
with soul-sorrows.
so in Job. 13. 21. and from hence I infer, that he was his own afflicter very
often, as I have showed more at large in chap. 16. at Reply 10.

And to this purpose I lately cited Damasen for Christ's voluntary soul-troubles
in his Agony.

And unto him I will add Beda; Jesus hungered (says he) it is true, but because
he would; he slept, it is true, but because See Beda in Ioh. 11.
he would; he sorrowed, it is true, but because he would; he died, it is true,
but because he would.

Ibidem, The affections of man's infirmity Christ took unto him, not by any bond
of necessity, but by the good pleasure of his mercy, as he did flesh, and death
it self. Wherefore his death was truly free and not forced, because he had
power to lay down his soul, and to take it up again.

From these words of Beda, which accord with Damasen and other ancient Divines,
we may see that they held it to be an evident truth, that Christ was often his
own afflicter with soulsorrows, and to that end he voluntarily took unto him
our infirmities of fear, sorrow, etc. they were not pressed from him, from the
sense of Gods wrath, as Mr. Norton holds.

And says Beda, his death was truly free and not forced, therefore especially
in the last act of his death, he was the only active Priest, in breathing out,
or sending out, his soul from his body.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 84.
And in this case Christ was his own Executioner, which last (says he) the
Dialogue it self expressly rejects.


Reply 20. There is good reason to reject it; for though God commanded Christ
in his humane nature (as it was accompanied with our infirmities) to enter the
Lists with his envious Combater, Satan, and also permitted Satan to enter the
Lists with Christ, and to assault him with a Band of Soldiers Christ was not
his own executioner, or self-murderer, though he was the only Priest in the
formality of his own death and sacrifice.
with staves and swords, yet he did not command Christ to take any of these
weapons from them, and run them into his own body, on purpose to kill himself,
that so he might be his own executioner (as Saul was, to prevent the
ignominious usage of his Adversaries) this kind of killing is Diabolical; and
Christ might not be his own executioner in any such like manner; therefore the
Dialogue had good reason to reject that kind of Tenent.

The Dialogue says thus in p. 102. Though he did not break his own body, and
pour out his own blood, with nails and spear, as the Roman Soldiers did, yet
he brake his own body in pieces, by separating his own soul from his body by
his own Priestly power; And thus Beza makes Christ to break his hody actively
as well as passively; But it is a profane expression to compare the act of a
Priest in killing a sacrifice, to the act of an executioner that puts a
malefactor to death; and it is a like profane expression to call such a death
Self-murder, or Homicide. If Abraham had formally killed Isaac, as he
intended, yet he had not been Isaacks murderer, no nor yet his executioner,
according to the known use of the word; neither was Isaac to be called a
Self-murtherer or a Homicide, (being now thirty three years old, and therefore
able to have resisted his Father) in submitting himself to be bound, and to be
laid on See Beza Annot. on 1 Cor. 11. 24. And Haymo there also.
the Altar to be killed: But in that act we see how God esteemed it, for in
that act Abraham should have been the Priest, and Isaac the Sacrifice: And so
ought we to esteem of the act of Christ in his death, in his Divine nature he
was the Priest, and in his humane nature he was the Sacrifice (as the Dialogue
says) or thus, by the joint concurrence of both his natures, he was both
Priest and Sacrifice.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 84.
Though Haman, according to the true sense of the Text Ester 8. 7. be said to
lay his hand upon the Jews, yet are the Jews no where said to be slain by
Haman: Abraham is said to have offered up Isaac, yet Isaac is said no where
to be slain by Abraham; as Abraham did sacrifice Isaac, so was Isaac
sacrificed, that is to say, interpretatively, or vertually, not actually.


Reply 21. Those instances in the Dialogue in p. 100. are more clearly
expressed than they are related by Mr. Norton, and the intent of those
instances was no more but this, namely to exemplify that though the Jews are
said to kill Christ, yet that they did not formally separate his soul from his
body (though they did enough to make themselves true murderers of the Lord of
life) but the last act was done by himself, as he was the Priest in his own
death.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 85.
How often do we read in Scripture, that Christ was actually crucified and put to
death by the Jews? Act. 2. 37. and 4, 10. 1 Cor. 2. 8.


Reply 22. I grant the Scripture does often say, that the Jews did slay and
murder the Lord of life; but says the Geneva note on Act. 2. 23. on the word,
you have slain; The fact is said to be theirs, by whose counsel and egging
forward it was done; By this note it appears that in their judgment, Christ
was not actually put to death by the Jews, but vertually only; and so Isaac
is said to have been offered up by Abraham in the Preter-tense (so the new
Translation in Jam. 2. 21.) because he did really intend and endeavor to do it.
So then, I hope the Dialogue saich true notwithstanding Mr. Nortons busling
contradiction; namely, that the Jews did not put Christ to death formally. But
in case he was put to death formally by second causes, then it follows, that it
was done by the Devil in the Roman powers, for they had the power of life and
death at this time, and not the Jews, as I have showed at large in the
Dialogue; the Jews and Romans were true murderers, but not the Priest in the
formality of Christ's death and sacrifice: This distinction of his death is
contemned by Mr. Norton.

But it is a very harsh saying in mine ears to say, That the Devil in the Roman
powers, was the Priest in the formality of Christ's death and sacrifice, as they
must be, if they were the formal cause of Christ's death; and to me it is as
hard a speech to say, That the wrath of God the Father, was the formal cause of
Christ's death, as some say it was, and as Mr. Norton says also, sometimes in
true effect; for in page 79, he says, That Christ's death was joined with the
curse made up of the pain of sense, and the pain of loss; and in page 70, he
says, It is a fiction to assert any divine prediction, That Christ should only
suffer a bodily death, and presently after he says, Christ dyed as a sinner
impuratively, pressed under the sense of the wrath of God, and conflicting with
eternal death.

Hence I reason thus, If the wrath of God the Father, did put Christ to death
formally, then the Father was the Priest in the death and sacrifice of Christ,
which is quite contrary to Gods own established order; for by his oath he made
Christ an unchangeable Priest, that so he might be the only Priest in the
formality of his own death and sacrifice, Heb. 7. 21.

Christ was not by nature obnoxious to death, nor to any other misery, but by
Covenant only, and therefore second causes could not further work his misery
and death, than he gave way to, according to his own voluntary Covenant; he
covenanted to take our nature and infirmities, and in that nature to enter the
Lists with Satan, and that Satan should have full liberty to do to him all the
mischief that he could, even to the peircing of him in the foot-soals; but he
also covenanted, that no man nor power of Satan should take his life from him
formally, but that himself would be the only Priest in the formality of his own
death, and according to this Covenant, God commanded him to lay down his own
life, and to take it up again, Joh. 10. 17, 18.

But the main Argument of the Dialogue M. Norton passes over, and never speaks
to it first or last; which is this, He that takes away the life of a Sacrifice,
must be a Priest; but the death of Christ, was a Sacrifice, therefore he that
takes away his life formally, must be the Priest. Hence the Dialogue infers,
that the Roman Soldiers did not take away his life formally, because they were
Executioners, rather than Priests; neither did his Fathers wrath take away his
life formally, because he was not the Priest, and none was ordained to be the
Priest but Christ himself, and therefore none but he must take away his life
formally. Mr. Norton should have answered this Argument, but he passes by
this, and pleads that Christ's suffering of the essential curse of
Hell Torments, was full satisfaction, and thence he must also hold, that
Hell Torments did put Christ to death formally, for there is no satisfaction
without the formality of Christ's death, Heb. 9. 25. Romans 5. 10.

But says Mr. Norton in page 169.
It is a daring Assertion, when there is not one Text, nor (I believe) one
Classical Author, who assirmeth, that Christ, as the next and formal cause shed
his blood; but on the contrar, plentiful Texts and Testimondes, that he was put
to death, killed, and slain, and that by the Jews, Luke 18. 33. 1 Pet. 3. 18.
Mar. 12. 8. Act. 3. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 15. Jam. 5. 6. Act. 2. 23. Rev. 5. 6. 9.
12. and 6, 9. to contradict not only the godly, whether learned, or unlearned,
both of the present, and all past Generations since the Passion of our Lord
Jesus: But also the Scriptures themselves in saying, The Jews did not actually
put Christ to death.


Reply 23. I have showed immediately before, that though the Scriptures do
charge the Jews, with murdering the Lord of life, yet that Christ was not
actually put to death by their power, and so says the Geneva Note on Act. 2.
23.

2 I will now cite a Jury of Classical Authors, some ancient, and some later,
that concur with the Dialogue, That Christ was the only Priest in the formality
of his Death, and Sacrifice.

1 Athanasius cont. Arianos, Orat. 4. says,
To have power to lay down his soul when he would, and to take it again, this
is not the property of men, but it is the power of the Son of God; for no man
dies by his own power, but by necessity of nature, and that against his will;
but Christ being God, had it in his own power to separate his soul from his
body, and to resume the same again when he would.

2 Origin in Joh. Tom. 9. says,
Does not the Lord affirm a thing that was singular to him above all that ever
were in the flesh, when he says, None takes my soul from me, but I lay it
down of my self, and have power to lay it Joh. 10. 17, 18.
down, and power to take it again? Let us consider what he means, who left
his body and departed from it without any way-leading to death: This neither
Moses, nor any of the Patriarchs, Prophets, or Apostles did say, besides Jesus,
for if Christ had dyed as the Thieves did that were crucified with him, he
could not have said, That he laid down his soul of himself, but after the
manner of such as dye; but now Jesus crying with a strong voice, gave up the
ghost, and as a King left his body, his power greatly appeared in this, that at
his own free power and will leaving his body, he dyed.

3 Gregory Nyssenus de Resur. Chr. Orat. 1. says,
Remember the Lords words what he pronounces of himself, of whom depends all
power, how with full and sovereign power, and not by necessity of nature, he
severed his soul from his body, as he said, None takes my soul from me, but I
lay it down of my self, I have power to lay it down, and power to take it up
again.

4 Turtullian de Resur. carnis cap. 48. says thus,
The Lord, though he carried about a soul fearing unto death, yet not falling
by death.

5 Jerome in Mar. 15. says,
With a faint voice, or rather speechless, we dye that are of the earth, but he
which came from heaven, breathed out his soul with a loud voice.

Ibid. ad Hedibiam, Q. 8.
We must say it was a show of his divine power to lay down his soul when he
would, and to take it again; yea the Centurion hearing him say, Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit, and straight way, of his own accord, to send forth
his spirit, moved with the greatness of his wonder, said, Truly this was the
Son of God.

6 Chrysostom in Mat. 27. Homil. 89. says,
Therefore Christ cried with a loud voice, that he might show this to be done
by his own power; Mark says, That Pilate marvelled if he were already dead,
and the Centurion also therefore chiefly believed, because he saw Christ dye of
his own accord and power.

7 Victor of Antioch in Mar. 15. says,
By so doing, the Lord Jesus does plainly declare, that he had his whole life
and death in his own free power; wherefore Mark says, that Pilate, not without
admiration, asked if Christ were already dead (he adds likewise) that the
Centurion chiefly for that reason believed, because he saw Christ give up the
ghost with a loud cry, and signification of great power.

8 Leo in Ser. 17. de Passi Domini, says,
What entreaty for life shall we think was there, where the soul was both sent
out with power, and recalled with power.

9 Fulgentius ad Transimund, lib. 3. says,
Where then the man Christ received so much power that he might lay down his
soul when he would, and take it again when he would, how great power might the
Godhead of Christ have? And therefore the manhood of Christ had power to lay
down his soul, because the divine power admitted him into the unity of person.

10 Nonius in his Paraphrase on John, on these words, None takes my soul from
me, says,
No birth-Law takes my soul from me, no incroaching time that tameth all
things, nor necessity, which is unchangeable counsel; but ruler of my self, I
of my own accord yield up my willing soul.

11 Beda on these words in Matthew. 27. And Jesus crying with a loud voice sent
forth the Spirit, says,
In that the Evangelist says, Christ sent out his Spirit, he shows, it is a
point of Divine power to send out the soul;

As Christ himself said, None can take my soul from me.

Ibid. In Mark. 15. he says, For none has power to send out the soul, but he
that is the Creator of souls.

12 Theophilact in Matthew. 27. says.
Jesus cried with a loud voice, that we should know it was true which he said,
I have power to lay down my soul; for not constrained, but of his own accord he
dismissed his soul.

Ibid. Says he, in Mar. 15. The Centurion seeing that he breathed out his soul
so like a Commander of death, wondered, and confessed him.

Ibid. Says he, in Luke 23. for he died not like other men, but as a Master of
death.

13 Lyra in Mat. 27. on these words, Jesus crying again with a loud voice, sent
forth his soul, says,
Whereby it appears that voice was not natural but miraculous. Because a man
afflicted with great and long torment, and through such affliction near unto
death, could not so cry by any strength of nature.

14 Austin de Tri. lib. 4. c. 13. says,
It is the death of the Spirit to be forsaken of God, as it is the death of the
body to be forsaken of the Spirit; and this is the punishment in the death of
the body, that the spirit because it willingly forsook God, should unwillingly
leave the body; neither can the spirit leave the body when it will, unless it
offer some violent death to the body. The Spirit of the Mediator did plainly
prove, that he came to the death of his flesh by no punishment of sin, in that
he forsook not his flesh by any means against his will, but quia voluit, quando
voluit, quomodo voluit, Because he would, when he would, and as he would.
Therefore he said, I have power to lay down my soul, and power to take it
again, no man takes it from me, but I have power to lay it down of my self;
and this those that were present greatly marvelled at, as the Gospel observes,
when after that loud voice he presently gave up the Ghost, for they that were
fastened to the tree were tormented with a long death; wherefore the two
Thieves had their legs broken that they might die; but Christ was wondered at
because he was found dead, which thing we read Pilat marvelled at, when Christ's
body was asked of him to be buried.

Three things are remarkable in these words of Austin.

1 That the death of the body was inflicted on all mankind for the punishment
of sin, in which death, the soul must depart from the body against her will,
and not when she would, or as she would.

2 That the manner of Christ's death was clean contrary to ours, because he gave
up his spirit by his own accord and power, when he would, and as he would.

3 That his giving up the Ghost so presently upon his loud prayer, was wondered
at by the slanders by, and by Pilat himself when he heard it.

15 Bernard Feria 4. Heb. panosa, says,
Christ alone had power to lay down his soul, none took it from him, bowing his
dead, being obedient to the death he gave up the Ghost; who can so easily sleep
when he will? To die, is a great infirmity, but so to die, was plainly an
exceeding power; he only had power to lay down his soul, who only had like
free power to take it again, having the rule of life and death.

16 Ambros De Incar. Dom. Sacram. c. 5. says,
Christ having power in himself to lay aside his body, and take it again; he
sent forth his soul, he lost it not.

17 Eusebius Demon. Evang. l. 1. c. 8. says,
When no man had power over Christ's soul, he himself, of his own accord laid it
down for man.

Ibidem lib. 3. chapter 6.
So loosed from all force, and Resting free, himself of himself, made the
departure from his body.

18 Erasmus in his Paraphrase in Luke 23. says,
Jesus, when with a mighty cry he had said, Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit; breathed out his soul to make it manifest to all, that he did not faint
as others do, the strength of his body by little and little decaying; but
straight way upon a strong cry, and words distinctly pronounced, he laid down
his life, as of his own accord.

Ibid. In Mark. 15. When the Centurion that stood overright at a Minister and
Witness of his death, and had seen many dye with punishment; when he saw
Jesus, besides the manner of other men, after a strong cry, presently to breath
out his soul, said, Truly this man was the Son of God.

19 Musculus in Matthew. 27. says,
That Christ sending forth his soul with a loud voice, is a proof of a greater
power, than may be found in a man dying, whereby he shows that he laid off
his soul of his own accord, answerable to that, I have power to lay down my
soul and to take it again, to which end John says, that bowing his head he
gave up the Ghost; others first die, and then their heads fall; but he first
lays down his head, and then of his own accord delivers up his soul to his
Father.

20 Gualter in Joh. 6. 9. says,
But let us see the manner of Christ's death, who as John writes with bowing
down his head yielded up the spirit; Luke says, he cried with a loud voice,
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Here find we manifest Arguments of
his Divinity, which the Centurion and others observed, as some of the
Evangelists witness.

1 That cry and distinct pronouncing of his last words, shows a power and
virtue more than humane, for we know that men dying, so faint that most of them
cannot speak, be it never so softly.

2 He dies when he will of himself, yea, and lays off his soul with
authority, to show himself Lord of life and death, which is an evident proof of
his divine power.

21 Marlorat on these words in Matthew. 27. Jesus crying again with a loud voice,
sent forth his spirit, says,
Christ declares his Majesty, in that he lays down his soul, not when men
constrain him, but when himself will, whereupon Pilat marvelled that Christ was
so soon dead; and the Lord himself said, None takes my soul from me, but I lay
it down of my self, I have power to lay it down, and power to take it again; to
which it appertains, that is written, he bowing his head gave up his spirit.
For other men first die, and then their heads hang, but Christ first laid down
his head, and then voluntarily rendered his soul into the hands of his father.

22 Mr. Nichols cited in the Dialogue page 101. speaks pertinently to the
judgments of these Divines, and cites Austin concurring with him.
23 Mr. John Smith of Clavering in his grounds of Religion, page 59. asks
this Question, How did Christ die?

Ans. He dyed not with extremity of pain as others do; but he willingly yielded
up his life, when he could have lived longer if he would, Joh. 10. 18.

24 Dr. Ames in his Marrow on the death of Christ, c. 22. comes near unto the
former, for in Sect. 27. he says, That Christ's death was in a certain manner
supernatural and miraculous, because Christ did keep his life and strength as
long as he would, and when he would he laid it down Joh. 10. 18. And in Sect,
2. he says it was an act, and not a mere suffering, etc. out of power, and not
out of infirmity only.

25 Calvin on Joh. 10. 18. says, These words may be expounded two manner of
ways. First, That either Christ puts his life from him, himself remaining
perfect, as if a man should put off his clothes. Or else secondly, That he
died of his own accord.

The first of these two ways is active, and the similitude, as if a man put off
his clothes, I conceive is borrowed either from Austin or from Bernard, for
both of them use this similitude, to set out the active separating of the soul
of Christ from his body.

26 John White of Dorchester, in his Way to the Tree of Life, page 186. says
at lastly, When he was nailed to the Cross, he voluntarily breathed out his
soul into the bosom of his Father, as it is evident, both in that he was dead a
good space before the two Thieves that were crucified with him; whereas by
reason of the strength of the natural constitution of his body, he might have
subsisted under those torments longer than they; and besides, by yielding up
his life when it was yet whole in him, as it evidently appeared by his loud
cry, which he uttered at the very instant of his death, as it is testified by
Mar. 15. 37, 39 and by Luke 23. 46. All which are undeniable evidences of our
Saviors voluntary resigning up, Luke 23. 46.
and laying down his life, according to the will of his Father, for his peoples
sins.

And Mr. Perkins on the Creed, p. 141. agrees thus far, That the state and
condition of our Saviors body (on the Cross) was such, that he might have
lived longer; yet says he, by the Council of God, he must to die at that
place, at that time, and at that hour, where and when he died.

And says the Dialogue in p. 97. The Angel Gabriel was sent to tell Daniel at
the time of the Evening Oblation, that from that very hour to the death of
Christ should be 490 years exactly cut out, Dan. 9. 24.

27 John Trap in Matthew. 27. 46. says thus,
Jesus cried with a loud voice, therefore (says he) he laid down his life at
his own pleasure, for by his loud outcry it appeared, that he could have lived
longer if he had listed, for any decay of nature, under those exquisite
torments that he suffered in his body, but much greater in his soul.

And says Trap in Joh. 19. 33. He took his own time to die, Joh. 19. 33.
and therefore in verse. 30. it is said, He bowed his head and gave up the
Ghost; Whereas other men bow not the head until they have given up the Ghost.
And (says he) he cried also with a loud voice, and dyed; which shows that he
wanted not strength of nature to have lived longer, if it had pleased him.

28 I might cite the words of Dr. Williams to this purpose in his Seven golden
Candlesticks, page 492. in Quarto. And I could also cite diverse others that
speak to this effect. But I hope the Judicious will think that these are
sufficient to vindicate the Dialogue from Mr. Nortons over-bold and false
charge.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 171.
Such as hold that Christ died of himself, do also hold that Christ made
satisfaction by suffering the essential curse, the one opposes not the other.


Reply 24. I grant that about four or five of the last cited Divines did hold
so. No full satisfaction was made by any thing that Christ suffered before his
death was com.


But I say also, that had they been put to answer this Question; Whether did
the formality of Christ's satisfaction lie in his greatest sufferings before he
gave up the Ghost, or in the formality of his death by giving up the Ghost?
They would soon have answered, That no formality of satisfaction was made by
any thing that he suffered, until he gave up the ghost in perfection of
obedience, by his own Priestly power; and the reason is plain, because his
death must be made a sacrifice for the procuring of Gods atonement, and there
can be no formality of a sacrifice, but by giving up the ghost; or in case any
shall deny this Answer, I believe they will entangle themselves in other
inconveniences, that they cannot escape, as long as they deny the said Answer.

2 I say further, That the one does most evidently oppose the other, namely, in
the formality of satisfaction, for in case Sometimes Mr. Norton does place the
formality of satisfaction in Christ's spiritual death as it accompanied his
bodily death, and sometimes contradicts that, and affirms that Christ made full
satisfaction by suffering the essential Torments of Hell before he suffered his
natural death.
Christ had made full and formal satisfaction by suffering the essential
Torments of Hell, before his death was completed, (as Mr. Norton does
sometimes most unadvisedly affirm) then the formality of his death and
sacrifice, was altogether needless, as to the point of satisfaction, which is
high blasphemy to affirm.

Sometimes indeed Mr. Norton does join his spiritual death, and his bodily
death together, in the point of satisfaction, as if his bodily death was caused
by his spiritual death, as in page 122, 153, 174, 213, etc. And thus he makes
Christ to dye in a cloud, for he makes the soul of Christ to depart out of his
body, under the cloud of Gods vindicative wrath, when he said, Father, into thy
hands I commend my spirit.

But in page 32. he does contradict this, for there he says, That Christ
suffered the essential penal wrath of God, which (says he) does answer the
suffering of the second death, before he suffered his natural death. And says
he in page 150. Christ offered himself, before his humane nature was dissolved
by death.

In both these places you see that he does hold, That Christ made full
satisfaction before he suffered his natural death (for so he does falsely call
the death of Christ) And hence it follows, that he does most dangerously
affirm, that his bodily death in the formality of it was altogether vain and
needless, as to the point of satisfaction, as I have once before noted it in
Chap. 4. page 79. And says another learned Divine, This reason drawn from the
final cause of Christ's sufferings, is most derogatory to the infinite worth of
Christ's bloody sacrifice.

On the other hand, when he makes him to dye formally under the immediate
vindictive wrath of God; He makes the Father to be the Priest in his death and
sacrifice, which is quite contrary to his own established order, for he has
established Christ to be the only Priest in the formality of his own death and
sacrifice, by his oath, which is an unalterable thing; for his oath does
witness, that he established Christ by his eternal Decree and Covenant, to be
the only Priest in his own death and sacrifice.

I believe it will make Mr. Norton sweat to get handsomely out of this Dilemma,
which he has brought himself into by his own contradictory principles.

But says Mr. Norton in page 85, 167, 168.
We read in Joh. 10. 18. that Christ laid down his life, but not that he took
it away by violence. The same word that is used here concerning Christ, Peter
has concerning himself, I will lay down my life for thy sake, Joh. 13. 37. and
John has the same concerning Christ and the Saints, because he laid down his
life for us, we ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren, 1 John 3. 16.


Reply 25. I grant that all the godly ought to say to Christ There is a
transcendent difference between the manner of Peter's laying down his life for
Christ, and Christ's laying down his life as a sacrifice for the redemption of
the Elect. Joh 10. 11.
as Peter said to him, I will lay down my life for thy sake, Joh. 13 37. and
they ought also to say as John said in 1 Job. 3. 16. For it is the duty of all
the godly to venture their lives as Martyrs for the defense of the truth; and
for the defense of the godly that stand for the truth, if they be called
thereto, rather than to deny it.

But the death of Christ must be considered, not only as he was a Martyr from
his Combater Satan, but it must also be considered, as it was ordained to be a
Sacrifice of satisfaction (to Gods Justice for man's Redemption) in the
formality of it. In the first sense, Christ says in Joh. 10. 11. I am the good
Shepherd, the good Shepherd gives his life for his sheep; that is to say, He
spares not to venture his life to encounter as a voluntary Combater with the
proclaimed Enemy (of his elect Sheep.) The old Serpent, according to Gods
declared will in Genesis 3. 15. to rescue, as the good Shepherd David did, the
prey (or the Lamb which was taken for a spoil) from the Lion, and the Bear, 1 Samuel 17. 35. Job 29. 17. And thus Christ gave his life as a Martyr.

2 But in the second sense, his death must be considered as it was to be made a
sacrifice of Reconciliation in the formality of it, and so it must be
considered as it was effected by his own Priestly power, and in that respect
his death is set forth in diverse other words in Joh. 10. 17, 18. to be of a
Joh. 10. 17, 18.
transcendent nature beyond that voluntary suffering, that is expressed by
Peter, or by any other Martyr, as it appears by these particulars.

First, Says Christ in v. 11. and 15 I lay down my life for my sheep; I am the
good Shepherd, I will not play the Coward to fly when the Wolf comes to
devour my sheep, but I will readily and voluntarily undertake to combat with
the Wolf for the redemption of my sheep; I am ready to venture my life in the
Combat with the old proclaimed Serpent for the rescuing of my sheep from
Satan's spoil, for though I know before hand, by Genesis 3. 15. that Satan has an
unlimited power given him to do his worst against me, and to use me as a sinful
Malefactor, for a time, which time is truly called the hour and power of
darkness in Luke 22. 53. yet like a good Shepherd I will readily enter the
Lists with Satan, and will so exactly manage the Combat by my humane nature,
for the trial of the Mastery according to the Laws of the Combat, that my
death at last, shall not only be a death of Martyrdom, such as Peter speaks
of, but over and above, I will make my death, in the formality of it, to be a
sacrifice of Reconciliation (according to the eternal Covenant) for the full
redemption of all my captivated sheep: I will divide the spoil with the strong
enemy Satan; I will redeem the Elect, though he keep the refuse, and therefore,

Secondly, Christ does still amplify the most excellent nature of his death,
saying in verse 18. I lay down my life of my self, namely, by my own will,
desire, and power, according to my voluntary Covenant, for I am a voluntary and
equal reciprocal Covenanter, and therefore I must never be overruled by any
supreme power, for that would destroy the nature of such a voluntary Covenant
as mine is.

Thirdly, Christ does still amplify the transcendent nature of his death,
saying, None takes my life from me; and if none (says Chrysostom) then surely
not death; that sentence of death that was denounced to sinful Adam in Genesis 3.
19. was denounced as a death to be co-acted by the justice of God for original
sin; this kind of death could not take away Christ's life from him; therefore
the death of Christ must be considered as a death of Covenant only; it was
founded in the voluntary Cause and Covenant to be performed by himself as a
Priest, and to be accepted as a sacrifice of Reconciliation, as the full price
of man's Redemption.

But on the contrary, if Christ had been our legal Surety in the same
obligation with Adam, then God might in justice have taken away his life from
him, volence, nolence, then God might in justice have said to death, Let death
seize upon him as upon a guilty Sinner, or as on a guilty Surety, and so death
might have exacted his life from him as a true debtor to death by Gods justice,
and then his death had been no more but a co-acted natural death, as Mr. Norton
makes it to be.

But the blessed Scriptures do testify that Christ in his death did overcome
him that had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14. and that he triumphed over
Principalities and Powers in it, Col. Heb. 2 14. Col. 2. 15.
2. 15. The Devil therefore could not put Christ to death formally by his
tortures as he does other men, that are sinners by Gods legal imputation, and
therefore Christ said, None takes my life from me.

Fourthly, Christ does still proceed to amplify the transcendent nature of his
death, saying, I have power to lay it down, namely, of my self, as he had
expressed his meaning in the former sentence; other men, sometimes have a great
desire to dye, and to lay down their lives formally, and yet they cannot dye
according to their earnest desire, because they want a power to effect it.

Jonah had a great desire to dye, and yet he had not power to dye, and
therefore he prayed unto the Lord, saying, O Lord, take away my vital soul
from me, Jonah 4. 3. I have a great desire to dye, but yet I cannot dye by my
own will, desire, and power, except I should use some sinful violence against
my life.

Elij^b also had a great desire to dye, and yet he had not power to dye, and
therefore he prayed unto God, saying, O Lord, take away my vital soul, 1 King.
19. 4. But Christ had a power to lay down his life of himself, when the
appointed hour was come, to make his soul a sacrifice.

Fifthly, Says Christ, I have the same power to lay down my vital soul, that I
have to take it up again, and therefore I do compare my power which I have to
lay down my life, with my power which I have to take it up again: This says
Origin, (before cited) neither Moses, nor any of the Patriarchs, Prophets, or
Apostles did say besides Jesus.

Sixthly, Christ does still make another addition to set forth the transcendent
nature of his death, This Commandment (says he) I have received of my Father;
no other man ever had, or shall have the like positive Command to be both
Priest and Sacrifice in his own death as I have.

If Abraham had offered up Isaac in sacrifice by a formal death, yet that
Priest and Sacrifice had been in two distinct persons, and so Isaac could not
have been a complete Mediator in his death; But says Christ, It is my Fathers
Commandment, that I must be the Mediator of the New Testament through death,
Heb. 9. 15, 16. therefore I must be both Priest and Heb. 9. 15, 16.
Sacrifice in one and the same person, and not in two persons; This peculiar
positive Commandment (...) have received of my Father, it is proper only to my
person and office, as I am ordained to be the only Mediator between God and man
in my death and sacrifice.

Christ (says Mr. Ball) was Lord of his own life, and therefore he had power
to lay it down and take it up; And this See Ball on the Covenant, p. 287.
power (says he) he had, not solely by virtue of the hypostatical union, but
by virtue of a peculiar Command, Constitution and Designation to that service,
Joh. 10. 18.

And says Grotius, The death of Christ was not determined by any Law, but by a
special Covenant with his Father: And hence it follows, if there had not been a
voluntary Covenant See Grotius in his War and Peace, part 1. (...) 36.
preceding, there could not have been any Commandment used by the first Person
over the second Person; and therefore this Commandment to lay down his life,
must not be understood of a supreme moral Command as Mr. Norton understands it,
for in page 103. he says, This act of Christ in laying down his life, was an
act of legal obedience. And, says he, in page 192. For the Mediator to suffer
death as our Surety in a way of justice, is an act of legal obedience; but by
the Commandment which Christ received from his Father, I understand the Decree
of God, that the conditions of the eternal Covenant should effectually be
performed, causing such a thing to come to pass effectually, and so God is said
to command his own Mercy, and to command his own blessed Promises to come to
pass. See Ains. in Psalm. 42. 9. and in Psalm. 105. 8. and in Psalm. 133. 3. and
in Genesis 50. 16. and in Lev. 25. 21.

Seventhly, Put these two speeches together, I lay down my life for my sheep,
Joh. 10. 15. And secondly, I have power to lay it down, and power to take it up
again, verse 18. and they do plainly show, that the true nature of my death, is
to be considered both as it is a Martyrdom from my malicious Adversary Satan,
and as it is a sacrifice in the formality of it by my own Priestly power: And
therefore,

Eighthly, In both these considerations my Father does love me, verse 17. and
he has testified his loving acceptance both of my person, and of this service
of mine.

First, By his own voice from heaven at my extrinsecal Instalment, Matthew. 3. 17.

And secondly, A^ my Transfiguration, when he sent Moses and Elias to inform my
Disciples of my Departure, which I should shortly after accomplish by my death
at Jerusalem; Then there came a voice out of the Cloud, saying, This is my
well-beloved Son, in whose Combat and Sacrifice, which he is shortly to
perform at Jerusalem, I am well pleased, satisfied, and reconciled for the
redemption Luke 9. 31. 35.
of all the Elect, Luke 9. 31, 35.

These eight Considerations taken from the Text, and laid together, do clearly
evidence, That the manner of Christ's laying down his life for his sheep, is of
a transcendent nature, to the manner of Peter's laying down his life in
Martyrdom for Christ, though Mr. Norton does most unadvisedly compare the
manner of their death to be alike, without making any difference, by which
means he does beguile both his own soul and his Reader, of the comfort of the
full sense of this blessed Scripture of John 10. 17, 18.

And Tindal does declare his sense of this Scripture by him translation which
goes thus; Therefore does my Father love me, because I put my life from me,
that I might take it again, no man takes it from me, but I put it away of my
self, I have power to put it from me, and power to take it again.

Hence I gather from this phrase, I have power to put my life from me, that he
held as the Ancient Divines did, That Christ put his life from him as a man
puts off his clothes, for so the Ancient Divines use the comparison, and says
Cyril, Derecta fide, without constraint of any, Christ of himself laid down his
own soul for us. It is evident, that the Devil and his Instruments did use
constraint as much as they could devise to force his soul out of his body; But,
says Cyril, he laid down his soul for us, not by their constraint, but at his
pleasure: And says Epipha^ius, Contra Ariomanitas Haeresi 69. The Deity
together with the soul, did move to forsake the sacred body.

But says Mr. Norton in page 162.
Christ had less strength of nature left to bear his Torments, than the Thieves
had; Therefore they compelled a man of Cyren to bear his Cross, that is, to
help him bear it.


Reply 26. It is granted by the Ancient Divines, that Christ had voluntary
weakness, but not necessary weakness of nature by the justice of Gods curse, as
sinners have.

2 I have formerly showed, That Christ was not appointed to combat with Satan
and his Instruments by the power of his divine nature, but by his humane nature
alone, which he voluntary assumed, together with our true natural infirmities,
of grief, fear, sorrow, etc. that so he might be touched with the sensible
feeling of our infirmities in all his sufferings from his proclaimed Combater
Satan, and therefore for the better manifestation of his said voluntary
infirmities (for necessary infirmities as we have, he had none) his Godhead
put forth a power to withdraw protection from his humane nature, that so his
humane nature might be the more sensibly touched with the feeling of our
infirmities.

And withal I say, That though Christ had this voluntary weakness, yet it did
not decay his natural vigor by degrees, as the like sufferings does decay our
sinful natures, for the constitution of his humane nature was so perfectly
orgonized and molded, that he could at his pleasure take our true humane
infirmities, for the accomplishing of his Combat, according to the Articles of
the eternal Covenant, as he did in his Agony in the Garden.

And again, at his pleasure, he could reassume his perfect strength of nature,
as he did after his prayers in the Garden (as I have formerly showed more at
large) he dyed not (says Mr. Smith of Clavering before cited) with extremity of
pains as others do.

And says Mr. White of Dorchester, and Mr. Perkins before cited, by reason of
the strength of the natural constitution of his body, he might have subsisted
under his torments longer than the two Thieves.

And says Erasmus (before cited) He did not faint as others do, the strength of
his body by little and little decaying.

And says Mr. Nichols cited in the Dialogue, page 101. Christ dyed not by
degrees as his Saints do; his senses did not decay, no pangs of death took hold
upon him, but in perfect sense, patience and obedience, both of body and soul,
he did, by his infinite power voluntarily resign his Spirit, as he was praying,
into the hands of his Father, without any trembling or struggling, or without
any show of the sense of his pains.

And several others both of the ancient and later Divines, I have immediately
cited that speak to this purpose, which proves that Christ had no necessary
weakness to bear his Cross, but voluntary weakness he had at his pleasure,
that he might be truly touched with the feeling of our infirmities.

And take also into consideration what Austin says de Trinit. lib. 13. c. 14.
where he expounds (...) Cor. 13. 4. thus, even of that infirmity (wherein
Christ was crucified) the Apostle also says, 2 Cor. 13. (...).
The weakness of God is stronger than men; Whatsoever seemed weakness in Christ
(says he) is so called in comparison of his divine power. And again, his
weakness was such, that it far passed the power and strength of us men, and
therefore in 1 Cor. 1. 24, 25. Christ crucified, is called the power of God,
because he was both God and man in one person, and therefore as soon as he had
finished all his sufferings, wherein he showed 1 Cot. 1. 24, 25.
his true voluntary weakness; he breathed out his soul, even whiles he was in
the full strength of nature, by the joint concurrence of both his natures. To
dye, says Bernard, is a great infirmity, but so to dye (says he) is an
exceeding power.

Hence then I conclude, That when the Executioners did compel a man of Cyren to
bear his Cross, that is, to help him bear it: It does not prove that Christ had
less strength of nature left to bear it than the Thieves had, as Mr. Norton
does argue; it proves no more but this, either that Christ had voluntary
weakness, or else that they thought him to have such necessary weakness
appertaining to his nature, as other sinful men have that are over-burdened,
for they could not discern his voluntary weakness, from necessary weakness,
unless they had known him to be God and man in one person, and therefore they
compelled a man of Cyren to help him bear his Cross; And who can tell but that
the Thieves had some to help them bear their Cross as well as Christ had? and
therefore it is a weak argument to prove that Christ had less strength of
nature to bear his Cross, than the two Thieves, because they compelled a man of
Cyren to help him bear his Cross; seeing the Scripture is silent whether the
two Thieves did bear their own Cross, without any help from others.

But says Mr. Norton in page 168.
It Is true, no Torments, though in themselves killing, could kill Christ until
he pleased; and it is also true, that Torments, killing in themselves, could
kill him when he pleased.

And says he in page 86.
Though Christ by his absolute power could have preserved his life against all
created adversary power, Joh. 10. 18. yet (says he) by his limited power be
could not; But as our Surety, be was bound to permit the course of Physical
causes, and the prevailing power of darkness for the fulfilling of what was
written concerning him, Luke 22. 53. The Jews therefore doing that which
according to the order of second causes, not only might, but also (through his
voluntary obliged permission) did take away his life, they did not only
endeavor, but also actually kill him, etc.


Reply 27. I have often warned, to have it the better marked, That the death of
Christ is set out to us two ways in the blessed Scriptures.

First, Either more largely by his suffering the pains of death, as a sinful
Malefactor from his envious Combater Satan.

Or secondly, more strictly, by setting out the formality of his death, as it
was made a sacrifice, when his soul was separated from his body by his own
Priestly power.

But Mr. Norton is much displeased with this distinction, because it crosses
his Doctrine of Satisfaction, by suffering the essential Torments of Hell, as
our legal Surety in the same obligation with Adam.

Now in the first sense it is true, That Christ was ordained to be the seed of
the sinful deceived woman, and in that nature, as it was accompanied with our
true humane infirmities, he was to combat with our malicious Enemy Satan; and
in that respect he must permit the course of Physical causes, and the
prevailing power of the Prince of darkness to do him all the mischief he could
to provoke his patience, and to disturb him in the course of his obedience
according to Gods Declaration of the Combat in Genesis 3. 15.

2 But yet notwithstanding, it is not any where written, that Christ covenanted
to let the powers of darkness to take away his life formally: I do not find
that Christ had limited himself by his obliged permission to let the Jews and
Romans take away his life actually and formally, as Mr. Norton holds: Nay, I
say, the blessed Scriptures do plainly deny this, as I have opened Job. 10. 17,
18. in Reply 25.

Secondly, It is also further evident, that none but himself was ordained to
be the Priest in the formality of his Death and Sacrifice, because God made
him a Priest for ever after the order of Melchlsedek by an oath, which
declares, That according to the eternal Decree, and the unchangeable Council
Heb. 7. 21.
and Covenant of God, he should be the only Priest in the formality of his
death and sacrifice; and in that respect Christ says, None takes my vital
soul from me, I lay it down of myself, I have power to lay it down, and power
to take it up again; This Commandment have I received of my Father, Joh. 10.
17, 18. Joh. 10. 17, 18.


And hence I reason thus, If Christ received this Commandment from his Father,
then doubtless his Father had covenanted, that he should be the only Priest in
the formality of his own death and sacrifice, and that he would accept it as
the full price of man's Redemption.

3 I have often showed that Christ's humane nature was so perfect, that it was
privileged from our natural death and sufferings; and that his death and
sufferings was undertaken only by his voluntary Covenant; and that Covenant
made it upon performance according to the Articles, to be the full price of
man's Redemption.

These two ways the blessed Scriptures do often speak of the death of Christ.
First, Of his passive death.

And secondly, Of his active death: But because his passive death from his
malignant Combater Satan, was accompanied with very many ignominous punishments
and reproachful Tortures which he was permitted to use, as thinking thereby to
provoke his patience, and so to spoil his obedience, that so he might not make
his soul a sacrifice: Therefore much Scripture is taken up to record the long
story of his passive death, and in that long and sharp trial, his perfect
patience and obedience, through all his ignominious sufferings, is much to be
admired, especially from the time that he was apprehended to the end of the
time of his crucifying, which was twelve full hours, and he abode under the
pains of a violent death for three hours together; and all the actions that
fell in about his sufferings in all this time were many, and therefore the
story thereof must needs be long, and his sensible feeling of our infirmities
in all his sufferings, does not only prove the truth of his humane nature, but
the perfection of his patience and obedience; and in that respect his
sufferings were ordained to be for the perfection of his Priestly Consecration
to his sacrifice, Heb. 2. 10. And therefore as soon as he had finished his
Priestly Consecration by suffering the utmost of Satan's temptations Heb. 2. 10.
Christ's Priestly Consecration. Christ's Sacrifice.
and trials, he presently after, without delay, made his vital soul a sacrifice
by his Priestly power in both his natures, as the formality of all satisfaction
for man's Redemption.

But because this short singular act of his sacrifice, was done as it were but
in a moment of time, and because it was done in the midst of his sensible
torments on the Cross; therefore it comes to pass, that this short singular act
of his sacrifice is not so much marked as it ought to be. But, most an end,
the long obvious story of his sufferings from his Combater Satan (which indeed
does belong to his sacrifice, as much as the consecration of the Priest does to
the Sacrifice) is named instead of full satisfaction, and so it may be justly
called by the figure Synecdoche, provided his sacrifice, in the formality of
his death, by his own Priestly power be not neglected; but a real distinction
ought to be observed when the parts of Christ's Priesthood, are to be explained,
though this distinction is often slighted and divided by Mr. Norton.

So then from the long passive action, Christ may be truly said to be killed
and slain (for he was crucified with the sores of death) even as truly as it is
said that Christ was the Son of Joseph; for indeed he was the Son of Joseph in
a true legal sense, because he was born of Joseph's wife after Manage, and in
that respect, he was truly and properly, in Laws esteem, the Son of Joseph, and
accordingly he was every where esteemed, and called the Son of Joseph, yea his
mother Mary, that best knew the truth, told her Son Jesus, that his Father
Joseph sought after him, Luke. 2. 48. yea and Jesus himself did also
acknowledge Joseph to be his true Father, according to Laws esteem, and
therefore he was subject to him as to his proper Father, for nine and twenty
years together; namely, until he was extrinsecally installed into the Mediators
office (and then he had the business of another Father to do) and the world in
general (some few excepted) knew no other, but that he was the true natural Son
of Joseph, and herefore no man did contradict that usual talk and speech; and
yet notwithstanding all this plain and downright speaking, Christ was not the
true natural Son of Joseph; he was legally, but not formally the Son of Joseph.

So in like sort it may be as truly said, That Christ was killed and slain by
the sores of death on the Cross by the Jews, because they did as much to kill
him, as they did to kill their own Prophets, 1 These. 1. 15. yea Christ himself
foretold his Disciples that he should be killed by the Jews, Mark. 8. 31. Mark.
12. 8. and all the Prophets said, It should be so, Genesis 3. 15. Psol. 22. Isa.
53. and the Evangelists said, It was so, Luke 24. 20. Act. 2. 23. and the
Martyrs in Rev. 5. 9, 12. said, It was so; and yet in verse 6. they say also
that he stood there, as though he had been killed; both speeches are true, and
both are truly affirmed; For first, He was truly killed and slain both by the
Jews, and by the Roman powers, in Laws esteem; and yet the Martyrs said, It was
but as though it were so; legally they killed him, but formally they did not
kill him (though they did what they could to kill him formally, and they
thought they had killed him formally, because he died formally whiles he was
under the sores of death) but indeed they could not kill him formally, because
God had given power to Christ to lay down his life formally of himself, and
that no other created power should take away his life from him, as I have
formerly expounded, Job. 10. 17, 18. Himself was ordained to be the only Priest
in the formality of his death and sacrifice, as soon as he had fulfilled all the
tortures of the Cross from his Combater Satan, but that act of separating his
soul from his body; was not so sensible to the beholders as his external
tortures of death were, and therefore they thought nothing less was the true
cause of his death.

They could not by the power of their natural reason discern how God did
interpose his power between the tortures of death, and their ordinary killing
effect, neither could they discern the difference that was between his sinless
nature, and their own corrupt nature, nor yet how he was God and man in
personal union, and therefore they could not know as they ought to have known,
how he must be the only Priest in the formality of his own death and sacrifice,
and that he must offer himself by his eternal Spirit, that so he might be the
Mediator of the New Testament through that kind of Mediatorial death, Heb. 9.
14, 15.

And yet this ignorance both of the Jews and Romans did no whit exempt them
from being the true murderers of the Lord of life, in as high a degree, as if
his Godhead had not interposed to hinder their killing power; as we may see by
that eminent example of Justice that was done by Darius upon such like
murderers of Daniel; for after that Darius was come to the Lions Den, and
perceived that God had interposed his power, between the fierce devouring
nature of the ravenous Lions, and their executive power, and that Daniel was
not formally killed by them, he did not in that respect excuse Daniels accusers
from being the true murderers of Daniel; but on the contrary, he did adjudge
them to be Daniels true murderers, and therefore he commanded them to be thrown
into the Lions Den, and to be killed as the true murderers of Daniel, in Laws
esteem, Dan. 6. 22, 23, 24. Dan. 6. 22, 23, 24.


4 In case Mr. Norton will still deny this Priestly power to Christ in the
formality of his death and sacrifice, then why has he not hitherto made it
evident by Scripture, rightly expounded, how else Christ was the only Priest
in the formality of his death and sacrifice? seeing the Dialogue did give him
just occasion to clear this point more fully than as yet he has done.

I find that some eminent Divines do make his own submission to be put to death
formally, by the Devils Instruments, to be his only priestly act in his
sacrifice.

But for the reasons fore-alledged from Job. 10. 17, 18. and from Heb. 7. and
Heb. 9. 14, 15, 16. It is still evident to me that his act of submission to be
put to death by the Devils Instruments, is not sufficient to demonstrate his
active priestly power, and authority, for the making of his death to be a
mediatorial sacrifice; for then the submission of Martyrs to be put to death by
Tyrants, might as well be called their Priestly power to make their lives a
sacrifice.

But I have formerly showed, First, That no other death can No other act of a
Priest does make a sacrifice but such an act as doth-formally take away the
life of the sacrifice.
properly be called a sacrifice but such a death only as is formally made by a
Priest, namely, by such a Priest as God has designed for that work.

Secondly, That no other act of that Priest can make it to be a sacrifice
formally, but such an act as does formally take away the life of the appointed
sacrifice.

5 Says Mr. Trap on Heb. 2. 10. The Priest was first consecrated Heb. 2. 10.
compared with Lev. 8. 30.
with oil, and then with blood; this I do the rather mention for the better
consideration of the nature of Christ's Consecration to his Priestly Office.

First, He was anointed with the oil of gladness, when he was first
extrinsecally installed into the Mediators Office at his Baptism, by the
apparition of the Holy Ghost in shape like a Dove, Matthew. 3.

Secondly, After this he was Consecrated with blood, in all his bloody
sufferings, Heb. 2. 10, 17. with Heb. 5. 9.

6 Every consecrated Priest must have some good thing to offer to the offended
party for his reconciliation to the offender, Heb. 8. 3. and none knows what
good thing will be acceptable to our offended God but himself; and therefore,
he only must both ordain the Priest, and the manner of his consecration, and
the good thing that he will accept, and the manner of the offering it.

And therefore it pleased God in the first Covenant to ordain typical Priests
that had sinful infirmities, and typical cleansings by the ashes of an Heifer,
and by the blood of beasts, for the cleansing and purifying of the flesh from
Ceremonial sins: And these beasts he appointed to be, First, of the gentle and
harmless kinds, and such as would continue patient under ill usage. Secondly,
To be such as were without spot outwardly. And thirdly, To be such as were
without blemish inwardly; that so they might be types of the perfection of
Christ's humane nature, and of his sacrifice, 1 Pet. 1. 10. as the only good
things which he had ordained to be offered by his Priestly power, to purge the
conscience from all our moral sins and so to bring us again to God, as the
Dialogue has showed in p. 91, etc. Therefore when he came into the world, he
said, Sacrifice and Offering thou would not have, but a body have thou
prepared me. God that was offended (knew best what good thing would be most
acceptable unto him for the procuring of his reconciliation) prepared a body
for Christ that so it might be that worthy thing (that from eternity he had
appointed to be offered in the fullness of time.) And therefore in the fullness
of time Christ said, Lo, I come to do thy acceptable will, O God; and so he
took away the first typical Priests and sacrifices, that he might establish the
second to stand for ever, Heb. 10. 5. 6, 7, etc.

By which will of God, thus performed by Christ, in making his prepared body a
sacrifice, we are sanctified or made holy and righteous again, Heb. 10. 10.
namely, set into a state of favor, Heb. 10. 10. The word Sanctify and make
holy, in the Law, is often ascribed to Gods atonement and forgiveness,
procured by sacrifice; and therefore sinners that are so made holy are
justified and righteous persons in Gods sight.
as we were in our first creation; for so we must understand the word
sanctified, and so the legal phrase in the word [sanctifieth] to the purifying
of the flesh in verse. 13. does teach us to carry the sense, and how else did
the offering of Christ's body (sanctify or) purge the conscience, as the word
is in ver. 14. from dead works (that is to say from original and actual sin?)
But because God was pleased to ordain that offering to be the only meritorious
procuring cause of his reconciliation, atonement, pardon and forgiveness; So
then it is Gods Atonement, so procured, that did sanctify the sinner or make
him holy and righteous in Gods sight, in respect of his state (in relation to
Gods favor) even as Adam was in his first Creation; and the reason is so plain,
that he that is but observant of the typical phrases may run and read it;
namely, because originally God created the nature of all mankind in holiness
and righteousness, after his own image; for in case Adam had but first eaten of
the Tree of life, all his children should have been holy, but in case he did
first eat of the forbidden fruit, then he and all his posterity should with him
forfeit their creative purity, and instead thereof become dead in sin, and so
be in a state of enmity with God; but by Gods reconciliation and atonement
procured through the sacrifice of Christ, all their sins should be forgiven,
and so they should be again restored into their former estate of holiness and
righteousness, namely, into Gods gracious favor again, as Adam was in his
innocence.

And says Baxter to Molivaeus, p. 181. It is the same act of God that is
called constitutive justification and pardon of sin, so far as Justification is
taken, as comprehending only the restoring of us to the happiness that we fell
from.

But this I perceive is a Riddle to Mr. Norton, for in p. 209. he says, to be
sinless is not enough to make a sinner righteous; but if he will but search
better into the Ceremonial Types, he may see that it is Gods forgiveness from
his atonement procured by legal washings, and by the blood of beasts, by which
all Israel were sanctified or made a holy people again, as the legal Heb. 9 13,
14. Lev. 11. 44. Pardon of sin by Gods Atonement, and a sinners righteousness
is the same thing, contrary to M. Nortons long dis^curse in p. 209, 210, 211,
212, etc.
phrase does testify, in Heb. 9. 13. and in Lev. 11. 44. and so in Exodus 29.
36, 37. to Purify and Sanctify are Sinonimous terms; and from these legal
phrases the Apostle does reason thus; If the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the
ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean does sanctify, to the purifying of
the flesh, Heb 9. 13. then says he in v. 14. How much more shall the blood of
Christ purge your conscience from dead works? in these two verses he compares
the force of the word purge, with the word sanctify; and therefore these legal
phrases do teach us the nature of a sinners Justification in Gods sight, for as
their legal washings and cleansings by the blood of beasts, etc. did sanctify
or make their bodies holy, because it procured Gods Atonement for the
expiation of their legal sins, by which they were again made fit to have
communion with God in his holy Sanctuary, Lev. 11. 44. and 19. 2. Number. 15. 40.
and 16. 3. and 5 1, 2, 3. Even so it must be understood in the typical sense,
and therefore as often as Gods holy people were legally defiled, what did God
require them to do to make them holy and righteous again? but to observe the
Laws of their legal washings, and cleansings, which God ordained on purpose for
the procuring of his atonement, pardon and forgiveness, and then they were
made holy again, or then they were sanctified to the purifying of their flesh,
Heb. 9. 13. Lev. 11. 44. Numb. 6. 8, 9, Deuteronomy. 14. 2. 21. and 26. 16, 19, Exodus
22. 31. Lev. 17. and 20. 25, 26. Even so it must be understood in the typical
sense.

But this is needful to be remembered, that this kind of holiness and sanctity
by Gods atonement, procured by their legal washings and sacrifices, must be
distinguished from that kind of sanctity and holiness that is first wrought in
us by Gods Spirit in our Regeneration; For this kind of holiness which we
obtain by Gods Reconciliation, Atonement, Pardon and forgiveness, may more
fitly be called, The satisfaction of merit.

For first, This satisfaction of merit sets sinners in statu quo prius; namely,
it sets them by Gods gracious voluntary positive Law and Covenant, into that
state of holiness and righteousness which they lost, both in the legal sense by
their ceremonial sins, and in the moral sense by Adams sin.

Secondly, This is further evident because the Sin-offering of Attonements in
Exodus 30. 10. is translated by the Seventy the blood of the purgation of sins,
because in their understanding, Gods atonement procured by their
sin offerings, and the purgation of sins by Gods atonement is all one; and
this very phrase of the Seventy, does Paul apply to the merit of Christ's
sin-offering, saying, by himself he made a purgation for our sin^, Heb. 1. 3.

Thirdly, On the day of Atonement, the High Priest made Atonement for all
Israel, To cleanse them, that they might be clean from all their sins before
the Lord, Lev. 16. 30. Mark the phrase, Lev. 16. 30.
He made Atonement for their cleansing; and how did he make Atonement for
their cleansing? but by offering their public Sacrifices by which he procured
Gods Atonement, which did formally cleanse them, or sanctify them, or make
them holy from the defilement of all their legal sins; for these legal terms
are synonimous, and this did typifie, That it is Gods Reconciliation or
Atonement procured by the death and sacrifice of Christ, that does formally
cleanse us from all our moral sins, and by which means only we are sanctified,
Heb. 10. 10. or made holy, just, and righteous in Gods sight, as I have opened
the matter more at large in 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Fourthly, Says the Apostle, in Heb. 10. 4. It is not possible Heb. 10. 4.
that the blood of beasts should procure Gods Atonement for the expiation of
our moral sins; which kind of arguing of his had not concluded any thing, if
the bloody combat of Christ in his sufferings, and his sacrifice by his own
Priestly power had not been established by Gods voluntary, positive Law and
Covenant, as the only means to cleanse and purify the conscience by procuring
Gods Atonement for all our moral sins, by the which will of God we are
sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, v. 10. And
here Mr. Norton may see that Gods atonement and forgiveness, is called
sanctity and holiness to justification.

For the self-same gracious will of God that gave efficacy to his first
positive Law and Covenant at Horeb, for the sanctifying of their polluted flesh
by the blood of beasts, Heb. 9. 13 gave efficacy to his eternal positive Law
and Covenant, by the death of Christ to sanctify or purify the polluted
conscience from dead works, and therefore in verse 14. the Apostle does infer
from verse 13. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who offered himself by
his eternal Spirit, purge your conscience from dead works? (and here it must be
noted that the word Purge in ver. 14 is of the same force with the comparative
word Sanctify, in ver. 13. and with the word sanctify in chap. 10. 10.) and
also from this act of Christ in offering himself by his eternal spirit in ver.
14. (namely, both as Priest and sacrifice in one and the same person) he proves
in ver. 15, 16. That he was the Mediator of the New Testament in this kind of
death, and so by this kind of death, he got the victory over Principalities and
Powers (that could not put him to death formally, though they had liberty to do
their worst) and spoiled them (as a Col. 2 15. Mark. 15. 39.
victorious conqueror, because they could not disturb his patience by all their
ill usage) triumphing over them in it, namely, in the priestly formality of his
death on the cross, Col. 2. 15. and the Roman Centurion confessed in Mark. 15.
39. that the formality of his death was not after the manner of other
malefactors (of which he had seen many to die) but that it was of a
transcendent nature; and therefore with great admiration he said Truly this man
was the Son of God. Col. 1. 21, 22. What other death can the Apostle mean did
God ordain to reconcile us to God, but the death of his flesh, and not the
spiritual death of his immortal soul, as Mr. Norton says?


Fifthly, It is also evident by the New Testament, that Gods Reconciliation or
Atonement procured by the death of Christ, does make believing sinners holy
and righteous, as in Col. 1. 21, 22. You that were enemies, he has now
reconciled in the body of his flesh, through death, to present you holy and
without blemish, and spotless in his sight (as Bro. reads it.) Hence it is
evident, that Gods Reconciliation, or his forgiveness by his Reconciliation,
does make a believing sinner not only without blemish, and spotless, but
[holy] also: And so the word sanctify and cleanse in Ephesians. 5. 27. is
synonimos with the word holy, and without blemish, in the same verse.

Sixthly, I pray note this also, That the holiness of Christ's person cannot be
imputed to us for our formal holiness (as it is affirmed by some) unless it
could be proved that God does first make us one with Christ in the personal
unity of both his natures, as the Dialogue does reason the case in p. 146. And
so Mr. Baxter does reason with Molinaeus in p. 183. Christ's Righteousness
formally (says he) is incommunicable to any other; our union with Christ
(says he) makes us not the same person with him, to be the same subject of the
same accident, Righteousness. This Section I have added only by way of
Parenthesi.

Seventhly, Seeing it is acknowledged that perfection does consist in action;
and seeing it is also acknowledged that the perfection of all Christ's obedience
was to be evidenced, not only by his perfect patience in all his sufferings
from his Combater, Satan, but especially in the formality of his death and
sacrifice, why should it not be formally done by his own priestly action?

And why then does Mr. Norton detract so much from the perfection of his
Priestly action, in the formality of his death and sacrifice, by ascribing the
formality of it to physical causes only, as his words repeated a little before
do testify?

But says Mr. Norton in p. 83.
The Scripture mentions no other death than what is inflicted justly for sin,
etc.


Reply 28. I cannot but wonder that Mr. Norton should detract so much from the
perfection of Christ's Priestly action in making his death to be a sacrifice, as
to make it to be nothing else but a co-acted death according to Gods sentence
denounced on fallen Adam, as the punishment of his original sin in Genesis 3. 19.
For as Lupset says well, In our death, the body does in a manner leave the
soul, before the soul leaves the body, For (says he) it is the body by it
self, forsaking life, that causes the soul to depart. Hence I infer, What
perfection of Christ's Priestly active obedience can there be in such a kind of
forced death, as this is?

But on the other hand, look upon the death of Christ as it was to be made a
sacrifice in the formality of it by his own Priestly power, and then we may see
it to be a death of Covenant only, and so consequently to be an active
mediatorial death and sacrifice, because he must be our Mediator in his
death. But in Reply 16. I have spoken more fully to this objection.

Therefore for a conclusion, I will yet once more distinguish upon the death of
Christ.

1 The long action of his bloody combat with Satan and his Instruments gave
the name to his being killed and slain.

2 His last short act in breathing our, sending out, or putting out his immortal
spirit, when he cried with a loud voice, Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit, gave the name of formality to his death and sacrifice by his own
Priestly power.

When Christ said, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, Luke 23. 46.
he did not breath out his soul through the decay of his natural spirits, as
the Saints do, when they say the same words, as in Psalm. 31. 5. Nor as Stephen
did, when he said Lord Jesus receive Psa 31. 5.
my spirit, Act. 7. 59. For their death is co-acted by Gods Justice on original
sin, Genesis 3. 19. But Christ made it evident that his death was not co-acted by
weakness of Nature, by his crying out with a loud voice, when he said, Father
into thy hands I commend my spirit, and at that instant gave up the Ghost; by
which loud outcry he made it evident that he was in full strength of nature
when he died, as it is noted before by Mr. White of Dorchester, and by Mr. Trap
and others, and this last act gave the formality,

1 To his Obedience. 2 To his Death and Sacrifice. 3 To the price of full
satisfaction. For as I have formerly showed from Exodus 30. 12. It was Gods
voluntary Covenant that Exodus 30. 12, 15, 16. The death of Christ as it was
made a sacrifice of reconciliation by the voluntary Covenant between the
Trinity, was the full price of man's redemption.
made the half shekels to be the full price, for the redemption of the lives of
the Israelites; and this price was employed (or part of it at least) to buy
public Sacrifices, which were ordained to make an Atonement for their lives
(as I have opened it in the Dialogue p. 86.) namely, this price was accounted
by God to be in the place, and in the stead of their lives, as verse. 15, and
16. does declare: And thus their lives were redeemed with a price, and yet
materially it was not the full price of their lives, but formally it was the
full price of their lives, by virtue of Gods free Covenant.
In like sort Gods voluntary Covenant and Decree, made the obedience of Christ
in his Combat of sufferings, and in the formality of his death and sacrifice,
to be the full price of the redemption of all the elect Israel of God, namely,
in their place and stead.

But says Mr. Norton in page 143.
No ^ice can dispense in case of the Antitype.


Reply 29. And why not? Is God by necessity of nature bound to punish sin to
the utmost extent of his Justice? Is not he a Supreme to do with his own what
he pleases? The Lord in mercy open his eyes, and all our eyes to see better
into the force of Gods voluntary Covenant, for it is his voluntary positive Law
and Covenant, that does make any thing to be a full formal price in his own
sight; and on the contrary, that nothing that is never so valuable in our eyes,
can be made a full price formally in his esteem, without his voluntary positive
Law and Covenant, does concur thereto.

Conclusions from my several Replies to the said third Question.
1 Hence it follows, That God did not forsake Christ in the formality of his
death on the Cross, namely, he did not so forsake him, as to suffer his humane
nature to be put to death formally by the power of Satan's torturing pains,
neither did he appoint his death to be made a sacrifice by his own immediate
wrath, but only by Christ's own Priestly power.

2 Hence it follows, That the death of Christ in the formality of it, was
accepted of God as a Mediatorial sacrifice of Reconciliation, by which his
wrath was appeased, and his favor procured to all poor humbled and believing
sinners; he was the Mediator of the New Testament through his death, because he
completed the same as our Mediatorial Priest by the joint concurrence of both
his natures in personal union, and in that respect, he is denominated to be the
Mediator of the New Testament, through that transcendent kind of death, Heb. 9.
14, 15, 16.

A brief Reply to Mr. Nortons Charge of Heresy; For out of his Heterodoxal
Tenants, he does charge Heresy upon the Dialogue.
3. For denying the Imputation of the sins of the Elect to Christ, and his
suffering the punishment due thereunto, contrary to 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13.
Isa. 53. 5, 6.
Reply THe Dialogue does indeed deny the imputation of the sins of the Elect to
Christ, in that new upstart formal legal manner (by imputing sin, and
inflicting punishments after the manner of the proceedings of legal Courts of
Justice) as Mr. Norton holds: But it does not deny but approve of the
imputation of the sins of the Elect to Christ, in the sense of the Ancient
Divines, and in the sense of Mr. Wotton (for in this point of Imputation, Mr.
Wotton follows the sense of the Ancient Divines, and the Dialogue does approve
and follow Mr. Wottons sense (as I have showed in Chap. 14.) whose memory will
be blessed where the truth prevails in this point; namely, That Christ bare our
sins in his body on the Tree, as the Dialogue has rightly expounded, 1 Pet. 2.
24. namely, our punishments (as our voluntary combating Surety against Satan)
according to Gods Declaration in Genesis 3. 15. Luke 1. 74. Heb. 2. 14, 15. 1 John
3. 8. and not as our legal bounden Surety in the same obligation with Adam to
the first Covenant of works, as Mr. Norton holds.

2 As for the several Scriptures which Mr. Norton has cited to prove his
corrupt sense, I have expounded them in their right sense, with the concurrence
of several Orthodox Writers. Therefore you may see that he has wrested the
sense of the blessed Scriptures to prove his corrupt Tenent; therefore his
charge of Heresy is but a paper shot, and a deep Charge of Error may justly be
retorted.

And whereas he has published another book called, The Orthodox Evangelist,
wherein he has asserted the same Tenants upon the same grounds that he has
done in his Answer to the Dialogue: This Reply which I have made in this Book,
will serve to prove, that the said high Title, is an erroneous and misleading
Title, and therefore it will advise the Reader to search better into the truth.

His second Charge of Heresy runs thus:
For denying that Christ as God-man, Mediator, obeyed the Law, and therewith,
that he obeyed it for us as our Surety, contrary to Gal. 4. 4, 5. Mat. 5 17.
18. Heb. 10. 7. compared with Psalm. 40. 7. 8. and Romans 3. 31.
Reply. I have Re-vindicated all these Scriptures from his unsound sense, and
expounded them in a right sense, with the concurrence and approbation of the
Orthodox in Chap. 3. and elsewhere, and therefore this charge of Heresied oath
also vanish as a mist before the Sun.

His third Charge of Heresy runs thus: For denying the Imputation of Christ's
obedience unto Justification, contrary to Romans 4. and Romans 5. 19. and Phi. 3. 9.
Reply, I have also fully Re-vindicated these Scriptures from his unsound
sense, and given the Reader the true sense, and so this charge of Heresy may
more justly be recorted to the gives thereof; For the Curse that is causless,
shall not come on the innocent, Prove. 26. 2. But it will return to the giver
thereof, according to Psalm. 109. 17, 31.

2 By the Table of chief Heads, and by the Table of Scriptures annexed, the
Reader may please to search out the several pagen where the said several
Scriptures are Re-vindicated from Mr. Nortons false glosses, and there he shall
find the genuine sense of them clearly discovered.

3 Hence the five Divines that subscribed the Letter at the end of Mr. Nortons
Book, may see their great unadvisedness in joining with Mr. Nortons to condemn
the precious truth of the blessed Scriptures, for Heresy, and to approve of
his perverted sense.

4 I will now conclude with a reference to Lev. 4. 13, 14. where a Church, a
Synod, and a Court of Elders and Magistrates, may see that they are sometimes
subject to Error in the things of God, and therefore they, as well as persons
of a lower capacity, had need to watch and pray, and to study daily, and
earnestly, that God would guide their judgments unto the sound understanding,
and righteous preserving of the truth of his blessed Scriptures. Amen.

The Wise will understand, Dan. 12. 10. Austin Cont. Faust. says, I pass not
for the censures of such as dare to reprehend, what they do not Comprehend.
FINIS.
Errata.
Reader,
Take notice that the first Figures stands for the Page, and the second for the
Line.

Page 23, line 23 blot out Now it remains to be expounded, 40. 11 r. granted,
40, 16 r. sinning. 50, 10 r. by the Ordinances. 95, 25 r. affect. 113, 14 r.
Naboth. 118, 10 r. Wotton. 130, 28 blot out He. 145, 10 for 25 r. 103. 148, 10
r. this, 161, 18 r. obrogate. ibid. 22 r. that he shall not have ib. 25 r.
Wotton. 164, 10 r. this 175, 17 r. to act according to Physical causes in his
moral obedience and namral actions, as the Dialogue does reason in p. 111. l.
31, and as it is opened in c. 17. Rep 11, and in c. 3. 176, 26. for Psalm. r.
page. 178, ^3 r. Is. 53. 5, 10. 186, 8 r c 6. 192, 8 r. 152, 153, etc. 193, 19
blot out made, 196, 38 r. Goat Bucks. 206, ult r. patienco and obedience. 21,
11 r. says he, 223, 16 r. Wotton. 232 from this page for 9 pages together, is
false p^ged, make all these 9 pages 233. and then the pages following are
right. 234, 16 r p. 119. 238, 32 r. statute. 141, 29 r. disposition, and
Ruther^urd on the Covenant does at large concur with Mr. Ball. 243, 4 r.
chiefly. 248, 13 blot out but, and r. and yet not be one person. 252, 13 r.
this phrase of the Septuagint, the Apostle, etc. 252, 15 after fully purged,
add compare herewith also Heb. 9 22, 23. 258, 23 r. Christ's body. 259. 35 blot
out it is in the same verses, r. the word Atonement is also explained by etc.'
263, 38. r. both of his sufferings, and of his death and sacrifice. 266, 2 r.
his Argument. 273. 28. blot out And r. The only reason. 275. 11 r. was to cover
and hide. 275, 28 r. themselves to Baal peor 282, 19 r. groundless fantasies,
295, 15. for disease r. curse of evil 299, 31 r. distaste. 307, 13 r. alone.
309, 9 r. this last Priestly act of his death. 311, 17 r propounded. 323, 26 r.
Ekthambe* sthai, and so in p. 324, 327: 313, 1 r. to the last gasp; seeing he
had got a confirmation against his sorrow^ by his prayers in the Garden, 326,
25 r. but Christ's perfections could not be disturbed with that disorderly hasty
fear, as they were in 2 King. 7. 15. 335, 25 add thus, 339, 21 r. Consecrator,
344. 31 r. Joh. 10. 11. 345, 12 r. usage, 362, 5 r. propounded, 363, 14 r.
patients, 368, 17, blot out which, 371, in the Marginal note, r. Azab has not
two, 373, 39 r. Exodus 23 5. 385, 39 r. tried, 386, 26 r. against me, 395, 6 r.
because he has not hid* 415, 2 blot out to, 427, 10. r. derided by, ib. 37 r.
therefore, 428, 28 r. else, 430, 29 r. thing, 432, 34 r. sanctification of
merit, but not that of the Spirit.

Other faults there be which the Reader may mend.


