THE TRVE PORTRAITVRE of the KINGS OF ENGLAND; Drawn from their Titles,
Successions, Raigns and Ends.

OR, A Short and Exact Historical description of every King, with the Right
they have had to the Crown, and the manner of their wearing of it; especially
from WILLIAM the Conqueror.

Wherein is Demonstated, that there has been no direct succession in the line
to create an hereditary right, for six or seven hundred years; faithfully
collected out of our best Histories, and humbly presented to the Parliament of
England.

By an impartial Friend to Justice and Truth.

Psalm. 146. 3. Put not your trust in Princes.

Psalm. 62. 9. Men of high degree are a lie; to be laid in the Balance, they
are altogether lighter then vanity.

Nihil est imperium ut sapientes definiunt, nisi cura salutis alienae,

Ammianus lib. 39. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton at the three
Daggers in Fleet Street, near the Inner Temple-Gate, 1650.

To the READER.
READER,
IN the Study of Politics, the more confident we are, commonly the less
proficient we are. For there is no other study wherein the Passions of men do
more impetuously contravene, and overturn right Reason. Men born in popular
States, think themselves bound to abhor all Kings, as being De genere Bestiarum
rapacium: So Rome it self pronounced from the mouth of Cato the Censor. Others
on the contrary born under Monarchs, speak as odiously of Democracies, and make
this reply to Cato, That even Rome her self, when she plundered a third part of
the world, and graced her own Captains, with the pompous titles of Africanus,
Asiaticus, Achaicus, etc. was as ravenous a beast as any other. See what strong
Byasses wisemen have, and obey. The Question is not, Whether this, or that form
be free from oppression and injustice, or not; we know well, all Forms have
their peculiar advantages, and disadvantages: and that at some times they all
transgress their own Rules and Interests, as it were by accident, and not out
of misconstitution: The question is, Whether the one constitution or the other
be more free, (...), from oppression, and injustice? Now for solution of this,
greater light shines, and breaks in upon us from demonstration, and sensual
proof, then from Syllogisms, and logical inductions. Reading assures us, that
Rome was not so just to other Nations, nor so constant to the Interest of her
own Citizens, when she was under Kings and Emperors, as she was, when she chose
her own Consuls, and limited Magistrates. It Is as apparent also at this day,
that the people of Venice, the German Hans-Towns, Switzerland, the United
Provinces, etc. do more flourish, and truly enjoy the due benefits of Liberty,
there the French, Turkish, or any Royalists whatsoever. It Is further as visible
by the public banks of Treasure kept in Democracies, and the strange splendour
which Traffic brings to them beyond Monarchies, that Faith is not kept so
sacred and inviolable where one raigns, as where Majesty and Supreme Power
remains vested in the people; and most sure it is, the sanctity and untemerated
chastity of public Faith is the best and firmest basis of all Government. To
dispute these things, is to undervalue the report of our own senses; and to
deny our own senses, is to deny our selves to be men. The enemies of our
present Government ubraide this our popular model, the rather, because it
exasperates all our neighbors against us; whereas this is a great argument for
us, that our neighbors are troubled at the ejection of Monarchy. For
neighbors are more apt to envy then pity: and the condition of him that is
envied, is far better then his that is pitied. The main advantage that commends
Hereditary Monarchy, is the unity of it, for that it is not so liable to civil
broils and commotions, as other temperaments where the Magistrate is elective:
Yet Reader, if thou will strip thy self of thy passions and prejudices, and
peruse this Treatise, thou shall see that even Hereditary Monarchy it self is
far from being a sovereign, a remedy against civil breaches and divisions. The
Author of this Book is unknown to me, and the Book it self came casually to my
hands, but I have been induced to publish it, because it invites thee not to
Precepts, but Precedents, not to Disputable but to visible Politics. I need
say no more; by the Work rather then report judge of the Author, and by
Experiment rather then Logic judge of the Work.

HENRY PARKER.

The true Portraiture of the Kings of England, drawn from their Titles,
Successions, Reigns, and Ends, etc.
TO treat of the nature and difference of Governments, the distinction and
pre-eminence of Monarchy, or Aristocracie, with the other kinds, and forms,
which have, according to the temper of the People, and the necessity of
providence, had their course in the world, will be useless in this discourse,
which is calculated only for this Nation, and to describe not so much the
Government, as the Persons who have ruled among us, and is only suited to
Monarchy as it has had the sway of the English Throne; a Discourse not so
pleasing as profitable; we are loath to have our old soars launced, or to think
of change, though it be of misery, the temper of this Nation being apt to be
pleased with any thing that is stately, and costly, though never so dangerous
and miserable; yet something must be said in general, to prepare the way for
the particulars of this Treatise, which is not intended as controversall, or
definitive of the nature of things, but merely practical and demonstrative, fit
for every eye that means not to shut himself up in blindness, and darkness.

As the foundation and original of Government is confessed to be of equal
Antiquity with the generation and multiplication of mankind: so doubless the
just and methodicall use, and due management of it, is as necessary to the
well-being of men, as the exact proportions, and orderly motions of the Heavens
are to the preservation of the Globes; and certainly without it the rational
world would be more miserable then the material without Sun, Moon and Stars,
with all celestial influences, which as they do beautify and bespangle the
world, so they do preserve it from returning to its first Chaos, and rude mass
of matter; nothing being more contrary to that unity, and harmony, which the
God of nature has molded, and disposed all things at first in, then disorder,
and confusion, in which, as there is nothing of a deity to be discerned, so
nothing of peace or happiness can possibly be found.

And notwithstanding all this, the world has scarce known what the natural
sweetness and true benefits of government are, but only as comparative and
rather as opposite to Anarchy, then as advancing really and effectually the
just liberties and freedoms of societies, or propagating the Commonwealth of
mankind; for what through the ignorance and sloth of the people, and the pride
and ambition of Governors, the whole order and end of government has been
inverted, and subverted, upon all occasions; and that which was made for the
good of the whole, has been so contracted, and circumscribed in one person,
that the great and sovereign use, and end of it, by practice and custom, has
been rather to set up the pomp, and state of one man, and his Family, then to
promote or propagate the profit and happiness of the Universe; and whereas of
right to its constitution, It should have a free Election as its original, and
common good for its end, and just and equal Laws for its rule; it has had
usurpation for its Principle, and tyranny, and bondage for its medium, and end.
As to this day we may see in the greatest part of the world, where all the
liberties of millions of men of all sorts of conditions, and ranks, are buried
in the glory and splendour of one Family; through which narrow channels, all
honor and justice, all Law and reason are to run up and down the world.

And whereas the goodness, and beauty of government consists in the harmonious
temperature of power, and obedience, of authority, and liberty, it has been
quite otherwise inverted by practice, and made apparent to lie in the Majesty,
and greatness of the Monarch, and the absolute subjection, and servitude of the
people; and the excellency, and sweetness of it rather to be seen in the
Presence Chamber, and the magnificence, and grandeur of the Court, then in the
Courts of Justice, and the rich and flourishing estate of the Kingdom, nothing
being accounted more political, and glorious, then to have the Prince high,
and the Subjects beggars; and yet this Ceremonial way of Government, has took
most place in the world, and got almost divine adoration, and has thrust out
all other forms of Government, (equally sacred with it self, and most
proportionable to the nature and benefits of societies, and the Fee-simple of
all the liberties of the people (which are as their blood and spirits in their
veins) sold to maintain its State.

Besides many causes, and grounds of this degeneration (whereby so much misery
has overflowed the Nations of the world) I find two, which at present are
principally to be mentioned; the first is the neglect of a right sense, and the
often inculcating the original, and end of government; and the next a lineal
succession, or continuation of government, by a natural and supposed heirship;
For want of the first, neither the people know their own rights, or how to
maintain them; or the Governor his use and end, nor how to keep himself within
the just bounds, and limits of his creation; for what between the stupidity,
and ignorance of the people in not knowing their primitive privileges, that
they are the original, and end of vernment; and the pride, and ambition of
men, when once they have got power, forget both how they came by it, and to
what end they are distinguished from other men, government comes both to be
usurped, and tyrannical. Did the people but know that their choice and
election is the foundation of just authority, and that none can rule over them
but whom they appoint, they would not then be drawn into controversies and
debates, whether it be treason in them to cast off a bad Governor, who have
the only power of choosing a good one; and on the other side, if Kings, and
Princes (for to reduce all to them who have been most guilty of the abuse of
government) had but the continual sense of the root from whence they sprung,
and the duties annexed to their Offices, they could not look on themselves as
rulers, but tyrants when they acted for their own private Prerogative* in
distinction from, and contrary to the liberties and freedoms of the people;
but these considerations have been by time and prescription worn out of the
mind and memories of both, partly through continual insinuations of Court
Maxims, and the spirit of bondage in the people, and by force and usurpation in
the Magistrate, whereby it has gone a long while for current, that the people
have no power, nor the Prince no account to give but to God, from whom they
challenge an immediate title, as if Kings and Princes, all their names, and
successions were let down from Heaven, in the same sheet that the beasts were
in Peter's vision, and had not their root in the earth as all other Magistrates
besides. We have had much ado of late, but to beat off from these Royal
notions, both by pens and swords, and yet still they have too strong a hold in
most men's hearts, though to their own undoing.

Whereas all men are equally born free, and naturalized into all the
privileges of freedom and just liberty, no man can obtain a special power
over any, but either ex pacto aut scelere, either by willing agreement, and
consent, which is the right and just way of title, and most natural, or by
conquest, and usurpation, which is most exotic, and unjust; for the original
of Kingly power, in the Scripture, we all know it came in as an effect of the
wantonness, and discontents of the Israelites, against that special way of
government God himself had set over them; And view the Character God gives to
them of that government, and not a blessing he gives them with it; for its rise
among the heathens, and nations (which knew not God (among whom that government
most prevailed;) it was certainly first good, and grounded on the
exorbitancies, and excess of other Magistrates, and a high opinion of the
justice, and virtue of some particluar persons, as Cicero lib. offic. 2.
excellently expresses it; Mihi quidem non apud Medos solum (ut ait Herodotus)
sed etiam apud majores nostros, servandae justiciae causa videntur olim been
morati Reges constituti: nam cum premeretur initio multitudo ab iis qui majores
opes habebant, ad unum aliquem confugiebant virtute praestantem. As if taking
it for granted that among all nations that Preservation, and execution of
justice, with injoyning of virtue, was the first ground of the constitution of
Kings; But they having got by their own goodness chief power and authority, use
that favor they had gained from their own deserts, to advance their own
family; and having got in the affections of the people, through the sense of
their own present worth, what by power and force, and what by policy and craft,
got the same power entailed on their heirs, and so by custom have made
succession the only right, or at least the most just to Crowns, and Scepters.

A principle which has more hindered the advance of Government, and run it on
more hazards and mischiefs then any other, where by a fatal Custom, people
must be irreparably content with what they can find, and reducing all to a
blind Fate, and Fortune, be he good, or prove bad, talis, qualis, give up both
their own Wills and Liberties to such a succession, not only by a natural
necessity, but a divine institution: How the world came to be so blinded, as
thus to give away their Rights and Liberties, and morgage their understandings,
and freedom, as bankrupts do their lands, is not to be determined, but by
supposal of a judgment of God, and an overreach of power and force, or by an
Ignis fatuus of Policy and subtilty.

For this natural and hereditary succession (which is now adored as the grand
title) if truly considered, is nothing else but a continuation of conquest, or
a surprisall by the good nature of the people, when they have been either low,
and in fear, and taking advantage of their high esteem of some eminent person,
who has been more then ordinary isntrumental to them, have got the people to
convey the same honor to their posterity after them; the peoples consent being
thus ravished from them, Its made a law, both civil and divine to after
generations; but the world is now, or should be grown wise: Let us consider the
nature and use of this succession, both in general, and particular, especially
as it has been acted in England.

Among all the Catalogue of vanities which Solomon reckons up in his sacred
retractations, there is none he puts such a character on, as for a man to spend
his time and strength in getting of riches, and knows not who shall succeed him
in the enjoyment of the profit and good of his labor, or whether he may be a
wise man or a fool; But what a misery, and worse then vanity is this, that the
supreme power of Government (in the right execution of which all the
concernments of millions of men are interested) should be intailed on one man,
(though never so deserving in his own person,) and the heirs of his body, be he
good or bad, a wise man, or very nigh a fool, and so all their happiness depend
on hap and hazard from generation to generation?

It cannot be rationally or spiritually supposed, that any man should be born a
Magistrate or Governor, especially not successively, when the best men, and
most choice spirits, who have had the highest eminencies of virtue, and best
improvement of education, and natural genius, are hardly fit for so great a
work. If Kings have such a vis formativa in their loins, as to beget Kings in
the likeness of their Office, as children in the image of their natures, it
must be necessarily supposed, that they must generate all these royal
qualifications together with them, and by the same natural necessity transfer
all their princely endowments to them also.

Whereas I had almost affirmed it, (and I hope no man can account it either
Heresy or Treason) that God himself cannot intail on any particular line of
mankind, the power and authority of Government out of his wisdom, and love to
their happiness (without he meant to do it in judgment, and to plague the
world) and not give them suitable and successive qualifications also, fit for
that emploiment; It being Gods use (according to his wisdom, and righteousness)
neither ordinarily nor extraordinarily to call out persons to any place, but he
anoints them with proportionable gifts to it.

And yet the poor people (whom God has naturally made free, and to make use of
their own understandings and affections for their own good) are by this
succession, bound up from the improvement either of soul or body, fain to be
content with what they can get for present, and to shift it out from age to age
(with the loss of all opportunities of choice) only with what corrupt nature
brings them forth, which oftentimes travels sorely in pain with the curse of
the Fathers who begat these Governors. Hence also it comes to pass, that
oftentimes children are made Kings, and though they are incapable at present
for the actual exercise of that office, yet are proclaimed, as having the
right, and title, and all things acted in their name, and the whole
Commonwealth, it may be of many Nations, must wait for his capacity with fear
and hope, which capacity is also at best to be judged by his years, rather then
fitness or qualification for so high a trust; and in the mean while the Kingdom
must be governed by some Favorites of the last King, or some next kinsman to
this; and while the King is thus in pupillage, we may well ask, who governs the
Kingdom? And yet oftentimes it has fallen out, that their Government has been
better ordered in their nonage by others, then in their own by themselves, as
appears especially in the reign of Henry the third, and Henry the sixth, Kings
of England; the first being but nine years old when his father died, the latter
but nine months; who while they were young, and under the protection of certain
wise and sober men, the Laws were administered uprightly, and with much Justice;
but when they themselves came to the years of Kingship, and Prerogative* so
Royalled, that both Laws and Liberties were soon altered and abolished, as anon
the Reader shall have a more exact account; And how sad is it, that when
Government may be advanced as well, if not better by others in their minority,
without their presence or influence, the world must be at such vast charges for
a title, and to maintain it ere they can use it, and which is worst, that when
they come to exercise it themselves, should make their title the ground of
their Tyranny. But if it so happen (for its a mere chance)* that the next heir
prove somewhat more then ordinary capable, yet what the next may prove, who
knows? If he be an Infant, (as it many times falls out) then there must be
patient and hopeful waitings, to see what he will be when grown up; until
that, there can be no further progress made in the alteration or reformation of
affairs, though of never so great, and present concernment; and when he comes
to these years which Custom pronounces him capable, how unreasonable is it,
that nothing can hinder, or exclude him from his Authority, but that he is
incapable of being begged for a fool? It being enough, if he can koow his own
name, and be able to write himself Rex, though he knows little what belongs to
the Office, or relation of a King.

If he be one of riper years, and stature, on which this Su^^^ssion falls, then
must all the observation of his nature, and the ominous, and more then
Astrological aspects of his constitution, and education be forgotten; and
although silenced in his pretended title, and a full compliance looked after,
though oppressed with never so many fears, and secret wishes of a more hopeful
Governor; yea, and though he has been never so active against the liberties
of the people, when but a Prince, and given demonstrations what a Governor they
may expect, yet his succession must be his qualification, and indemnity, and
his Title his virtue.

On this ground also it comes to pass, that oftentimes women come to hold the
rains of government; and to steer at the Helm, as well as men; for if there be
any defect of the male line, the female succeeds; and that feeble and weaker
sex, whom God and nature have ordained to be only particular helps, and good
Subjects, (only to keep up the name of a Family) must be invested with the
highest authority, over the choicest, and most select spirits of many Nations,
and all further thoughts of bettering the State of things utterly extinguished
by a female pretense.

And which is most desperate by this succession, (and its plea of the only and
absolute right) the fundamental liberties of the people are not only
insensibly undermined, but absolutely rooted up, and that birthright
privilege of the people, their Election and choice, then which, they have
nothing more natural, and which is far more hereditary to them and theirs,
then by all the Laws of God* nature, and reason, Crowns can be to Kings and
their heirs, is quite extinguished; For pass by the first King, (who it may be
as with us it has been, came in by Conquest) you must go back in some Kingdoms
five hundred, in others a thousand years, ere you can but recover the clear
notion of a free election (wherein the peoples power and priveledge is alone and
peculiarly seen) and yet that so faintly and hardly extorted from them, as
great loans of money from a cruel miser, without use or advantage; and though
Election must be acknowledged at last, the first just ground of government, yet
custom in successions soon wears out its right, and transfers it on the next
blood; And though in England it appears by the Coronation Oath, that there is
even in succession a kind of election, yet its so limited in the line, that its
as good as nothing, and so weak and implicitly manifested, that its but a mere
customary Ceremony, which always is pursued by the natural title, and only
used to deceive the people, and as a step to the further confirmation of a more
fundamental, and sure right; and its easy to demonstrate it; for our Kings
soon forget it, ere they come from Westminster to Whitehall, or from the chair
of Inauguration to the Presence Chamber. In a word, what gives all this ground
of such an inevitable and successively insensible incroachment on the laws and
liberties of Nations, but this lineall title, whereby the Son without remedy
goes on where the Father left off, and by a divine pretense seiseth on what by
nature is due to the meanest subject, as to himself? And what makes the present
Kings so daring, and venturous to raise their own prerogative, but this, that
that they know there can be no alienation of the Crown from his heirs, and that
they may make it better (that is more tyrannical?) but surer they cannot: And
thus there is a constant hope, and possibility, by continuation and propagation
of principles, and designs, backed with title, and authority, that what cannot
be done in one Kings reign, may be done in the next, and so on; For the minds
of Princes are not usually contracted, or contented with present enjoyments;
especially if there be any restraint on their wills, or more of height, or
advancement to be attained unto.

Yea, this is one of the main reasons (that in our times can be rendered) why we
have had such uneven actings, and such strange alterations in several Kings
Raigns; the principles, and laws, the people have been always the same, who are
capable of small or no variation or change, but as higher, and supreme
influences move them, of which none has been so powerful as Princes, who as
they are Stars of the first magnitude, so of the strongest operations; and
though the people be compared to the Sea, yet as the Sea, they have no
turbulent motion of their own, but what is occasioned by violent and uncertain
winds; but the great change has been by the temper, and actings of Princes,
and commonly the next successor has been the omen and fate of the times; if
any way good, then the Nation smiled, and his reign began the Spring; if
probable, there was hopes; and yet both these at first promised, but at length
frustrated; and however the beginnings were, yet the succession of acts
demonstrated how the title was created; for until they have made their
succession sure, none have been more fair, and promising, but afterward both
Laws and Liberties, like favorites, have been advanced ad placitum; and what
they have got an interest in by nature, that by prerogative they have centred
in their own proper persons, even the most fundamental privileges of the
people, and have only granted Leases unto the people of their own inheritances,
and dated them not for life (which would have been too great a mercy) but as
long as the Royal pleasure lasts, which changes always with advantages. Yea,
by this succession Tyranny is so intailed, and all things so necessarily acted,
as if the Prince were not only the civil, but natural Parent of the people,
and that Kings had begot the people as so many Bastards to obey, as they do
beget one lawfully to reign over them.

Its too well known, that good and wise men are the fewest of the sons of men,
and are commonly picked out here, and there, as rich pearls on the shore of
violent torrents; but to expect in one Line, and Family, a succession of good,
wise, and governing men, is almost as probable to Christians, as to expect
Mahomets second coming among the Turks, after so many hundred years delusion;
and although it must be acknowledged, that there have been some good Kings, yet
they have been so few, that as their names from the beginning of the world can
hardly make up the Dominical letters in the Almanac, or possibly supply the
Holidays in the year, so a little goodness has gone far, and at the best we
shall find it but comparative; good Kings instead of better Governors, as some
of the Roman Cesars, chose those to succeed them who were worse then
themselves, that they might commend, and set off their own Reign, though
tyrannical enough in it self; and we may without any passion demonstrate, that
the design by succession has been rather to keep up the Governors, and
palliate their vices, then ever to maintain or highthen the glory, and
splendour, or carry on the benefit of the Government it Self in the execution of
good and righteous Laws.

But to come nigher home, and leave generals (granting Succession in it self to
be a good title) let us view without partiality, the succession of the Kings of
England, whereby they plead their title to the Crown, and we shall find in our
Histories, that nothing has been more commonly interrupted, then a succession
of the next Heir; and for this seven or eight hundred years (if not more) we
have not had succession continued in any even line or just right, and no title
was ever more broken, and unjust, then of our Kings, if they make a Lineall,
and Hereditary succession the foundation of their right; Let us look but a
little back to those which preceded the Norman race, especially among the
Saxons and Danes, the ancient competitors for the Government of this Nation,
and it will appear, that the right Heir has been commonly past by; and
Strangers or Usurpers preferred; to go no further back then to Alfred King of
the West Saxons, and the twenty fourth Monarch of the Englishmen; as soon as he
died, Athelstan his Bastard was preferred before his legitimate son Edmond, and
after him got his own brother Edmond to succeed him; and though this Edmond
left two sons, Edwin, Dan. Hist. p. 14. Speed.
and Edgar, yet as he and his former brother had usurped the Government, so
Edred his brother stepped into the Throne, and put them by until he had finished
his Reign, and then they took their turns; Edwin first, and Edgar after him;
this Edgar had two wives, Ethelfled his first, and Elfrida the second: by the
first he had issue, Edward, surnamed the Martyr, who succeeded his father in
title; but having hardly felt the Crown warm, and fast on his head, was cruelly
murdered, to make way for the second wives son Ethelred who succeeded him, as
Daniel well expresses it, whose entrance into his Reign was blood, the middle
misery, and the end confusion; and though he left his son Edmond, surnamed
Ironside, to succeed him, yet Canutus the Dane by compact got half of the
Kingdom from him, and soon after the whole, setting up his Danish title, and
murdering the two sons Edmund had left, with his brother Edwin, that no
further pretense might be made by them of their title; and now come the Danes
to convey their title by* Canutus; and yet Harold his bastard gets the Crown
before Hardicanute, who was his legitimate son; and among these three Kings
(for the Government under the Danes continued but twenty six years, and only
under these three was aone Usurper, and immediately interrupted the right of
succession. And the Danes Government being ended, which was but an intervall of
conquest) the Saxons regain their title; and Edward, called the Confessor, the
seventh son of Elthelred (who came in with the murder of the right heir) being
kept as a reserve in Normandy) is elected King, and the Saxons title now begins
to revive, but soon its extinguished, not only by the Norman pretense* but by
the next successor, Harold the second, son to Goodwin, Earl of Kent, Speed.
who came in with the expulsion of Edgar Athlings the proper successor.

And with Harold ended the Saxon race, which had lasted about five hundred
years, after the coming in of Hengist, and their Plantation in this Kingdom;
and yet you see what have been the titles successively of these former Kings,
wherein the Line has not only been now and then through force and violence
cut off and discontinued, but usurpation solemnized with as much ceremony as
any natural pretense: but these Instances are but as representations of objects
afar off, which may seem otherwise then they are; we will go on and review the
title of our Kings from William the Norman, Surnamed the Conqueror, and by
whom, not only the line, but all the whole fram of Laws and Liberties were not
only curtailed but changed; for though in the raigns of the former Kings,
every Conqueror made his impression, and drew his Picture in England, yet never
was the whole Scene of State changed until now, and a new Model so
peremptorily (and without repeal) introduced, as by him: The first jus, or
right of his title (the only foundation of all the rest of our latter Kings
(we all know was by mere Conquest, which as it is a disseisin in Law, so an
unjust title in Reason, and common to one as unto another: yet he though a
Bastard, (and so had less title to his Dukedom then to England which he won by
the Sword) made himself the principal of that divine Succession we now stand
upon, and all our Kings have no other pretense then by the succession of his
Sword; and certainly, if the Fountain, and Head-Spring be corrupt, the stream
cannot be Crystal and pure; and yet (as Baron Thorpe declares in his Charge
given at the Assizes holden at York the twentieth of March, 1648. and now in
Print) of all these twenty four Kings, which have King'd it amongst us since
that William, there are but seven of them that could pretend legalty to succeed
their former predecessors, either by lineal, or collateral title, (and he
might have contracted that number, and have been modest enough.) But that the
Reader may not be prejudiced, or wrap up his understanding in any expression,
let him but follow the discents of the Kings of England in the line, (and
pardon the first strange and exotic way of right) and he will discover, that
as the first title was created by force, so the succession has been continued
by usurpation. Speed (too Royal a Writer) gives us a hint to go on upon in the
Life of Henry the Fourth, page 746. (asks by way of Interrogation) What right
had Will, the Conqueror, the Father of all our glorious Tyrants? What right (we
speak, says he, of a right of equity) had his son William Rufus, and Henry the
first, while their elder brother lived? and so he goes on. But to give a more
particular account to the Reader, how* every King came to his Crown, Let us
begin with the first of the first.

After that the first William, who laid the foundation of his right in the
blood of the English, had left this world, as well as his Kingdom, great
strivings there were who should succeed; and though he left three sons, Robert,
William, and Henry, yet could leave but one Heir, which was Robert; yet William
surnamed Rufus, gets the crown set on his head, notwithstanding the elder
brothers title, and though Robert fights for his right, yet being too weak in
the field, is fore't to a composition, on these terms that he should enjoy it
after his decease, if he happened to survive; and yet notwithstanding, Henry the
youngest brother (called Henry the first) steps in, and makes use of his
brothers absence to set up himself in his place; and Robert yet surviving, he
wears it in his stead, and however he strove to regain his right, he at last
was fain to yield up, not only his title, but his person to Henry, who not only
unjustly excluded him from the succession to the Kingdom, but cruelly put out
his eyes that he might only feel his misery, and never see his remedy. The line
male of the Conqueror is now extinct, as well as it was irregularly diverted;
as William got his right by his Sword, so all his successors maintained it in
imitation of him, rather then by any legal pretense they could derive from him.
But Henry the first (though* he had come in over the back of his elder brother)
that he might make more sure work for a succession, wanting issue male living,
pitcheth on Maud his daughter, formerly married to the Emperor Henry the
fourth, who left her a widow, and died without issue; and having sworn all the
Nobility (especially Stephen) to her, ordained her and her issue to be his
successors in Englands* Throne, and married her again to Jeoffrey Plantagenet,
the son and heir apparent of Fulk, then Earl of Anjou, by whom she had three
sons, Henry, Jeffrey, and William; to Henry the Crown belonged as next heir
after his mother (by the usurped title of his father,) yet Stephen, Earl of
Mortain, and Bulloign, son to Adelincia the third daughter of William the
Conqueror, by Maud his wife, (notwithstanding his oath to the last King) gets
the Crown set on his own head, and excludes her, and her issue for the present;
yet after he died, Henry, called the second, surnamed Shortmantle, though his
mother was alive, enjoys it. This Henry had six sons, William, Henry Richard,
Jeoffrey, Philip, John; the two first dying, Richard the third son, the first
of that name, Surnamed Ceur de Lion succeeded his father; this Richard dying
without issue, his youngest brother John usurps the Crown, notwithstanding
Jeoffrey his elder brother had left a young son, named Arthur Plantaganet King
of Britain, who was heir apparent to the Crown; and after he dyed, Henry his
son the third of that name succeedes him, though Arthurs sister was then alive,
(though in prison) who was next to the title (such as it was); after him Edward
surnamed Longshankes, called Edward the first, lays hold on the Crown and wore
it with much majesty, and after him Edward the second his son goes on, but
still on the old account, and on the ruin of the most proper heirs; this
Edward was deposed by the Parliament for his ill government as anon shall be
more fully related; and his son Edward the third of that name set up in his
room; after him followed Richard the second, son to the black Prince, who was
also deposed, after whose dethroning, Henry called the fourth, son to John of
Gant Duke of Lancaster, and uncle to the former King, snatcheth up the Crown,
though of right it, was to descend to Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, the son
and heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third son of Edward the third, and an
elder brother of John Duke of Lancaster; and thus we have nothing hitherto, but
interruption, and usurpation; and those which in their own reigns can pretend a
divine title by succession, which must not be altered, can for their advantage
put by the succession of the issue of others. But to go on, Here now began the
bloody wars, and contests between the house of Lancaster, and York which made
the world to ring of the misery of the civil wars of England, and all about a
title, and neither of them (if seriously weighed) had a right title by
succession, if the first title of their Ancestors were to be the original; But
that custom might be the best right, he got in his son Henry, who was the
fifth of that name, to succeed; and his son Henry the sixth (though an infant)
takes his place, until Edward Duke of York overthrew his Army in the battle at
Towton Field, and got him deposed, and was proclaimed King by the name of
Edward the fourth, though the title had been carried on in the House of
Lancaster through three discents; thus favor, and fortune, not lineall
succession always gave the best title; this Edward left two sons behind him,
(to maintain the succession of the House of York) Edward and Richard Duke of
York and five daughters. His eldest Son Edward who was the fifth of that name,
succeeded him in claim, and title, but rather lived then reigned (being an
infant) had never any actual exercise of his government; for Ric. Duke of
Gloucester, and Uncle to this Infant, and made his Protector, that he might set
up himself, causes both the young titular King, and his Brother, (these two
Royal Infants) to be barbarously murdered in their beds, and so wears the
Crown himself, by the name of Richard the Third, until Henry Earl of Richmond
(a twigg of a Bastard of John of Gaunt) by his valor at Bosworth field, having
overthrown his Army, slew the Tyrant himself, and created by his sword (for
other he had none) a new title to himself, and was Crowned King, by the name of
Henry the Seventh, who, what by his power and by a marriage of the Lady Eliz.
the eldest daughter of Ed. the Fourth, confirmed his succession, and from him
do all our later Princes derive their Title, as Henry the Eighth, Edward the
Sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and our last Tyrant Charles.
This Henry, the foundation of our great ones, was himself but a private man,
who as Speed says, had scarce any thing of a just title, or of a warrantable
intention, but to remove an Usurper; besides there were many natural heirs of
the house of York which were children of Edward the Fourth, and George Duke of
Clarence, Richards elder brother, who had better right: but when once a title
is made, it must be maintained, and if it can but get through two or three
Successors, its presently proclaimed to be jure divino, and pleaded as the
only just title and right.

Thus you have a faithful, and true account of the succession of our Norman
Monarchs; we can only say we have had so many persons reigning, and as Kings
of England; but for a title by lineal succession, there is none, but what every
man may make as well as any man, and what is as proper to a stranger, as to an
heir; power, and favor, murder and deceit being the most common principles of
the right of most of our Kings to their government over us. If it be asked, as
Speed does, What right had William the Conqueror? then it must follow, What
right had all the rest? but supposing his right, What right had these, who so
many times cut off the line, and made themselves the Stock of future
succession? and what misery is it that this broken and usurped title must still
be forced on us, even by an Ecclesiastical, and Divine Institution, who have
now a way of redeeming our liberties, and bettering our conditions, and
following the direct line of just and true titles, the Election and choice of
the people? Is not five or six hundred year enough for England to be under the
succession of a Norman Bastard (pardon the expression, its true though plain)
and to be sold with all its liberties, from usurpation to usurpation, as well
as from generation to generation? I need not be very zealous in application,
the history is enough to make all wise men consider, by whom we have all this
while been governed, and upon what terms; How tyranny and usurpation comes to
be adored, if it have but a royal name added to it. Shall the Parliament of
England be now blamed for cutting off that race of usurpers and tyrants, and
reducing affairs to their first natural and right principle; or will the
people of England after all their experiences, center their liberties and
freedoms in a customary usurpation of succession, and lose their Commonwealth
for the personal glory of a young Pretender? especially, when they have fought
against the Father, and cut him off as a Tyrant, endeavor to set up the Son to
follow on both the first cause, and revenge, merely because he was supposed to
be proceeded of his polluted loins: this blindness will be our misery, and
endear us to a more perfect and more tyrannical slavery then ever yet England
felt.

But to go on, the Reader has seen what a line we have had in England, and how
pure a title our Kings have had to their Crowns; Lets now but have patience to
view their actings successively, and yet shortly, and we shall better guess of
their right by their raigns; for though one would think that they should
endeavor to make good a bad title by a good reign, yet it has been far
otherwise; every man having made his right by force, maintained it by tyranny;
and when they have gotten power, never remembered how, or to what end they
attained it; if we look back again, and make a new and strict survey of their
several actings in their Government, and go over every Kings head since Willam
the Conqueror, we shall not much mistake if we pass by Turkey, Russia, the
Moors, and yet call Englands Kings Tyrants, and their Subjects Slaves; and
however in the theory, and System it have been limited, and bounded by good and
distinguishing Laws, yet in the exercise and practique part almost of every
Kings Reign, we shall find it deserve as bad a name as others who are called
most absolute; for the Laws and Privileges which this poor Nation has
enjoyed, as they have been but complementally granted for the most part, and
with much design, so they have ever (upon any occasion) proved but weak and low
hedges against the Spring-tides, and Land floods of the Prerogative of the
Prince, which has always gained more on the privileges of the people, then
ever the Sea by all its washing and beatings of its boisterous and unmerciful
waves has gained on the Land; for if at any time the poor Commons (through
much struggling, and a good and present necessitous mood of the Prince) have got
off any present oppressions, and forced out the promise for enacting of any
good and seasonable Laws: yet either the next advantage, or at least the next
successor, has been sure, either to silence, or diannul it, and incroached
upon it; and never was Privilege or good Law enacted, or gained to the people,
but by hard pressure of the Subject, and with a predominant ingredient of the
Kings advantage, and still rather out of courtesy then right. We shall find
also that England for three or four hundred years together (some lucida
intervalla excepted) has been a stage of blood, and the astonishment of all
Nations in civil wars, and that merely, either for the clearing of the title to
the Crown (which yet at last was only made lawful by the prevailing power,
and as soon made illegal when another side got the better) or else by the
Subject and Barons, taking up arms to defend themselves, and make Rampires (if
possible) against the inundation of Prerogative, and rather preserving, then
obtaining any additions of liberties, and yet they were commonly defeated at
last; for if for the present by some eminent advantage, they got a little
ground, they soon lost it again by royal stratagems, and were either forced, or
complemented* into their old miseries, with a worse remembrance of former
actings. But to enter into the particulars of this sad Story:

All men know (or may) the tyrannical domination of that first William, who
behaved himself as a Conqueror indeed, and a most perfect tyrant (since whom we
have never had an English man, but one, who has been naturalized by the
succession of his Conquest as King of England) he presently changed most of our
Laws, especially those wherein the English liberties were most transparent, and
preserved, and made new Laws, and those which he left, writ them all in French;
disweaponed all the Natives, sent the children of the best, and most faithful
of the Nobility into Normandy as Hostages, and the most gallant of the English
were transported by him into France to serve his wars, that he might extinguish
their Families; he advanced his Normans into all places of the Nation, and kept
them as a guard over the English; brought in the cruel Forest Laws, and
dispeopled for thirty miles together in Hampshire, pulling down many Towns, and
Villages, with Churches, Chapels, and Gentlemen's Houses, making it a Forest
for wild beasts, (which is ever since named the New Forest, but was the old
ensign of our misery and slavery) he laid on innumerable taxes, and made Laws
royal, very severe, and in an unknown Language, that the English offending
might forfeit their states and lands to him, which they often did, through
ignorance: But alas, what need I mention these? who ever reads but our
Histories, (and the most favorable* and fawning Royalist) will see more then
now can be expressed; and yet here is the first fruits of our Kings and of
their righteous title, whose succession has been as much in tyranny after him,
as in title: and yet we must, by a sacred obligation be bound to maintain with
our blood, and lives, the branches of this rotten root, notwithstanding all the
providential, and divine opportunities of casting off that miserable yoke which
our forefathers, so sadly groaned under, and would have triumphed in the
pouring out their blood (which they shed freely, but to little purpose) but to
have foreseen their childrens children might have but the hopes of attaining to.

But although William the first made sure his Conquest to his own William Rufus.
person, yet by his tyranny he gave ground of designs, and hopes of recovery
after his death, and therefore the people who but murmured and mourned in
secret formerly, consider now their condition, and that Robert the right heir
was wanting, and his second son endeavored to be set up, begin to capitulate,
and repeat their former grievances, and to stand upon their terms, with the
next Successors; But William Rufus who longed for the Crown, and saw what
advantage he had by his brothers absence, through the mediation of Lanke-Frank
the Archbishop of Canterbury (a man for his virtue and learning in great
esteem with the people) got himself to be accepted, and crowned King (with
exclusion of his elder brother) by fair promises, and engagements to repeal his
fathers Laws, and of promoting the liberties of the English (any probability
being then taking to the poor people.) But no sooner had he got the Crown
fastened on his head, (and defeated his brother in battle) but he forgot all his
own promises, follows directly his fathers steps, grows excessive covetous,
lays on intolerable taxes, and merciless exactions, returns their longings, and
hopes after their just liberty into a sad bondage and slavery. The poor people
having thus smarted for their credulity, and renewing their sense of their
misery, under the two former tyrants, take heart once again, and refuse to
admit any after his death, until (as Judge Thorpe well expresses it in that
forementioned discourse) they were cheated into a second election of Hen. the
first, his youngest brother; for the people standing for their Liberties (and
yet, alas, but negatively, rather to be freed from excess of oppression, then
knowing what true freedom was) having felt the misery of their loss in the two
former persons (shall I call them Kings?) Reign; denied any consent to another
person of that stock without solemn capitulations, and covenants to settle just
Laws, and to engage for the execution of them, with abrogation of all former
mischievous and inconvenient ones, (which Matthew Paris calls unworthily, a
Politic, but traiterous way of capitulating.) Whereupon Henry, who had
nothing of title, made friends by his engagements, and Roberts absence in the
Holy Land, and does absolutely promise to begin all anew, constitute just laws,
reform his Fathers, and brothers exorbitancies, and to be as a Nursing Father
both to Church and State; these fair insinuations got him the Crown, though
Robert was to have it first by his own right, and next by his Brothers Covenant
and Will.

And that he might not seem altogether disproportionable to his Dan. life of
Henry the first.
engagement, the first action of his government was to bait the people, and
sugar their subjection, as his predecessor in the like interposition had done,
but with more moderation and advisedness; but having once secured his title
from his Brothers jus, and settled some affairs abroad, began much after the old
strain, (yet not altogether so violent) yet these cruel and savage Laws of the
forest he revived, and put in execution, yea, urged as the most fundamental
Law of the Realm, and many sore in positions he levied (which the people were
not able to bear;) that these two sons, though they ended the direct line, yet
they propagated their Fathers tyranny; only he got the throne by force; they
by subtilty, and delusive engagements; and now the poor people, who had still
been cozened, and are commonly passive, begin in the next Kings reign, ( viz.
of Stephen, another Usurper) to be active, and to struggle for their liberties
more seriously and thoroughly, and not contented with promises of abating former
pressures, drew up the sum of their desires in a more exact method, and demand
publicly the restoring and re-establishing of St. Edwards Laws (for such a
rarity was that former Prince, as they Canonized him a Saint) which were many
years before granted* but by new and strange successions buried; and Stephen,
who came in odly to the Crown, and was continually in various motions to
maintain it, confirmed all these laws, and to gain the people, ratified them by
Parliament, the best security in these cases; But soon after Prerogative (like
a Lion in chains) breaks forth again with fuller rage, and devours all these
grants, with the hopes, and expectations of the people; for though in the two
next Kings raigns these grants were not actually repeled, yet were laid by, and
only wrapped up in parchments, and hushed by the noise of Drums, and Trumpets. For
Henry the Second, the next King, spent most of his time in clearing the
controversy* between Regnum and Sacerdotium, the Crown and the Mitre, as in
settling his own Title both here, and in Normandy* and Ireland; a while he and
Thomas Becket were standing in the special rights, and privileges of the
Church, and State, the liberties of the people were laid asleep, and certainly
he hated the former grants, because made by Stephen, who had stolen the Crown
both from his Mother, and himself; the notablest story in this Kings reign
(setting by his warlike achievements) is, that after Becket had often foiled
him in his authority, he was handsomely whipped by the Monks, in going to visit
Beckets shrine, which was part of his penance, for giving secret order to
Assasinats to make him away; And that he kept Rosamond as his Concubine, to the
vexation of Elenor his Wife, who at last vented her revenge on her, having
found her out in that intricate Labyrinth made on purpose for her at Woodstock,
by the clew which Rosamond had carelessly untwisted.

The next that laid claim to this Crown, was his son Richard the first,
surnamed Ceur de Lion (as before) who was to be commended rather for his
personal valor, in other Nations, then for any good done to this; He began
well in enlarging his Mother Elenor, whom his Father had imprisoned, because
she could not abide his lascivious living with his wanton Paragon Rosamond, and
advanced many persons by special favors; yet these respects were more
particular, then of any public advantage to the State; for out of a blind zeal
in those times, after he had been in England but four months after his
Coronation, he went into the Holy Land, against the Turks, leaving the Regency
of the Kingdom to an Ecclesiastical Person, William Longchampe, Bishop of Ely,
who to please the King, and by special command, undid the people, and
committed great exactions, and as Hoveden says, Clerum and populum opprimebat,
confundens fasque nefasque did all as he listed, and little cared by what means
he filled the Kings Coffers, and his own; (acting but by Proxy and in
imitation of what his Master would have done, if at home* and by many a private
command) as it afterward proved; for when Richard undertook this voyage, that
he might not seem at first burthensom to the people when he left them, and to
maintain both his design, and absence on their purses (and so alienate their
affections from him when at so great a distance, and give grounds to his
Brother John to try an experiment for the title) wifely sold much of his own
estate to raise him moneys, as the Castles of Berwick* and Roxborough, to the
King of Scots for ten thousand pounds, and the Lordship, and Earldom of Durham,
to Hugh then Bishop of that See, for much money, as also many Honors, Lordships,
Manors, Offices, Privileges, Royalties, to many of the Nobles, and rich
Commoners, whereby he furnished himself with a vast treasury of money for that
service; and that you may see what interest he and his companions think they
have in his peoples goods (however they dissemble it) he often protested that
he would sell his City of London (as my Author says) to any that would by it,
rather then be chargeable unto others; but notwithstanding all this, as the
people were sadly oppressed in his absence by his Viceroy, so much more when he
returned by himself; for he then began to redeem his time, and to play Rex with
a witness; he fell presently to plunder all religious houses, laid on new and
unheard of Taxes on the people, and resumed into his hands again all the
Lordships, Manors, Castles, etc. which he had sold to his subjects, and
confirmed it by all the security they could have from man; this is the misery
of depending on royal promises, and engagements, which are usually nothing else
but complementall engines to move up the peoples affections, while they more
easily, and insensibly drain out their blood, and purses, this was the end of
this Rough, and Lionlike King, who reigned nine years, and nine months, wherein
he exacted and consumed more of this Kingdom then all his Predecessors from the
Norman had done before him, and yet less deserved it then any, having neither
lived here, nor left behind him monument of piety, or any public work, or ever
showed love or care to this Commonwealth, but only to get what he could from
it; we see hitherto what a race of Kings we have had, and what cause we have to
glory in any thing but their Tombs; and yet if we expect better afterward, we
shall be as much mistaken of their actings as they were of their right.

The next that reigned (though without any hereditary title) was King John,
Stephens Brother; whose government was as unjust as Dun.
his title, for he (having by Election, out of fear and policy of State, got
the Crown, with expulsion of Arthur the right heir ut supra) embarked the
State, and himself in these miserable incumberances, through his violence and
oppression, as produced desperate effects, and made way to those great
alterations in the government which followed; the whole reign of this King was
a perfect tyranny; there is in History hardly one good word given him; the
Barons and Clergy continually opposed him, struggling for a confirmation of
their long desired liberties, but were most commonly either cluded, or defeated
by promises which were never intended to be performed, until at last being more
entirely united with the Commons, and stoutly resolved and confirmed by an
Oath, taken at St. Edmunds-Burie in a general Assembly, they then swore on the
high Altar, never to lay down arms, if King John refused to confirm and restore
unto them these liberties (the rights which this Kingdom was formerly blessed
with, and which all the late Kings had cheated them of) the King knowing their
power, and considering their engagements, makes use of policy, and desired time
to answer them, entertaining them with smooth and gentle language, and
courtesy, until he had got strength, and then he began anew to try
experiments of securing himself, and frustrating their desires: But the Lords
continuing their resolution, and knowing nothing was to be obtained but by
strong hand, assemble themselves with a great Army at Stamford, from whence
they marched toward the King, who was then at Oxford; sent him a Schedule of
their claimed liberties, with an Appendix of their absolute resolutions, in
case of his denial; this Tyrant having heard them read, with much passion
replies: Why do they not demand the Kingdom as well? and swore he would never
grant these liberties, whereby himself should be made a servant* The Barons
upon his Answer being (as Daniel says) as hasty as he was averse, resolve to
seize on his Castles, and Possessions; and repairing to London, being welcomed
by the Citizens, who had too long groaned under the same tyranny, they get a
great access of strength by new confederates, and renew their spirits and oaths
for the through prosecution of the war; the King seeing himself in a strait,
which by no ordinary strength he could evade, by gentle and teeming Messages
sent to the Barons, he obtained a Conference in a Meadow called Running-mead,
between Windsor and Sta^es, where armed multitudes came from all places, crying
nothing but Liberty, Liberty, so sweet was that tone to them then: After many
hard Conferences, the King seeing it no time to dally, and that they would not
trust him with any complemental expressions, whom they looked on as formerly
perjured, grants their desires; not only, says Speed, for Liberties specified
in Magna Charta and Charta Forrestae, but also for a kind of sway in the
Government, by five and twenty selected Peers, who were to be as a check over
the King, and his chief Justiciar, and all his Officers to whom any appeal
might be made in case of breach of any article or privilege confirmed by that
Charter; And now one would think the people were secure enough; but though they
seem now to have the livery, yet they had not the seisin; for presently the
King having got now credit by the largeness of his grants, gets liberty with
less suspicion to undo all; and in a short time (pretending these grants to be
acts of force) having got power, renounceth his engagement by them, and
afterward repeals them, and dispoiled all these of their lands and
possessions, who had any hand, or heart in procuring the former grants; and by
new, and additionall Laws made them more perfect slaves then ever they were
before, until at last he was poisoned by a Monk, instead of being deposed.

But though he be dead, yet the miseries of this Nation ended not with him; for
his son Henry the third; who succeeded him, though he could not at first follow
on his Fathers designs, being an Infant, yet at last did not only imitate, but
outstrip him, yet the English Nation, (who are much given to credulity, and apt
to be won by fair and plausible promises,) notwithstanding all the fathers
iniquity, embrace the son, having taken an oath of him to restore, and confirm
the liberties they propounded to his father, which he had often granted, and as
often broken; but for all his first oath, they were fain, not only to remember
him of it, by petitions, but oftentimes by arms and strength. And though there
was in this Kings Reign twenty one Parliaments called, and many great Subsidies
granted, in confirmation of their liberties, yet every Parliament was no sooner
dissolved, but the engagement ceased; a hint of two or three special
Parliaments, and their success will not be amiss to be set down in this place.

This King not being able to suppress the Barons and people by his own
strength, (they having gotten not only heart, but power) sends to foreign
Nations for aid, and entertains Poictovines, Italians, Almains, Provincioes to
subdue his own people, and set them in great places; which dangerous and
desperate design the Barons much resenting, raised their spirits, and engaged
them in opposition to his Government, and set them on with more courage to look
after their liberties; therefore they several times stand up against the
violence of Prerogative; but what through want of strength or caution they were
commonly disappointed; yet rather (if we may speak truly) from the
unfaithfulness of the King then any other defect, except it were their easiness
to believe Kings, when their Prerogative, and the peoples liberties came in
competition; for after they had many times got, or rather extorted many
promises, and confirmed them by oaths, (the best humane security) they were put
to new designs, through either the suspention, or breach of them, witness these
Instances; after many foiles* and tedious and various delusions by this King
(whose beams attracted most, dazzled others) the Barons, and people (who were
then unanimous through mutual oppressions) fall more close, and severe on their
principles, and will not endure either delays, or delusions, and therefore
effectually to redress their grievances, came very well armed to a Parliament
then holden at Oxford (intended rather for getting Subsidies, then removing
oppressions) in which Assembly they put the King to it, urge their former
complaints with more zeal and reason, and with an addition of a mighty Spirit,
demand the absolute confirmation of Magna Charta, and in a larger edition
(wherein are comprised those gallant privileges of the Commons of England,
which have yet been but kept by Ink, and Parchment) and not trusting the King,
got his son, Prince Edward, to Pryn.
seal it, with an addition of twenty four (some write twelve) Peers which
Fabian styles the douze Peers, not only to see these privileges truly
observed, but to be as joint Regents with the King; and all the Lords, and
Bishops in Parliament took a like Oath, to maintain these Articles inviolable;
yea, and all that would have any benefit of residence in the Kingdom, were
enjoined to take the same; But these were too strict bonds for such a Princes
will, he soon finding advantages (as he sought them) recals all, gets a
dispensation from the Pope for his forced Oath and to countenance his perjurie*
and acts in the old account; the Barons again stand up with the people stoutly
for the performance of the Articles of Oxford; and sometimes brought him into
straits; yea, fully* defeated him in many Mat. Paris p. 961 Dan. Hist. p. 179.
bloody battles, and regained the confirmation of the same laws, with security;
that all the Castles throughout England should be delivered to the keeping of
the Barons, that the provisions of Oxford be inviolably preserved, that all
strangers should be dismissed the Kingdom, but those which by general consent
should be thought fit to remain; this necessitous act though as it gave the
people some peace and hopes, so it gave the King time to consider of new
mediums, and therefore still to delay, and blind, he Assembles a new Parliament
at London, where having (by the sprinkling of Court water) won many Lords to
take his part, begins to surprise as many of the Barons as he could get, and
spoiled their Castles and Houses, that success and authority grows strong on
his side, and the Barons with some calm provisoes mediate a peace, insisting
only in general that the Articles of Oxford might be observed; But the King
relying on his strength, defies them as Traitors; which done, the peoples two
Generals, the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester, seeing no other means but to
put it to a day, supply their want of strength by their wit and diligence, and
carefully and artificially placing their battle (which was fought at the Town
of Lewis in Sussex) overthrew the Kings Army, took the King, the Prince, the
Earl of Cornwall, and his son Henry, the Earls of Arundel, Hereford, with many
other Lords, and Gentlemen, both English and Scottish.

And now having the King, and Prince, and most of the Nobles, and a new
confirmation of all, one would think the great Charter was out of danger,
either of blotting or razing; especially if we consider the solemnities
formerly used in the ratification of it, (as Daniel excellently relates it in
his history, p. 169.) The people knowing that no civil promises, or verbal
professions would hold in Kings raptured by Prerogative* and devoted to perjury
to maintain their tyranny, take a more Ecclesiastical and divine way of
obligation, swearing to excommunicate all that should be found infringers of
that Charter; when the people with the King, and all the great Nobility were
assembled with all the Prelates, and the chief Bishops in their reverent
ornaments (with burning Candles in their hands) to receive that dreadful
sentence; the King having one great Candle in his hand, gives it to a Prelate
that stood by, saying, it becomes not me being no Priest to hold this Candle,
my heart shall be a greater testimony; and withal laid his hand spread on his
breast all the while the sentence was pronouncing, which was Authoritato
omnipotentis Dei, etc. which done, he caused the Charter of King John his
Father to be read, and in the end having thrown away their Candles (which lay
smoking on the ground) they cried out, so let them that incur this sentence
be extinct and stinck in Hell; And the King with a loud voice said, As God
help, I will, as I am a man, a Christian, a Knight, a King Crowned and
Anointed, inviolably observe these things. Never were Laws says he (whose
words express the thing most emphatically) amongst men (except those holy
Commandments from the Mount) established with more Majesty of Ceremony, to
make them reverenced, and respected, then these were; they wanted but thunder,
and lightning from heaven, (which likewise if prayers could have effected they
would have had it) to make the sentence ghastly, and hideous to the breakers of
it; the greatest security that could be given was an Oath (the only chain on
earth besides love, to tie the conscience of a man, and humane society
together) which should it not hold us, all the frame of Government must needs
fall quite asunder; yet so (almost a miracle (though over common among our
Kings, says Master Prin out of Mat. Paris) the Parliament being thus dissolved
(by a sacred Mat. Paris, p. 8, 9.
and most solemn conclusion) the King presently studies how to infringe all the
premises, his Parasites telling him the Pope could soon absolve him for a sum
of money, which afterward the Pope did, and the King returned to his former
oppressive courses with more violence, and hardness; and taking advantage by
the division of the Barons, two Generals, the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester,
the latter of which joined with the young Prince Edward, and Sir Roger Mortimer
the Kings wicked Counselor, a new and potent Army is raised by them, against
the Earl of Leicester (who had the King prisoner) and those which kept constant
with him for the Peoples Liberties; and he with the rest of the Barons, are
overthrown; and immediately after a Parliament is called, and all these laws
and decrees made void; and that Parliament held at Oxford, wherein all these
Laws were first confirmed by him, called Insanum Parliamentum, the mad
Parliament; and all these Patents, Commissions or Instruments made to ratify
these Articles, were brought forth, and solemnly damned; and so bright and
resplendent did Prerogative break forth, that it was Proclaimed Treason in any
but to speak or mention any of these Grants with the least approbation; and
because the City of London had engaged with the Barons and People as a
principal part of the whole, he would needs have burnt the City, had not some
wise and potent Favorites interposed, and yet they could hardly dissuade him
from that barbarous and impolitick wickedness; But what he spared in their
houses, that he got out of their purses, and made up all his losses with a
thorough subjection of their persons, and suppression of their liberties. I
need relate no more of this King, nor make observations, the Reader will be
amazed at the repetition; he at least 20 times gave his promise for the
confirmation, and execution of these just decrees (contained in Magna Charta)
and as many times was perjured, notwithstanding all the solemnities, both
Civil, Moral, and Ecclesiastical, used in the acts of ratification; this may
learn us how to trust the most positive Engagements of Princes, which cross
their own interest, and what to think of that word and promise they call
Royal; this King reigned fifty six years, the longest of any King of England:
But we have had too much of the story of him, as he had too long a time to
rule, considering his temper, and design. Its well if we can be wary for the
future, and be more cautious then to trust the most promising and insinuating
Princes with our liberties, and privileges, which can be no longer expected to
be preserved by them, then they may serve as footstools to advance them in the
Throne of absolute Majesty, But no more of this King; never were there more
hard strivings and wrestlings between tyranny and liberty, with such bad
success to the people; I only conclude his reign with the exhortation of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 146. 3. O put not your confidence in Princes, surely men of
high degree are a lie.

King Henry is by this time laid in his grave, and one would think Magna Charta
buried with him; His Son Edward, who was his right hand in his wars against the
Barons, and the principal Agent in their ruin, succeeds him in the throne; and
instead of lessening goes on and makes an higher improvement of that royalty
which his Father left him; having in his own person got the victory over the
Peoples Libertyes in his Fathers time, and having won or worn out the
greatest of those which opposed, and being long experienced in the world, so
secured and advanced the Prerogative, that as one says, he seemed to be the
first conqueror after the Conqueror that got the domination of this State in so
absolute and eminent a manner, as by his government appears; He laid
unsupportable Taxes both on the Clergy and Laity, even unto Fiveteens and halfs
of their Estates* As for Tenths, that was comparatively accounted easy; the
Barons and People for a long time durst not move for removal of greivances,
until that the King (being always in wars in France, Flanders, Wales and
Scotland, and so needed continually vast sums of money) called a Parliament
wherein he demanded a great treasure of money from the People, that he might
give them somewhat in lieu of their expenses, confirmed the two great Charters
on the Petition of the Barons and People, (and so stopped their mouths) and
this he did as often as he had extraordinary occasions for money; But (like all
other royal promises) they were performed by leisure. Never was Royalty more
Majestic and glorious then in this Kings reign, and the people less able to
oppose; he was always so watchful and eager to enlarge his own power; I shall
end his reign also with what Daniel that impartial and witty Historian says
of him, He was more for the greatness of the Kingdom then the quiet of it; and
never King before or since ( except our last Charles) shed so much Christian
blood within this Isle of Britain, and was the cause of more in that following,
and not one grain of benefit procured unto the people by all their expenses on
him, which was but to make themselves more perfect slayes.

The next King was Edward the Second his Son, who though more vicious then the
Father, yet not more tyrannical; he gave more advantage to the people thorough
his lewd life and unmartiall nature, to seek the confirmation and establishment
of Magna Charta, and other good Laws which were utterly suppressed, and darkened
in his Fathers reign. This Prince gave himself over to all wicked courses, and
surrendered his Judgment, and the management of all affairs of State unto evil
and corrupt Counselors; especially to one Pierce Gaveston, who had both his
ear and heart, unto whom he was so much endeared, that he ventured the loss of
Kingdom, and all the hearts of his Subjects for his company, and preservation;
and though the Barons had by often Petitions, and earnest solicitations
prevailed with the King to banish him, yet he soon after sent for him home, and
laid him more nigh his bosom then before; on this the Barons raise an army
against the King; and send him word, that unless he would observe the late
Articles (which they had formerly by much* ado got him to sign in Parliament)
and put from him Pierce Gaveston, they would rise in Arms against him as a
perjured Prince; the King (whom they found, was apt to be terrified) yields
again to his banishment, with this clause, that if he were found again within
the Kingdom he should be condemned to death as an enemy of the State: All
places were now dangerous to Gaveston; both Ireland (where he formerly was
protected) and France also too hot for him; in this extremity, finding no
security any where else, he again adventures on England, and puts himself once
again into the Kings bosom (a Sanctuary which he thought would not be polluted
with blood) and there he is received with as great joy as ever man could be;
the Lords with more violence prosecute their suite to the King for delivering
up* or removing him once more; but to no purpose; they therefore set forwards
with an Army, say siege to the Castle wherein Gaveston was, took him, and
notwithstanding the Kings earnest solicitation for his life, they condemned
him to the block, and took off his head; this obstacle being removed out of the
way, the Lords having now the better end of the staff make advantages of it for
demanding the confirmation, and execution of all those Articles formerly
granted, threatening the King, that if he would not consent to it, they would
force him by a strong hand; with this message they had their swords also drawn,
and march toward London: A Parliament is called, where the King, after a
submission by the Lords to him, for that act done against Gaveston, contrary to
his consent, and will, grants the Articles and pardon to them. But the King
goes on his old way, adheres to wicked counsel (waving the grave advice of his
Parliament) and is ruled by the two Spencers, who acted with mighty strain of
injustice, which caused the Lords again to take up arms, and stand for their
Liberties, but are, through the revolt of some, and the treachery of others
overthrown at Burton upon Trent, and two and twenty Noblemen, the greatest
Peers in the Realm executed in several places for nothing but opposing his evil
Counselors* this was the first blood of Nobility that ever was shed in this
manner in England since William the first, which being so much, opened veins
for more to follow; and now the beam of power being turned, regality weighs
down all. But by degrees, through the continuation of his ill government,
whereby he daily lost the peoples hearts, the Lords get an Army, and take the
King prisoner, and by general consent in Parliament deposed him as a tyrant,
and elected his son Edward the third to succeed, and his son was crowned before
his eyes. Thus ended his reign, but not his life.

Poor England which had labored so long and successively under so many
tyrants, and had contested so long with Royalty for their dearly purchased
liberties, might now hopefully expect at least a dawning of Reformation,
especially when they had got so much power as to depose Authority; and began,
as it were, on a new account; and the truth is, affairs were now promising, and
distempers seemed to wear away with the former Governor; yet the condition of
the Kingdom, had but a new face on it, and grievances were rather not
aggravated or multiplied then any whit removed, and oppressions may be rather
said to be changed from one shoulder to another then abolished.

Prince Edward who succeeded, who was crowned in his fathers life, had
observance enough to remember his fate, and was much warned by it, both to
prevent and suppress insurrections, knowing by experience the full state of the
controversy, and therefore began his Government very fairly, and with much
applause; only to prevent factions, and sidings, he privately caused his
father, the deposed King to be cruelly murdered, and so sat more securely,
though with more guilt upon the Throne; his reign was fifty years, and odd
months, the longest next Hen. the third; he spent most of his time in the wars
of France to regain his titile to that Crown, which the poor Subject felt in
their estate and families, and it was a happiness (say some) that he was so
much abroad; for when ever he came home, as he wanted money to supply his
expenses, so the people got ground to urge their Privileges, and Magna Charta
was at least twelve times ratified in this Kings Reign, and so often broken;
yet because he goes under the name of the best Prince that reigned so long, and
so well, let the Reader take but an Instance or two concerning his engagements
to perform the grand Charter. This King in the first Parliament made the
fifteenth year of his reign, had granted the enacting of diverse wholesome and
seasonable Laws, which he willed and engaged unto for him and his heirs, that
they should be firmly kept, and remain inviolable Master Prin, the Parliaments
interest in the Militia, second part, p. 38. 39.
for ever, for the ratification of Magna Charta, and other good Laws formerly
enacted; and that all the Officers of State, as Chancellor, Treasurer, Barons
of the Exchequer, Judges, etc. should at that present in Parliament, and for
ever after, take a solemn oath before their admission to their Offices, to keep
and maintain the point of the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest,
etc. But no sooner was the Parliament dissolved, but the very same year he
publicly revoked these Statutes, pretending that they were contrary to the
Laws and Customs of the Realm, and to his Prerogative and Rights Royal, etc.
wherefore we are willing (says he) providently to revoke these things we have
so improvidently done; because (says he) mark the dissimulation of Princes
even in Parliaments) We never really consented to the making of such Statutes,
but as then it behoved Us, We dissembled in the Premises, by Protestations of
revocation, if indeed they should proceed to secure the dangers, which by
denying the same we feared to come, with many more such passages; and yet this
King is the Phoenix of our more ancient Monarchs; but the Reader may still
learn what the best of our Princes have been, and what weak assurances any
engagements from them are where power is wanting from them, and advantages
present to them.

Another instance of his actings we may take up from the success of his first
siege of Tourney in France; having laid on heavy and excessive taxes to
maintain that war, and the people seeing no fruits of all promises for
executing the Articles of Magna Charta, they refuse to pay any more, without
more faithful performance of his Vows, and solemn engagements to them, whereby
he wanting money was fain to quit the place, and return for England, full of
revengefull thoughts, and in much fury breaths out destruction to all the
refusers; But the Archbishop of Canterbury told him publicly, but plainly,
that he had oftentimes as well as his Father offered manifest violences to the
Liberties of the English Nation, comprehended in that grand Charter, and if he
expected Subsidies, from the people, he must more carefully maintain their
privileges so justly due. But the King vexed with such language, both storms
against the Archbishop, and as much as possibly he then could, sought the
ruin of all that had made any refusal of payment of these taxes, although he
had not in any manner performed his own promises. Yet I will end his reign,
because he has a name of a good King. (though as Speed says, by the General
vote of Historians, he committed many foul errors in his government) with a
good act he did at the fiftieth year of his age (which he kept as his Jubilee)
he called a Parliament, and there freely heard the grievances of the people,
and redressed many, especially a Petition of the Commons against the doublings
of Lawyers; he caused the pleas which were before in French to be made in
English; a necessary Law (says Speed) if it had been as carefully observed;
especially if he had ordered (says he) that the same should not have been
written in French, That the Subject might understand the Law, by which he holds
what he has, and is to know what he does. But all this is not for nothing; for
as he imparted grace unto his people (says the same Auther) for so all acts of
Justice are termed, when granted by Kings, so he took a care to replenish his
own purse by it, that the poor Commons obtain not any thing which they pay not
too dearly for.

Here ends the Life of the best reputed Prince; and yet you see wherein his
excellency lay; the best happiness the people had in his reign, was* that they
had more engagements for their liberties with more cost, and the remembrances
and sense of the goodness of them more fresh and sweet by the often repetition
of them; but for execution or addition to them, they were as far to seek as in
former times. And if it do possibly happen that in one Kings reign either
through the goodness of his nature, or rather want of advantages, there be an
intermission of oppressions, (for that is the utmost to be expected) yet the
next King will be sure to make it up, and if they give the people a little
breath, its but that they may sow for the next to reap, or as they do with men
on the rack, let them down, and give them cordials, and spiritfull liquors,
that they may be the longer and more sensibly tormented; which was made good in
the next Kings reign, viz. Richard the Second, who presently dashes and utterly
nips these blossoms that sprung out in the former Kings reign, devoting himself
to all uncivil and lewd courses, and to enable him the better unto it, lays
on sad and miserable taxes on the people without so much as a mention or hint
of their liberties, and as the parallel of Edward the second, both lived and
died; Its enough to decypher his reign by his end; for he was deposed by the
universal consent of the people in Parliament as a tyrannical, and cruel
Governor, and not a good word spoken of him to commend him in his Government,
and its pity to aggravate his misery after his death, and yet (as we say)
Seldom comes a better; when one is cut off, another like the Hidra's head
springs up in his place. Henry the fourth who overthrew him in battle, and was
made King in his stead (though by a wrong title) at first promised the new
modelling of Laws to the peoples ease, and did, as in a complement (rather to
secure his title, then out of affection to the people, or sense of his
relation) redress many grievances, which were more gross and less concerning
the Commonwealth; and as he did strive by these common acts to engage the
people to him, so (as one that had continual sense of guilt on him) he got the
deposed King to be barbarously murdered in the Castle of Pomfret, that no
competition might endanger his title by his life; He spent most of his reign
incontinuall wars about his title, and was often opposed as both a Tyrant and
Usurper; but he still got ground on both the liberties and laws formerly
granted; yet not so sensibly as in the former Kings raigns, that the people may
be said to have a little respite from the violence and height of Prerogative
by him; but they may thank the unjustness, and brittleness of his title, for
that he being more in fear of of loosing it, then out of love with the excess
of his ancestors. I shall only add one story to conclude this Kings reign,
which is universally reported by most of our Historians, worth observation,
because it has much of ingenuity in it, and because they were his dying words;
Being cast into an Apoplexy, and nigh his end, he caused his Crown to be
placed by him on his Pillow, least in the extremity of his sickness it might
have been delivered to some other, who had better right thereunto then he had;
But when his attendants, (through the violence of his distemper, supposed him
to be dead, the young Prince of Wales seized on his Crown, whereat the King
started up raising himself on his arms, demanded who it was that had so boldly
taken away the Crown? the Prince answered that it was he; the King fell back
into his bed, and fetching a deep sigh, and sending forth many a pensive groan,
replies thus; my son, what right I had to this Crown; and how I have enjoyed
it, God knows, and the world has seen; But the Prince, (ambitious enough of a
Diadem) answered him thus; Comfort your self in God (good Father); the Crown
you have; and if you die, I will have it and keep it with my Sword as you have
done; and so he did soon after, maintaining his Fathers injustice by his own.

And now comes up his Son Henry the Fifth as the next heir, who though while a
Prince was given to many wicked practices, yet when a King, became moderate,
and has better commendation then most of his Ancestors; the people had two
advantages and comforts by him; first, that his reign was short, and that he
was much employed in the war with France for regaining a title to that Crown,
which he accomplished, and so they were free of Civil wars; though they had
still heavy taxes, yet they thought it better to pay for maintaining war
abroad then at home; and truly, the people thought themselves very happy in
this Kings reign, (though their privileges were laid asleep) that they had a
little breathing time from Domestic and Civil wars, and had hopes to regain by
degrees a reviving of their Spirits.

But the next King, Henry the sixth, makes up what was wanting of Tyranny and
Oppression in his fathers reign. He was Crowned King about the eighth or ninth
month of his age, and so had not present oppertunity to show his royalty.
Until he came to age, the Kingdom was well governed by his three Uncles,
Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, John Duke of Bedford, Thomas Duke of Excester, who
by their wisdom and justice, kept up the flourishing estate of the English
Nation; but when his years of nonage were expired, and he came to weld the
Scepter with his own hands, (what as some favorably think out of weakness, for
he was no Solomon) all things went presently out of order, and Prerogative
breaks forth beyond bounds; which gave occasion to Edward Duke of York to try
conclusions for his title against the House of Lancaster, and making use of the
discontents of the people through his evil Government, opposed him, and
afterward deposed him, and reigned in his stead by the name of Edward the
Fourth, and so by Conquest he got the title to run through the House of York,
having cut it off by his Sword from the house of Lancaster; notwithstanding
actual possession of three descents, many overtures of war were yet between
them; for Henry was not yet dead, though for the present outed; but as a dying
man strove for life, but being quite overthrown was imprisoned, and afterward
murdered to secure the Title; there was in these two Kings reign but merely
for a title fought ten bloody Battles, besides all lesser skirmishes, wherein
many thousands of Lords, Gentlemen, and Commons were slain, and yet not one jot
of advantage gotten by it for the peoples liberties; It being the misery and
folly of the people to venture all they have, to set up those over them who
afterward prove most tyranni call, and to sow seeds of future misery, by
spilling their bloods for a usurped title.

In this Kings reign, as in the former, the whole land was miserably rent by
unnatural divisions against his title, and government; and though neither or
these two had a just title (if we will begin from the root) yet all the blood
of the Nation is thought too little to be spilt to maintain their pretenses;
yet we may not reckon this King among the worst, had it not fallen out that his
title must be kept up with expense of so much blood and ruin of the English
Nation; yet in his last five years, he laid on such extraordinary taxes, and
changed the form of Laws, that he lost the love of all his Subjects.

For Edward the Fifth his Son, who succeeded him in title, we need but mention
him, for he had but the name of a King (being an Infant) and his reign may well
be called an Inter-regnum, for ere he came to know what government was, he was
cruelly murdered with his Infant Brother, by his Uncle Rich. Duke of
Gloucester, who reigned both for him, and afterward for himself by the name of
Richard the Third, a bloody and cruel man, rather a monster then a Prince, his
name stincks in the English dialect; the shortness of his reign was the
happiness of the people; for after three years usurpation, he was slain in the
field by the Earl of Richmond, who by his valor, more then his Title got the
Crown by the name of Henry the Seventh; this was the best act that was done by
him, in easing the Kingdom of such a viper. In his reign (who is the first root
of our Kings since) the people had more hopes then benefits, and were rejoiced
and made happy more by expectations, then enjoyments of any real privilege,
or liberty. For though he took all the ways to secure his title by his marriage
with the Lady Elizabeth daughter to Edward the Fourth, yet many stratagems were
laid to disturb his peace, which put him on acts of policy, and diligence,
(which he excellently demonstrated) to free and extricate himself out of
dangers and designs; many sad divisions were still in the Kingdom, all men were
not pleased either with his title or government, and that they might but
disturb him, or hazard his Crown, they made Stage Kings, dressed up pretty lads
in Princely robes, and carried them up and down the Kingdom as puppets for the
people to gaze one, and admire; all this while King Henry had not time to
advance his prerogative, while he was but securing his Title; but after he had
done that, and now began to look on himself as free from either foreign or
home competitors, and the coast of State seeming clear from all thickning
weather, he thinks of redeeming Sir Francis Bacon.
what he had lost by factions, and imployes his wit for bringing down the
height of the English Nation, and plucking down their courage, and was
especially (says one) jealous over his Nobility, as remembering how himself was
set up; and how much more did this humor increase in him after he had
conflicted with such idols and counterfeits as Lambert Simnel and Perkin
Warbeck? the strangeness of which dangers made him think nothing safe; and
thinking that the riches of the English occasioned their rebellions, he took a
course to empty their Coffers into his; and the plot whereby he meant to effect
it was by taking the advantage of the breach of penal Laws, which he both
found, and made for that purpose; his Instruments which for this work were
picked, and qualified sufficiently, were Sir Richard Empson, and Edmund Dudley,
men learned in the Law, and of desperate and subtle heads, and forward in
executing the Kings commands; these two attended by troops of base Informers,
Promoters, Catchpoles, Cheaters, Knights of the Post etc. went up and down the
Kingdom, cruelly polled and taxed all sorts of people, and prosecute in every
Shire the most deserving and generous men, that the Kingdom in a little time
was more beggard, then by most of the former Civil wars; and all this done by
the Kings special command, and countenance, that we may see what was the
reason he began not sooner to play Rex; want of opportunity, and fear of
loosing his Crown while he was advancing it; but the latter end of his reign
was too soon, and too long for such actings. This King ends his reign with the
greatest acts of tyranny; he made himself a rich King by beggaring his
Subjects; after he had freed his own person out of danger* he imploys all his
wits to enslave the English; the fruits both of his title and tyranny we have
felt ever sense in these that followed him.

His son Henry the eighth of that name, succeeds him; in his first beginnings
he seemed to be tenderly affected to the Commonwealth, and redressed many
grievances, especially those which were laid on by his father, and executed by
Empson and Dudley, doing Justice on them for their cruelty and oppression. But
those affections were too good, and too violent to last long; the sound of
Drums and Trumpets soon quasht them, and many encroachments grew on the peoples
Liberties; many tempestuous storms and controversies there were in this Kings
reign; but they were more Ecclesiastical then Civil, and so more dangerous and
strong. In a word, he was accounted a better Soldier then a Governor, and more
fit for a General then a King to govern by just and equal Laws; the best act he
did, was the discovery of the wickedness of the Clergy, and casting off the
Popes Supremacy, which yet he took to himself, and annexed it to his own Crown;
as the most of his reign was full of controversies and tempests, so all affairs
were managed in a ranting and turbulent manner, not with that gravity and
soberness as becomes civil and prudentiall transactions; he was very
lascivious, and delighted Martin.
much in variety, and changes of Laws, as wives; he oftentimes much pleased
himself to be in the company, and was overfamiliar with swaggering and loose
fellows; and the people ever and anon found the power of his Prerogative at
home, as his enemies did of his Sword abroad. Edward the sixth his only son
succeeds him, a Prince that was too good to live long, the Phoenix of English
Kings, had he had time to prosecute his intentions and mature his genius; but
the Sun in him did shine too bright in the morning; God gave England only the
representation of a good King, but would not in judgment let us be blessed long
with him; Religion began to revive, Liberty to bud forth, the people to peep
out of their graves of slavery and bondage, and to have their blood fresh and
blushing in their cheeks; but all is presently blasted by his death, and the
people (who have seldom more then hopes for their comforts) are now fainting
for fear; England is benighted; and hung with black; Queen Mary that Alecto,
and fury of women succeeds; and now both souls and bodies of the people are
enslaved, and nothing but bone fires made of the flesh and bones of the best
Christians: But its too much to name her in the English tongue; Queen Elizabeth
succeedes her, who being prepared for the Crown by suffering, came in a most
seasonable time, both for her self and the people, who were made fuel for the
flames of her sisters devotion.

And now England begins to flourish again, and to recover its strength; many
inlargements were granted, both to the consciences, and estates of the people;
yet if we speak impartially, we were kept further off Rome, then royalty; yet
doubtless she may be Chronicled for the best Princess, and her reign the most
even, and best managed, with more fruits to the people then any of the former
Kings, especially if we consider how long she governed this Nation; I end her
reign with this Character, That she was the best Queen that ever England had,
and the glory of her Sex to all Ages.

The English Line is now ended; we must go into Scotland to seek for a King,
because a daughter of Henry the seventh was married to James the fourth, King
of Scotland; but I will not question his title.

King James the sixth of Scotland, and first of England, succeeded on the
English Throne; A Prince that had many advantages to set up Prerogative, which
he improved; he was too timorous to act, but most subtle in Council and
designs, and no King did more insensibly and closely undermine the Liberties of
England then himself; he gave us cause to remember from whence he came; but his
peaceable reign was the rail to his design, and did choke suspicion; we were
brought by him very nigh Rome and Spain, and yet knew it not; he had an
inveterate hatred against Puritans, as he had a fear of Papists, and made more
of Bishops then ordinary by remembrance of the Scots Presbytery; He had as much
of Royalty in his Eye as any Prince could have, but had not so much courage to
prosecute it; the Puritan always lay in his Spleen, the Papist on his Lungs,
that he durst not, that he could not breath so clearly and strongly against
them; but the Bishops lay in his heart. I will not rip up his personal failings
after his death; he was the most profane King for oaths and blasphemies that
England had besides, etc. He now grows old* and was judged only fit to lay the
Plot, but not to execute it; the design being now ripe, and his person and life
the only obstacle and Remora to the next Instrument, he is conveyed away
suddenly into another world, as his son Henry was, because thought unsuteable
to the Plot, it being too long to wait, until Nature and Distemper had done
the deed.

We are now come to our last Charles (who is like to end both that race and its
tyranny) the perfect Idea of all the rest, and the most zealous prosecutor of
the designs of all his ancestors, who, if Divine Providence had not
miraculously prevented, had accomplished the utmost of their intentions, and
for ever darkened the glory of the English Sun; so much I must say of him, that
he got more wisdom by action, then could possibly be expected by his nature;
experience that teaches fools, made him wise; he endeavored to act what
others designed; he dissembled as long as he could, and used all parties to the
utmost; But his zeal and hardiness brought him to his death. He needed no
physic for his body, had he remembered his soul. But what need I mention him?
he is the last of English Monarchs, and the most absolute monument of Monarchy,
and example of tyranny and injustice that ever was known in England; he would
have been what other Kings are, and endeavored to attain what others would be;
he lived an enemy to the Commonwealth, and died a martyr to Prerogative.

Thus you have seen a faithful representation of the Norman race, under which
we have groaned for about six hundred years; the first Title made only by the
Invasion and Conquest of a Stranger and Bastard, continued by usurpation and
tyranny, that take away but two or three persons out of the list (and yet these
bad enough if we consider all things) and all this while England neither had a
right heir, or good King to govern it; and yet by delusion and deceit we must
be bound to maintain that Title as Sacred and Divine, which in the beginning
was extorted and usurping* as if gray hairs could add reverence to injustice.
England has now an advantage more then all its Ancestors, of freeing it self
from this successive slavery, and interrupting that bloody line, and after an
apprentiship to bondage for so many hundred years, Providence has given us our
own choice; If we take it we are made; if not, the old judgment of God lies on
us for our stupidity, and blindness. For my part, as I do not give much to that
Monkish Prophecy from Henry the Seventh times; Mars, Puer, Alecto, Virgo,
Vulpes, Leo, Nullus (yet I wonder how the Devil could foresee so far off, and
must needs say that it has yet been literally fulfilled* both in the
Characters of the persons, and the issue) yet I must so far give way to the
power of divine actings on my faith, as to think that either we shall never
have a King more, or else we shall have one sent of God in wrath, as the
Israelites had, seeing we are not contented that way which God has from Heaven
led us to.

As for the Title of this Prince (who would fain be accounted the right heir)
Let us but remember from whence he had it, and how its now tainted; were it
never so just, the Treason of the Father has cut off the Son; and how unwise
an act, besides all other considerations, will it be for England to set up the
Son to propagate both his Fathers design, and death. We may prophecy soon what
a Governor he is like to be which has both sucked in his Fathers principles,
and his Mothers milk; who has been bred up under the wings of Popery and
Episcopacy, and doubtless sucked both breasts; one who was engaged from the
beginning in the last war against this Parliament, who has the same
Counselors his Father had, to remember him both of the design, and the best
ways of effecting it; one who has never yet given any testimony of
hopefullness to this Nation; who was in Arms when a Subject, against the
Libertyes which England and Scotland spilt much blood for to maintain; one who
has both his Fathers and his own scores to clear, and is sain to make use of
all Medium's, though never so contrary, attended with all the crew of
Malignants of three Nations; who is so relatively and personally engaged, that
both old and new reckonings are expected to be paid only by him. To his Father
He is endebted for His Crown, and bound to pay His Debts, both Ecclesiastical
and Civil (which will amount to no small sum); To the Papists He is engaged
for their old affections, and hopes of new, besides the obligation of duty to
his Mother, and freeing her from her Monastry and Hermitage. To the Prince of
Orange he owes more then his ransom, besides the States courtesies; to Ireland
he is in more arrears then his Kingdom of Scotland will be able to pay, and to
Scotland for his entertainment and enstalment more then England (for present or
in many years) can repay without a morgage, or community of lands, and
liberties, besides what he owes England for helping his Father to make the
Parliament spend so many millions of treasure, besides blood (which would have
weighed down all expenses besides) and helping as a prime Agent the utter
destruction of England; all which must be reckoned for with much seriousness;
and if men have so much charity and generousness to forgive all, yet we have a
reckoning with heaven to be discharged, which debt is yet unpaid (without we
think the Fathers blood be sufficient satisfaction to divine Justice); and if
that death should be a satisfaction for himself, yet not for his Son, who
joined with him, and now continues the same fault, and guilt, and intends to
follow on with more violence and intention then ever. Can we think (and retain
our memories and reasons) that Charles the Second can forget Charles the First?
that custom and education can easily be altered? that the true and real
engagers with him and his Father, shall be razed out of his heart, or that he
can heartily love his opposers, but as he may make use them: or that when some
Banks and Rocks are out of the way, the waters and floods of Royalty will not
run in its wonted Channel? will Episcopacy dye in England, when Kingship is set
up? Can reason think or dream, that Majesty will not eat out sincerity? or that
Presbytery can flourish in that state where Prerogative is the ascendant? or is
that person fit to be the medium of peace, and the glory of this Nation, who
was the conjunct instrument of the war, and the survivor both of the war and
peace? a person that durst not stay in his own Nation to plead his right,
because of his guilt, whose youth and wilfulness is most unapt for the settling
the storms and tempests of a distracted Nation. But no more until we feel the
misery of such an attempt; It was said of Tiberius Caesar in a Satyricall
expression, yet it proved true, Regnabit sanguine multo
Ad regnum quisquis venit ab exilio, Suet. lib: 3. c. 59.

Who first exiled is after Crowned,
His reign with blood will much abound.


When this poor Nation (after all neglects of providence) has spent its blood
and treasure to set up this Prince in the Throne, (which it may be they shall
never effect) yet at the last they must stand to his courtesy for all their
Liberties, which they can never expect, and make him a Monarch. The patience
and long suffering of God has permitted usurpation and tyranny in England this
long time for the hardness of our hearts, and sottishness of our natures, and
it may be, may lengthen it out to the utmost, which will be a misery with a
witness, and yet a just punishment of God on those who were born free, but will
sell away their inheritances for nothing to a stranger. Did ever King since the
world began (seting aside some who were Priests and Prophets also) naturally,
and ingenuously, with a royal affection devote himself to the propagating of
the pure and real liberties of the people? Let him be shown forth as a
miracle; but that ever any one that has been all his days, both in the
Fathers time, and his own engaged in wars against the Liberties of the people,
(solemnly proclaimed in Parliament) and to set up Prerogative, either intended
or managed his reign that way (how ever he was brought into his Government) I
durst affirm to be a Paradox, and the utmost contradiction; I am sure its as
impossible to be fouud in England as the Philosophers Stone among the
Peripatecicks. But a word more to the Title, between the now present Power, and
this Charles; what reason is there, and equity, that the Parliament of England
(take them in what qualification you will (following to the utmost the first
principles for the liberty of the people) should not be esteemed as just heirs,
and their Parliamentary successors as this young Confident? shall William the
Norman, (only having a better Sword) a stranger, one who by nature was never
born heir of any thing, create himself a title to Enland, and a succession for
many score of years, merely on that account? and shall every one after him
break the line as they please, and take their opportunities to make themselves
roots of Kings, though springing in the Wilderness? Shall Henry the Seventh
(the Father of us all) who was little less then a Bastard, being the son of an
illegitimate son of John a Gaunt, a forraigner, and private man, by fortune and
power give himself a title to this Crown, and all our Kings since acknowledging
Right by that Root? Must those Pretenses be Sacred which have only the
Ordination of a more keen and glittering sword? and a confirmation by Custom
be thus Divine? and shall not the Parliament of England (clothed with the
Authority of all the People, and carrying all the Libertyes of England with
them) backed with the power of a faithful Army, be thought (in the utmost
Criticisme of reason) to have as much title to propagate their Success for our
freedoms, as they have had to convey both their usurpation and tyranny? that a
private claym by a better Sword should be jure Divino; and a public Title
both by reason, success, and providence of a solemn Assembly, who have been
many years opposing the former oppressions, and now have gained it, should not
be accounted valid, nor of equal right with a successive illegal claim? Let
all the world be judge (who consider the premises) and let the violentest
reason unroyalis'd speak its utmost. It is high time now to end that line that
was never either well begun, or directly continued; Charles the Father is gone
to his own place, and so is Charles the Son likewise, he being in his own proper
Nation, Scotland; Let us keep him there if we be wise, and intend to be happy,
and let England disdain to be under the domination any more of any foreign
power for the future; and seeing we have conquered the Conqueror, and got the
possession of the true English title, by justice, and gallantry; Let us not
lose it again, by any pretense of a particular, and debauched person.

FINIS.

