ENNEADES ARITHMETICAE THE NUMBERING NINES. OR, PYTHAGORAS His TABLE Extended to
All Whole Numbers under 10000. AND The Numbering RODS Of the Right Honorable
JOHN LORD NEPEER, Enlarged With 9999 Fixed Columns or Rods, of Single, Double,
Triple and Quadruple Figures, and With a New Sort of Double and Moveable Rods,
for the much more sure, plain and Easy performance of Multiplication,
Division, and Extraction of Roots.

The Whole being very Useful for most Persons, of whatsoever Calling and
Employment, in all Arts and Sciences.

All having frequent Occasions of Accounts, Numbering, Measuring, Surveying,
Gauging, Weighing, Demonstrating, etc. The Devine Wisdom having from the
Beginning Disposed all things in Measure, Number and Weight, Sap. 11. 21

LONDON. Printed for Joseph Moxon, at the Sign of Atlas in Ludgate Street.
Where also these Numbering Rods, (c^^monly Called Napiers Bones) are made and
Sold. 1684.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THe End and Use of the Ensuing Table will be the better understood, if
something in Brief, by way of Preface, be premised concerning these Three
Points. First, the Table of Pythagoras; Secondly, the Extensions of the same;
and Thirdly, the Numbering Rods. Wherefore be pleased to peruse the following
Preamble concerning the said Points; The Reading whereof will not Cost thee
much above an Hour or Two. But First, vouchsafe to hear, what is meant by the
New Title of Enneades Arithmeticae, or Numbering Nines.

The whole following Table containing Gradually all the whole Numbers from 1.
to 9999* Inclusive, Viz. 9. of One single Figure, 90 of Two Figures; 900 of
Three Figures; And 9000 of four Figures: Again, every one of the said whole
Numbers (multiplied severally by all the 9 Unites, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.)
making so many Columns, as there are Capital Numbers, to wit, 9999. each
Column, consisting of 9 distinct Numbers, and these 9 Numbers being the
products of 9 distinct Units, I think we may with good Reason call the said
Columns (yea and the Numbering Rods also; For in effect they are the same thing)
by the Name of Enneades Arithmeticae, that is, the numbering Nines, or more
expressively, the numbering Ninities. For the Greek word nnea being a Nown
Substantive, signifies properly the Number of nine in abstracto, which may as
well be called a Ninitie, as na signifying the Number of One in abstracto, is
interpreted, Unity, and (...) signifying the Number of Three in abstracto, is
Translated Trinity. But though there be but Nine Cells expressed in every Rod,
yet one other Negative Cell of Ciphers is ever to be understood, which if you
please, may be sufficiently insinuated by putting so many Points over the
Vertical Cell, as there are Figures in the Vertical; see Figure 10. whose
Vertical is 1 2 3 4 and may be pointed, as you see here, to insinuate a
Supposed Cell of Ciphers.

Concerning the Table of PYTHAGORAS.
THE known Arithmetical Table, invented by Pythagoras, (such as you see
expressed in Figure 1.) is not only an easy and sure Rule to multiply and
divide by, but is also those very Operations themselves, Multiplication and
Division, done to your Hands, and known by inspection, comprehending three
distinct Numbers, proper to them both, viz. Multiplicand, Multiplier and
Product, proper to Multiplication, Dividend, Divisor and Quotient, proper to
Division. For if you take any one of the Numbers, Seated in their several Cells
between A and B. for a multiplicand; for example 8. and another Number of those
that are Seated in their several Cells between A and C for a multiplier, for
example 7. in the Angle of their Concurse. you will find the Number 56. the
just Product of 8 multiplied by 7. Again, the said Product, 56. is also a
Dividend, whose Divisor is 8 in the highest Cell, above the Dividend and
Quotient (...) 7 in the 7th. Lateral Cell, over against the Dividend, the
better to distinguish the 9 Units, Figures, Numbers and Cells Seated between A
and B* from the like Seated between A and C. call the first Capital Units,
Figures, Numbers, Cells, as being placed in the Head of the Table: but the two
Lying between A and C call Lateral, as occupying the side of the Table on the
left Hand.

Every Capital number in the Pythagorean Table has under it 8 other numbers
lodged in 8 several quadrats or Cells, as you may see in Figure 1. all which 9
numbers make a kind of a little straight Column, parallel to the side A C or B
D. The Columns are 9 answerable to the 9 Units or Capital Numbers in the Head
of the Table. But observe also, that there are other 9 Transverse Columns,
parallel to the side A B. or C D. which cross the former at Right Angels, and
meet one another in a common Cell, ever containing a perfect Qu^drat Number,
whose Root appears in the Heads of the two Meeting Columns: For Example, the
Column of 8 Capital meets with the Transverse Col. of 8 Lateral in the Cell of
64. a square Number. So 9 Capital Meets with 9 Lateral in the Cell of 81. a
square Number, etc. But what is worthy of Observation, these two different
sorts of Columns, Capital and Transverse, though most cross one to another, do
most punctually agree in all their Numbers, without any difference, as is
manifest to the Eye.

There are yet many things more, very Observable in the Pythagorean Table. The
first is that not only the 9 Units, are multiplicand and Divisors in it, but
Tens, Hundreds, Thousands, 10000ds, 100000. 1000000* 10000000 and 100000000. in
great variety, and all actually and orderly Tabulated, showing at the same
time, their true Product and Dividends, with multiplyers, Divisors, and
Quotients. As for Tens you see 12 Tabuated on the 1. and 2 Col. Then 23. 34.
45. 56 67. 78. 89. each number Tabulated on two Contiguous Columns. As for
Hundreds, you see 123. Tabulated on the first 3 Col. Then 234 345. 456. etc. As
for Thousands, you have 1234. Tabulated on the four first Col. Then 2345. 3456.
4567. etc. and so of ^he rest, till you come to 123456789. a multiplicand or
Divisor of all the Capital Units, of the Table, whose multiplyer is one (or
more, as you please) of the Lateral Units, and the Product is the Transverse
Column of that Unit, which you choose for multiplyer to be counted from the
Right Hand to the left. For example, if you multiply 123 456789 by 2. the
product will be the second transverse col. gathered from the right hand to the
left, viz. 246 913578. If you multiply it by 9. the product will be the 9th.
transverse column, viz. 1111 111101*

The second thing very observable is, that if you turn Pythagoras his Table in
such manner, that all the Numbers remain unchanged in their cells, and yet the
Figures 9. 8. 7. 6. 5. 4. 3. 2. 1. ^ying between C* and A. become Vertical,
which before were Lateral, and 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. lying between A. and
B. become Lateral, which before were Vertical, you may find another great
Variety of Multipliers, Divisors, Products, Dividends and Quotients, and of
greater Numbers than before, all differing from the former, and all Tabulated
on contiguous columns. As for tens, you see 98 Tabulated on the two last
transverse columns, then 87. 76. 65 etc. As for Hundreds, you have 987 876.
765. etc. And so for the rest, till you come to 987654321 a Multiplicand or
Divisor made of all the Lateral unites from C. to A. which Number multiplied by
2. will have for product 1975 308642. to be found in the second Capital Column,
and gathered thence from the right Hand to the left. If you multiply it by 9.
the capital Column of 9 will show the product 8888 888889.

The third observable thing is, That whatsoever under-cell of any Column, has
more figures or places in it, than are in the capital cell of that Column, then
infallibly the Figure which is outmost on the left side of that under-cel; is
to be added to the next Figure of another Column, if another Column be
Tabulated by it on the left Hand. This Addition may be called Collateral,
because it adds together two Figures on the sides of two Neigbouring Columns,
and makes but one Number of them both. If the two Figures added should make 10.
then put down a cipher, and carry one to the next Number on the left Hand: If
they make more then 10, put down the surplus and carry one. Take this example
of Collateral Addition. If you Tabulate 12. with two Rods or Columns, viz. the
column of 1 and the column of 2. in the 2d. Cell of both Rods together, is 24.
in the 3d. Cell is 36. in the 4th. Cell is 48. but in the 5th. Cell is 510.
which make not five Hundred and 10. but 60 only, because 1 and 5 (the
Neighboring Figures of 2 Columns) are to be added into one number 6, by reason
that the 5th. Cell of the Column 2 has 10. in it, a Figure more than in the
Capital of the Column two. This Rule then is Universal, whatsoever undercell of
any column has more Figures in it than are in the capital number of that
column, there must be collateral Addition, if any other column be Tabulated on
the Left Hand with it. Note that this Rule holds good, not only in columns of
single Units, but of Tens, 100ds. 1000ds. etc.

The 4th. Observable thing is, and of chief moment, that all and every column,
Ennead, or Rod (Synomical words in the present matter) not only of Pythag. his
Table, but of all following Tables to 9999 and much more, is singularly useful
both in Division and multiplication though the Column be never so little
(except the Column of 1 the first Unit, which in Rigor neither devides nor
multiplys any Number) and the Dividend and multiplyer never so great. For in
Division it performs the work, or gives the Quotient, by mere Substraction of
its own Numbers out of the Dividend: and in multiplication it gives the
Product, by setting down in due order its own numbers, and afterward adding
them into one Sum. For example, take the Column 25 and divide by it 7896525 the
Quotient will be 315861. and the work ended will appear as underneath ^
where note that the Numbers 75. 25. 125. 200. 150. 25. all marked with this
mark-are taken out of the cells of the column 25. to be subtracted out of the
partial Dividends: 75. is taken out of the third cell, and gives you 3. to
beset in the Quotient; 25 is taken out of the 1 cell, and gives one for the
Quotient, and so of the rest, the Number showing its cell, and the cell the
Quotient. Again, take the column 25. for a Multiplicand. and ^ultiply it by
315861. the product will be 7896525, which before was the Dividend. The
Operation ended, will appear, as underneath at ^
, Where note, that the Numbers 25. 150. 200. ^ 25. 25. and 75. are all taken
out of the cells of the column 25. to be placed as you see, and added into one
sum for product of Multiplication. Here also you may observe, that the
self-same cells or Numbers are added together in Multiplication, which were
subtracted in Division, only their Order inverted: what was first subtracted
in Division, is last taken and added in Multiplication, which always happens
when the Divisor and Quoient become Multiplicand and Multiplier and ^eproduce
the Dividend as Product of Multilication.

The fifth thing observeable is, That every ^nnead or column, be it never so
little or great, that is, of one, or more, or many Figures in its Capital Cell)
by multiplying its Capital Number with 45. will produce a sum equal to all the
Figures, as they stand in that col. added into one sum. For example, take the
col. of 6. and multiply 61. by 45. the product will be 2745. which is just the
sum of all the column added together, as appears in the margent 61 122 183 244
305 366 427 488 549 2745
. By this means you may exam^ne any col. whether it be right or wrong.

Add unto the former or fifth Observation another, not much unlike, to be seen ^
in this little Table of Roots, squares and cubes, or rather of the ending
Figures or Units of all Roots, Squares and Cubes whatsoever; where you see the
sum of each column by Addition, to be severally 45. 1R sq. cub. 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 4
8 3 9 7 4 6 4 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 9 3 8 4 2 9 1 9 45 45 45 The first Column is of the
first ten Roots, from 0 to 9 inclusive, but all following Roots have the same
ending Figures, and in the same order, as in the first column. The second
Column is of the first ten ending Figures of Squares; the first ten Squares,
and all the following Squares have the same ending Figures, and in the same
Order as in the second column. The third Column is of the first ten ending
Figures of the first ten Cubes, and all the following Cubes have the same
ending Figures, and in the same order as in the third column. By the ending
Figure of any Root, you may know the ending figure both of the square and cube
by this Table: in which the square and cube stand right over against the Roots.
Hence may you know, whether a Table of Roots, squares and cubes be well made or
no: for if any ten ending Roots, or Squares, or Cubes lying next one under
another do not make the sum 45, or that the squares and cubes do not answer the
roots, as in this Table, there must necessarily be an Error committed.

The 6th. thing very remarkable, and indeed admirable is, that multiplication
and Division being two very distinct and different Operations, yet they so
inseparably and essentially accompany one another, that the one, for example,
Multiplication can never be wrought or Finished by its proper Rules, but that
Division at the same time shall be given you without working by any Rules of
Division: yea, when the Operator did neither intend Division, nor so much as
think of it. That they are two different Operations, it is clear. For

1. Multiplication, by two Numbers given (multiplicand and multiplier) seeks a
third, Viz, the Factum or Product: But Division by two Numbers given, different
from those of Multiplication, (Divisor and Dividend) seeks a third, viz. the
Quotient, different from the product of multiplication.

2. Multiplication begins its work with the least figure, and Ends it with the
greatest: but Division quite contrary, begins with the greatest and Ends with
the least.

3. Multiplication requires Addition only, without Substraction: But Division
requires Substraction only, without Addition. Notwithstanding these differences
of the two Operations, it is impossible to work a Multiplication but a Division
will be at the same instant given you, without working or dividing. So is it
also impossible to work a Division but a Multiplication shall be given you
without working or multiplying. And the reason is manifest, because the self
same three Numbers which constitute the Essence of Multiplication constitute
also the Essence of Division, though under different denominations. The three
Numbers in Multiplication are called Multiplicand, Multiplyer and Product. In
Division, Divisor, Quotient and Dividend. And observe, that by how much a
Multiplcand exceeds or comes short of his Multiplyer, by so much the Divisor
will exceed or come short of his Quotient. The Product of Multiplication is
ever equal to the Dividend in Division. See the following example.

Multiplication wrought Division Given Multiplicand 144 Divisor 144 Multiplier
12 Quotient 12 Product 1728 Dividend 2728 Division wrought Multiplication Give^
Divisor 7324 Multiplicand 7324 Dividend 4789896 Product 4789896 Quotient 654
Multiplier 654

Observe, that when in Multiplication the less Number is made the Muitiplicand,
and the greater the Multiplier; Then in Division given, the Divisor is the less
Number, and the Quotient the greater. Example.

Multiplicand 12 Divisor 12 Multiplier 144 Quotient 144 Product 1728 Dividend
1728

The 7th. thing observable is, That the third, fourth and fifth Cell of every
Ennead (whether it has one, or more or many Figures in its Vertical, and
those either pure integers or mixed with Fractions) contain three different
Numbers, which are exact Roots of three exact Square Numbers, the two less
being exactly equal to the greatest, according to the 47. Prop. l. 1. Euclides,
and the Sides or Roots making the perfectest sort of right angle triangles,
keeping proportion one to another, as 3, 4 and 5. and having constantly these
Angles proxime 90. 53. 8. and 36. 52. For example, take the Rod of 4. whose
third, four^^ and fifth Cells contain these three Numbers 1^* 16. and 20. the
sides of a right Angle triangle^ and true Roots of these three square Numbers
14^ 256 and 400. Now the two less squares (...) added together, make exactly
400. the greate^^ square of the greatest root. Other right ang. Triang. that
have not the said proportion of Sides, and aforesaid Angles, must necessarily
have one o^ more defective Roots for their Sides, which will either come short
or overshoot the truth, when we endeavor to square the unsquareable Numbers.

The eighth Point observable is, that though some Columns or Enneads refuse all
Collateral Addition, (because they have no more Figures in the 8. under cells,
than in the Vertical) yet others far more in Number require it. For in the
whole following Table of Columns, from 1. to 9999. there are only 127. that
refuse collat. addition whereas 9872 require it, in one or more of their under
cells. In the single Columns of the 9 Units, only the first or column of 1.
refuses Collat. Add. In the double columns of Tens, only the two first, viz.
column 10 and 11. In the triple columns of Hundreds, only the twelve first,
that is, all from column 100 to 111 inclusive. In the Quadruple columns of
Thousands, only the first 112 Columns, that is, all from column 1000 to Col.
1111 inclusive; All which 127 Columns or bones are void of all collat. add. And
therefore all the 8 Under cells in them are marked with Stars, as Signs of
non-addition. Note, that no Vertical cells have any collat add. nor stars
before them. Note also, that no Ennead, be it never so great, or have many
Figures in the Vertical cell, can have any collat. add. in any one Under cell,
if the two first Figures of the Vertical begin with 10 or with these three 110
or these four 1110 etc. Though all the following Figures be never so great, as
9999 in infinitum.

The ninth thing Observable is, that by how much any Ennead contains more
Figures in its Vertical cell, by so much is it the better to multi^ly and
divide by, since it takes away all collat. ^dd. the chief trouble in gathering
the products ^n multiplication, and finding readily the Quo^ients in Division.
For example, if you turn all the Vertical Units of Pytha. Table into one Sum,
viz. ^ 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9. and multiply it severally by 1. ^. ^. 4. etc, it would
make an Ennead such, as you ^ee expressed in Figure 13. far different from Figure
^. the Table of Pytha. whose collat. add. it wholly ^akes away, and yet in
substance is the same with ^he Table.

^oncerning the Extensions of Pythagoras his Table.
The Extensions of the Pytha. Table may be di^inguished into two sorts, the
greater, and the ^^s. The greater extends it two ways; length ^ay by Capital
Numbers, and breadth way with as many lateral Numbers: The less extends it onl^
length way by Capitals and not by any more Laterals, than are in Pytha. Table;
which are the ^ Units. For example, the first greater Extensio^ adds to the 9
Capital Units of the Table 90 more Capitals: that is, all the whole Numbers of
tw^ places between 10 and 99 inclusive: And the lik^ it adds to the 9 Lateral
Units, viz. 90 more L^terals. As all the cells with their enclosed Num^ in
Pytha. T. are known to be 81. by multiplyin^ the two greatest Units, 9 Capital
and 9 Lateral t^gether; so by multiplying 99 by 99 the two gre^^est Capital and
Lateral Numbers of two places, yo^ will find the Cells of this first greater
Extensio^ to be 9801. The first less Extension adds to the^ Capital Units (as
did the first greater Extensio^ 90 Numbers of two places from 10 to 99
incl^sive, but adds not any one Number to Pythago^^ his 9 lateral Units. The
cells of this Extension ^^ multiplying 99 its greatest Capital by 9, the
grea^est Lateral, are found to be 891 which is not t^ 10th. part of 9801 the
cells of the first great Extension. A Table of this kind of extent, co^taining
9801 cells would be very useful, and be^^ of a Moderate largeness, occupying
about 10^ 11 pages in Folio, might be easily made, as for have heretofore done:
Mr. Joh. Darling and other But in this present Table we forbear to place^ and
all other Extensions of the greater sort, ^^ reason of their Vast largeness and
labor in ^^king and using them. In the following Tab^^ ^he one of 5 greater
Extensions, the other of 5 less Extensions, you may see their differences and
how many cells, pages and Tomes in Folio, each one would contain. But first
observe, that we allow a Folium to be 14 Inches long, and 8 broad, prescinding
from Margents, one page whereof will contain 112 square Inches, In every page
reckon ^000 cells: In every Tome a 1000 pages.

Five greater Extensions of Pythagoras his Table:
Extensions 1st. 2d. 3d. Multiplicand 99. 999. 9999: Multiplier 99 999 9999.
Cells. 9801. 998001. 99980001. Pages. 10 801/900 1108 801/900 111088 801/900
Tomes. 0. 1 109/1000 111 089/1000 Extensions: 4 th. 5th. Multiplicand 99999.
999999. Multiplier. 99999. 999999 Cells. 9999 800001 999998 000001 Pages. 11
110888 801/900 1111 108888 801/900 Tomes. 1 1110. 889/1000 1 111108 889/1000

Five less Extensions.
Extensions 1st. 2d. 3d. 4th. 5th. Multiplicand 99 999 9999. 99999 999999
Multiplier 9 9. 9. 9. 9* Cells 891 8991. 89991 89999 8999991. Pages 0 891/900 9
891/900 99 891/900 999 891/900 9999 891/900 Tomes 0 0 0 1- 10.

In these Tables, every Extension is expressed by 5. oblong Quadrats, one under
another. In the first Quadrat is the Number of the Extension, First, second or
third, etc. In the second Quadrat are two Numbers, a Multiplicand, and
Multiplier, being the greatest capital Numbers; and the greatest lateral Number
of that present Extension. In the third Quadrat is the Product of the abovesaid
multiplicand and multiplier, or Number of cells of the Extension. In the fourth
Quadrat is the Number of pages in folio, which that Extension would make.
Divide the cells by 900 and the Quotient will give the pages. In the fifth
Quadrat is the Number of Tomes which that Extension would make. Divide the
Page^ by 1000. and the Quotient will give the Tomes* The Extensions both of the
greater and lesser sort may be made in infinitum, though these two Tables
exhibit only five of either sort. It is incredible to our first apprehensions,
what a vas^ space would be taken up by a Table of the fifth greater Extension,
wherein, as you see, 999999. capital Numbers are supposed to be multiplied by
so many Laterals, and to produce the Number of cells 999998 000001: and
consequently, according to Allowances abovementioned, pages ^1111 108888
801/900, and Tomes in folio 1 111108, each Tome having 1000 pages, and (with
its cover) 3 inches in thickness. These Tomes, if they were set on end,
contiguous one to another in a straight line, they would make a rank of books
above 52 English miles long. Or if all the aforesaid pages, their Margents cut
off, should be laid close one to another on a plain, they would cover more than
30 square English miles, or 19200 square Acres.

But setting aside all Extensions of the greater sort, we will content our
selves with the third less Extension, in which as the Table shows, 9999. is the
greatest capital Number (Multiplicand and Divisor) and 9. the greatest lateral
Number (Multiplier and Quotient. The product of cells is 89991. The pages in
folio are 99 891/900 which scarce make the 10th. part of a Tome in folio. And
observe that 9999 contains all the capitals, both of the Pythagorean Table, and
of the first, second and third less Extensions. For 9 (the Unit on the right
hand) counts the 9 Units of the Pythagorean Table; the next 9 counts 90 Numbers
of two places, from 10 to 99 exclusive, and makes the first Extension. The
third 9. counts 900 number. of 3 places, from 100 to 999. and makes the 2d.
Extension: The 4th. 9 counts 9000 number. of 4 places, from 1000 to 9999. and
makes the 3d. Extension observe also, that the foresaid numbers, of 990. 900.
and 9000. added together make just the number of 9999: and being multiplied
severally by 9 do produce severally these number. 81. 810. 8100. 81000. all which
added together, make up the just number. of cells of the 3d. less Extension viz
8999. Observe lastly, what we touched before speaking of Pytha. Table, that
every Capital number from 1 to 9999 being multiplied by all the 9 Units or
single figures, produces 9 distinct numbers, one greater than another, which
being orderly placed and perpendicularly one under another, make a certain
column, whose length is divided into 9 equal parts or cells, the Seats of the 9
Numbers produced, the Capital being the highest. Wherefore there being 9999
Capitals in this present Table, there must be also 9999 Columns, which in
substance and in effect are the Numbering Nines, Enneads, Rods or Bones, or what
else you please to call them: and not only the single Rods of Units (as they
were first invented, and hitherto too commonly used) but double Rods of Tens,
Triple Rods of Hundreds, and quadruple Rods of Thousands: So that whatever
Operation can be performed in matter of Multiplication or Division, by 1. 2. 3.
or 4. of the single Rods, the same may be performed by one Rod or column of
this Table, and with far greater expedition, without any collateral Addition.
For here are actually Tabulated to your Hand all and every whole Number
(Multiplicands and Divisors) under 10000, and ever with one column or Rod
alone. Nay, it will not be hard to work by two columns of this Table at the
same time, and then your Multiplicands and Divisors may be any Number under 100
000000. But let us proceed to the third point of the Numbering Rods.

Concerning the Numbering Rods or Bones.
These Arithmetical Rods (described by most Authors, who have writ of
Arithmetic, since they were first found out) own for their first Inventor, the
Right Honorable and Learned John Lord Nepeer, Baron of Marchiston, who put
forth a Latin Treatise concerning them, Entitled, Rabdologia, that is, a
Discourse or Treatise of Rods, calling them Virgulae and Laminae: others have
or may call them, Columellae, Tesserae, Enneades, adding the Epithets,
Numerales or Arithmeticae. To the same Noble Lord, Posterity is obliged for
another Ra^e Invention of Logarithmes, both them aiming at, and attaining the
same en^ which is, to facilitate and perform with greate^ dispatch ease and
certainty the harder parts o^ Arithmetic, viz. Multiplication, Division an^
Extraction of Roots. These late years past Si^ Samuel Morland most ingeniously
invented two Arithmetical Instruments to the purpose abovesaid, for which he
deserves singular praise. Thoug^ the Instruments in themselves be excellent and
useful, yet they have been hitherto more sparingly used for these two reasons
First, because few Artificers are found, who have Hand and Head sufficient to
make them so exactly as is requisite* 2ly, because the Vulgar sort either wants
Head^ to comprehend them, or purses to purchase them* being somewhat
chargeable: whereas the Rods of the Lord Nepeer are plain, easy and Cheap. H^
happily fell upon the conceiving and devising o^ them by thoroughly considering
the Pythagore^^ Table, in which as before I mentioned, an incredible variety of
great and little numbers is found orderly Tabulated, multiplied and divided,
with apparent Multiplyers, Divisors and Quotients. For example, He said 1234.
Tabulated by the first 4 capital Columns of the Table, which he multiplied by 9
and found the product in the 9 cell to be (Collateral additions being observed)
11106* This product he perceived to be also a Dividend whose Divisor appeared
1234. and Quotient 9. o^ vice versa Divisor 9. and Quotient 1234. Further he
Noted that 1234. inverted was 4321. This Number he also found Tabulated
together by the first four Transverse Columns, which multiplied by 9. gave
38889 in the 9th. Capital Column. This being also a Dividend showed 4321 for
Divisor, and 9. for Quotient, or viceversa, etc. But ^aking a middle Number
between 1234. and ^321. For Example, 3142. or 2413. he was at a ^oss, not
finding them Tabulated together, nor ^he Product lying together, but was to be
picked ^ut here and there, not without trouble of the Head and delay of time.
This inconvenience happened as he well perceived, because the Table was always
made with its Columns fixed in the ^ame gradual Order of Unites, increasing from
^. to 9. But the Remedy of this inconvenience ^oon occurred, which was to unfix
the fixed co^umns by cutting them asunder, and making them moveable, apt to be
placed in what order he ^leased, as occasion required. Thus were the famous
Numbering Rods extracted and dissected ^ut of the Pythagorean Table, and in
reality are nothing else but the Table it self cut out into its ^olumns, adding
thereunto 3 more for the square, ^ube and cypher-Rods; such as you see in Fig.
2. (...) is true, the Lord Nepeer, to mind the Operator ^f ^c^llateral
Addition, drew Diagonal Lines through all the 8. undercells of every column or
Rod, whereby frequent Rhombes of this shap^ rhombusappeared in the Rods
Tabulated; And whatsoever 2. Figures should be found in one Rhombe^ they were
to be added and made one Number See Fig. 5. Others by making a cross Diagonal
i^ the undercells, included the 2. Figures to be added, in this kind of Diamond
form ^ See Fig. 6. Others again included them in a round Circle. See Fig. 7.
But because all these three Ways seem to offend the Eye, and breed Confusion
by so many Lines; Others with much less ado note all the addend Figures with
this mark * or this * declaring that every Figure so Noted require^ collateral
addition, if Tabulated on the right Hand with another Rod or column on the
left. See Fig* 3. ^et because the far greater part of the undercells in the
Pythagorean Table, (having one Figure more in them then is in the capital)
would require this mark* to wit, 58 cells, whereas only 14 cells refuse it:
Again, because thi^ mark* and one Figure more then is in the capital require a
greater breadth of Rod, I have rather chosen to put an Asterisk *, as a sign of
non-addition to a few cells and lesser Rods, then thi^ Sign of Addition * to
four times more cells an^ larger Rods, declaring that the Star in an^ undercell
hinders collateral Addition; an^ where the Star is not in an undercell, ther^
must ever be collateral addition, if another Ro^ be Tabulated on the left Hand
with it.

But here observe, that when any (9) has a Star before it, and (1) carried to
it, by reason of a Rod Tabulated on the right Hand of it, then that (9) becomes
10, and is capable of lateral addition, if another Rod follow on the left Hand.
Observe also, that all these Enneads 1. 11. 111. 1111. 11111. and the like in
infinitum, require Stars in all their undercells, unless when a (9) becomes 10
by (1) carried to it, as now we said. Note also, that all less Numbers then
these, having equal places or Figures with them in the Vertical, require Stars
in all Undercells: For example, 1111. is an Ennead of four places, and so is
1000, a less Number yet of four places; so is 1001. 1002. 1003. and so on till
we come to 1110. all less Numbers then 1111. but all of four places, and
requiring Stars in all their undercells. But whatsoever Number of four places
is greater then 1111. as is 1112. 1113. 1114. and so on till 9999. then in
fallibly it will reject the Star, and require lateral addition in one or more
of the undercells. See the eighth Observable.

Moreover, to avoid Multiplicity of Lines, as much as may be, in the Rods, I
reduce 8 of those lines to 2. which formerly separated the 9. cells from one
another, as you may see in Fig. 8. 9. 10. and 11. For dividing the length of
the Rod into three equal parts by two lines, I place the three highest cells in
the first Division, three others in the second, and the three last cells in the
last division. See Fig. 8. 9. 10. and 11. accordin^ to this Model of placing
Stars before certai^ undercells, (viz. such as have equal Number o^ Figures
with their capital cell) and dividing every Rod or column into three equal
parts by two Lines; I made a Table, wherein all Capital Numbers from 1. to 99
inclusive, were multiplied by the 9. lateral Units. which Table being directly
the first less Extension of Pythagoras hi^ Table, I caused to be cut in brass
some years ago and a few Copies to be printed for my own and other Friends use.
At that time I had in prospect the other two less Extensions (2d. and 3d. of
Pyth^ Table) which soon were completed, and that very readily, by the help of
the double Rod^ (whereof I had made some Sets) and the Table of the 1 less
Extension now mentioned: For laying one double Rod at a time to the Columns of
that Table, you Tabulate any number from 100 to 9999. and see immediately the
product of multiplication in all the 9 cells. The other Numbers from 1 to 99
the Table it self Tabulates and multiplies See a printed Copy of the Table,
inserted in page 27. As the single Rods of my Lord Nepeer were cut out of the
Pyth. Table, so both single and double Rods have been cut out of the Table of
the 1 less Extension, and found by Experience of 9 or 10 years to double the
usefulness of the single Rods For first they sooner Tabulate any great number
with fewer Rods. 2dly they Tabulate the sel^ same number with great variety of
Rods, differing ^n Specie one from another. See Fig. 12. 3dly they ^ake away
more then the half of collateral Addi^ions, the chief trouble of numbering Rods.
4thly ^hey more readily show the product of multipli^ation and Quotient of
Division in great numbers and fewer Rods. Two of the double Rods reach ^o any
number under Collat. Additions 1 at the most
10000 three of them to any under Collat. Additions 2 at the most
1 000000. Four of them to any under Collat. Additions 3 at the most
100 000000. etc. This and more the double Rods perform by themselves. But join
or Tabulate them with the Table of the 3d Extension, and they will most readily
multiply and divide ^ast numbers. For one Rod and the Table reaches ^o Collat.
Additions 1 at the most
1 000000. Two to Collat. Additions 2 at the most
100 000000. Three ^o Collat. Additions 3 at the most
10000 000000. etc. To use them with the Table of 9999 columns, it is
necessary, that the Rods be of the same length with the columns, though the
same breadth is not precisely required.

The Rods having on them all the Capita^ Numbers from 1. to 99. they will
require either 50 thin two-faced Talleys, or 25 square-side^ Parallelopipedons
of four faces. It will be convenient to have every Rod twice over, (thoug^ once
over will be sufficient if your single Rod^ of the 9 Units be twice or thrice
over,) wherea^ an ordinary Set of single Bones must have eve^^ Rod 4. 5. 6. 7.
or more times over, according a^ the Operator designs the working of greater
o^ lesser Numbers.

Another way of supplying the want of mo^^ Rods of one and the same Number, may
be ^^ the Table of 9999. Enneads, for in that Tab^^ are all Numbers of four
places, and consequent^^ this Number 5757. Besides, in the double Bon^ are all
Numbers of two places, from 10. to 9^ inclusive, and consequently this Number
5^ wherefore in the Table and double Bones ^ have 57. three times over. But
setting as^ the Table, the Bone alone of 57. is in practi^ equivalent to three
or more Bones of the sa^^ Number 57. for if you set down with your (...) three
times 57. thus 575757, as one Vertic^^ Number of one Ennead, you will know w^^
is the Content of every under cell by the und^^ cells of the Rod 57. thrice
setting them do^ For example, the second cell of 57. is ^^ which thrice
repeated, is 114. 114. 114. Or ^ serving lateral Addition 1151514, which is the
^^cond cell of the Ennead 575757. In this man^er your Operation will be as
ready, as if you ^ad had three distinct Rods of 57 a piece. There (...) yet a
third way of most ready and clear work^^g, multiplying and dividing vast
Numbers of the ^^lf same Species of Figures, viz. all of Nines, or ^ights, or
Sevens. etc. And in what multiplicity ^ou please, of the same Figures, as 3. 4.
5. Nines, ^ea 10 Nines, 20 Nines, 100 Nines: And so of ^ights, Sevens, sixes
etc. Some 5 special Enneads, ^r 5 two-faced Rods (or two four-faced square
^ods) are required to this sort of Operation, ^herein you will not be troubled,
either with any ^abulating of Rods, or collateral Addition. See ^e Scheme of
the said special Rods page ult. Fig. ^4 where observe that the nine single
Units oc^upy severally nine Vertical cells, and their under-^ells to contain
for the most part only 3 Figures, ^^e leading on the left Hand, another in the
mid^le, a 3d. ending on the Right Hand. Some few under cells (not above 8 in
72) have 4 Figures in them, and then the two last on the Right Hand are ^nding
Figures. The middle figure is most remarkable, and more then it appears; For in
O^eration it is to be repeated, or taken so often over, as there are Figures of
one kind in the suppo^ed Vertical, abating one: for example, Suppose ^he
Vertical to be Ten Nines, or 9999 999999. In the 2d. Cell of the special Rod
(9) are these thre^ figures 198. where (9) in the middle between (1) and (8) is
truly nine times nine, that is, one nine less, then Ten nines in the Vertical:
So that the said 2d. cell 198, is in operation 19999 99999^ or the Vertical
multiplied by (2) This Rule i^ Universal, yet has two exceptions; first when
any cell has four figures in it; 2dly. when any cell has a Star prefixed
before it, according to what is abovesaid concerning Asterisks, then infallibly
the middle figure is to abate, not only one, but two of the number in the
Vertical. One example will clear all. Let ten fours or 4444 444444. be given
for a Multiplicand, and 279 for a multiplyer, then in your special Rod of 4
Vertical, take out the ninth cell, apparently 396, but really 39999999996. the
middle figure (9) requiring to be repeated nine times* or one less, then the
number of fours in the Vertical. Next take out the 7th cell, apparenly 3108 but
really 31111111108. the middle figure (1) requiring Eight repetitions, or two
less then Ten of the Vertical, because this 7th cell has 4 figures in it.
Lastly take our the 2d cell, apparently * 888. but really * 8888888888. because
the middle figure (8) requires 8 repetition^ (besides the leading and ending 8)
or two less then Ten of the Vertical, by reason of the Star prefixed before the
second cell. The Work ended would appear thus in Multiplication.

Multiplicand 4444 444444 39999999996 cell. 9 Multiplier -- 279 31111111108
cell. 7 8888888888 cell. 2 Product 1 239999 999876

Product 1239999999876 In Division, Multiplicand the Divisor, Product ^he
Dividend, and Multiplier the Quotient.

Dividend Divisor 4444 444444) 1239999999876 (279 Qu. 2 -- 8888888888
35111111107 7 -- 31111111108 39999999996 9 -- 39999999996 0000000000

The square and cube Rod ought to be once over in every Set, with three or four
cypher-Rods, ^s you see expressed in Fig. 11, All are to be so or^erly placed in
a neat pocket case, that every Rod be known what Number it has. by a mark ^r
figure, even before you take it out of the Case. ^f you please to reprint the
Table of the first ^ess Extension by it self in a page, (with its co^umns,
equal to the Columns of the great Table ^f 9999.) and give it a Varnish to last
the longer* ^ou may immediately thence make Sets of the ^ouble bones, merely by
cutting out the capital columns, and passing them on Talleys of Wood or other
matter (two faced or four faced) of the same length and breadth with the
columns. Besides, as is abovesaid, this little Table of the first less
Extension, with one double Rod applied unto it at a time, performs all the
whole Work of the great Table of 9999 fixed columns, only with thi^
disadvantage, that it will often have one collateral Addition, whereas the
great Table will have none. Notwithstanding the great performances of the less
Table, the great Table hat^ many special uses, for which it deserves to b^
published, especially not being of any great extent, nor making any great bulk.
By advice^ Judicious Friends, I thought good to put it fort^ in a Duodecimo, as
a convenient Enchiridion, ^^ pocketbook, every four pages containing 10^
columns with their 900 cells, or every page 2^ columns with 225 cells. In which
case the Table alone would require 400 pages in Duodeci^^ But perhaps it will
be better, to contract the pag^ to half the Number, viz. to 200. in this manne^
Let every page have five Ranks of Columns o^ under another, each Rank
consisting of Ten C^lumns: so will every page contain 50 Column^ and
wheresoever you open the book, the two p^ges before your eyes, will show you a
just Hundred of Columns. To find the Number yo^ seek for, more readily, you may
Tack to the Ma^gent little outstanding Labells, or Indexes, she (...) before
you open the Book, where every 100 and 1000 begins, such as are seen in certain
ac^ount-books of Merchants. Let the Book be so ^ound, that wheresoever you open
it, the leaves ^n either side, may lie Flat without any uprising; ^or so it
will be more easy to Contabulate the Rods with the Table, when occasion
requires. ^erhaps it would be better to print it in a little ^olio, for use at
home in your Closet or Library; ^or then every page would contain its Hundred
^f Columns, easy to be found out by their own na^ural order.

As well the forementioned Table of 9999 fixed Columns, as the single and double
moveable Rods ^erve equally in Decimal and common Arithme^ick; yea in Decimal,
they in a manner take away ^ll the trouble of Division. Neither do they re^ui^e
any particular Rules in operation, different from those which have been
delivered concerning ^he Lord N (...) single bones, by himself in his
Rab^ologia, by F. Andrew Taquet, Sir Jonas Moor, Mr William Leybourne and
others in their Arithmetical Treatises. Wherefore I shall say no more of them
but only show by single examples, (one of multiplication, another of Division,
the ^d of extraction of the Square Root, the 4th of ^he cube Root) the ordinary
use of them.

Example of Multiplication.
In multiplication commonly it is best to Tabu^ate the greater Number as
multiplicand when one is greater then the other. For example. Tabulat^ 4628 to
be multiplied by 72. Place Unit under Unit, as in the Margent ^
Then for 2 (the Un^^ of the Multiplyer) take the 2d cell of the Multiplicand,
viz. 9256. and for 7 of the multiplyer tak^ the 7th cell of the Multiplicand,
viz. 32396, an^ set both cells down, as you see in ^
Add the tw^ cells together, and the total Sum or product o^ multiplication
will be 333216 as you find in ^
But if you Tabulate 72 to be multiplied by 462^ the operation will appear as
in ^
.

In Division the Divisor is to be Tabulated; an^ it much imports, for the
speedier dispatch of yo^^ operation, that the leading Rod of the Divisor be ^
great Rod or Column of the Table; a quadrupl^ rather then a Triple, a Triple
then a double, ^ double then a single, if the Number of your Divisor will
permit.

Example of Division
Let 5678556 be a Dividend, and 4628 the Divisor. set them down as in the
Margent ^
with a Semilune, for the Quotient, and Tabulate the Divisor. Then enquire how
often can the Divisor 4628. be taken out of the first partial Dividend, viz.
5678. Only once; Therefore put 1 for Quotient in the Semilune, and Subtract 4628
out of 5678. and t^ere will remain 1050 the work standing (if you cash the
Figures dispatched) as in ^
. Next bring down 5 out o^ the Dividend, and place it on the right Hand of the
remainder, as you see in ^
separated with a Comma. This done, seek in the cells of the Divisor for 10505
(the next partial Dividend) or for the next less Number then 10505. In the 2d.
cell is 9256 the next less. Put 2 in the Quotient, and Subtract 9256 out of
10505. and the remainder will be 1249 to which bring down the other) of the
Dividend, and dash what is dispatched. Then will the work stand, as in ^


In like manner proceed to find the 3d. and 4th. figure of the Quotient, and
the work finished will appear, as in ^
Others dash no figures at all, not place the Quotient on the Right Hand of the
Dividend, but set every quote-figure over against the cell of the Divisor from
whence it was taken. Every remainder they distinguish with a colum^ from the
figure brought down out of the Dividend* as you may see in ^
When in one Number ther^ happen to be two columns, there will be a cipher in
the Quotient; when 3 Commaes, then 2 Ciphers in the Quotient. The like Method
serve^ wel^ Extraction of the Square Root, and much Fac^^tate the examining of
the work done. If any ^umber remain after Division ended, it will be ^he
Numerator of a Fraction, whose Denominator ^s the Divisor. When you turn
Integers into a Ra^ius of Decimals, Division either ceases, or is easily ^ad by
cutting off so many Figures (on the Right ^Hand) from the product of
multiplication as are in ^he Radius, excepting one.

Example of the Square Roots Extraction
The Extraction of the Square Root is very ready and plain by the Table, or by
the double Rod^ or both of them together. Let the number given, whose Root you
seek, be 70476025. Put a point under the Unit, and every A^tern Figure with a
Semilune after the Unit as you see in ^
The 4 points foretell that in the operation there will be 4 partial Dividend^,
and as many Roots. Then seek in the cells of the Square Rod for 70 (the 1
partial Dividend) or the nearer less number to 70. 64 is the nearest less to 70
in the 8th cell. Therefore 8 is your first Root to be placed in the Semilune,
and 64 is to be Subtracted out of 70. The remainder will be 6 the work
appearing as in ^
. For the finding the 2d. 3d. or any other Square Roots following, obs^rve
these Rules: First, bring down the next parttial Dividend and join it to the ^^
remainder on the Right Hand.

Secondly, double the Root or Roots found, an^ Tabulate that double on the left
Hand of the Square Rod or (working by the Table) carry t^^ Square Rod to the
double in the Table.

Thirdly, seek for the Number (or next less) ^^ your last remainder joined to
the next partial D^vidend in the cells of the Tabulated Rods and the Cell
wherein it is found, will give you the nex^ Root.

Fourthly, Subtract the cells Number out of the remainder and partial Dividend,
and proceed a^ before, wherefore in our present example to fin^ the 2d. Root,

First, bring down 47 and join it to 6 to make 647.

Secondly, Double the Root 8 and Tabulate 16 with the Square Rod.

Thirdly, seek 647 (or the nearer less) in the Tabulated Rods the third cell
gives 489, the next less, which Subtracted out of 647, leaves the remainder
158. The 3d. cell gives 3 for the 2d. Root: see the Margent ^
For the finding o^ the 3d. and 4th. Root, proceed as before. The whole
Operation ended stands as underneath a^ ^
or according to the Method, mentioned in ^ivision, underneath at ^
where any number re^ains after the work ended, it is the Numerator ^f a
Fraction, whose Denominator is the double ^f all the Roots and one Unit more.
But if you ^esire a more exact Fraction, add to the Nume^ator 2. 3. or more
Couples of Ciphers, and wor^ ^s before, and you will find the nearer Decimal
^raction.

Example of the Cube-Roote's Extraction.
^st. set down the number (whose Cube-root you ^ek) with a point under the Unit
and every 3d. Figure, and a Semi-Lune for the Roots, as unde^neath at ^
how many points, so many parti^^ Dividends and Roots will be in the Operation

2ly, Seek in the Cube Rod for 94 or the neare^ less number: In the 4th cell
you find the nearest ^ Set down 4 for the 1 Root and Subtract 64 o^ of 94, the
remainder will be 30; and the work appear as in ^


For the finding of the 2d, or any other following Root, observe these Rules.

1st. Bring down the next partial Dividend 81^ and join it to the remainder 30,
on the Right Hand, as in ^


2ly, Tabulate the triple of Root or Roots found (Root 4 the triple 12) with
Rod or Rods apart call them for distinction, Right Hand Rods.

3ly. Tabulate the triple of the Sq. of the Root^ found (Root 4 Square 16 the
triple of 48) with Rod or Rods. placed on the left Hand, of the Cube Rod: call
these left Hand Rods. Or working by the Table, carry your cube-Rod to 48 in
your Table.

4ly, Seek for 30818 the present partial dividend or next less number, in the
cells of the left Hand Rods. In the 6th cell you find 29016 the next le^^ yet
indeed too much, 2s will after appear. Set th^^ this number down apart, and
draw a line abo^e ^t as you see in ^
over the Unit; and above the ^ine place 6 the number of the cell, out of which
^9016 was taken: On the left Hand of 6 place ^he Square of 6, viz. 36 as you
see in ^
then take the 6th and 3d. cell (by reason of 36 the Square) ^ut of the right
Hand Rods, viz. 72 and 36 and place them as you see in ^
adding all the numbers under the line into one Sum, viz. 33336, as you see in ^
which being too great to be taken ^ut of 30818. you must go back and take a
less ^ell, then 6.

Take therefore the cell 5. which has in it the ^e number 24125. write it
apart with a line above it, and an above line over the Unit: place 5 the cells
number) and on the left Hand of 5 the he Square of 5 viz. 25 as in the margent ^
^ake out of the right Hand Rods the 5th. and 2d. ^ell (by reason of the Square
25) viz. 60 and 24 and add them, as you see in ^
to make 27125 which taken out of 30818 there will remain 3693 and the work
stand as in the margent. ^
For the 3d Roo^ do as you did for the 2d.

1st, Bring down the nex^ Dividend and join it to t^^ last remainder.

2ly, Tabulate a part on the right Hand Rod^ the triple of the Roots found.

3ly, Tabulate the triple of the Square of t^^ Roots on the left Hand of the
Cube-Rod.

4ly, Seek in the cells of the left Hand rods for the left Hand rods for the
partial Dividend.

5ly, Set down apart the number required foun^ and draw a line above it: above
that line a^ over the Unit place the Figure of the cell taken and on the
lefthand of the figure, place its squar^ ^s was expressed as before above in
the margen^ (u) the whole Operation ended, will appear brie^ly as in ^


Note first, that scarce can you give any prece^ in writing concerning
Extraction of roots, clear, but that they shall confound or puzzle young
Student of Arithmetic, who will be ab^ to learn more in an Hour of a Master
shewi^^ him the practice, than in a day or week by his own reading of precepts.

2ly, note, that in Cubick Extractions it is not easy to fores^e or prevent
the taking of too great a number out of the left Hand and Cube-Rods. We may
probably conjecture that it will happen so, when the number taken is almost as
great as the partial Dividend, and yet is to be increased by adding 1 or 2
cells more out of the Right Hand Rods.

3ly, Note, that when the capital cell of the left hand and cube-rods is
greater than the partial Dividend, a Cipher is to be put in the Quotient as a
Root, and the next partial dividend is to be brought down and joined to the
former.

4ly, note, that if any number remain after Extraction, it must be set down as
the Numerator of a common Fraction, whose Denominator is a number made of the
triple of all the roots, and of the triple of the Square of all the roots,
and an Unity. For example. The roots being 456 the Denominator would be 625177
See the Margent Triple of Roots. 1368 Triple of Square. 623808 Unity 1 Summa
625177
But far better it is to add to to the Numerator, or the remaining number, 3 or
4 triples of ciphers thus, 000, 000, 000. and work out by the precedent rules a
clear and plain decimal Fraction.

Thus much (and indeed more than I first intended) concerning Pythagoras his
Table, the Extensions thereof, and the Numbering Rods.

And here I might (had I not been too long already) exemplisy in a few
instances; and there by show, that whatsoever is performed by Logarithmes in
Problemes of Trigonometry, Sines Tangents, Secants, Questions of Interest, etc.
may be also performed by this Table of the third less Extension, and the double
Rods, or by the double Rods alone: whether with more readiness and clearness,
Practice and Experience must show.

What also can be performed by Mr. Brigges's Table of 20 Chiliades of
Logarithmes, may be done (if I mistake not) more plainly and speedily by this
Table. For though it be but the half of 20 Chiliades, (it being only 10
Chiliades), yet by applying one double Rod thereunto, it exceeds 20 Chiliades
by 980000 Chiliades.

For Conclusion, I will here suggest certain Lines divided into certain digits,
which are singularly useful in measuring most things measureable, and make your
Operation quick and plain, without trouble of division, or necessity of
reducing inches into other known Integers. For though you measure by digits
only, and multiply them by one another, yet the Product of Multiplication
immediately gives you in hundreds or thousands, the superficial or solid
content, not only in digits, but in other known terms of Feet, Yards, Acres,
Gallons, Barrels, Bushels, etc. For Wine-Gallon-digits proceed thus, Take the
Cube Root of 231, (the solid inches in a Wine-Gallon) which is 6, 136 vulg.
Inc. proxime. Divide this Root into ten equal parts exactly, with subdivisions
of each part into other ten less parts, and you have the Wine-Gallon-digits.

You measure by them, for example, a cylindrical capacity, and find the
Diameter of it to be 56 digits, and height 60 digits, the area of that circle
will be 24,64 superficial digits, which multiplied by 60 digits, produces
147.840 solid digits, whereof every thousand is a just Wine-Gallon. There are
therefore 147 Gallons, and 840 digits toward another thousand or Gallon: that
is above three quarts.

For Beer or Ale Gallon digits, take the cube Root of 282 solid vulg. inches in
the AleGallons, which is 6,558 proxime. Divide this Root into ten equal parts,
with subdivisions, as above.

For Beer-barrel-digits, take the cube Root of 10152 (solid vulg. inc. in a
Beer-barrel of 36 Gall.) which is 21,653 proxime, to be divided into ten equal
parts with subdivisions, a^ before.

For Foot-digits take the square-Root of 144 (a Foot square) or cube*Root of
1728, (a Foot solid) both which is 12 common inc. Divide this Root 12 into ten
equal parts, with subdivisions; measure and work by them, every hundred square
will be a true Foot square, equal to 144 common inc. and every thousand solid,
a Foot solid equal to 1728 com. inc. For example, you measure a tetragon
pyramide, whose one square side is 50 Foot-digits, and height 60. The square of
50 is 2500, and gives the area of the pyramid^ at the bottom, viz. 2500 sq.
dig. or 25 sq. Feet^ multiply the area 2500 by 20 (a 3d of the height 60) and
the product will be 50000 fol. dig. that is 50 solid Feet, equal to 86400 solid
common inc^

These 4 lines of Wine-gall. dig. Beer-gall. dig. and foot-digits, are of
excellent use in Gauging, and measuring any thing by feet sq. or solid, and may
be conveniently cut on a Ruler, or long measuring staff, hard by or on both
sides of a line of common inches, so that by mere inspection you may see how
much they differ amongst themselves, and from common inches. If you desire
yard-dig. to measure by sq. or cube-vards, divide 36 the square Root of 1296 (a
sq. yard in common inches) and cube Root of 46656 (a yard sol. in common
inches) into ten equal parts, as in other digits above; So may you have
bushel-dig. by dividing 12, 958, which is proxime the cube Root of 2176
(commonly esteemed a solid bushel in vulgar inches) into 10 equal parts. For
measuring of Land, Mr. Gunter's Chain (of 100 links, equal to 4 perches or 66
foot in length, is very convenient. Every 10000 sq. links is a chain sq. or 16
perch. sq. or the 10th. part of an Acre s. 100000 of links sq. is 10 chains sq.
or 160 perches sq. or an Acre sq. Note 1. That when the Root is great, as 20,
30, or more vulg. inc. then you may divide it into more than 10 equal parts, as
100. 1000, etc. Note 2. That in working by the aforesaid Root-dig, the
contingent Fractions will be decimal and clear.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Fol. 32. lin. 12. set them thus 72. ^

Fol. 33 l. 21. read thus ^

Fol. 39 l. 12. ^

TETRASTICHON. In Enneadas Arithmeticas.
COnditor Aen^idos peperit sibi nobile Nomen* Nullum Nomen habet Conditor
Enneados. Si tamen Enneados, quaeratur, quis fuit Author? Baro, Refer, Neperus,
Pythagorasque fuit.

The Aeneid's Author is a Man much Famed,

The Ennead's Author not so much as Named;

But if you are asked who the Ennead's Author was*

Say Lord John Neper, and Pythagoras.

DISTICHON. In Tabulam 10000 Enneadum.
HAc Tabula Enneadas decies tibi Mill Ministr^ Pythagorae tantum prisca
Tabella december.

This Table gives Ten Thousand Enneades, when Pythagora's Old Table gives but
Ten.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31 32 33 *2 *4 *6 *8 10 12 14 16 18 *20 *22 *24 *26 *28 *30 *32 *34 *36 *38
*40 *42 *44 *46 *48 *50 *52 *54 *56 *58 *60 *62 *64 *66 *3 *6 *9 12 15 18 21 24
27 *30 *33 *36 *39 *42 *45 *48 *51 *54 *57 *60 *63 *66 *69 *72 *75 *78 *81 *84
*87 *90 *93 *96 *99 *4 *8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 *40 *44 *48 *52 *56 *60 *64 *68
*72 *76 *80 *84 *88 *92 *96 100 104 108 112 116 120 124 128 132 *5 10 15 20 25
30 35 40 45 *50 *55 *60 *65 *70 *75 *80 *85 *90 *95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130
135 140 145 150 155 160 165 *6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 *60 *66 *72 *78 *84 *90
*96 102 108 114 120 126 132 138 144 150 156 162 168 174 180 186 192 198 *7 14
21 28 35 42 49 56 63 *70 *77 *84 *91 *98 105 112 119 126 133 140 147 154 161
168 175 182 189 196 203 210 217 224 231 *8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 *80 *88 *96
104 112 120 128 136 144 152 160 168 176 184 192 200 208 216 224 232 240 248 256
264 *9 18 27 36 45 54 63 72 81 *90 *99 108 117 126 135 144 153 162 171 180 189
198 207 216 225 234 243 252 261 270 279 288 297 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43
44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 *68 *70
*72 *74 *76 *78 *80 *82 *84 *86 *88 *90 *92 *94 *96 *98 100 102 104 106 108 110
112 114 116 118 120 122 124 126 128 130 132 102 105 108 111 114 117 120 123 126
129 132 135 138 141 144 147 150 153 156 159 162 165 168 171 174 177 180 183 186
189 192 195 198 136 140 144 148 152 156 160 164 168 172 176 180 184 188 192 196
200 204 208 212 216 220 224 228 232 236 240 244 248 252 256 260 264 170 175 180
185 190 195 200 205 210 215 220 225 230 235 240 245 250 255 260 265 270 275 280
285 290 295 300 305 310 315 320 325 330 204 210 216 222 228 234 240 246 252 258
264 270 276 282 288 294 300 306 312 318 324 330 336 342 348 354 360 366 372 378
384 390 396 238 245 252 259 266 273 280 287 294 301 308 315 322 329 336 343 350
357 364 371 378 385 392 399 406 413 420 427 434 441 448 455 462 272 280 288 296
304 312 320 328 336 344 352 360 368 376 384 392 400 408 416 424 432 440 448 456
464 472 480 488 496 504 512 520 528 306 315 324 333 342 351 360 369 378 387 396
405 414 423 432 441 450 459 468 477 486 495 504 513 522 531 540 549 558 567 576
585 594 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90
91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 134 136 138 140 142 144 146 148 150 152 154 156 158
160 162 164 166 168 170 172 174 176 178 180 182 184 186 188 190 192 194 196 198
201 204 207 210 213 216 219 222 225 228 231 234 237 240 243 246 249 252 255 258
261 264 267 270 273 276 279 282 285 288 291 294 297 268 272 276 280 284 288 292
296 300 304 308 312 316 320 324 328 332 336 340 344 348 352 356 360 364 368 372
376 380 384 388 392 396 335 340 345 350 355 360 365 370 375 380 385 390 395 400
405 410 415 420 425 430 435 440 445 450 455 460 465 470 475 480 485 490 495 402
408 414 420 426 432 438 444 450 456 462 468 474 480 486 492 498 504 510 516 522
528 534 540 546 552 558 564 570 576 582 588 594 469 476 483 490 497 504 511 518
525 532 539 546 553 560 567 574 581 588 595 602 609 616 623 630 637 644 651 658
665 672 679 686 693 536 544 552 560 568 576 584 592 600 608 616 624 632 640 648
656 664 672 680 688 696 704 712 720 728 736 744 752 760 768 776 784 792 603 612
621 630 639 648 657 666 675 684 693 702 711 720 729 738 747 756 765 774 783 792
801 810 819 828 837 846 855 864 873 882 891

Figure. 1
A B 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 0 4
8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 0 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54
0 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 63 0 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 0 9 18 27 36 45 54 63
72 81 Fig. 2
S. 1 C. 01 0 4 08 0 9 27 0 16 64 0 25 125 0 36 216 0 49 343 0 64 512 0 81 729
0 Fig. 3
A B 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 4 8 12 16
20 24 28 32 36 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 7 14 21 28
35 42 49 56 63 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 9 18 27 36 45 54 63 72 81 Fig. 4
S. 1 C. 01 0 4 08 0 9 27 0 16 64 0 25 125 0 36 216 0 49 343 0 64 512 0 81 729
0 numerical table too complicated to transcribe Fig. 5
numerical table too complicated to transcribe Fig. 6
numerical table too complicated to transcribe Fig. 7
Fig. 8
12 *24 *36 34 *68 *102 *48 *60 *72 136 170 204 *84 *96 108 238 272 306 Fig. 9
123 *246 *369 *492 *615 *738 *861 *984 1107 Fig. 10
1234 *2468 *3702 *4936 *6170 *7404 *8638 *0872 11106 Fig. 11
S. 1 *4 *9 C. 01 *08 *27 0 *0 *0 00 *00 *00 000 *000 *000 16 25 36 *64 125 216
*0 *0 *0 *00 *00 *00 *000 *000 *000 49 64 81 343 512 729 *0 *0 *0 *00 *00 *00
*000 *000 *000 Fig. 12
78,96,78 78,96,7,8 78,9,67,8 7,8,9,67,8 7,8,96,78 7,8,9,6,78 54,72,54 72
54,72,5,4,7,2 54,7,25,4,72 5,47,25,4,72 5,4,7,2,54,72 Fig. 13
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 * 2 4 6 9 1 3 5 7 8 * 3 7 0 3 7 0 3 0 7 * 4 9 3 8 2 7 1 5 6
* 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 5 * 7 4 0 7 4 0 7 3 4 * 8 6 4 1 9 7 5 2 3 * 9 8 7 0 5 4 3 1 2
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1. Fig. 14
1 *222 *333 2 *444 *666 3 *666 999 4 888 132 5 110 165 6 132 198 7 154 231 8
176 264 9 198 297 *444 *555 *008 *888 110 132 132 165 108 170 220 204 220 27^
330 204 330 396 3108 385 402 352 440 5328 300 405 504 *777 *888 *999 154 176
198 231 264 297 3108 352 396 385 440 495 462 5328 594 5439 0210 693 6216 7104
792 693 792 891 Fig. 15
Sq. 1 *4 *9 C. 01 *08 *27 0 *0 *0 *00 *00 *00 16 25 36 *64 125 216 *0 *0 *0
*00 *00 *00 49 64 81 343 512 729 *0 *0 *0 *00 *00 *00


