AN ACCOUNT OF THE NATURE and EXTENT OF THE DIVINE DOMINION and GOODNESS,
Especially as they refer to the ORIGENIAN HYPOTHESIS Concerning the
Preexistence of Souls, TOGETHER With a special Account of the vanity and
groundlesness of the Hypothesis it self. Being a second Letter Written to his
much Honored Friend and Kinsman Mr. Nath. Bisbie.

By SAM. PARKER A. M. C. T. And Fellow of the Royal Society.

OXFORD, Printed by W. Hall for R. Davis. 1666.

Imprimatur,

ROBERTUS SAY, VICE-CANCELLARIUS OXON.

SIR,
I Have now satisfied and perhaps surpised you too; for I question not but
these Papers will more prevent then answer your expectations: For when you
remitted me to my own leisure to satisfy your demands (the true import of a
Friends desires) I am confident you believed I would as well use as acknowledge
your Favor; and I really thought my next to you should have been a Letter of
thanks for your forbearance, and not a final discharge of my Obligations. But
being shortly to bid adieu to my Retirements here, and fearing I shall no where
else enjoy so much Privacie and Leisure; I could not satisfy my self till I
had gratified your expectations, and put my self past all hazard of disobeying
your Commands. For methinks (Sir) nothing concerns me so much as those designs
that aspire to serve my dearest -- But my Business is not to complement, and I
foresee how exceedingly I shall be straightned in time, and therefore I must
without the Ceremony of any farther Preface immediately apply my self to the
serious discharge of my Task, which I shall (following the method your
injunctions have prescribed me) perform in three parts (1.) By giving you an
account of the true Nature and Extent of Gods Dominion. (2.) By laying down a
right Notion of his Goodness. (3.) By proving the Groundlesness and Vanity of
the Origenian Hypothesis concerning the Preexistence of Souls. Of each in their
order.

OF THE NATURE and EXTENT OF Gods Dominion.
BY Gods Dominion, I mean that Sovereigne Right and Authority residing in Him
in reference to his Creatures, or that Power and Prerogative which he has to
dispose of them according to his own good will and pleasure, and this is
indifferently expressed by these three terms of Ius, Potestas, and Dominium:
The minute and precise differences whereof seems to lie herein: that Ius
nakedly signifies a right or freedom to act, whereas the two latter imply,
together with this, a power or strength of acting; And then that Power, which
God has in himself antecedently to the Existence of any Created Being, is in
rigidness and propriety of speech called Potestas; but that which he has and
exercises since the Creation, Dominium. But not to insist upon such Niceties,
they all promiscuously import Dominion and Sovereignty. Of which many
definitions have been attempted, but none of them seem to me more accurate and
comprehensive then Mr. Hobs's, when he defines it to be Libertas propriis
facultatibus secundum rectam rationem utendi. De Cive. l. 1. c. 1.
Though what Exercises of Power are consistent with right Reason, and what not,
I shall discourse anon. But if you fancy short definitions, it is the lawful use
of Power, and so implies two things, first it supposes a power or strength to
Act, and then it imports the legitimate extent and use of it. Now as for the
Extent of this Power, it is Infinite and Unconfined, as well as all the rest of
the Divine Perfections, and therefore it warrants God to do any thing that will
comply with the Reputation of his other Attributes. Whence it is that the Beings
and Subsistencies of all things are entirely at his disposal: It was at his
choice, whether he would ever or never create any thing; and it is still in his
Power either to continue the frame of things in the same state they are in, or
to erect a new one, and that better or worse then the present, and any thing
else, that is not inconsistent with the perfection of his Nature and
Attributes. But for a fuller Evidence hereof, it is necessary to observe that
there is a twofold acceptance of Right, either more loose, when it signifies a
License and Freedom to do any thing; or more restrained, when it signifies an
Obligation to do any thing: The difference between them is this, that the
former signifies Liberty, and the latter Duty; that is extended to any thing
that is not unlawful, this only extends to things due, and required by Justice
and Equity: For instance, there is a Right to demand Debts, and a Right to pay
them; the former may be done, because no equity forbids it, but the latter must
be done because Justice requires it. Upon this account (to give you this Notion
by the way) every man is bound to make good his Promises, though not his
Threatenings and Punishments, because promises make us Debtors, but in reference
to threatened Penalties we are Creditors, for the Offender owes the punishment
to the person Offended: But though every man be bound to pay his Debts, yet he
is not bound to demand them, for he has a Right to Relax as well as Challenge
his due: The Rewards therefore consequent upon promises, being Debts due from
me, I am bound by the first sort of Right to pay them, but the Penalties
consequent upon Threatenings, being Debts owing to me, I am permitted by the
second sort of Right, either to demand or remit them.

And thus there is a twofold Right in God, the one whereof referres to his
Sovereignty, which is nothing but an absolute Liberty to act or not to act, as
Himself shall see cause; the other to his Justice and Holiness, whereby God is
obliged to act suitably to the Essential Rules of Justice and Equity. For the
Divine Justice is exercised only about things Good and Just, but his Dominion
about all things that are not Evil or Unjust; things therefore being the
Objects of Gods Dominion, not because they are Just, but because they are not
Unjust, it is extended to every thing that is not contrary to Justice, i. e. to
every thing that is not Evil. But I shall wave all general considerations, and
only consider the Extent of the Divine Prerogative in reference to Mankind,
not only because it is most pertinent to our present design, but also because
what I shall discourse concerning the Extent and Latitude of Gods Power over
Men, may by Analogy of Reason, be applied to all other Creatures endued with
Sense and Perception: Now, in Treating of this matter proposed, I shall only
consider,

1. What God can do. 2. What he can not do.
1. First, Then God has Power to take back from us all or part of what he has
given us, i. e. He can either utterly destroy our Beings, or take from us so
many Comforts of life, and inflict upon us so many Calamities, as shall leave
us in a condition only preferable to that of Nonexistence; for all that we
have to render our conditions more valuable then not Being, is the free Product
of the Divine Power; But it is a certain and undoubted truth that every
Superior Authority has Power to Revoke all the free Issues of its own Power,
unless it have abridg'd it self from the Exercise thereof by some special
compact or promise: For compact and promise lay an obligation upon him that
makes it, and vests a Right in the Person to whom it is made; and therefore
where Benefits are bestowed without these Instruments of conveighing Right,
there the Donor has the same Right to withdraw, as he had to give them; and
therefore that God, who has given us our Beings, has full Power arbitrariously
to destroy them.

But here it will be Objected, that destroying the life of a guiltless person,
is justly accounted the most salvage and unmerciful piece of Injustice in the
World; that it is almost the only Instance, which carries in it an undeniable
Iniquity antecedent to all Humane Laws and Sanctions. So that when Mr. Hobs
asserts that in the State of Nature, there could be no Injuries and Violences
Acted amongst Men, because they could not have a Right of Propriety in any
thing, before they had by mutual Compacts apportion'd each man's share, if he
had limited his assertion to possessions of Lands, and all other Proprieties
Foreign to a man's own person, it had been equally true and blameless; for
Nature does not assign this Moiety to Tuius, and that to Caius, but leaves us
to share the Earth among our selves, and to Enclose what she had left in
Common, into particular proprieties, as we shall agree among our selves. But
when he extends the forementioned assertion to the persons of Men, his Error
is as palpable as it is mischeivous, because every man has a right and propriety
in himself Antecedently to all Law and Compact. There needs no Covenant to
appoint that I shall have a propriety in my own person; nay, it is as impossible
it should be otherwise, as that I should alienate my self from my self; and
all the grants of all the men in the world cannot Vest me in a greater
propriety to my self then Nature has, because they cannot make me to be more
my self then I already am; so that though I were in Mr. Hobs's Natural State
of War; if he or any other man should take away my life, without just cause,
he would do me at least as evident an Injury, as if he should now, either by
Fraud or Violence, thrust me from mine Inheritance, to which I have an
unquestionable Right, both by his own consent, and the Laws of that Civil
Society, of which we are Members, because he will Rob me of that, in which I
have as clear a Right and Propriety, as it is possible for me to have in any
thing that depends upon Pact or Covenant. Well then, it being thus Evident that
to take away the Life of an Innocent person, is among men a most Enormous and
Inhumane piece of Injustice, and that antecedently to all positive Sanctions
and Contracts, why should it not be so in reference to God, the Rules of Equity
being the same to all, Eternal, Unalterable, and abstract from all Persons,
States and Relations?

To which I answer, that notwithstanding there are the same general Rules, and
Principles of Justice in reference to God, as to Men, that yet the particular
Instances are not the same; because Gods Relation to the Creatures being
infinitely different from that, which they bear to each other, the particular
Actions and Displays of his Justice, though measured by the same Rule, must
needs be of a widely different Nature, not because the Measure is changeable,
but because the relation of the Persons suffers variety and alteration: For God
being the Supreme Sovereign and Cause of all, has upon that Account power to
deprive any, or all of his Creatures of what Perfections and Endowments he
pleases, whereas the Creatures not having any natural Dominion over one
another, they cannot take away from their fellow creatures any thing which God
has given them, without manifest Robbery, unless in such cases where the
Supreme Lord has been pleased to communicate any part of his Power and
Dominion. And so in humane Societies, though there are the same Laws of
Justice in reference to all men, yet there are not always the same Instances;
for though it be granted that every man has by right of Nature a power of
punishing any one that injures him, yet having entered into Societies, either
by Gods Institution, or their own consent, or both, the exercise of this power
is devolved upon some peculiar persons whom we call Magistrates, in whose hands
every man has for the common good, deposited his Authoritative Rights; its upon
that account just and lawful for the Magistrate to punish and take away
Delinquents, but unjust for the private person to do the same, for that were to
Usurp that* Authority, which I have granted away to them (unless in cases of
necessity, as when I am assaulted by another, and have no other way to preserve
my own Life, then by destroying my Assailants, there the Commonwealth is
presumed to allow me to exercise my natural right my self) but where no such
necessity urges, there the Governors of the Society, in which I am, and to
whom I have passed away the Exercises of my Original Right, are to Execute
Justice for me: so that private persons, not having power to punish Criminals,
as Magistrates have, that action would be judged Murder in those, which is
accounted Justice in these, notwithstanding that they are both subject to the
same common Rules and Maxims of Equity. Duo cum idem faciunt saepe, ut possis
dicere
Hoc licet impune facere huic, illi non licet;
Non quod dissimilis res est, sed is qui facit.
And thus there being so manifest a disproportion between God and Men, in
reference to their propriety in, and dominion over the life of man; God may
have a right to act that, which no Creature can do without the grossest and
most exorbitant Injustice: for seeing that propriety, which every Man has in
himself, is held from the free gift of our Supreme Lord, and that not confined
by any Promise or Covenant, he may cancel and reverse it when he pleases, only
by taking back what he has given. And if we could stand in the same relation
to, or dependence on any creature, as we do to Him, that creature would have as
great a right to divest us of the propriety we have in our own Essences, as God
himself has; but because the former can never be supposed, that is the reason
the latter can never happen.

2. This Power and Dominion, which God has over an Innocent persons life, and
all its appendant privileges, may be exercised by occasion of another man's
sin, for what God has a power to do absolutely, he may certainly do upon any
occasion, for this is only to make use of the Instances of his Dominion, to
serve other designs of his Providence. Exodus 20. ver. 5.
Thus God threatens to Visit the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children,
unto the third and fourth Generation; i. e. to punish the Impieties of wicked
Parents, by bringing their Posterity into those evil Circumstances, into which
he might have brought them by virtue of his Supreme Dominion, though not only
themselves, but their Progenitors had been faultless. The Posterity of Cham was
consigned to slavery for their Fathers Impiety. Seventy thousand men expiated
David's folly; and Saul's sons were hanged for their Fathers perfidiousness; and
the sin of Ahab was visited upon his Children. Scripture supplies us with
infinite more instances, where God makes use of the Sons infelicity to punish
the Fathers sin, in which cases God only makes his Sovereignty minister to the
designs of Justice, and if it be lawful, as I have proved it is, for God to
exercise his Supreme Dominion absolutely, surely it cannot be unlawful to do it
with respect to other ends of Providence. And such was the Origin of all the
common miseries of mankind: God created man at first in a more perfect and
happy state, but upon occasion of Adams prevarication, he divested all mankind
of a great part of those privileges and perfections, with which he had endued
humane nature; And all this God might have done, though Adam had never sinned,
and therefore it is no Injustice that God has made his Posterity the Heirs of
his misfortunes. The constitution of Adams body was probably so regular and
harmonious, that it had no natural propensions contrary to those of his mind,
but was entirely subject to all the Dictates of his understanding, his Organs
clear and well-disposed, his Spirits brisk and active, his Humors spirituous
and oily; the ferments of his body regular and steady in their motions, and
not infected with those malignant tinctures, that hurry us into all manner of
exorbitant passions and appetites. The Earth was fruitful, and of its own
accord, brought forth all sorts of wholesome and pleasant Fruits: Man was
surrounded with pleasures and delights, and had nothing else to do but to take
his ease and enjoy them. But when Adam fell, God disrobed him of most of those
great and happy Privileges, and cast him into a condition of life uneasy and
troublesome. Now our bodies are unactive, sickly, and indisposed, and instead
of being Instruments to the actings of the mind, are the greatest lets and
hindrances; Paradise is turned into a Wilderness, the Earth is barren and
accursed, and man must earn his bread by the sweat of his brows, and this has
ever since been the condition of Mankind: And though this be a sad story, yet
after all these losses, our condition is still competently, or rather extremely
happy, for besides that, if we will but be considerate, and live by the use of
our rational faculties, we may enjoy contentment enough in this world, to
render our lives pleasant and comfortable; God has prepared for us most
exquisite and ravishing delights in the next, only if we will forbear to pursue
our Buitish Appetites, from which he has afrighted us by the fearfulest
threatenings, and resolve to follow the dictates of Reason and Sobriety, to
which we are encouraged by the biggest Rewards and Promises; so that
notwithstanding all the present weaknesses and imperfections of our natures, a
man must be prodigiously absurd and sottish to make himself miserable. And if
men will choose to be wicked and miserable, against all the Principles of
Reason and Interest, they have no Reason to blame the Condition of their
Natures for that, which proceeds purely from the choice of their Wills. So that
though God has punished the Prevarication of Adam, by the evil Condition of all
his posterity, yet he has done nothing unjust, because he might have placed us
all in the same Condition, though neither Adam nor our selves had prevaricated
his Sanctions.

And this is no more then what is in some instance or other practiced in all
Commonwealths. As in England every man holding his Estate of the King, and the
right of all Tenures being derived from his Grant with certain Conditions, if
any of the Grants fail in the performance of the Conditions on their part, the
Grantor may justly disseize both them and their Heirs of their Estates. Thus if
any Person be convicted of Treason against the Crown, he is thereupon
attainted, and not only his Estate esceats to the King as supreme Lord, but his
Blood too is corrupted, so that his Posterity are not capable of Inheritance,
as deriving no inheritable blood, and consequently no Right from him. In which
case he that should have been next Heir cannot justly think himself injured by
being deprived of his Inheritance; although himself had not by any misdemeanor
forfeited it, yet he having no right to it, but what was derived from his
Ancestors, and that being rescinded by breach of those Conditions, upon which
it was suspended, he can with no more equity claim a right in the Fee, then he
could though his Ancestors had never been vested in it. And thus that Entail of
Privileges, which God, of his free goodness, had settled upon Adam and his
Heirs for ever, upon Condition of their Obedience to his Laws, was by the
disobedience of Adam cut off from himself and all his Posterity.

3. The Rights of Gods Dominion over sinless Creatures, do not extend so far as
to warrant his dooming them to a condition more wretched and forlorn then
Nonexistence. That he has power to reduce them into a state not worse then
Not-being is already proved, but farther he cannot go without transgressing all
the lines of Goodness and Equity, because if he should, he would rob his
Creatures of more then he had ever given them; And if this would not be an
injurious Cruelty, I must challenge all the world to tell me what would. This
Assertion is levelled against those men, who are so hardy as to say that God
might, to show the uncontrolableness of his Sovereignty, have decreed infinite
myriads of faultless Creatures to endless and insupportable Torments. That ever
such Thoughts could enter into the minds of men! For what can we imagine more
repugnant to all the notions of goodness and equity then to be the deliberate
and sole Author of the biggest misery to an innocent and harmless Person? What
more Heavenly wide from the nature of true goodness? It Is a malice so near and
abstracted, that it can reside no where but in the Breasts of Fiends and
Devils; nay it is the blackest Part of their natures, and that very ingredient
which makes them what they are. Besides, how can God be glorified in the
eternal miseries of guiltless Creatures? How can their deserved damnation be
conducive to his Interests? How can their unmerited torments gratify infinite
goodness, or add to infinite happiness? Could he promote his own Real Felicity
by the Infelicities of an innocent Creature, yet we cannot imagine him so
selfish spirited as to effect it, much less for the mere ostentation of his
greatness. If God can damn his Creatures to magnify the absoluteness of his
Dominion, why do we rail at Tyrants and Devils, when they upon the same
account take pleasures in the miseries of others? God is supposed to delight in
the advancement of his own glory, but can we suppose him to delight in the
eternal miseries of Innocents? Was there ever any Tyrant so salvage, as to
please himself in the endless and most exquisite Tortures of an harmless
Infant? It Is the property of Devils, (whose malice is boiled up to an infinite
rancour and cruelty) to make another torment their pleasure, and do mischief
for mischeifs sake; And shall we fasten that upon God, which is the Devils
Reproach? Shall he contrive Mischief, feed and recreate upon Misery, and glut
his Vengeance with Innocent blood? Shall he that delights not in the Death of
Sinners, seek Pleasure and Glory in the Eternal Miseries of Innocents? This is
the very top and extremity of Cruelty; so that were it thus, we must add
Cruelty to the Divine Attributes, and believe him as Infinite in that, as in
any other.

Besides all this, mere Existence without Perception carries in it no more
Goodness or Happiness then Nonexistence, and is only desirable before it in
reference to those Perceptive Capacities, which are founded in it: It Is all one
not to be, and to be in a state of senseless inactivity; take away Perception,
and it is indifferent whether the substance remain or utterly perish; as suppose
the Poets Metamorphosis had been as great Realities as they were Fictions, it
had been indifferent to the Persons that suffered them, whether they were
changed into Trees, Stones and Flowers, or into nothing, and it would have been
the same thing to Niobe whether she were petrified or annihilated. Upon this
account arose that ancient Dispute, Whether never to have been born had not
been better then to be? For they considering only the present Stage of affairs,
where these measures of good and evil seem to be dispensed in equal
proportions, were doubtful which way to determine; but those of them who
thought the world to be more replenished with ungrateful and displeasing
objects then the contrary, preferred Nonexistence; the chief assertors whereof
were some of the melancholy Philosophers, such as Heraclitus and Empedocles,
together with the Tragedians, who in the Persons of forlorn and miserable men
are full of little sentences and discourses to this purpose, and this opinion
was so ancient, ut Author and Initium illius prorsus ignoretur, Ethic. l. 1. c.
1.
as Gassendus asserts.

But they, who with more truth, counted the world was fuller of pleasures then
miseries, did with more satisfaction esteem their existence a privilege, so
that they preferred not, existence before nonexistence upon its own score, but
upon the account of those pleasant perceptions which were founded in it. Well
then, it being evident that existence is good or evil in order to the
perceptions that are founded in it, where it is the basis of nothing but
tormenting Perception, and where the continuence of life is nothing else but
the continuance of misery, there it is the greatest, because it is the fountain,
of all miseries. So that if God can create a Being only to make it miserable,
and condemn it to the Regions of sadness and eternal darkness, his creation
would be so far from being any kind of benefit, that it would be the greatest
ill-turn or injury he could possibly act. Nay, this still raises the Cruelty,
in that rather then want an object for it, he would make one, and set infinite
power on work only to exercise an infinite cruelty, and manifest himself as
absolute in Tyranny, as he is almighty in Power. From all this I suppose it is
unquestionably evident, that for God to Create an innocent Creature to make it
everlastingly miserable would be the highest act of cruelty imaginable.

It was long since observed, that there was never any opinion so absurd, which
was not maintained by some of the ancient Philosophers, but yet there are not
to be found among them any such hateful sentiments concerning Gods transactions
with his Creatures, as this I am discoursing against, which carries in it such
apparent contradictions to the Divine Attributes, that it could never have
found entrance into the minds of men, had they not thought it was suggested to
them by Revelation: for the only thing that is pleaded on its behalf is the
grossly mistaken ninth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, which they apply
to Gods eternal Decrees, although nothing can be more apparent then that it
treats of a quite different matter; For Saint Paul having discoursed of the
universal Apostasy, of both Jews and Gentiles, from the practice of true
goodness; and of Gods merciful designments to pardon and receive them all into
favor, so they would be content to obtain it that way, which he had made known
to the world by Jesus Christ, and not by the works of the Mosaic Law; and also
that many of the Gentiles had accepted of the conditions proposed to them in
the Gospel, and therefore that if the Jews should persevere in their obstinate
adherence to the Mosaic dispensation, God would cast them off, and take in the
Gentiles for his favorites: Saint Paul having, I say, discoursed of these
things in the foregoing Chapters, he here supposes this would seem very
strange and absurd to his Countrymen that God should casheire his peculiar
darling Nation, upon whom he had bestowed so many signal privileges; To whom
pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, etc. To which he
answers that the supreme Sovereign was not tied to any peculiar Nation, but
that he could adopt whom he pleased to be his favorites, and that though the
Jews had been blessed with greater advantages then the Gentiles, yet
notwithstanding God might discard them, and take in these; as he had made the
Israelites his peculiar People rather then the Edomites, notwithstanding they
were of the younger Family, etc. And that this is the genuine scope of Saint
Paul's discourse is unexceptionably evident from its conclusion, verse 30, 31,
32. What shall we say then? that the Gentiles which followed not after
Righteousness, have attained to the Righteousness which is of faith: But
Israel, which followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the
Law of Righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it
were by the works of the Law. Now what can be more clear, then that he speaks
of the rejecting of the Jews, because of their obstinate adherence to the
Mosaic Law, and of the calling of the Gentiles because of their Faith and
closing with the Gospel. But if you would see this improved to the strength and
evidence of a Demonstration, you need only be at the pains to read over
Episcopius his Paraphrase upon the Chapter.

Before I conclude, I will endeavor a little more fully to illustrate and
confirm my foregoing Propositions by a brief Arbitration of a late fiercely
argued dispute, viz. What is the True Ground of Gods Sovereignty over man.
Episcopeus, Curcellaeus, etc.
For some assert that it Bottoms upon the Benefit of Creation; thereby the
better to Control that horrid Opinion, that asserts, God might have made a
Creatrue to no other purpose, than to make it Eternally miserable, only to show
the Almightiness of his Sovereignty; for (say they) God cannot exercise more
Sovereignty over his Creatures, then he has, but he cannot have Right to more
then he has given, and therefore the utmost of his Right is to destroy what he
has made; but if he should afflict an Innocent creature with Eternal
punishments, he would go beyond the Right he has acquired by its Creation;
because he would thereby take away more then he has given, and place his
Creature in a worse Condition then that of Nonexistence, in which he found it.
Now because the benefits bestowed by God upon his Creatures are finite, they
infer that his Sovereignty resulting from them must be finite and limited, and
therefore that they have a Right, of which God cannot Rob them without Violence
and Injury. Calvin, and Mr. Hobs.
But others ground the Divine Dominion upon the irresistibleness of his Power,
thereby to justify that Right (or Tyranny) they have fastened upon Him,
arbitrariously to Reprobate and Damn his Innocent Creatures. For, say they,
Power Irresistible justifies all actions really and properly, in whomsoever it
be found, and therefore such Power being in God only, it without other helps,
is sufficient Justification of any action He does; so that if He had from all
Eternity consigned infinite Myriads of innocent Creatures to Eternal flames,
the uncontrouleableness of His Omnipotence would have made good the Equity of
such a merciless Decree. And therefore they resolve the Maxim, that God cannot
Sin, not into his Holiness, but Power; His very doing a thing never so
Injurious and Irregular, and that antecedently to all Law, making it just, and
consequently no sin.

But for my part, I think both of them are evidently mistaken, the former in
their Principles, and the latter in their Conclusions. To the first therefore I
reply, that it is apparent that the Divine Right and Dominion over the
Creatures, could not be founded upon the Benefits of Creation, but upon the
absolute unlimitedness of his Power, because God was from all Eternity invested
with a Power of doing any thing that was not misbecoming his Divine
Perfections, and therefore He acquired not any new Right from his Creation, but
only made Objects to exercise his Eternal right upon; I confess there is a
Power acquired by benefits, where there is none antecedently, because they
bestow an (...) or Pre-eminence upon him that gives above him that receives
them; but God being always infinitely Perfect, could not acquire any new
Excellence from the Worlds Creation, and therefore the collation of Benefits
cannot beget any new Power in Him; because the Power which He had antecedently
to all his Benefits, was not capable of being made greater; for He always had
a Power to Act any thing that lay within the bounds of just and lawful; but his
Power since the Creation is not more then so, and therefore he acquired no new
Prerogative by it. And then, if the Creatures should have a right to any thing,
of which God cannot deprive them, they would have something of their own, to
which God has no Right: But seeing every Creature is entirely Gods, and can
have nothing which is not His gift, and can do nothing which is not His debt;
it cannot have a Right where God has none, because He cannot but have an entire
Right in his own Works. And therefore if in any thing Gods Supreme Sovereignty
seems confined, it is not bounded by any Rights or Privileges in the Creature,
but only regulated by His own Perfections.

And this brings me to the latter sort, who ground Gods Dominion in the
Almightiness of his Power, and infer thence, that He may do any thing though
never so Injurious and Irregular. I allow their Principle, but deny their
Inference, because God is essentially Good and Just as well as Powerful; take
away his Justice and his Goodness, and you take away his Divinity; without them
he would be but an Almighty Devil. And therefore, though the Rights of Gods
Power be not straightened by any External obligation, because that is tied on by
a Superior Authority, and so cannot agree to him whose Prerogative is Supreme;
yet they are bounded by an Internal Principle, for Gods goodness may be said to
tie and restrain him not to do any thing repugnant to it self. Now this is not
properly a Restraint or Confinement superinduced upon his Natural right, but is
rather a circumscription set and chose by himself, which he cannot Transgress
because he will not. Neither does it limit the Divine Prerogative any more then
his Omnipotence is limited, because he cannot do any thing that is absurd, and
unworthy the Wisdom of his Understanding, or sinful and repugnant to the Purity
of his Will: For as he can not do such things, not because his Power is not
Infinite, but because his Wisdom and Holiness are so; (for its not from defect
of Power, but from the Infiniteness of his other Perfections, that He cannot
act any thing that is either Sinful or Foolish;) so neither is it for want of
Sovereignty, that he cannot do any thing Indecent or Tyranical; but because he
is infinitely Holy as well as Powerful, he is thereby obliged to do nothing
unbeseeming his Holiness. And therefore that God cannot Tyranize, it is not
because his Power has limits, but because his Goodness has none. And so the
Divine Will is the Measure of Justice, not because its absolutely Sovereigne,
but because its infinitely good, and that whatsoever God wills or does, is
therefore just, because He wills it; derives not from the Sovereignty, but from
the goodness of his will. For if this be taken away, it is all one whether you
call him God or Devil; he may lie, and forswear, and act all the Villainies in
the world, and then what a brave condition is mankind in, so repugnant to all
the principles of piety, honesty, and policy, is that opinion, that allows no
essential Justice and Injustice, but derives all goodness from arbitrary Power.

Of the Nature of the Divine Goodness.
HAving briefly explained the Nature and full Extent of Gods Sovereigne
Prerogative, we come in the next place to give an account of his Goodness and
Benignity; of which Attribute we must be careful to assign such a notion as is
not inconsistent with the former: Chiefly because the Idea of God consists
mainly in Dominion and Sovereignty; The notion of him in Scripture never refers
to his Essence, but always to his Power and Empire; and the names by which he
is there expressed do not so much denote his Nature, as his Supreme and
Almighty Prerogative: for all his Appellatives (except Iah and Jehovah, which
express his constancy and veracity) import only a Supreme and Almighty
Sovereign; so that the Scripture represents God under no other notion, then as
the Supreme Lord and Sovereign of the Universe; and therefore we must be wary
of attributing any thing to him, that either lessens or quite destroys the
freedom and uncontroulableness of his Dominion; and may withal conclude, that
no property which complies not with it, can be attributed to him, and
consequently that that is a false notion of his goodness, that interferes with
his Dominion. And therefore they that assert Gods goodness to be a necessary
Agent, that cannot but do that which is best, and so make all the Divine
actions the necessary results of his goodness, directly supplant, and destroy
all the rights of his Power and Dominion: For if all the effects of Gods power
be the natural Emanations of his goodness, and depend not upon the free
determinations of his will, it will follow that God can have no liberty or
dominion in relation to them, because necessity is altogether inconsistent with
the liberty or freedom of Sovereign power; Sovereignty bottoming upon a liberty
and freedom of acting; For how can he that has no Power and Dominion over his
own Actions, have power over any one else, for in that there can be no power
without a liberty to use and exercise it, nor any exercise of power but by
acting, it necessarily follows that that Agent that has no liberty or freedom
of acting, is utterly incapable of any Power or Dominion. And therefore if all
Gods actions were the necessary Emanations of his goodness, it must necessarily
destroy all the rights and liberties of his Sovereignty and Dominion.

The Platonists assert, that Gods infinite goodness necessitates him to do
always that which is best, (...), In Timaeo. (says Plato) and therefore that all
the Divine works were produced by an irresistible necessity, and that he had no
more power not to do what he has done, then the Sun has to withhold his
influences, or an overflowing fountain to keep back its streams. And upon this
foundation they erect any Hypotheses that suit with their own fancies, but
chiefly that of the Pre-existence of Souls: Because (say they) it is better they
should Pre-exist, and therefore Divine goodness, which does always that which
is best, must of necessity have given them a better and happier state of life
and self-enjoyment, before they descended into these bodies. But these men's
minds are so excessively possessed with thoughts of Gods goodness, as to
neglect all his other Attributes, advancing it to such an exorbitant
Pre-eminence, as to make it not only Usurp upon, and invade the Rights and
Privileges of other Attributes, but also to banish all other Perfections from
the Divine nature, and engross the Deity wholly to it self. For this notion of
Gods goodness is most apparently inconsistent, not only with his Power and
Dominion, but with all his other moral Perfections. But in order to a further
satisfaction herein, I shall give you a brief account of the Divine goodness,
and show it to be not a necessary, but a free and self-moving Agent.

The Divine goodness then is of three sorts, either as it is taken for the
perfection of his nature, or for the sanctity and holiness of his mind, or for
the free bounty and beneficence of his will; Though the two latter are properly
but branches of the former; Justice and Beneficence being absolutely necessary
to the Infinite perfection of the Divine nature. The first sort I shall omit to
discourse of, as being impertinent to our present purpose, and only account
for the two last, and first of the former.

Gods Sanctity or Holiness, is that natural or essential Goodness, whereby he
cannot but act suitably to the excellence and dignity of his Rational nature:
For the dignity of the Divine nature, consisting in Reason and Wisdom, this is
prefered the measure and rule of his Actions; and therefore it is nothing else
but that natural Justice, Equity and Rectitude, which is the measure of all
Gods transactions with his Creatures, and consists in doing every thing that
right Reason requires, and not doing any thing, that it forbids. Now the
Relation this Goodness has to the Divine Dominion, is to bound and regulate it
in the exercise of its Rights and Liberties; because God has power to do any
thing not inconsistent with it; so that the true way to find out how far the
Divine Prerogative extends, is to discover what is repugnant to the Nature of
goodness and equity; for every thing beside is subject to the free disposal of
the Divine Will. Thus God cannot delight in the eternal miseries and calamities
of Innocent Creatures, he cannot secretly resolve and take care that his
creatures shall act those Impieties, which himself openly hates, forbids and
threatens: he cannot lay upon us Impossible Commandments: he cannot violate
his Faith, and not perform his Promises, Oaths, and Covenants, because they are
all of them essentially evil, and contrary to the Natural and Eternal Laws of
Equity and Right Reason.

But Goodness, as its Equivalent with Benignity, Bounty, or Benificence, is a
free, constant and habitual propension of will to do Good. And being seated in
the Divine Will as one of its main Properties, it must not be supposed to
destroy the freedom of its Nature, but rather to participate of it. For the
Divine will is endued with the highest kind of Liberty, as it imports a
freedom not only from Foreign Violence, but also from inward necessity; For
spontaneity or immunity from coaction without indifferency carrys in it as
great necessity as those motions, that proceed from violence or mechanism: and
a Beast, that of its own accord goes to Pasture, would have as much Freedom as
God has, if his actions were only spontaneous, and proceeded not from a
choosing and self-determining Principle. And therefore when I assert the Divine
will to be Free, I mean that it is a Rational and Active Faculty, that has
Power and Dominion over its own actions, and that can be determined only by its
own intrinsic energie, in so much that all the external incentives requisite
to its acting being supposed, it yet remains so indifferent and undetermined in
it self, as that it is able either to exert or suspend its action. For unless
the divine will enjoy this kind of freedom, it had as good have none at all,
all other sorts of Liberty being fettered and determined by fatal Necessities.
And the Fatalist do but loose their Labor, when they endeavor to invent ways
of reconciling Liberty with Necessity, unless they can also make Indifferency
consistent with it; because all necessity of what nature soever implies a
detemin'd and unavoidable Fatalitie, which apparently destroys all the
foundations of Religion and Morality; For necessity is not inconsistent with
moral Goodness, because it is of this or that sort, but simply because it is
necessity: for the only cause why a necessary Agent is not capable of
Morality, is because it is not able to determine it self to Good or Evil, and
consequently not capable of being directed and governed by Laws, Rewards and
Punishments. For what other reason can there be imagined, why any Agent is
incapable of being thus governed, then that it has no power and command over
its own Actions, the Office of Laws being to enjoin them, to whom they are
prescribed, that they determine themselves to act according to their
Prescriptions? But to require this of a principle void of any such power of
self-determination, is as absurd as to require it of Stones and Trees, because
the absurdity of both consists in requiring obedience, where there is no
principle or capacity able to render it. And therefore unless they can
reconcile necessity and indifferency so, as that the same Principle shall be
necessarily determined to one extreme, and yet remain so indifferent, as to be
able, if i^ please to determine it self to the other, it will be altogether
fruitless to make other sorts of liberty not inconsistent with necessity. But
this they can never do, unless they can bring the extremes of a contradiction
together, and make it all one to be determined and undetermined in reference to
the same Action. Thus (for Instance) that Principle that is endued with no
other Liberty, then what consists in mere spontaneity and immunity from
violence is, without indifferency and a power of self-determination, at as
great a distance from moral Good or Evil, as it would be, if it were acted
merely by external force and violence, because the reason why that which is
moved only by force, is not a principle capable of morality, is because it has
no power at all over its own motion, and so is moved with a fatal and
unalterable necessity, but a spontaneus or unforced Action, if it proceed not
from an indifferent but necessary Agent, is as fatal, and as necessary, as if
it were forced, and as little subject to the determination of the Principle,
from whence it flows, as it would though it proceeded from a foreign and
violent one, and by consequence is equally incapable of morality. And so that
principle, which is not only at liberty from Co-action, but is also endued with
Reason and Understanding is, without indifferency and a power of
self-determination, not less incapable of moral Good and Evil, then that which
is quite devoid of Rational faculties; because it is acted by an equal
necessity. For if the Judgment and definitive sentence of the understanding be
natural and necessary (as it not only is, but is also unanimously acknowledged
to be) and if the wills following this Judgment be as natural and as necessary
as its self; then it is as extravagant to command the will not to embrace the
object commended to it by the understanding, as it is to command the
understanding to judge otherwise of it then it does, which is the same
absurdity as to command the eye to see an object, after another manner then its
represented to it, because they are both determined by an equal necessity. From
all which it follows by all the Laws of Inference, that if Gods goodness should
take away the Indifferency of his will, it would certainly destroy not only his
Freedom, but all his moral Perfections and Accomplishments: which is my first
Argument.

2. If the Divine goodness or Benificence were a necessary Agent, it would not
only destroy the nature of the subject, in which it resides, but also, what is
more absurd, its own: for it is absolutely necessary to the nature of
Beneficence and Goodness, that it proceed from a free and elective principle.
No courtesy can oblige, but what is free and chosen, and the obligation of
benefits is only then acknowledged, when they are received from one, that had a
power not to bestow them, for otherwise they are owing not to his favor and
goodwill, but to chance or necessity. We make no returns of gratitude to the
Sun for his kind visits, and benign Influences, because his emanations flow
from a bare necessity of Nature: And Ioshuah thanked him not for standing still
at his request and interest: I should think it a strange Solecisme in
Courtship, if any one should make me retributions for a favor, that proceeded
only from some necessity of nature and not from choice of will. Because the
reason of the obligingness of benefits is, that they argue Benevolence and good
Intentions in the donor toward the person, on whom he bestows them, but when
they are the Issues of a necessary and unelective cause, they flow not from
Goodwill, and argue no benevolence in their Principle, but are the pure Results
of Nature. And therefore if all the Communications of Gods goodness be
necessary, they may argue the fullness of his nature, but cannot the goodness of
his will, because that is founded upon choice and freedom. I have in my former
reason endeavored to evince that a necessity of acting, of what sort soever,
is not capable of moral Good or Evil, because it is inconsistent with a Dominion
over ones own actions, in which all morality is founded, for an Agent that has
no power and command over its own Actions, and that acts because it must,
whatsoever excellent and commendable effects it may produce, is as incapable of
morality as those senseless Machins, that move by the Laws of matter and
motion, because it produces its effects after the same manner as mechanical
causes do, namely, by a necessity of nature. And if any artificial Automata
were endued with deliberative, elective and self-moving Principles, so as to
have power over their own motions, they would in degrees of proportion be
capable of doing well or ill, but because they have no elective and self-moving
power, that is the Reason why their motions are incapable of being good or evil;
and consequently all causes, whose effects result from the same necessity of
Nature, and that have no power, to restrain their emanations, are as incapable
of morality as these liveless Engines, because they lie under the same
incapacity. Now then Beneficence being a moral Excellency, it must loose its
morality, and consequently its nature, when it is natural and necessary, and
therefore if all the emanations of the Divine Bounty be such, it will
unavoidably follow, that there is no such, virtue or Beneficence and Goodness
in God, so that we may safely conclude that though the Communications of Gods
Goodness to his Creatures be exceedingly agreeable to his Nature, yet to make
them necessary and natural Results, is by denying their being free, to deny
their being Good.

3. God can never act contrary to his necessary and essential properties, as
because he is essentially wise, just and holy, he can do nothing that is
foolish, unjust and wicked. And therefore if Gods Beneficence and Bounty were
so natural, as that all its exertions were necessary, he could never act
otherwise; but that he frequently does, as is evident in all the Instances of
his Anger and Severity, which not only Reason but Scripture opposes to
Benignity, Romans 11. 22. Behold therefore the Goodness and Severity of God; on
them which fell severity; but toward thee Goodness. And Romans 9. 13. Iocob have
I loved, but Esau have I hated: The reason whereof is, v. 15. Because I will
have mercy, on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion, on whom I
will have compassion. The sole cause then why God showed greater bounty to
Jacob then to Esau, was a free determination of his own will, without the
intervention of any extrinsique motive to incline it: For v. 11. the Children
were yet unborn, and had done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God
according to Election [or choice] might stand. The Argument suggested by the
Apostles Discourse, beside his express resolving Gods Beneficence into his
freewill, is this, that if the flowings forth of Gods Goodness were necessary,
then Esau must have been blessed with as great expressions of favor as Jacob,
because there could be no cause, that could make a difference: Not Gods
Goodness, for its exertions being necessary, it would stream forth equally into
equal Capacities, and therefore if they were equally capable, the emanations of
the divine Goodness must have been equal, so that there was nothing could put a
difference, unless the Persons themselves, but the difference was made before
they could make it, viz. before they were born, or had done any good or evil,
but were in all respects equal. The Spirit of God has recorded in Scripture
almost as many instances of his severity, as of his clemency, because the
exercise of these contrary virtues depends on his free will, which being
indifferent to either, sometimes displays the one, and sometimes the other;
whereas those attributes that are Physical and Necessary, are determined one
way antecedently to the determinations of his Will.

From all which premises, we see (1.) that Gods benignity, goodness, and
beneficence, consist in a gracious Propensity to let forth the Communications
of his fullness to his Creatures, which being lodged in the Divine will, does
not only suppose its freedom, but is also subject to its determinations, so
that though it may incline, yet it cannot either command or destroy its
liberty, because if it should, it would not only interfere with Gods moral
accomplishmets, but would withal be inconsistent with it self. And therefore
it rather approaches to the nature of a habit seated in the Divine will, then
to the condition of an Essential faculty; whence a habit and custom of
goodness and clemency are frequently attributed to God in Scripture, but only
acts and single instances of severity; for though contrary habits cannot lodge
together in the same faculty, yet single actions of the one may sometimes issue
from that Power, in which its contrary is entertained: and therefore though the
expressions of Gods bounty be his usual and constant work, yet he sometimes
lets forth the eruptions of anger and severity, though with some unwillingness
and reluctance: for (Lament. 3. 33.) He does not willingly (or from his heart)
afflict the children of men; and therefore the holy Ghost (Esa. 21. 21.) styles
it his strange work, as if by reason of its seldom exercise, he were
unacquainted with it: so that though Gods inclinations to acts of Beneficence
and Goodness be vastly great and vigorous, yet they are free, and depending
upon the determinations of his will, and are upon this score consistent with
Gods dealing sometime with us by more severe and rigorous measures, which God
is pleased at certain seasons to dispense according to the unsearchable
Counsels of his own will. (2.) That the Communications of Gods goodness consist
in the use and exercise of his Dominion, for the good and benefit of his
Creatures; for they being all originally nothing, all the advantages they enjoy
to render their condition more desirable then Nonexistence, are the free gifts
and effects of Divine goodness, which being free and unconstrained, has
distributed its favors with an infinite variety, having made innumerable kinds
of Beings, and endued them all with perceptive faculties and capacities
proportioned to their respective natures, and provided suitable objects in
order to their gratification, so that although he has, according to the free
pleasure of his own will, created some in a more imperfect state then others,
yet he has provided liberally for the happiness of them all, having furnished
each order with objects agreeable to their respective faculties, in the
perception and enjoyment of which, consists all pleasure and satisfaction.

Now, if we will measure how large and ample the communications of Divine
goodness are, they are as vast as free, Psalm. 145. 9. The Lord is good to all,
and his tender Mercies are over all his Works. Psalm. 38. 5, 6. Thy goodness (O
Lord) reaches to the Heavens, and thy faithfulness to the clouds. Thy
Righteousness is like the great Mountains; thy Judgments (or works of
Providence) are a great deep; thou preservest man and beast, etc. i.e. Gods
goodness is of equal extent with his works, as vast and wide as the Universe,
running through all parts of the Creation. But to speak only of that goodness
which concerns our selves: how free and unstreitned have been the expressions
of Gods bounty to mankind? Not to mention the pleasures and enjoyments of life
it self, in which the Divine munificence has made provision, not only for our
necessity, but for our delight and curiosity too; nor the great variety of
perceptive faculties he has endued us with; nor the innumerable instancies of
his Mercy, Clemency, Patience, Long-suffering toward the sons of men, his
slowness and unwillingness to punish, and his readiness to pardon our
Impieties; nor his demanding only such homage and service from us, as cannot be
more our duty, then it is our happiness, with infinite more inestimable
vouchsafements, and expressions of his tenderness and good inclinations toward
mankind. I will only instance in his rewarding that obedience that is our debt,
with such great and inestimable blessings, viz. not only earthly and secular,
but spiritual and eternal pleasures: He might have sent us into the world to
act our parts a while, and have endeared our duty to us only by its own
appendant delights, and then have remanded us back into our pre-existent state
of not being: But that he should recompense the bare discharge of our duties,
with the rewards of Heaven and Eternity, is such a stupendous height of
goodness, as not only puzzles conceit, but outreaches wonder and admiration.
And yet that which enhances the value of the Reward, is not more its greatness
then its freeness, though some are so arrogant as to challenge a natural and
necessary right in it: Arrogant, I say, because if it were our due, we must
derive it not from Gods goodness, but from our own desert, for nothing beside
Gods goodness, can create us a right to future happiness, but our own Merits,
which from a Creature to its Maker implies the greatest contradiction. And if
in any respect Heaven be our due, God would be obliged by the natural measures
of Equity to bestow it, and so our happiness would not derive from the free
grant of Divine goodness, but from the prime and intrinsique Laws of Justice.
For if there were any natural and eternal necessity that Happiness should wait
on Virtue, that the Virtuous are happy, would be no thanks to the Divine
favor, because that cannot be an act of favor, which is demanded by Justice
and natural Right. And therefore those passages in Scripture, that seem to make
our future reward just and due, speak upon supposition of Gods gracious Promise
and Covenant with mankind, as Heb. 6. 10. For God is not unrighteous, to forget
your work and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his Name. 2 Timothy 4.
8. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous Judge, shall give me at that day; and not unto me only, but unto all
them also that love his appearing. In which, and other passages, the assured
hope of our future reward is therefore argued from Gods Justice, because it is
essentially just that he should perform his Promises, and therefore, although
Gods Promise or Covenant were not an act of Justice, but of Grace, (for it is
impossible for God to enter into any Covenant with his creatures, but a
Covenant of Grace) yet its performance, when made, is absolutely just and
necessary, and that in which God cannot fail without gross deceit and
falseness, he having engaged his Veracity to discharge all the debts of his
Grace. And therefore (as some learned Men have noted) this Justice in Scripture
is promiscuously expressed by Justice, Truth, and Faithfulness, Romans 3. 3, 4,
5. they are all used to express the same thing; And 1 Ioh. 1. 9. If we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins; Because if he be just
and faithful, he will perform his Promise.

If I were to prove the necessity of future Rewards and Punishment, from the
nature of any of the Divine Attributes, I should rather fetch my Arguments from
the Attributes of Wisdom then any else; because they are (as might easily be
evinced) so hugely useful, and well-nigh necessary to the Government of the
World; whence the Rabins reckon Paradise and Hell among those seven Pillars,
upon which they say God founded the world, supposing it could not subsist
without them: But yet no one sort of means being absolutely necessary to
Almighty Power and Wisdom, in order to any end, God could have found out in
finite ways to engage us to obedience, though he had never acquainted us with
future Rewards and Punishments. So that whatsoever Rationalities may be drawn
from the Divine Attributes, to prove a future state, yet it depending wholly on
the Divine will, and the Divine will being absolutely free, we can have no
rational inducements to bring us to any sufficient knowledge of it, but by a
clear Revelation of the Divine will, and therefore God (to complete the
Instances of his Goodness) sent the blessed Jesus into the world to bring life
and immortality to light, and to encourage us to Virtue and Goodness by greater
Rewards then were before proposed to mankind. So that though we could enhance
the expressions of Gods love and bounty to mankind, to their utmost pitch and
value, yet we have just reason to conclude, that the peculiar and unequaled
eminency of the Divine benignity, consists not so much in the greatness, as in
the freeness of its Emanations, as streaming forth from a fountain of free and
self-moving Goodness.

Of the Preexistence of Souls.
THough the foregoing Discourses are as useful and important Theories as any in
Divinity, (there being not any other Articles so universally interested in
Theological Speculations as these; nor any thing that has occasioned so much
Error and Ignorance in other points, as false and confused conceits,
concerning these two grand Attributes of Dominion and Goodness:) Yet they
cannot be more important and concerning in themselves, then they will be useful
and necessary for the successful management of this ensuing discourse against
Preexistence; because the most plausible Argument alleged, on behalf of this
Hypothesis, is grounded upon such mistaken notions of the Divine goodness, as
I have already (I think) evidently enough disproved in what I have discoursed
concerning that Attribute; so that I am so far before hand in the Dispute, as
to have prevented the strongest Objection I am liable to be Assaulted with.
This premised, I immediately proceed (1.) to give an account of the Hypothesis
it self, and the grounds on which it bottoms; and then (2.) to give in my
exceptions both against it and them. And that you may be sure of my
faithfulness in the first, I will perform it as near as I can, in the very
words of its most Peremptory assertours. Their account then is this,

That the Souls of men are not then first produced, when they are united to the
Bodies prepared for them by generation, but were created all at first in an
incomparably more Blessed and Divine Condition of Life, then that they are now
condemned to in this sad Region of sin and misery, but that at several times
and occasions by their Revolt from God and his righteous laws they forfeited
their better life and condition, and so were thrust down into these terrestial
Bodies, partly to be punished for their former prevarications, and partly that
by acting their parts well here, they might recover that more happy state from
which they lapsed into this. And this they endeavor to prove,

1. from the nature of Divine Goodness, which (say they) is constrained always
to do what is best; for the Souls of men being capable of eternal existence
and happiness backward as well as forward, and it being much better that they
should have enjoyed the pleasure of their life and actions from eternal Ages,
then either to have layn so long in the comfortless night of nothing, or to
have been at first created in so mean and wretched a condition, as that is
which they suffer in this Region of Death and Misery; and then God being
infinitely good and gracious, and infinite Goodness doing by the same necessity
that which is best, as infinite fire will necessarily burn whatever is
combustible, if put to it, it clearly and unavoidably follows (say they) that
they must have existed of old before they came into these Bodies.

2. From the Actions of Providence, which will not otherwise correspond to
those holy Attributes in the Deity, Righteousness and Benignity, according to
which he Governs and Orders the affairs of all the World. And this Argument
they make use of two ways, viz. in respect of the place and time wherein we
are born, and of the temper and disposition of the body, wherewith we are born.

As to the first of these, there is no man doubts but that education,
institution, and company, are of such wonderful moment to the making us good or
bad, as that where vice and wickedness are in use and practice, there seems
little less then a necessity of swimming down in the stream of our Countries
Vices: And then the greatest part of the World having been always overrun with
all manner of Lust and Barbarity, for God to send out of his pure and holy
hands an immaculate soul, capable of living elsewhere, and fit for all virtue
and heavenly Wisdom, into an habitation in such parts of the Earth, where
reigns nothing but gross Ignorance and Vice by which she cannot fail without a
miracle to be overborn, what is this, say they, but to betray his own
offspring unto unavoidable miseries?

As to the second of these they argue thus, seeing there are in mankind strange
and fatal propensities to all manner of vice and wickedness, that flow from the
very intrinsic constitution of their Bodies, how can it be consistent with the
Goodness and Righteousness of God, the blessed spring of all virtue and
Holiness, and tender lover of all his Creatures, to put innocent souls into
such foul and untamed bodies, which so fatally and necessarily hurry them to
that which alone of all things in the world he disapproves of, and which he
knows will be their utter bane and miserable ruin.

And here some of them argue more particularly from the absurdity of the two
opinions of the souls immediate creation, or seminal traduction; for if it
begins neither of these ways, it must have preexisted, therefore (1) against
the first of them, they use the forementioned Argument, viz. that it seems
inconsistent with the Goodness and Benignity of God, to put pure and immaculate
spirits into such Bodies as will presently defile them, pervert all their powers
and faculties, and incline them to all manner of vice and impiety. And then (2)
against the second, viz. seminal Propagation of souls, they argue from the
nature of the soul it self, for (say they) if the soul be generated then it
must be made of the soul of the Parent, which is against the nature of an
immaterial Being, the chief property of which is to be indiscerpable. These
are the most material considerations urged in behalf of Preexistence, others
that either depend on these, or are less considerable, I shall have occasion to
mention as I proceed, and withal, to reply to a few passages of Scripture,
that for the better countenance of the business, they press to serve in the
cause of this Controversy. Having given you this brief, but comprehensive
account of the Hypothesis it self, I now proceed to give in my Exceptions.

First then, although I am not obliged by virtue of what I have discoursed in
my fifth exception against the Platonic Philosophy, to oppose this Hypothesis
by Counter-arguings, because it is out of the sphere of Humane knowledge, and to
be ranked among Epicurus's (...), things merely possible, and merely
contingent, and so is sufficiently confuted by destroying the grounds on which
it stands, yet, to render my Triumph over it more full and entire, I shall make
my first onset from an objection drawn from its ill corresponding with the
divine Attributes of Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness, and that upon a twofold
account.

1. In that it supposes God to inflict the severities of his Justice without
attaining the ends thereof; for to what purpose is it to inflict penalties upon
any Person for offenses, of which he is as ignorant, as he could have been,
though they had never been committed? For assign they what ends of Justice they
please, this is most undenyably certain that to punish a guilty Person, that is
invinvincibly ignorant of his sins, is as far from attaining the ends of
Justice, as to inflict the same Punishments upon one that is guiltless, for if
he has no knowledge of his miscarriages, he has the same reason to be faultless
in his own esteem as he that is really so: But for God to chastise with the
rods of his vengeance any Creature that is in the same condition with the
Innocent and guiltless (in reference to the ends of Justice and Punishment)
bids not a less defiance to the Reputation of his Attributes, then to inflict
the same Punishments upon one that never deserved it. I conclude therefore that
if the calamities of this life were inflicted upon us only as punishments of
sins committed in another, Providence would have provided some effectual means
to preserve them in our Memories; and therefore because we find no remainders
of any such Records in our minds, it is (I think) sufficient evidence to all
sober and impartial enquirers, that our living and sinning in a former state
is as false as inevident.

2. In that it would be an invincible Temptation to mankind to have hard and
jealous thoughts of Gods dealings with them. For when they see themselves
environed with miseries and punishments, and feel the heavy strokes of divine
Anger, and yet are utterly ignorant that they have offended him, what more just
and reasonable grounds can they have not only to call in question but flatly to
deny his Goodness and Equity. For if it will not comport with Gods
Righteousness and Benignity to place us in these sad Circumstances we are in,
unless thereby to punish us for our former prevarications (as the patrons of
Preexistence fiercely and clamarously contest) when we know our selves to be in
this sad plite, and yet are utterly destitute of all knowledge how we deserved
it, what can we more naturally infer, then that God has, contrary to all the
Laws of Justice and Equity, made us Wretched and Miserable? Should he take the
most lewd and debauched Vilain upon Earth, and thrust him into the Dungeons of
endless misery, but withal take away all sense and memory of his former state
and wickedness, would not that miserable wretch have just reason to exclaim
against the Cruelty of his Maker, as supposing himself created in that sad and
deplorable state? And suppose it possible for God to have produced any being in
the same miserable condition the damned in Hell are supposed to suffer, that
wretched Creature might as well argue for a state of Preexistence, in which it
had deserved the Torments it endures, as any other being, that finds it self in
that forlorn condition, but is deprived of all knowledge of any former scene of
Life? Now God cannot in Reason expect we should acknowledge his Justice and
Righteousness contrary to his actings; and therefore if he has inflicted upon
us those Calamities, that cannot justly be inflicted upon any but sinners, and
yet not let us know we are such, what else can we conclude but that we
innocents are unjustly doomed to the sad and miserable Portion of the Wicked?
Perhaps it would not be difficult to invent many other not inconsiderable
Objections, but these are all that occurr to my thoughts at present, and all
those I have met with in Authors are most lamentably frivolous and impertinent.
And therefore I shall immediately pass on to the main and only needful part of
my Task, viz. to evince the Groundlesness of this Hypothesis I oppose, for if I
can show the Ratiocinations from whence they conclude its Truth and Reality to
be apparently vain and frivolous, I shall thereby sufficiently evidence the
vanity of the Hypothesis it self, as being built upon vain and trifling
Pretenses. But before I descend to their particular Examination, it will not be
impertinent to observe,

1. That it would be no difficult task to erect other much different or quite
contrary Hypotheses. Methinks that purely Phisical account which Porphiry some
where gives of the Souls descent into these Terrestrial Bodies, is as neat and
handsome as the Origenian or Moral one, for as this derives our lapse
Originally from our voluntary and chosen Immoralities, that other derives them
merely from a Physical necessity, which it illustrates by this similitude. As a
fruitful field, though it may for a certain period of years yield good Grain,
yet at length it is exhausted and grows barren, and then if sit be laid fallow
though it brings forth nothing but weeds and tares, yet it thereby recovers its
ancient vigor and fruitfulness; so our Souls having been for many ages
impregnated with the seed of Divine Ideas, by degrees spent, themselves in
bringing forth large returns of contemplation, till at length their
Intellectual powers decaying, the higher part falls into a swoon, and they can
exert no acts but of Imagination, whence spring forth the powers of the Vegetal
life, which cause in them strong and irresistible propensities to an union with
these inferior and terrestrial Bodies, in order to the awaking of the higher
Powers, for because every thing in the Etherial Regions is too calm and serene
to awake them, they are therefore conveyed into this place of noises and
disturbance, and invessel'd in a body full of rude and impetuous passions, by
which they may be chafed into life and sensation again. Or what if I would, out
of a perverse humor of contradiction, assign a quite contrary Hypothesis of
Preexistence, and as they will have this world a place of Punishment, and
maintain the Soul came into it by lapsing from a happier and more excellent
condition, so why may not I assert that it is a place of Reward, and that God
sends us hither to reward our virtuous actions in a lower and less happy
condition of life, or that they that had miscarried in a weaker and less
advantageous state, might once more try their fortunes in better and more
advantageous circumstances? Which Hypothesis would be as much, and perhaps more
consistent with it self, then the contrary. For seeing they will needs have it
the design of Providence, in thrusting the Soul down into this Region of
Misery, to amend and reform, as well as chastise it, it seems much more
consonant to effect this, by raising it to a more perfect state, then dooming
it to a worse, for it is a very preposterous way to Reformation, to put the soul
into such fatal propensities of sinning, (as they say it is in here;) this being
the directest course utterly and irrecoverably to undo it. And now had I a mind
to set up for a Maker of Hypotheses, (which you see is but an easy trade) I
might so trim and adorn this with artificial and affected Phrases, and so
support it with a set of Theorems, Pillars, and Fundamental Principles, as to
make it appear a competently handsome and well built Structure. And withal, I
think it would be able to stand the shock of those Objections and
Counter-evidences, that would shrewdly shake, if not utterly demolish the
Origenian Hypothesis: But if any Origenist shall disapprove my Hypothesis, I
only challenge him to confute it, for I am sure the like arguments will confute
his own: and therefore to show him the Vanity of inventing groundless and
imaginary Hypotheses, I will be so cross-grained as not to abandon mine, as
long as he shall persist peremptory in his.

2. The second thing I am to observe, is, that they (which is the usual
oversight of unwary disputants) dispute not more against their Adversaries then
themselves, in that the Arguments they use to destroy all other Hypotheses and
confirm their own, do as evidently oppose it as them. For their own account of
our descent into this world is, that it is only a merciful provision and
contrivance of the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God (the end of all whose
Councils is his Creatures Happiness) to put lost and delinquent Souls into a
capacity of acting their parts anew, Lux. Orient. p. 41.
that so, so many of his excellent creatures, might not be lost and undone
irrecoverably, but that they might be in a condition to recover the old
happiness of their Celestial state. Now is it not highly derogatory to the
infinite and unbounded Wisdom of God, that he should detrude those souls,
which he so seriously designs to make happy, into a state so hazardous, wherein
he sees it to be ten thousand to one, but that they will corrupt and defile
themselves, and so make themselves more miserable here, and to Eternity
hereafter? A strange method of Recovery this, to put them into such a fatal
necessity of perishing. It Is but an odd contrivance for their Restoration to
happiness, to use such means to compass it, which it is ten thousand to one but
will make them infinitely more miserable. This is such a contrivance of Mercy,
that puts us in a worse condition, then it abandons the Devils to, for if the
conditions of our Recovery be so near being impossible, our state is as bad as
theirs, and if the nonperformance of these conditions be punished with greater
penalties, it is worse. Better be abandoned to an eternal despair, then have
hopes to be rescued only by such means, as it is ten thousand to one but will
exceedingly increase our Torment and Misery. The Account of Orig. etc. page 27.
Again, If we call to mind the sad accounts we have met withal in History, of
times and places almost all the world over, overrun with all manner of
barbarity and lust, adopted even into their Laws, and practiced in their most
solemn Religions, how can we but think that the Soul then and there born and
living, is inevitably condemned to all Iniquity and Impiety? But can we imagine
that infinite Wisdom seriously purposes to restore us to our ancient. Holiness
and Purity, when it places us in such a state, in which we are inevitably
condemned to all Iniquity and Impiety? If God had contrived to betray us into
all manner of vice and wickedness, how could he more effectually have
accomplished it, then by putting us into such a condition, as should inevitably
condemn us to all Iniquity and Impiety? That Father would take a strange course
to reform a debauched and wretchless Child, that should go about to effect it
by abandoning him to the Society of Rogues and Villains. Page 28. For God
therefore to send an immortal Soul (whose happiness is his greatest design and
contrivance) into an habitation in such parts of the Earth, where reigns
nothing but gross ignorance and vice, by which she cannot fail without a
miracle to be overborn, what is this but to betray his own offspring (for he
is the Father of Spirits) unto unavoidable misery, whilst he pretends to plot
and contrive their happiness, and so govern the world with less prudence, then
an ordinary discreet man would do. Once more in their own words, Page 35. I
would ask them whether or no the condition of our nature considered, the
strong inclinations naturally to that which is evil, and those strengthened and
further confirmed for several years before we can come to have any considerable
use of our Reason, or arrive to any command over our selves. Lastly, the way
and manner how the Elections of our will are performed, which we never find
free, where there is a custom or passion against it, and how corporeal motions
determine the thoughts and passions of our minds; I ask them whether these
things being considered, it be not hundreds to one odds, that we shall choose
the ways of Vice rather then Virtue? Or let the proportion be as little as they
can with any color pretend, they cannot clear the Wisdom and Discretion of
Divine Providence by their Hypothesis, which thrusts the Spirits (it intends to
make for ever happy) into so great a danger of being defiled and corrupted by
the passions of the Body, and of soundly smarting for it hereafter. Thus you
see what strong Objections, the Arguments they urge with most noise and
clamor, are against themselves, if therefore these Phenomenon be inexplicable
without the Origenian Hypothesis, they are so too with it; and if so, then the
result of all is, that they are not so much Arguments of Preexistence, as
Aspersions of Providence. For whatever Hypothesis is true, they charge Gods
Transactions with mankind either of Injustice or Folly; and therefore I shall
attempt their solution not so much to oppose the Hypothesis of Preexistence, as
to vindicate the Divine Providence from so many contumelious and unworthy
Reproaches. After these more general considerations against the Hypothesis it
self: I come now to a particular Examination of the Arguments on which it is
founded.

First then, as for that strong Demonstration (as they style it) taken from the
Nature of Gods goodness, which they suppose constrained to do always that which
is best, it is so fully, not only answered, but confuted, in what I have already
discoursed, of the nature and extent of Gods Goodness and Dominion, that to
subjoyn any formal Reply, would be but a needless and troublesome Repetition.
For having made it apparently evident, that any state, better then that of
Nonexistence, may be the object of Gods Dominion, and the effect of his
Goodness; every condition of Being, preferable to that of Not-being, is not
only consistent with the Divine Goodness, but a Product of it; and therefore
if they will make good this Argument drawn from the Divine Goodness for their
Hypothesis, they must first either disprove the Truth and Validity of my
preceding discourses, or else make it appear that the condition of Souls in
this life is more deplorable and less desirable, then the state of
Annihilation. And when they shall have done either, they will deserve a farther
reply, but not till then.

And yet I cannot forbear to super add this one Consideration more, viz. that
the boundless Infinity of the Divine Goodness is consistent with the existence
of different Ranks and Orders of Creatures, God being not constreined to make
every Creature the most Perfect he can, for then there would have been but one
sort of Beings, viz. the highest and most consuminate Rank of all, whereas we
see the World replenished with diverse species of Creatures, some more, some
less perfect. Now, if notwithstanding the Infiniteness of the Divine Goodness,
there may be various kinds of Creatures of various and unequal Perfections;
then what necessity or Reason imaginable is there, the Divine Goodness should
be constrained to let forth its largest Emanations to mankind; for why may not
our species be of an inferior Rank in the Order of Beings? And if so, then
what necessity is there we should be endued with all possible Perfections? Are
there not several Ranks of Spirits or Immaterial Beings? And are not the
Assertors of Preexistence the most Zealous Patrons thereof? And do they not
Marshal the Souls of Men in one of the lowest and most imperfect Orders, as
being united to the grossest and most ignoble Body, viz. Terrestrial matter,
whilst all the rest reside in Bodies of Air or Ether? and therefore for men
to deem the Divine Goodness less infinite, because its Communications are not
so great to them as they are to others, is as absurd as it was for the Figs in
the Fable, that complained to Jupiter, because he had not made them Grapes.
Again, why might not all these several Ranks of immaterial Beings be at first
created in the same estate they are in at present, without lapsing from a
higher to a lower condition of life, as well as several sorts of material
creatures, which were at first disposed in the same order they still hold? If
God could, his Goodness notwithstanding, create such an innumerable variety of
Insects, which are but imperfect and half Animals; then why might he not also,
notwithstanding the same Goodness, create among spiritual Essences a species
not more perfect then humane Souls? For if the boundlesness of Gods goodness
does not hinder but that some Creatures may exist in a much more imperfect
Condition then others, then neither can it hinder but that the Souls of men
might be placed in a much less perfect condition then other immaterial Beings.
From all which it follows, that it cannot with the least pretense of Reason,
be argued from the Nature of Gods Goodness, that the Souls of men did once
preexist in the happiest state, which Beings of their Nature are possibly
capable of enjoying. As for their Arguments taken from the Providence of God,
their whole force Centers in this one difficulty, that God has not taken
sufficient care for the happiness of his Creatures, but has left them too
obnoxious to Sin and Misery; now to assoil and clear this Objection, I need
only evince that the Divine Providence has made not only sufficient but large
provisions for the Happiness of Mankind. But I shall not be content nakedly to
answer their Objections, unless I can confute them too; In order to which, I
shall undertake to do these two things, (1.) To propose a plain and easy
Hypothesis, that gives a rational and satisfactory account of all the
forementioned Phaenomina of Providence. And then (2.) To show that Mankind is
not only endued with such Faculties, by the use whereof he may arrive at the
highest degrees of Virtue and Happiness; but also that we have the greatest
Endearments and Advantages in the world, to engage and assist us in a diligent
and vigorous prosecution thereof.

My Hypothesis is this, That it has pleased Providence to place mankind here in
an immature and more imperfect state, that so we might in a way congruous to
free and rational Agents by degrees be fitted for, and at length arrive at a
better and more raised condition of life. As in nature all things commence
their Beings in a rude and immature state, and make orderly progressions, to
farther degrees of maturity, 'till they arrive at the utmost perfections their
Beings are capable of; so is mankind Created and born into the World as it were
in the Spring, in a Budding and Blossoming season, that so we may by proceeding
forward in the differing Periods of our lives, grow up to higher and more
excellent Capacities, till at length we ripen into a state of maturity and
perfection. Our natures are at first somewhat rough-cast, to the end that they
might be refined and polished by Virtue and Religion; so that it is the main
(and perhaps only) design of Religion to perfect and advance our Natures, and
make us capable of a higher and more noble condition of life. Now I need not
declaim and expatiate upon the neatness and consistency of this Hypothesis,
when we know by experience that it is the way and method pitched upon by
Providence to conduct mankind to its Perfection, it being an Economy hugely
agreeable to all the designs and purposes of Religion, the Natural tendency
whereof is to raise us to higher Capacities and nearer approaches to the Divine
Nature. This gives a more general Reason of the present, low and imperfect
condition of mankind, but that I may give a more certain and perspicuous
account thereof, and more close to the main Origenian objection ( viz. why God
should put pure and immaculate Souls into these disorderly Brutish Bodies) I
shall make my Hypothesis more distinct and particular.

Mankind then is an order of Beings placed in a middle state between Angels and
Brutes, made up of contrary principles, viz. Matter and Spirit, endued with
contrary Faculties, viz. Animal and Rational, and encompassed with contrary
Objects proportioned to their respective faculties, that so they may be in a
capacity to exercise the Virtues proper and peculiar to their compounded and
heterogenial Natures. For the perfection of humane Souls does not consist in an
effeminate Beauty, and Physical proportions, but in a manly courage and moral
accomplishments, as at the Olympic Games there was no regard had to Beauty and
Neatness, they only were capable of honor and reputation, who had courage and
patience enough to combat. And the life of man in this world is nothing else
but an Olympic exercise, God having placed us here not to admire the native
Beauty and Perfection of our Beings, but to exercise our selves in the
conflicts and difficulties of Virtue; therefore the worth and praise of the
Soul, consists in a Braveness and Gallantry of Spirit, when it scorns to be
usurped upon by those faculties that ought to obey her, and checks and
controules all their unruly and tumultuous exorbitances by her own sovereign
and imperial Laws, and resolutely defends its own Authority and Prerogative
against all the furious and rebellious attempts of Passion and Concupiscence.
And therefore though humane Souls be capable of subsisting by themselves, yet
God has placed them in Bodies full of brutish and unreasonable Propensions,
that they might be capable of exercising many choice and excellent Virtues,
which otherwise could never have been at all; such as Temperance, Sobriety,
Chastity, Patience, Meekness, Equanimity, and all other Virtues that consist in
the Empire of Reason over Passion and Appetite, Religion is common to Men and
Angels, appertaining to them purely as Spirits, but Virtue is proper to man
alone, and belongs to him as a Being made up of contrary principles, whence
spring contrary desires and inclinations, in the good or bad Government whereof
consists the Nature of Virtue and Vice, and upon this score it is that Virtue is
never attributed to God, because being of a simple and purely spiritual nature,
he has no unruly passions and sensual Appetites to Govern.

And therefore the Platonists, though they place all Intellectual Virtues (...)
in the abstracted Soul, yet they will have all moral ones reside (...) in the
Composition, denying the naked Soul to be capable of moral Good or Evil, these
belonging only to the whole which results from Soul and Body; (...) says
Plotinus. And this (by the way) is their meaning, when they unanimously resolve
that grand perplexing enquiry (...) into the terrestrial Hyle; because our
material Principle, by reason of its intrinsique dullness and stupidity,
naturally hinders and obstructs the intellectual efforts of the mind, and
inclines it to the love of material and sensual objects, which if it suffer it
self to be so far immerst into matter as to pursue only or chiefly the
satisfaction of its gross and sottish Propersities, thence naturally spring all
those Irregularities that pass under the name of Moral Vices. And this account
of the Origin of Evil, is not so devoid of Reason, as some Learned men would
persuade us. For (1) it does not (as is objected) make matter to be essentially
evil, but rather the occasion thereof from its extra essential union with the
soul. Nor (2*) does it make the existence of evil natural and necessary, for it
dos not assert that it results from the nature of matter (as they would make us
believe) but only an accidental effect thereof after its union with the soul,
in that from the sluggishnesse of its nature, it inclines the soul to the love
of gross and material objects; and if the soul be so careless as to yield to
its inclinations, it becomes the voluntary cause of its own evil. But you will
think my Pen very unruly if it be so apt to fly out into Digressions, when
it is in so great speed, and therefore I return.

Now because the nature of Virtue consists in the minds governing the Brutish
and Animal appetites and motions of the body, Providence has furnished it with
instruments convenient for that purpose; for having its principal and
commanding residence (...), where the Nerves that convey all motions and
impressions backward and forward, have their Original, it is able by its
immediate influence upon them to command and bridle all the Animal motions of
the Body. Thus because all excess of Passion consists in an irregular motion of
the blood; the Nerves (which the soul uses as its reins) are twisted about the
veins and arteries, that so by contracting them, it may be able to refrain and
check the Impetuosity of the Bloods motion, and consequently curb the eager and
unruly passion; as when for example such an object is presented to us, that
naturally provokes to anger, which mainly consists in a violent ebullition and
fervor of the blood about the Region of the Heart, which violently hurrying
from thence into the Brain, disorders the motions of the Spirits there, and so
by confounding the phautasms that lodge therein, disturb all its conceptions
and operations; then does it concern the Soul to abate and cool this unruly
heat, which is effected by restraining the violence of the Torrent, which is
effected by its influence upon those Nerves that are the passage and high way
from the Brain to the Heart. And therefore the Providence of nature has made a
peculiar passage for commerce between the Head and the Heart in Man, V. Willis
Cereb. Anat. cap. 26.
where it has made none in Beasts, viz. whereas the Praecordia of Beasts are
furnished with nervous branches only from the Par vagum to supply the vital
functions with spirits, in man there are peculiar large branches, derived from
the Intercostal Nerve into the same region, only for a way of commerce between
the Brain and the Heart, and passage of the Animal spirits from the one to the
other, as need shall require. In so much that we may define Prudence and Virtue
to be nothing else but a due commerce between the Brain and the Heart (which
Plotinus only expresses more abstractedly, when he describes it to be (...)) of
which the forecited machless Author supplys us with a clear Example, viz. that
dissecting a Changeling or Natural Fool, the chief defect he could discover in
him was, that this Plexus of the Intercostal Nerve, which is proper to the body
of Man, and is the way of commerce for the Animal spirits between the Heart and
the Brain was exceeding small, and its branches very thin. By reason whereof,
his Soul could have but very little command over his Passions and Appeties, in
the impotency and irregularity whereof consists the nature of Folly.

The result of all is this, that mankind is compounded of contrary Principles,
endued with contrary desires and inclinations, to the end that there might be
an order of Beings in the world (without which there would perhaps have been
one Species wanting to complete the Universe) capable of all those Heroic
Virtues, which consist in the Empire of Reason over the brutish and sensual
Faculties. As also that by the right use and emprovement of our superior
Powers, we might be raised to greater Capacities, and qualified for higher and
more divine Accomplishments. So that man seems to differ from the Angels only
in this, that he must by conquest and industry win the happiness, which is
entailed on their Natures; for when we become (...) in our dispositions, we
shall be made so too in our enjoyments; the Divine Goodness having graciously
appointed, that when the Soul is so far advanced in Virtue, as to live above
the reach of all its Passions and Desires, that then it shall be translated
into a more free and disintangled state, where it shall be neither enticed nor
vexed with the importunity of these lower and brutish Appetites, but shall
enjoy the Serenity and Pleasures of a pure and intellectual Being, as the
Reward of its former Pains and Industry. As on the contrary, when any man
suffers his Passions and Brutish Appetites to beat Reason out of its Throne,
and to run headlong into an ungovernable Anarchy, he degenerates from humanity,
grows incorrigible in sin, and sinks so deep into the Animal life, as to be
made incapable of acting Virtuously, and suitably to the ends of his Being; and
thence is congruously doomed to the Portion of degenerate and apostate Spirits,
as being fit for nothing else. So that the whole design of Providence, in
sending us into this world, is only that we may in a way congruous to rational
Agents, prepare our selves for another; and therefore the Souls of men shall at
their departure hence, be stated in a condition proportioned to their good or
bad Qualifications. I am apt to be positive and dogmatical in this Hypothesis,
not so much because it gives a rational and satisfactory account of Gods
sending pure and innocent Souls into Bodies full of brutish and irregular
Inclinations, as because it exactly agrees with the Condition of our Natures,
with the natural tendency of Virtue and Religion, and with the whole Economy
of Providence in conducting mankind to their future happiness. Not to mention
its consonancy with Saint Paul's Hypothesis, in his Account of the Civil and
Intestine War between the law of the Mind and the law of the Members.

And now having laid my Hypothesis, I come to show (1.) that mankind is endued
with such faculties, by the use whereof, he may attain to the highest degrees
of Virtue and Happiness; (2) that we have the greatest endearments and
advantages in the world to push us forward to a diligent and vigorous
Prosecution thereof. And if Virtue and Happiness be in our own power, and if we
are invited to pursue and endeavor after them by the greatest endearments and
persuasions, then certainly Providence has placed us in a sufficient capacity
of being happy, and if it happen that we should at last be abandoned to Misery,
we must owe it to our own choice and prodigious folly.

1. First then, Mankind is furnished with such faculties, by the use whereof he
may arrive at Virtue and Happiness. To evidence this, I require no other
Postulatum, then that which is the great foundation of all Religion and
Morality, viz. that the Mind of man is endued with Reason and Understanding,
able to discern the essential differences of Good and Evil; and with Liberty
and Election, able to choose and pursue the one, and eschew the other. This (I
say) is a Postulatum so just and evident, as that it cannot be denied without
destroying not only the Nature of Good and Evil, but of Man himself; For if in
any thing we differ from Brutes, it is in the Reason and Liberty of our minds,
all our other faculties we have in common with them, it is these alone that are
the peculiar Prerogatives of humane Nature, and therefore without them we may
be Sheep or Oxen, but not Men.

-- Separat haec nos
A grege mutorum, atque ideo venerabile soli
Sortiti Ingenium, divinorumque capaces,
Atque exercendis capiendisque Artibus apti,
Sensum a caelesti demissum traximus Arce.
However these are the efficient Causes and necessary Foundations of all
Morality; for no Action can be morally Good or Evil, but what we can choose,
and concerning which we can deliberate, because without them all our Actions
would be either Casual or Fatal, and the mere Issues of Chance or Necessity,
and by consequence, as incapable of being moral, as those motions that result
purely from Mechanical Powers, as I have already (I think) demonstrated, in
what I have discoursed concerning the Freedom of the Divine Goodness. And now,
if the mind of man be a deliberative and elective Principle, able to discern
between Good and Evil, Happiness and Misery, and to choose the one and refuse
the other, then it is at its own choice, and in its own power to be Virtuous and
Happy; for no body questions but that Goodness and Happiness are much more
eligible then Vice and Misery, and therefore if men are able to discern, and
choose that which is best, their Happiness and Misery depend upon their own
wills and their Portion, whether good or bad, is the result of their own
choice; and certainly they that can be virtuous and happy if they will, are in
a fair capacity of being so.

From hence it follows, that the mind and rational part of man is Superior and
Predominant, not only endued with Power, but also invested with Authority to
Govern the inferior and brutish part, which is of a slavish and servile
nature, and made to obey. Reason is uppermost, and has the bridle in its own
hands, and is strong enough to manage the wildest and most untractable
Passions. There Is no appetite within us uncontrollable, no inclinations so
strong and fatal, which reason cannot master; natural Propensities can only
tempt, but not command our Souls; they may incline, but cannot force them; and
our minds are never vanquished, but when they betray themselves. Briefly, none
of the charms of Concupiscence are so powerful and irresistible, but that
Wisdom and Discretion can easily dissolve and disenchant them. The Truth and
Reality whereof, I thus Argue, Either the rational Part of man is able to
command the lower Appetites, or it is not; if it is, then is he sufficiently
able to live well and happily, because Virtue and Happiness are obtained by
living up to Reason, and being conducted by its Laws and measures; and
therefore if our superior Powers are able to give check and control to our
brutish Lusts and Passions; it is in our own Power to attain to virtue and
happiness. But if the Superior part be not strong enough to Govern the
Inferior, it destroys the very Being and Existence of Good and Evil, and
renders mankind utterly incapable of Goodness and Morality. For (1.) our
Irrational faculties are unanimously acknowledged to be incapable of Moral
goodness, because they are acted purely by a necessity of Nature; and their
Exertions, like the Appetites of Brutes, and the Motions of Artificial Engines,
result merely from the Mechanical Powers of Matter. And hence it is that our
Imperate Actions (i.e. those that do not issue immediately from the Will it
self, but are exerted at its command, by some of the inferior faculties that
owe it subjection) are devoid of all moral Capacities, as considered
abstractedly in themselves, or as proceeding from their immediate Cause, and
without respect to the wills Authority, because when so considered, they are
not free and voluntary; and therefore their being Morally good or evil, is
entirely derived from the Will, because they act only in obedience to its
Commands. Nor (2.) would our Rational faculties in this case, be capable of
Morality, as being fatally determined by the stronger and irresistible motions
of Lust and Passion; But the Actions that proceed merely from force and
foreign Violence, are of all others least capable of being moral, because they
do not only not issue from a free and self-determining Principle, which is the
greatest and most necessary foundation of all Morality, but also because they
are not at all determined from their own Principle, but are forced thence
barely by the Power of an exterior Agent. Besides this, the moral Goodness our
Superior faculties are capable of, would consist in their Commanding and
Governing the Inferior, but if they are not able to master and rule them, they
cannot be supposed to be enjoined to govern them, because nothing can be
obliged to impossibilities; and therefore if our Superior Powers are commanded
to govern the Inferior, they must have strength enough to do it. Wherefore,
howsoever fatal and boisterous our Bruitist propensions are, if there be any
such thing as Religion and Moral goodness in the world, they must be subject to
the command and discipline of our Superior and Governing faculties. From all
which it is evident, by a plain and undeniable deduction, that mankind,
notwithstanding the force of their brutish Inclinations, is placed in a fair
capacity of living well and happily, which utterly destroys all the
forementioned Arguments alleged from this Phenomenon of Providence, on the
behalf of Preexistence.

As for the other part of their Argument, taken from the customary Vices and
Impieties of the World, viz. seeing that Custom and Education have a great
influence upon the manners of men, to make them good or bad, as also that the
greatest part of the world has been always overrun with all manner of lust and
barbarity; for God to send an Immaculate Soul into an habitation into such
parts of the Earth, where reigns nothing but Vice and Wickedness, by which she
cannot fail without a Miracle to be overborn, is to betray his own offspring
unto unavoidable Misery. It Is an objection sets too mean a value upon humane
Nature, and supposes mankind no better then Mushrooms, as if all men were but
so many Engines moved by the wheels of Custom, and had not faculties within
them able to discern of the good and evil of Customs, as well as of other
things. I confess custom has acquired great Power and Authority over the life
of Man; because the lives of most men are disposed of by chance and casual
Principles, they pursue those things with which custom presents their Fancies,
without ever deliberating of their Goodness and Decency. You know who has
Pictured mankind coming into the World upon Hobby-horses; and truly (Sir) the
Emblem would perhaps have been as true, if he had represented most of them
going out so. Seneca long since complained, that the World was not governed so
much by Reason, as by Custom; Men accounting that most Honest, which is most
in Practice; and Error when it becomes Public, becomes Truth. Custom is
almost every where so confident, as to outface Reason, and charge it of
singularity, as indeed the Wisest men are the greatest Rebels to her Usurped
Empire, whilst she rides upon the shoulders of the People, who are almost
universally, not only, her Slaves, but her Idolaters: For the rude and vulgar
sort of people, every where, judge of things barely by their conformity to the
Modes and Fashions of their own Country, and esteem all foreign Customs and
Usages inept and barbarous, purely for their disagreement with their own
Domestic manners; and therefore I account the Boors of Attica, and the common
people of Greece (in its most refined age) not less barbarous then the wild and
unpolished Scythian, because they were equally Idiotical, and lived by no other
Rule then Prescription, preferring the Customs of Greece, as the Standard of
Decency, and judging of the goodness of things by their Correspondence with the
Manners and Fashions of their own Country, and condemning all strange and
foreign usages of barbarity, because they agreed not with the Municipial laws
and customs of the Town they lived in. But the plain and evident Reason of all
this is, because the Idiotical sort of Mankind are Fools, and live below the
dignity of their Natures. For certainly Reason ought to take the upper hand of
prescription, and men that are wise and considerate [i.e. those that live as
becomes men) will examine the nature and reasonableness of customs, and not
rely upon their Warrantie till they are satisfied of their Goodness, and adopt
only those which they judge to be innocent and laudable. Opinion is the guide of
Fools, and to yield ones self up to the Government of Custom is one of the the
grossest instances of Folly; and it is but a silly Apology for fond or vicious
Practices, to plead that it is the Custom of the World: For no man can tamely
resign up the Authority of his Judgment to the power of this little
Monosyllable Tyrant (as Erasmus according to the quibling wit of his age terms
Mos) unless he renounce his allegiance to his Reason, and live the life of
brutes that always follow one another for company. And therefore if Custom be
the Empress of the world, it is because men delight in slavery, and abandon their
Liberty to live in Chains, for if they would continue faithful to their own
faculties, and own no other guide but their Reasons, (which doubtlessly is the
prime and fundamental duty of mankind) they would scorn to suffer themselves to
be oppressed and imposed upon by so silly a thing as Custom. So that if men
would but live suitably to their Rational Natures, the corrupted and vicious
manners of the Age and Place they live in, could have no Influence upon their
Practices; for Custom is a thing without us, of the good or evil, whereof we
are as well able to judge, as of other things, (for we are not Parrots, but men
born with rational Faculties) and therefore if we impotently permit our selves
to be seduced by it, we act unworthy the Faculties God has given us, and so
deservedly forfeit the Happiness that is due to our Rational Nature. Here I
might argue that if men's Reasons were not able to bear them up against the
Torrent of their Countries Vices, it could be no crime to be borne down by the
violence of the stream, but I have already prevented my self in this, in what I
have argued concerning the predominancy of our Rational Part over our lower
Appetites; for how great soever the power of Custom may be, it cannot be more
forcible then natural Inclinations, and it is much more easy to divest our
selves of superinduced habits, then to alter that which is radicated in our
Natures; and therefore if we are able to correct the Vicious inclinations that
flow from the structure and composition of our Bodies, we are much more able to
reclaim or quit those vicious habits, we have contracted only by casual and
accidental usages. We esteem it indeed a mighty business for any man to
discharge his mind from the prepossessions of Custom and Education because it is
so rarely practiced; but if we consider the nature of the thing it self,
nothing can appear more easy and practicable; in that all men are endued with
rational and reflecting Faculties, and no action costs less pains then a
reflecting thought, and nothing more obvious and palpable then the different
Natures and Consequences of Virtue and Vice; and therefore every man that does
not choose a stupid In-advertency may with an ordinary diligence disabuse
himself from all the false and groundless Preconceptions of a customary Belief;
Superinduced disciplines may corrupt, but cannot evacuate our natural
Faculties, and therefore though they may delude and inveagle our Infant
Reasons, yet when we are grown to an Age capable of Rellishing morality, it is
then as easy to cashire all absurd Customs, as it was before to be cajoled by
them. As the Earth may steam forth vapors gross enough to cloud the Sun, and
for awhile check the radiations of his light, yet the energy of his Rays will
at length vanquish, and in spite of all their Resistance break through the
thickest of those benighting clouds, and enlighten that Globe, which
endeavored to darken him; And thus though Custom, Prejudice, and Education,
may for a while cloud our Understandings, and intercept the displays of our
Reasons, yet so prevailing is their innate Brightness and Vigor, that (unless
we our selves stifle their emanations) they will both discover and dispel the
grossest delusions.

Having hitherto treated of the Forces within us, I come now to discover our
Auxiliaries without, and to show that as we are endued with Faculties, by the
use whereof we may attain at Virtue and Happiness, so also that we are aided
and asisted herein by the greatest endearments and encouragements in the world,
which is the next Theme I proposed to discourse of.

As Pleasure then is man's chiefest good, so Virtue is his highest Pleasure, the
Divine Goodness has made it our duty to be happy, all the restraints that God
has tied upon Mankind are so many engagements to confine them within the
compass of their own Happiness, and whatsoever lies beyond the lines of our
liberty, lies beyond the limits of our content, and to transgress them is to
step into continual hazzards and disquietudes. The divine Wisdom has made the
Portions of Virtue and Vice to be as distant as their Natures, having entailed
on the one nothing but Sorrow and Calamity and on the other nothing but Joy and
Satisfaction. The evil effects of evil Practices are so spontaneous and
natural, that though there were no superinduced Penalties, Wickedness would be
its own Executioner. Malitia ipsa maximam partem veneni sui bibit; every vice
exacts the Penance of its own folly. All Criminal Pleasures conclude in
Repentance, and if men would but resolve to pursue only (...), pleasures that
expire not in Repenting (which is all that Socrates prescribed for the making
men both virtuous and happy) we should soon see wonderful alterations in the
lives of Men in spite of all those fatal Propensities, concerning which the
Patrons of Preexistence make such Tragical Declamations. Tranquillity of mind
and Indolency of body, are the most natural, most easy, and most durable
pleasures in the world, these two combined together, compose the most
sovereigne and standing delight of the life of man: And that man that is so
expert in moral Wisdom, as to be able out of the Mass of all his transient
delights, to extract health and contentedness, is as happy as this world can
make him: And yet it is the very design of all moral Virtues, first to render
us capable of this state and then to procure it. Whereas they that
intemperately indulge to their transient delights, because they are more
sensual, do but exchange constant stable Pleasures for perishing uncertain
ones, and such as conspire to create lasting and permanent miseries. And
therefore Epicurus, who having casheir'd Providence and the Souls Immortality,
was consequently obliged to discard all moral Goodness, yet set as high an
estimate upon Virtue as any Philosopher of them all, because he apprehended it
so highly conducive to Indolency of Body and Tranquillity of Mind, in which
alone he expected his sovereign Felicity: so big a lie is it that he placed
man's supreme Happiness in Brutish Pleasures.

If in any respect Virtue and Religion entrench upon the liberty of our Natures
it is in the Instances of sensuality, and yet in these there is no other
restraint laid upon us, then that we live by the Rules and Measures of nature;
and the Natural Appetites of a Man are temperate and reasonable; Nature desires
nothing but what is useful and convenient, and its satisfactions are as innocent
as necessary: So that whilst we follow the dictates and appetites of humane
nature, we do nothing contrary to Virtue and Religion: But when the Man is
divided from the Beast, and his Reason separated from the inferior and Brutish
Appetites, then arise irregular and unreasonable desires, but these proceed
merely from the brutish part, and are preter-natural and violent to the man:
so that till we abandon Reason and the better part of our selves, Lust is a
violence to our Natures and so far from gratifying our natural Propensities,
that it is their greatest contradiction. But if we should suppose that Virtue
consisted in a perpetual Violence to all our Appetites and Inclinations, yet
its future reward being so great and glorious, there is no advised and
reflecting man, but would exchange a short satisfaction of his present desires,
for the hopes and assurance of Infinite felicities hereafter. It must be a
strange piece of Folly and Indiscretion to prefer the enjoyment of a short,
cheap, imperfect delight, before the hopes of the Joys of Heaven and Eternity:
For sensual gratifications are so low and unsatisfying that to want them can
amount but to an inconsiderable misery, whereas the future pleasures that
entertain our hopes are as great as endless; and therefore to miss them must
needs be the saddest disaster man can suffer. So that though I should grant the
object of our hopes to be inevident and uncertain, yet any man, that acts
beyond the Indiscretion of a Child, will rather choose to foregoe the present
Enjoyment of cheap and little pleasures, then the probable hopes of the
greatest and most satisfying Felicities: For the naked hope and expectation of
so great a Blessedness, is more pregnant with present content and satisfaction
to the mind of man, then the enjoyment of the highest and most exquisite
delights of sense. But when the ways of Virtue are so pleasant, reasonable,
and advantageous in themselves, as though they procure, yet they need not
promise the Blessings of another world, and yet are so endeared to us by their
inesteemable appendant rewards, as to make them delightful, though they were
unpleasant in themselves, then certainly are they recommended to our choice by
the strongest motives and allurements that can work upon a Ramotional Nature.
Though the Prosecution of this Argument be as pleasant as it is copious, yet
(beside that I have not now leisure to pursue it through all its particular
instances) the Pulpit has of late afforded enough excellent discourses upon
this Theme, to supercede the necessity of any farther Performance of it. But if
you desire to see it discoursed of in a more Philosophic way, I refer you to
Tully's Books de Finibus, where it is as Rationally as Largely asserted by
Torquatus the Epicurean. And now, If Humane Nature be endued with Rational and
reflecting Faculties, if it be most natural and easy for these Faculties to
choose and pursue those objects that are most agreeable to their own Natures,
and most conducive to Humane Felicity; If Virtue be most natural, easy, and
reasonable; if it be endeared to us by present and future delights; If vice be
contrary to the Nature, Interest, and Reason of men; if men have all the
inducements and Persuasions in the World to pursue Virtue and Goodness, and as
great discouragements to scare and deter them from the Prosecution of Vice and
Impiety; if I say these things are so, then I appeal to all Mankind whether
the Divine Providence can be justly charged for leaving them too obnoxious to
sin and misery. But I easily foresee that you will enquire, if all men have
such pregnant engagements to Virtue, what is the Reason of the almost unanimous
viciousness of mankind, and that when they have all the Reason in the world to
engage them in an indefatigable pursuit of Goodness? whence comes it to pass,
that they should with so much eagerness thwart both their Reason and their
Interests for the love of Vice and Wickedness. I answer, that though sensual
Inclinations, false Principles, vicious Examples, and wicked Customs, may be
inducements and occasions of it, yet the only proper cause is the wilful or
stupid Inadvertency of men. Inconsiderateness is that (...) (as the Rabins
speak) the root whence all mischiefs grow: it is the spring and head of that
torrent of wickedness, that has always overflown the greatest part of the
world. For if men would but look to the end of all criminal Pleasures, they
would easily discover in them much more to avert, then to entice and court
their Passions; but when their Appetites are passionately set upon them, they
grow wild and impatient, and will enjoy though they know it is death and misery
they embrace. That no man miscarries but by bruitishness and inconsideration, I
might demonstrate out of my precedent discourse; for if every man be endued
with Rational faculties; if he can reflect upon the Essential differences of
good and evil, together with their natural Products; if he can observe what
things tend to his damage, and what minister to his advantage; And if it be
most apparent that virtuous Practices are infinitely more conducive to the
interests and happiness of man then Vice and Luxury; then what other Reason can
possibly be assigned, why men are so unanimously vicious, but only because they
are wilfully or carelessly unreasonable? But I need not put my self to the
Charge of an Elaborate Dispute to prove a thing that is evidenced by the surest
and most obvious of Demonstrations, viz. an Induction of particular Instances.
For if we consider the single Obliquities of every Individual man, it is not
only easy to observe how they descended from carelessness and inadvertency, but
also to convince the man himself, that had he but reflected upon the natural
results and events of his Criminal actions, he would never have committed them:
Take the pevishest Humorist in his hottest and most transported fits, and ask
him whether it was not in his own power to have refrained the folly of his
Impatience; I never yet met with any person so unreasonable, whom I could not
at lenghth force to own them as avoidable Indiscretions; but if any person
should be so cross-grained as to plead a brutish necessity, it were very easy
by laying before him the circumstances, upon which his Anger kindled, to
convince him that the Provocation was not irresistible. How few are so wise as
to avoid a fruitless grief and anxiety for past, and therefore not avoidable
disasters? And yet what proposition in Euclid more pregnant with conviction
then this, that it is the absurdest folly in the world to greive for losses and
misfortunes; in that nothing can be more evidently irrational, then by
laboring in matters gone and irrecoverable; to double our miseries to no
purpose? And what Council can be more unquestionably rational then the Advice
of the Son of Syrach, about Mourning for Deceased Friends. Take no grief to
heart, for there is no turning again: thou shall not do him good, but hurt thy
self, Eccles. 38. 17. And yet all men are so foolishly inconsiderate, as upon
such contingencies, to afflict themselves with a grief equally fruitless and
troublesome. What Vice assaults us with more peremptory and importunate
Temptations then Intemperance, yet any man that will be but at the pains of a
Thought, to represent to himself its unpleasant and direful consequences,
cannot but confess, that its invitations are so far from being irresistible,
that no man can comply with them without the imputation of the most apparent
Madness and Folly. For who but Madmen can be enamored of Gouts, Dropsies,
Catarrhs, Consumptions, broken Sleeps, restless Nights, loathing Stomachs, and
every thing that is destructive of health or life? And that these uneasy
Symptoms are the natural Appendages of Intemperance, both Philosophy and
Experience assure us. Whereas Temperance is a healthful and delicious Virtue,
moderate diet creates no indisposition either to the Body or the Mind; the
Temperate man rises from the Table light and cheerful, and truly relishes the
pleasures that the Epicure designs; But Luxury, as it adds nothing to the
pleasures of Temperance, so it both afflicts us with a present dullness, by
loading the Brain with crudities, and lays up materials for future diseases, by
loading the blood with raw and indigested humors. Though I am not so Stoically
vain, as to vye Power and Majesty with Kings and Emperors, yet sure am I that
all the sumptuous Entertainments of Palaces, afford not such exquisite
dainties as are served up by Temperance; Constant satiety makes us loath the
most refined delicates, whilst hunger prepares such sawces, as Apicius with all
his witty Gluttony, could never taste of; and therefore Epicurus (that great
Exemplar of a Philosophic Temperance) was wont to say, that give him but
Hunger, Pulse, and Water, and he would vye delicates with Jove himself. Now
certainly, if men would but represent to themselves the troublesome Appendages
of intemperate eating and drinking; no morsel could appear so delicious, or
wine so pleasant, which they could not with much less trouble forbear, then
suffer all the uneasy symptoms of a tired and overloaded Appetite. And
although this is obvious from every days experience to every man's observation,
yet how few are they, that can stint their Appetites at the necessities of
Nature, though they are certain that all they devour beyond the satisfaction
thereof, ends in surfeit and oppression, only because most men are so bruitishly
sottish, as to sacrifice all the contents of their lives to a moments tickling
of their Palates, and like Beasts, grow wild and impatient to enjoy a trifling
pleasure, which they know will expire in loathing and restlesness.

The Mass and Community of Mankind, is but an Aggregate of Individual men, of
whom the common and mechanical sort of people (a word of a vast extent) are
incomparably the greater number; who yet are utterly senseless and
inconsiderate, and suffer themselves to be disposed of purely by chance and
accidental Principles, and are so prodigiously regardless, that they will not
put themselves to the trouble of thinking, whether the usages Custom has
taught them, are wise and rational. And hence it is that they are always
floating between contrary Vices, and are not a less contradiction to themselves
then to Virtue; one while they are base and servile, another proud and
insolent; now stubborn and refractory, anon inconstant and changeable; envious
and malicious, yet sordid and senseless to honor; credulous and talkative, yet
morose and sullen; ignorant and stupid, yet censorious and scornful; Idolaters
of custom, yet Seditious and desirous of novelties: and hence as they chance
to be swayed by custom, or any accidental emergencies they roll to any extreme
without setting bounds to their unruly progress; and if they be suffered to run
without restraint, they will break down all the banks of Law and Government;
and therefore it is the main wisdom and policy of Governors (who are deputed by
Divine Providence to understand and consider for them) to check the violence of
the Tide, by swaying them backwards by contrary laws, and to keep them
fluctuating between both Extremes, and so by alternate Fluxes and Refluxes, to
preserve the Commonwealth from popular Inundations. Thus they must be kept
from sinking into too much ignorance, or rising to too much knowledge in
matters of -- for the former renders them salvage, which is apparently
destructive to Government; the latter makes them proud, conceited, and zealous,
that breeds contempt of Governors, and sets them upon headless plots and
designs of Reformation, that usually proceed to Rebellion, and end in a deluge
of civil Wars, as the experience of all ages sufficiently attests, and our own
too sadly demonstrates. But the Reason of all this, and much more, is because
they are unreasonably wilful and inconsiderate, for nothing but inadvertency
distinguishes them from the wise and understanding part of mankind. To conclude
therefore, if a sottish and regardless stupidity be the proper cause of every
single obliquity (of which every man will be satisfied, that shall consider of
every actions particular circumstances) it is evident by a very easy Inference,
that all the wickedness in the world must be its effect: For the cause of every
Individual, and the whole species is the same, and therefore if every
particular sin be the effect of Inadvertency, all sin must be its issue.

Of which the wisest and most experienced of men, was long since eminently
sensible, whence it was that he has so earnestly recommended to mankind
consideration and advertency, for the wisdom, he parabolically represents in
his Book of Proverbs, imports nothing but consideration, discretion, and
weighing of things in opposition to that folly and stupidity which betrays men
to those immoralities, from which he there so assiduously dehorts the sons of
men. And that this is the only true and genuine sense of that Book, any one
that shall but read it over with a mind clear of those rash and unwarrantable
glosses Commentators have fastened upon it, will easily acknowledge, both by the
Tenor of the discourse, and by the original signification of those terms, by
which he expresses the wisdom there Celebrated; and chiefly by those peculiar
Properties he attributes to it, many whereof can very hardly be applied to any
thing else. And now, if folly and inconsiderateness be the Origin of the
general and unanimous Apostasy of mankind, then judge whether their crime be
not of all others (not excepting even Peevishness and moroseness themselves)
the hainousest and most inexcusable, for beside that it is aggravated by all the
circumstances that can enhance its guilt, nothing can be baser and more
unworthy of a man; for if the dignity of humane nature consists in Reason, then
certainly nothing can be more brutish and unmanly then to abandon its use, and
thereby to disrobe our selves of our highest Prerogative, to renounce the Glory
and Privilege of our Natures, and in difiance of our Creatours Goodness, who
made us Men, to prefer the condition of Bruits and unreasonable Creatures, and
in a word to dismount our Reasons, that Providence has placed in the Sadle,
that the Bruit might Ride the Man.

Thus (Sir) have I replied to, and cleared off, the main Ratiocinations urged
on behalf off Preexistence, and have not declined or shuffled of any Argument
for its difficulty, but have been careful that the Account I have given you
might be as faithful as satisfactory: If therefore I have omitted any
objections, 'twas not because I could not, but because I need not answer them,
either upon the score of their being too inconsiderable, or of their entire
dependence on the Arguings, I have here encountered; and therefore having
undermined and ruined their Foundation, I suppose it would be but a fruitless
and impertinent piece of service to beleager them by a particular onset. I have
(Sir) so strong an antipathy against all Impertinency, that in all enquiries I
have the patience only to examine the most weighty and considerable
reflections, after which the less concerning matters will as little want as
merit Consideration, and therefore I have not only waved all their pretty gay
Probabilities, apprehending them subjects too frivolous for serious and
rational discourses; but have also forborne all Duels or Personal Combats,
having all along only opposed the Hypothesis, not its Patrons; for I have taken
no notice of the particular miscarriages of any Adversary, and have no where
objected the Inconsistency either of any Author with himself, or of more of
them with one another, unless where it is apparently the fault of the
Hypothesis, and not the oversight of the Men. For I must confess (Sir) I am so
far from quarrelling either with the Ancient or Modern Patrons of Preexistence,
that I peculiarly esteem and honor them as Persons more then ordinarily
Learned and Ingenious; and therefore though I might perhaps have triumphed over
some weak passages of particular Authors, yet I have scarce been less careful
to pass by their weakest then I have been to assault their strongest objections.

The most remarkable things I have purposely omitted are those conclusions they
draw from the Nature and Substance of the Soul, all which I have slighted,
because we are so utterly ignorant of the nature of the Soul that it is
impossible to deduce any sure and solid Speculations from it: It Is I know as
easy a business to imagine Hypotheses concerning things, whose natures are
placed beyond the Reach of Humane Inquisition, as it is for the Rosi-Crucians
(for the confirmation of their Frenzies) to tell us of strange Books,
Monuments, Inscriptions found in the inmost and remotest parts of China, Iapan,
and Tartarie, because in such stories they are secure from all Contradiction:
But the difficulty is to give us evidence of the Truth and realitie of their
Conjectures; For when they have contrived and polished a neat and ingenious
Idea of the Soul, how can they assure either me or themselves of its agreement
with the thing it self? And therefore of them that pretend to acquaint the
world with true and real notions of its Nature, I demand by what means or
methods they attained their knowledge; for if they came by it in a Rational
way, they are able to show by what steps and Ratiocinations they arrived at it,
but because this they have never performed, they must give us leave to look
upon their Hypotheses as the mere Issues and contrivances of their own Fancies.
It Is not therefore enough to coin Ideas of the Soul, and stamp it, with what
essential Characters and Properties they please, unless they can assure us of
their real Conformity to the thing it self (it being otherwise precarious and
uncertain) but as no such assurancew as as yet ever given, so when I consider
the ways and methods of gaining acquaintance with the Natures of things, I
despair that it ever will: For though I may by Rationacination obtain a clear
and certain evidence of the Real Existence of many things, of the Essential
Ideas whereof I am utterly ignorant, yet am I assured by diligent and impartial
Trials, that all the Objects and Ideas I could ever with all my Industry
understand were conveyed to my mind through the Organs of sense. But whether
any certain knowledge of the Nature and Substance of the Soul be attainable or
not, I am sure it is as yet undiscovered, and so altogether unqualified to be
the Ground of any true and certain Knowledge, in that where the first and
Fundamental Principles are inevident, all the Ratiocinations depending on them
(how coherent soever in themselves) must of necessity be so too. And therefore,
for Instance, when they conclude against the seminal Propagation of Souls,
because it is one of the prime and chiefest Properties of a Spiritual essence to
be indiscerpible, they argue at a high rate of confidence and impertinency,
because, though perhaps the soul may be indivisible, yet they are not able to
produce the least tolerable Evidence thereof, being utterly unacquainted with
its Nature and Essence; and then though perchance it may be indiscerpible in
its primary and central substance, yet who knows but it may, as well as the
Body, have its seminal Excrescencies? I am not more concerned for the
Hypothesis of seminal Traduction, then for the other of Immediate Creation, for
they are both to me equally uncertain, and consequently indifferent. For as the
only material objection they assault the former with, is that groundless one I
but now mentioned, so they object nothing singly against the latter, but its
inconsistency with the Divine Goodness to place pure and spotless souls in such
evil and sad Circumstances, as inviron us in this life; but this objection as
it equally concerns all the Adversaries of Preexistence, what other soever
particular Hypothesis they adopt, so it is already abundantly answered. So that
it is not at all material whether the reality of either or neither of the
forementioned Hypotheses be sure or evident, for notwithstanding all that is
objected either of them may, and therefore it is of no concernment which is.

And now (Sir) though both my Patience and my Pen begin to fail me, yet am I
obliged as well by my Promise as my Method, to consider the most plausible
passages of Scripture the Patrons of Preexistence allege on behalf of their
Hypothesis; but the application of the Texts, they produce to their design, is
so lamentably forced and frivolous, that it will scarce excuse a serious answer
from being useless and impertiment. I know not any one Theological speculation,
that cannot boast of more Favor and Countenance from Scripture, then this
pretends to. And if you will but parallel the periods of Scripture made use of,
in a small Pamphlet you have, to prove Mulieres non esse Homines, I am
confident you will discern so vast a disproportion in their evidence, as to
acknowledge that if the latter may be accounted probable inducements, the
former will amount to Demonstrations. And therefore perhaps I may render my
self not less ridiculous by encountering them with a serious Reply, then that
grave Dutch Doctor, who has with mighty transports of zeal opposed himself to
that waggish Pamphlet, and has conjured up all his Dutch or Systematick
Orthodoxy to confound that blasphemous Heresy as himself styles it. But having
begun, I must to avoid all suspicion of shufling, plunge through; And though
their Scipture-evidences do not merit a refutation, yet through some men's
Ignorance and others Partiality they need it. Had I been left to my own choice,
I should not have at all concerned the Authority of the Divine Oracles in this
dispute. For so sensible am I of that violence and injury they suffer from our
presumptuous forcing them to be parties in our own trivial and imaginary
speculations, that I am exceedingly averse from making any use of their
suffrage, unless it be in matters of grand importance, and with all very
evident and consonant to its main intendment. It Is the fashion amongst
Opinionists to Argue in a reversed order, first they contrive Opinions and then
Arguments, they adopt Hypotheses, and then suborn Testimonies out of the sacred
Volume to vouch them: like Chrysippus, who (as Laertius records) was wont to
say, that he only wanted opinions to vent, but would never want Arguments to
defend his opinions. And thus the Assertors of Preexistence seem first to be
enamoured with the Prettiness of their Hypothesis, and then to seek our for
Scripture expressions to countenance it. For all the testimonies they allege
would never have afforded the least intimation of it, had it not first
prepossest their Fancies: Of which some of them are so sensible as to confess,
that though they do not persuade their Hypothesis, yet they are applicable to
it. But I wish they could name any opinion, howsoever vain and unwarrantable,
that cannot boast as much; what is more easy then for Fancy to make pretty
applications of Scripture to purposes vastly distant from its own, especially
if we consider how large and miscellaneous a composure the Holy Volume is? They
who are acquainted with the Customs and Tenets of the Modern Jews, know what
pretty Analogies they fetch from Scripture to abet their fond and ridiculous
usages, indeed their prettiness is so odd and surprising, that were it in any
other matter, they would be as delightful as impertiment.

But it is time to advance to a closer and more particular engagement, the few
hours that remain obliging me to a quick and (I fear) overhasty dispatch: but
before I clear off the Texts they object, I will represent a passage or two on
my own behalf. And first methinks that is a shrewd one Romans 9. 11. For the
Children being not yet born, neither having done either good or evil, that the
purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works but of him that
calls. They that were not in a Capacity of doing either good or evil before
they were born, neither existed nor sinned before; But neither Jacob nor Esau
were in a capacity of acting well or ill, before they were born into this life,
and therefore nor they, nor (by consequence) any others preexisted. For (1.)
it is too pitiful a shift to say that all other men, Jacob and Esau only
excepted, were in Being before their Appearance upon this stage of life. And
(2.) it is most expressly against the whole design of the Apostles Argument; the
Purpose of whose Discourse is to show that Gods vouchsafing greater Instances
of his Favor to Jacob then to Esau proceeded not from any extrinsique motive
of greater merit in him, but purely from the free determination and
beneplaciture of his own will, (...) but (...): Now this he proves because the
Choice was pitched upon before they were born, and so before they had done
either good or evil. But if the souls of men had been in a capacity of acting
morally, before their descent into this life, then has the Apostle argued at a
strange rate of inconsequence, when he concludes that Gods different dealing
with Jacob and Esau depended not on their own Actions, because the difference
was resolved on before they were born, and consequently before they had done
good or evil. If therefore the Apostles conclusion be consonant to the Laws of
Inference, it must be unquestionably certain that the Souls of men never acted
before they were born into these Bodies.

There are a brace of Texts more, that I conceived would, without any
torturing, give in evidence against Preexistence, but I find that its Patrons
have already suborned them to speak in their Cause, and therefore I that am a
modest man must be content to give up my Right in their Testimony, and to
Encounter them as objections. The first is our Saviors reply to his Disciples
enquiry about the man born blind, Ioh. 9. 3. Neither has this man sinned nor his
Parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. In which
words he expressly affirms, that that mishap was not inflicted upon the man as a
Penalty for any miscarriages he had been guilty of in any former state, but
that it was designed by the Divine Providence upon a special score, namely,
that he might be a fit object to evidence our Saviors miraculous Power. And
yet from this very passage they argue with no small confidence against us, in
that the question supposes the man might have sinned before his Terrestrial
Birth, and that the Hypothesis of Preexistence was an Opinion much in Vogue
among the Jews, and therefore when our Savior had so fair an occasion of
rectifying the common belief, and yet said nothing against it, his silence is
almost as argumentative in favor of it as a positive Approbation. I answer
(1.) it is far from being evident that the Disciples question supposes him
capable of sinning before his birth: for might they not, if they had any
notions of the Divine Prescience, suppose that God foreknowing what kind of
person this blind man would prove, had antedated his punishment. Or why might
they not intend his Original sin, which the Jews supposed to be the (...) in
every individual man; so that when they enquired whether the man was born blind
for his own or his Parents sin, they might only ask whether that particular
Judgment was the effect of any miscarriage in his Parents, or of his own
original Pravity. (2.) It was not the Preexistence, but the Metemphychosis or
Transmigration of Souls that was the common Opinion of the Jews; it is styled by
the Rabins (...) the Revolution of Souls in opposition to their (...)
Revolution of the Dead, whereby they meant the Rolling of the Carcasses of
Jews, (that happen to be Interred in the polluted Earth of the Gentiles)
through the secret Caverns of the Earth to Palestine, where they believe all
Jews shall arise at the last Resurrection; and hence some of them have in their
old age traveled to the Holy Land to lay their Bones there, to avoid the
disturbance of their Subterraneous Pilgrimage; and R. Solomon tells us the
Reason why Jacob charged his Son Joseph to conveigh his Corpse from Egypt to
Canaan, was partly that his dust might not afterward be turned into Lice, (a
cleanly old man!) and partly to escape the trouble of this posthumous Journey:
But their impertinencies tempt me to be so too. Now that the opinion of
Transanimation obtained among the Jews, is proved from the testimony of
Josephus lib. 2. de Bello Iud. cap. 7. where he relates among the dogmata of
the Pharisees, that the souls of good men did not perish, but did (...); and
Tisbi relates that it is the common opinion of the Circumcised Doctors that
every Soul animates three Bodies, which they (after their usual rare of
arguing) prove from that passage in Job. 33. 29. All these things God works
with man, (...) tribus vicibus. And by virtue of this Vicissitude, they assert
the Soul of Adam to have informed the Body of King David, and that the Soul of
David will by secret Revolutions, wind it self into the Messiah, which they
think is clearly intimated by the word (...) being compounded of the Initial
Letters of Adam (...), David (...), Messiah (...). As also that those two
mighty zealots Phinees and Elias, were animated with the same spirit because of
the resemblance of their Zeal; and that Labans Soul was translated into
Balaams, Abels into Seth; and Abravanel that bold Jew asserts, that it was
Esau's Soul that possessed our Savior. Manasse Ben Israel cites several of their
old Books and Authors to this purpose. And therefore, if this passage proves
any thing, it proves too much, viz. not only the Preexistence, but also the
(...) or perpetual revolution of Souls: For if they can infer any thing in
favor of Preexistence from our Saviors silence in so apt an occasion to have
rectified the common Error concerning it, they may with the same reason
conclude his Approbation of the Transmigration of Souls, this being the common
Opinion of the Jews, and so as probably employed in the Disciples Quere. (3.) It
was not our Saviors custom to take notice of every impertinent Question, much
less the suppositions on which they relied. Thus when his Apostles asked him,
Acts 1. 6. Lord will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel.
Though it was an important Question, and bottomed upon a grand and dangerous
mistake, he makes no reply to it, but only takes occasion thence to discourse
of matters of a widely distant nature, but that more closely touched their
concerns. And therefore nothing can be fairly inferred from our Saviors
silence; especially when he had replied so fully to the direct scope of the
Question, there was not any necessity he should take notice of the Theories it
collaterally implied: And if the Hypothesis of Preexistence were so principally
implied in the main scope of the question as is pretended, then is it expressly
enough destroyed by our Saviors plain and unlimited Negation. To conclude, he
had as good ground to take occasion from their Enquiry, to discourse of the
Equity of punishing Posterity for their Ancestors sins, it being one of the
main Phenomenon of Providence, and of as grand importance as they can presume
the Hypothesis of Preexistence to be, and yet, notwithstanding the fairness of
the opportunity, and the weightiness of the subject, it is evident he took no
notice of it. The other Resembling Passage I meet with in Job 38. 4. where the
Almighty undertakes to pose Job through all the Phenomenon of Nature, and among
other particulars of the true Origin of things, and to convince him of his
ignorance, he tells him he was so far from being acquainted with it, that he
was then shut up in the dark state of Nonexistence, Where wast thou when I
laid the foundations of the earth, etc. Now, if all Spirits had been in Being
when the foundations of the Earth were laid, as our Adversaries conclude from
the ensuing words, When the morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of
God shouted for Joy. By the former whereof (say they) is intended the Angels,
by the latter the blessed untainted Souls. But if this gloss were as true as
it is precarious, then Job might have justly replied to the Almighty, that
himself was present among the Sons of God at the laying the Foundations of the
earth, and joined in that great and unanimous Acclamation And then the Almighty
having discoursed of each particular mystery and contrivance of Nature, he
concludes with this bafling Ironie, Know thou them because thou wast then
born, because the number of thy days is great? And yet they conclude from hence
for Preexistence, because the 70 render it without the Interrogation, I know
that thou wast then born, for the number of thy days is many. A various Reading
may serve for a subterfuge to escape the force of an objected Testimony, but
certainly it is a pitiful Argument that relies barely on the Authority of a
Version, when it not only contradicts the Original, but the plain design of its
own Context. For if Job had then been born, how could God have convinced him of
his unacquaintedness with the Origin of things, because he was not then in
Being? so that unless Reason it self be out in its Logic, our Adversaries are.

Having thus gained back these Texts to our side, I pass on to the rest of
their objections. And first, as for that pasage Ier. 1. 5. urged with so much
Jewish confidence by Manasse Ben Israel, Before I formed thee in the Belly, I
knew thee; and before thou came forth out of the Womb I sanctified thee, and
I ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations. It implies nothing else but Gods
designment of Jeremy to the Prophetic Office; for his knowing of him imports
in its native and most unstrained sense, merely his foreordaining him to that
employment, and then his sanctifying of him signifies in its genuine and most
proper use, only the separating or devoting of him to that peculiar Office,
which is exegetically expressed in the last branch of the Period. I ordained
thee to be a Prophet. Besides, this passage is peculiarly applied to the
Prophet Jeremy in opposition to any other, but should it have referred to his
Preexistence, there had been no peculiarity, forasmuch as God would not only
have known him, but the whole Mass of mankind before they were formed in the
Belly. And now what shadow of favor do these words cast upon the Origenian
Hypothesis, No man could ever have discerned the least color for Preexistence
here, whose mind was not aforehand tinctured with its belief. Here Is not the
least foundation for an Argument, unless this supposition were first laid, viz.
That God cannot foreordain a Person to any special employment before he exists.
And therefore to conclude, that because God had consigned Jeremy to the
Prophetic Office before he was born, that therefore he preexisted, is an
Inference fit for none but a Rabbi, and upon that score I have taken notice of
it only as his, though other men have urged it with as great a grace as he.

And for that passage, Phil. 2. 5. Let this mind be in you which was in Christ
Jesus, who being in the form of God, did not think equality with God a prey or
spoil, but made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, and was made in the likeness of men, etc. Its plain and palpable
meaning is only this, That though the Blessed Jesus was invested with the
Divine Power and Authority, and sustained the person of a Deity, being made
Sovereign Lord of all (in which alone consists the Scripture notion of God) yet
he did not boast and triumph in his Greatness, but made his appearance to the
world only in a servile condition of Poverty, and made himself so subject to
those that seemed his Superiors, that in obedience to their Authority he
yielded himself up to a most reproachful death, not opposing his Almighty and
Irresistible Power to rescue himself from their equally ignominious and
merciless Decrees. And what is all this to Preexistence?

In the next place they urge us with some passages out of Saint John, And now O
Father Glorify me with thine own self, with the Glory I had with thee before
the world was. I come forth from the Father, and am come into the world: Again
I leave the world, and go to the Father, etc. Whence they argue, that the
Glory our Savior prays to be restored to, seems to concern his Humane nature
only, for the Divine could never be disrobed of it, and therefore it supposes
that he existed in his Humanity before, and that his Soul was of old before
its appearance in a Terrestrial Body. Ans. (1.) The most these places can
pretend to prove, is barely our Saviors Preexistence, but to conclude thence
the Preexistence of all mankind is a very wide and gaping Inference; and we may
as well prove we were all born of Virgin-Mothers because he was. Our Savior
was a singular person designed for an extraordinary Employment, and therefore
may be supposed to have transacted with his Father about it, before he
undertook it, and therefore we may as well Attribute all his personal
Properties to Mankind in general, as argue for their Preexistence from his.
(2.) Those Praedicates that in a strict and rigorous Acceptance agreed only to
his Divine Nature, might by a communication of Idioms [as they phrase it] be
attributed to his humane; or at least to the whole Person compounded of them
both: Then which nothing is more ordinary in things of a mixed and heterogeneous
Nature, as the whole man is styled immortal from the deathlesness of his soul.
We ought not therefore to understand these and the like passages in a nice and
metaphisical rigor of this or that nature, but in a familiar sense of the
Person of Jesus Christ. The instances hereof in Scripture are so frequent, that
few texts concerning our Savior (supposing his double nature can well be
understood without it. (3.) Methinks Grotius's sense is very easy and natural
viz. that the Glory he had with his Father before the world began, was only in
the intendment of the Divine decree: as, 1 Pet. 1. 20. Revel. 13. 8. he is said
to be a Lamb slain from the foundations of the world, not that he was really
slaughtered, but because he was then marked out in the divine decree to be a
sacrifice for Mankind. It being a Proverbial from of speech among the Jews, to
express matters of great moment only resolved upon in the Divine Decree, as if
they were really existing: thus they say the Messiah is ancienter then the Sun,
and the Mosaic law older then the world, not as if they apprehended them
really so, but only to express their absolute usefulness and necessity. Now
Scriptures are not to be interpreted in an exact and strictly literal sense,
but in a familiar manner suitably to the Idiom and manner of speaking used in
the Age and Place, in which they were written. This therefore being a vulgar
form of speech to express the Important usefulness of a thing existing only in
decree, as if it had been as long in actual existence, as it was in Futurity;
the glory our Savior here prays for, and which he had before the world was, as
it could not, so it need not be his essential luster, but was that honor, with
which God had from all eternity designed to dignisie the Messiah. Thus have I
satisfied all their Scripture Objections, that can need an answer, but as for
their Applications of Parables and Cabalistical interpretations, they are too
impertinent to bear one.

And now (Sir) having evinced the Precariousness of the Origenian Hypothesis
from the Nature of the thing it self, and its uncouthness from some of the
Divine Attributes, having shown the apparent and lamentable defiency of that
evidence they produce for it, having engaged the suffrage of the Divine Oracles
against it, and having given a hansome, rational and certain account of the
Phaenomina of providence without it. I hope it is sufficient to convince your
self or any other ingenious and unpossest inquirer, that for any thing we are
able to know, this is the first Stage upon which the Souls of men ever appeared
and that there is no need of recurring to a former scene, to solve the
perplexed difficulties of Providence, and to make the plot thereof seem neat
and consistent enough to be a contrivance not unworthy the Divine Wisdom.

And now Sir methinks I ought not bluntly to conclude this tedious Discourse,
and it would be but good manners to complement you with unnecessary excuses, or
some other little pieces of Court-ship; but you know I have long since
remonstrated to these common ceremonies of the world. And though I had a mind
to trouble you with Apologies, or News, or anyother impertinencies, yet I have
not time (being just now upon the very point of my departure for London) to add
any more, then that I am as much as I ought or can be

My Dearest Coz. Your etc.
From Trin. Coll. Oxon. May 1.
ERRATA.
PAge 12. l. 21. for Buitish r. Brutish. p. 13. l. 17. for Grants r. Grantees.
l. 22. for esceats r. escheats. p. 15. l. 7. for near r. mere. l. 13. for
deserved r. undeserved. p. 30. l. 22. for Fatalist r. Fatalists. p. 61. l. 12
for Phaenomina r. Phenomenon. and alias. p. 84. l. 5. for ramotional r.
rational. p. 90. l. 25. headless r. endless. p. 95. l. 13. for assurancew as r.
assurance was.

FINIS.

