Let this be Printed,

WHITEHALL, December. 10. 1687. Sunderland P.

REASONS FOR ABROGATING THE TEST, Imposed upon All Members of Parliament Anno
1678. October. 30.

In these Words, I A. B. do solemnly and sincerely, in the Presence of God,
profess, testify, and declare, That I do believe that in the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper there is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and
Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, at, or after the Consecration thereof
by any Person whatsoever; And that the Invocation or Adoration of the Uirgin
Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used
in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous.

First Written for the Author's own Satisfaction; And now Published for the
Benefit of all others whom it may concern.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Bonwicke at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXXXVIII.

REASONS FOR ABROGATING THE TEST.
THE TEST imposed upon all Members of Parliament, October 30. 1678. ought (I
humbly conceive) to be repealed for these Reasons;

First, Because it does not only diminish, but utterly destroy the natural
Rights of Peerage, and turns the Birthright of the English Nobility into a
precarious Title: So that what was in all former Ages only forfeited by
Treason, is now at the mercy of every Faction or every Passion in Parliament.
And therefore how useful soever the Test might have been in its season, it some
time must prove a very ill Precedent against the Rights of Peerage; for if it
may be allowed in any Case, there is no Case in which it may not be imposed.

And therefore I remember that in the First Transubstantiation-Test, Anno Dom.
1673, the Rights of Peerage are [indeed according to constant Custom] secured
by Proviso. Provided always, That neither this Act, nor anything therein
contained, shall extend, be judged, or interpreted any ways to hurt or
prejudice the Peerage of any Peer of this Realm, or to take away any right,
power, privilege or profit, which any person [being a Peer of this Realm] has
or ought to enjoy by reason of his Peerage, either in time of Parliament or
otherwise.

And in the Year 1675. when this Test or Oath of Loyalty was brought into the
House of Peers, That it is not lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever to take up
Arms against the King, and by his Authority against his Person, it was
vehemently protested against as a Breach of Privilege.

No body could except against the Matter of the Test it self, much less the
Nobility, who had generally taken it upon the Account of their several Trusts
in the Militia. So that the only Debate was, Whether the very Proposal of it,
as a Qualification for a Right to sit in Parliament, were not a Breach of the
fundamental Right of Peerage? And after some Debates upon the Point of Peerage
it was, without ever entering into the Merits of the Cause it self, thrown out
by an unanimous Vote of the House, April 21. 1675. Before the putting of the
Question, this PROTESTATION is entered.

A Bill to prevent the Dangers which may arise from Persons disaffected to the
Government.

The House resolved into a Committee to consider of it, and being resumed, the
Question was put, Whether this Bill does so far entrench upon the Privileges of
this House, as it ought therefore to be cast out? It was at first resolved in
the Negative with this Memorandum, That before the putting the abovesaid
Question, these Lords following desired Leave to enter their Dissents, if the
Question was carried in the Negative, and accordingly did enter their Dissents,
as follows.

We, whose Names are underwritten, being Peers of this Realm, do according to
our Rights, and the ancient Usage of Parliaments, declare, That the Question
having been put, Whether the Bill, entitled An Act to prevent the Dangers
which may arise from Persons disaffected to the Government, does so far
entrench upon the Privileges of this House, that it ought therefore to be cast
out, it being resolved in the Negative, We do humbly conceive, That any Bill
which imposes an Oath upon the Peers with a Penalty, as this does, That upon
the refusal of that Oath they shall be made incapable of sitting and voting in
this House: As it is a thing unpresidented in former Times, so is it in our
humble Opinion the highest Invasion of the Liberties and Privileges of the
Peerage that possibly may be, and most destructive of the Freedom which they
ought to enjoy as Members of Parliament.

Because the Privilege of Sitting and Voting in Parliament is an Honor they
have by Birth; and a Right so inherent in 'em, and inseparable from 'em, as
that nothing can take it away, but what by the Law of the Land must withal take
away their Lives, and corrupt their Blood; The Names of the protesting Peers to
the number of 23. are to be seen in the Journal Book.
upon which Ground, We do here enter our Dissent from that Vote and our
Protestation against it.

QVAERE, How many of those Noble Lords voted for the Test in 1678. and then,
whether if they have preserved their Rights of Peerage, they have preserved its
Honor too?

But the Debate was kept up many Days, till at last, April 30. 1675. it came to
this Issue.

It was at last resolved, That no Oath shall by this Bill be imposed; and
passed into a general Order by the whole House, Nemine contradicente, as
follows.

Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That no
Oath shall be imposed by any Bill or otherwise, upon the Peers with a Penalty
in case of Refusal to lose their Places and Votes in Parliament, or liberty of
Debates therein; and that this Order be added to the standing Orders of this
House.

Secondly, It ought to be repealed, because of its dishonorable Birth and
Original; it being the Firstborn of Oats's Plot, and brought forth on purpose
to give Credit and Reputation to the Perjury.

Now I should think that when the Villainy of that is so fully laid open to the
World, it should not a little concern the Honor of the Nation, but very much
concern the Honor and Wisdom of the House of Peers, to deface so great a
Monument erected by themselves in honor of so gross an Imposture.

It is Shame enough to the present Age to have given any public Credit to so
enormous a Cheat, and the greatest Kindness it can do it self, is to destroy,
as much as may be, all the Records of Acts done by the Government to abett it.

What will Posterity judge of the present Nobility, to see such an
unpresidented Law, not only enacted upon so foul an Occasion; but after the
Discovery of the Cheat, asserted with Heat and Zeal, though to the Subversion
of their own fundamental Rights and Privileges?

Besides, the Roman Catholic Peers have suffered severely enough already by
their own honorable House's giving Credit to so dull an Imposture: And I think
it is the least Compensation that they can in Honor make them, only to restore
'em to their natural Rights.

What will foreign Nations and future Ages think of the Injustice and Barbarity
of the present Peerage, to suffer English Noblemen to be stripped of the greatest
Privilege of their Birthright by so unheard of a Villainy? And when it is in
their Power to see their injured Peers redressed, that they should not only
suffer 'em to be so basely robbed of their Peerage, but should for ever
establish and ratify the Fraud by Authority and force of Law.

This would be an eternal National Reproach, and such a Blot upon the House of
Peers, that no length of Time could wear away; nothing but the Universal
Conflagration could destroy.

Thirdly, It ought to be repealed, because of the incompetent Authority by
which the Law was enacted: It is a Law of an Ecclesiastical Nature, made
without the Authority of the Church, contrary to the Practice of the Christian
World in all Ages, and indeed to our Saviors own Commission, who settled all
Power of Government, and especially the Legislative (which is the highest Act
of it) upon the Officers of his own Kingdom; so that for any other Order of
Men, to assume the Exercise of any such Authority to themselves, is no less
than to depose him from his Throne, by disowning, neglecting, and affronting
his Commission to his Catholic Church.

This Power of making Decrees concerning Divine Verities, is the very
Foundation upon which the whole Fabric of the Christian Church has hitherto
stood, and is to stand to the End of the World. For if it be once taken away,
as here it is, there is no peculiar Government left to the Church it self, and
without Government there can be no Society, or Band of Union; and without that,
there remains nothing but Confusion: So dangerous a Trespass is it for the
Temporal Powers to entrench upon this sacred Prerogative of the Holy Catholic
Church.

The Civil Power may restrain the Exercise of it, as they shall judge meet for
the Ends of Peace, and the Interest of the Commonwealth, and punish it too, at
their own Discretion, if it shall any way presume to entrench upon the Power of
the State.

But though it may prevent or correct Abuses, yet it cannot usurp the Power it
self without manifest Sacrilege and Blasphemy; in short, this is such a daring
Invasion of our Savior's own Kingdom, that nothing more imports Christian
Kings and Governors, than to be wary and cautious how they lay Hands upon it.

Neither can it be pleaded this Law was consented to by the Bishops (to their
Shame) in the House of Lords. For First, it being an Ecclesiastical Law, it
ought to have been antecedently enacted by them, without any Lay-concurrence;
and when they had first decreed it by their own proper Authority, Then, and not
before then, was it lawful for the Parliament to take it into their
Consideration, and as they judged fit, to abett it with temporal Penalties.

Which Practice (as I have before mentioned) was ever most religiously observed
by all Christian Kings and Princes, and never before violated, but by Apostates
and Rebel Parliaments.

But then Secondly, The Bishops sit not in the House of Lords as Bishops, but
as Temporal Barons, and so act not there by virtue of any Power derived from
our Blessed Savior, but from the mere Grace and Favor of the King; And if
they themselves should pretend to exercise any Ecclesiastical Authority in that
Place, they would most scandalously betray, and as much as in 'em lies, destroy
the very Being of a Christian Church, and profanely pawn the Bishop to the
Lord: Besides, that lastly by the Law of England the Ecclesiastical Power is
settled in Convocation; so that to Enact any thing of that Nature without their
Consent, is to betray the Rights of the Church of England as by Law established
in particular, as well as of the Church Catholic in General.

Fourthly, It ought to be repealed because of the uncertainty and Falsehood of
the Matters contained in the Declaration it self; as,

First, That there is no Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of our Savior's
Body and Blood.

And Secondly, That the Invocation of Saints and the Mother of God is Idolatry:
Both which Propositions are by this Law to be solemnly and sincerely in the
Presence of God professed, testified, and declared, which in Conscience is the
same thing with a formal Oath, whatever it is in Law.

Now to oblige the whole Nobility of a Nation, to swear to the Truth of such
abstruse and uncertain Propositions, which they neither do nor can, nor indeed
ought to understand, and this upon Penalty of forfeiting the Privileges of
their Birthright, is such a monstrous and inhumane Piece of Barbarity as could
never have entered into the Thoughts of any Man, but the infamous Author of it,
neither into his (as malicious as his Nature was) but in his fierce Pursuit of
Princely Blood; for that was the only Design of all his Actions after the
starting of the Otesian Villainy (of which this Test was the first Sacrament)
to pursue and hunt down the Heir of the Crown, which all the World knows, and
is now satisfied, he sought by numberless Perjuries, though by nothing more than
this Test, by which he stripped his Royal Highness of the Guards of his most
faithful Friends; and when he was left alone, it was an easy matter to come to
his Person, and in him to the Monarchy; so that the very next thing that
followed immediately upon it, was the black Bill of Exclusion: And next to that
it was the very Masterpiece of little Achitophel's Wickedness. But to return
to my Argument.

What is meant by Transubstantiation is a thing altogether unknown and
uncertain, especially to the Persons chiefly concerned, the Nobility and Gentry
of the Kingdom: It is a Word and a Notion chiefly handled by the Schoolmen and
Metaphysicians Skill, in whose Writings is the least part of a Gentleman's
Education, their Learning is more polite and practicable in the civil Affairs
of Humane Life, to understand the Rules of Honor and the Laws of their
Country, the Practice of Martial Discipline, and the Examples of great Men in
former Ages, and by them to square their own Actions in their respective
Stations, and the like; but for the Wars between Scotus and Thomas Aquinas, the
Nominalists and the Realists, and the several Commonwealths in the
Metaphysical World, they are not more beyond than they are below their
Knowledge, and yet these numberless Sects of Disputers do not quarrel and
differ more about any one thing, than the Notion of Transubstantiation.

How unreasonable a thing then is it, to impose it upon the Nobility and Gentry
of a whole Nation under Forfeiture of all their Share in the Government, to
abjure a thing that is morally impossible for them to understand? This seems
too bold and profane an Affront to Almighty God, in whose Presence the
Protestation is made; and only declares that Men will swear any thing, they
know not what, before the great Searcher of Hearts, rather than lose any
worldly Interest: And I dare appeal to the Honorable Members of both Houses,
if (when they consider seriously with themselves) they have any distinct Idea
or Notion in their minds of the thing they here so solemnly renounce. I fancy
if every Man were obliged to give his own account of it, whatever
Transubstantiation may be, it would certainly be Babel.

The two Fathers or rather Mid-wifes of the first Transubstantiation Test, in
the Year 1673. were the two famous Burgesses of Oxon, who brought it forth
without so much as consulting their learned University. How much the Gentleman
Burgess understood, I can only guess; but I am very apt to believe, that his
Brother, the Alderman, (if the Trial were made) cannot so much as pronounce the
word, much less hammer out the Notion. In short, there seems to be but a
profane Levity in the whole matter, and a shameless abuse put upon God and
Religion, to carry on the wicked designs of a Rebel Faction, as the Event has
proved.

But for the true state of this Matter, I find my self obliged to give a brief
historical Account of the Rise and Progress of this Controversy of
Transubstantiation; which when I have done, the result and sum of the account
will be, that there is no one thing in which Christendom more both agrees and
disagrees. All parties consent in the thing, and differ in the manner.

And here the History will branch it self into Two parts:

I. As the Matter is stated in the Church of Rome.

II. As it has been determined in the Protestant Churches.

Where the first part will sub-divide it self into Two other branches.

1st. The Ecclesiastical account of the thing; that is, the Authoritative
Definitions and Determinations of the Church about it. And,

2ly. The Scholastical account, or the various Disputes of the Schoolmen among
themselves in their Cells and Cloisters, none of which were ever vouched by the
Authority of the Church: And when I have represented the whole matter of Fact,
I may safely leave it to the Honor and Wisdom of the Nation to judge, whether
of all things in the World Transubstantiation be not the unfittest thing in it
to set up for a State TEST?

In the first place then it is evident to all Men, that are but ordinarily
conversant in Ecclesiastical Learning, That the ancient Fathers, from Age to
Age asserted the real and substantial Presence in very high and expressive
terms. The Greeks styled it, (...).

And the Latins agreeable with the Greeks, Conversion, Transmutation,
Transformation, Transfiguration, Transelementation, and at length,
Transubstantiation: By all which they expressed nothing more nor less than the
real and substantial Presence in the Eucharist.

But to represent their Assertions at large, would require much too long a
Discourse for this short Essay. And therefore I shall only give an account of
it from the time that it first became a Controversy.

And the first Man that made it a public Dispute, was Berengarius, Archdeacon
of Angers, in the Eleventh Century, about the Year 1047, who pleaded in his own
behalf, the Authority of a learned Man, Johannes Scotus Erigena, who passed
without Censure in the Ninth Century; but, to pass him by, it is certain, that
Berengarius publicly denied the Doctrine of the Real and Substantial Presence
of the Body and Blood of Christ, and resolved the whole Mystery into a mere
Type and Figure; for this he is condemned of Heresy in the Year 1050, in a
Council at Rome, under Leo the Ninth; and in the same Year, in a Synod at
Verselles, and another at Paris; and afterward by Victor the Second, in the
Year 1055. Upon which Berengarius, in a Council held at Tours, in the same
Year, submitted, and solemnly recanted his Opinion.

But soon relapsing, Pope Nicholas the Second, summons a Council at Rome, of
113 Bishops, in the Year 1059, where Berengarius abjures his Opinion in this
form, viz. That he Anathematizes that Opinion, that asserts, That the Bread and
Wine, after the Consecration upon the Altar, is only a Sacrament, and not the
true Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that it is not sensibly
handled, and broke by the Priest's hands, and so eaten by the Communicants. And
this declaration he seals with an Oath to the blessed Trinity upon the
Evangelists.

But upon the Death of Pope Nicholas, or rather of King Henry the First of
France, a vehement Enemy of Berengarius his Doctrine, (who therefore had
summoned the forementioned several French Councils against him) Berengarius
returns to his old Principles, and publicly justifies them, in writing, to the
World. For which he is censured by several Provincial Councils.

But then Gregory the Seventh, succeeding in the Apostolic See, calls a
Council at Rome in the Year 1078, in which Berengarius abjures again, much
after the same form with the former abjuration. But Pope Gregory (not satisfied
with the same general Confession, of the substantial Presence, that he had
already eluded) in a second Council, held the Year following, he imposes this
From of Recantation upon him.

I Berengarius believe in my Heart, and confess with my Mouth, That the things
upon the Altar, by virtue of Prayer and Consecration, are changed into the true
and proper Flesh and Blood of Christ, and are the true Body of Christ, that was
born of a Virgin, and sacrificed upon the Cross, for the Salvation of the
World, and that sits at the right hand of the Father; and the true Blood of
Christ that was shed out of his side, not only as a sacramental Sign, but in
propriety of Nature, and reality of Substance.

This is indeed a pretty bold Assertion of the substantial Presence; but as to
the Modus of it, it is evident, that he durst not venture to desine it, as
himself declares in his Commentaries upon the Gospels, where after having
recited several Opinions about it, he concludes, But these several surmises I
shall not pursue, it is enough that the substance of the Bread and Wine are
converted into the substance of the Body and Blood of Christ; but as to the
Modus of the Conversion, I am not ashamed to confess my Ignorance. And so ended
this Controversy at that time; Berengarius ever after living peaceably; and
about Eight Years after dying in the Communion of the Church.

But about this time Aristotle's Philosophy was brought into Europe, out of
Arabia, as it was translated into the Arabic Tongue by Averroes, Avicenna and
others, and out of them translated into Latin; for the Greek Language was at
that time utterly lost in those Western parts of the World. This being then a
mighty novelty, the Schoolmen, that were the only pretenders to Learning at
that time, embraced it with a greedy and implicit Faith, supposing it the very
Gospel of all Philosophic Knowledge; and therefore set themselves to mix and
blend it with the Doctrines of the Christian Schools; and by its Rules and
Maxims to Explain all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

Among the rest, he had one very odd Notion, singular to himself, from all the
other Philosophers of Greece, viz. That every substance was compounded of
matter and form; and that these two were really distinct from one another; and
then that the quantity of every Body was really distinct from the substance of
it, and so distinct as to be separable from it: And lastly, That all other
Qualities, Accidents, and Predicaments were founded not in the Substance, but
in the Quantity; and therefore in all change of Affairs ever fol'owed its
Fortunes.

Now the Catholic Church having in all Ages asserted the real and substantial
Presence; Oh, say they (to show their deep new Learning) That is to be
understood in the Aristotelian way, by separating the Form of the Bread from
the Matter; but chiefly by separating the inward Substance of Bread, from its
outward Quantity, and its retinue of Qualities.

This was the Rise of Philosophic or Scholastic Transubstantiation, that the
Quantity and Accidents of the Bread are pared off from all the Substance, and
shaped and molded anew, so as to cover an humane Body: And after this they
run into an infinite Variety of Disputes and Hypotheses among themselves; so
that till the Last Age, it has been the chief entertainment of all pretenders
to Philosophy in Christendom.

Rupertus Abbot of Dentsch, a Village upon the Rhine, lying on the other side
of the River, against the City of Cologne, a Man of great reputation for
Learning in that Age, makes out the Philosophy of the Thing, by the Union of
the Word, or Divine Nature, that is Omnipresent with the Bread and Wine; and it
is that Unity (he says) that makes it one Body with that in Heaven: And withal,
that it is as easy for our Savior to assume, or unite himself to one as the
other; and when that is done, they are both one body; because they are both his
Body. This was fine and curious, but not Aristotelian enough for that Age; in
which that Philosophy was set up as the Standard of humane Wisdom, by the Beaux
Esprits: Among these, Petrus Abelardus gained a mighty Name and Reputation for
his skill in these new found Philosophic Curiosities, though otherwise a Man
versed (much beyond the Genius of that Age) in Polite Learning; but being of a
proud and assuming Nature, he soon drew upon himself the Envy of the less
Learned Monks; which cost him a long scene of Troubles, as he has elegantly
described them, in his Book of his own Persecutions.

But among many other singularities to maintain the separation of the matter
from the form, and the substance from the accidents in the Sacrament of the
Altar he is forced to make use of this shift, That upon the Separation of the
Substance, the Accidents that cannot subsist of themselves, are supported by
the Air.

But then comes Peter Lombard, Lib. 4. did. 10.
Anno 1140. Grand Master of the Sentences, and Father of the next race of
Schoolmen, who indeed proves the real and substantial Presence out of the
Ancients; particularly St. Austin and St. Ambrose; but when he comes to explain
the manner of it, whether it be a formal or material change; whether the
substance of the Bread and Wine be reduced into its first matter, or into
nothing, and the like, his conclusion is, definire non sufficio: I presume not
to determine; and therefore quitting these uncertain things, this I certainly
know from Authorities, viz. That the substance of the Bread and Wine, are
converted into the substance of the Body and Blood of Christ; but as for the
manner of the Conversion, we are not ashamed to confess our Ignorance. But if
you inquire in what subject the Accidents subsist, he answers problematically
(mihi videtur) that they subsist without any subject at all.

But it was agreed in all Schools, That whatever became of the Substance the
Accidents remained: And that all outward Operations terminated there; and that
only they were broken and eaten.

But as for the substance of the Bread and Wine, some were for its permanency
with the Substance of the Body and Blood, some for its Annihilation, some for
physical Conversion. But then these Curiosites were kept in the Schools, where
witty Men, for want of more useful Employment entertained and amused
themselves, with these fine subtleties of thought: But then they were confined
within the Schools and never admitted so much as to ask the Authority of the
Church.

In the next Age comes that young and active Pope, Innocent the Third, who
succeeded to the Sea, Anno 1198. in the Thirty seventh Year of of his Age,
having been made Cardinal in the Twenty ninth.

In the Eighteenth Year of his Reign he summoned the famous Fourth, or great
Council of Lateran, at which were present above 400 Bishops, Metropolitans and
Patriarchs, besides Ambassadors from all Princes in Christendom, for recovery
of the Holy Land, Extirpation of Heresies, and for Reformation of the Church.
In this Council the Word Transubstantiate is first used in a Decree of the
Church, to express the real or substantial Presence of the Body and Blood of
Christ in the Sacrament, under the species of Bread and Wine: Where, in the
Decree against the heresy of the Albigenses, who denied the Real Presence, it
is Enacted, That the Body and Blood of Christ, are really contained under the
species of Bread and Wine: The Bread being Transubstantiated into the Body, and
the Wine into the Blood, by the Power of God. But though the Council used the
word to Express the Mystery, they did not so much as define its signification,
much less the nature of the thing. It was a word that at that time (it seems)
was in fashion, having been made use of by some of the more Polite Writers of
the Age.

Some give the honor of the Invention to Paschasius Radbertus, some to Petrus
Blesensis, and some to others; but being a word in Vogue among learned Men, the
Council made use of it as a Term of Art, instead of the old word,
Transelementation, that had hitherto kept its possession among both Greeks and
Latins.

It is pity the Greek Copy of this Canon is lost, whereas all the rest are
preserved: For if we had the Greek word that answered to the Latin, it might
have given us some more light into the thing. However, this was all that was
defined by Innocent the Third, or by the Council of Lateran; for it is much
disputed by learned Men, who was the Author of those Canons, many contending
that they were drawn up after the Council, because they often quote, and appeal
to its Decrees.

This is the chief Argument of the Learned and the Loyal William Barclay, and
others against them. But if these learned Men had considered a little further,
and looked back to the Third Council of Lateran, they would have found all the
Canons cited in this extant in that: So that only some Canons of the Third
Council, are revived and ratified in this Fourth: And after the clearing of
this Objection, I can see no other material Exception against them.

But to proceed; this word having gained the Authority of so great a Council,
and being put into the Decretals of the Church, by Gregory the Ninth, in honor
of his Uncle Innocent the Third, it soon gained universal usage among the
Latins, and was adopted into the Catalogue of School Terms; and was there
hammered into a Thousand shapes and forms, by those Masters of Subtlety: And
upon it St. Thomas of Aquin erects a new Kingdom of his own, against the old
Lombardian Empire; but long he had not Reigned, when Scotus, our subtle
Countryman, set up against him. And whatever St. Thomas of Aquin asserted, for
that reason only, he contradicted him; so that they two became the very Caesar
and Pompey of the Schools, almost all the great Masters of Disputation from
that time, fighting under one of their commands; and what intelligible
Philosophy both parties vented about the Substantial o^ Transubstantial
Presence, upon supposition of the real difference between Matter and Form,
Substance and Accidents, would be both too nice and too tedious to recite; only
in general the Thomists maintain the Transmutation of the Elements; the
Scotists, the Annihilation; and they proceed to abstract so long, till they
could not only separate the Matter and Form, and Accidents of the Bread from
one another, but the Paneity or Breadishness it self from them all, and founded
a new Vtopian World of Metaphysick and Specific Entities and Abstracts.

Thus far I have, as briefly as I can, represented the Scholastic History of
this Argument; in which the Authority of the Church is not at all concerned;
having gone no farther than to assign or appropriate a Word to signify such a
thing; but all along declaring the Thing it self to be beyond the compass of a
Definition. I know it is commonly said, that the Council of Trent has presumed
to define the Modus; and learned Men (I know not by what fatal oversight) take
it up on trust one from another; and the Definition is generally given in these
Terms: That,

Transubstantiation is wrought by the Annihilation of the substance of the
Bread and Wine, the Accidents remaining: To the which Annihilation succeeds the
Body and Blood of Christ, under the Accidents of Bread and Wine.

So the Bishops of Durham and Winchester represent it; so Mr. Alix, and the
Writers of his Church, and not only so but contrary to the sense of all other
Churches, they confound the Real Presence with Transubstantiation, as this
learned Man has done through his whole Disputation upon it, using the very
words promiscuously (as indeed all the modern Followers of Calvin do) and
charging the same absurdities upon both, and imputing the first Invention of
the Real Presence to Nicolas the Second, and Gregory the Seventh, in their
Decrees against Berengarius. But I cannot but wonder how so many learned Men
should with so much assurance fancy to themselves such a Definition in the
Trent Council, of the Modus of Transubstantiation, by the Annihilation of the
Substance, and the Permanency of the Accidents, when the Fathers of that
Council were so far from any such Design, That they designed nothing more
carefully, than to avoid all Scholastic Definitions. The subtle Disputes about
the Modus existendi (as they termed it) between the Dominicans and Franciscans
in that Council are described at large by Father Paolo himself in the Fourth
Book of his History. But withal, he says, they were extremely Displeasing and
Offensive to the Fathers, but most of all to the NUNCIO himself; and therefore
it was resolved in a General Congregation to determine the Matter in as few and
general Terms as possible, to offend neither Party, and avoid Contentions; and
when, notwithstanding this Decree, they fell into new Disputes, they are
checked by the Famous Bishop of Bitunto, who was one of the chief Compilers of
the Canons, telling them they came thither to condemn Heresies, not to define
Scholastic Niceties. And accordingly in the very First Chapter of the 13th.
Session, in which this Article was defined, when they determined the Real
Presence; they at the same time declare the Existendi Ratio to be ineffable;
and in the 4th. Chapter, where Transubstantiation is decreed, the Canon runs
thus: That,

By the Consecration of the Bread and Wine, there is a Conversion of the whole
Substance of the Bread into the Substance of the Body of Christ, and of the
whole Substance of the Wine into the Substance of his Blood, which Conversion
is fitly and properly called by the Holy Catholic Church; Transubstantiation.

In all which the Council only appropriates the Word Transubstantiation to
express the Real Presence, which it had before determined in the First Chapter,
not to be after a natural way of Existence, as Christ sits at the right Hand of
God, but Sacramental, after an ineffable manner.

Tho here some peevishly object, the Inconsistence of the Council with it self,
when it declares, that the thing is inexpressible and yet appropriates a word
to express it: Whereas all Christendom knows that the Procession of the Eternal
Word from the Father is Ineffable, and yet is expressed by the Word Generation;
and that the Union of the divine and humane Nature is ineffable, and yet is
called the Hypostatical Union; and that the Unity in the Trinity is ineffable,
and yet is expressed by the Word Consubstantial: So that this Council seems to
have defined no more than the Council of Nice did in the Doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity, in expressing the Unity of the Three Persons by the Word
(...), and the Distinction, by the Word (...), which amounted to no more than
this, That as it is certain from the Holy Scriptures that in the Unity of the
Godhead there is a Trinity, so the Holy Fathers to avoid the Niceties of
contentious Men, such as Arius was, determine that for the Time to come the
Mystery shall be expressed by the Terms (...) and (...); but as for any
Philosophical Notion of the Mystery, the Church never presumed to define it,
and this is the Definition of the Council of Trent, of the Real Presence, that
there is a Conversion of the Substances under the Species or Appearances of
Bread and Wine, which the Church has thought convenient to express by the Word
Transubstantiation.

And yet tho the Council approve the Word, yet it does not impose it, it only
declares it to be convenient, but no where says it is necessary. And as for the
Term Conversion, it is much older than the Word Transubstantiation, familiarly
used by the Ancient Fathers; and so is the Word Species: I know indeed it is
usual with Schoolmen and Protestant Writers to translate the Words under
Species of Bread and Wine, by these Words, under the Accidents of Bread and
Wine, as particularly the late Bishops of Durham and Winchester have done. But
this is to impose Philosophic Niceties upon the Decrees of the Church.

And tho perhaps all the Fathers of the Council believed the Reality of the New
substantial Presence under the Old Accidents, yet they had more Temper and
Discretion than to Authorize it by conciliar Determination, and therefore use
only the Word Species (and no other Word is used by Nicolas II, Gregory VII,
and Innocent III, that are thought the Three great Innovators in the Argument
of the Real Presence) that properly signifies Appearance, but nothing of
Physical or Natural Reality, so that tho the Presence under the Species be
real, yet as the Council has defined it, it is not Natural but Sacramental,
which Sacramental Real Presence they express by the Word Transubstantiation,
and recommend the Propriety of the Word to the Acceptance of Christendom.

This is the short History of the Real Presence in the Church of Rome, where,
as far as I can discern, the thing it self has been owned in all Ages of the
Church, the Modus of it never defined, but in the Schools, and tho they have
fansied Thousand Definitions to themselves, their Metaphysics were never
admitted into the Church. And so I proceed to give an Account of it, as it has
been defined in the Protestant Churches, where we shall find much the same
Harmony of Faith and Discord of Philosophy as in the Church of Rome.

And first we must begin with the famous Confession of Ausburg, that was drawn
up by Melancthon, and in the Year 1530 presented to Charles the Fifth, by
several Princes of Germany, as a Declaration of the Faith of the first
Reformers, and as the only true standard of the Ancient Protestant Religion.

The Confesion consists of Two parts. I. What Doctrines themselves taught. II.
What Abuses they desired to be reformed.


As to the later, the Emperor undertook to procure a General Council.

As to the former, particularly this Article of the Presence in the Sacrament,
they have published it in two several forms: In the Latin Edition it is worded
thus: Concerning the Lords Supper, we teach, That the Body and Blood of Christ
are there present indeed, and are distributed to the Receivers at the Lords
Supper; and condemn those that teach otherwise. In the German Edition it is
worded thus: Concerning the Lords Supper we teach, That the true Body and Blood
of Christ are truly present in the Supper, under the species of Bread and Wine,
and are there distributed and received. And in an Apology written by the same
hand, and published the Year following, it is thus expressed: We believe, That
in the Supper of our Lord, the Body and Blood of Christ are really and
substantially present, and are Exhibited indeed with those things, that are
seen, the Bread and Wine. This belief our Divines constantly maintain, and we
find, not only the Church of Rome has asserted the Corporeal Presence, but
that the Greek Church has anciently, as well as at this time, asserted the
same; as appears by their Canon Missae.

The same Author Explains himself more at large in his Epistle to Fredericus
Myconius. I send you (says he) the passages out of the Ancients, concerning the
Lord's Supper, to prove, that they held the same with us; namely, That the Body
and Blood of our Lord are there present indeed. And after diverse Citations he
concludes, That seeing this is the express Doctrine of the Scriptures, and
constant Tradition of the Church, I cannot conceive how, by the name of the
Body of Christ, should only be understood the sign of an absent Body; for
though the Word of God frequently makes use of Metaphors, yet there is a great
difference to be made between Historical Relations, and Divine Institutions. In
the first, matters transacted among Men, and visible to the Sense are related;
and here we are allowed, and often forced to speak figuratively: But if in
Divine Precepts, or Revelations, concerning the Nature or the Will of God, we
should take the same liberty, wise Men cannot but foresee the Mischiefs that
would unavoidably follow. There would be no certainty of any Article of Faith.
And he gives an instance in the Precept of Circumcision to Abraham: That upon
those Terms the good Patriarch might have argued with himself, That God never
intended to impose a thing so seemingly absurd, as the words sound; and that
therefore the Precept is to be understood only of a Figurative or Metaphorical
Circumcision; the Circumcision of our Lusts. So far this Learned Reformer.

Now the Authority of Melancthon weighs more with us of the Church of England,
(as the learned Dr. St. very well observes) that in the settlement of our
Reformation, Conference, P. 119.
there was no such regard had to Luther or Calvin, as to Erasmus and
Melancthon, whose Learning and Moderation were in greater Esteem here, than the
fiery spirits of the other; and yet few Writers have asserted the Substantial
and Corporeal Presence in higher terms than this moderate Reformer; and though
he may sometimes have varied in Forms of Speech, he continued constant and
immovable in the substance of the same Doctrine.

For in the Confession of the Saxon Churches (at the Compiling of which he was
chief Assistant) drawn up in the Year 1551, to have been presented to the
Council of Trent; a true and substantial Presence is asserted, during the time
of Ministration. We teach (say they) That Sacraments are Divine Institutions;
and that the things themselves out of the use desing'd are no Sacraments; but
in the use, Christ is verily and substantially present; and the Body and Blood
of Christ are indeed taken by the Receivers.

There seems to have been one singular Notion in this Confession, That the Real
and Substantial Presence lasts no longer than the Ministration; but that is
nothing to our Argument, as long as a substantial Presence is asserted.

In the Year 1536 an Assembly of the Divines of the Ausburg Confession on one
side, and the Divines of Upper Germany on the other, convened at Wirtemberg, by
the procurement and mediation of Bucer, who undertook to moderate between both
parties; where they agreed in this form of Confession. We believe according to
the words of Irenaeus, That the Eucharist consists of two things, one Earthly
the other Heavenly; and therefore believe and teach, That the Body and Blood of
Christ are truly and substantially exhibited and received with the Bread and
Wine. This is subscribed by the chief Divines of both Parties, and approved by
the Helvetian Ministers themselves.

The Bohemian Waldenses in their Confession of Faith presented to Ferdinand,
King of the Romans and Bohemia, declare expressly, That the Bread and Wine, are
the very Body and Blood of Christ; and that Christ is in the Sacrament with his
Natural Body, but by another way of Existence than at the Right Hand of God.

In the Greek Form of Consecration, this Prayer was used: Make this Bread the
precious Body of thy Christ; and that which is in this Cup, the precious Blood
of thy Christ, changing them by thy Holy Spirit; which words are taken out of
the Liturgies of St. Chrysostom and St. Basil.

And Ieremias the Learned Patriarch of Constantinople, in his Declaration of
the Faith of the Greek Church in Answer to the Lutheran Divines, affirms That
the Catholic Church believes, that after the Consecration the Bread is changed
into the very Body of Christ, and the Wine into the very Blood, by the Holy
Spirit.

In the Year 1570. was held a Council in Poland of the Divines of the Ausburg,
the Helvetian, and the Bohemian Confessions, in which they agreed in this
Declaration. As to that unhappy Controversy of the Supper of our Lord, We
agree in the Sense of the Words, as they are rightly understood by the Fathers,
particularly by Irenaeus, who affirms that the Mystery consists of two things,
one Earthly, and another Heavenly. Neither do we affirm, that the Elements and
Signs are mere naked and empty Things signified to Believers.

But to speak more clearly and distinctly, we agree that we believe and confess
the substantial Presence of Christ is not only signified to Believers, but is
really held forth, distributed and exhibited, the Symbols being joined with the
thing it self, and not merely naked, according to the nature of Sacraments.
This Confession was confirmed at several times, by several following Synods in
the same Kingdom, at Cracow 1573. at Peterkaw 1578. at Walhoff 1583.

The First Man that opposed the real and substantial Presence was
Carolostadius, Archdeacon of Wirtenberg, of whom the candid and ingenious
Melancthon gives this Character: That he was a furious Man, void both of Wit,
Learning, and common Sense, not capable of any Act of Civility or good Manners;
so far from any appearances of Piety, that there are most manifest Footsteps of
his Wickedness. He condemns all the Civil Laws of the heathen Nations, as
Unlawful, and would now have all Nations governed by the judicial Law of Moses,
and embraced the whole Doctrine of the Anabaptists.

He sets up the Controversy about the Sacraments against Luther, merely out of
Envy and Emulation, not out of any Sense of Religion, and much more to the same
Purpose: The Truth of all which (he says) a great part of Germany both can and
will attest. Tho the greatest Proof of his Levity is his own Writing, when all
that Disorder and Schism that he made in the Church, of which he professed
himself a Member, was founded upon no better Bottom than this slender Nicety,
That when our Savior said this is my Body, he pointed not to the Bread but to
himself.

But in this he is vehemently opposed by his Master Luther, in behalf of a true
Corporeal Presence, especially in his Book Contra Coelestes Prophetas seu
Fanaticos; wherein he lays down this Assertion, That by the Demonstrative
Pronoun hoc, Christ is declared to be Truly and carnally present with his Body
in the Supper, and that the Communication of the Body of Christ, of which St.
Paul speaks, is to eat the Body of Christ in the Bread, neither is that
Communication Spiritual only but Corporeal, as it is in the personal Union of
Christ: So we are to conceive of the Sacrament, in which the Bread and the Body
make up one thing, and after an incomprehensible manner, which no Reason can
Fathom, become one Essence or Mass, from whence, as Man becomes God, so the
Bread becomes the Body.

And in a Sermon preached by him the same Year at Wirtemberg, against the
Sacramentarian Heretics, as he calls them: The Devil opposes us by his
Fanatic Emissaries in the Blaspheming the Supper of our Lord, that dream the
Bread and Wine are there only given as a Sign or Symbol of our Christian
Profession, nor will allow that the Body and Blood of Christ are there present
themselves, tho the Words are express and perspicuous: Take, eat, this is my
Body. In this Controversy he was engaged all his Life, against Carolostadius,
and other Apostates from the Ausburg Confession, giving them no better Titles
than of Fanatics, Heretics, Betrayers of Christ, Blasphemers of the Holy
Ghost, and Seducers of the World.

And in his last Book against the Divines of Lovain in the Year 1545, the Year
before his Death, he makes this solemn Declaration. We seriously believe the
Zuinglians, and all Sacramentarians, that deny the Body and Blood of Christ to
be received Ore carnali, in the Blessed Sacrament, to be Heretics, and no
Members of the Church of Christ: So that hitherto it is evident, That the whole
Body of the true Old Protestants, both in their public Confessions and private
Writings, unanimously asserted the Corporeal and Substantial Presence, as they
use the Words promiscuously.

As for the Calvinian Churches, Grotius has observed very truly, That the
Calvinists express themselves in a quite different Language, in their
Confessions, from what they do in their Disputations, where they declare
themselves more frankly. In their Confessions they tell you, That the Body and
Blood of Christ, are taken Really, Substantially, Essentially; but when you
come to Discourse'em closer, the whole Business is Spiritual, without
Substance, only with a signifying Mystery; and all the reality is turned into a
receiving by Faith; which, says he, is a perfect contradiction to the Doctrine
of the whole Catholic Church.

So they declare in the Conference at Presburg with the Lutherans, That in the
Sacrament, Christ indeed gives the Substance of his Body and Blood by the
working of the Holy Ghost.

And when Luther signified to Bucer, his Jealously of the Divines of Strasburgh
and Bazil, as if they believed nothing to be present in the Sacrament, but the
Bread and Wine. Bucer returns this Answer, in the name, and with the consent of
all his Brethren; This is their Faith and Doctrine concerning the Sacrament,
That in it, by the Institution and Power of our* Lord, his true Body and his
true Blood are indeed exhibited, given and taken, together with the visible
Signs of Bread and Wine (as his own Words declare.) This is the Doctrine not
only of Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius, but the Divines of Upper Germany have
declared the same, in their public Confessions and Writings.

So that the Difference is rather about the manner of the Absence and Presence,
than about the Presence or Absence themselves.

And the Reformed French Church in the year 1557. declare themselves much after
the same manner, to a Synod of Reformed German Divines, held at Worms. We
confess that in the Supper of our Lord, not only all the Benefits of Christ,
but the very Substance of the Son of Man, the very Flesh, and the very Blood
that he shed for us, to be there not merely signified, or Symbolically,
Typically, or Figuratively, as a Memorial of a thing absent, but truly held
forth, exhibited and offered to be received, together with the Symbols, that
are by no means to be thought naked, which by virtue of God's Promise, always
have the thing it self truly and certainly conjoined with them, whether they
are given to the good or to the bad.

But what need of more Witnesses, when Calvin himself, the very Vrim and
Thummim of the Calvinian Churches, declares his Sense in these express Words.
Institut. Book 4. cap. 17. Sect. 11.
I affirm that Christ is indeed given by the Symbols of Bread and Wine, and by
consequence his Body and Blood, in which he fulfilled all Righteousness for our
Justification, and as by that, we were ingrafted into his Body, so by this are
we made Partakers of his Substance, by Virtue of it we feel the Communication
of all good Things to our selves.

But as to the Modus, Sect. 32.
if any Man inquire of me, I am not ashamed to confess that the Mystery is too
sublime for my Wit to comprehend, or to express; and to speak freely, I rather
feel than understand it, and therefore here without Controversy I embrace the
Truth of God, in which I am sure I may safely acquisce. He affirms that his
Flesh is the Food of my Soul, and his Blood the Drink. It is to these Aliments
that I offer my Soul to be nourished. He commands me in his Holy Supper, under
the Symbols of Bread and Wine to take, eat, and drink, his Body and Blood, and
therefore I doubt not but he gives it. Here, besides the express Words
themselves, if there be so much Mystery in the thing as he affirms, there is
much more than mere Figure.

And in another Passage he thus expresses himself. That God does not trifle in
vain Signs, but does in good earnest perform what is represented by the
Symbols, viz. the Communication of his Body and Blood, and that the Figure
conjoined with the Reality, is represented by the Bread, and the Body of Christ
is offered and exhibited with it, the true Substance is given us, the Reality
conjoined with the Sign, so that we are made Partakers of the Substance of the
Body and Blood. This is express enough.

But yet in his Book de Coena Domini, he declares his Sense much more fully.

If notwithstanding (says he) it be enquired whether the Bread be the Body,
and the Wine the Blood of Christ; I answer, that the Bread and Wine are the
visible Signs that represent the Body and Blood, and that the Name of the Body
and Blood is given to them, because they are the Instruments by which our Lord
Jesus Christ is given to us.

This form of Speech is very agreeable to the thing it self, for seeing the
Communion that we have in the Body of Christ is not to be seen with our Eyes,
nor comprehended by our Understandings, yet it is there manifestly exposed to
our Eyesight; of which we have a very proper Example in the same case: When it
pleased God that the Holy Ghost should appear at the Baptism of Christ he was
pleased to represent it under the appearance of a Dove; and John the Baptist,
giving an Account of the Transaction, only relates that he saw the Holy Ghost
descending; so that if we consider rightly we shall find that he saw nothing
but the Dove, for the Essence of the Holy Ghost is invisible: But he knowing
the Vision not to be a vain Apparition, but a certain Sign of the Presence of
the Holy Ghost represented to him in that manner, that he was able to bear the
Representation.

The same thing is to be said in the Communion of our Savior's Body and Blood,
That it is a Spiritual Mystery, neither to be beheld with Eyes, nor
comprehended with humane Understanding, and therefore is represented by Figures
and Sings, that (as the weakness of our Nature requires) fall under our Senses,
so as it is not a bare and simple Figure, but conjoined with its Reality and
Substance: Therefore the Bread is properly called the Body, when it does not
only represent it, but also brings it to us.

And therefore we will readily grant, That the Name of the Body of Christ may
be transferred to the Bread, because it is the Sacrament and Emblem of it; but
then we must add, that the Sacrament is by no means to be separated from the
Substance and Reality.

And that they might not be confounded, it is not only convenient, but
altogether necessary, to distinguish between them, but intolerably absurd to
divide one from the other. Wherefore when we see the visible Sign what it
represents, we ought to reflect from whom it is given us, for the Bread is
given as a Representation of the Body of Christ, and we are commanded to eat
it.

It is given, I say, by God, who is infallible Truth, and then if God cannot
deceive nor lie, it follows that He in reality gives whatever is there
represented: And therefore it is necessary that we really receive the Body and
Blood of Christ, seeing the Communion of both is represented to us.

For to what purpose should he command us to eat the Bread and drink the Wine,
as signifying his Body and Blood, if without some spiritual Reality we only
received the Bread and Wine? Would he not vainly and absurdly have instituted
this Mystery, and as we Frenchmen say, by false Representations?

Therefore we must acknowledge that if God gives us a true Representation in
the Supper, that the invisible Substance of the Sacrament is joined with the
visible Signs, and as the Bread is distributed by hand, so the Body of Christ
is communicated to us to be Partakers of it. This certainly, if there were
nothing else, ought abundantly to satisfy us, when by it we understand, that in
the Supper of our Lord, Christ gives us the true and proper Substance of his
Body and Blood.

Thus far Calvin: And I think it is as high a Declaration of the real and
substantial Presence, as I have met with in any Author whatsoever. And if in
any other Passages the great Dictator may have been pleased to contradict
himself, that is, the old Dictatorian Prerogative of that Sect, as well as the
old Romans, That whatever Decrees they made, however inconsistent, they were
always Authentic.

Neither does Beza at all fall short of his adored Master in the Point of
substantial Presence: In his Book against Westfalus a Sacramentarian, de Coena
Domini. He declares freely that the (...), or grammatical Sense of our
Savior's Words, This is my Body, cannot be preserved without
Transubstantiation, and that there is no Medium between Transubstantiantion and
a mere Figure: And yet the whole Design of the Book is to prove the real
Presence in the Sacrament, in opposition to the Figurative.

And in the Year 1561, The Protestant Churches of France held a Synod at
Rochel, and the Year following at Nimes, in both which Beza sat as President,
where the substantial Presence was maintained, and defined with great Vehemence
against the Innovators (as they were then esteemed;) for when Morellus moved to
have the Word Substance taken out of their Confession of Faith, Beza and the
Synod, not without some Indignation, decree against them.

This Decree Beza declares in his Epistle to the Ministers of Zurick, dated May
the 17th. 1572, to extend to the Protestants of France only, least they who
were Zuinglians should take Offense at it as a Censure particularly designed
against themselves.

But the highest Declaration of the French Protestants is that sent by their
Ambassadors to the German Divines assembled at Worms Anno 1557. in which
Business Beza was chief Manager. We confess, say they, that in the Supper of
our Lord, not only all the Benefits of Christ, but the very Substance of the
Son of Man, the very real Flesh, the very Blood that he shed for us, not only
to be signified or Symbolically, Typically, or Figuratively to be proposed as
the Memorial of a thing absent, but to be truly represented, exhibited and
offered to be received; the Symbols by no means to be thought naked, being
annexed, which because of the Promise and Engagement of God, always have the
thing it self truly and certainly conjoined, whether given to the Good or to
the Bad.

But these Civilities and Condescentions were made in their low Ebbs of
Fortune: For whenever they could flatter themselves with any Advantage of
Interest, no Accommodations would serve their Turn. Thus at the famous
Conference at Poissy, before Charles the Ninth, Anno 1561, where they supposed
themselves warm, and powerful enough, by the Favor of the Queen Mother (who
supported them for her own Ends of State) and some great Ministers of State,
who (by the way) soon after proved Rebels, I mean Coligny and his Faction;
Beza, who was the chief Manager in behalf of the Protestants, runs high in his
Demands. As to the Eucharist, says he, the Body of Christ is as far distant
from it, as the highest Heaven from the Earth: For our selves and the
Sacraments are upon the Earth, but Christ's Flesh is in Heaven so glorified,
that it has not lost the Nature, but the Infirmity of a Body. So that we are
Partakers of his Body and Blood only after a spiritual way, or by Faith.

This Boldness highly offended the Queen; and therefore he afterward
endeavored to excuse himself by Palliations and softning Expressions, but
after all, to avoid farther Equivocation, he is hardly pressed to it by the
Cardinal of Lorrain, whether they would stand to the Confession of Ausburg.
Beza demurs and consults Calvin; Calvin defies it, and commands him to protest
against it. Upon which Occasion Osiander, a plain Protestant, in his History
makes this Remark upon the Calvinian Honesty.

Heretofore (says he) when Peace was granted to the Protestants in Germany, the
Calvinists put in their Claim to their Share in it, because they owned the
Ausburg Confession (and it was subscribed by Calvin himself) notwithstanding
that at the same time they held contradictory Opinions. But in the Conference
at Poissy, when they presumed that they had Strength and Force enough to defend
their own Doctrines, they openly rejected the Ausburg Confession, when it was
offered them by the Cardinal of Lorrain, to subscribe as the only Article of
Pacification. And yet after this, when they had not obtained their Ends, they
again in affront to their own Consciences, cry up the Ausburg Confession as
their only Standard of Faith, not that they approved it, but under that false
Guise to impose Calvinism upon the plain meaning Lutherans. So far the
Historian, though the matter of Fact is its own best Proof.

This is the short Account of this Controversy in all foreign Churches. All
Parties of Christendom agree in the Substance of the Doctrine, even the
Calvinists themselves, who, tho they sometimes attempted to deny it, had not
Confidence enought to be steady to their own Opinion, but were often forced to
submit it to the consent of Christendom.

From all these Premises it is evident, that no one thing in the World is more
unfit to be set up for a Test than Transubstantiation, seeing all Parties agree
in the thing, tho not in the Word, and yet tho they do, they again disagree in
numberless Speculations about it, and when they have done, all Parties
unanimously agree that the Modus is a thing utterly unknown and
incomprehensible. So that take it one way (i. e.) as to the thing it self, or
the real Presence, the Test is a Defiance to all Christendom; take it the other
way, as to the Modus, it is nothing at all but only imposing an unintelligible
Thing upon the Wisdom and Honor of a Nation under the severest Penalties.

As for the Church of England, she agrees with the Tradition of the Catholic
Church both Roman and Reformed, in asserting the Certainty of the real
Presence, and the Uncertainty of the Manner of it; tho the true account of it
has been miserably perplexed, and disturbed by the oblique Practices of the
Sacramentarians.

The first Account we have of it is in our celebrated Church-Historian out of
Dr. Stillingfleet's famous invisible Manuscript, whereby as he had before made
Archibishop Cranmer a mere Erastian as to Discipline, so now here he makes him
a mere Sacramentarian as to Doctrine.

A Committee of selected Bishops and Divines being appointed in the First Year
of King Edward, for examining and reforming the Offices of the Church. The
First, because most material Point, was the Eucharist, concerning which all
things were put into certain Quaeries, to which every Commissioner gave in his
Answer in Writing. And to the Question concerning the Eucharist, What is the
Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass? Cranmer's Answer is,

The Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass is not so called, because
Christ indeed is there Offered and Sacrificed by the Priest and the People,
(for that was done but once by himself upon the Cross) but it so called,
because it is a Memory and Representation of that very true Sacrifice and
Immolation, which before was made upon the Cross.

This is pure Zuinglianism, and in Opposition to it, it is asserted by Six
Bishops in a Body.

I think it is the Presentation of the very Body and Blood of Christ, being
really present in the Sacrament, which Presentation the Priest makes at the
Mass in the name of the Church, unto God the Father, and in Memory of Christ's
Passion, and Death upon the Cross, with Thanksgiving therefore, and devout
Prayer, that all Christian People, and namely they who spiritually join with
the Priest in the said Oblation, and of whom he makes special Remembrance, may
attain the Benefit of the said Passion.

And to these agree the several Answers of Carlisle, and Coventry, and
Litchfield, by which (as the Historian well observes) the Reader will perceive
how generally the Bishops were addicted to the old Superstition, and how few
did agree in all things with Cranmer.

Now this Old Superstition that he finds in this passage, is nothing but the
true Old Protestant Doctrine of the real Presence, in opposition to mere Figure
and Representation, which is all that is here asserted by the Bishops.

But this is the bold practice of this bold Writer, to make Cranmer the
Standard of the Reformation; and this unknown Manuscript the Standard of
Cranmer's Opinions; and these two grand Forgeries concerning no Church
Government; and the mere Commemorative Presence in the Eucharist, are the two
grand singularities of his History; and the main things that gave it popular
Vogue and Reputation with his Party; and were these two blind Stories, and the
Reasons depending upon them retrenched, it would be like the shaving of
Samson's Hair, and destroy all the strength peculiar to the History.

The Design was apparently laid before the Work was undertaken, that
industriously warps all things into Irenical and Erastian Principles, and the
vain Man seems to have been flattered by his Patrons into all that Pains to
give Reputation to their Errors.

And here lay the Fondness for the Stillingsteetian Manuscript, that it so
frankly and openly asserted Erastian and Sacramentarian Principles as the
Bottom of the Reformation. But if such an unprov'd and unwarrantable piece of
Paper, without any certain Conveyance or Tradition, without any Notice of so
public a Transaction in any contemporary Writer, without any other Evidence of
its being genuine, than that it was put providentially into the Hands of Dr.
St. when he wrote his Irenicum, must be set up for undoubted Record, against
all the Records of the Churches, our great Historian would be well advised to
employ his Pains in writing Lampoons upon the present Princes of Christendom
(especially his own) which he delights in most, because it is the worst thing
that himself can do, than collecting the Records of former times. For the First
will require Time and Postage to pursue his Malice, but the Second is easily
traced in the Chimney Corner.

And therefore I would desire these Gentlemen either to give a better Account
of the Descent and Genealogy of the Paper, than that it came to Dr. St. by
Miracle; or else to give it less Authority.

But to proceed, a new Office for the Communion-Service was drawn up in the
same Year by the Bishops, in compiling of which Cranmer had the chief hand, and
by his great Power overruled the rest at Pleasure; in this Service he retains
the old Form of Words used in the ancient Missals, when there was no
Zuinglianism or Doctrine of figurative Presence in the Christian World, and the
real Presence was universally believed as appears by the very Words of
Distribution.

The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy Body
and Soul unto everlasting Life. And the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which
was shed for thee, etc.

This was the Form prescribed in the First Liturgy of Edward the 6th. and
agreeable to this are the King's own Injunctions published at the same time,
where the Eucharist is called the Communion of the very Body and Blood of
Christ, by which Form of Words they then expressed the real Presence as opposed
to Zuinglianism.

This Liturgy being thus established, and withal abetted by Act of Parliament,
for some time kept up its Authority in the Church against all Opposition;
though it was soon encountered with Enemies enough both at Home and abroad out
of the Calvinian Quarters.

At the end of the Year ensuing Peter Martyr, a rank Sacramentarian, came over,
and after much Conversation with Cranmer, he was placed Regius Professor in
Oxford, where he soon raised Tumults about the Zuinglian and Sacramentarian
Doctrines.

But Bucer, that prudent and moderate Reformer, came not till some time after,
though invited at the same time: And so either came too late or departed too
soon; for as he came over in June so he died in January, so that tho he were a
great Assertor of the real Presence (as our Church-Historian himself often
observes) he had not a Season to sow his Doctrine, and Martyr reigning alone,
and being a furious Bigott in his Principles, it is no wonder if Zuinglianism
spread with so much Authority.

But the most fatal Blow to the Reformation of the Church of England was given
by Calvin's Correspondence with the Protector, and afterward with Dudley,
taking upon him to censure, expunge, reform, impose, at his own Pleasure; the
Malignity of whose Influence first discovered it self in the Ceremonial War
against a Cap and a Tippet, but soon wrought into the Vitals of the
Reformation, especially, as to the Liturgy and the Eucharist; both which must
be removed to give way to the Zuinglian Errors.

This Alteration was made in the 5th. Year of the Kings Reign, tho precisely
when, and by what Persons, Page 166.
is utterly unknown, only it is remarked by our Church-Historian to have
followed immediately after the Consecration of Hooper. When (as he observes)
the Bishops being generally addicted to the Purity of Religion, spent most of
this Year in preparing Articles which should contain the Doctrine of the Church
of England. Among which the 29th. condemns the real Presence, as the new
Liturgy, to which they are annexed, had before almost run it up to the Charge
of Idolatry.

For they were not content to abolish the old Missal Form of Distribution. The
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy Body and
Soul unto everlasting Life. Take and eat this, etc. But instead of it appoint
this Zuinglian Form, Take and eat this (without any mention of the Body and
Blood of Christ) in remembrance that Christ died for thee. etc.

Neither were these Innovators (whoever they were) satisfied with the
Alteration of the old Form; but add a fierce Declaration to bar the Doctrine of
Real and Essential Presence.

Whereas it is ordered in this Office of the Administration of the Lord's
Supper, that the Communicants should receive the same Kneeling (which order is
well meant for a signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgment of the
benefits of Christ therein, given to all worthy Receivers, and for avoiding
such Profanation and Disorder in the Holy Communion, as might otherwise
ensue.) Yet least the same Kneeling should by any Persons, either out of
Ignorance and Infirmity, or out of Malice and Obstinacy be misconstrued and
depraved, it is here declared that no Adoration is intended, or ought to be
done unto any real or essential Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood,
for the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very natural
Substances, and therefore may not be adored, (for that were Idolatry to be
abhorred by all faithful Christians) and the natural Body and Blood of our
Savior Christ are in Heaven, and not here. It being against the Truth of
Christ's natural Body, to be at one time in more places than one.

And whereas a body of Articles was composed at the same time, it is declared
in the 29th. Article, That since the very being of humane Nature does require,
That the Body of one and the same Man, cannot be at one and the same time in
many places, but of necessity must be in some certain and determinate place;
therefore the Body of Christ cannot be present in many different places at the
same time. And since as the Holy Scriptures testify Christ has been taken up
into Heaven, and there is to abide till the end of the World, it becomes not
any of the Faithful to believe or profess, that there is a real or corporeal
Presence (as they Phrase it) of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Holy
Eucharist.

This Declaration, though it seemed to be aimed with a particular Malice
against the Lutherans, and their peculiar manner of Asserting and Explaining
the real Presence, yet it strikes at the general Doctrine it self, held in all
Churches. And as these were the great Alterations made at that time; so who
were the Authors and Contrivers of them is so utterly unknown to Historians, that
they are not so much as able to conjecture.

Doctor Heylin would ascribe it either to the Convocation it self, or some
Committee appointed by it. But this is the officious Kindness of the good Man
to help out the poor oppressed Church at that time, at a dead Lift, having no
Record or Authority for his Assertion.

Doctor Burnet has often heard it said, That the Articles were framed by
Cranmer and Ridley. But whoever told him so, knew no more than himself; I am
sure it is the meanest Trade in an Historian to stoop to Hear-says.

All that can be conjectured of it, is, That it was done at that unhappy time
when Dudley Governed all, who when he formed his great and ambitious Designs,
first (as the Historian Remarks) endeavored to make himself Popular; and to
this end, among other Arts, he made himself Head and Patron of the Calvinian
Faction, and entertained the Established Church with Neglect and Contempt; and
therefore I find not Ecclesiastical Matters referred to the advice of the
Regular Ecclesiastical Order, but were either Transacted by Himself, and his
Agents in private, or some incompetent Lay-Authority.

As to this matter of the New Liturgy and Articles, there is no Record but an
Act of Parliament, by which they are Imposed and Authorized. Whereas there has
been a very Godly Order set forth by the Authority of Parliament for
Common Prayer, Anno 5to. and 6to. Edw. 6ti.
and Administration of the Holy Sacraments, to be used in the Mother Tongue
within this Church of England, agreeable to the Word of God, and the Primitive
Church, very comfortable to all good People, desiring to live in Christian
Conversation, and most profitable to the Estate of this Realm; upon the which,
the Mercy, Favor, and Blessing of Almighty God is in no wise so readily and
plenteously poured, as by Common Prayers, due using of the Sacraments, and
often Preaching of the Gospel with the Devotion of the Hearers; and yet this
notwithstanding a great number of People in diverse parts of this Realm,
following their own sensuality, and living either without Knowledge, or due
Fear of God, do wilfully and damnation before Almighty God, abstain and refuse
to come to their Parish Churches, and other places where Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments, and preaching of the Word of God, is used
upon Sundays and other Days, ordained to be Holy Days.

II. For Reformation hereof be it enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with
the assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and
by the Authority of the same, that from and after the Feast of All Saints next
coming, all and every person and persons inhabiting within this Realm, or any
other the King's Majesty's Dommions, shall diligently and faithfully (having no
lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent) endeavor themselves to resort to
their Parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or upon reasonable let thereof, to
some usual place, where Common Prayer, and such Service of God shall be used in
such time of Let, upon every Sunday, and other days ordained and used to be
kept as Holy Days, and then and there to abide orderly and soberly during the
time of the Common Prayer, Preachings, or other Service of God there to be used
and ministered, upon pain of Punishment by the Censures of the Church.

III. And for the due execution hereof, the King's most Excellent Majesty, the
Lords Temporal, and all the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, does
in God's name earnestly require and charge all Archbishops, Bishops, and their
Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor themselves to the uttermost of their
Knowledges, that the due and true execution thereof may be had throughout their
Diocesses and Charges, as they will answer before God for such Evils and
Plagues, wherewith Almighty God may justly punish his People, for neglecting
this good and wholesome Law.

IV. And for their Authority in this behalf, be it further likewise enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the same Archbishops, Bishops,
and all other their Officers, exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as well
in place Exempt, as not Exempt, within their Diocesses, shall have full Power
and Authority by this Act, to Reform, Correct, and Punish by Censures of the
Church all and singular persons which shall offend within any their
Jurisdictions or Diocesses, after the said Feast of All Saints next coming,
against this Act and Statute; any other Law, Statute, Privilege, Liberty, or
Provision heretofore made, had, or suffered to the contrary notwithstanding.

V. And because there is risen in the use and exercise of the aforesaid common
Service in the Church, heretofore set forth, diverse doubts for the fashion or
manner of the Ministration of the same, rather by the curiosity of the Minister
and Mistakers, than of any other worthy cause; therefore, as well for the more
plain and manifest Explanation thereof, as for the more perfection of the said
Order or Common Service, in some places, where it is necessary to make the same
Prayer and fashion of Service, more earnest and fit to stir Christian People to
the true honoring of Almighty God, the King's most Excellent Majesty, with the
assent of the Lords and Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by
the Authority of the same, has caused the aforesaid Order, or Common Service,
Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, to be faithfully and godly perused,
explained, and made fully perfect, and by the aforesaid Authority has annexed
and joined it, so explained and perfected, to this present Statute, etc.

In this new Office, beside the forementioned alterations in the Liturgy it
self, there was ordered in the Rubric, the Abolition of Copes and Hoods;
neither is it altogether unobservable, that at this time Hopkins his Psalms
broke in upon the service of the Church.

But in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when the Reformation was
settled in that State, in which it ever after continued, that new Declaration of
the Second Liturgy of King Edward was rejected, together with the 29th.
Article, and the First old Form of Distribution was restored. And that's a clear
Declaration of the Sense of this Church for a real and essential Presence, when
it was so particularly concerned to have all Bars against it removed. And from
that time forward, the most eminent Divines in it, were successively from Age
to Age the most Assertors of it.

It were in vain to recite the numberless Passages to that Purpose, it having
been so often done by other Hands. A List of the Names of the principal Authors
may be seen in the late Bishop of Durham's Historia Transubstantiationis, John
Poinet, Bishop of Winchester, who wrote a very learned Book upon the Argument,
entitled Diallacticon, to explain the Sense of the Church of England about it;
John Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, the learned Bishops Andrews and Bilson, Isaac
Casaubon in the Name and by the Command of King James the First, in his Answer
to Cardinal Perron; Mr. Hooker; John, Bishop of Rochester; Montague, Bishop of
Norwich; James, Primate of Armagh; Francis, Bishop of Ely; Archbishop Laud;
Bishop Overal, and the Archbishop of Spalato.

To this Catalogue variety of other Writers might be added, but either here are
Witnesses enough, or there never can be. Neither need I produce their
Testimonies, when they are so vugarly known, and have been so frequently
recited.

I shall content my self with the Two principal, the most learned and reverend
Prelates Poinet and Andrews.

The First wrote his Diallacticon concerning the Truth, Nature and Substance of
the Body and Blood of Christ in the Eucharist. A Book much approved and often
commended by Grotius, Animad. Cass. Artic. 10. in Animad. Riveti. Votum pro
Pace Art. 10. Rivet. Apol* dicuss.
(tho he knew not the Author) as the best Discourse upon the Argument, and the
most proper Method to restore the Peace of the Christian Church in that Point,
which he further says was for that purpose translated into French by a reformed
Divine, by the Advice of his Brethren. I have not the Book by me, but the
Design and fundamental Assertion is to prove (as Dr. Cosins recites it) that
the Eucharist is not only a Figure of the Body of our Lord, but contains in it
the Verity, Nature and Substance; and therefore that these Terms ought not to
be exploded, because the Ancients generally used them in their Discourses upon
this Argument.

But Bishop Andrews his Passage, though grown Vulgar and Threadbare, by being
so continually quoted, best deserves our Observation, because by that means it
is made not only a Declaration of his own Sense, but of all that followed him
in it, and that is of almost all the learned Men of the Church of England, that
have succeeded from that time. The Passage is in his Answer to Bellarmine in
these Words.

The Cardinal is not ignorant, except wilfully, that Christ has said, This is
my Body. Now about the Object we are both agreed; all the Controversy is about
the Modus. We firmly believe that it is the Body of Christ, but after what
manner it is made to be so, there is not a Word extant in the Gospel, and
therefore we reject it from being a Matter of Faith. We will, if you please,
place it among the Decrees of the Schools; but by no means among the Articles
of Religion. What Durandus said of old, we approve of. We hear the Word, feel
the Effect, know not the Manner, believe the Presence. And so we believe the
Presence too, and that real no less than your selves: Only we define nothing
rashly of its Modus, neither do we curiously inquire into it; no more than how
the Blood of Christ cleanses us in our Baptism; no more than how in the
Incarnation of Christ the Humane Nature is united to the Divine. We rank it in
the Order of Mysteries (and indeed the whole Eucharist it self is nothing but
Mystery) what remains beside, ought to be consumed by Fire, that is as the
Fathers elegantly express it, to be adored by Faith, not examined by Reason.

This was his State of the Controversy, that was then perused and approved of
by King James, and ever after retained by the Divines of the Church of England
down to the Rebellion and Subversion of Church and State, and then it was
carried into Banishment with its Confessors. For whilst his late Majesty
resided at Cologn, it was there commonly objected, in his own Presence, by the
Roman Divines against the Church of England, That all its Members were mere
Zuinglians and Sacramentarians, that believed only an imaginary Presence.

Upon this Dr. Cosins, who was then Dean of the Chapel Royal, by his Majesty's
Command writes a Discourse to vindicate the Church of England from that
Calumny, and to give an Account of its Sense concerning the true and real
Presence; in which he declares himself to the same purpose with all the
forementioned Authors, all along vehemently asserting the true reality of the
Presence, and still declaring the Modus to be ineffable, unsearchable, above
our Senses, and above our Reason.

So that still all Parties are agreed in the thing it self, were it not for
that one mistaken Supposition, That the Church of Rome has not only defined
the Matter, but the Manner, which she is so far from pretending to attempt,
that before she proceeded to decree any thing about it, she declared that it
was so incomprehensible, that it was not capable of being defined, as we see
all Christendom has done beside.

Now after all this I leave it to the common Sense and Ingenuity of Mankind,
whether any thing can be more barbarous and profane than to make the renouncing
of a Mystery, so unanimously received, a State TEST. And that is my present
Concernment about it, not as a Point of Divinity, but as turned into a Point of
State.

Thus far proceeded the Old Church of England, which as it was banished, so it
was restored with the Crown. But by reason of the long Interval of Twenty Years
between the Rebellion and Restitution, there arose a new Generation of Divines
that knew not Joseph. These Men underhand deserted and undermined the Old
Church, as it stood upon Divine Right, and Catholic Principles, and instead of
it crected a New Church of their own Contrivance, consisting partly of
Independency, partly of Erastianism, with the Independent, leaving no standing
Authority in the Christian Church over private Christians, but leaving every
Man to the arbitrary Choice of his own Communion; with Erastus allowing no
Jurisdiction to the Christian Church, but what is derived from the Civil
Magistrate.

These Principles being Pleasing to the Wantonness of the People, these Men
soon grew popular, and soon had the Confidence to call themselves the Church of
England: But the principal Object of their Zeal was the Destruction of Popery,
and the only Measure of Truth, with them, was Opposition to the Church of Rome.
And therefore they assumed to themselves the Management of that great and
glorious War.

And as they managed it upon new Principles, or indeed, none at all (never
writing for our Church, but only against that Church) so they advanced new
Arguments to represent the Church of Rome as Odious as possible, to the People.
Among these the Two most frightful Topics, were Transubstantiation and
Idolatry. One was a very hard Word, and the other a very ugly one. These Two
Words, they made the Two great Kettle-drums to the Protestant Guards. They were
continually beating upon them with all their Force, and whenever they found
themselves at any Disadvantage with an Enemy (as they often were by pressing
too far, for they never thought they did enough in the Cause) by making a Noise
upon these Two loud Engines, they could at pleasure drown the Dispute.

Now, ever since this Alteration of the State of the War between the Two
Churches, we hear little or nothing at all of the real Presence in the Cause,
but it is become as great a Stranger to the (i.e. their) Church of England as
Transubstantiation it self, but the whole matter is resolved into a mere
Sacramental Figure and Representation, and a Participation only of the Benefits
of the Body and Blood of Christ by Faith.

I know not any one Writer of that Party of Men that has ever owned any higher
Mystery, but on the contrary they state all the Disputes about the Eucharist
upon Sacramentarian Principles, and with them to assert the true reality of the
Presence of our Savior's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, as naturally
resolves it self into Transubstantiation, as that does into Idolatry.

And the main Argument insisted upon by them, is the natural Impossibility of
the thing it self to the Divine Omnipotence, which beside the profane Boldness
of prescribing Measures to God's Attributes in a Mystery that they do not
comprehend; it is, as appears by the Premises, a Defiance to the Practice of all
Churches, who have ever acknowledged an incomprehensible Mystery, not subject
to the Examination of Humane Reason, but to be embraced purely upon the
Authority of a Divine Revelation.

And therefore that ought to be the only matter of Dispute. For if it be a
Divine Revelation (as all Christendom has hitherto believed) that determines
the Case without any further Enquiry; and if any Man will not be satisfied with
that Authority, he makes very Bold with his Maker. And Men of those Principles
would no doubt, make admirable Work with the Definitions of Articles of Faith
by the Four first general Councils.

But to let their new way of Arguing pass, it is these Men that first set up
Sacramentarian Principles in this Church, and then blew them into the
Parliament House, raising there, every Session, continual Tumults about
Religion, and it is to their Caballing with the Members that we owe these new
and unpresidented TESTS. Perhaps to have their own Decrees and Writings
established by Law, and imposed upon the whole Nation as Gospel.

In short, if they own a real Presence, we see from the Premises how little the
Controversy is between that and Transubstantiation, as it is truly and
ingeniously understood by all reformed Churches. If they do not, they disown
the Doctrine both of the Church of England and the Church Catholic, and then
if they own only a figurative Presence* (and it is plain they own no other)
they stand condemned of Heresy by almost all Churches in the Christian World;
and if this be the thing intended to be set up (as it certainly is by the
Authors and Contrivers of it) by renouncing Transubstantiation, then the Result
and Bottom of the Law is under this Pretense to bring a new Heresy by Law into
the Church of England.

And yet upon this Foot I find the Controversy stands at this present Day
between the Bishop of Rome, or the Bishop of Condom on one part, and little
Julian in the Back-shop with his Dragoons on the other part: The Bishop
establishes the Real Presence in Opposition to the Figurative; His Answerer
turns the whole Mystery into mere Type and Figure, by seting up a figurative
Interpretation of the Words of Institution, and yet confesses it at the same
time to be somewhat more than a Figure.

To this it is replied, I would gladly know what that is, which is not the
thing it self, but yet is more than a mere Figure of it: To this it is
answered, That the Presence is Spiritual, but yet Real; but how a Corporeal
Substance should have a real Spiritual Presence, is a thing that requires more
Philosophy to clear it up than Transubstantiation, or in the Words of the
Author himself: We suppose it to be a plain Contradiction that Body should have
any Existence, but what alone is proper to a Body that is Corporeal.

This is their last Resolution of this Controversy, that a true real Presence
is a Contradiction; and so I think is a real spiritual Presence of a bodily
Substance.

This Scent the whole Chase follows, and unanimously agree in this Cry, That
there is no Presence, but either merely Figurative, and that shuts out all
Reality, and is universally condemned by all the Reformation; or merely
Spiritual, (i.e.) the present Effects and Benefits of the absent Body and Blood
of Christ, which has been all along equally cashiered by all other Reformed
Churches, as the other grand Scandal of Zuinglianism.

Thus the London Answerer to the Oxford Discourses: There can be no real
Presence, but either Figuratively in the Elements, or Spiritually in the Souls
of those who worthily receive them. Answer to T. C. Dialogue, p. 66.
So Dr. St.

All which the Doctrine of our Church implies by this Phrase, is only a real
Presence of Christ's invisible Power and Grace, so in and with the Elements, as
by the faithful receiving of them to convey real and spiritual Effects to the
Souls of Men.

The Oxford Answerer to the Oxford Discourses allows no other real Presence but
the virtual Presence, that is the mere Effect.

So the popular Author of the Discourse against Transubstantiation, makes no
Medium between the mere figurative Presence and Transubstantiation, so that all
other Presence, that is not merely Figurative, comes under the Notion of
Transubstantiation.

Now the gentlest Character he is pleased to give of this Monsieur, is this,
That the Business of Transubstantiation is not a Controversy of Scripture
against Scripture, or of Reason against Reason, but of downright Impudence
against the plain meaning of the Scripture, and all the Sense and Reason of all
Mankind.

But besides the intolerable Rudeness of the Charge against all the Learned Men
of the Church of Rome, as the worst of Sots and Idiots, if there be no middle
real Presence between Transubstantiation and the Figure, he has cast all the
Protestant Churches into the same Condemnation of Sots and Fools.

But howsoever rash and preposterous it may be for Presons that believe the
real Presence to abjure the Word Transubstantiation, ye to determine any part
of Divine Worship in the Christian Church to be in its own Nature Idolatry, is
inhumane and barbarous.

IDOLATRY is a Stabbing and Cutthroat Word, its least Punishment is the
greatest that can be, both Death and Damnation; and good Reason too, when the
Crime is no less than renouncing the true God that made Heaven and Earth. Thus
Exodus 22. 20. He that sacrifices unto any God, save unto the Lord or Jehovah
only, he shall be utterly destroyed. Deuteronomy. 13. 6. If thy Brother the Son of thy
Mother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy Friend
which is as thine own Soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve
other Gods (which thou have not known, thou nor thy Fathers) namely of the Gods
of the People which are round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee,
from the one end of the Earth unto the other: Thou shall not consent unto him,
nor hearken unto him: Neither shall thine Eye pity him, neither shall thou
spare, neither shall thou conceal him. But thou shall surely kill him; thine
hand shall be first upon him to put him to Death, and afterward the Hand of all
the People. And thou shall stone him with Stones, that he die: Because he has
sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt, from the House of Bondage.

This was the Crime, and this the Punishment of Idolatry, and the Sentence was
so severely Executed, that for the setting up the golden Calf, or Symbol of the
Sun, that the Egyptians Worshipped, as the supreme Deity, as will appear in its
proper place, Three thousand of the Ringleaders, were put to the Sword by the
Command of Moses, Exodus 32. 27. And for this Reason it pleased God to destroy
the Canaanites from off the Face of the Earth, (i.e.) for giving Divine Worship
to false and created Deities in Defiance to the Eternal Creator of it.

So black a Crime as this, that is no less than renouncing God is not lightly
to be charged upon any Party of Christians, not only because of the foulness of
the Calumny, but the barbarous Consequences that may follow upon it, to invite
and warrant the Rabble, when ever Opportunity favors, to destroy the Roman
Catholics and their Images, as the Israelites were commanded to destroy the
Canaanites and their Idols.

But before so bloody an Indictment be preferred against the greatest part of
Christendom, the Nature of the thing ought to be very well understood. The
Charge is too big for a Scolding Word. And how inconsistent soever Idolatry may
be with Salvation, I fear so uncharitable a Calumny (if it prove one) can be of
no less damnable Consequence. It is a piece of Inhumanity, that out-does the
Salvageness of the Canibals themselves, and damns at once both Body and Soul.

And yet after all, we have no other ground for the bold Conceit, than the
crude and rash Assertions of some popular Divines, who have no other Measures
of Truth or Zeal, but Hatred to Popery; and therefore never spare for hard
Words against that Church, and run up all Objections against it into nothing
less than Atheism and Blasphemy, of which Idolatry is the greatest Instance.

But if they would lay aside their indecent Heats, and soberly enquire into the
Nature and Original of Idolatry; they would be as much ashamed of the Ignorance
of their Accusations, as they ought to be of its Malice. And therefore I shall
set down a plain and brief Account of that Argument, that when we understand
the easy, obvious, and natural Notion of Idolatry, it will for ever expose the
Vanity of these Men's Fanatique Pretenses. I pray God there be nothing worse at
bottom, seeing it has ever been set up as the Standard against Monarchy.

It is a Subject that has entertained the most able Pens in the World, but I
shall not presume or pretend to be so learned, but shall confine all my
Knowledge to the Word of God, chiefly to the Mosaic Writings, for there it is
fully and clearly stated, the Mosaic Law being enacted purely in Opposition to
Idolatry. Now nothing can be more obvious, than that the Notion of it there is
neither more nor less than this: The Worship of the Heavenly Bodies, the Sun,
the Moon, and the Stars, or any other visible and corporeal Deity, as the
Supreme God, so as to exclude all Sense and Apprehension of a spiritual and
invisible Godhead.

This evidently appears both by the Almighties several Revelations that he made
of himself to the Children of Israel to preserve them from it, and from the
several Characters and Descriptions, that himself has upon numberless
occasions made of it.

Most learned Men would trace its Original from before the Flood, but they
follow their Chase without any Scent, as generally all Antiquaries do, when
they pursue into the first Source and Original of things.

The Jewish Robbies (that are of too late a standing to pretend to any
Authority in such Ancient Matters; for as they lived not above Six Ages before
us, so they had no other Records than what we have, the Writings of Moses and
the Prophets) derive its Original from the Age of Enos; but as their Conjecture
is founded upon an ambiguous Word, so it is contradicted by the State of the
World at that time; for by reason of the long Lives of the Patriarchs from the
Creation to the Flood, it is not easy to conceive, That the Memory and
Tradition of the late Creation of the World should be worn out in so short a
time, Enos being Adams's Granchild, and living in the same Age with him for
some Hundred Years.

But the plain Demonstration that there was no such Impiety before the Flood,
is, that Moses, when he reckons up the Causes that provoked God to bring that
Judgment upon the World, makes no mention of the Sin of Idolatry, of which, if
they had been Guilty, as it is a Sin of the first Magnitude, so it would have
held the first place in the Indictment.

Others make Cham the Father of this Monster, as they do of all other Crimes,
but for no other Reason beside his ill Name.

Others derive it from the Tower of Babel, which they will have to have been
built for an Altar to the Sun, after the Custom of aftertimes, when they
Worshipped him upon High Towers for Altars.

Maimonides, and his Followers, find deep Footsteps in the time of Abraham, who
was born in Ur of the Chaldees that is, say they, the Country of the Ancient
ZABII, the Founders of Idolatry; and for that reason he was commanded out of
his own Country to the Worship of the True God.

But this Dream of the ZABII is so modern, and so void of the Authority of any
Ancient Record, that it proves it self a fond Imposture. Tho in Abraham's time
(and that was many Centuries after the Flood) we meet with the first Traces of
this Apostasy: For that extraordinary Discovery that God was pleased to make of
himself as Supreme Lord of all things, was made to Abraham in Opposition to the
Idolatry of his own Country, i.e. Chaldea, who seemed to have been the first
Founders of it, and for that reason God commanded him to leave his Country,
Genesis 12. 1.
his Kindred, and his Fathers House, and sojourn in the Land of Canaan, where
the Tradition of the Knowledge of the True God seems to have been much better
preserved. So that tho there were some Decays from the true Old Religion, yet
they were as yet very far from an Universal Apostasy.

That the Plague was then broke out in Chaldea, is evident from the words of
Joshua, (24. 2.) Your Fathers dwelt on the other side the River in old time,
even Terah the Father of Abraham, and the Father of Nachor, and they served
strange Gods. But when Abraham came into Canaan; I find no Records that the
Customs of his Country had passed the River, but on the contrary evident
Instances of their Knowledge of the true God, as Creator of Heaven and Earth.

What can be more plain than the Story of Melchisedeck, Priest of the most High
God (a Term appropriate in Scripture to the Supreme Deity) in his blessing
Abraham. Blessed be Abraham of the most High God, Creator of Heaven and Earth.
And when God consumed Sodom and Gomorrah with Fire from Heaven, Idolatry is no
where reckoned among the Causes and Provocations of that severe and unusual
Judgment; and had it been one of their crying Sins, it would have been the
loudest, and so never have been omitted by the Sacred Historian. And when Isaac
was forced by Famine into the Country of the Philistines, Abimelech their King
entered into a Solemn and Religious Covenant with him of mutual Defense and
Offense, upon this Inducement, that he was the Blessed of the Lord, or the
peculiar Favorite of Jehovah; so that as long as himself and Isaac were of a
side, the Supreme Gods immediate mediate Providence would be engaged in his
Protection.

The first plain Intimation we find of it in Palestine is in the History of
Jacob, after his Conversation with the Shechemites, where, upon his departure
from that City by God's especial Command, he builds an Altar at Bethel to God,
and commands his Family to put away their (...) or Strange Gods. And from this
time we read of nothing of this Nature till the Deliverance of the Children of
Israel out of Egypt, after they had been detained there Four Hundred and Thirty
Years, according to the Hebrew, or Two Hundred and Fifteen according to the
Seventy, the greatest part of which time was spent in Slavery and Bondage.

But at, and after their Deliverance, we hear of nothing else but Cautions
against Idolatry or Worship of Strange Gods, as if in that long Tract of Time
and Misery, they had lost the Tradition of the God of their Ancestors, and by
long conversation with the Egyptians, had taken up their Masters Religion
together with their Burdens; and it was scarce possible to be otherwise for men
in their poor condition, after so long a Tract of Time, than to take up the
Religion in public Practice.

Long custom and conversation naturally inures Men to the Manners of the
Country, but Slavery breaks Men to them: And what could be expected from
miserable People, who spent all their days in carrying of Clay, gathering
Straw, making Bricks, and all Offices of Servility, than that they should serve
their Masters Gods, as well as their Masters themselves? And that this was
their case, is evident from the whole Series of the Story.

The first Discovery that the Almighty made of himself, was to Moses, in the
Burning Bush, where he tells us, Exodus 3. 6.
I am the God of thy Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob: But this seems to be a New Language to Moses; Ver. 13.
For he replys, When I come unto the Children of Israel, and shall say unto
them, the God of your Fathers has sent me unto you, and they shall say to me,
what is his Name (or what God is he) what shall I say unto them? To this he is
commanded to answer, I am that I am has sent you; that is, the only self
existent Being, that is, the only Supreme Deity, and God of your Fathers: And
for the truth and demonstration of this, he refers both him and them to the
following Miracles.

And when Moses was discouraged by the complaints of the People, Chap. 6.
because of their severe Usage, the Almighty gives him encouragement upon this
powerful Motive, I am Jehovah, or I am the Lord, who will deliver you with a
strong Hand, or stretched out Arm, i.e. I am that Omnipotent, self-existent
Being; and that shall be the proof of it, the great Miracles that I will work
for your Delivery.

And at the time of their Deliveranee he immediately institutes the Passover,
not only as a Memorial of the Thing, but as I shall prove afterward, the
strongest Bar against Idolatry.

But as soon as they sat down at the Foot of Mount Sinah, which was their first
place of Rest, God's first Care was to make further provision against Idolatry,
where after a fearful and glorious Representation of his Presence, he gives the
Ten Commandments, whereof the Four First are directly levelled against Idolatry.

First, He enjoins the worship of Himself, who by his Almighty Power had
delivered them from their Egyptian Bondage.

In the next place, He forbids them the Worship of all Idols, i. e. as himself
describes them, The likeness, or similitude, of any thing that is in Heaven
above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under the Earth. A plain and
indeed logical Definition this, that Idolatry is giving the Worship of the
Supreme God, to any created corporeal or visible Deity, or any thing that can
be represented by an Image, which nothing but coporeal Beings can, and to
suppose such a Being the Supreme Deity, is the only true and proper Idolatry.

And tho there may seem to be two sorts of it: First, either to Worship a
material and created Being as the Supreme Deity: Or Secondly, to ascribe any
corporeal Form or Shape to the Divine Nature; yet in the Result, both are but
one; for to ascribe unto the Supreme God any corporeal Form, is the same thing
as to Worship a created Being, for so is every corporeal Substance.

This is, I say, the true and only Notion of Idolatry: And all the Strange Gods
mentioned in the Scripture, are only some most glorious Pieces of the visible
Creation, as I shall prove at large from undeniable Testimonies. And for this
reason it was, that the very Angels, by whom this Affair was immediately
transacted, never made any appearance in any visible Shape, but only in a
Cloud, or in a Glory, to prevent the very Peril of Idolatry; and therefore
Moses in his dying and farewell Speech, reminds them over and over, that at
Horeb they heard the Voice of God, but saw no Similitude, with this Application
to them, lest you corrupt your selves, i. e. by believing that there can be any
Similitude of the Supreme Godhead. And as this is the literal and plain Sense
of the two first Commandments, so it seems to be the only Design of the Third
and Fourth: For the English of the Third, if it were rightly translated, runs
thus; Thou shall not give the Name of the Lord thy God to a Vanity or Idol; and
so the Septuagint* render it: For the Word Vanity and Idol are Synonomous in
Scripture, because an Idol is a vain and empty Thing that represents nothing;
for when it is set up as the Symbol and Image of a Deity that is no Deity, it
is the Image of nothing, as St. Paul defines it. So that it is not the mere
Image it self that is the Idol, but the Image as representing a false God, tho
it be only a Symbol, and not a Picture of him, as most of the Heathen Images
were, of the Sun, as the Calf, and the Ram. These are the Vanities or
Representations of False Gods in Use, at that time, among the Neighbor
Nations, that seem to be here properly interdicted in this Commandment.

As for the Fourth Commandment, it is the very Sacrament of the Worship of the
true God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, in opposition to Idolatry, or the
Worship of his Creatures, and therefore is prescribed, as it were, as the Holy
Day of the Creation, continually to mind the Jews, that the God that they
Worship, was the God that made the World, and all the Gods that their
Neighbors worshipped, particularly the Sun, Moon, and Stars, his Creatures.

This then being set up as the great Festival, of the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, from hence it was that the Precept of not Worshipping of Idols, and
Keeping the Sabbath, are so frequently coupled together in Scripture; and that
the Breach of the Sabbath is punished in the same manner as Idolatry it self.

But I shall treat of this more largely when I come to a Review. At present I
have only given a narrow Prospect of the whole matter, but upon a full and open
View of the Mosaic History, it will appear in full and undeniable Evidence, by
these Two Considerations.

First, If we consider the great Propensity of the Israelites to renounce the
Worship of the One True Invisible God, and to return to their accustomed
Worship of Idol Gods.

Secondly, If we consider that these Gods were nothing else but the Heavenly
Bodies, and that the Sun was worshipped as the Supreme Deity.

As to the first, their continual Revolts, and Rebellions against that Almighty
God, of whose Power they had had so much Experience, could proceed from nothing
less than the most inveterate and invincible Prejudices. Their whole History
from their first Deliverance to their last Captivity, is nothing but a
perpetual Series of Disloyalty against the God of Israel, to play the Harlot
(as the Scripture expresses it) or commit Fornication with the Idols of the
Gentiles.

Psalm. 78. We have an acurate Epitome of this whole History, the Miracles that
God wrought for them in Egypt, in the Wilderness, in the Land of Canaan,
notwithstanding all which, as they made continual Attempts of Rebellion, so
they at last sunk into an universal Apostasy, v. 58. Provoking him to Anger
with their High Places, and moving him to Jealousy with their Graven Images;
so that at length he gave them up into the Hands of their Enemies: And first
the Ten Tribes were lead away Captive, and not long after the Tribe of Judah,
as it immediately follows in the same Psalm, God was wroth, and greatly
abhorred Israel, so that he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the Tent which he
placed among Men, and delivered his Strength into Captivity, and his Glory
(that was the Symbol of his Divine Presence) into the Enemies hand.

But to Trace a few Particulars. The first Opportunity they could gain in the
Wilderness, after the miraculous Deliverance out of Egypt, by the Absence of
Moses, they set up and worshipped the Golden Calf, a Form of Worship they were
accustomed to in Egypt: what this Idol was, is variously disputed by Learned
Men; some will have it to have been made in Imitation of the Cherubin, when as
yet God had made no Description of them. Others, and almost all the learned,
will have it to have been the Idol of Apis, or Serapis, or Osyris, whom the
Egyptians worshipped by that Symbol; and that it was the same Idol, is certain;
but I take it to be much more ancient, for as yet we find not any Footsteps of
Divine Worship given to Men and Women. That Folly is of a much younger Date,
and seems to have been brought in purely by the Grecian Vanity, to derive the
Originals of all Nations from Themselves, and to People Heaven with their own
Countrymen.

Thus they tell us, that this Apis was King of the Argives, natural Son to King
Jupiter by Niobe, who marrying Isis, left his Kingdom, and went into Egypt, who
teaching the Barbarous People Civility, and the Art of dressing Vines and
Agriculture, He was by common consent chosen their King; and after he had
Reigned with extraordinary Wisdom and Mercy, to the great Improvement of the
Nation, when he dyed, they deify'd him, and worshipped him under the Image of a
Calf or Ox, all which is pure Grecian Fable.

For Egypt had been a famous Nation many Hundred Ages, before any of the
Grecian Deities were born: It was a flourishing Kingdom in the days of Abraham:
I am sure they knew how to dress their Vines, and plow their Fields, before
there was any such Nation as Greece, or any of its Cantons known by any
Records: There was no News of them till the Trojan War, and that is the thing
objected by all Writers to the Greeks both before and since Christianity, that
their remotest Antiquity is mere Novelty in comparison of the Egyptians, and is
confessed, by their own best and most ancient Writers; at least in these Ancient
Times, there were no Men nor Women Deities, Gods or Goddesses.

But when the Greeks had stolen their Religion from the Eastern Nations, in
requital they furnished them with Gods of their own, and clapped the Heads of one
of their own Countrymen upon every ancient Idol, thereby gaining Reputation of
Antiquity, both to their Nation and Religion, as if they had been as ancient as
the Egyptian and Oriental Idolatry.

Thus they fasten this old Idol of the Golden Calf upon King Apis, whereas if
there ever were any such Man (for the Greeks have neither Faith nor Knowledge
enough to be believed one Word in any matter of Antiquity, either of their own,
or other Nations) he was born many Ages after this Idol had been Famous in the
World: And in that unknown Interval of which there are no Historical Records,
and therefore the whole Story of him, as well as of all the other Grecian Gods,
is nothing but Fable.

And much more probable it is, that the Greeks were so far from bringing a God
Apis into Egypt, that they carried the very word thence: Apis being the Hebrew
and Egyptian Word to signify a Calf, or a Bullock, and so it is rendered by the
Septuagint. Jeremiah 46. 15. in the Prophetic Burden against Egypt, (...).
Why did your Apis fly, Bochart.
or that your beloved Calf desert you, Dr. Hammond.
because the Lord did drive him? Dr. Spencer. Kircher.
Tho we render it in the English Translation, Why are thy valiant Men swept
away?

So that the Calf can be nothing else than an Old Egyptian Idol, or Symbol of
some Deity, that they had been accustomed to Worship. And therefore thinking
themselves betrayed or deserted by Moses after Forty Days Absence, (as for this
Moses, the Man that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt, we wot not what is
become of him) they force Aaron to restore to them the Symbols of their Old
Gods to go before them, instead of this new God, that now seemed to have
deserted them, and to those they ascribe their Deliverance out of Egypt; and
this is the first cheerful Act of Devotion, that they seem to have performed
since their Deliverance. For as for all their Worship of the True God,
especially at the Delivery of the Law, it seems to be forced and uneasy, to
which they were rather over-awed by dreadful Appearances, than inclined by
their own Choice.

And the Solemn Sacrifice that was made immediately after, was the Act of
Moses, rather than the People, who rather seemed Spectators, than Actors; and
therefore as soon as they thought themselves quit of him (which was immediately
after) they set up their Idol, and were transported in their Devotions toward
it, to a Degree of madness They rose up early in the Morning, Exodus 32. 6.
and offered Burnt-Offerings, and brought Peace Offerings, and the People sat
down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

This Solemnity had been endeared to them by Custom and Education, and there
could be no other ground of their great Joy, than that they were restored to
the Exercise of their former Religion, and the Worship of their Old Gods, of
which the Calf was one of the most eminent Symbols, so that when they say that
was the God that delivered them out of Egypt, their meaning is, the God of
which That was the Symbol or Representation, according to the Language of those
Times, Genesis 31. 30.
and indeed of the whole Old Testament, to give the Name of the Deity to the
Idol.

Now at that time we find no other mention of any other Deities, than the Sun
and Heavenly Bodies; so that this Calf could be the Symbol of no other Gods
than the Sun, and therefore was ever reckoned among their (...), their holy
Animals, as the Egyptian Priest and Antiquary Manetho informs us, of which
Aries and Taurus were the chiefest, and both of them consecrated in honor of
the Sun, being the two first Signs in the Heavens; but the Festival of Aries
was the most Solemn, when the Sun entering into that Sign, began the Joyful New
Year. In Opposition to which the Israelites were commanded to cut the Throat of
the Paschal Ram upon that very Day, with all the Ceremonies of Contempt, as
shall appear more afterward.

This invincible Obstinacy in their Old Religion, notwithstanding the mighty
Works God had wrought for their Deliverance, is severely upbraided to them long
after by God himself to his Prophet Amos, Chap. 25, 26.
Have ye offered unto me Sacrifices and Offerings in the Wilderness Forty
Years, O House of Israel? But ye have born the Tabernacle of your Moloch, and
the Star of your God Remphan, and their Images which ye made to your selves.

This is a plain Description of their great averseness to the Worship of the
True God in the Wilderness, when God declares, that in reality they never
Worshipped him at all, but stuck close to their old God Moloch, which is but a
Synonymous Word for the God Baal, i. e. the Sun, and therefore they are
promiscuously used in Scripture to express one and the same Deity. Thus Jeremy,
19. 5. They have built the High Places of Baal to burn their Sons in the Fire
for Burnt Offerings unto Baal. But Chapter the 32. v. 35. the same Crime is
thus express, They built the High Places of Baal to cause their Sons and
Daughters to pass through the Fire unto Moloch; by which it is undeniably
evident, that they were but Synonymous Terms for one and the same God; and
indeed they are Words of the same Signification, denoting Supreme or Kingly
Power, and so were appropriated by them to the Sun, as Sovereign Lord of the
Universe.

This strange Inclination of the Israelites to Idolatry, or the Worship of Baal
and Moloch, is so vehemently upbraided to them in the Scripture, as shows it to
have been inveterate and impetuous beyond Example: So God himself upbraids it
to them, that when he did such mighty things for them in their Deliverance from
Egypt, and only required them to renounce the Idols of Egypt, Yet they rebelled
against me, Ezekiel. 20. 7, 8.
and would not hearken to me; They cast not away the Abomination of their Eyes,
nor the Idols of Egypt.

And when Joshua had settled them in the Holy Land, Josh. 24. 14.
he forewarns them to serve the True God sincerely, and to put away the Gods
which their Fathers served on the other side the Flood, and in Egypt. By which
it appears, they had not yet parted with their Old Gods: but the next
Generation made a total Revolt; Judge. 2. 11.
and the Children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served
Baalim, and they forsook the Lord God of their Fathers, which brought them out
of the Land of Egypt, and followed other Gods, of the Gods of the People that
are round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and provoked the Lord to
Anger, and they forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashteroth.

This whole Book is nothing else but a Narrative of their Sin by Idolatry,
their Punishment by Captivity, their Repentance by imploring of the Mercy of
the God of Israel, till at last after so many Relapses, they are thus answered
by God in their Addresses and Supplications unto him: Chapter 10. 10.
And the Children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying; We have sinned against
thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Baalim: And the
Lord said unto the Children of Israel, did not I deliver you from the
Egyptians, from the Ammorites, from the Children of Ammon, from the Philistines?
Also the Zidonians and the Amalekites and Maonites did oppress you, and you
cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand, yet you have forsaken me,
and served other Gods, wherefore I will deliver you no more: go and cry unto
the Gods that ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your
Tribulations. But upon their Reformation they are delivered, and as soon
relapse, of which a Train of Instances are to be seen in that Book.

Here it may be observed all along that the Scripture Notion of Idolatry is
renouncing and forsaking the True God, to Worship other Gods, or Baalim, that
is, Idols of the Sun, whom they commonly called the King of Heaven. And so they
sin on, till God suffered his own Ark (the Symbol of his own Presence) to be
carried into Captivity: They apply themselves to Samuel to intercede for them;
Samuel returns them the old Answer that God himself had often made, If ye
return unto the Lord with all your Hearts, Sam. 7. 3, 4.
then put away the strange Gods, and Ashteroth from among you, and prepare your
Hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only, and he will deliver you out of the
Hands of the Philistines: Then the Children of Israel put away Baal and
Ashteroth, Cap. 12.
and served the Lord only.

And Samuel at the resigning of his Government, upon the Election of Saul,
upbraids them with their continual Ingratitude against the Lord their God, from
their first Deliverance out of Egypt to that very Day, in for saking the Lord
to serve Baalim. So plain is the practical Notion of Idolatry through the whole
Sacred History.

Under the pious Reigns of David and Solomon the Sin of Idolatry was
competently well retrenched, till the Dotage of Solomon, when his Wives and
Concubines turned away his Heart after other Gods, 1 King. 11. 4, 5.
So that Solomon went after Ashteroth the Goddess of the Zidonians, and after
Milcom the Abomination of the Ammonites. But the great Revolt was made by
Jeroboam, upon the Division of the Kingdom, tho rather upon a Political than
Religious Account. Jeroboam said in his Heart, 1 King. 12. 16.
now shall the Kingdom return to the House of David, if this People go up to do
Sacrifice in the House of the Lord at Jerusalem; whereupon he makes two Calves
of Gold, and said to the People, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem,
behold thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt.

It was only an Artifice to oblige the People to himself by restoring to them
their old Egyptian Idolatry.

Some will have these Calves to have been set up in Imitation of Solomon 's
Cherubin, but this is fully confuted by the learned Visorius. If Jeroboam,
says he, Vide Dr. Spencer, p. 773.
by his Calves designed to imitate the established Religion of his Country, I
pray you when he took these counterfeit Cherubs, why not also the Ark, the
Propitiatory, the Seat of God, where the Divine Majesty appeared most
conspicuously in giving of Oracles, the Tabernacle and the Temple? Why if they
were made only in imitation of the Cherubs, why did he not call them by their
own Name, by which they were known to the People, when that would have been a
more easy way to deceive them? Why did he not take the Priests of the Family
of Aaron, why did he banish them out of his Kingdom, why did not the People
comply for three whole Years, if it had been an Imitation of their Old Religion
under David and Solomon? Why if they were nothing but Cherubins, are they so
often in Scripture styled other Gods? Why should he Sacrifice to them, when in
the Law of Moses no Sacrifices were offered to the Cherubim?

So that it is plain that these Calves were set up by him as Idols or Symbols
of a new or separate Religion from the Tribe of Judah; and tho he took up the
old Egyptian Idol for his Foundation, yet he seemed to have erected a Motley
Religion upon it, like that of the Samaritans of old, partly to invite the
People of all Nations into his Kingdom, where every Man worshipped his own God;
and partly by diversity of Religion, more effectually to divide his own Kingdom
from that of the Line of Solomon.

Tho not long after Rehoboam and the Tribe of Judah revolt from the Worship of
the true God (as the Scripture aggravates it) above all that their Fathers had
done. 1 King. 14. 22.


And from this time Idolatry, or the Worship of Baal, was the prevailing
Religion in both Kingdoms, tho sometimes checked by the Piety of reforming
Princes. But it spread so fast, that Elijah thought himself left alone, tho for
his comfort God informed him, that he had the small remainder of 7000 in
Israel, 1 King. 19. 14, 18.
all the Knees which have not bowed unto Baal.

But the Infection soon became universal, and tho God Almighty sent his
Prophets from time to time to reclaim them, yet all in vain, they still
continued to worship the Host of Heaven, and serve Baal, till finding them
irreclaimable, he first delivered the Ten Tribes into the hands of Shalmaneser,
King of Assyria, where they continue in Captivity to this Day, 2 King. 17.
and are a lost Nation.

But the Piety of Hezekiah at that time for a while reprieved the Tribe of
Judah: But his Son Manasseh built up again the High Places, which Hezekiah his
Father had destroyed, and he reared up Altars for Baal, and worshipped all the
Host of Heaven, and served them: Upon this God by his Prophets denounces their
Destruction. Ver. 15.
Because, says he, they have ever done that which was evil in my sight, and
have provoked me to Anger since the Day their Fathers came forth out of Egypt,
unto this Day; or because they have forsaken me, Cap. 22. 17.
and burnt Incense unto other Gods, that they might provoke me to Anger with
all the work of their Hands; therefore my wrath shall be kindled against them,
and shall not be quenched. But the Execution of the Sentence is suspended
during the pious Reign of his Son Josiah; 2 King. 25.
but as soon as he is gathered to his Fathers, Jerusalem and the Temple are
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, and King Zedekiah with all his People are carried
Captive into Babylon.

This is a compendious History of the old Jewish Idolatry, and I think a
sufficient Proof both of their strange Inclination to it, to the highest degree
of Madness, and wherein it plainly consisted, their forsaking the true
invisible God, to worship created Deities; than which nothing is more evident
through the whole Series of Scripture.

To this Evidence I might add a more ample Proof out of the Writings of the
Prophets, that are almost wholly employed upon this Subject. But I must not be
too tedious, and therefore I shall only observe, that they generally express
the greatness of this Folly under the Figure of ungovernable Lust. Thus Ezekiel
the 23d. God describes it to the Prophet under this Scheme. Son of man, there
were two Women, the Daughters of one Mother, and they committed Whoredoms in
Egypt, they committed Whoredoms in their Youth; there were their Breasts
pressed, and there they bruised the Teats of their Virginity; and the Names of
them were Ahola the Elder, and Aholibah her Sister, and they were mine, and
they bare Sons and Daughters; Samaria is Ahola, and Jerusalem Aholibah; and
Ahola played the Harlot when she was mine, and she doted (or run mad) for her
Lovers, the Assyrians her Neighbors, with all their Idols she defiled her
self, neither left she her Whoredoms brought from Egypt; for in her Youth ('it is
in the Hebrew) before she was ripe of Age, they lay with her, and they bruised
the Breasts of her Virginity, and poured their Whoredom upon her; wherefore I
have delivered her into the Hand of her Lovers, into the Hand of the Assyrians,
upon whom she doted, and after whom she ran mad.

The same is repeated of her Sister Aholibah, who for her incorrigible
Adulteries is delivered into the hands of the Babylonians; nothing can be
expressed with greater vehemence than this, that is compared to the utmost
lewdness of Female Lust; and nothing more evident, than that this Lewdness
consisted in deserting the true invisible God, to worship the false Deities of
their Neighbors, particularly the Gods of the Egyptians, Assyrians and
Chaldeans.

And that is my Second Head of Discourse, that the Gods that they worshipped at
that time were nothing but the Heavenly Bodies, or the Sun, as the Supreme
Deity. This is evident enough from what has already been discoursed, Idolatry
in general being every where described in Scripture by the Worship of the Host
of Heaven, or Heavenly Bodies. Thus Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Lest thou lift up thine Eyes
to Heaven, and when thou see the Sun and the Moon, and the Stars, even all
the Host of Heaven, should be driven (tempted) to worship them, which the
Lord thy God created for the use and benefit of all Nations under the whole
Heaven. So Chap. 17. v. 2, 3. If there be found any among you that have wrought
Wickedness in the sight of the Lord your God in transgressing his Covenant, and
has gone and served other Gods, and worshipped them, either the Sun, or Moon,
or any of the Host of Heaven, ye shall stone him to Death, 2 King. 17. 16. They
left all the Commandments of the Lord their God, and made them Molten Images,
two Calves, and made a Grove, and worshipped all the Host of Heaven, and served
Baal. So Manasseh erected Altars to Ball, and worshipped the Host of Heaven,
chap. 21. 3. So Josiah, when he destroyed Idolatry, brought out the Vessels of
the Host of Heaven.

And the Jews, when after their return from Captivity, they would enter their
solemn Protestation against Idolatry, they do it in this form -- Thou even Thou
art Lord alone, thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, with all their
Host, etc. Nehemiah 9. 6. So Jeremiah 19. 13. Jerusalem and Judah shall be
destroyed because they have burned Incense unto all the Host of Heaven, and
have poured out Drink Offerings unto other Gods. So Zephaniah 1. 5. God
threatens to destroy the Worshipers of Baal, and of the Host of Heaven: And
lastly, St. Stephen in his last Speech upbraiding the Jews with their Idolatry,
says, that God gave them up to Worship the Host of Heaven.

So evident is the Practical Notion of Idolatry, through the whole Series of
Scripture, that it was the worshipping the Heavenly Bodies as the supreme
Deities, or as Job emphatically expresses it, Chap. 31. ver. 26. If I beheld
the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and my Heart has
been secretly enticed, or my Mouth has kissed my Hand, this also were an
Iniquity to be punished by the Judge, for I should have denied the most High
God.

What can be more plain than this Definition of Idolatry, that it is the
Worship of the Sun and Moon, because it would have excluded the Worship due
only to the most High God? And the very Word, that we commonly translate Images
in general, signifies properly Images of the Sun. Thus Leviticus 26. 30. God
threatens them I will destroy your Images, as we translate it; but in the
Hebrew your Chamanim, i.e. Images of the Sun. So the second of Chronicles,
chap. 34. v. 7. And so it is set sometimes in the Margent even in the English
Translation [or Sun Images] as Isaiah 17. 8. Ezekiel. 6. 4.

And so all learned Men of all Nations, all Religions, ever understood the old
Notion of Idolatry, till this last Age, when Folly and Passion cast it at any
thing that peevish Men were angry with. More Nevoch. Lib. 3.
So Rabbi Maimon, the most learned and judicious of the Jewish Doctors,
discourses at large, that the ancient Idolatry was nothing but the Religion of
the Eastern Nations, who acnowledge no other Deities but the Stars, among whom
the Sun was supreme, in Opposition to which false Principle, he says, God
enacted the Law of Moses.

This was the sense of all the other old Heathen Nations, as may be seen at
large in Eusebius's Collections of their several Opinions in his First and
Third Book of the Preparation of the Gospel, where he proves, that the ancient
Heathens worshipped only the Stars, without any Notion of Heroes and Demons. The
same is attested by all the Historians; by Diodorus Siculus of the Egyptians,
by Herodotus of the Persians and Chaldeans, by Strabo and Justin of the
Arabians, by Caesar of the Germans; so Macrobius, in his first Book Saturnal,
proves it of all the ancient Idolaters, that it was the Worship of the Sun as
the supreme Deity. So in the ancient Hymn to Jupiter ascribed to Orpheus, it is
the Sun only that is all along adored.

In short, so all learned Men interpret all the several Idols that we read of
in the Holy Scriptures; particularly those two learned Protestants, Mr. Seldom,
in his learned Book De Diis Syris; and Gerard Vossius, de Idololatria, proves
all the Idols mentioned in Scripture to have been only so many several
Appellations of the Sun, whom the ancient Idolaters believed to have been the
supreme God and Creator of the World, as Baal, Baal Peor, Bell, Moloch, Dagon,
Baalzebub Mythras, etc. In a Word, the whole Nation of the Critiques, that
agree in nothing else, are unanimous here; tho indeed the thing is so evident
in all the Accounts, Histories and Descriptions of the Ancient Idolatry, that
it is to me the greatest astonishment in the World, that Men should apply it to
any other purpose.

I know there was another sort of Idolatry introduced afterward, the Worship of
Men and Women, but I find no such Practice in the Scriptures, but take it to
have been much more modern, and a mere Invention of the vain and lying Greeks;
but whenever it came in, it was grafted upon the old Stock, of giving the
Worship of the supreme God, not only to created, but to mortal Beings.

Here it were easy to wander into a large Field of Mythologick Mystery; but
besides that, I take all Mythology to be much more Fable than the literal Fable
it self: I have resolved to confine my self to the Information of the Holy
Scriptures, from whence, as we have the most infallible Testimony that can be
had, so in this case we can have no other, all other Writings whatsoever being
by some Thousands of Years too modern to give any Account from their own
Knowledge of those Ancient Times.

And for a more acurate account of this, I shall refer the Reader to that
admirable Book of Dr. Spencers, concerning the Jewish Laws and the Reasons of
them, in which he proves every Minute Circumstance of the ritual and ceremonial
Law to have been enacted only for the prevention of Idolatry or Sun-Worship.
There any Gentleman that delights in ancient Learning, may have his glut of
Pleasure and Satisfaction; for beside the great Compass and Variety of polite
Literature, he has brought Wit, Sense, Reason and Ingenuity into the
Synagogue. I will only exemplify the thing in some few Particulars.

The first is the Institution of some Rites peculiar to God's own Worship, both
as a Bar to preserve them from any other Worship, in which those Rites were not
used, and as an Obligation to bind them the faster to their Duty to himself;
among these the chiefest are Circumcision and the Sabbath, which he instituted,
as it were, the two Sacraments of the Jewish Religion, or the Worship of the
Creator of Heaven and Earth, to distinguish them from their Neighbor Nations,
who Worship only his Creatures.

With Circumcision God signed his Covenant with Abraham, which was the first
Revelation of himself against Idolatry, and the Foundation of the whole Mosaic
Law, which was sealed to, by this sacred Rite of Circumcision; so that without
it, they were esteemed no better than Idolaters, and an uncircumcised Man
signifies no less than an Heathen.

This Reason is expressly given by God himself at the first Institution of it in
his Covenant with Abraham: Genesis 17. 7, 10.
I will establish my Covenant between thee and me, and thy Seed after thee in
their Generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto Thee, and to
thy seed after thee. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and
you, and thy seed after thee, every Male Child among you shall be Circumcised.
And you shall circumcise the Flesh of your Foreskin, and it shall be a Token
of the Covenant betwixt you and me; and therefore the uncircumcised shall be
cut off from his People, as having broken my Covenant, i.e. renounced the true
Religion, which is, as Grotius observes, not reasonably to be understood of
Infants, but of Men grown to Years of Understanding, whose Parents had
neglected that Office in their Infancy, and therefore if they did not supply
that Defect, when they came to Age, it was looked upon as renouncing the
Worship of the true God, of which this was the first Sacrament or Ceremony of
Admission into the Jewish Church, which alone professed it, and that is the
Reason of St. Paul's Assertion, Gal. 5. 3.
Every Man that is circumcised, is a Debtor to do the whole Law, i.e. he that
willingly and knowingly undergoes this initiating Ceremony, by Virtue of that
he obliges himself to the Observation of the whole Mosaic Law, and all things
commanded in it.

And for this Reason no Proselyte was admitted to the Paschal Festival, the
most sacred Solemnity of the Jewish Religion, without Circumcision. Exodus 12.
48.
When a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the Passover to the
Lord, let all his Males be circumcised, and then let him come near, and keep
it, and he shall be as one that is born in the Land; for no uncircumcised
Person shall eat thereof.

This seems to be the meaning of that Passage, Joshua 5. 9. when God commanded
Joshua to circumcise all the People, that were born in the Wilderness, and that
indeed is all then living; for those that came out of Egypt were dead, and when
Joshua had done it, God tells him, This day have I rolled away the Reproach of
Egypt from off you; the Reproach of Egypt was their Idolatry, which they had
now renounced by the Sacrament of Circumcision. And accordingly in the
Persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes to abolish the Jewish Religion, 1 Mac. 1. v.
15, 48, 60 61.
and establish Idolatry, the Jews are commanded to leave their Children
uncircumsised; and the Apostates endeavored to blot out the Marks of their
Circumcisioni; and certain Women that had taken care to circumcise their
Children, were put to Death, and the Infants hanged about their Necks. That was
the distinctive Mark through all Ages between a Worshiper of the true God and
an Idolater. So that it was the same thing, not to be circumcised, and to
apostatise to Idolatry.

The second, and indeed the greatest Bar of all against Idolatry, was the
Institution of the Sabbath in memory of Gods Creation of the whole visible
World, and for that reason this Doctrine of the Sabbath, was reputed as
fundamental an Article in the Jewish Church, as the Doctrine of the Cross in
the Christian, because all other Articles of their Religion depended upon the
belief of their God's Creation of the World.

And therefore when God had given Moses a complete Body of Laws for his own
Worship, he ratifies, and as it were comprises them all in a vehement and
reiterated pressing that one Law of the Sabbath, Exodus 31. v. 12. to the end of
the Chapter. And after the Children of Israel had committed Idolatry in
worshipping the Golden Calf, for which God had for some time cast them off, he
is at last prevailed upon by Moses to renew his Covenant with them upon a new
Contract. First, That they worship none of the Gods of the Heathen Nations, nor
ever use any of their Rites and Ceremonies. And then that they be more careful
to observe the Passover and the Sabbath, Exodus 34. 12.

And the Observation of the Sabbath is again enforced in the very beginning of
the next Chapter, as the Bond and Epitome of the whole Law, And Moses gathered
all the Congregation of the Children of Israel together, and said unto them,
these are the words which the Lord has commanded that ye should do them, Six
days shall work be done, but on the Seventh day, there shall be to you a Holy
day, a Sabbath of rest to the Lord, whosoever does work therein shall be put to
death; As if the Sabbath alone were the whole Law, according to that Saying of
the Talmud, Whosoever denies the Sabbath, denies the whole Law. Because that is
an Acknowledgment of the Creator of the World, as the Author of the Mosaic
Law. And for that reason the Almighty upon all occasions styles himself in
Scripture, Creator of Heaven and Earth, which we (improperly enough) translate
Possessor of Heaven and Earth; and indeed the History of the Creation it self,
and the whole Pentateuch, seem to have been written on purpose to prevent
Idolatry, or the Worship of Created Beings; and therefore Moses does not set
down the Creation of the Universe in gross, but of every part by it self,
particularly of the Sun, Moon, and Stars. And that is in it self a sufficient
Security against giving them that were mere Creatures, the Worship that is only
due to the Creator.

And this seems to be the reason of the particular form of words in the Fourth
Commandment, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, for in six days the Lord
made Heaven and Earth, and rested the seventh day; As if he had said, be sure
that you be particularly mindful of this Commandment of the Sabbath above all
others, for it is a Day dedicated to the Eternal Memory of the Creation, and
therefore enjoined to be observed every Seventh Day, that it may continually
bring to mind that great work, and never suffer it to decay out of thy Memory.

And from hence it is that the Precepts of not worshipping Idols, and observing
the Sabbath, are so frequently coupled together in the Scriptures, as if they
were inseparable. Exodus 23. 12, 13. Six days thou shall do thy work, and on the
seventh day thou shall rest, and make no mention of the Names of other Gods,
neither let them be heard out of thy mouth. Levit. 19. 34. Ye shall keep my
Sabbaths, I am Jehovah your God; turn ye not unto Idols, nor make to your
selves molten Gods: I am the Lord your God. Levit. 26. 1, 2. Ye shall make ye
no Idols, ye shall keep my Sabbaths. Ezekiel. 20. 18, 20. Walk ye not in the
statutes of your Fathers, nor defile your selves with your Idols, and hollow my
Sabbaths that are for a sign between you and me, that you may know that I am
Jehovah your God; for their hearts went after their Idols: so v. 24. they
polluted my Sabbaths.

And as these Commands are so frequently joined together, so is the violation
of them, as if they could not be parted, Ezekiel. 20. 16. They polluted my
Sabbaths, and their eyes were after their Fathers Idols. And King Ahaz, when he
set up Idolatry, he in Contempt turned the Covert for the Sabbath out of the
House of the Lord. 2 King. 16. 18.
1 Mac. 1. 44. And many of the People consented to the command of the King, and
sacrificed to Idols, and profaned the Sabbath. So necessary was it for the
observation of the Sabbath, and the Worship of the true God, to run the same
Fate, or stand and fall together; because the Sabbath was instituted in memory
of the Creation of the World by the true God; and therefore the belief and
observation of it, was an open Defyance to all Idolatry, as the Psalmist joins
them together, Psalm. 96. 5.
All the Gods of the Heathens are Idols: But the Lord made the Heavens.

And this is the distinctive Character that God has given between himself, the
only true God, and the Heathen Idols or Vanities; The Gods that have not made
the Heavens and the Earth shall perish from the Earth, Jer. 10. 11, 12.
and from under the Heavens. The Lord has made the Earth by his Power, he has
framed the Universe by his Wisdom, and has stretched out the Heavens by his
Discretion.

Now the Observation of the Sabbath, as instituted in honor of the invisible
Creator of the visible or material World, being the fundamental Article of
Faith in the Jewish Church, in opposition to Idolatry, or giving the Worship of
the supreme Deity to created Beings, it is for that reason more frequently
recited than any other Law, and its Breach as severely punished as Idolatry it
self; the recital of this Command is almost half of the Law and the Prophets,
and the violation of it certain Death, as a Crime of the same Nature with
Idolatry it self. So evident is it through the whole Series of sacred History
that the Sabbath was instituted in opposition to Idolatry, and that the
Idolatry it was opposed to, was the Worship of created Beings as the supreme
uncreated Deity.

To conclude this Argument, tho I designed to confine my self to the Testimony
of Holy Scripture, that is the only competent Witness in the case; yet I find
such a pregnant Passage cited out of St. Cyril of Alexandria to the same
purpose with the Premises, from his own Observation of the Train of Scripture
History, that it were great pity to rob the Reader of so fair an Authority,
Hom. 6. de fest. Pasch.
After the Israelites, (says he) left their own Country to sojourn in Egypt, in
process of time they lost all memory of their Ancestors, and descent from the
Line of Abraham; so that their ancient Customs being worn out by degrees, and
the Religion of their Forefathers disused, they were at length debauched by
conversation with the Egyptians to Idolatry, and gave the worship of the
supreme God to the Sun, and under him to the Heavens, Earth, Moon, Stars. And
therefore when God delivered them out of their Egyptian Bondage, to bring them
to the promised Land, he peremptorily commands them to discard all their
Egyptian Errors; but because there was need of an evident sign, by which they
should, as it were, be forced to confess, that Heaven was made by his Almighty
Power; and that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all other Beings, were the works
of his hands, he commands the Festival of the Sabbath as a Memorial and
Imitation of himself and his work; and therefore they that devote themselves to
rest as their Creator rested, by that acknowledge, that all other things were
the product of his Power; and that is the natural design of the Sabbath Rest,
to affect them with a sense of the supreme Deity, or Creator of all things.

In the second place, a very great and considerable part of the Mosaic Law was
enacted, purely in opposition to the Old Heathen Rites and Customs. Here I omit
the Idolatry of the Zabii, so much of late insisted upon by learned Men,
because I find no ancient Footsteps of any such People in the World.

The Mohammedan Arabic Writers are the first that make any mention of them, and
their Divinity (as the Arabians describe it) is a mere Fanatic Rhapsody of
Chaldaism, or Astrologick Idolatry, Judaism, or the History of the Patriarchs
turned into Fables; Gnosticism, or the Worship of Demons and Angels;
Pythagorism, or turning all things into Allegories, and therefore must be of a
much younger Date than Christianity.

The first time we read of them, is in the Alchoran, and Mahomet gives them
that name of Zabii, because they lay Eastward from Arabia, for so the Word
signifies Easterlings: Or more probably from a Fanatic Imitation of the Old
Testament, that frequently and commonly styles the Heathen Idolaters by the
Title of the men of the East, i.e. the Chaldeans, who were situated Eastward of
Judea.

After him we have no account of any such Nation as the Zabii, till about Eight
Hundred Years since. For the Prophet and his barbarous Followers, as they
conquered, destroyed all Monuments of Learning, till being settled in Peace and
Empire, (as is the manner of all Barbarians) they betook themselves to the
humor of Learning, and translated Books out of other Languages, not only Greek
and Latin, but of their Neighbor Nations into their own Tongue.

This is the most ancient Account, after all the noise that has been made of
their extreme Antiquity, that we have of any Zabian Writers; so that setting
that Modern Nation aside, the Mosaic Rites were instituted in opposition to
the more ancient Idolatry of their Neighbor Nations, particularly the
Egyptians and the Canaanites, of whom there was most danger by reason of their
late conversation with the one, and their new conversation with the other. And
therefore against these God arms them with a special Caution, Lev. 18. 3.
After the doings of the Land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt shall ye not do; and
after the doings of the Land of Canaan, whether I bring you, shall ye not do;
neither shall ye walk in their Ordinances.

This contrariety of the Jews to the Laws and Customs of all other Nations is
made use of by Haman to King Ahasuerus to procure their Destruction; Esther 3.
8. And Haman said unto King Ahasuerus, there is a certain People scattered
abroad, and dispersed among the People in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, and
their Laws are diverse from all People, neither keep they the Kings Laws; and
therefore it is not for the King's Interest to suffer them. If it please the
King, let it be written that they may be destroyed.

This is perpetually objected by Manetho the Egyptian Priest against the Jews,
that they aimed at nothing so much in the Rites of their Religion, as to
affront and reflect Defiance upon the Egyptian Devotion. Hist. l. 5.
And so Tacitus his account of them is this; Moses ut sibi in posterum
Iudaeorum gentem firmaret, novos ritus contrariosque caeteris mortalibus
indidit; Prophana illis omnia, quae apud nos sacra; rursum concessa apud illos,
quae nobis incesta. Moses, that he might the better confirm the Jewish Nation
to himself, instituted new Rites, contrary to the customs of the rest of
Mankind; what is most sacred with us, is most profane with them; and what with
us is esteemed most abominable, is allowed to them as lawful and innocent.

This is the certain ground of that known universal contempt and hatred of all
other Nations against the Jews: And so that Passage in Jeremiah, cap. 12. ver.
9. is applied by Grotius to the Jews, Mine Heritage is unto me as a speckled
Bird; the Birds round about her are against her: Mine Inheritance is become
like a strange Bird, and is pursued by all the Birds of the Field; As when a
Bird of a strange Color, happens to consort with other Birds, it is natural
for them all to set upon it; and this was the case of the Jews in reference to
all their Neighbor Nations.

It were an endless work to recite all the Rites peculiar to the Jews, and
instituted in contradiction to the Customs of their Neighbors, when it is the
only reason that runs through almost all their Law, even to the boiling of a
Kid or Lamb in its Dams Milk; to the sowing of diverse Seeds together; plowing
with an Ox and an Ass; wearing Linsey Woolsey, etc. And therefore I shall only
instance in two remarkable particulars.

The Institution of the Passover; And the Law against Sacrificing in High
Places, both which are enjoined as most effectual Remedies against Idolatry.

The Passover was the first Law instituted by God, Exodus 12. 3.
at, or upon their Deliverance out of Egypt. In the Tenth day of this Month,
they shall take to them every Man a Lamb, a Male of the first Year, according
to the House of their Fathers. In the Observation of this great Solemnity, as
it is there prescribed, every the most minute Circumstance is an express
defiance to the Egyptian Follies. First, the Paschal Lamb must be a Male a year
old, that is, a young Ram; and that was the greatest Affront that could be put
upon the Egyptians, that held a Ram not only in religious esteem, but the most
Sacred of all their Holy Animals in more ancient times, as the Symbol of the
Sun entering the Sign Aries, and beginning the New Year: And afterward of
Jupiter Ammon, whom the Greeks planted upon the Stock of the Old Egyptian Idol
of the Sun.

Now upon the account of the Sacredness of these Animals, they never offered
any of their Species in Sacrifice. And hence when Pharaoh bid Moses go
Sacrifice to the Lord in the Land of Egypt, Exodus 8. 26.
Moses answers, that they dare not, Because it would be an Abomination to the
Egyptians, so that they would stone them; that is, it would be a Profaneness
and open Affront to the Religion of the Egyptians if they should offer in
Sacrifice (according to the custom of their Forefathers) those very Animals
that the Egyptians had consecrated to the Honor of their Gods. And for the
same reason they are commanded to Sacrifice the Passover with a young Bullock,
Deuteronomy. 16. 2.
as well as a young Ram, out of the Flock, or out of the Herd, as the Scripture
expresses it. And when King Josiah kept, after a long intermission, 2 Chronicles.
25. 7.
a most solemn Passover, besides Lambs and Kids, he gave to the People 3000
Bullocks.

Now next to a Ram the Bullock was the most Sacred of all the Holy Animals, and
therefore made the second Sign in the Zodiac. And therefore when the Greeks,
or later Egyptians, gave the first Symbol to Jupiter Ammon, their Supreme God,
they gave the second to Osyris, by them commonly called Apis (not understanding
that that word only signified the Image, not the Deity) so that here Tacitus
his Malice is not much in the wrong; Caeso Ariete velut in contumeliam Ammonis,
Bos quoque immolatur, quem Egyptii Apim vocant. They sacrifice a Ram in Affront
to Ammon, and a Bullock in Affront to Osyris. Beside, it must be a Male, not a
Female, because the Egyptians and Heathens (who indeed generally followed the
Egyptian Customs, especially the Greeks) used only Females in their Sacrifices.

But the most observable circumstance in this whole Solemnity, is the time of
its Celebration; the Lamb was to be solemnly set apart for the Sacrifice on the
Tenth Day of the Month, Exodus 12. 36
till the Fourteenth, because on the Tenth Day, on which the Sun entered the
Sign Aries, began the great Festival of Aries, or the New Year; so that
beginning the Jewish Passover at the same time, it was a manifest Triumph over
the Egyptian Deity, by cutting the Throat of the poor Beast, with as much
Solemnity as the Egyptians at that very time worshipped it.

And for the same reason a Cow that was sacred to Isis, or rather to some more
ancient Deity, I suppose the Moon, Number. 19.
was commanded to be driven out of the Camp, and burnt as an unclean Beast; and
so because the Egyptians addressed their Worship to a Goat, as the Symbol of
some Deity, probably the Sun in that Sign, God commanded the Jews to make use
chiefly of Goats in their Expiatory Sacrifices, and particularly the Escape
Goat, laden with all the Sins, and all the Curses of the People; and hence the
Israelites were strictly forbidden to Sacrifice to Goats, Levit. 17. 7.
which we translate Devils: And they shall no more offer Sacrifice to Devils,
((...)) to Goats, after whom they have gone a whoring. This shall be a Statute
for ever unto them throughout their Generations.

But to return to the Paschal Ram, all the circumstances of the Institution
carry a remarkable significancy in them: Thus when they are commanded to
besmear the Side-posts, and upper Door-posts or Lintal of every House: What
could have been a more public Contempt of the Egyptian Religion, when by it
they declared, that the Almighty Power that had proved it self by so many
Miracles and Judgments, especially this Last in the Death of the Firstborn,
commanded to put all manner of contempt upon those Creatures that were
consecrated to the Worship of their Gods, and to leave those Bloody Posts to
the Egyptians, as Monuments of their baffled Deities?

And tho I have no Reverence to the Authority of the Jewish Rabbis in the
account of ancient times, being not only very trifling, but very modern
Writers; yet there is cited an excellent Passage out of R. Abraham Seba, that I
cannot omit to recite, not for its Authors sake, but its own. The Egyptians
began the computation of their Months from the time that the Sun entered Aries;
and this whole Month was celebrated with extraordinary Festival Solemnity, and
was more sacred than all the Months of the year beside. God therefore designing
to set his People at as great a distance as could be from the Customs of the
Heathens, commanded them to begin the year, not from the Full Moon, as the
Egyptians did, but from the first day of the Month; and whereas the Egyptians
spared their Cattle, and durst not so much as eat Rams Flesh, therefore they
are commanded to kill, roast, and eat it; so that whereas they offer Incense to
it, and perform their Solemn Devotions before it, these are commanded in
contempt to sprinkle the Blood of this most Holy Animal upon the very Threshold
of their Houses. So far the Doctor.

So again they are commanded not to eat the Paschal Ram raw, in opposition to
the Customs of the ancient and barbarous Heathen Nations, who eat all their
Sacrifices raw, especially at their signing of Covenants and Treaties of Peace;
and that is the original Reason of the Command to abstain from Blood.

Then it is to be eaten in one House, not to be eaten abroad in solemn Pomp and
Procession, as the Heathen Priests did their raw Sacrifices. Nor a Bone of it
to be broken, because the Heathen Priests in their pretended holy Rage were
wont to tear their Sacrifices in pieces with their Teeth. The Head with the
Legs and Purtenance to be eaten, because the Heathens only eat the Viscera, or
Inwards, nothing of it to remain till the morning, lest it should be abused to
superstitious uses, as the Heathens did the Relics of their Sacrifices, who
sold them to the People as a Charm against Diseases and ill Luck.

All which circumstances are most particularly remarkable in the Bacchanalia,
or great Festival of Bacchus, that the Greeks stole out of Egypt, as well as
all their other Superstitions, as the most learned of them confess: And
concerning the Bacchanalia in particular, Herodotus tells us by whom they were
first brought out of Egypt into Greece, viz. the famous Physician Melampus.

Lastly, the Passover was not to be sodden in Water, becaue the Egyptians and
Syrians always boil their Sacrifices, especially to Horus or the Sun; and for
that reason it is, that this little circumstance is so often urged, and so
strictly observed. And this is particularly objected by Manetho the Egyptian
against the Jews, that they were not content only to destroy their (...), their
Consecrated Animals, but consumed them by Fire, as it were burning their Gods
in Effigy.

These are the great Reasons, why the Divine Lawgiver laid so much stress upon
this Solemnity, and all the circumstances belonging to it, when it was the
grand Diagnostick, or distinguishing Character between the Worshipers of the
true God, and of created Deities.

And therefore upon all Apostasies of the People from their Religion, it was
the Custom of their pious Princes to recall them, by reviewing and renewing the
Laws of the Paschal Festival. So Josiah, when he set himself to abolish all
Relics of Idolatry, and establish the Worship of the true God for ever: He
commanded all the People, saying, Keep the Passover unto the Lord your God, as
it is written in the Book of the Covenant. Surely there was not holden such a
Passover from the days of the Judges that Judged Israel, nor of the Kings of
Judea.

That was an undeniable Proof of their complete Reformation.

The second Law enjoined in opposition to Sun in their Devotions. And therefore
God, on the contrary, commands the Israelites to sacrifice to himself upon a
low Altar of Earth, Exodus 20. 24, 26. without steps or stairs; which Laws were
given either with, or immediately after the Ten Commandments, as it seems of
equal weight with them.

So that to offer Sacrifices upon High Places, is always represented in
Scripture as a very high Act of Idolatry; and to destroy the High Places in
Scripture as an eminent Act of Reformation, which must be understood of Towers,
not of Mountains, that are not so easily demolished. So Levit. 26. 30. I will
destroy your High Places, and cut down your Images, [or Chamanim] and cast your
Carcases upon the Carcases of your Idols, and my Soul shall abhor you. So
Numbers 22. 41. Balack took Balaam and brought him up into the High Places, or
Pillars, as the Septuagint always render it by (...), of Baal, that thence he
might see the utmost part of the People. So Numb. 33. 52. Ye shall drive out
all the Inhabitants of the Land before you, destroy all their Pictures and
Molten Images, and pluck down all their High Places.

In the Historical and Prophetic Writings, Idolatry is almost every where
expressed by Sacrificing or Worshipping in High Places. The Idol Priests are
styled Priests of the High Places.

This, says Herodotus, was the received Custom of the ancient Nations, and of
this Nature were the Egyptian Pyramids; and that which is still standing is
built in the form of an Altar, i.e. a four square Plane, ten Cubits broad on
every side, (not as it is vulgarly supposed, a Point or Spire) to which the
Priest advanced by 250 Ascents, which Herodotus, that viewed them above 2000
years ago, says, were so many lesser Altars. But that the Pyramids were
supposed in the more polite Times, to have been ancient Altars, is evident from
that known Verse of Luca^.

Votaque Pyramidum celsas solvuntur ad Aras. There are Monuments of this
ancient Custom still remaining in the West Indies. Gage in his Survey,
describes such a Tower in the middle of the great Temple at Mexico, of an 180
Ascents, where their Priests offered all their Sacrifices.

In short, the People of Israel were so fond of these High Altars, that some
Princes, who would have demolisht them as pieces of Idolatry, were forced to
persist for fear of popular Tumults and Seditions. 1 King. 15. 14.
So Asa in his Reformation, when he burnt their Idols, could not remove their
High Places. 1 King. 22. 43.
So Iehoash could do every thing, but remove the High Places. 2 King. 12. 3.
So Amaziah was forced to leave them behind him: so his Son Azariah: and when
they were demolished by Hezekiah, Chap. 14. 4.
and some of the more pious Princes, Chap. 15. 4.
they were ever first restored at the Peoples return to Idolatry.

And agreeable to what is here represented is the Reason annexed to the Divine
Law, lest ye discover your nakedness; which words, tho they may be literally
taken, yet according to the Language of Scripture in this matter, they have a
much higher meaning, i.e. lest you commit Idolatry or Adultery with other Gods,
and expose your shame and nakedness by playing the Harlot upon your High
Places: These two things, Idolatry and Adultery being so frequently joined
together in Scripture, as the same Crime.

Thus far, to mention no more, it pleased God to provide against Idolatry, by
enacting special Laws in direct Opposition to the Heathen Rites.

When God had casher'd the more rank and notorious Acts of Heathen Worship, he
retained some of their more innocent Rites, especially those that were derived
from the ancient Patriarchs, before the later Corruptions were crept in, lest
if God had given a Law altogether new, and abolished all their Old Customs,
People that are always fond of the Usages of their Forefathers, should rather
have revolted to the Heathen Idolatry, than submit themselves to such a new and
uncouth Religion; and therefore out of condescension to their rudeness and
weakness, God permitted them to retain several of their former Rites and
Ceremonies in his new Worship, that by that Indulgence he might win them more
easily to embrace his new Institution.

And this seems to be the Grammatical Sense of St. Paul's Expression, Act. 13.
18.
That God suffered their Manners in the Wilderness Forty Years, where the word
(...) suffered, is taken from the Use or Language of Mothers or Nurses, that
are forced to humor and comply with the little Follies of their Children by
any way to please them.

In allusion to this word, God was pleased to express his Treatment of the
Children of Israel, who knowing the weakness of their rude and childish
Understandings, permitted and indulged them to enjoy not a few of their former
Conceits together with his own Divine Law.

And so Moses lets them know in his Farewell Speech, Deuteronomy. 1. 31.
That the Lord had all along born with them, as a Father does with his Child.
And so Grotius paraphrases that passage of St. Paul, When we were Children,
Gal. 4. 3.
we were in Bondage under the Elements of the World, i. e. says he, we were
under subjection to those Rites and Usages that were common to us with the rest
of the World, as Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, New Moons, to which he might have
added, Oblations of First Fruits, Purifications, Festival Solemnities,
Tabernacles, Dedication of Tenths, the Ark; the Cherubim or Teraphim (for they
are promiscuously used in Scripture, and are of very ancient use:) These, and
the like old Customs were enjoined the People of Israel, lest for want of them
they should relapse to Idolatry.

And because these Customs were common to the Jews with the rest of the World,
therefore they are called the Elements of the World, and weak and beggarly
Elements, and carnal Ordinances, that were imposed and born with till the time
of Reformation, in the Apostolical Writings, when they would beat down the
value of the Mosaic Law.

But to omit the rest, I shall only insist upon the Cherubim, that God
commanded to be placed over the Ark, Exodus 25. 18.
and all Divine Worship to be directed toward them, And thou shall make two
Cherubims of Gold, of beaten work shall thou make them, in the two ends of the
Mercy seat, etc.

That they were Statues or Images is out of doubt by their Description, but of
what particular Form is matter of Controversy among learned Men; tho what ever
they were, I am not concerned; it is enough that they were Images used in the
Worship of God, and then the use of Images is not in it self Idolatry.

That the Word originally and properly signifies an Ox, is evident from
Ezekiel, who uses the Words promiscuously, Chap. 1. 10. As for the likeness of
their Faces, They four had the Face of a Man, and the face of a Lion on the
Right side, and they four had the face of an Ox on the left side, they four
also had the face of an Eagle: but Chap. 10. 14. the same things are thus
described, And every one had four faces; the first Face was the face of a
Cherub, the second the face of a Man, the third of a Lion, and the fourth of an
Eagle And as an Ox or a Cherub was used by the Ancients as a Symbol of Strength
or Power, so thence came they to signify the thing it self; so God tells the
King of Tire, that he was his anointed Cherub, Ezekiel. 28. 14.
i. e. that he had made him great and powerful.

Hence whenever God in Scripture is said to sit upon, or dwell between the
Cherubims, it is when his Power particularly is represented. Thus when the
Israelites were defeated by the Philistines, they agree at a Council of War to
send for the Ark of God to save them out of the hands of their Enemies. 1 Samuel
4. 3, 4.
So the People sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord of Hosts, who dwells between the Cherubims. So King
Hezekiah in his Distress calling upon the Divine Protection and Deliverance
from his Enemy; And Hezekiah prayed before the Lord, and said, 2 King. 19. 15.
O Lord God of Israel, that dwell between the Cherubims, thou alone art God
of all the Kingdoms of the Earth. So Psalm. 99. 1. The Lord reigns, let the
People tremble; he sits between the Cherubims, let the Earth be moved.

And for this reason were these sacred Images placed over the Ark, as the
Symbols or Hieroglyphics, to represent the Presence of the Divine Majesty; so
that as the Ark is styled God's Footstool, the Cherubims are called his Throne:
And so when the Ark and Cherubims were brought into the Temple, this Anthem was
sung: Lift up your Heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting
Doors, Psalm. 24. 78.
and the King of Glory shall come in: Who is this King of Glory? the Lord of
Hosts, the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle.

In short, these Images were the most sacred things in all the Jewish Religion;
what they were, I will not determine; some will have them to have been Statues
of Beautiful Youths (as they are now vulgarly represented:) Others, the Statue
of a young Bullock, from the synonymous signification of the Words: But the
Grotius. Dr. Spencer. Villalpandus Bochartus.
most learned conclude them, as they suppose with good Authority from the
Scriptures, not to have been any one certain Form, but mixed of several Forms,
in which that of a Bullock had the biggest share; but compounded of these four
shapes, a Man's Face, an Eagles Wings, a Lions Back, an Oxes or Bullocks Thighs
and Feet. As they are described in the fore cited Chapters of Ezekiel, 1. and
10. And to this no doubt St. John alludes in his Vision of the Four Beasts,
Rev. 4. 6, 7. Round about the Throne were four Beasts; and the first Beast was
like a Lion, and the second like a Calf, and the third had a face as a Man, and
the fourth was like a flying Eagle. And they rest not day and night, saying,
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

In Allusion, it is no doubt, to the representation of the immediate Divine
Presence in the Ark by the Cherubims, that were made up of these four Beasts,
that were probably pitched upon, because of that great pre-eminence that they
hold above all other Orders of Creatures. A Man for Understanding, an Eagle for
Swiftness, a Lion and a Bull for Strength.

But what ever they were, they were sacred, Images set up by God himself in the
place of his own Worship; and he was so far from forbidding the use of Images
in it, that he would not be worshipped without them.

This is the true Account of Idolatry, as it is stated in the Scripture from
the grand Design of the Mosaic Law, to restore the Worship of the true
invisible God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, in opposition to the Idols, or
created Deities of the Heathen World, and by all wise Arts and Methods to keep
them loyal to himself: And this gives us the true Rationale of the Mosaic Law,
in which every particular Rite had some regard to Idolatry. So that the Breach
of any one ceremonial Law was a degree of it; and to boil a Kid in its Mothers
Milk was Idolatry, as well as to offer Sacrifice to the Sun, because the
Heathens used that form of Ceremony in the Worship of that God.

God did not think it sufficient for their security to forbid them the Worship
of this false God, but every minute Circumstance that belonged to it, lest by
degrees they might be reconciled to it. And therefore God calls himself upon
all occasions a jealous God, and oftentimes a jealous Husband, to let them
know, that they must not only avoid Idolatry it self, but all the least
appearances and suspicions of it by Heathen Compliances.

Now if we compare this ancient Idolatry of the Jews, with that of late charged
by some men upon all Christians of the Roman Communion, I know not which will
appear greatest, the Malice or the Folly of the Charge. It consists of these
three Heads. I. The Worship of Images. II. Adoration of the Host. III.
Invocation of Saints.


All which are represented to the People as Crimes of the same Nature with the
old Egyptian Idolatry.

But as to the first, the Use of Images in the Worship of God, I cannot but
admire at the Confidence of these Men, to make so bold a Charge against them in
general, Exodus 25. 22.
when the Images of the Cherubim were commanded by God himself.

They were the most solemn and sacred part of the Jewish Religion; and
therefore, tho Images, so far from Idolatry, that God made them the Seat of his
Presence, and from between them delivered his Oracles; so that something more
is required to make Idolatry, than the use of Images.

This Instance is so plain and obvious to every Reader, there being nothing
more remarkable in all the old Testament, than the Honor done to the Cherubim,
that it is a much greater Wonder to me, that those Men, who advance the
Objection of Idolatry so groundlesly, can so slightly rid themselves of so
pregnant a Proof against it.

It is objected, Dr. St. of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome.
I remember, by a learned Adversary, to the great Founder of this, and all
other Anticatholique, and Antichristian, and uncharitable Principles among us;
but he turns it off so carelessly, as if it were not worth his Notice. First,
That they only directed their Worship toward the Images. Yea, they did so, as
the Symbols of God's Presence, and that is to Worship God by Images, or to give
the same Signs of Reverence to his Representations, as to Himself. And
therefore when David exhorts the People to give Honor to the Ark, he says,
(...), bow down to, or worship his Footstool, for It, or He, is holy.

And if so much outward Worship may be given to Images, as Symbols of the
Divine presence, it is enough to justify it. But however the thing stands, the
case of all Images is the same, and a Roman Catholic may make the same Plea
for his Church, as this Author does for the Jews; and if he accept it in one
Case, he cannot refuse it in another; or if he does, he will give but little
proof of his Integrity.

At least God was not so nice and metaphysical in enacting his Laws, by
distinguishing between bowing to, and toward; or if these Gentlemen say, he
was, they must show us where: But what Authority do these Men assume to
themselves, when by the precarious use of these two little Particles, they
think to make the same Act the Whitest, and the Blackest thing in the World,
toward an Image, it is innocent; to it, Idolatry?

But let them take which they please (for they are their own Carvers in all
their own Controversies) If it be no Idolatry to Worship toward an Image,
after all their Frights, they fairly give up the Cause to the Church of Rome,
that requires no more.

But the second Reply is much more curious and metaphysical, That the Cherubims
were not seen by the People, and adored but once a year by the High Priest:
Here then we distinguish between the Idolatry of the Sight and the Mind; an
Image seen is Idolatry, but if covered, it is none. So that to adore the Host
exposed, is Idolatry; but in a Pix, it is none. What Rubbish is here to stuff
out so weighty an Argument!

But if they did not see their Images in the Ark, they knew them to be there,
and of what Form they were, being described to them by God himself in their
Law. Upon these Terms it seems a Blind Man can never be an Idolater; and if all
the Romanists would shut their Eyes at convenient Times, they would quit
themselves of this black Accusation.

But the High Priest used this Solemnity only once a year. If it were Idolatry,
it was as unlawful once a year, as if done every day; and if lawfully done but
once a year, it was no Idolatry: Its being seldom or frequent, makes no
difference; it is either always Idolatry, or it is never so.

And yet these little Pretenses are the last Result of this great Argument; and
when we have loaded the greatest part of Christendom with the foulest Crime in
the World, we think to make good the Accusation by such shameless Shifts and
Pretenses as these; for in these Trifles, the Dispute, as to the Cherubim
Images, ended; and yet the Clamor of Idolatry is kept up as high as ever to
this very day.

But what Images do the Roman Catholics worship? Do they worship any Image or
Symbols of False Gods, as the Supreuse Deities? If they do not, then they are
innocent of the worst part of Idolatry. Or do they attempt to make a Similitude
of the true God, or uncreated Divine Nature? That is the other part of
Idolatry, and the Scripture knows no more; therefore however superstitious they
may be in their use of Images, yet they cannot be guilty of Idolatry, but upon
one of these two Accounts, which no Man was ever yet so hardy as to charge upon
that Church.

Till therefore it be proved that they worship Images of false Gods as the
Supreme Deities, or that they worship the true God by Corporeal Images and
Representations of his Divine Nature, there is no Footing for Idolatry in
Christendom.

As for the Adoration of the Host, when they can prove it is given to it either
as a Symbol of a false God, or the Picture of the true one, howsoever faulty it
may be otherwise, it can be no Idolatry.

And as for the Invocation of Saints, unless they worship them as the Supreme
God, the Charge of Idolatry is an idle Word, and the Adoration it self that is
given to them as Saints, is a direct Protestation against Idolatry, because it
supposes a Superior Deity, and that Supposition cuts off the very being of
Idolatry.

But to give an Account of their precarious Notions of Idolatry, and their more
precarious ways of proving it, would swell to Volumes; and therefore at present
I shall dismiss the Argument, and shall only observe what a Barbarous Thing it
is to make the Lives, Fortunes and Liberties of the English Nobility and Gentry
to depend upon such Trifles and Crudities, by remarking the unheard of and
unparalled Penalties that are annexed to so slender a Law, viz.

That every Offender shall be deemed and adjudged a Popish Recusant convict to
all Intents and Purposes whatsoever, and shall forfeit and suffer as a Popish
Recusant convict, and shall be disabled to hold and Office or Place of Trust or
Profit, Civil or Military, in any of His Majesty's Realms or Foreign
Plantations; And shall be disabled from thenceforth to Sit or Uote in either
House of Parliament, or make a Proxy in the House of Peers, or to sue, or use
any Action, Bill, Plaint or Information in Course of Law; or to prosecute any
Suit in any Court of Equity, or to be Guardian of any Child, or Executor or
Administrator of any Person, or capable of any Legacy or Deed of Gift; and
lastly, shall forfeit for every wilful Offense the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds.

Here are all the Punishments that can be inflicted upon a living Man.

Convict Recusancy it self, one would think, is Punishment more than enough for
any one Crime: Abjuration of the Realm; 35 Eliz. ca. 1.
Returning without leave, Felony without Clergy; upon refusing to abjure,
Forfeiture of all Goods, Chattels and Lands for Liofe.

Forfeiture of Sixty Pounds per Annum, 3 Jacob. ca. 4.
Banishment from the Kings Court under Forfeiture of an Hundred Pounds, and
from London on the same Penalty, Forfeiture of Right of Patronage, Disabled
from any Practice or Office in Law, and finally disabled to be Guardian,
Executor or Administrator, and Legatee.

This was thought the utmost Severity in the Zealous days of Queen Elizabeth;
but alas! our Modern Zeal will not be confined to the gentle Moderation of our
Forefathers; but now we must suffer all those, with many more, to the loss of
our Birthrights, and all Benefits of Law, for no higher Act of Recusancy, than
not swearing to the Truth of Dr. St's Unlearned and Fanatique Notion of
Idolatry; for that in reality is the bottom of all this Mischief and Madness.

And as it is advanced among us into so bloody a Charge; I cannot but declare
my utter Abhorrence both of that, and its Abetters, as sworn Enemies to the
Peace of Christendom; and in the Result of all, I find, That Idolatry made the
Plot, and that the Plot made Idolatry, and that the same Persons made both.

Thus begging Allowance for Humane Infirmities, lesser Errors and Mistakes,
which in so much variety of Argument and Citation will escape the greatest
Care, I have declared my present Judgment of this unhappy Law, as I will answer
for my Integrity to God and the World.

SA. OXON.


