A REPROOF TO THE Rehearsal Transprosed, IN A Discourse to its Author.

By the Author of the ECCLESIASTICAL POLITY.

London, Printed for James Collins at the Kings Arms in Ludgate Street, 1673.

TO THE READER,
WHen I first condemned my self to the drudgery of this Reply, I intended
nothing but a serious Prosecution of my Argument; and to let the World see that
it is not reading Histories, or Plays, or Gazets, nor going a Pilgrimage to
Geneva, nor learning French and Italian, nor passing the Alps, nor being a
cunning Gamester that can qualify a man to discourse of Conscience and
Ecclesiastical Policy; in that it is not capping an Argument with a story that
will answer it, nor clapping an Apothegm upon an Assertion that will prove it,
nor stringing up Proverbs and Similitudes upon one another that will make up a
Coherent Discourse. And for a great while I kept close to my resolution, and
contented my self to expose the man's Ignorance, without laughing at it: But he
is all along so ridiculous, that at last Flesh and Blood could not refrain from
being a little pleasant with him. And as it chances it happens not unluckily,
for I hope I have hereby given an Example, how it is possible to be serious and
merry with a Buffoon without violating the Laws of Decorum, and to discourse
with a Clown as long time as I have been writing without being rude or angry. I
have been much more tedious than at first I designed, and indeed than was
necessary to correct such a Yelper. But as I would not have you think that I
have taken all this pains for his sake, so let me tell you that when I
undertake an Argument I love (as far as I am able) to handle it to some
purpose, and how mean soever the occasion of my writing may be, to contrive a
Book as useful to the Reader, as if I had not been bound to trace another man's
follies, but had been left at liberty to pursue the Results of my own mind.
Thus did I heretofore deal with J. O, and thus have I now dealt with this
Trifler, from their Impertinences to take advantage of discoursing upon
material and pertinent Arguments. And therefore the main design of this ensuing
Treatise, beside justifying my Grand Thesis of the Kings Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction against Perverseness and Impudence, is taken up partly in carrying
on my old War against Faction and Nonconformity, and putting an end to all my
trouble in it, not only by baffling them but forcing them to see themselves
baffled, and convincing the Ringleaders that they have nothing left to trust
to, but their own Impudence and the Peoples dullness: But chiefly in showing
that certain and inviolable confederacy that there has always been between
Nonconformity and the Good old Cause; so that whenever one of them appears at
Top, the other is sure to lurk, at Bottom; and if I have proved it (as I think
I have sufficiently) I may leave it to others to make out the Consequences. But
judge you whether I have not been hard put to it by this bold man, when the
hardest Task he has put me to, has been to prove that the King and the Loyal
Party were not the only guilty Persons in reference to the late Rebellion. And
now I think I have born Testimony enough for the Peace and Welfare of my
Country, and so I have done; if it be to any effect, I have a double reward;
if to none, I have my own. I have no other Civility to request of the Reader,
than only to desire him, that if he shall think what I have written worth his
perusal, to read it over with an unprejudiced Mind and an ordinary Attention,
and then if he do not conclude this trifling man that has put me to all this
trouble as despicable a Scribler as ever blotted Paper, I must confess I have
lost not only my labor but my Understanding.

SIR,
I Have perused Your Book, and of This you might have been sooner informed, had
I not (immediately after I had undertaken your Correction) been prevented by a
dull and lazy distemper; but being in some measure recruited, I have, as my
health and leisure would permit, given my self the divertisement of these
following Animadversions. You have indeed taken the Advantage (though it is
cowardly and dishonourably done to take it) of accosting me in such a clownish
and licentious way of writing, as you know to be unsuitable both to the
Civility of my Education, and the Gravity of my Profession. And this is so like
the Ingenuity of the Brotherhood, that I all along both foresaw and foretold
it. It has ever been their old Artifice, that when they are baffled out of all
their impotent Pretenses by dint of Reason and Argument, that then they should
hire some Buffoon to recover their Credit and Cause by downright Rudeness and
Impudence. But this device shall not serve their turn, no fooling shall divert
me from the serious prosecution of my Design. And though I shall not baulk any
good jests (if they will thrust themselves upon me) for Page 198.
fear of the day of judgment, as you forsooth ridiculously and impudently
enough pretend to have rejected thousands merely upon that account; yet however
I shall for a better reason forbear hunting after them, (viz.) to convince the
world how little Wit is requisite to prove that you have none at all. There is
nothing more required to make some Creatures ridiculous, than barely to show
them. And by that time I have dispatched all that I shall think convenient to
chastise the folly and rashness of your Undertaking, I am pretty confident you
will have so much occasion to look simply, that the company will be fully
satisfied there will be but little need of sending for a witty man to put you
out of countenance.

In the first place then after a long train of Beginning of 96 Pages, that
might indifferently serve against all the Ecclesiastical Politicians from the
beginning to the end of the World, I find you at length begin under pretense of
Animadversions upon a Preface, to attaque all my Discourses of Ecclesiastical
Polity, and immediately fall on front and reere, and with an horrid deal of
noise and astonishment warn all Mankind that the Grand Thesis upon which I
stake (you all along speak the language of a gamester) not only all my own
Divinity and Page 96.
Policy, Reputation, Preferment and Conscience, but even the Crowns and Fate of
Princes, and the Liberties, Lives and Estates, and which is more, the
Consciences of their Subjects, is this; That it is absolutely necessary to the
peace and government of the world, that the Supreme Magistrate of every
Commonwealth should be vested with a Power to govern and conduct the
Consciences of Subjects, in affairs of Religion. Is it so? why what then? what
then! why nothing at all but this is the grand Thesis. For you are not provided
with one syllable of objection against it, and have not spent so much as a Tale
or a Jest or a Quibble in its confutation. You are a right Champion for the
Fanatique Cause, that can confute any Argument with face and confidence. There
is no disputing such an Adversary without an headpiece. This is only tilting
of foreheads, where the hardest skull, not the fullest, must get the victory.
Away you trifling Wretch, talk you no more of Ecclesiastical Policy, and
hereafter never pretend to any knowledge that pretends either to Reason or
Modesty! for had you any sense of the former, you would never have been so
silly as to be so seriously scared at such an innocent and undeniable
proposition; or any of the latter, you could never have been so impudent as to
bray forth such a confident and heinous censure against it, as if it were
notoriously evident without proof that it directly subverts all the Principles
of Religion and Government. And therefore I would fain know in good earnest
what your meaning was, in making your first onset upon this Grand Thesis? If
you intended its Confutation, why have you not discharged so much as one
semi-vowel of exception against it?. If you did not, to what purpose is it to
trouble your self, and the world with its Quotation? A man (in my Opinion) had
as good altogether, unless he be very idle, keep his mouth shut as gape and yet
say nothing. If this be the Grand Thesis, in comparison whereof the rest of my
Assertions (as you inform Page 98.
us) are to be reckoned no better than sneaking Corollaries, and if I bottom
all the foundations of Government and Religion upon it, and make it more
necessary to the support of the World than the Pillars of the Earth, or the
eight Elephants; one would think this, if any thing, should have been battered
down with knocking and dead-doing Arguments, and here, if any where, one would
have expected you should have given an hot and fierce alarm, and have drawn up
all your squadrons of vowels, mutes, semivowels, and liquids, and by the next
Gazet to have heard of a sorer and more dreadful battle than ever was fought in
your Grammar-War, or my Roman Empire. Now after all this Threatening and
Preparation, what a disappointment must it be to the Readers and Spectators to
see so proud an He that bore up so bravely, and with such a manful Confidence,
come off with this soft and gentle Rebuke, Verily and indeed now it is a
naughty Proposition, ay, and all that. Thou a Rat-Divine! thou have not the Wit
and Learning of a Mouse; when thou endeavour'st to bite, thou can not so much
as nibble. Thou talk of Government, of the Crowns and State of Princes! to
School, Truant, mind your Push-pin, and con your eight parts of Speech, and
presume not hereafter to cavil at things that are above the capacity and
concern of Boys and Girls, and sucking-bottles.

And yet to the same purpose (that is, to none at all) is that tedious train of
Quotations that you bring in at the tail of this, without passing any smarter
remarque upon them than the same general censure of Malignancy; though if they
are chargeable, there was no need of your Edition, for they were in print
before; and therefore it is but sit you should be endited for a scandalous
Plagiary to transcribe so much of my Book to no other purpose than only to make
up 6 pages toward your full tale of 326. I believe it will be found against
the Laws of the Stationers' Hall, for your Bookseller to print so much of
another man's Copy, after it is entered according to Order, without his leave
and consent, and I hope Mr Martyn will seek his remedy against the Assigns of
John Calvin and Theodore Beza. They are bold and saucy fellows, as it is the
nature of every thing to be so that relates to Geneva. But you and I will not
concern our selves in their Controversies: they know without our information,
as well as any Vermin in Christendom, how to manage their own Affairs by the
intrigues and mysteries of their own Trade. At least it more concerns me to
keep close to your self, for they tell me, that if a man will keep continually
running after a mad dog, it is the only way to secure himself from being
bitten. Tell me therefore quickly in answer to the Grand Thesis; do you
seriously believe, that his Majesty has no Power in matters of Religion? What
then becomes of all your Acts of Parliament against Popery ever since the
Reformation, nay, what then becomes of the Declaration it self for Indulgence
and Liberty of Conscience, in which his Majesty declares, that he therein only
makes use of that Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Page 4.
Matters, which is not only inherent in the Crown, but has been declared and
recognized to be so by several Statutes and Acts of Parliament. Beside, do you
not think it possible for men to create public disturbances under pretenses
of Religion? Was there never any Rebellion carried on by popular Zeal and
Reformation? Did you never hear of any men that set up Christ's Standard in
defiance to their Princes, and that fought against his Person at least, only to
carry on the work of the Lord, and that have murdered and banished Kings, only
to dethrone Antichrist and the Whore? You so great a Traveller! and did you
never hear the Country people tell stories of the merry pranks of John of
Leydon, and the Anabaptists of Germany? You so great an Historian! and never
read of any Kingdoms and Empires some time or other embroiled or destroyed by
Arts of Religion? You would be an Historian indeed, if you could but name any
one Nation in the World, whose Annals do not afford us variety of sad stories
to this purpose: And then after all this, dare you be so confident as to
declare it is absolutely unlawful, and in all cases, for any Prince to claim or
exercise any Authority over Conscience or Religion? If you dare not, but allow
a necessity of Coercion in some cases, then after all your confidence you grant
the truth, and justify the innocence of the Grand Thesis, (viz.) That it is
necessary to the Peace and Government of the World, that the Supreme Magistrate
of every Commonwealth should be vested with a Power to govern and conduct the
Consciences of Subjects in affairs of Religion. An Assertion so obvious and so
harmless, that never any People in the World had so little brains, or so much
forehead as to deny it to all Intents, but only the salvage Anabaptists of
Germany; and they indeed claimed an absolute exemption from the Civil Power for
themselves, and that only upon the privilege of Saint-ship, but then they
equally cancelled all Government, and protested against all manner of
Subjection either to Secular or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. But excepting
these inhumane Canibals, this Grand Thesis that you suppose to be so grossly
absurd, that barely to name it is enough to expose the person that shall
maintain it as an open enemy to God and Man, is so granted and undoubted a
truth, that it is plainly ratified by the unanimous consent of all mankind.

Nay, when a man has demonstrated its certainty from that unavoidable influence
that Religion always has upon the peace of Kingdoms, and the interests of
Government, and from those intolerable mischiefs that must follow upon its
exemption from the Civil Power; from the natural tendency of Enthusiasm and
Superstition to public disturbance; from the boldness and insolence of
Fanatique Zeal, from the nature and original of Government, from the practice
and prescription of all Ages, and from all the topics of Reason and
Experience; and when he has stated and confined its exercise within easy and
discernable bounds, and has prevented all cavils and pretenses of dislike,
unless only such as dash as fiercely upon the very foundations of all Civil as
well as Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. After all this pains is it not a sad thing
to see all blown up with mere confidence and presumption, and if a bold man
will but say Tush, it is false, without any proof or reason for his dislike,
away it all flys in fumo. I have insisted the longer upon this, because as it
is the Grand Thesis of my Books, so it is the first Essay of your courage, that
by this first Specimen of your Wit, the World may take a true scantling of your
parts and abilities. But having thus nimbly dispatched this general Thesis, you
proceed to your particular Exceptions, where you sum up your Charge in Six
Heads, which you sometimes entitle Plays, sometimes Hypotheses, sometimes
Aphorisms; and why not Plots, and Scenes, and Walks, and under-walks, etc? The
first is the Unlimited Magistrate, or as you eloquently Page 107.
express it page 246. his unhoopable Jurisdiction. A Metaphor taken from a Tub,
I suppose, because you find Power in your Book of Apothegms compared to liquor,
for a certain Reason known to every body, though no body has expressed it so
happily as your self, viz. because if it be infinitely Page 206.
diffused or extended, it becomes impotency, even as a straight line continued
grows a circle. I will leave it to the Mathematicians to consider how it is
possible for a straight line to become a circle by being infinitely straight.
But however for this reason it is necessary to hoop up the Authority of
Princes, lest they too soon weaken themselves by too great a leakage of their
Power; so that methinks according to your notion, there is nothing so patly
emblematical of Sovereign Princes, as Dufoy in his Tub, or a Pig under a
washbole, and if you would define them suitably to the conceit, they are
nothing else but so many vessels of Authority, some Kinderkins, some Hogsheads,
and some Tuns, according to the circuit or hoop of their Government. Though as
you and your Puritan Coopers, or (as Mar-prelate words it) Tub-trimmers, have
been pleased to contract their Power, all the Empire in the world might easily
be contained in a pipkin or a quart pot, and he would pay dear for it, that
should purchase the Kings Supremacy at the price of a jug of Ale. For when you
have once exempted Conscience out of the circle of humane Laws, the greatest
and most absolute Monarchs upon earth will be reduced to as scant a measure of
Authority as your Mock-kings of Brentford, in that there is nothing in humane
nature directly liable to their Obligation but only Conscience: and therefore
if that must be let loose from the commands of Superiors, nothing else can
bind them. So wretchedly are such bunglers as you wont to talk, that only suck
in, and then pour out your phrases by rote and at random: and because some of
the Ancients have sometimes discoursed of Conscience in Metaphorical and loose
expressions (as they do of all things else) calling it (...) the Domestic God,
(...) the Guardian Angel, etc. you must by all means take them in the literal
sense, and discourse of Conscience, as if it were some little Spirit or Puppet
Intelligence within you distinct from your selves, so that though you are His
Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects, yet as for your dear and tender
Consciences you must have them excused by the Laws of Hospitality, that is to
say, you owe him Obedience in all things, excepting only those in which he does
or can require it, for wherever the man is bound to obey, his Conscience, and
only that is bound to obey, it being the only principle in him that is capable
of Obligation: and therefore if that be absolved from all engagements of
Allegiance, and all ties of Duty, the case is plain, the whole man is at
perfect Liberty. And all Subjects may huff and rant it to their Princes teeth,
as well as your proud Almanzor. Obeyed as Sovereign by thy Subjects be, Conq.
of Granada.

But know that I alone am King of me.


You see then there is no remedy but Conscience you must submit to the
Jurisdiction of your Prince, if you will submit your selves. Yes, but you would
not have it unlimited and unhoopable as I have stated it. But Sir, give me
leave to tell you, that though it should be unlimited, it does not at all
follow that it would be unhoopable, because it would be (as you inform us) like
a straight line continued into a circle. Now I will maintain it against all the
Mathematicians in Europe, Asia and Africa, and the Terra Incognita of Geneva
too, (you must bear with me, for in some cases I cannot avoid this confidence)
that all circles, as well as all other figures how big soever, are hoopable
things.

But for all my jesting, my own words are upon Record, where I have vested
every Supreme Magistrate with an universal Page 140.
and unlimited Power, and uncontrollable in the Government of Religion, that is
to say (say you) over men's Consciences, and that is to say (say I) that some
men's Consciences are concerned in nothing but matters of Religion. Well, seeing
you are content to give Macedo for a finished and burnisht piece of modesty; now
then welfare J. O. for a modest thing, for he had the Grace to load me with
this Calumny before you, but then he had the Grace to take his Answer too. And
it is possible, though it is scarce credible, that he might stumble into such
an horrid mistake through haste and inadvertency, for you know he always
writes post. But what a Coloss of Brass are you, that after I have given him
such humbling and convictive rebuke for it, persist so obstinately in the very
same tract of forgery and falsification.

The Answer I gave him was easy enough for your understanding as meek as it
is, viz. That in that Paragraph where I asserted the Supreme Government of
every Commonwealth to be Universal, Absolute and Uncontrollable in all affairs
whatsoever, that concern the Interests of mankind, and the ends of Government,
it was only in opposition to the pretenses of a distinct Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction here on earth. For having first asserted the necessity of a
Sovereign Power over the affairs of Religion, from their concernment in the
Peace and Government of the world, I thence proceeded to enquire where and in
whom it ought to reside; and having shown the inconsistency of erecting two
Supreme Secular Powers, one over Civil, and the other over Ecclesiastical
Causes, I concluded that the Supreme Government of every Commonwealth must of
necessity be Universal, Absolute and Uncontrollable, in that it must extend its
Jurisdiction as well to affairs of Religion, as to affairs of State, because
they are so strongly influential upon the Interests of Mankind, and the Ends of
Government. And now is this to make the Ecclesiastical Authority of the Civil
Magistrate absolutely Paramount without regard to any other Jurisdiction of
what nature soever, when I only maintain it in defiance to the claims of any
other humane Power? For this was the only subject of that enquiry. And when I
asserted the Sovereign Power to be Absolute and Uncontrollable, it is apparent
nothing else could be intended than that it is not to be controuled by any
distinct Power, whether of the Pope or the Presbytery (for they are the only
Rivals of the Princes of Christendom.) And when I asserted it to be Universal
and Absolute, no man unless he would give his mind to misunderstanding, could
understand it in any other sense, than that it was not confined to matters
purely Civil, but extended its Jurisdiction to matters of an Ecclesiastical
Importance, upon which account alone I determined it to be Absolute, Universal
and Uncontrollable. This is the main and the fundamental Article of the
Reformation, and that which distinguishes the truly Orthodox and Catholic
Protestant both from Popish and Presbyterian Recusants, and is the only fence
to secure the Thrones of Princes against the dangerous encroachments of those
bold and daring Sects; and therefore from so plain and avowed a Truth to charge
me for ascribing in general terms an Absolute, Universal and Uncontrollable
power to the Civil Magistrate over the Consciences of men in matters of
Religion, argues more boldness than wit and discretion, and gives us ground to
suspect that these men are not less forsaken of shame and modesty than they are
of Providence: for it must needs be a very bold face and a very hard forehead,
that could ever venture to obtrude such palpable and disingenuous Abuses upon
the world. This I think was answer enough for him, and is I am sure too much
for you.

But when beside this I have drawn up a brief and plain account of the parts,
the coherence, and the design of my first Treatise to prevent you from abusing
the People for the future with such rude mistakes and pervertings: for you to
repeat the very same Leasing is (if any thing is) false Heraldry, it is brass
upon brass. And when I have there so stated the Controversy as to provide with
equal care and caution against the Inconveniences of both extremes, an
unlimited Power on the one hand, and an unbounded License on the other; when
the bounds I have proposed are so very easy to be observed, and so unnecessary
to be transgressed by all Partys concerned, viz. that Governors only take care
not to impose things certainly and apparently evil; and that subjects be not
allowed to plead Conscience for disobedience in any other case; and when I have
so carefully avoided all kind of severity more than is absolutely necessary to
the preservation of Government and the peace of Mankind, with many other things
so easy and so obvious that there is scarce any thing to excuse me from
Impertinency in taking so much pains to prove them but their Manifest Necessity.

After all this I beseech you (by the ties of ancient Friendship) deal clearly
and heartily with me, and tell me upon what other principles I could have
discoursed more safely or more innocently upon this Argument, though it is
possible I might have done it more wittily by the help of your friend Bays; who
supposing two Kings of Brentford, one for example a Secular, the other an
Ecclesiastical King, remarks upon it that the People having the same Relations
to both, the same Affections, the same Duty, the same Obedience, and all that;
would be divided among themselves in point of devoir and interest how to behave
themselves equally between them: these Kings differing sometimes in particular
though in the main they agree. And therefore what if they should agree to
divide their Empire, and one be King of the Land-men, and the other of the
Watermen, or one to rule by night and the other by day, or take their turns of
Government by weeks or months? but this device would not do, for where there
are two supreme Powers in the same Commonwealth, there can be no avoiding
civil jars and bloody-noses. So that for this reason had I been a Senator of
Brentford I should have humbly proposed that either King Phys or vice versa
King Ush might be vested with the absolute and uncontrollable Power of the
Empire, i. e. with both kinds of jurisdiction, because otherwise (as he
proceeds shrewdly) the People being embarrast by their equal Ties to both, and
the Sovereign's concerned in a reciprocal regard to their own Interest, as to
the good of the People; may make a certain kind of a -- you understand me --
upon which there does arise several disputes, turmoils, heart-burnings, and all
that -- Ay, this is pregnant and demonstrative, and does not sob us off (as you
always do) with empty tittle tattle, without any color or pretense of reason.
And had it come to hand time enough, I might have been as much beholden to it
for sense as you have been for wit; for so you will have it that I have
pilfer'd all my best, or (in your own Poetic phrase) rapping flowers out of
Play-books, and several choice ones you have in spite of Almanacks and
Chronology discovered in my first Book that were by all means filch'd out of
this very Play, though as fortune would have it this was not made any way
public till above two years after that. But waving the advantage of Bays his
Assistance and every body else, and relying upon my own single strength and
presumption, after all my care and pains to way-lay Calumny could I ever
suspect any thing in the shape of a man so desperately fallen from all sense of
Conscience or Modesty as to upbraid me with ascribing an infinite jurisdiction
to Princes without any regard to the Divine Laws? Well! I now see what it is
for a man to live in his study, and be unacquainted with the world; for my part
I could never have supposed it possible that Mankind could ever by Travel and
Conversation improve it self to such an height of Confidence. Especially when
there is not any one Writer extant either ancient or modern, that I know of,
that has so vehemently and industriously asserted the hoopableness of all
humane Authority as I have done; And when in particular I have spent two whole
Chapters in my first Book to prove, that as the opposite opinion is no less
than rank Atheism or Blasphemy, so it utterly subverts the Power of all
Government, and irrecoverably destroys the safety of all societies in the
World. This Confidence of yours is so provoking that I cannot but wonder your
ears have not done Penance for the rudeness of your Tongue. Macedo! thou art
able to outforge and outbrazen ten Macedos. And yet so assured are the drivers
of the dissenting Herd, and so silly the Creatures they stear, that there is
scarce a Shop-Divine in the whole Nation, that does not as heartily believe
this unhoopable Jurisdiction to be the only design of all my Books as he does
the ten Commandments to be obligatory, or the Apostles Creed to be true. But
when my innocence as to this charge is so infinitely clear, and when they have
nothing to object against me or to plead in their own behalf but upon its
presumption, that is a demonstrative Argument of a bassled and defenseless
cause, that can be defended with no other weapon but impudent and barefaced
Calumny. And now when you have once taken this for granted, away you run
clattering with abundance of noise and nothing, till you fall into another
story full as loud and rattling as this. That I have complemented Page 110.
his Majesty so far as to inform him, that he may, if he please, reserve the
Priesthood and the exercise of it to himself. So said J. O. too, and was very
pleasant in his Remarques upon it, but was I suppose sufficiently satisfied or
at least silenced with this plain and simple Answer. That in the Paragraph
(against which this Objection is levelled) I undertook to give a brief
Historical account of the Original of all Civil and Ecclesiastical Government,
where I showed how in the first Ages of the World they were vested in the same
Person, and founded upon the same Right of paternal Authority: and in this
State of things antecedent to all superinduced Restraints and positive
Institutions, I asserted the supreme Magistrate might, if he pleased, reserve
the exercise of the Priesthood to himself; And so all Writers, that I know of,
assert as well as I. Though afterward the Priestly office was in the Jewish
Commonwealth expressly derogated from the Kingly Power, by being settled upon
the Tribe of Levi and the Line of Aaron; and so likewise in the Christian
Church by being appropriated to the Apostles and their Successors, that derive
their Priestly Office and Power from our Blessed Saviors express and immediate
Commission.

Now what I affirmed of things in the bare State of Nature without the guidance
of Revelation, for this man to represent it, as if I had applied it
indifferently to all Ages and Periods of the Church, by whatsoever positive
Laws and different Institutions they may be governed, is wonderfully suitable
to the Genius of his own Wit and Ingenuity. But though I think I have passed so
high a Complement upon his Majesty, this only Page 111.
troubles you, how his Majesty would look in all the Sacerdotal Habiliments,
and the Pontisical Wardrobe. Alas good man! Your tender heart would not serve
you to behold the Ceremonies of the Coronation. The Rebels Wounds bled too
fresh in your Memory, it would have rubbed up all the late sad spectacles at
Cheering-Cross, and minded you of all those choice ones that were hanged to
make way for this great Solemnity, for whose sakes the 29. of May is annually
observed among the secret ones as a day of private humiliation to bemoan the
loss and commemorate the Martyrdom of so many anointed and precious Brethren.
But as for the malicious Consequence, that you out of stark staring Love to the
Church (of which you are so enamored, that it even joys your Heart to hear any
thing well said of her) suggest upon this Occasion: that then he may (and it is
all the reason in the World he should) assume the Revenue too, it only shows
your Judgment at nicking a Lucky juncture of Affairs: When you have put the
King in mind of his Coronation Oath, in which he swears, to protect and defend
the Bishops and the Churches under their Government, to preserve their
Canonical Privileges, to confirm the Laws, Customs and Franchises granted to
the Clergy by the glorious King St. Edward, and all other Kings of England his
Lawful and Religious Predecessors: Immediately, whilst this Oath is piping
hot, to advise him to disfranchise them from the common rights of all Subjects,
and to invade their Proprieties not only contrary to his solemn Oath, but to
the most ancient and most ratified Laws of the Realm. But methinks it more
concerns the Parliament than any private man to chastise such bold and lavish
talk, as plainly subverts the very foundations of all our Proprieties; in that
the Churches Rights and Revenues are vested in her by as firm and fundamental
Laws as any by which you or I can hold or claim our Estates; so that the Laws
of England have made but a very silly provision for any man's Birthright, if
they are not a sufficient security for the Churches Patrimony. And it becomes
such a tender assertor of the English Liberties to insinuate the subversion of
those Laws upon which alone they are founded. I hope you will be considered for
your pains, at least for your good will: it is no wonder to see you upon all
occasions so afraid of Pillories and Whipping-Posts; for if you are resolved to
follow these courses, and at last go uncropt to your Grave, it will be a
scandal to the Justice of the Nation.

But before I quit this Master-Calumny of the unhoopable Magistrate it will not
be improper to take an account of your Hoops and Hola's that relate to it; for
when you have acted over your six Plays you begin them all afresh, (for you
have at least eleven or twelve distinct Beginnings) and run them (together with
some few coincident passages) all down with Hoops and Hola's, i. e. with noise
and confidence. The first next to these I have answered is that I have asserted
the unhoopable Power wherewith I have invested Princes to be their Natural
Right and Antecedent to Christ, etc. But oh Page 143.
the Consequence! then his Majesty may lay by his Dieu and make use only of his
Mon-droit. Hoop and Hola! hold, not too loud, for it does not so necessarily
follow, that because he has his Patent under the Broad-Seal of Nature, that
therefore he derived it not from God, for as much as Nature it self has no
power of making grants, but all its Commissions are signed only by the Author
of Nature, and all Natural Rights whatsoever are the Immediate Gifts of his
Providence, that has ordered and disposed the frame of Nature according to his
own Sovereign Will and Pleasure; and therefore you must resolve all Natural
Rights as well as all Natural Laws into his Authority, for though Nature may
discover, yet it is only he that passes and enacts them. But I know this
Inference was not made for any great opinion you had of its Logic, it was only
intended for a boast of your Antiquary-Learning, to let the World know how
deeply you skill in old Coins and Inscriptions; and so take this occasion to
acquaint us with this ancient Motto, that you have picked out among the Marmora
Arundeliana, Dieu and Mon-Droit. But seeing you are given to these Curiosities,
here is a Trial worthy of your skill. I have seen and (pardon my Vanity) was
once Master of an Antique Medal, On the Reverse whereof was graved
The alliance betwixt Christ and David.
Expound me the meaning of the Device, and tell me in what Emperors Reign it
was Coined, and I will upon the word of a Clergyman of Honor requite your
Information with ten of the largest Decus and Tutamens: and that is a very
scarce Medal (you know,) though not altogether so antique.

But however (say you) this Power I have ascribed to the Civil Magistrate, is
not derived from Christ, or any grant of Page 143.
his, but is antecedent to his coming, or any Power granted by him as Head of
the Church, being given under the Broad-Seal of Nature, so that his Majesty is
next under that, and immediately before Christ, over all Persons and in all
Causes etc. This is very shrewd, but then it is none of your own, J. O. had it
before you, and in truth you are so given to purloining, that I expect ere long
to hear of you among the Advertisements at the bottom of the Gazet, with a
description of your Stature, Complexion and Clothes. But the result of all that
we discoursed upon this point was that he said I, and I said no, because though
Magistrates Page 276.
were vested with an Ancient and Antecedent Right, yet its Continuance, ever
since our Savior commenced his Empire, depends merely upon his confirmation,
in that whatever Prince does not reverse a former grant confirms it. And
therefore, though they were empowered to govern the Church of God antecedent to
his Supremacy, yet that they are still instrusted with the same Authority, they
owe it entirely to his Sovereign Will and Pleasure, because it is now in his
Power to divest them of this or any other of their ancient Prerogatives: so
that seeing he has thought good to continue the Government of the World in the
same state and Posture he found it in, Princes are not now less indebted to him
for the grant of their Imperial Power, than if they had been at first instated
in it by his immediate and express Commission. This is a pretty reasonable
answer to any plain man that has any stomach to be satisfied, but it is too
homely a Truth for your Palate, nothing forsooth will down with you under the
Geneva race of Capons and Mathematical Similitudes. The straight Line continued
into a Circle! that is a Treat for a Gentleman that has Traveled and
understands the Orthodoxy of modern eating and drinking.

The last Essay of your shame-facedness (for it is a great symptom of Modesty
that you will not venture to be confident in any Objection for which you have
not some Authority; so that you dare not say one word that J. O. has not said
before you) is to stand in it that when J. O. affirmed that I confine the whole
work and duty of Conscience to the inward acts and persuasions of the mind, it
was no downright Lie. By this I perceive your whole family of the secret ones
are incurably addicted to leasing, and therefore as then I gave him the Lie, so
now without any farther Complement I give it you Sir. It is but a blunt and
Yeomanly Jest, and I must confess smells somewhat of Garlic and Onions, but it
may serve for once though it were only for variety; downright English is in
some Cases as good a Flower as the fairest Trope in Aristotle's Rhetoric. And
I still declare that though it is no extraordinary conceit, yet it is the best
and most proper Repartee, that my barren fancy is yet able to suggest to me
upon so rude an occasion. And tell me Sir, for I have already made my appeal,
that suppose it were your own case, that should any Person be so bold and
disingenuous as not only to pervert the meaning, and disturb the method of your
Book (I mean if you could write one with either) but fasten upon you assertions
equally false and wicked, without any Reference to Page or Section, and without
any imaginable foundation of his mistake, what other return would you vouchsafe
to such an unmannerly attempt than what I have made? If you would not return
the same, thanks to your Cowardice more than your Civility. And therefore as
for what you seem to threaten, that such a provocation must needs come to a
quarrel, fear not, there is no danger of Bloodshed: We that are no Brothers of
the Blade know how to put up harder and more girding Repartees than this with
Patience and Philosophy. This is all the answer I will vouchsafe you for your
own sake, and revenge your self as you can. But because both your self and J.
O. have this Rapper perpetually in your mouths when you have nothing else to
say, I will for the Readers sake bestow upon you another Reply somewhat more
soft and gentle, especially when I hope it was not altogether lost upon J. O.
because as you have Page 200.
observed most gravely and Senator-like that serious words have produced
serious effects. Thus when upon another occasion the tells no body but all the
Nation, that the thing by me asserted is that a man Page 252. of J. O.
may think, judge or conceive such or such a thing to be his Duty, and yet have
thereby no Obligation put upon him to perform it: for Conscience we are
informed has nothing to do beyond the inward thoughts of men's minds. In answer
to this it was inquired who gave in the Information, because the Informer
(whoever he is) would in some Courts of Justice have jeoparded something that
he would be loath to lose for so lewd and bold a Forgery. Phy! phy! for shame
give over this pitiful Legerdemain. Such open and visible falsifications serve
only to expose the lewdness of your Cause and your Conscience, and if you
delight in such wretched Practices they will in process of time betray you to
more pernicious Courses: for what should hinder a man that can pervert and
falsify at this rate, from forging Wills, and setting counterfeit Hands to
Deeds? Neither fear nor modesty can ever restrain him, that dares venture upon
abuses so palpable, when it is so absolutely impossible you should ever hope to
escape the shame and rebuke of discovery. The Assertion it self is one of the
chiefest and most fundamental Maxims of Knavery; and yet it is boldly charged
upon me without the least shadow or syllable of pretense, either to justify
the Accusation, or excuse the Mistake. You know as well as I that all I
attempted was only to exempt the inward Acts of the minds of men from the
Jurisdiction of Humane Power, and so to confine their Government to the Empire
of mere Conscience: Now from this assertion, that our secret thoughts are
subject to Conscience only, to infer that Conscience has no Power but only over
our secret thoughts, is a conclusion too absurd for you to make either in good
earnest or through mere mistake. This is your Answer, if you are not satisfied
with it, you know my mind and my weapon.

Your last and lowdest hoop and hola is at my Censure of the Clause in the Act
of Parliament quinto Eliz. and you make every where an horrid noise about it,
and I am consident you have in more than twenty places of your Book rended your
throat against this presumption. But be that as it will, the aspersion you
would fasten upon me from it is so silly, that I am not at all concerned to
wipe it off; however I have discoursed enough already to satisfy, nay almost
to surfeit any reasonable man, and if that will not suffice you, I am resolved
I will not be impertinent to gratify your Clownishness. I will only challenge
you and all your party of mankind to maintain That whoever enacts a Law with
this Proviso that it shall not bind in Conscience, enacts no Law: For if it
does not oblige that, it obliges nothing. Whether therefore the Clause were
added by Cecil or by the Parliament, I am not concerned, and though you should
throw in the Queen and Convocation and all, I care not, I must and will declare
they were all miserably out in their Divinity.

And as for what you intimate that I have endeavored to prove a whole
Parliament Coxcombs, that is Language rough enough for your Mouth. For I
expressed my self modestly enough, and though I observed how manifestly through
this mistake they abated the obligation of the whole Law, yet I hope it is no
Crime against the Privilege of any Protestant Parliament to suppose it fallible
in any speculation of Divinity. I know their meaning was, that they did not
intend to enjoin that Fast upon a Religious Account, but that was their
Mistake, in that all Laws Civil as well as Ecclesiastical equally oblige the
Conscience, so that no Lawgiver can make a Law with an intention not to oblige
that, and though he do, it is in vain, in that his Laws are bound upon it by
virtue of the Divine Command and not his own. But they were then so amused and
confounded by the Clamours of the Papists on one hand, that Conscience was only
subject to the Church, and by the Puritans on the other, that it is only
subject to God, that they durst scarce own the proper Obligation of their own
Laws, and so through mere Modesty clapped in this blind Proviso.

And now as for all these goodly slanders, when they were first vented by J. O.
they were little more than an unkindness to my single self; and though it
argued a fair deal of Considence in that precious man, to load me so briskly
with so many, so great, and so ungrounded Calumnies, yet it was a sign that he
had some little sense of humanity left, that he could desist when his forgeries
were so laid open, as to leave the Rat no Craney of excuse or evasion. But
after such an ample discovery of his wretched Cheats and Leasings, for you to
stand in them with such a Brazen Brow is a palpable Affront both to the
understanding and ingenuity of Mankind. What soft and changeling sots must you
suppose the people of England, to be imposed upon, and born down by such wrank
and bold faced Impostures? Did they all walk with their Legs scambling in, and
their hands dangling down, you could not have more presumed upon their
silliness than you have by going about to abuse their Credulity with such
shameless and unpalliable Lies.

The Title of your next Comedy is the Public Conscience, I suppose in
imitation of the Public Faith. And here all your Plot too is borrowed from J.
O. and the great subtilty of it lies no deeper than only in representing what I
have determined in the Case of a doubting, scrupulous and unsatisfied
Conscience, as if I had intended it of Conscience in general in all matters and
as to all events. This is pretty well for Legerdemain, and cleaverly enough
performed, and the People have swallowed it with a glib and round Assurance
that I have exhorted them to disgorge their Consciences instead of their
Scruples, and to renounce all Obligations of Virtue and Religion but what are
tied upon them by the Laws of the Commonwealth, and to know no other Rule or
Measure of their Duty, but the will and Pleasure of their Prince, and when once
the outcry is taken, it is to no purpose for me to plead that this is the very
Divinity of the Leviathan, that I have labored to oppose with greater Zeal and
Vehemence than I have modern Orthodoxy and Fanaticism it self; so as to prove
(and that I am confident past all Contradiction) that those men who profess to
own no obligations of Conscience but what are laid upon them by the Commands of
their Governors, own none at all; and that without a sense of Duty to God, it
is impossible to bring any subject under a sense of Loyalty to his Prince. But
whoop and hola, what is that to them if I contradict my self? Now what should a
modest man do in this case? should I betake my self to your refuge of Dullness,
that when you have nothing else to reply, appeal to the day of Judgment? That
indeed is a Trial I hope hereafter to stand by, and it is comfort enough to
support an upright man, that then at least his integrity shall be for ever
cleared; but alas! I have too tender a sense of my present Reputation among
good men to be willing that so great a Blot (were there any way to wipe it off)
should lie so long upon my Innocence. And therefore Sir, you must pardon me for
once if I dispense with a point of friendship, and leave your credit at pawn to
redeem my own. For after you have given in this heinous Charge against me, it
is not in my power to salve both our Reputations. If I am guilty, I do confess
it, I am a very Secret one: if I am not, I will be so civil as to give you the
Choice of your own Title.

The case then is plainly this, that next to the Paganism of Symbolical and the
Popery of Latin Ceremonies, the two grand Pretenses, or rather excuses of
Nonconformity are Scandal and an unsatisfied Conscience. The first is the
shelter of their Leaders, who being at length ashamed of those Scruples, and
little Principles that scare the People (though they themselves at first set
them up to fray them away from the Communion of the Church of England) pretend
now to comply with them only out of good Nature and Condescension. For they
would not by any means be thought so weak and unlearned in their Conceptions of
things, as seriously to fancy that there is any Idolatry or Immorality in our
Ceremonial Constitutions. But yet because there are some simple and
well-meaning Professors that are not sufficiently assured of their Lawfulness,
and by Consequence are apt enough to be scandalized at their Use, they think
themselves out of pure tenderness and compassion to these weak ones obliged
altogether to forbear their Practice. A goodly pretense this to weigh against
the Commands of Authority, that because some of the common People forsooth of
weak heads and strong necks are afraid of something though they know not what
nor why, that therefore Government must tack about, and strike sail to their
folly and ignorance. But the triflingness and petulancy of this Scruple I have
represented upon its own proper Principles; it is enough at present that it
resolves it self into the pretense of a scrupulous and unsatisfied Conscience;
i. e. though as yet they know no harm or danger by the things they boggle at,
yet they are suspicious and jealous lest they should not be altogether so
harmless as they appear to be, and therefore desire to be for a while excused
their Obedience till they can give themselves and their Consciences some better
and more assured satisfaction of their Innocence. Now would not any prudent and
sober man think it enough to advise them in this perplexity, that this Scruple
has long since out-worn and outlived it self; for though it might be allowed
of in the days of Queen Elizabeth, when at first it was started, yet after so
long time and so much enquiry it is intolerable; for if with all their search
and examination they have not been able to descry the Evils they suspected,
that is a sufficient Principle of presumption that their jealousies are
ungrounded. So that if they are now able to object any certain crime against
them, then this plea of a doubtful Conscience ceases, and the certainty is to
be pleaded instead of the doubt. If they are not, an hundred and fifty Years is
(one would think) a sufficient time either to satisfy or to cancel Scruples. A
man cannot (if he would) always doubt whether if he handle a Frog, it will
sting him, or if he touch the tail of a Glowworm it will burn his Fingers. And
if after all this men will be scrupulous and afraid of nothing or they know not
what, it is because they will be old Boys, and resolve when they have once
blown a soap-bubble, to pursue and keep it up as long as they have breath to
follow it. So that it is infinitely unbecoming Authority to submit its Laws to
such an exception as this, that can proceed from nothing else but invincible
Peevishness and Impertinency.

But if this will not prevail, what can be more effectual upon ingenuous and
upright minds than to represent that this weakness and tenderness of Conscience
is so far from being any allowable Reason of disobedience, that it lays upon
all them that pretend to it peculiar obligations to obey. Not only because (if
they are what they pretend to be) it is of a modest, a yielding and a pliable
temper as arising from diffidence and distrust of it self: but also because
doubts and scruples are rarely employed unless upon trifling and inconsiderable
matters. In that the material parts of duty are too plain and easy to be
almost at all liable to so much uncertainty; and therefore obedience to
Authority being withal one of the greatest and most indispensable dutys of
mankind, in that it is in it self so absolutely necessary to their well-being,
and enjoined upon them by the most positive Precepts and severest penalties of
the Gospel, that alone is more than enough to outweigh all scruples and
determine all doubts of Conscience. But more especially in doubtful Cases of a
public Concern, it is not fit that men should be suffered to talk too
peremptorily of their own private persuasions, because they are incompetent
Judges of the public good, and therefore they are to be determined and
overruled by the Judgment of those, to whose care the management of public
affairs is entrusted, and this to prevail universally and without exception,
unless in case of certain and unquestionable disobedience to the Divine Law;
for we are no other way free from the supreme Authority on earth, but as we are
subject to a Superior in Heaven, so that unless where our duty to God
manifestly interferes, there is no other plea of exemption against the Commands
of Government. So vain a thing is it for doubts and scruples, fears and
jealousies to be put in bar against them, when the result of all that can
amount to no more than this, that they refuse obedience because they dare not
obey, and they dare not, because they dare not, for as yet they have no reason
to produce, and only desire to be born with till they can find one, and when
after so long a search there is none to be found, still and still they crave
leave to be satisfied till they can, i. e. for ever. This is the plain account
of all that I discoursed of the public Conscience.

And now to represent what I have determined concerning the submission of
private Conscience to its guidance in doubtful and difficult cases of a public
concernment, as if I had affirmed it of conscience in general, in all cases,
and to all purposes, is such a strein of kindness and ingenuity! -- That face
of thine is of so good proof, and so true metal, that were it upon my
shoulders, I would not exchange it for any crowned head in Christendom: I would
stare with the great Turk for all his dominions, and though the great Cham
boasts himself the Lamp of the world, and son of the everlasting Son, I would
look him out of all his Conquests of China.

But here you thicken your plot upon us, and under this scene of public
conscience you bring Christian Liberty upon the stage, and are all upon the
sudden so civil as to make your Leg, and con me page 113.
thanks for this new and important discovery that the great Privilege of
Christian Liberty is, that Thought is free. This I know you intended only for
wit, but that is your want of Judgment; for, I will assure you it is a very
serious truth, and a very important discovery, and you had been a very
ungrateful Wretch had you not acknowledged it: all the misfortune is, that it
is neither new nor mine. Pay your acknowledgments to its right Authors; and be
not so partial to your friend as to entitle him to the honor of other-mens
inventions. That such a master of Systems and Syntagms! that one so well
acquainted with Germany and Geneva should ever suppose me the first inventor of
so old a discovery! Alas poor wretch! it is the known and received doctrine of
all Divines whether ancient or orthodox, the first that taught it (as I
remember) were S. Paul and S. Peter, and your great and infallible John Calvin
has not been able to go beyond them in this, though he has in most other
Articles of Religion. Freedom of thought was the utmost that he could discover
upon this Argument. And no man was ever suspected to think otherwise, but only
the Gnostick Fanatics of old, and the German Anabaptists of late, that
whenever occasion was pleased to be debonair, had this pretense always in ready
pay to warrant any Rebellion and disobedience. But at length from them our
English Puritans got the word into their mouths, and then it might signify any
thing as it happened to chime to their purposes. Sometimes it was the same thing
with the Liberty of the Subject, when they pleaded it for an Exemption from all
Ecclesiastical Impositions. And sometimes it was nothing else but the Liberty
of Contradiction, when they will have it that whatever the Magistrate commands
in matters of Religion, though before they were free to do it, yet for ever
after they are bound to do the contrary. Sometimes it is this, and sometimes it
is that, and sometimes they know not what, for never did any generation of men
so shuffle and prevaricate with themselves and the world at the rate that these
men have done in this pretense; and no wonder, for every cause must be defended
as it can, and if when they once fall into an absurdity, they will think
themselves obliged to justify it, the more they contend to get off, the more
they vex and entangle themselves. But however this mystery of Libertinism is so
easy a cover, and so fruitful a Nursery for all manner of Treasons and
Seditions, that it highly concerns all Christian Princes not to suffer any of
their Subjects to stretch its Plea any farther than the Apostles intended it.
For it is very observable with what zeal and caution they bestirred themselves
in all their writings to confine it within its proper limits, that it might not
be extended (as the Gnostics would have had it) to the prejudice of
Government. So that from them we must take the only certain account of its
nature and notion, especially when beside their care to state it, they were the
first Founders both of the name and thing. Now it is undeniable, that the
controversy that was managed about it between the Jews and the Christians in
their days concerned only the eternal obligation of the Law of Moses, which the
Jews supposed unalterably established to all ages, whilst the Christians
thought it not only capable of a Repeal, but to have been actually abolished by
the Christian Religion. And though the Apostles might and did suffer them for
some time to conform to the practices of their sturdy Countrymen for ends of
prudence, yet they would never be brought to do it upon the account of the
Mosaic Law; and if at any time they condescended to humor them in their old
customs, they still protested against the opinion of their necessity. So that
their Christian Liberty plainly consisted in nothing else but the rescuing of
their minds from the obligatory force of Moses's Law, that was tied upon them
by Divine Authority in the Old Testament, and rescinded by the same in the New.
And therefore it can relate only to the freedom of men's minds, and thoughts;
and that too only in such cases, wherein the immediate Authority of God is, or
may be pretended. This then is so far from being any invention of mine, that it
was a trite and vulgar notion in the Apostles days. And now I hope you see that
you are as far to seek in my trade of Divinity, as I am in yours of Buffoonry.
We are all bunglers out of our own Profession; but you will be snearing at
every thing, though it be only to betray your ignorance, and show your want of
teeth.

The Hypothesis of the third play is moral Grace. Yes, so it is, and I will
maintain it is as pure terse Orthodoxy as any grows upon the banks of the
Lakelemane. What, would you have an immoral Grace? I see you are still for the
old Grace of the secret ones, a Grace that is invisible to all the world beside
your selves; a Grace that can maintain it self upon plunder and sequestration;
a Grace of which we formalists and moral men, that are strangers to the secret,
could never perceive any other effects beside Confidence and Knavery. This is
the Grace you would be at, to show your zeal for the Lord and against
Antichrist by preying upon Kings and Bishops Lands. It is the Grace of Beggars
and Bankrupts, that have the face to look demurely, and amuse us with talk of
their intimate Communion with God, whilst their fingers are in our Pockets, and
their Daggers at our Throats. We have seen and felt so much of the goodly
Pranks of this your Grace already, that you have no great reason to blame us,
if we are a little concerned to get Morality joined in commission with it. But
this same Morality is an arrant Cavalier, and would quite defeat the Act of
Indemnity. It is so unkind and so unmerciful to Gods People, that it would
force them to refund all their Plunder and Sacrilege; It is so severe as not
to accept of any pretenses, or offers, or compositions of Repentance upon any
milder terms than of entire Restitution; and (oh more than Church-mens Cruelty)
it would even after an Act of Oblivion require them to undo themselves, before
it would so much as allow them to sue out their Pardon.

But Sir, how come you to be concerned either in Grace or Morality, but that it
is the nature of some Vermin to be nibling though they have no Teeth. What if
I have confounded them, what have you to say against it? Why! you need say
nothing at all, because 1. I my self Page 118.
have discoursed it large enough even to surfeit. I easily believe you, for
what I have discoursed is more than enough to make any man that will or can
understand sense to disgorge all your fanatic Nonsense. But 2. If Grace be
resolved into Page 117.
Morality, I think a man may almost as well make God too to be only a notional
and moral Existence. Indeed now! do you think so in good earnest? Is this an
inference for a man to make that talks of nothing under Divarications,
Dilemma's and Mathematical Simile's? That thou should make thy self so
pleasant, i. e. (in Bays his sense) so ridiculous to no purpose! This is mere
and witless Impertinence, the Prentice-Boys shake their heads at this idle
talk, and there is no professing she so silly as not to understand the dullness
of this Consequence; this Logic is below the apprehension even of the Blew
Apron-strings. But 3. White Apron'd Amaryllis was of the same Opinion. Ibid.
The honester she. 4. If the Archbishopric should ever fall to my Lot, you
are resolved instead of his Grace, to call me always his Morality. I thank you
Sir, it is a much more civil and cleanly Title than his Belzebubship of
Kanterbury, which yet was the softest word your meek-spirited Puritans could in
the days of your Predecessor Martin afford to that pious and humble man
Archbishop Whitgift. But you may set your mind at rest, I have no such
vehement design upon the Archbishopric as you imagine; and if I had, I would
not care how you loaded me with all the filthy and dirty Language that your
Party has vomited out against the Church of England; though out of their
Pamphlets you may furnish your self with more Flowers and Embellishments of
your own eloquence than are to be gathered out of all the Libells in the World
beside. His Grace, and his Morality! a surprising Conceit this! it is lovely
worth a whole Tester in English. And seeing you have still a faculty and (they
tell me) once had an employment that way, I would give you more than it is
worth, or perhaps your self either, to translate or transprose it into Latin:
It is pity but so quaint a fancy should be preserved in the Universal Tongue.
And now (as you inform us) Clementia is the Latin word for his Grace. And then
the Crisis of the Wit would lie thus: If Grace be Morality, then instead of
calling the Archbishop his Clemency, I would call him his Morality. But then
no foreign Critic would ever be able to pick out where lay the Picquancy of
the Conceit; and yet that the Learned affirm is the most certain Symptom of a
Quibble, when the jest cannot live in another Language. But if this be no more
than a Quibble, the next and last remarque is Page 322.
scarce so much as a Semi-quibble. 6. Methought I never saw a more bold and
wicked attempt, than that of reducing Grace, and making it a mere Fable, of
which he gives us the Moral. Sure, your Muse pinched you for this Conceit. Bays
talk of elevating and surprising! an impudent Fop! no mortal man could ever
have luckt upon this feat fancy beside thy self. It is the very Non ultra of
Spirit and Flame. I will warrant it thine own, Virgin-new, and never yet blown
upon by Mankind. Take no farther care, it shall be inscribed upon thy Tomb;
thou art its undoubted Author, and no man will ever be so presumptuous as to
rob thy Ghost of the Glory of its invention. Make Grace a mere Fable, and then
give us its Moral! Hold, you either juggle or conjure; I thought I had fast
hold of the Jest, and yet when I open my hand it is quite vanished, and there is
nothing left behind but a gross and palpable mistake. For I never in the least
attempted to make Grace the Fable (there is not the least syllable to that
purpose in all my Books) you your self know I only made it the moral, so that
at last it plainly appears, that though I have given the moral of Grace, it is
only you and your party of modern Orthodox, that have turned it into a Fable.
And so in truth you must, if you will make it any thing beside Morality; for if
it be not that, it can be nothing else but cheat and enthusiasm. And therefore,
to be serious, do we not write to very great purpose, when such whifling tools
as you are able to defeat our most rational discourses by squirting at them
with such trifles as these. I have asserted (and I still believe it to be
undoubtedly true) that there is no real difference between Grace and moral
Virtue, and I have proved it by a particular Induction of all the most material
duties of Mankind, and have reduced all the Branches of Christian Religion
either to the Virtues or the Instruments of Morality; have shown that they are
but different names of the same thing, and that they are nothing else than
moral Virtues that are called Graces in the Gospel, because they are wrought in
us by the assistance of Gods free Grace and goodness. I have challenged them to
produce any ancient Writer that gives any other account of them than what I
have done. I have appealed once and again to their own Understandings, that
when they have set aside all manner of Virtue, they would tell me what distinct
duty remains to be called Grace, and give me any notion of it different from
all morality. If they can, they are more abstracting and subtle Metaphysicians
than J. O. that has in a large Volume described that distinct Communion that
every Believer is sensible of in every Act of Worship with each distinct Person
of the Blessed Trinity. And now (by the way) because I have smiled at the
ridiculousness of this Attempt, you (according to the custom of your Ingenuity)
charge me confidently, as if I had blasphemed the Mystery it self. But this (I
have already told you) is no fouler Play than you have ever shown to all
Adversaries; for whoever is so hardy or so unadvised as to correct any of your
wild and crazy triflings in any Article of Faith, is immediately traduced as if
he had rejected the Article it self. It were very easy (were it not tedious
too) to give you a large Catalogue of the worthiest men of our Church, that you
have from time to time branded with rake-shame names. But I suppose it will be
caution enough to all Prudent men, not to give too easy credit to our
malicious suggestions, when Mr. Hooker (whom one would have thought no body
could suspect either of Heresy or Infidelity) was immediately upon the
Publication of his Eccles. Pol. taken to task by a Smectymnuan Club of your
Orthodox Divines, for broaching such Doctrines as overthrew the foundations of
the Christian Religion, and the Church of England. But this I must pass by with
a Thousand more of your friendly and Candid bobs, because they are too trifling
to need or to deserve an answer. And therefore to keep close to our present
debate of Grace and Virtue, the argument it self is so plain and obvious that
it carries along with it its own Evidence and Conviction. In so much that J. O.
himself, notwithstanding all his Zeal and Reluctance, is at length forced Def.
Page 335.
over to my side of the Question (as you know where I have charged it upon him)
Truth and Innoc. vindic. Page 104.
for as much as all the difference he himself is able to assign between Grace
and Virtue relates not to the nature of the things themselves, but to the
Principles from whence they issue, viz. that the same Instances and Duties of
Moral goodness, that are called Virtues when they proceed from the strength and
emprovement of our own natural abilities, are called Graces when they proceed
from the Assistances and Impressions of the spirit of God: so that even in his
account Grace is nothing but infused Virtue, and infused Virtue is Virtue
still. I am not apt to be over-positive in my own Conceptions of things, yet in
this Article I must crave and will take leave to be peremptory and confident,
because I am seriously persuaded that as Religion has been of late trifled with
among us, great Numbers of well-meaning People have merely through this mistake
been abused both out of the Notion and the Practice of all real goodness. And
my heart even bleeds to consider how woefully they have by this means been
gulled with rank Nonsense and Imposture. For whilst their gracious Preachers
work their Lungs, and water their Handkerchiefs to decry Moral Righteousness as
a thing not only useless but dangerous if void of Grace, and therefore drive
them on with furious Exhortations above all things to get this secret of Grace;
if any of them chance to enquire what it is, and wherein it consists, they are
forced to amuse them with abundance of general talk in Scripture Phrase of an
uncertain i. e. no signification. And presently they begin to make a grievous
noise of the Lord Christ, talk loud of getting an interest in the Lord Christ;
tell fine Romances of the secret amors between the Believing Soul and the Lord
Christ, and prodigious stories of the miraculous feats of Faith in the Lord
Christ; all which, and infinite Loads more of the like crude stuff, that they
are perpetually pouring forth upon them, is at last no better than mere
gibberish; they are perfect Barbarians to the People, and prophecy in an
unknown Tongue; they gaze at the Mystery, and perhaps lay up the Phrase, but
yet understand its meaning no more than if they had discoused to them in
Chinese or High Dutch. Now the unavoidable consequence of this way of trifling
is to betray the People into Enthusiastic and giddy conceits of Religion; it
fills their heads full of something, they know not what; and this heats their
Fancies, and sets their Brains awork, and makes them talkative and impertinent;
and then they abound and overflow with Mystery and Nonsense, and the whole
neighborhood is annoyed with the Rattle of their Phrases, and canting Noise.
But that which is worst of all is, that if once men fall into this Crazedness
of mind, as there is little hopes of their recovery, so there is no end of
their Frenzy. Nonsense and Enthusiasm are unbounded things, and they seldom
stop till they run stark mad with zeal and reformation. It Is the natural humor
of this sort of people to dislike, and (if they are able) to subvert all
established order for something else that they would have, though they know not
what; for what can restrain mad men from railing at their Keepers and
Governors, and what more grievous to Enthusiasts than sober discipline?
because that fetters them up from those outrages, that they are eager to act
upon themselves and the public. But to spare these political considerations,
it is enough and too much that this mistake has this sad effect, that it
forestalls all the real obligations of Religion, and gives men up to the
invincible delusions of hypocrisy and false godliness. They are possessed with
a confident persuasion of their own Grace and Saintship, and thereby they are
already endeared unto God and engrafted into Christ, and then this unavoidably
stifles all thoughts of change or amendment, because their conversion is past
already: so easy is it through this mistake for the common people to abuse
themselves into a strong opinion of their being ensured in the state of Grace,
when they are upon terms of utter defyance to all the practices and obligations
of Religion. And hence is it usual with them to style some of the grossest
enormities of vice by the civil title of sins of infirmity and such as are the
peculiar spots of Gods own people. For if they can but once find or fancy in
themselves those characters of Grace that they are told are the marks of Gods
secret ones, they roundly conclude all their accursed Lusts and Vices to be
rather weaknesses of their natures, than obliquities of their wills. And then
they take the measures of good and evil, not from the nature of actions, but
from the conditions of persons, and with them an action is not thought gracious
so much because it is agreeable to the Law of God, as because it issues from a
child of God. So that if a man be once in a state of Grace, all his sins are
presently turned into infirmities; and what is a crying sin in other men, is in
them at worst but a pitiable weakness, and vice in the people of God ceases to
be vice suitably to the doctrine of the Stoics of old, (for they too had found
out an odd kind of Wisdom, much like this secret of Grace, peculiar to their
own Sect, that no body could understand beside themselves, and that was
reconcilable to all the folly in the world,) (...), that a sage or a long
beard of their Sect might indeed be soundly overcome with wine, but could never
be properly drunk. Though to be overcome with wine were downright drunkenness
in a carnal Epicurean, yet it was only to be full of the Creature in a grave
Stoic. To be adopted into their Sect and Conventicle, was enough to enchant a
man against all the powers of Wine, in spite of all the debauchery and
intemperance in the world. And thus is it with these men, they list themselves
into some party and faction of Saints, in which after they have been for some
time trained and exercised, and are prettily well skilled in the arts of their
own way of godliness, and thereby secured of their interest in the love of God,
which if once they can get, they can never lose; upon this presumption how
smoothly and contentedly do they slide into an habitual commission of those
sins, to which their natural propensities, or their worldly interests most
incline them. And they protect all their lusts and passions under the privilege
of Grace, and by wearing the Livery of Gods people.

And what is still more fatal, they do not only excuse and dispense with their
rank and froward passions upon the score of their imaginary Grace and
Saintship, but they adopt them among the choicest virtues of their Religion.
They will be angry and spiteful for the Glory of God, i. e. to gratify their
own fancy; rude and malicious against all that are enemies to the godly, or
(what to them is the same) their own party; and they may and ought to hate
their brother, if he hate the power of godliness, i. e. if he loath and despise
their way of hypocrisy. And when they have thus consecrated their passions by
separating them to religious Uses, they are so far from cooling or allaying
their unreasonable and brutish heats, that they think nothing more their duty
than to feed and cherish them; till they blow up the sparks of zeal into
glorious blazes of Reformation, i. e. into public Combustions. And thus when
their Religion is nothing but zeal, and their zeal nothing but an heated rage,
it is so far from controuling their passions, that it not only justifies, but
causes their excesses, and instead of sweetning their humors, it tinges them
with malice and malecontentedness. It Is made a Sanctuary for ill nature and
ill-manners, where they not only shelter, but abett their pride and insolence.
Those vices that mere moral Philosophy would banish humane conversation take
shelter under the protection of zeal; and those heats that bare reason would
quench in humane nature are kindled at the Altars of Religion; and they usually
nourish this glowing coal in their bosoms till it burn out all their bowels of
natural pity and compassion. This is enough, but yet it is not all; for as
their zeal is implacably fierce and bitter against all that oppose them, so is
it salvagely rude and censorious against all that are not as extravagantly mad
and raving as themselves, aspersing men of a silent and composed piety with the
odious names of hypocrites and Lukewarm Formalists, and abhorring nothing more
than the virtues of Christian meekness and discretion. But if this be Religion,
then farewell all principles of humanity and good nature, farewell that glory of
Christianity an universal love and tenderness to mankind, let us bid adieu to
all the practices of charity, let us renounce all pretenses to the meekness and
innocence of a Christian Spirit. Let our B. Savior be branded as the greatest
Incendiary in the world, let his Laws be cancelled as arts and precepts of
Sedition, let us banish Religion humane converse as the mother of all rudeness
and incivility, and let us at last go to the school of Atheism and Impiety to
learn good manners. And yet all this is the unavoidable event of fixing peoples
care and zeal upon this imaginary godliness, called Grace as distinguished from
all morality or the obligations of natural Religion, in that whilst their
minds are busied and satisfied with this fantastic nothing, it appeases their
Consciences in the neglect of their useful and material duties, and prevents
all endeavors of possessing them with serious and effectual Resolutions of
virtue and true goodness. I must beg your pardon if I have discoursed too
warmly and copiously upon this Theme; it is you see of very weighty Consequence
both to the welfare of mankind here, and their eternal salvation hereafter, and
upon this mistake merely are founded all Abuses and Impostures of Religion
whatsoever, viz. when men fancy it to be some secret they know not what; and
therefore I here declare that I still adhere to my opinion with the seriousness
of a dying man, and that I shall be content to stand or fall for ever by my
integrity in this belief. But what can we think of you? must you not be deeply
concerned in a matter of such sad and serious importance, to whiff it all away
with so childish a conceit as this, that this is first to turn Grace into a
mere fable, and then to give the moral of it. At least must we not suppose you
profoundly learned, to be so very fond of such a poor crawling fancy, that were
it not ridiculous for its sense, would be unpardonable for its wit, and yet you
are so highly opinion'd of it, that you have reserved it for the disert of your
book, and serve it in for the last jest, to give a farewell to the whole
entertainment. One pregnant conceit I had almost overpass'd in have, give me
but leave to record it, and I have done, viz. that I have made the passage to
Heaven page 76.
so easy, that one may fly thither without Grace, as Gonzales to the Moon,
only by the help of his Ganzas. Now I would fain know what likeness there is
between flying without Grace and with Ganzas; do but make me out the wit of the
similitude, and I will cast you in the sense of the argument into the bargain.

The Plot or Hypothesis of the fourth page 119.
Play is debauchery tolerated. That is to say, I have in some of my Books
represented his Majesty this Declaration to issue out to all his Loving
Subjects, for the toleration of debauchery, in opposition to that of the
fifteenth of March for the indulgence of tender consciences. Whereas ever since
our happy Restoration, we have, out of our special zeal and care for the
interest and security of the Church of England, executed with all severity all
penal Laws against whatsoever sort of Non-conformists and Recusants; but yet
finding by the sad experience of 12 years, how ineffectual all forcible courses
are either to reduce or restrain dissenters, We think our self obliged to make
use of that unhoopable Power, that is naturally inherent in us, not granted by
Christ, but belonging to us and our Predecessors under the broad Seal of Nature
next and immediately before him. By virtue whereof we have and claim an
absolute dominion not only over the consciences of all our subjects, but over
all the Laws of God and man, so as to repeal or dispense with their obligation,
as shall from time to time seem good to our Royal Will and Pleasure. And
therefore that we may obviate and prevent those mischiefs that are likely to
befall our Kingdom from the sobriety and demureness of the Non-conformists, our
Will and Pleasure is to give a free and uncontrollable License to all manner of
vice and debauchery; and of our Princely Grace and Favor we release to all our
Loving Subjects the obligation of the ten Commandments, and all Laws of God,
and Statutes of this Realm whatsoever contrary to the contents of this our
Declaration: And we require of all Judges, Justices and other Officers
whatsoever, that the execution of all manner of penalties, annexed to the Laws
aforesaid, whether by Pillories, Whipping-posts, Galleys, rods or axes, etc. be
immediately suspended, and they are hereby suspended. From whence we hope by
the Blessing of God to give some check and allay to the insolence of fanatic
Spirits, and by debauching our good people out of all tenderness of Conscience
to free our Kingdoms from those great and grievous annoyances, wherewith they
perpetually disturb our Government, and at last bring back all the advantages
of peace and good-fellowship, both to our Self and all our loving Subjects,
etc. Such a Declaration as this had been a stabbing proof against me and home
to your purpose. But when you have exhibited so foul a charge without so much
as referring to any passage of mine to make it good, you prove nothing at all
but that you have a bold face and a foul mouth. For we all know you are not so
unskilful at improving the smallest and most inconsiderable advantages, that
had you been furnished with any shadow of proof, you would have smothered it;
and therefore when you have produced none, your Readers easily conclude that
the only reason is, because you know none. Yes! but however I have said as much
as amounts to the same reckoning. But what have you to do with my reckonings,
mind your own accounts, and take care to balance your expenses with your
incoms. Assure your self, I shall never trust you to be any of my Auditors, for
I find you are as ignorant in Computation as in Logic. But yet that which
amounts to this sum is this, that it is less hazardous to Government to give
toleration to men's debaucheries, than to their religious persuasions; and
therefore debauchery is to be tolerated. A fair reckoning! But what this
amounts to I have already accounted largely enough to J. O. And if you are not
satisfied, that concerns not me, I will not trifle because you are peevish; I
have both computed and proved it at large in my answer to him, from p. 678. to
p. 697. If you or he or any body else have ought to object against it, you know
the Press is open, do your worst, it defies all your Forces; but as you value
your own credit hereafter cease to trouble me and the world with such silly and
childish surmises. But to be short, the sumn of all that can or need be
determined upon this argument is, that offenses are punishable by humane Laws,
not according to the degrees of their intrinsic evil, but according to the
malignity of their influence upon the public Weal. So that those offenses that
are of most dangerous consequence to the welfare of the Community, usually are
or ought to be provided against with severer penalties, and punished with more
rigorous executions. From hence it is evident, that it concerns Government to
keep a more watchful eye, and to hold a stricter hand over the freaks of
Enthusiasm, than the exorbitances of Debauchery. Because though Debauchery
always may, and often does its share of mischief wherever it prevails, yet it
rarely proves so dangerous, as either serious or affected pretenses of
Religion. For as much as this is the most necessary and most plausible disguise
of all Rebellion. And therefore if men are not in good earnest, this is the
fittest mask under which Malcontents and ambitious minds can hide their crafty
and disloyal designs: If they are, then they are always so much the more bold
and confident in their disobedience, and pursue their seditious courses with
greater courage and assurance of mind, than those that are conscious to
themselves of their hypocrisy and disloyalty. But the main mischief of all is,
that in all Seditions under color of Religion there is always an unhappy
mixture of both these sorts of people; the crafty knaves drive on the zealous
fools, and they never want for trinkling Maxims to wheedle them out of all duty
of Loyalty and Allegiance; and if they do but beat the Drum, or blow the
Trumpet to Reformation, they will do or venture any thing for the Cause. So
that it is plain enough that Fanaticism is very often more dangerous to the
peace of Government, than downright debauchery: which as mischievous as it is
can never proceed to any more daring wickedness, but under this fair and
deceitful Vizor. And this is so notorious that it is almost a shame to appeal
to the experience of mankind to make out its proof; when there have been so few
if any Rebellions in Christendom that have not been commenced, or at least
maintained by factions of Religion. And as for what you affirm (confidently
enough) that it is demonstrable that for one war upon a Fanatic or religious
account, there have been an hundred occasioned by the Thirst and Glory of
Empire, that has inflamed some great Prince to invade his neighbor; Were it
true, it is lamentably impertinent and like your self. For the only wars that
do or can concern our present debate are Rebellions and not Invasions. That
being the only argument I all along chose to insist upon, to represent how much
it imports the peace and security of Government to prevent all religious
contentions. Because they are either the Causes or rather the Covers of all
Rebellion: But you add immediately and it is done like a man of Algebra: That
more yet have sprung from the Contentiousness and ambition of some of the
Clergy. And yet you know the Cause or at least the Pretense of Religion is the
main ground of all their ambitious Contentions; so that they very rarely
involve their Country in a Civil War, but upon a Religious Account. But yet
because it is possible they may be pragmatical upon other scores, I will deduct
all out of this additional number but one, and then thus your reckoning casts
up it self, That for one war upon a Religious Account there have been an
hundred occasioned by the thirst of Glory and Empire, but more, that is at
least an hundred and one, by the Ambition and Contentiousness of Clergymen;
and now lay all this together, and the resolution of the Problem is, That for
one war upon a religious account, there have been an hundred and one upon a
religious account. But (you proceed) however Page
comparisons of vice are dangerous. It is a venerable Sentence and worthy the
wisdom of a Senator, and I should have supposed it entirely your own, but that
it jumps so exactly with as wise a Paradox of the old Stoics, that all Crimes
are equal; so that it is as heinous a wickedness to kill a Robin-red-breast, as
to murder ones Father or betray ones Country; and therefore they were wont to
be very angry if any man would be making comparisons between vice and vice,
though he did it but in jest and waggery. But as for all other Sects of learned
men, whether Moralists or Divines, they unanimously allow the degrees of
wickedness, and are so far from thinking these comparisons always odious, that
they often think them necessary. And certainly there can be very little harm or
danger in teaching children that it is not altogether so naughty a thing to
cheat one another at Push-pin as it is to pilfer half-crowns out of the
Shop-box. But the great mischief of all would be; that if a greater severity
(as Page 119.
I teach) ought sometimes to be exercised over men's Consciences, than over
their vices and immoralities, debauched persons will be ready hence to
conclude, although it be a perverse way of reasoning, that when the severity
ought to be less, the Crime is less also. But can I help the perverseness of
mankind, when it is in their power to draw any thing out of any thing in the
perverse way of reasoning? Name me if you can any one Assertion never so true
or so harmless from whence perverse men may not force perverse Conclusions.
Thus when I affirmed the Sovereign Power in Church Matters to be so absolute,
that it ought not to be controlled either by the Conclave or the Classis; I
hope you are by this time better informed than to think your perverse
Conclusion from it even to my denial of a Deity, an allowable objection either
against the honesty or the discretion of asserting his Majesty's Ecclesiastical
Supremacy. However as long as their way of reasoning is perverse, it can never
reflect any disparagement upon my Premises. Ten thousand perverse exceptions
cannot in the least impair the credit of any Truth, but it is enough that if it
be a perverse way of Reasoning, it is your own.

Your fifth Play is Persecution recommended; and here in the opening of Page
123.
your first Scene you bring the Emperor Julian upon the Stage as a more cruel
and execrable Monster of Persecution than Antichrist or the Dragon himself, and
you throw your slaver upon him with so much scorn and rudeness, that the People
take him for as very a rake-shame as Bishop Bonner or Pope Hildebrand. And yet
poor Gentleman, he was a very civil person, and a great Virtuoso, and though he
were somewhat Heathenishly inclined, yet he had nothing of the persecuting
Spirit in him against the Christians, as you may see at large in Ammianus
Marcel. l. 22. unless you will suppose (as he did) that there is no such
effectual way of persecuting an established Church as by suspending all
Ecclesiastical Proceedings against Schismatics and Heretics, and granting an
Unlimited and Universal Toleration. So that you might have found out some other
Emperors that might better have become your Character of Cruelty than Julian.
And how you will reconcile this hard usage of him with that deep Respect you
profess to Sovereign Page 254.
Princes is past my Understanding. I am roundly taken up for my Irreverence to
Queen Elizabeth, only because I seem not to approve the humor of some Writers
in her time, that affected to stuff their Books with Shreds and Remnants of
Poetry; and it must by all means be for her sake, that I will not endure the
Wit and Learning of her times. And when elsewhere I happen to use this
expression of old Elizabeth Pretensions, concerning the Puritans foolish talk
of their Holy Discipline, it is no less than a spiteful piece of Unmannerliness
to her Majesty to call her old; though it is manifest I spoke it not of the
Queen, but the Fanatic Arguments; and if I had intended it of her self, yet I
hope it is no ill Manners, notwithstanding she was a Woman, and never married,
to call Queen Elizabeth old under the Reign of Charles the Second. But yet for
all your severity upon me, you cannot find in your heart to speak with any
kindness of any Prince out of hearing. Nay, you cannot so much as afford his
present Majesty one good word, but only for his Gentleman's Memory, and when you
have occasion to mention your comfortable Act of Oblivion and Indemnity; and
how many bad things you have suggested of him, I will not be so unmannerly as
to repeat. It Is too plain that it was the least part of your design to fall
upon Ecclesiastical Policies; your Plot was under that pretense to take
advantage of bolting ugly suggestions against some bodies Person and
Government. And it is obvious to all Readers with what violence you force
opportunities of hinting spiteful and unmannerly Reflections, and then think to
bring your self cleanly off by pretending to discover naughty and secret
meanings in my words, though after your rate of Construction a Quarrelsome man
might raise an Action of the Case out of your humble Servant Sir. I forbear
Instances, because I will not be so far assistant to your insolent and bold
Aspersions. But it were easy to specify some saucy Remarques that you have
darted without any other ground than your own Malecontentedness, for which, if
you had your due, the Rods, the Axes, the Whipping-posts, the Galleys, the
Pillories, and the Strappados would scarce be all together a sufficient
Correction. But so it is that no Person that was more than ordinarily branded
for a dissolute and sottish Life in ancient times can be so much as
occasionally mentioned (though the occasion of mentioning him be the vulgar and
Proverbial use of his name) but as if the resemblance were as obvious and
natural as it is forced and malicious, you take upon you to conclude, that some
Person now in Being must be for certain intended, and then plainly enough
unriddle the Secret, and make the Application. It is happy for you that I have
so tender a sense of respect and reverence where it is my Duty, that I had
rather an impudent Libeller should escape uncorrected than serve his design and
promote his Slander by bringing him to public Punishment; I say no more, but
if you have any gratitude I expect you will shortly thank me for the possession
of your Ears. Certainly you were so provident as to take leave of your
Comfortable Importance before you set Pen to Paper. And though you dare not
speak out plainly against every body now alive, I am sure you have bolted it
out broadly enough against his Majesty's Royal Father, when you represent him
no better than a Jailour to all his Subjects, and accuse him for turning his
three Kingdoms into one great Prison, in Page 295.
so much that many thousands of his Subjects that had no mind to rot in Jails,
were constrained Page 296.
to seck another Habitation, and every Country, though it were among Salvages
and Cannibals, appeared more hospitable to them than their own under his
Government. But yet for all this, I have good reason to believe that your Pick
at Julian was not taken up against him either as Emperor or Pagan: But (as you
suppose) he once belonged to the Clergy, and then because of his Indelible
Character he is the eternal Mark of your Malice. And if you can but get scent
of any thing that smells of a Priest, away you run with full Cry and open
Mouth. And were your Fangs as good as your Throat the whole Order would in a
very little time be torn and woried in pieces. For so, (it is your own
Remarque) of all Beasts none are so fierce and cruel as those that Page 240.
have been taught once by Hunger to prey upon their own kind; as of all men,
none are so inhumane as the Cannibals. The shrewdness of the observation makes
some amends for the dullness of the Similitude. For take but an Hunger-starved
Whelp of a Country Vicar, and enter him in a Committee-Pack for plundered
Ministers, and let him but once draw blood of the Church, and taste the
sweetness of Ecclesiastical Sequestrations, and if ever after he get view of
any regular Clergyman, though an Archbishop, he opens and pursues with all
the rage of a Phanatick Blood-Hound. I know your outrage springs from another
Principle, because forsooth you were cheated by a Dignitary at Picquet; yet had
you been a Committee-Cannibal, you could not have been more inhumane to your
own kind, than you have shown your self upon this frivolous Provocation.

Having arrain'd Julian, your next Article Page 124.
is against my self for inveighing against Trade. Ay, that is to the purpose,
Purse-persecution strikes deep, drain away our money, and you draw out our
Blood and Vital Spirits. What, Young man, are you not content to whip the
Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, but you must whip them out of the Nation
too; and when you have already shipped away Grace, will nothing appease your
rage, unless you may send Trade after it too? Is it not privilege enough to
blaspheme the Blessed Trinity, to travesteer the Bible, and to revile the King,
but you must be wrecking your Ecclesiastical Malice upon the best and most
industrious part of his Subjects too. This is beyond either the Rage of Julian,
or the Zeal of Archbishop Laud, or the Salvageness of a Capon-Cannibal; for
that is your Name for a Presbyterian. Here I see I have raised a Devil that I
can never lay; there is no Calumny, how black soever, so effectual to expose me
to popular hatred as this Clamor; and therefore do what I can, it is resolved
I shall never get clean from it, and let me bestir my self never so nimbly in
my own defense, they will throw it on as fast as I can wipe it off. I thought I
had given J. O. his Answer, but it seems that will not edify with their Zeal
and Choler. It is and shall be decreed that I have with all my might persuaded
the discouragement of Trade, for this strengthens their Interest, and combines
both God and Mammon in a Confederacy against me, and endears the Trading and
the Puritan Party of the Nation to each other, and then whoever ventures to
reprove one shall be voted to rail at both: And now in this case it is to no
purpose for my self or any of my friends to make Apologies, as good preach to
the Wind and Tide, as remonstrate to the prejudice of the wild Multitude:
though it is so very notorious that were all I have said put in Practice, no
Trade could ever be in the least endammaged, but that of the secret ones, the
Trade of Plunder, and Sacrilege, and Conventicles, unless possibly the
Pinmakers Trade by my having declared so frankly against the usefulness of
Push-pin Divinity; and I wonder you have not exasperated that whole Company in
particular against me for the rashness of that Attempt. But what, (say you) do
not I Page 151.
say there is no such ungouernable Beast as a Wealthy Phanatick? I beg your
pardon Sir, I was mistaken, I am now convinced by you that a beggarly Phanatick
is somewhat worse, though of all wild Creatures I find none so fierce and
implacable as the Gaming Fanatic, especially when he is rook'd of all, for
that is the trick of all broken Gamesters, who having nothing of their own to
lose are ever for serambling. However it is plain here from your own Quotation,
that it is not the Tradesman I meddle with, but the Fanatic, nor with him as
wealthy, but as Fanatic. Yes, but (say you) many a proper man has marched up
Holborn Page 151.
for distinguishing betwixt the wealth and the Fanatic. This may pass for a
Clinch, (and I presume you intended it for no more) but not for an Argument;
and therefore seeing you have nothing serious to prove your Charge, if you had
any Conscience or Modesty you would have forborne it, and not have endeavored
to expose me to the Violence of the Multitude by such false and knavish Abuses.
In short then, I am so far from bearing any ill will to Tradesmen, as such,
that when I see one that keeps his Shop, obliges his Customers, delights in his
own fireside, lives lovingly with his Family, behaves himself quietly, and
converses cheerfully with his Neighbors, keeps his Parish Church, pays Parish
duties, bears Parish Offices, relieves the Poor, and is kind and civil to his
Minister, methinks he looks like a Venerable Relic of the meekness and
modesty of the Primitive Christians; and is beside as good and useful a member
of the Commonwealth as any private Subject of what Rank and Condition soever,
and deserves too as much respect and encouragement. But -- I was about to give
a Character of some People of another Kidney, that I shall forbear, because I
foresee it will grate too severely upon too many guilty Consciences. Especially
when you have (as a token of your ancient Friendship) given me secret Advice
that I presume too much upon the good nature of the Fanatics in thinking to
walk night Page 128.
and day in safety, when it is so easy a thing to deifie me, after the ancient
manner, and no body be the wiser. Hitherto you have put me to no great pains to
acknowledge and complement your Civility, but now, dear Sir, you overwhelm me
with love and kindness. You could not have made a fairer invitation to the
Rascal-multitude to attempt some Violence and Outrage upon me as I walk the
Streets. This is such a Villainous piece of Malice, as could never have offered
it self to the thoughts of an English man, that had not traveled abroad to
learn Italian Cowardice and Cruelty. But had I exasperated any of my
Contrymen so much as you would insinuate to the unruly Rabble, yet I should
never fear such attempts as you suggest but from such as are debauched with
Foreign Villainy. This is offered so like a Wretch that has forfeited all Sense
of Honor and Conscience, that you could scarce have spoke more broadly, had
you a mind to be hired for the Executioner. And yet it is no fouler Play than
what was shown to the late Archbishop himself; for when such another civil
Gentleman as you had loaded his Grace with a vast heap of Calumnies, then
(according to the Ingenuity of the times) called Cumulative Treason; he at last
falls into an Admiration (as you did) that the People did not stone him, as
they did him that acted the part of Bellerophon in Rome. Thereby animating the
Rabble to some Violence, that might save the credit of his Judges, who
otherwise must have been forced to murder him in form of Law. And to the same
purpose I suppose it is intended that you intimate your knowledge of my
Lodging, to invite Page 130.
the Apprentices and the Southwark Rascality to bestow another Visit upon
Lambeth-House; but I doubt things are yet scarce ripe enough for these
Long-Parliament Tumults; though if they were, I doubt not but that there are
seditious Bankrupts enough who would be forward enough to thrust themselves
into the head of the Riot; but then, my friend, take you heed lest your Zeal
and good service be rewarded with Captain Bensteads pay, a bold fellow that was
only hanged, drawn, and quartered for heading that Tumult. You can expect but
little Mercy if I am not defeated of the Hang-man's Office, that you have been
pleased so generously to bestow upon me; Ibid.
it is no very Honorable Employment, but yet however he is one of his
Majesty's Ministers of Justice, and you know and rue the time when he has done
him admirable Service, and as meanly as you think of the place and as much as
you despise it, set your heart at rest, it is an higher Office than ever you
are likely to be preferred to in the Commonwealth; and in truth it was a place
of very comfortable Importance in the Roman Empire (which for your sake I will
venture to mention once more) and yet (as little as I love you) I would not
care though I recommended you to the Employment, because this is an age
whereinGentlemen, (i. e. Page 131.
Gamesters) cannot well support their Quality, without some Accession from the
Public. So that had you this or any other honest way of livelihood, it might
stop your mouth from bawling perpetually for the seizure of Church Revenues,
only in hopes of creeping into some small Office at the division of the Prey;
for I am apt to believe (though all that know you, know so ill of you, that
they will take it for a very strein of Candor and Courtship) that all your
rudeness to the Church does not proceed from mere malice to that, and revenge
upon the Dignitary. Want will put any man that delights in Gaming out of
humor; but of all discontents there is nothing so peevish and so clamorous as
when pride and poverty meet together in the same Gamester. But that which seems
to strike the greatest damp upon your mind, and of which you make the oftenest
complaints is that I talk so much of Pillories, Whipping-posts, Galleys, Rods
and Axes, that is to say, the Pod^strabae, the Tilethrae, Page 132.
the Otagrae; the Rhinolabides and the Cheilostrophia; these are villainous
Engines indeed, but take heart Numps! here is not a word of the Stocks, and you
(since the Act of Indemnity is past and sure) need never stand in awe of any
more honorable Correction; however suppose the worst, you have read Seneca and
Epictetus. And what though your worth should sometime or other prefer you to
the Pillory (and that is not impossible) yet it is no very painful Engine (and
Philosophers can endure any thing but smart) it is only intended to make men
look a little simply, and put them out of countenance awhile; but for
confidence let you alone.

And now having thus far followed your dance, it is time (I hope) to advance to
serious Counsels. You cry out of persecution! So did Hugh Peter's, and so did
Venner, and so might all Malefactors, when brought to Justice, but that most of
them are more modest than the most of you. This is but seizing upon words, and
forcing them to sound or signify any thing to your own purpose. But unless all
execution of Laws upon offenders deserve this hard name, it is not enough for
you to complain you are persecuted, when you are only punished. It is the cause
that makes the only difference; and you ought first to make out the iniquity of
the Laws, and to make good your obligation to disobedience, before you can set
up this out cry. But to this you reply that you suffer for Conscience; for
Conscience! what is that? but that you would take advantage of it, and report
that I affirm there is no such thing as Conscience, I would say it is for
nothing. For Conscience it self is an indeterminate thing, and has no more
certain signification than the clinking of a Bell, and that is as every man
fancies. And though you are wont to discourse of it, as though it were an
infallible Oracle in your breasts, or a Pope in your bellies; yet had you but
skill enough to anatomize your selves, you would find nothing there beside
Lights and Liver and Stomach and Guts, and perhaps a deceitful heart; for in
the heart the Jews seated it of old, though the Cartesian Philosophy has of
late pearch'd it up into the Glandula Pinealis. But wherever it resides, it is
not any principle of action distinct from the man himself, being the very same
individual thing with the mind, soul and understanding; so that there is no
other real difference between a man and his Conscience, than between a man and
his mind, or rather between a man and himself. And therefore when you make such
an heavy ditty about your being persecuted for your Conscience sake, the result
of it is, that you are persecuted for your mind sake, or suffer only because
you have a mind to suffer. For whatever Conscience is, this is certain, that it
is neither the rule nor the reason of its own Actions, but it is bound to guide
and govern it self, and all its determinations by the measures and
prescriptions of its duty, and that only can warrant either the wisdom or the
innocence of its proccedings. And therefore in any case to plead only
Conscience for any action, without specifying some particular Principle, upon
which it grounds it self and its dictate, is in effect to plead any thing, or
rather nothing. For without some certain direction distinct from it self, it
may signify any thing what you please, or if you please nothing. And it may as
well be called Pride, Ignorance, Passion, Humor, Peevishness, Melancholy,
Rudeness, Frenzy, and Superstition, as Conscience; for whenever a man's mind is
possessed or abused with any of these unhappy Passions, that to him is his
Conscience. And therefore if ever you intend to make out the justice of your
Cause, or the equity of your Grievances, you must give over this hovering and
uncertain pretense of Conscience in general, and betake your selves to some
more distinct and particular pleas; and that is to appeal to the adequate rule
and measure of humane actions, and that is to all divine and humane Laws; and
if from either of these you can plead any express warrant to excuse your
disobedience to the Constitutions of the Church, in Gods Name plead it; and
then, but not till then, it will appear that you indeed suffer for the Cause of
a good Conscience: But if you have none, then the case is plain, that you
suffer for nothing. And yet it is as plain that you have not any other
imaginable ground or pretext of reason to justisie your peevishness to the
Ecclesiastical Laws, beside the indisputable pleasure of your own proud and
imperious minds; for you are run off of all your old Cavils, and know not what
you would have beyond the satisfaction of crossing the Commands of Royal
Authority. For as for all your general clamours against the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of Princes, that they invade Gods Royalty, lay waste the
Consciences of men, usurp upon their Christian Liberties; first they signify
no more than the general plea of Conscience, that whenever Superiors impose
any Commands upon Subjects that they have no mind or stomach to obey, they then
entrench upon Gods Supremacy, as the only Lord of Conscience; and then it
subverts all Government, and cancels all Humane Laws, in that they neither do
nor can pass any Obligation upon any Subjects, but only as they are bound upon
their Consciences; and lastly, they will never stand to this themselves, when
they are urged with those horrid mischiefs, that must perpetually overtake the
Government, if the plea be once admitted in general terms, and without
exception. This then being quitted, the Magistrate may, and sometimes must
restrain men in their pretenses or persuasion of Religion, without seating
himself in Gods Throne, or invading their Subjects Consciences, or offering
violence to their Christian Liberties. And then have they nothing to pretend in
their own excuse, but the unlawfulness of the particular Commands themselves;
and this brings them to a sweet pass, when they are kept to it closely to prove
out of the Holy Scriptures the wickedness and abomination of our Liturgy and
Ceremonies.

And though you are here wont to roll up and down in rambling and uncertain
talk, yet still the last resolution of all your Impertinency (as you have been
told often enough) is the great Mystery of unscriptural i. e. symbolical
Ceremonies, for excepting these all of you allow the lawfulness of all other
unscriptural Ceremonies, and here, after you have done your poor utmost at
sending and thrusting, are you forced to shelter both your Self and your Cause;
and at last your Quarrel against them is, That they want nothing of a
Sacramental Nature Page 218.
but Divine Institution; that is to say, they want nothing of a Sacramental
Nature, but a Sacramental Nature. But the Ibid.
grievance it seems, is, that these Humane Institutions should be made of equal
force to Divine Institutions, in that they are imposed with so high a penalty.
But what is that to you or me, if our Governors should be over-severe in their
making of Laws, as long as they thereby enact and enforce nothing that is in it
self unlawful? Beside, that this is such an Objection as may be equally thrown
against all Laws whatsoever, in that they are all established upon their proper
Penalties, so that if it once pass, there will be no Remedy left to prevent mad
people from playing the Apes and Baboons in the worship, as you have done the
Wolves and Tigers in the Cause of God; in that to restrain them by penalties
(and yet there is no other way of doing it) will be to make Humane Institutions
of equal force with the Divine. But here lurks the great mischief of all your
peevishness (as you have been too often informed, seeing you will not attend)
that your complaints are so impossible to be redrest, that though we would save
you from persecution, yet it is not in our power to do you so much kindness, in
that Divine Worship cannot possibly be performed without some Arbitrary and
unscriptural Ceremonies. And make choice of what others you please, refine and
purify them as long as you will, they will still retain their symbolical
Nature. And then as it is necessary to the nature of external Worship to
express it self by symbolical Ceremonies, so is it as necessary to prevent
madness and confusion that some particular Rites be determined and enjoined by
Authority; otherwise after what a ridiculous rate must the public Service of
God be every where performed, when every humorous and conceited Fellow would be
at Liberty to affect his own singular posture and extravagance. And for this
reason all Churches in the world have ever taken upon them to determine their
own rules of Order and Decency, and exacted Conformity to them of all the
members of their own Communion. And so do all the particular Clans and
Conventions of the Fanatiques among themselves; and without this uniformity all
their Assemblies would be no better than a wild and confused rabble of people:
For do but suppose a mixed Assembly partly of a Congregation of Presbyterians,
and partly of a meeting of Quakers, what an uncouth and fantastic medley would
this appear to the Spectators, when upon the very same Principle that the
Presbyterian refuses to kneel at the Communion, the Quaker refuses to be
uncovered, and so still they would quarrel and combat each other as much as
they do the Church. This is so plain and obvious to every man's experience, and
they have been so often upbraided with it, that no man, whose confidence had
not devoured his understanding, could have taunted us so perpetually as you do
with the indifferency of our Ceremonies in their own Natures; when it is so
plain, that the determination of some indifferent things is absolutely
necessary to the exterior performance of Gods worship, and when it is so
certain that this exception, if once admitted, would fall as foully upon all
your several Customs, as upon our Constitutions: So that the Quarrel relates
not so much to the particular matters in controversy between us, for no man
is, or ever was so fond as to pretend an antecedent necessity for their
particular injunction; it is enough for us, and too much for you that it is
absolutely necessary to enjoin either these, or some other symbols as
unscriptural and arbitrary as these: But our main concern relates to that
dangerous and exorbitant Principle upon which your Dissent and Nonconformity
is founded. A principle so fond and so mischievous, that it will not suffer the
settlement of any Church or Commonwealth in the world. So little reason have
you to complain of the severity of the Laws, whilst the Laws are only levelled
against such Principles as must eternally oblige you to be seditious and
unpeaceable under all Governments and in all Churches; insomuch that should his
Majesty condescend to grant you a Commission to order Divine Service to your
own humors, if you would but be constant to the peevishness of your own
Prinoiples, that would bring you under as indispensable an Obligation of
Nonconformity to your own Constitutions, as you now pretend to lie under to
ours. So that you see the last Issue of this Plea is plainly nor more nor less
than this, that you are persecuted for your Conscience sake, i. e. only because
you are resolved to keep your selves under a necessity of being persecuted. And
this I hope at present may suffice to stop your Cry of Persecution; but if this
will not do, then there is no remedy but I must muzle you and your whole party,
and that I hope to do to the purpose when I come to your State Policy. In the
mean while it concerns Authority to consider whether as simply as your
pretenses look at top any thing but the Good Old Cause, or (as you mince it)
the Cause too good be lurking at the bottom, whilst they observe such blessed
Saints as you that are known to boggle at nothing your selves, and withal to
be the fiercest and most vehement enemies to the present form of Government, to
be the only men that come forth to Witness against Prelacy and Antichrist, and
preach such silly scruples to the Rabble as you know must be unremoveable
grounds of discontent between the King and his People. For as much as your
general pretense, viz. that if His Majesty shall ever challenge any Authority
over Conscience he invades the Divine Prerogative (which yet you know and
sometimes acknowledge to be false) destroys all Government in general, in that
Princes have no other secure and fast hold upon their Subjects, but only by
virtue of their Consciences; and then as for all your particular exceptions,
they as apparently destroy all Church Government in particular, and are so
remediless that it is not in the Power of Princes to avoid them, as long as
they will leave any outward appearance of Religion or Divine Worship in the
World. For if they will admit of any more Rites than the two Sacraments, it
must be performed by something as liable to your own Scruples as any thing
enjoined or practiced in the Church of England, i. e. by some Symbolical
Ceremonies that are not enjoined in the word of God, seeing it is plain that
all outward Devotion can be expressed by nothing else, and seeing it is as
plain that there are no more prescribed in the Gospel than barely the two
Sacraments; from both which Premises nothing can be more plain than that
Nonconformity to all customary and established ways of worship whatsoever must
upon your Principles be for ever unavoidable.

Your Sixth and last Play is pushpin-Divinity; from this one would conclude I
had written at least a Treatise upon this Argument; and yet it is so far from
being any head of my discourse, that I only used it once as the most proper
Term to express those childish Controversies that some men manage upon almost
all the Articles of Religion, and that signify no more to the Edification of
the Church than Boys Play does to the Government of the State. But because you
have so utterly mistaken the meaning of the Phrase, and because I perceive you
have not Divinity enough to set you up at Push-pin, I will furnish you with a
small stock of Instances. 1. Whether Conversion be performed in an Instant, or
whether it be divided into several Acts and Scenes. As 1. the work of Vocation
is the Prologue, 2. this vocation infuseth Faith, (only say some, but Faith and
Repentance say others) and then 3. this Faith must be acted (so that it seems
Believers may have Faith before they act it, i. e. they may believe before they
believe) then 4. by this Act we apprehend Christ's Person, and by this
Apprehension we are united to him, 5. from this Union proceed the Benefits, 1.
of Justification, 2. of Sanctification. 6. This Sanctification infuseth all
other gracious habits, and has two degrees, 1. Regeneration, 2. Renascentia as
they call it, or the New Birth. Upon this dispute a great many weighty
Arguments are pusht pro and con, and a great number of grave Divines engaged on
both sides, though (in my opinion) they had been as wisely employed in playing
with the Boys at Push-pin, as in finding ten real differences in one and the
same thing. 2. Whether the Word and Sacraments have only a moral Operation in
the Conversion of a Sinner, as a man draws an Horse to him by the sight of
Provender, or an Hog after him by the Rattling of Beans; or whether they are
only the Instrumental Cause to conveigh the Physical Operation of the Spirit,
as a Conduit-pipe does water. But this Heresy the more Orthodox will by no
means endure, because it is evident to all that understand Metaphysics that
none of Suarez his conditions of an Instrumental efficient Cause are to be
found in them, and then the case is clear, and the Controversy out of danger.
And yet there is a very moderate man, and one that is much given to
reconciling, who ventures to declare that if any man had rather say that the
word is Causa efficiens minus principalis Procatarctica, that for his part he
will not contend. What a Condescension is here! Were all the Divines in
Christendom of this yielding temper, how quickly should we see and rejoice in
that Catholic Unity, that you in your deep Wisdom and Policy have set down
for as crazy and impracticable an Undertaking as to dig through the separating
Istmos of Peloponesus; Page 30.
or to make a Communication between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean. 3.
Whether common and saving Grace differ only gradually or specifically, and if
specifically, then whether it be only by a Moral or a Physical specification;
and when they discourse upon such heads and points, they are wont to set as
strong a Guard upon them of Chapter and Verse out of St. Paul's Epistles, and
to as little purpose as the Assembly-men did upon their darling and fundamental
Doctrine of absolute and irrespective Reprobation, though they were not
satisfied with that, but for greater security were solicitous to place it next
to the existence of God, and the Being of Providence. Blessed Apostle! should
thou but make a visit to the Christian World, how would thou stand aghast to
see such a vast Body of Modern Orthodox Faith framed out of thy Writings
distinct from and for the most part opposite to the old Christian Belief!
Should thou peruse those strange Glosses and Commentaries that have of late
been made upon thy Epistles, how would it recover to thy Memory all that
Gibberish in which thou were so idly busy whilst thou sattest at the feet of
Rabbi Gamaliel! How would it grieve thee to see so many Churches of thy own
Plantation overrun with the Barbarism either of Turks, or Heathens, or
Schoolmen! Little did thou dream that ever thy Epistles should be brought
upon the Stage to decide the difference between moral and physical
Specification. But yet to confess the Truth, these were not the impertinent
Fopperies I intended in that Expression; the only thing I then glanced at was
the undertaking in the Grotian Religion to prove that the disputes between the
Calvinists and Arminians are more about words than matter, which is pursued
warmly and eagerly enough, from Sect. 5. to Sect. 20. of the Preface; all which
the Reverend Bishop gravely and prudently baulkt as a matter altogether
impertinent to his Argument, and that would bear Eternal wrangle in the way of
playing Scholastic heads and points. And that you may be forced to acknowledge
his Wisdom, I will give you a summary Account of his Adversaries performance.
Imprimis to reconcile Gods absolute decree of Election of the lesser part of
Mankind Antecedently to any Consideration of their Faith and Obedience, and his
absolute Decree of Reprobation to all the rest Antecedently to the deserts of
their Impenitence and Infidelity, to the Justice and Goodness of God. Item to
reconcile Christ's suffering death for the Elect only, that are the least part
of Mankind, without having any intent to make satisfaction for the sins of the
whole World, with the design of Universal Redemption. Item to reconcile the
loss of free will in all the posterity of Adam, so as that they lie under an
unavoidable necessity to do or not to do, whatsoever they do or do not, whether
it be good or evil, with the first Principles of Morality or the Right of
Rewards and Punishments. Item to reconcile Gods Method of saving his Elect from
the corrupt Mass, by begetting Faith in them with a Power equal to that,
wherewith he created the World, and raised up the dead, (insomuch that such
unto whom he gives that Grace, cannot reject it, and the rest being Reprobate
cannot accept it, though it be offered to both by the same preaching and
Ministry) with the Power of Election and Free Will. Item to reconcile the
Impossibility of falling away finally and totally, notwithstanding the most
enormous Crimes, with the Power of Apostasy; or the necessity of perseverance
with the liberty of falling away, because it is only a necessitas
consequentiae; though to you and me that are not so deep read in Modern
Orthodoxy every necessity of what kind soever is a necessity, and then call it
what you please, it plainly destroys all Power over our own actions. This may
serve for a compendious Syntagm of pushpin Divinity.

I might be very large and particular upon this Subject, but for the present I
shall desire those that would be farther satisfied in the Mystery, to repair to
Pin-makers-hall every Tuesday about ten of the clock in the forenoon, and there
in six weeks time it is ten to one but they shall find two or three of them at
it. And thus having represented as briefly as the Subject would bear the plot
and contrivance of your six Plays, I shall make no other Epilogue than to
desire the Company to give me their impartial judgment first of your own
Modesty, Wit, Learning, and Honesty; and secondly of the understanding and
ingenuity of the whole Faction, that are so strangely elevated with such a
crude and indigested heap of nonsense and nothing. These Arguments I have
pursued somewhat farther than was necessary to blow up your idle Cavils,
because I was willing to do something to the edification of those Readers that
have some understanding of their own, as well as to the Conviction of those
that have none. And that the company may be sensible how much they are beholden
to me for their entertainment, I will give them a short Bill of Fare of your
Provisions. First, the Grand Thesis is served in, and at this you spread your
arms, and cock your train, and chatter (as one would think) in token of courage
and victory; but alas! under all this Pageantry there is nothing to be found
beside tail and feather, and after all this cackling nothing to be discovered
beside noise and amazement, not a word discharged at the Grand Thesis it self;
only you are scared out of your wits to see one so presumptuous as to assert
what all the world have always believed and practiced, and so you immediately
fall to transcribing a lump of quotation, being sentences accidentally culled
backwards and forwards out of several discourses; and these you will have to be
sometimes such Corollaries, and sometimes such Superstructures as are necessary
to justify the Grand Thesis: Though Corollaries justify Theses just as
superstructures support foundations. But however from hence it is evident with
what presumption I treat His Majesty in my Books, though in the conclusion you
tell us very judiciously, that they are not to be answered for certain
invincible Reasons.

1. Because they are so full of contradictions, and therefore you cannot answer
them.

2. Because no man can do it without bringing himself within the Statute of
treasonable words, and at least a Praemunire, and therefore you dare not.

3. Because whoever goes about it must of necessity either be, or be thought to
be a Fanatique, and therefore you will not. And for diverse other Reasons, some
whereof you dare not discover, and some you discreetly reserve to your self;
and so leave them to be sound out by Gods Providence, or our own Sagacity, and
if both ways fail, to wait with patience till the day of judgment: Only you
inform His Majesty, (1.) That I have given him too much Power; (2.) Too much
advice; and (3.) Taken them both away again. And now while two or three other
dull people can in the tumult of other business consume eight or ten months in
one single Book of seven or eight hundred pages, for one man even without any
Partners after forty months travel, to be able to Transprose three leaves, and
find out the Grand Thesis, and the Corollaries that justify it, and from
thence to irradiate his Brethren with this beam of discovery, that such
Divinity with such Policy cannot be good, no really by no means: This (I say)
if duly weighed, is such an enterprise, as cannot but strike your self, and all
the world with admiration. And thus having dispatched the Grand Thesis, you
advance with huffing train against all its subordinate Hypotheses. And here
first you cannot proceed well without a Preface, and so as if you had treated
me hitherto with as much reverence as the Emperor of Russia, you humbly crave
leave to treat me according to Decorum, i. e. like a Buffoon; the very same
Request word for word that Martyn-Mar-Prelate has often put up to his Readers
to be allowed the same freedom with his Nuncka John the Archbishop of
Canterbury; though Sir, you might have used this familiarity with me without
all this ado, for I perceive we are so intimately acquainted, that we have no
doubt sometime heretofore either robbed Orchards or lampoon'd the Court
together. And then from this Apology in the strength of another Apology to
Kings and Princes, lest by reason of your private condition and breeding you
should trip in a word, and fail in the mannerliness of an expression, you
proceed from Apology to Apology, (for one half of your Book is written to no
other end than to beg pardon for the other) till you compare his Majesty
sawcily and unmannerly, and that without Apology, to a mad horse kicking and
flinging most terribly. And all this being premised out of tender regard to the
rules of Decorum, you enter upon the unlimited Magistrate, where if you
intended any thing against me, you ought first to have made it evident that I
had really invested him with an unhoopable Jurisdiction, and after that you
would have had scope and advantage enough to have made me an Example to all
Ecclesiastical Politicians to the worlds end. But you are a Civil Gentleman,
and will say nothing more severe than only to admonish me,

1. That Bishop Bramhall would have censured this of Erastianism, though
Erastus never dreamt of any Opinion half so dangerous as unhoopable
Jurisdiction.

2. That the Bishops and their Chaplains would never have licensed it without
clauses or provisos.

3. That the King does not love to hear of concealed Lands. Only if he may
exercise the Priesthood himself, he may with all the Reason in the world
assume their Revenue too, which is as much as to say, if he may discharge the
Function of the Secular Magistrate, he may (and it is all the reason in the
world) assume all Secular Revenues too, which would be a better Subsidy than
twenty Church Revenues: But truly otherwise (i. e. were it not that he is not
guilty of Sacrilege) you do not see but that the King does lead a more
unblameable conversation, etc. And so you forsake the fantome of unhoopable
Jurisdiction to proceed to Public Conscience. But here too you are out of
your element, and begin first with a wretched blunder about Christian Liberty,
and then pick up here and there some passages out of my discourse of doubtful
and unsatisfied Consciences, and impose them upon the Reader, as if they were
intended of Conscience in general, and as if I had persuaded men that they may
and ought to act against their Consciences where the Commands of the Magistrate
intervene, because forsooth I have proved that when the Command of the
Magistrate intervenes in doubtful and uncertain Cases, by obeying they do not
nor cannot act against their Consciences, if they really are what they pretend
to be; and if they are not, that then they are Knaves and Hypocrites. But the
Opinion is brutish, and the consequences devilish; though whether it be so, it
is no matter of your Judicature, and therefore must be referred either to a
Jury of Divines, or the day of Judgment. And so we have you at Moral Grace,
where you warble forth a pleasant ditty of Fortune, Prudence and Honesty in
three several Languages, and the Song ended, we might have had a dance upon the
high ropes, but that lightly one time or other by that means men break their
necks; and for this reason you make have to bid adieu to moral Grace, of which
not a word more, only he that is not satisfied, may satisfy himself if he can.
And so immediately you get to debauchery tolerated, and this you understand a
little better than moral Grace, but yet all that you have to say upon this
subject, is, to acknowledge that I never asserted any such thing, only
debauched persons will (as you do) by a perverse way of reasoning conclude so
and so, i. e. if I had affirmed (as you do) that it had been safer to give
toleration to men's Blasphemies and Heresies than to their debaucheries, then it
would have been Heresy tolerated. And so after a driveling and Schoolboys
Declamation against the debauchery of the Sibarites, you are at Persecution
recommended. And here it is Gods Mercy that Julian was Emperor and not I, and
though you dare jest upon him and the Galleys as the more remote, yet you sculk
by the Axes, Pillories, and Whipping-posts, as the more practicable and
dangerous instruments of Persecution; and being your self a most gracious and
conscientious Coward admire at some bodies courage that dares walk the streets
so confidently, when it were so easy to deisy the Divine after the ancient
manner, and no body be the wiser, and so cunningly insinuate as if you your
self would be glad to accept the Office, provided you may gain some accession
from the public stock of the Party, because in this age Gentlemen cannot
otherwise well support their Quality; but if ever you undertake it, I shall
never fear any other weapon than a Spanish Fig, or some more secret Italian
dispatch; for though you talk so much of fighting and duels, you are so far
from being so hardy as to see any man dye upon the spot, that it is manifest
you never had the Courage to attend the event of a war between two Boys in the
streets, in that among all the wise and politic remarques you have made upon
the transactions of Oheering-Cross and Lincolns-Inn-fields we have not one
Observation upon that subject. And so at length we come to Push-pin Divinity,
but because you understand nothing of the Game, I have directed you to the
School where it is weekly practiced: Only to hide your ignorance you tell us
what you have to say upon it, and perhaps you may have a stomach, but perhaps
you may not, for when you come to it, you only repeat it all over Page 247.
again, and tell us, that though you indeed have not, yet the King himself has
considered all these things. Strange that a man of such private condition and
breeding should be so intimately acquainted with the studies and retirements of
Kings. These are the Acts and Scenes of all your six Plays, but yet when all is
over, the Plot of the Grand Thesis and Ecclesiastical Policy stands stock
still. And now among friends was ever any thing so monstrous? you see what some
men may come to with high feeding and no Divinity. Did ever any man run such
taplash as this at first Broaching? Well! for your sake may I never live to
outlive my self and my little Understanding so much as to be proud of such
witless and insipid stuff as this upon the usefullest and most pregnant
Arguments in the World.

This a Merciful man (as I am) would have thought Correction enough for one
man's back; but you are so pregnant and awkerd a Dunce, so emproved in
Ignorance, so dexterous in the knack of being impertinent, and so addicted to
all kinds of Leasing, that though you had Truth on your side, yet it would
never please you, till you had dressed it up and set it off with all the
Colors of Falsehood, and whatever the cause is in which you engage, you will
be sure to make your self ridiculous; and therefore but for a proof of this
peculiar giftedness of yours, I shall (to avoid Ink-shed) content my self, and
(I fear) more than satisfy my Reader with three or four of the goodliest
Instances of your Wit, and so leave you to chew the Cud upon your own shame and
folly. Thus when J. O. had (and that without blushing too) pleaded in
Justification of his own Nonconformity, that he dares not conform to
Socinianism, Arminianism, and Popery, as if he could be admitted into the
Communion of the Church of England upon no other Terms than of Popish and
Socinian Subscriptions, and when I had scourged such an insolent Libel with
some smartness of Correction, though not so much as it deserved; you (in your
bashfulness) call it railing. So that it seems if any man impudently belie the
Church of England, and I take him in it, and expose him for it, it is but
telling me I rail, and I am answered. This is too like the stubbornness of your
shrew; that when she was duck'd Page 160.
over head and ears, still stretched up the Symbols or (as your Pin-Divines
will have it) the Sacraments of Lowsiness and Cuckoldry. Nothing but such
incorrigible Scolds as you and she could have persisted so obstinately in so
rude a Calumny as this of J. O's. But when among other passages, I tell you
that to the Isme of Socinianism, he might as justly have added all the Ismes in
the Old Testament; out of this you rear two thwacking Objections, the one
against my self of profaneness, the other against the Church of England of
Schism. And this is yelp'd like a true Whelp of Old Martyns; for no man, be he
Bishop or Archbishop, could ever open his mouth against the holy Discipline,
but this dull Buffoon presently run him up into Blasphemy and Treason.
Blasphemy; because he reviled the Lord Christ's own Institution, and set up a
form of Church Government of man's devising, in defyance to his unalterable
Platform. Treason; because he persuaded her Majesty to keep out Christ's true
Officers and plant Antichristian Bishops in their steads, and by that means to
draw the Judgments of God down upon her self and her Kingdoms.

This was the Sum not only of all old Martyns Buffoonry, but of all the
serious part of the old- Elsibeth Puritanism. But as Martyn was just such
another Wit as you, so are you just such another fool as Martyn, that as
despicable as you make your self when you would play the Monkey, are ten times
a more ridiculous sight when you would look serious. For here forsooth you
would fain make up your Mouth and turn up the white, and put on as rebuking a
Countenance as you fancy J. O. did when he spoke of the day of Judgment, and
take me up with ruful face for that peculiar delight and felicity I Page 184.
have (which no man envies me) in Scripture Drollery. My friend, this is too
severe reckoning; what, can we not make mention of any Name recorded in Holy
Writ, but we must abuse the sacred book it self? shall we not dare so much as
to take the names of the Hivites, Perizzites and Hittites into our Lips because
we find the story of their wickedness recorded in the Holy Scriptures? shall we
not call a Traitor Judas, or a Rebel Achitophel for fear of profaning the Old
and New Testament? This is a shrewd and a sad symptom of wretched Poverty of
Cavil when you are every where forced to make so very much of so very little. I
only wonder how the Bramble escaped this severity, especially when one would
think that of all the Books of the Bible, you should have been acquainted with
the Book of Judges, because though it be no Gazet, yet it conteins the
Transactions of a certain time when there was no King in Israel, and yet even
here you betray the Grossness of your Ignorance, and declare in the Simplicity
of your Heart, that you cannot imagine what the Mystery of Shiboleth is no more
than of Categoricalness and Entanglement. And yet the story of Shiboleth is
recorded in the same Book of Judges with that of the Bramble, so that it is not
improbable but you might be equally ignorant of both; and that you might look
for this story in Gerhard's Herbal, or AEsop's Fables. But as for the other two
words, you know as well as I that it is only for my dear J. O's sake that I am
so fond of them, as well as diverse others, that you might as well have insulted
over; viz. Self-wrought-out-mortification, Eristicalness, Songs upon Sigionoth,
the high places of Armageddon, Providential revolutions and some other affected
Phrases that are the peculiar Language or Shiboleth of your secret ones. But
perhaps you had a mind to reserve this Parable (for all its being found in the
Bible) for your own Drollery; and you are wonderfully pleasant both upon that
and me, because after I had (in allusion to that) transformed Calvin into a
Bramble (not a Bishop Bramble as you notably clinch it for the nearness of the
sound to Bishop Page 50.
Bramhall) I should ascribe indefatigableness to him, a Liberty that has ever
been allowed of by all Critics, and must be practiced by all the Writers of
Apologues, and without it what pleasant work would such a Sarcastical Wit as
you make with AEsops Fables and Reignold the Fox. But if I am guilty of a
solecism (and I do not much care if I grant it) I am not alone, you your self
stick as fast in the same absurdity, for when you have turned the Clergy of
England into an Ivybush, Page 133.
you in the same breath ascribe cunning and contrivance to it; now if you will
but undertake to teach a shrub how to plot and contrive for its own
self-interest, I will undertake to teach it how to take pains to compass its
ends, so that your Politic Ivy will be a fit match for my Indefatigable
Bramble, and I hope in time will overcome it too, i. e. that the discretion of
the Church of England may at last be too hard for the Zeal of the Geneva
Faction.

But though it be profane enough to droll upon the word of God, yet wilfully
to pervert or (in your own unaffected language) trinkle it, is somewhat worse,
and that is the next Article of my charge; that when I quote St. Paul to prove
that the fruits of the spirit as he enumerates them, Gal. 5. 22. are only Moral
Virtues, I translate (say you) joy to cheerfulness, peace to peaceableness, and
faith to faithfulness, page 193.
as if either the Apostles Original were written in English, or I had
translated it out of English into English; no, that is your own way of
translation, to expound the Greek Text by the English Version as you do the
Chapter by the Contents. It was not then joy, and peace, and faith that I
translated into cheerfulness, peaceableness and faithfulness, but (...) and
(...). But what ignorance, or rather what forgery is this of Scripture and
Religion? Who is there of the Systematical, German, Genevah, Orthodox Divines,
but could have taught you better? Who is there of the sober intelligent
Episcopal Divines of the Church of England, but would abhor this
interpretation? So say you, but then say I, what honest and upright dealing is
this with Scripture and Religion? Who is there of the Systematical, German,
Genevah, Orthodox Divines, that could have taught me better? Who is there of
the sober intelligent Episcopal Divines, that would not approve of this
interpretation? And so Mr Impertinence you and I are even, you see how little
Answer will serve to stop your mouth, though you open never so wide. But this
confidence is worth all our Moral Virtues, and is able to make such stuff as
this pass among the Party for Wit and Demonstration. And with what Triumph here
do you bear me down, and rescue this Text from my violent interpretation, and
carry it off as bravely recovered out of the Enemies possession, and yet it is
but dropping one simple No-forsooth in your way, and your carreere is stopped,
and there may you stand gaping till the day of Judgment. For as for this Text,
when all your Orthodox Divines have sifted and bolted it to the Bran, they will
with all their search and canvasing never get any thing out of it, or discover
any thing in it beside Moral Virtues. And if you have credit enough to borrow a
Bible in the Neighborhood, you will quickly find (if you can find the
Epistle) that St. Paul is there describing the opposite Effects between the
Flesh and the Spirit; and therefore as all the fruits of the flesh there
reckoned up are immoral Vices, so must all the fruits of the Spirit there
opposed to them be moral Virtues; but particularly cheerfulness must answer to
envy or discontentedness, peaceableness to strife or contention, and
faithfulness to the Gnostick treachery or perfidiousness. But in the Name of
Mercury, tell me to what end you quarrel my preferring the word cheerfulness
before that of Joy, when (as I have told you) they are but synonymous
expressions of the same thing, and may be, and often are used promiscuously,
and differ no more than Reason and Reasoning. And what if instead of this I had
made choice of the word Alacrity, What ignorance or what forgery had that been
of Scripture or Religion? But yet after all your swaggering all your own
Orthodox Divines will vote cheerfulness as a much more proper expression in
this place than joy. Because St. Paul here speaks of the temper or the habit of
the mind, whereas Joy in its proper acceptance denotes only the particular
acts of rejoicing. Oh! but say You and J. O. to grievous purpose, that this Joy
is not cheerfulness, but that spiritual joy which is unspeakable, yes, but then
say I, this spiritual joy that is unspeakable might more properly have been
translated that spiritual cheerfulness that is unspeakable, in that it is that
habitual tranquillity of mind that arises from the testimony of a good
Conscience, and a right to Eternal Life, and therefore is best expressed by
cheerfulness that denotes the habit, and not Joy that denotes the act. And so
Peace (cry you both) is not peaceableness but that peace which is wrought in
the hearts of believers by the holy Ghost: though this is plainly coincident
with your former notion of joy, in that the holy Ghost works this satisfaction
of mind only by joining its suffrage to the vote of our own Consciences, so
that according to your account joy and peace would be but one thing in two
words. But beside this it is manifest that the Apostles design here is to
enumerate the Vertucs, or the Duties, or the Graces of the Spirit (call-them
what you will) whereas this Peace you talk of is a privilege or a felicity of
good men, but no proper effect of the spirit of Sanctification, and therefore
cannot without plain violence to the Text be understood of any thing else than
peaceable-mindedness, especially when it is so manifestly opposed to
contentiousness, and when there are so many parallel Texts of Scripture, that
do not only warrant but enforce the same interpretation, as you may easily
inform your self by the help of a Concordance, if you cannot procure a Bible.
And this (without forgery) is that Peace that passes all understanding: not
because it is some secret and unintelligible thing, of which no rational and
sober account is to be given, or ought to be demanded. But if you can find out
the Epistle to the Philippians (it stands not many leagues off from that to the
Galatians) you will perceive that its grand design was to exhort them against
breaking the Peace and Unity of the Church by Gnostick disputes and
contentions, to which purpose he recommends to them above all things a
peaceable and quiet temper of mind, as a thing much more excellent and valuable
than exactness of Wit and Knowledge, or (as we render it) that passes all
understanding. But then lastly, as for the word (...), I know there are several
acceptations of it in the New Testament (and that is more than you knew before)
though none so common as this of faithfulness, at least none so proper in this
place, where it is not only opposed to the perfidiousness of the Gnostics, but
is reckoned up as one of the fruits of the Christian Faith, and therefore must
be something distinct from it, and consequent to it, and then unless it be the
Faith of Miracles, it can be nothing else but the virtue of Fidelity. And now I
hope you see what reason I had to slight J. O's Cavil as too trivial to need or
require a set and serious Answer, though your impertinency has forced me to
your shame upon such a tedious and needless Task, Notwithstanding that the
Fortune of Caesar and the Roman Empire depend not upon it. But no sooner can I
any where mention Caesar or the Roman Empire, but your blood immediately rises,
and you are past all patience. I cannot imagine the ground of your Antipathy,
unless it be, that when Caesar took the Empire upon himself, he turned the
Commonwealth into a Monarchy. But whatever the picque might be, this I am sure
of, that there is not any one passage in which these words occurr through all
my writings that has escaped your wit and fury. You think it a pleasant conceit
to find me so often meddling with the Roman Empire. And yet not so often
neither, for what is it to quote something of its affairs and transactions six
times in above a thousand pages, that is about once in a Book as big as yours;
It is no more to a man that reads Livie and Tacitus than six kicks was to Daw
after he had read Seneca. At least it is not half so often as you have hooked
in Gazette, and that you know is in comparison a very Modern History. For if
you will consult your Almanac, it is a great while since the building of Rome,
2424 years; and yet from its very foundation it has always been a place of
very great action, and bred more business for Heroic Song than Gondibert or
all the Princes of the Lombard Race, and its Story is not so much the History
of a particular Nation as of the whole World; and yet after all, you are
pickeering at the Roman Empire five times for my once. You have informed
Princes that Julius Caesar Page 251.
was stabbed for subverting the Liberties of the Commonwealth: And another
Roman Emperor for giving the word Page 244.
unhandsomly. From you we learn, that Page 34.
in his time the Empire was stretched to its largest dimensions, though the
learned say, that happened not till the Reign of Trajan. From you we learn that
it Page 232.
cost the Roman Empire some Millions of Men to gain the Dominion of Words, and
yet that Augustus though so great an Emperor, Page 230.
and so valiant a man, (but being withal a very wary Prince) was used to fly
from a new word as studiously as a Mariner would avoid a Rock for fear of
splitting. From you we learn that the Page 164.
Emperor Tiberius when he was very angry would curse a little; and that Julian
was not only a powerful Holder-forth, but the first Founder of the Inquisition.
From you we learn that there was no love lost between the Guelphs and
Gibellines, and that Geneva was the Helvetian passage that Caesar speaks of in
his Commentaries. From you we learn that there was a certain Roman Emperor,
who triumphed Page 219.
over the Ocean, because he had gathered Periwinkles and Scallop-shells on the
Beach; with an hundred more that you have told as but idle stories, and yet
Kings can tell how to make use of them, and learn to behave themselves
dutifully to their Subjects, and not force them to Conform, remembering Caesar's
Page 251.
bloody Coat. Here is twice as much Roman Empire in 300 Pages, as I have in
1300. And now though no other Urchin-Pamphleteer, no not Martyn nor his Cubs,
would have pelted me with such lean and meager Cavils as these, yet this is not
enough to assuage your Fanatique zeal and malice to abuse me for perverting the
Texts that I have quoted, unless I may be abused for those that I never (for
any thing you know) so much as mentioned, or read; and thus when you cite for
your own convenience this passage, That Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft;
Page 120.
you are pleased to add too, that this Text will scarce admit my
Interpretation. And yet you know no more what my Interpretation would be, than
you do what Rebellion and Witchcraft are. But fear not, you are I perceive
concerned (for what reason you your self best know, I know none) lest I should
interpret it of the Rebellion of Subjects against their Prince. No, but (if it
will do you any service) we will resign up this Text to the Long-Parliament
side, and you know a friend of ours that has vindicated its true meaning
against a learned Man abroad that indiscreetly and injudiciously enough
objected it against the late Rebellion.

But that which is still more pleasant is to see such a one as you seriously
reproving the Divine for making merry with the day of Judgment, because
forsooth, when I had bafled J. O, and he had cited me to answer for it at that
day, I laughed at the silliness of his summons, and thought it a very peevish
and impertinent Appeal. For to what purpose should he or any man else write
Eristical Books to satisfy the World in the Innocence and Justice of their
Cause, when at the last they have nothing to plead in their own defense but by
appealing to the World to come? It Is (I say it again) an easy matter by this
dancing and capering humor to perpetuate all the Controversies in the World,
how plainly soever determinable, to the coming of Elias; and after this rate
shall the Barbers Basin remain Mambrino 's Helmet, and the Asses Panel a
furniture for the great Horse till the day of Judgment. You seem much pleased
with this Quotation, and traveled a great way to fetch it in, and it is a very
pertinent story to represent the folly of such impertinent Appeals. For Sir you
must know that once upon a time a Knight Errant (you may have read of)
despoiled a poor Village Barber of his Basin, (which the poor man in rainy
weather was wont to wear upon his head instead of an Oyl-case to preserve his
Hat) supposing it to have been the enchanted Helmet of one Mambrino a notorious
Magician of those times. But a while after the Barber happening into the same
Inn with the Knight, spies his Basin and cries stop Thief; at this an uproar
is made, the Lie is given, and the Inn is immediately filled with nothing but
plaints, and cries, and screeches, and confusions, and fears, and dreads, and
disgraces, and flashes, and buffets, and blows, and spurnings, and kicks, and
twecks, and effusions of Blood. But at last by the mediation of some that had
more Wit and less Courage than others, the Tumult was appeased, the whole
business between the Knight and the Barber was referred to the Arbitration of
some pleasant fellows, that were present at the Fray; but they resolving to
turn all into Mirth determine at last upon grave and solemn deliberation, that
the Basin indeed to them seemed an Helmet, but yet they durst not swear that it
was so in good earnest, and therefore for the greater safety enjoined both
parties to refer its Decision to the day of Judgment. No doubt, much to the
Barbers comfort and satisfaction. And just thus has J. O. dealt with me, who
having fallen as rudely upon me as the Knight did upon the poor man, and coming
off with no great advantage either to the Justice of his Cause or the
Reputation of his Wit, gravely summons me to the day of Judgment, where though
I am prepared to answer him and all the World, yet I cannot but deem it a very
simple and ridiculous determination of any Controversy that concerns the
Affairs of this present Life, to adjourn it to the Life to come, because as to
the present purpose the decision will come somewhat too late. Now methinks it
is a very hard case if a man cannot despise this Confidence and Folly without
making a mockery of the supreme Judge and Judicature. But that which most
troubled me was to see proud men abuse themselves and the World with so serious
a thing, so as whenever they expose their own discretion by any rash or silly
Attempt, they presently call down for Fire from Heaven upon any man that does
but smile at their weakness. And it is a sad and prodigious thing to observe
how some men feed and pamper their Malice with Religion, and depute the Divine
Justice the Executioner of their Rancour and Bitterness, and make the World to
come a mere shelter for Anger and Discontent. When their minds are thoroughly
sowr'd with ruminating upon Injuries and Disgraces, and this World seems to run
counter to their designs, then they will take refuge and sanctuary in the other,
that so if they cannot bear up against their Enemies here, then Hell and the
day of Judgment may make amends for all. And if you had indeed marked J. O's
looks (as you pretend you did) when he spoke of this day, you could not but
have observed what a mighty ease and satisfaction it was to his discontented
mind, and that the very hopes of some revenge then did as much allay his
Maladies, as if he had really executed the utmost of his spite and Malice now.
I am sure any man that reads the Character of the Persons that he in his
Christian meekness summons to this judicature, will easily conclude he was in
no very kind and loving humor, viz. that they are such as have no regard to
Truth, or Modesty, or Sobriety toward God or Man, that they are only animated
by their secular Interest or desire of Revenge, that they are hard hearted and
incompassionate, that they have no thoughts but of Rage and Destruction; that
they are for nothing less than Massacres, and cutting Throats, etc. This is a
sweet and obliging Character, and it is not to be doubted but that J. O. made
no question of being too hard for such Rake-hells as these at the day of
Judgment. And against such as these it is that he has denounced these Expos. on
130. Psalm. Page 275.
Curses. Cursed be you of the Lord with all the Curses that are written in the
Law, and all the Curses that are denounced against despisers of the Gospel.
Yea, be you Anathema Maranatha; cursed in this World always until the coming of
the Lord; and when the Lord comes, be ye cursed from his Presence into
everlasting Destruction. Yea, Curse them all ye Holy Angels of God, as the
obstinate Enemies of your King and Head the Lord Jesus Christ. Curse them all
ye Churches of Christ, as despisers of that Love and Mercy, which is your
Portion, your Life, your Inheritance; let all the Saints of God, all that love
the Lord, curse them, and rejoice to see the Lord coming forth mightily, and
prevailing against them to their everlasting ruin. Why should any one have a
thought of Compassion toward them, who despise the Compassion of God? or of
mercy toward them, who trample on the Blood of Christ? -- Nay, God forbid, we
hope to rejoice in seeing all that Vengeance and Indignation, that is in the
right hand of God, poured out unto Eternity upon our Souls. By this you may
perceive what J. O. means by talking of the day of Judgment when he is angry,
and that he then designs for himself no small Devils Office. Oh! the day of
Judgment! how does it allay all Maladies and Discontents! Then shall it be one
part of his Eternal Bliss to behold his own and the Lord Christ's Enemies lodged
in Eternal Flames. The Brimstone of the damned shall shed a perfume up into his
Heaven, and their shrieks and howlings shall be as musical to him as the
Hallelujahs of blessed Spirits. Not that he is in the least unwilling to
forgive all affronts and unkindnesses, but that God never will. Ay, that is the
comfort of their Spite and Malice. They snatch not the Sword out of his hand,
only because they hope the strokes of an Almighty Arm will light heavier than
theirs. They put out their Revenge to Interest, and are content to stay a
little for it till hereafter, because then they expect to have it paid in with
infinite Emprovements, and hope to rejoice in seeing all that Vengeance and
Indignation, that is in the right hand of God, poured out unto Eternity upon
their Souls. Truly a very comfortable spending of Eternity, and a ravishing
Description of the Joys of Heaven. But as for your part (had I made too light
of that terrible day) your seriousness looks more abusively than my Mirth; you
bring it in in such a sly and snearing way, and you preach upon it in such
untoward and light Expressions, as would give occasion to any man, though he
were endued with some more Charity and Civility than your self, to make a
shrewd Conjecture of your Opinion. How many good jests Page 198.
have you baulkt even in writing your Book, lest you should be brought to
answer for every profane and idle Word! A wicked Knave! it seems you had them
all in your Heart. But whilst you conceal your good Jests for fear of
Damnation, could you ever hope to be saved by so many bad ones? Can a man
strein so much and beat so far about to hale in a poor malicious and smutty
Conceit, and yet study to baulk good Jests though they always come in easily
and of their own accord? Could you take so much pains to mistake through so
many Pages J O for one word, and then I Vowel for I Consonant to rear a few
despicable fancies, and yet think to persuade the World that you have baulkt a
Thousand good Conceits for fear of accounting for idle words? But seeing you
Page 197.
are pleased to attribute something to my Judgment, and desire to know what I
think in good earnest of these things. If it weigh any thing with such a one as
you, that dare not trust either your Soul or your Money with one of my Robe
since the sinister Accident of Picquet, I declare frankly that I would by no
means advise you to check and mortify your wit for fear of the day of
Judgment, for I will ensure you that neither your self nor any friend of yours
shall then fare the worse for a good Jest. But yet you are afraid of being
brought to answer for every profane word; poor man, never be scrupulous, for
good jests are never profane. Thus have you unawares given the public a
trial of your judgment of good wit, whilst you think it consistent with
profaneness. But could ever any Creature in the world beside thy self have
been so scandalously impertinent as to beg excuse for the sparingness of his
good jests only to avoid the danger of entrenching upon profaneness, and yet
at the same time stuff a witless and ridiculous Libel with so much impudence,
malice and ribaldry? Your last charge upon this Article is so silly, that out
of mere pity to your ignorance I could almost pass it by in silence; viz. that
whereas I affirm that our Savior, when he whipped the buyers and sellers out of
the Temple, took upon him the person and privilege of a Jewish Zealot, that is
(say you) the second person of the Trinity did Personam induere of a notorious
Rogue and Cutthroat. But to omit the classicalness of your translation out of
English into Latin, I perceive you are as much a stranger to the Rabbis as to
the Push-pin Divines (and the truth is they are both much of the same
understanding) and therefore at present I shall only advise you for the cure of
your ignorance to consult Mr Seldom de Jure Naturali and Gentium, Lib. 4. Cap.
4. and a little Treatise of Dr Hammonds upon the Subject, and there you will
find a vast difference between a Jewish and a Fifth-Monarchy Zealot; or between
the Order of Zealots in the Jewish Commonwealth founded in imitation of
Phinees and Elias, and that was empowered, or at least licensed by Public
Authority to execute notorious Malefactors without form and process of Law; and
those bloody Cutthroats that under this disguise played such reaks in the City
at the destruction of Jerusalem. I say no more, but I hope you will acknowledge
my civility to let so great a miscarriage escape with so mild a correction.
Take warning, and play no more at my heels with such trifles as these; if you
do, thank your self, if you go yelping off.

But of all the gall you have lickt up from J. O's vomit, methinks there is
none so rank and bitter as your Charge of Schism against the Church of England
upon the account of your Fanatique Separation; and that for no wiser Reasons,
than first, because Schism rhimes to Ism; and secondly, because Mr Hales has
written a Pamphlet upon the Subject. As for the first I scorn to answer it,
though it is surprising beyond all Bays his Plots, and Martyns pranks. As for
the second, if Mr Hales have printed any thing that reflects upon the Church of
England (though I have a very deep respect for his worth and piety) it is no
more to be regarded than if it had been bolted by such despicable Scriblers as
your self and J. O. and that is your answer. But if he had any such design, it
is enough if he will stand to his own definition of Schism, that you have set
in the Van of your long Quotation, that it will concern the Church of England
no more than J. O's charge of Socinianism, viz. That Schism is an unnecessary
separation of Christians from that part of the visible Church of which they
were once Members. Now he must be a bold man and something more, that will
venture to assign any Reason (beside yours of Rhithm) that shall convict the
Church of England of being the cause of any unnecessary separation from that
part of the visible Church, of which it was once a Member, only because you and
your Clients the Nonconformists tie your selves by confederacy not to submit to
her necessary injunctions; for if the things she requires and imposes in order
to the due and decent performance of Gods Worship are not necessary of
themselves, (as you plead) yet either these or some other as unnecessary as
these are. And then good Noble Marquess you might have put up your trumpery
too, and spared that grateful Penance you have undergone in transcribing so
many pages for your own proper use out of that Author. For whatever he has
suggested after this, you may assure your self the Church of England neither is
nor will be concerned. I am not ignorant that he has dropped some loose passages
in that Treatise, for which himself was then censured, and the Book is still,
though the Author be pardoned, because as he did not first publish it, so he
afterward recanted it. At least it is too well known that this learned man was
in his younger years too much tainted with the Socinian Tenets (perchance for
their novelty and singularity) and so might vent some expressions derogatory to
the established discipline of the Church in which he lived conformable to the
mind and doctrine of Socinus. Who (you know) had an ambition to set up for as
great a Patriarch as Calvin, and therefore labored as Calvin did to erect a
New Church of his own, and distinct from all other Communions, only that it
might bear his own Name. In pursuance of this design he was forced to contrive
such Conditions of Church Membership, as flatly condemned the Constitution of
all the established Churches in the world, and consequently warranted his
separation from them. Of this if you are not satisfied you may see enough in
his own Epistles to Radecius upon this Argument, where you may too (if you have
any mind to it) trace Mr Hales his Books of Schism, and undergo another as
grateful a Penance in transcribing and construing as much more to your own, i.
e. no purpose. The next time you nose the Church of England with Mr Hales, let
the Disquisitio Brevis be your Book. I will add no further censure of him, he
was a good man, and therefore if he had any defects, I shall choose to cover
them with that additional Civility that (you Page 18.
say) consecrates the ashes of the deceased. I see you are a friend to the
consecration of Relics though not of Chapels, for you have made bold to
trample upon the Learned and Venerable Bishop Andrews his ashes for leaving
behind him a form of Consecration of a Church or Chapel, Page 309.
and of the place of Christian Burial, i. e. for being a little concerned that
Posterity should know some difference between St. Paul's and a Stable. However I
shall not treat Mr Hales for your sake so as you have Bishop Bramhal for mine,
whom because, as you enviously think, I have over-praised, though you profess
your self utterly unacquainted either with his Person or his Writings, you will
not allow the truth of any one period of all the Commendations I have given
him, but represent him as a crackt-brain'd fellow that was stroke with a
notion, and crazed Page 43.
on one side of his head, and so busied himself, and troubled the world as
other mad men are wont to do with extravagant and impracticable projects, or in
digging through the separating Istmos of Peloponesus, and making a
Communication between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean. Nay, you are not
satisfied with making the Bishop alone an undertaking Coxcomb, unless you may
throw in Grotius, and all the wisest and learnedest heads of Christendom into
the same basket, they only talked like conceited fellows that went bigg forty
years with impossibilities. Page 29.
And this is as modestly chatter'd as can reasonably be expected from such an
Urchin as you, that are so sufficiently unqualified to give a competent
judgment of the best and most probable terms of Reconciliation, that you are
as yet to learn the differences of the several dissenting Parties among
themselves. Go to your Systems and your Syntagms, your sucking-bottles of
Orthodoxy, before you presume so lavishly to spend your Censures against the
most pregnant wits, and best improved Scholars in the Christian world. But to
all wise and discreet men the accommodation is feasible enough, when the truly
learned and sober of all interests are so inclinable to it; especially when the
best part of the Church of Rome it self are as desirous to abolish their
corruptions out of their own Church, as we are to keep them out of ours. The
two hindrances are the pride of the Jesuits on their side, and the sierceness
of the Calvinists on ours, so that neither of them will part with a pin (though
it have neither head nor point) for the peace and prosperity of the Church, but
the former are resolved one and all to adhere unalterably to their old
Innovations, and the latter to their new ones. And here snap me not up too
nimbly, for it is no Bull to style the Innovations of the Church of Rome old,
so they are when compared to the Calvinian Novelties. But shutting out these
two fiery and waspish Sects for eternal wranglers, it is no such difficult
thing for all sober men to agree upon a form of primitive simplicity; or if it
be, I am sure it is not encumbered with so many difficulties as was the attempt
of the Reformation, and yet so zealous a Protestant as your self would not, I
suppose, have discouraged those men that arose to that great work, from the
consideration of those many and great inconveniences that might probably ensue
upon it. However though they had been favored neither with Power nor
Opportunity to effect it, yet it had been worthy the greatness of their minds
to recommend so brave and pious a work to the Princes of Christendom. And so it
was of Bishop Bramhal and H. Grotius (that
prodigiously-erastio-arminio-socinopontificio-politique Headpiece, as a
certain long-winded Presbyterian calls him) to inform the world that the
distance between Party and Party was not so wide and irreconcilable as some
hot and eager Bigots would represent it, and their endeavors have been kindly
enough accepted by the best and most judicious men of all Communions. But here
I am snapt, for how cleverly do I contradict my self, when I say, that the
Bishop was not so Page 27.
vain nor so presuming as to hope to see his design of Catholic agreement
effected in his days, and yet but two pages before I had told you, that he
finished all the glorious designs he undertook, here no doubt I am trapt in a
palpable contradiction, and yet the escape is as easy as the pitfall, for the
Bishop only undertook to propound the way of a Catholic agreement, not to
effect it, so that though he were not so vain as to hope to see it effected in
his days, yet for all that he might finish all the glorious designs he
undertook, seeing he only undertook the proposition not the execution of this
glorious design. You see how little you get by fastening upon any of my
Assertions, no more than one of the Curr-dogs (you speak of) would by starting
and worrying of an Hedgehog. As for the rest of my Character of the Bishop, I
scorn to justify it, it were an affront not only to the greatness of his Worth
but of his Name, that will bear a much loftier Panegyric than I am able to
compose for the consecration of his ashes. Though I could tell you how by his
skill and courage he forced back the Revenues of the Church of Ireland out of
such hungry men's hands as yours, for there you must know they had finished the
Reformation that you only propound, that is, they had unrevenued the Clergy,
and in Conformity to the Primitive Times had turned all the Tithes into
Lay-fees, only allowing the Vicars comfortable stipends of about twenty or
forty shillings per annum. Now to me it seems as difficult a Task to force men
of sacrilegious stomachs to disgorge their Prey after it has been so long
poucht, as to you it does, to dig through the separating Istmos of Peloponesus.
But I will not, only to satisfy your petulant exceptions, give a retail of all
the proofs of this great man's prudence and courage; it is enough that he
related to the Earl of Strafford, and if he had not an hand in all his
enterprises, yet (though he were none of his Secretary) he had an head in all
his Counsels, and that alone, if all the reports I have heard of that Great Man
be true, will suffice to entitle him to ten times greater Elogies than those
wherewith I have consecrated his ashes, especially when you your self allow
some additional civility to the praises of the deceased. But if my character of
him be too termagant (abuse me not for this fantastic word, as you do for
several of J. O's, when it is your own) yet it is not so romantic, as your own
luscious and fustian lines wherewith you would embalm the ashes of your own
Hero, in whom you cannot but admire that Majesty and Beauty which sits upon the
forehead of masculine Truth and generous Honesty. This is properly to trick up
the good Old Divine in a yellow coif and a bulls head, to set Majesty and
Beauty upon the forehead of his Masculine Truth. The forehead of truth is a
single flower of a stronger and more rapping scent than a whole posie of Dr
Bailys. But we still take an higher flight, He was a man that had cleared
himself from froth and groans. As scurvy a Commendation this as one shall
lightly meet with! when the loftiest thing that can be said of so Great a Man
as Mr Hales, is, that he was neither a Madman nor a Fanatique. But seeing I
have acquitted my self so ill-favourdly to the Bishop, that were he alive he
would be out of love with himself, and that you (though a stranger to his worth
and person) account it a work of some piety to vindicate his Memory from so
scurvy a Commendation. I will (to make him some amends) trick him up in some of
those elaborate and studious periods wherewith you have with an additional
civility endeavored to Consecrate the ashes of the deceased. I am confident
the Bishop studied to do both God and His Majesty good Service, so that he
ought never to be mentioned without due honor; but alas, how utterly was he
mistaken, though so learned, so pious, so wise a man, he seemed to know nothing
beyond Ceremonies, Arminianism, and Manwaring, and seemed to place all the
business both of Christianity and State in persecuting men for their
Consciences differing from him in smaller matters; with these he begun, and
with these he ended, and thereby deformed the whole Reign of the best Prince,
that ever weilded the English Scepter, turning his whole Kingdom into a
Prison. What Censures, what Excommunications, what Deprivations, what
Imprisonments? I cannot represent the misery and desolation, as it has been
represented to me. But wearied out at home, many thousands of His Majesty's
Subjects, to his and the Nations great loss, thought themselves constrained to
seek another habitation, and every Country even though it were among Savages
and Canibals, appeared more hospitable to them than their own. Happy had it
been for the King, happy for the Nation, and happy for himself, had he never
clim'd that Pinnacle. He was indeed a Person, whom my age had not given me leave
to be acquainted with, nor my good fortune lead me to converse with his
Writings; but sor whom I had collected a deep reverence from the general
reputation he carried, beside the veneration due to the place he filled in the
Church of England. So that had any man a mind to show a proof of his good
nature and eloquence, he could not in my opinion have fixed upon a fitter
Subject of commendation. And therefore (here mark the Connection) I could have
wished for my own sake that I had missed this occasion of being more fully
informed of some of the Bishops Principles, whereby I have lost part of that
pleasure, which I had so long enjoyed in thinking well of so considerable a
person. But however I recreate my self, with believing that my simple judgment
cannot, beyond my intention, abate any thing of his just value with others. And
seeing he is long since dead, which I knew but lately, and now learn it with
regret, (tender heart!) I am the more obliged to repair in my self whatsoever
breaches of his credit, by that additional civility which consecrates the ashes
of the deceased. And for a proof of this my additional civility, I tell you he
was an undertaking Churchman that had a vast opinion of his own sufficiency,
and went big forty years with an useless and impracticable project, and however
he were otherwise a person of excellent prudence and learning, yet was he
struck with a Notion and crazed on one side of his head. And so neglected not
only his own Charge and Diocese, but the whole Protestant Interest both Foreign
and Domestic, to take an Ecumenical care upon him, which none called him to,
and none con'd him thanks for. Being upon his own single judgment too liberal
of the public, and retrenching upon our part more than he had Authority for,
and granting more to the Popish than they can of right pretend to. And indeed
he all along complies much for peace sake, and judiciously shows us wherein our
separation from the Church of Rome is not warrantable. And in fact made a
bridge, as Grotius too did, for the Enemy to come over, or at least laid some
of our most considerable passes open to them and unguarded, and the bottom of
all this most glorious design was only to fetter men straiter under the formal
bondage of sictitious discipline. So that this enterprise of Bishop Bramhals,
being so ill laid and so unseasonable, deserves rather an excuse than a
commendation. And beside all this he had a great respect for poor Readers, he
was no friend to preaching, he was a zealous Patron of Sports and May-poles, he
was an enemy to the reading of the Scriptures, and the observation of the
Sabbath; and lastly, he did not prevent the Irish Rebellion, or if he performed
any such wonderful things as are ascribed to him, the honor of it is due, and
ought to be given to General Usher. In short, an accusatory Spirit would desire
no better play than he gives in his own vindication. And now whatsoever all
this may have glanced upon him, it was directed only against a certain Author,
that has ill-favourdly commended him, and intended out of pure piety (and pure
piety it is) to vindicate his memory from so scurvy a Commendation, and to
repair the breaches that he through his unskilfulness had made in his Credit,
with that additional civility which consecrates the ashes of the deceased. And
have you not done it to purpose? no doubt were the Bishop alive, this
flattering Panegyric would reconcile him to himself again. But certainly such
improbable Elogies as these are of the greatest disservice to their own design,
and do in effect diminish always the person, whom they pretend to magnify.
And the result of all these elaborate and studious periods of Commendation is
to prove him only a most egregious Knave and Fool; such is your piety and
additional civility. I would know whether this be to trick him up in a yellow
Coif and a Bulls head, or to furbish him in martial accoutrements, like another
Odo of Baieux, though in your account they are all one, and you have been so
inconsistent with your self as to compare the same commendation to both, in one
page it is as effeminate as a Ladies dress, and in the next it is as martial as
a fighting man in armor. Well! you of all men are in most danger of being
choakt not with the swelling of truth (as you ridiculously speak, for truth it
self never yet choakt any man) but of falsehood and calumny. Was ever civility
graduated up and enhanced to such a value? Had you been the very pink of
courtesy you could not have endeared the Bishop with greater sweetness. Had
you spoke the language of a Lover, and transcribed the Grand Cyrus and
Cassandra, you could not have courted your Mistress in a more luscious and
extravagant style. Poor Bishop Bramhal, whether you or I are most unfortunate I
cannot determine; whether you in being always courted, or I in being always
railed at. But in good earnest I think I have the better of it; for though an
ill man cannot by praising confer honor, nor by reproaching fix an ignominy,
and so they may seem on equal terms, yet there is more in it; for at the same
time that we may imagine what is said by such an Author to be false, we
conceive the contrary to be true. This I am sure of, it is hard to disparage a
man more by slander and calumny than you have the Bishop with all your
elaborate and studious periods of commendation. And this I hope is enough to
convince you of your insolence in passing your malepert censures upon a man so
great in a matter so foreign, not only to your judicature but understanding.
But this is right Fanatique Malice and Impudence to bespatter the most worthy
persons with such foul reproaches under profession of so much love and
sweetness. And so go your way like a wretch as you are, and if you have any
spark of Virtue unextinguish'd, lament and pine away for this desperate folly,
for the disgrace you have, as far as in you is, brought not only upon this
venerable Prelate, but all the Church of England, by this undertaking, and for
the eternal shame to which you have hereby condemned your own Memory.

To this your new Edition out of Mr. Hales, I care not though I cast in that
other long lesson, that you have been at the pains to construe out of
Archbishop Parker (for should I altogether baulk it, as impertinent as it is,
I know your way of insulting) wherein he censures the Ceremonies of the Church
of Rome as too troublesome and too numerous. Why, what then? nothing at all,
but you have gained by this in English and Latin five pages, as you did eight
by Mr. Hales, a good days work and wages easily earned, and you were too hard
here for the Assigns of Theodore Beza and John Calvin; had they been aware how
cheaply you came by these 13 Pages, they would no doubt have deducted
proportionably for it out of that days Pay. But if you intended it to any other
purpose than barely to fill up, you ought to have proved either that the
Archbishop intended this against the Church of England, though certainly by
his Office he could be as to Ceremonies no Nonconformist. Or if he did not,
that yet his words fall as heavily upon the Church of England as upon the
Church of Rome. But to say only in general that in this passage he girds us no
less than J. O. himself does in his Treatise of Evangelical Love, though he
does there in broad terms indite us both of Socinianism and Popery, is such an
additional Civility to the Ashes of this Venerable Prelate, as was not long
since offered him by some of your dear Brethren, when they translated his Urn
out of the Chapel at Lambeth into an Unconsecrated Dunghill. Yes, but however
(say you) if we once grant the Church a Power of establishing Humane
Institutions in the Worship of God, they may accumulate their number till they
become as burdensome as the Roman or the Mosaic Yoke, and therefore though
the Ceremonies already enjoined are neither many nor troublesome, yet they
expose us to the peril of Superstition, for the same Authority that appoints
three, may (if it please) appoint three Hundred. And when it does so, then
complain; in the mean while it is (to say no worse) but a saucy and uncivil
deportment toward your Governors, to refuse Obedience to their reasonable
Commands, that you may not encourage them to proceed to unreasonable
Impositions. And if this may pass with you for an allowable Objection against
the use and exercise of any Authority, only because it is possible it may be
abused, then farewell all the Laws and all the Government in the World, when
it is so impossible for any of them to prevent or avoid this Exception. But
methinks it is a pleasant Entertainment to hear you tell so many sad and
heartbreaking stories of the Yoke of Moses and Superstitions of Rome upon
Occasion of three innocent Ceremonies; when they are so easy and so natural,
so without labor and distraction, that to lift up a finger requires full as
much pains and trouble. Whereas their rites were so numerous, so chargeable,
and so troublesome, that it was almost impossible any care should constantly
attend or exactly perform such an intricate service. But men that are resolved
to be seditious, are forced to be unreasonable. And what can silence their
Clamours that have the face to compare three easy and harmless Rites with the
Yoke of Moses, and the Tyranny of Antichrist. But thus split a Straw and lay it
cross a Fanatics forehead, and (as hard as it is) it shall break the back of
his Conscience.

I could have wished you had been as much refreshed and edified with the
Archbishop's Testimony as with Mr. Hales's, that so instead of quoting a
single Passage, you might have taken upon your self the grateful penance of
transcribing his whole Book, and then you would have obliged us with that
remarkable Prophecy wherewith he shuts up his Antiquities. There is nothing
more to be feared and provided against in this well-constituted Church of
England, than lest the Clergy, whilst it takes pains in the Word and Truth, and
is with the greatest Observance subject to the Sovereign Power, should be set
forth as a Prey and Spoil to the Lavish and Spend-thrifts, and be torn by the
Reproaches and Contumelies of the Ignorant, and exposed to the Affronts and
Insolences of the Rascal-Rabble; If this shall ever happen, more heavy Scourges
from God, and sadder times than those of Queen Mary's Reign may justly be
expected. And yet thus it has been, and thus it must be, wherever it is the
humor and fashion to vilify the Priesthood, Religion becomes contemptible
with its Officers, and where that loses its Esteem and Reverence, Government
loses its support and security. And this was at the bottom of our late wild and
wanton Rebellion, that the People were debauched into a slight regard of all
things Sacred and Civil by the bold and juggling suggestions of a few ambitious
and sacrilegious Malcontents, and then it was not only easy but natural to
put Affronts upon all the Proceedings of Authority, to bear down all its
Remonstrances, and run the Commonwealth into flat Anarchy and open War. You
see how little Execution is to be done upon the Church of England with the
But-end of an Archbishop, as you express it with Page 281.
equal Wit and Manners.

Here the Quotation of my Lord Verulam, which you could produce to my Page 166.
confusion, would in my opinion have been much more to the purpose; but to tell
us what you can say without saying it, is only to talk to your self. Or the
story of Pork, that you forbear to tell too, because you say I know it, but I
say I do Page 320.
not know it, or if I did, you should however have had the Manners to have told
it for his Majesty's sake, because he knows how to make use on it.

But another Qualm that is upon every turn throwing you into groaning Fits is,
that after all my seeming and pretended zeal for the Church of England (for
which you have the greatest kindness in the World, were it not for the
Pick-thankness and Pick pocketingness of the Clergy) I shall be found by any
unpack'd Jury of Divines little better than a rank Erastian; a word you have
picked up out of Bishop Bramhal, though for any thing you know, that may
signify a Wizard or a Magician, yes, or a Jewish Zealot, i. e. a notorious
Rogue and Cutthroat. But be it what it will, this too was (as all the rest
are) J. O's grievance. And you are both Crafty Colts, that when you know your
selves unable to answer Arguments presently spurn at them with some false and
foul Recrimination. I scorned to take any notice of his Braying, and so I
should of yours; but that I perceive some weak and well meaning Brethren, that
are only wont to skim and skip over Books, to be a little startled at the
Impeachment, because I all along discourse of the Power of the King and not of
the Church, though the reason of it is very obvious, viz. because the Subject I
designed and proposed to treat of was the Power of the King, and not of the
Church; so that if you and J. O. are aggrieved at any thing, it is for no other
cause than that I have stuck close enough to my own Argument, and too close to
yours. Now Sir, as you well remember, you have for want of wiser Remarques
calculated at least ten times over in what Year of the Lord, and upon what day
of the Month my several Books were born, and then, if you will compare it, you
will find that the juncture of Affairs to which the first was accommodated, was
at a certain Season after the Chatham Adventure, when you began to lift up your
Heads, and to Nose your Governors, and to make bold demands in the name of
your Consciences against the late illegal Impositions of King and Parliament.
And you know what innumerable swarms of Pamphlets you were perpetually sending
abroad only to declare to all his Majesty's good Subjects (that either were
already out of humor, or had a mind so to be) that if himself or any other
Civil Magistrate whatsoever shall presume to challenge or exercise any
Authority over their Free born Consciences in any matters of Religion
whatsoever, he usurps upon the Royalty of God, and involves himself in the
guilt of Tyranny and Persecution. This was loud and broad enough to alarm the
Church of England, we understood the men and their meaning; and had no mind
(believe me) to have that comfortable settlement restored to Church and State
by his Majesty's happy Restoration unravel'd by these Men's bold and insolent
Pretenses. And therefore diverse Persons out of pure Love for the Church, and
Loyalty to their Prince, and Zeal to their Country, set themselves to beat
back all your new Republican Pleas of Sedition, and to assert his Majesty's
Prerogative against all your old Shifts of Dis-loyalty. Among the rest I had no
more Wit than to thrust my self too forward into the Scuffle, and to pursue you
too close through all your peevish Clamours and Pretenses. For when I saw men
of known and approved Enmity to the present State, buzze abroad such Exorbitant
Principles among the Common People, as flatly contradict all the Principles,
and defeat all the Obligations of Government, I could not, I ought not to
refrain from lashing such Lewd Designs with some Warmth and Smartness of
Reproof, and if I have any where overlash'd, it was out of an overvehement
Concern for the Peace and Prosperity of my Country; though for my own part I
am not sensible of any one Expression that is chargeable with the least
Harshness or Incivility; I have only expressed ill things by their Proper
Names; and whereas both your self and J. O. pour fourth in every Page incessant
complaints of Railing and Reviling, that is but an Uncivil Word that you may
throw at any man that you are not fond of; and it proceeds merely from your Old
prodigious Pride and Partiality to your selves, who whilst you make it both
your Recreation and Employment to invent or blazon Slanders against the
Innocent, rave and foam at all Conviction of guilt against your selves. I have
challenged you often enough to specify but one foul or false word in all my
Writings, to name but one good Quality, that you possess, that I have not
granted you, or one bad one, that you disclaim, and I have unjustly charged
upon you, and I will be content to suffer all the Engines of Clergy men's
Cruelty, the Pillorie, the Whipping posts, the Galleys, the Rods, the Axes, and
the Rhinolabides; nay what is a more desperate Penance than all this, I have
stipulated to write a Panegyric in praise of the Good Nature of the
Presbyterians, and the Sincerity of the Independants, and I think it would
puzzle the Wit of Mankind to invent a severer Penalty, unless it were to write
another in Commendation of your Wit and Learning. But whilst you continue this
outcry against me only in general Terms without being able to produce
particular Articles to vouch and justify it, you prove nothing but your want
of breeding and better Arguments, and the Calumny when you cannot drive it
home, recoils upon your own Heads. He that charges another of an uncivil Crime,
when he cannot make it good, indites himself. And yet perhaps in spite of my
Integrity I may have been too zealous for my King and Country, Plain-dealing
is too rough a Virtue for this false and self-designing Age. But be that as it
will, and as for the decency of the manner of my treating you, when I have said
all I can (and I have said too much already) I must leave it to the Judgment of
the World. I am now only concerned to vindicate the matter of my discourses
against you, and here I have laid open your juggling so plainly that it is a
Reproach to Mankind that you should still persevere so immodestly in the same
Impostures. This is no bragging, no man that had any consisistency in his Skull
could have performed less in so plain and palpable a Case. For what can be more
notorious than that

1. When you exempt your Consciences from the jurisdiction of your Prince you
exempt your selves, both in that a man and his Conscience are one and the same
thing, and in that he is not capable of any obligation of Laws, but purely by
virtue of his Conscience.

2. When you exempt matters of Religion from the same Power, you in effect
exempt all things, there being nothing of any considerable weight or
concernment in humane affairs, that is not matter of Religion, and much more so
than those things that you contend about; and this dashes in pieces all your
general pleas. But then

3. As for your particular pleas of Scandal, and an unsatisfied Conscience, and
unscriptural Ceremonies, etc. what can be more evident than

1. That they are precarious and depend purely upon your own humors?

2. That they are unavoidable in all Churches and all Constitutions in the
world?

3. That they are so unreasonable as that they may be adapted or applied to
subvert all Government in the Church as well as ours, even your own? And if
after all this you will not learn to be quiet and peaceable, you will first or
last thank your selves for something that must follow; and then your being big
with conscience will not serve to reprieve you: You are ferreted out of all
your subterfuges, and they are laid open to the view and scorn of all men. And
you have now nothing left to shelter your selves, but only by slandering your
Adversaries, and persuading the people (for you presume strangely upon their
ignorance and stupidity) that whilst we assert His Majesty's Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, we invest him with an unhoopable Jurisdiction; which being so bold
and rank a forgery it is to all intelligent men, (i. e. all such as can either
read or understand) an ample demonstration of a desperate and baffled Cause.
But by the way, how is this consistent with what you as often suggest, that my
design was to write against the Power of the King, and to animate the People
against the exercise of his Ecclesiastical Page 278.
Supremacy? Are you not sufficiently furnished with informations against any
man, that can in the same indictment charge him for plotting and attempting at
the same time to assert the unlimited Power of Kings, and yet to allow them
none at all; certainly between two such wide extremes a man can never want for
materials to make out an impeachment. But how have I animated the People
against the exercise of His Majesty's Supremacy? How! have I not written
expressly against his Indulgence to tender Consciences? Not one syllable; you
know well enough, I have only beat down and witnessed against your demands of
Indulgence, when you challenge it from the King by virtue of your Natural and
Religious Rights, and charge him as a Tyrant toward his Subjects, and a Rebel
against God, if he presume to claim or pretend to any Jurisdiction over your
Consciences or Religious Pretenses; the insolence of this kind of talk was not
to be endured, and therefore it was that I set my self to clear and defend His
Majesty's Supremacy against such plain, and yet (to the Rout) plausible
Principles of Anarchy and Confusion. But I was no where so presumptuous as to
censure or condemn the measures Page 264.
he has taken of his Government; pardon me Sir for that, we of the Bran of the
Church of England have modesty enough to submit to the wisdom of our
Superiors, when ever they are pleased to declare their will and pleasure. And
whatever may be my own private Opinion, neither I (nor any other good Subject)
shall ever go about to confront it to the public Declarations of the State;
so that as long as the Government shall think good to grant you Indulgence,
assure your self (whatever you simply surmise) I shall never trouble them with
Page 144.
Remonstrances. They understand the turns and junctures of their own affairs,
and are the most competent Judges what methods are fittest to procure both
their own and our quiet. And though they should at any time mistake, yet if
there were no other tie of duty, it is more eligible they should be complied
with, than that their Government should be affronted, and the Commonwealth
disturbed by every man that thinks himself wiser than his Governors. But Sir,
though we are so dutiful to His Majesty as to submit to his granting
Indulgence, if he apprehends it seasonable for his present Affairs; and as for
his power of dispensing with Laws, by virtue of his Prerogative, we have
nothing to do with it by virtue of our Office, it is a matter foreign to our
Judicature; and therefore it is not only manners but duty in us to leave it to
our Governors to adjust such disputes among themselves. But yet though we are
so entirely submissive to our Prince, yet assure your selves we shall never be
so civil to you, as to suffer you to challenge a right to it in spite of his
Power, and to extort it from him as he would not stand charged before God of
Tyranny and Usurpation. You see now the vast difference between opposing the
Kings Power to give Indulgence, and yours to demand it; and whether he give it,
or give it not, as he sees it most convenient for the ends of Government,
concerns neither Me nor my Writings, seeing in both he exercises that
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that I have asserted to be inherent in the Supreme
Power. At least you see what reason I had to discourse of the Kings Power,
rather than the Churches, because that was the only Principle you endeavored
to batter down, and if once you could but tie up the Secular Arm, you valued
not the strokes of the Spiritual Rod; so that had I opposed the Power of the
Church to your attempts of Anarchy, it had been as wisely designed as to send
forth a party of Churchmen to encounter a Brigade of Horse with their
Spiritual Weapons. But because I see you are resolved not to spare for laying
on load enough, and have the confidence to impeach or suspect a man of any
thing that is odious, if he do not expressly protest against it, and because
some other men that I have more reason to satisfy than your self, have fallen
into the same suspicion of Erastianism, take this short and plain account of
the whole business, for the prevention of future mistakes. Religion then has a
twofold End, either as it relates to the affairs of this present life, or of
that which is to come, and so is enforced with a twofold Jurisdiction or Power
of Coaction suitable to its respective ends. Now its design in reference to
this present world is the peace of Societies, and the security of Government,
and therefore it must be enforced by such sanctions as are proper to the
attainment of that end, and those are secular rewards and punishments; so that
this being the Office of the Civil Magistrate, or (as you word it according to
that deep respect you profess to Princes) the trade of Kings, to provide for
the safety or welfare of the Commonwealth, all his Jurisdiction must be
temporal, and backed only by external inflictions, as suited only to the ends of
his Authority. His Power then over Religion is of a Political Nature, and is
intended to the same purpose as his Power over all other affairs of State, i.
e. the public peace and prosperity, and therefore need only be exercised in
the same way of Jurisdiction, and this is that Authority that I have all along
asserted to be the natural and unalienable Right of all Sovereign Princes. But
then secondly, its design in reference to the world to come is purely
spiritual, and relates only to the welfare of the Souls of men hereafter, and
therefore is to be prosecuted by such enforcements as are apt to govern Souls
without laying restraints upon their bodies. Now the only sanctions proper in
this case are the rewards and punishments of another life, and this is the
power of the Ecclesiastic State Authoritatively to declare the Laws of God to
the People, and to enforce their obedience to them from the threatenings and
promises of the Gospel. And to this purpose did our blessed Savior depute the
Apostolical order or succession of Apostles to superintend the Affairs of his
Holy Catholic Church; it is the right of their Office and Commission, to
consult, advise, and determine in all disputes that concern the Government, and
the welfare of all Christian Assemblies; and their Decrees are obligatory upon
the Consciences of men, by virtue of their own proper Authority, and under
their own proper penalties. For as all their Power is merely spiritual, so are
all the Sanctions of their Laws, and therefore though they cannot by virtue of
their own inherent Jurisdiction punish the disobedient with Civil and Secular
inflictions, yet may they require and demand obedience to their constitutions
under pain of the Divine displeasure, and the lash of the Apostolical Rod; and
their sentence when regularly passed upon refractory offenders is valid and
terrible as a decree of heaven; and if there be any truth or sense in our
Saviors words to the College of Apostles, that whatsoever they shall bind on
Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; their Censures shall be approved and ratified
by the judgment of the Almighty. And that man deserves the wrath of God that
is want only rebellious and incorrigible to the soft and gentle discipline of
his Church, this is such a desperate and malicious peevishness, that it does of
it self consign a man up to final contumacy and utter impenitence. He is too
stubborn, and too impudent to be reclaimed that dares rashly bid defiance to
the wisdom and authority of his ghostly guides and governors; but when the
exterminating sentence is passed upon the Offender, it smites like the sword of
an Angel, it throws him out of the Church, and the ordinary capacities of
Mercy, and delivers him up to the wrath and judgment of God. And this is no
more than what is necessary to the very Being and Preservation of all Society;
in that Society cannot subsist without Order, nor Order without Authority, nor
Authority without a Power of requiring and enforcing Obedience; and therefore
if our Savior have founded a Church in the world, and does design its
continuance to the end of it, it is necessary he should provide for its
Preservation by delegating some peculiar persons to govern and guide the
Society by Laws and Penalties, otherwise his Church were no better than a wild
and ungovernable Rabble, that only meet together by chance or by humor, and
are under no enforcements of orderly and peaceable behavior. And this would be
a worthy representation of the Church of Christ, that it is only a Rout of rude
People without Law or Government. But as it is necessary that Ecclesiastical
Affairs should be governed, so is it that this should be done by Ecclesiastical
persons, whose profession, and peculiar employment it is to study and
understand those matters; and it is but reasonable to rely upon their
judgment, who ought to be presumed best skilled in the nature of the thing, it
is no more than what common prudence directs to in all other affairs of life to
consult and trust every man in his own profession; we do not apply our selves
to Physicians for the settlement of our Estates, nor to Lawyers for the
preservation and recovery of our healths. But men are to be entrusted and
employed with regard to their own proper skill and office, and therefore though
we should set aside the express Authority of our Saviors commission to the
Apostles and their Successors for the perpetual Government of his Church, the
very rules of common prudence will cast the management of Ecclesiastical
matters upon Ecclesiastical persons; and this is so avowed a principle among
mankind, that the Jurisdiction proper to the Church was never yet invaded by
any Laics, till the other day the Tradesmen and Burgers of the Corporation of
Geneva banished Vid. vit. Joan. Calvini.
their Prince and Bishop, and then took the Government both of Church and State
into their own hands; and seated the Power of the Keys in Mr. Mayor and the
Town Clerk, and issued out Excommunications under the Town Seal, and every
Fisherman upon the Lake Lemane, if he were a Livery man of the City,
immediately became an Apostle, and the Spirit of Infallibility forsook the
whole Order of Churchmen, and settled upon every illiterate Mechanic that had
a bold Face and a loose Tongue. And with what Apostolical Wisdom and Gravity
they made Religion it self ridiculous, Mr. Calvin himself has informed us
particularly in the cases of Bertileir Vid. Epist. Calv.
and Perin, who were absolved from the Sentence of Excommunication by the Page
122.
Common Council and under the Town-Seal. And it is observable that those States
that have made bold to despise or disregard the Power of the Clergy, have
always first prostituted the Revenues of the Church to the worst of men, and in
a little time the Government of it to the Scorn and Contempt of the Common
Rabble. And therefore all wise and pious Princes have ever chosen to govern
Religion by the Counsel and Assistance of their Clergy, and to be determined in
Enquiries of Faith by their Decrees and Declarations, for though all Power of
External Coercion be vested in the Civil Magistrate, yet that of teaching and
declaring the Law of God is the Right and Office of Ecclesiastics; so that
though they cannot force Princes to confirm and ratify their Decrees, yet may
Princes be obliged by Virtue of an Higher Authority, by regard to Piety and
Religion, by the Order and Decency of things, to have reference to their
Judgments; though if they will not, it is not in the Power of the Church to
call them to an account for their Proceedings (as the men of Rome and Geneva
talk) That shall be demanded at an higher Judicature; they can only declare and
discharge their Duty, and leave the pursuance of their Cause to the Judgment of
God. For in all Affairs whatsoever capable of External Cognizance the Supreme
Civil Power must and will overruled; this is absolutely necessary to the Order
and Preservation of Government, and the World must be governed as they will, or
not be governed at all. And thus have I briefly proved that the Clergy must be
vested with some Power peculiar to themselves both from the Institution of
Christ and the nature of Society, for as much as the Constitution of the Church
as such is distinct from that of the Civil State, so that all Christians are
obliged to the Visible Profession of the Name of Christ, not only without the
leave, but against the Edicts of the Supreme Authority of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths. The next thing to be considered against Erastus is that their
Office is not merely declarative or ministerial, but carries proper
jurisdiction in all the Acts and Exercises of its Power, and enforces all its
Decrees by Penalties and Inflictions; and wherever we find Coercion, there is
all that can be required to the Nature and Exercise of Jurisdiction, that is
nothing else but a Power of Imposing Laws and Inflicting Punishments, and
whoever has a Right to both these Acts of Government, has all that Authority
that is proper to Empire and Dominion; and whatsoever Privileges and
Prerogatives of absolute Sovereignty we can imagine, they are all reducible to
one of these swo Heads either a Power of requiring Obedience to its Commands or
of punishing Disobedience by its Penalties, and both these are apparently
included in the Priestly Office, that consists of two parts, first the
Authoritative Power of Preaching, whereby they are enabled to declare Divine
Laws under Penalty of the Divine Displeasure, and this is proper Legislation,
and is declared to be so in his Original Commission granted by our Savior to
his Apostles and their Successors to the End of the World, in that he sent
them as his Father sent him, to teach or disciple all Nations, whereby he
derived upon them the same Power that himself was furnished with from above to
pursue the same ends, so that if he himself were entrusted with any proper
Jurisdiction, he has conveyed and imparted the same to the Apostolical Office
and Order, and that he was so is an unquestionable and granted Case on all
sides, and therefore he himself founds the Validity of their Commission upon
the Right of his Power. All Power in Heaven and Earth (says he) is given me of
my Father, therefore go, etc. I am now enthroned Sovereign Lord of the whole
Creation, and the Exercise of all my Fathers Power is entrusted to my
Management, and therefore in the first place I appoint and Authorize you and
your Successors in my Name and by Virtue of my Supremacy to take care of the
Guidance and Instruction of my Church, this is the Office and Power to which
you are deputed next and immediately under my self, in the Discharge and
Execution whereof I engage all my Power to be immediately assistant to you to
the end of the World. So that it is plain that their Power of Preaching and
Declaring the Laws of the Gospel is properly Authoritative and of the same
Nature though of a Subordinate force with our Saviors own Dominion over
Mankind, and all Men by Virtue of his Command and his Commission are bound to
give Obedience to their Doctrines, in the right and Faithful Discharge of their
Trusts, as to the Authorized Stewards of his Mysteries. And then as for the
other part of the Power of the Keys or Church Censures, it is as full of
Jurisdiction as any Secular Power whatsoever; it judges, gives Sentence, and
inflicts Punishment in Criminal Causes, and though they do not execute their
own Judgment but leave it to the Divine Justice, yet where God has promised to
abett their Censures by his immediate Power, it is the same thing as to all the
purposes of Government, as if it were done by the stroke of their own Arm, and
though they did but only minister to the Divine Judgment, as to these
immediate Inflictions of Heaven, yet the sentence it self is a severe instance
and exercise of Coercive Jurisdiction; it cuts a man off from all the
Advantages of the Communion of Saints, and of our Saviors Incarnation, and
that is a Capital Execution, and more affrightful to any man that makes
Profession of the Christian Faith than all the Rods and Axes and Pillories and
Whipping-posts of the Secular Power.

And as their Authority carries in it true and proper Jurisdiction, so is it in
its Kind, Supreme, Universal and Uncontrollable; and extends to all Nations;
Ages and Conditions. Kings and Princes are subject to the Spiritual Authority
of their Doctrines, they have Souls to be conducted to Heaven as well as their
Subjects, and therefore stand as much in need of Spiritual Guides and
Instructors; for if Christ have entrusted the Spiritual Government of his
Church in the hands of his Apostles and their Successors, then all its Members
of what Rank and Quality soever are regularly to make enquiries, and receive
determinations of Conscience from their Mouths; and when the Bishop reproves
his Prince of any enormous Vice, if he refuse to hear him, he sins against the
Command of God, who has given him Authority in his name to declare and to bind
every man's Duty upon his Conscience under pain of the Divine Displeasure, and
it is an equal Aggravation of Guilt in all men before God to break his Commands
against the Sentence and Declaration of his Officers. This is so clear and
obvious a Truth, that if there be any Divine Institution or perpetual Necessity
of a Priestly Office in the Church, the greatest must be equally bound with the
least to Obedience, not by the Coercion of Secular Penalties, but by the Ties
of Religion and the Judgments of God. I mean not hereby to excuse the boldness
and insolence of those men that take upon them to upbraid and expose their
Prince with public and Pulpit Reproofs. This is to abuse the Dignity of their
Office into the Ill-manners and Sedition of the Kirk, that insulted in nothing
more than putting affronts upon Kings, and exposing them and their Authority to
the contempt of the Rabble. No, but all Addresses to Superiors must be
private, and prudent, and modest, and though Kings may and ought to be informed
of their duty as well as Subjects, yet it must be done with all the Arts of
Gentleness and Humility; and if any man shall abuse his Sacerdotal Freedom to
vent unhandsom and disgraceful Reflections upon his Superiors, he deserves (as
much as you do) the Scorn of a Buffoon and the Correction of the Stocks.

And now from these Premises it is very easy to determine the bounds of the
Imperial and the Priestly Power, notwithstanding that both are and must be
acknowledged Supreme in their several Kinds. The Prince is Supreme and Absolute
over all things and persons within his own Dominions, as far as they concern
the Affairs of this present Life, but yet when they are considered purely as
relating to the Life to come, the Priest is Superior; and therefore in all
cases of Competition (whenever they happen) he can only refer the Justification
of himself and his Cause to the future Judgment of God, but at present he must
be content either to obey the Commands, or (if in Cases of manifest Obedience
to God he cannot) to submit to the Authority of his present Superiors; and if
it be his Fortune to oppose the Judgment of his Prince, there is no remedy but
he must suffer his Lot, and rather choose to be endamaged in his own private
affairs than that Government should be disturbed or defeated for his sake. Here
then is no interfering of the two Jurisdictions, the exercise of the one is
Spiritual, and of the other Secular; and so being of different natures, and to
different ends, they may both without any material inconvenience be supreme in
their different kinds, and if the Ecclesiastical State shall at any time think
it self obliged to controwl the civil power, it is only of a spiritual
efficacy, and brings no direct disadvantage to the supreme Authority, because
it has ordinarily no visible force but in the World to come, and that makes no
alteration in the present state of things. So that the exercise of the supreme
civil Power is as uncontrollable as if it were absolute and not limited by the
spiritual, because at present it must prevail as to the Government of the
World, and the effectual execution of its Decrees. And thus have I (to avoid
dull or wilful mistakes) as briefly as the nature of the Subject would permit,
proved the necessity of a spiritual Authority in the Church as a distinct
society by it self, and in order to its peace here and the salvation of its
members hereafter. And then that it is not a merely ministerial Office, but is
Authoritative to all the intents and purposes of Jurisdiction, and in the next
place that it is supreme and uncontrollable in its own kind by any other Power
whatsoever, and lastly that its spiritual Supremacy is no infringement to the
civil Rights of Sovereign Princes, in that their Power must notwithstanding all
Countermands whatsoever overruled in the present Government of the World. And
now I hope you see how plainly the spiritual Power of the Church is
reconcilable with the Ecclesiastical Supremacy of Kings, and that there is no
necessity (as you dream) that whoever asserts one must unavoidably casheir the
other. And upon review of the whole ^^ate of the controversy, it is some
comfort and satisfaction to me, that as I have not vested the civil Magistrate
with any other Power than what is and ever has been challenged by all
Commonwealths in the World, so I never could meet with any thing objected
against it, but what proceeded purely from malice or inadvertency. And that is
all the trouble I have been put to both by you and J. O. to vindicate easy and
honest assertions from wilful or sleepy Mistakes.

But the great Misprison of all, and that approaches nearest to Treason against
modern Orthodoxy is my presuming to trample upon your great secret of
symbolical Ceremonies, which hard word is now become the only remaining
Palladium of your Cause, and Idol of your Conventicles, for in our days it is
not with you as it was from the Reign of good Queen Elizabeth quite down to
that of the Good Long Parliament. The Good Gentlemen of those times had the
Holy Discipline, and the Scepter of the Lord Christ to rattle in the Peoples
and the Princes ears; but those good days are gone, and the Kirk-discipline
when it came to be put in practice, though it were an Iron rod upon the backs
of Kings, yet it proved such a wooden Scepter among the Common People, that it
quickly wore it self into sport and contempt, and all the little Folk that
waged War with so much zeal and fury against Prelacy and Antichrist, only aimed
their strokes at random, and railed and raged at they knew not what, till at
last they became ashamed at the littleness of their own Pretenses, and how
little all of them were able to perforn in behalf of the Divine Right of
Presbytery sufficiently appears to the world by the great Smectymnuan labors.
Nothing but a complicated dullness could ever have brought forth such a
phlegmatic and insipid Pamphlet, and no man has now so little wit, or so much
confidence as to own, much less to appear in defense of such a contemptible and
baffled Cause, or if there should remain a Scot or an High-Lander so
unalterably peevish, he lies below both our scorn and our confutation. But
though their Principles have forsaken them, yet they (so invincible is their
constancy) will never forsake their Principles, but having once been drawn into
a Revolt from the Church by a manifest Imposture, they have too much stomach to
confess their fault so far as only to return back to her Communion; and
therefore Covenant one and all to stand firm to their party, and justify
themselves as they can. And then the result of all their Messages,
Remonstrances and Declarations is the illegal and arbitrary imposition of
unscriptual Ceremonies, by which (when we come to treat more closely) they mean
nothing else but only those three established in the Church of England, for
they themselves never stick to allow or practice any others, so these be
excepted. And had you wit and learning enough to judge of Nonsense, you would
even cross your self (were it not a Popish Symbol) to observe what a deal of
Metaphysics J. O. has lavished away upon this Argument. But alas, you show so
little judgment, as to slide over his great depths of subtilty, and fix upon
speculations so wretchedly shallow, that every man has wit enough to fathom
their folly. Thus I verily believed I had in my first Book acquitted my self
manfully enough toward battering down this Theological Scar-crow, that you
have set up in the high places of Armageddon to fray away the People, or rather
Boys and Girls from the Communion of the Church; by showing that it is so far
from being a crime in any Ceremonies to be significant and symbolical, that it
is their only nature and office so to be; that the signification of all
Ceremonies is equally arbitrary; that it is of the very same kind, and to the
very same purpose with that of words; and therefore that all tender Consciences
have the same reason to be offended at the one as the other. These I thought in
the simplicity of my heart solid and satisfactory notions, and counted upon it
that we should never more be annoyed with such a thin and empty bubble. But
behold out stalks the great Leviathan J. O. and pours upon me such a volley of
Distinctions, as would have stunded a whole Regiment of stouter and more
experienced Schoolmen than my self. In the first place he distinguishes (very
subtilely!) between the Appointment and the Institution of Page 277, 8, 9, 10.
Ceremonies, the first he allows of, but the last is or may be blasphemy. From
hence he advances to distinguish between natural and customary signs, and then
of customary signs, between Catholic and Topical, and these all pass muster.
But as for all such wicked signs as signify neither by Nature nor by Custom,
but only by virtue of their Institution, they are full of such rank and
desperate Idolatry, that the people of God ought rather than suffer themselves
to be defiled with them, to tear the Church into Schisms, and the State into
Wars, to murder and banish Kings, to subvert the Government and destroy
Religion. At their own peril therefore be it (as he threatens them) if
Magistrates will be venturing at such a dangerous extravagance of power, because

1. They have not any absolute Authority over the sign and thing signified.

2. They cannot change their Natures, nor create a new relation between them.

3. They cannot give a mystical and spiritual efficacy to them. And then
lastly, as for the signification of words that I have paralleled with that of
Symbols, the Schoolmen have demonstrated it, that when they are signs of sacred
things, they are signs of them, only as things, but not as sacred. Here are
dragons and deeps; it were worth a man's while to work in the Mines of
Metaphysics for such Jewels as these; this is gibberish strong enough to make
a Rosi-crucian mad, and were J. O. in good earnest, I should (notwithstanding
all Quarrels) be so much his friend as to provide him a dark lodging and clean
straw. But what wretched fooling this is, any man that has a mind to the sport,
may see in my Reply to him where I gave my self the divertisement of ferreting
him from distinction to distinction, i. e. from nonsense to nonsense. And
methinks it is no unpleasant sight to see a poor Rat thus to work and traverse
it about, to find some little hole wherein he may hide his baffled head, and
when he can hope for no other shelter then to stand still and wink hard. But as
for your part though you are in the very same straits, yet you have the
confidence to think your self close, with your eyes open, and all the world
staring at you. Thus whereas your most astonishing objection from Cartwright
downwards (for just where he begun you have all left off, and stand like the
statue of Erasmus in the posture of turning over a leaf, but without ever
turning it over will stand in the same posture to the day of judgment) against
the Institution of Symbolical Rights, is, that it is no less an attempt than to
entrench upon the Divine Prerogative by offering to institute new Sacraments,
J. O. in particular expresses his sense of it thus, that to say that the
Magistrate has power to institute visible signs of Honor to be observed in the
Page 277.
outward worship of God, is upon the matter to say, that he has power to
institute new Sacraments; for so such things would be. For this I took him up
somewhat roundly as he deserved, I upbraided him with the precariousness of the
Cavil; I challenged him with that plain answer that he could not but know had
always been returned to it, viz. that Divine Institution is the only thing
necessary to the nature and the office of a Divine Sacrament, and so at last I
dared him to renounce his Argument if he would not take notice of his answer.
And I could do no less, when they have for above one hundred and fifty years
together vexed and haunted us with such a newfangled nothing. To all this what
do you reply? why, after a tedious deal of forced mirth and grinning you
gravely inform us that the Non-conformists were never Page 218.
so silly as to attempt to prove that these Symbolical Ceremonies are indeed
Sacraments. Nothing less, it is that which they most labor against. And now is
it not time for me to cry Victory and Triumph, when I have put an end to so
long and bloody a War, when I have gained all that we have fought for ever
since Cartwrights Rebellion, when you your self have resigned up the
Controversy, and tied all their Champions and their Chiefteins to my Chariot
wheels? Are you not a trusty Patron of the dear Brethren and their dear Cause
to give them all up thus broadly for a generation of egregious and incorrigible
block-heads, should they ever be so weak as to go about to prove that these
Symbolical Ceremonies are indeed Sacraments? When it is the very Curtana of the
Cause, when it is the only weapon wherewith Cartwright gored the Bowels of the
Church, and that has been transmitted successively to all their Champions down
to J. O. and the Cobbler of Gloucester; when it is so undeniably upon record in all
their writings; when it is the subject of so many whole Books; and when it is
still the last word of all their brawls and contentions. So that you say well,
It is time indeed for the Page 218.
Non-conformists to desire a truce to bury their dead, nay, there are none left
alive to desire it, but they are slain every mothers son of them. But it is you
that are Sir Solomon or the dead-doing Scanderbag, that have laid them all a
gasping, and not left such a Creature as a Nonconformist in Nature. Was ever
Cause thus defended, or men thus abused, to be marked out for a succession of
incurable dunces for spending so much zeal and logique in so absurd a Cause.
But poor J. O. what an unfortunate wretch art thou, that thou art an old
Cob-nut in Controversy, conqueror of Scores upon scores, in comparison of
whose Eristical prowess both Sir Solomon and his Sword were but wooden tools;
that when thou were so unfortunately and so unexpectedly dashed to pieces, that
then thou should be so strangely unhappy or unadvised, as to hire such an
empty and unkernel'd shell as this to avenge thy ruin, a thing so soft and
harmless that a pellet of dow or soft clay would have done as much execution,
and yet so silly and ignorant too that he knows not on which side to play his
strokes, and as lamentably bruised as thou art, has discharged all his little
strength upon thine own head. He has drol'd upon you (as far as his wit would
give him leave) in as many capacities as you have past through Providential
Revolutions; he sometimes abuses you, as tall J the Consonant, and sometimes as
little I the Vowel; sometimes he makes sport with you, as in Conjunction with
O, sometimes as at opposite points; sometimes you are a Talisman i. e. (as much
as you detest it) an Idolatrous Image, and sometimes an He-cow, i. e. either a
Bull or an Ox, and at last a very man with an hot head, a wide mouth, a rude
tongue, rotten teeth, and long nails, with abundance more of such small
tap-lash and blew- John that he has wantonly squirted upon your venerable and
immortal Name. And then after all this has recorded you for a dull and
senseless tool upon supposition that you could be so simple and weak-headed as
to assert, what he could not but know you have given under your own hand in
legible black and white. And now have you not all reason to join throats to
rail down that villainous Engine the Press, and the drunken Dutchman that would
not be content with the Wine Press; not for contriving (as you accuse him)
those innumerable Syntagms of Alphabets that have ever since pestered the
world; for there is not one Alphabet now extant, that was not reduced into the
Syntagm of a Cris-cross row some ages before the Dutchman was born, except
only the Universal Character, and that was invented some Ages since. I had
almost forgot J. O's Primer, that would never suffer the Letters to be ranged
under the Conduct of a Cris-cross: For having of his own head disbanded the
Lords Prayer, he was Commissioned by Authority of Parliament to casheir or at
least new model the Cris-cross-row; and what reformation he wrought in the
several squadrons of vowels, mutes, semivowels, etc. I shall not here relate;
but as for the poor Cross, that was without any mercy turned out of all
service, not because it kept always so close to the Loyal or malignant party,
but because it was a mere symbolical Ceremony set there on purpose to transform
a plain english Alphabet into a Popish Cris-cros-row. A great and pious work!
worthy the pains of so great a Divine, and the Wisdom of so long a Parliament.

But to return; has not your beloved Press after all your fondness sold you a
sweet bargain, and more than turned her tail upon you? With what zeal and
courage have you asserted its Liberty from the bondage of Imprimaturs and the
Inquisition of Prelates? What stiff and stubborn Homilies have you made to make
it good that the suppression of a good Libel is no less than Martyrdom, and
Areo page Page 4.
if it extend to the whole Impression a kind of Massacre, whereof the Execution
ends not in the slaying of an Elemental Life, but strikes at that ethereal and
fifth essence, the breath of Reason it self, slays an Immortality rather than a
Life? Such fustian bumbast as this past for stately wit and sense in that Age
of politeness and reformation. Have you suffered Banishment and Persecution
together; has the Engine been content to wander with so mean a fellow as Newman
the Cobbler through almost all Counties of the Kingdom for the sake of
publishing seditious and abusive Pamphlets; has it drawn your selves and your
un-cris-cross'd Letters into seditious words and meetings? and then (vilain as
it is*) does it turn informer? and when you had thought you had confidence
enough to outbrazen all accusations by word of mouth, and to forswear your own
most avowed Principles and most notorious practices, what a surprising trepan
is this, that this perfidious and apostate Engine should betray all, and
produce your own Writings and Records against your selves? What think you now
of a public Tooth-drawer to wrench out its old ugly rotten teeth? there is no
outfacing this printed black and white, and nothing could be more rashly and
indiscreetly done than for you to attempt it. You had been a prudent man
indeed, had you applied your self to J. O. and the rest of your good masters
that set you on work, and paid you your wages, and told them plainly,
Gentlemen you engage at such mighty disadvantage on that side of the question
that you have hitherto undertaken, that it is not possible for humane
confidence to defend your cause. Burn therefore all your old Puritan books,
wheel about to the opinion of the Church of England, and force them to wheel
about to yours, and then if you your selves will but stand stoutly to it for
face and conscience let Crop alone. But now when you have done this of your own
head, and without any of their Commission; you have as it falls out, only
betrayed their cause and your own ignorance, to cross thus awkerdly with their
great and master-principle. And this, as it happens, proves at last the most
pleasant scene of all your folly (though you have blunder'd so shamefully in
every thing you have offered at) for as if you had long owed your self a shame
and were now resolved to pay off all Arrears with Interest, in the very same
unhappy Paragraph where you deny it with so much resentment and indignation in
the name of all the Nonconformists in the known and habitable parts of the
Earth, that to institute new signs in the worship of God is to institute new
Sacraments, you are (so unhappy are you) wonderfully enamoured of that
pertinent passage directly to the contrary cited out of St. Austins ten Volumes
by J. O. Signa cum ad res divinas pertinent, sunt sacramenta, (so his M S.
reads it, though in your own and all other printed Copies it is read Sacramenta
appellantur.) Now by this J. O. without doubt intended to prove (as he
immediately subjoyns) that these things are real Sacraments or pretend to be so
fully and effectually to all intents and purposes; could any man then that were
not bewitched or bereft of his Understanding, be so ravishingly taken with this
little scrap as you are, if he were not seriously of J. O's mind, that our
symbolical Ceremonies are Sacraments indeed? And yet this ignorance (as
wretched as it is in it self) is sadly aggravated, if we consider from how
small advantage and to what little purpose you have raised all this noise and
triumph. For J. O. having (as you confess) forgot to quote Book and Page, I
thought my self under no indispensable engagement to examine its truth or
regard its Authority, and therefore vouchsafed it no other answer than to tell
him that it was neither civil nor ingenuous to trouble me or any man else with
such objections as could not be answered without reading over eight or ten
large Volumes in Folio. No man is bound by the Laws either of duel or
disputation (as you know and no man better) to supply his enemies defects, so
that if J. O. forgot book and page, all the World will throw all the blame upon
him alone; and yet here (after the manner of your modesty) you crow and insult
over me as a timorous and cowardly Craven, that was glad of any excuse to shift
or escape the challenge, though I am confident no wight living could have had
the confidence to do it beside your self; for say what you will, it is too
unreasonable to expect that I should search ten Voluminous Tomes for one line,
only because J. O. either did not or could not quote Book and Page. Yes, but I
could not possibly miss so remarkable a passage, when it was so dirtied with
the Non-conformists Thumbs. But that is more Page 212*
than I knew or could be obliged to know before; and this is the first time
that ever I heard of such familiar acquaintance between the Fathers and the Non
conformists, however I read them not either with their Glosses or their
Spectacles, at least I find none of their dirty Thumb nails in my Patron's
Library. Who but such a Wit as you could put himself into so good humor with
so small taplash as this? But yet if I will promise not to laugh Ibid.
at you, you will tell me in the simplicity of your heart, where even you your
own self have met with it, viz. Ep. quinta ad Marcellinum. And because you
profess to do it in the simplicity of your heart, for once, if I can refrain at
so unhappy a blunder, I will not laugh, no, you rather deserve to be scourged
for so gross and impudent a falsehood; for it is undeniably plain from your own
Quotation, that you never read it in St. Austin himself, but either J. O. or
some other secret friend transcribed it to vour hands, and so have unwarily
imposed upon your ignorance a fifth Epistle to Marcellinus, whereas (as Fortune
would have it) the fourth is the last that ever he writ to him, and that which
you quote for the fifth is the first. But had they been as careful to prevent
your mistake as they ought to have been either for your or their own credit,
they ought to have set it down thus, Ad Marcellinum: and then have added
Epistola Quinta, i. e. the fifth Epistle in order as they are placed in
Erasmus's Edition; but when you quote Epistola Quinta ad Marcellinum, you need
not have informed us that you did it in the simplicity of your heart; though when
you add that you have done this out of your own reading, you betray something
else beside your simplicity. And whereas you profess that you have taken all
this pains to save me a labor, I do not see but you have left me as much to
seek as J. O. did, unless you had set down not only Book and Page but Tome and
Edition; for otherwise after all the directions you have given me, and your
Author gave you, there is no remedy but I must be forced to turn over all St.
Austins Works, to find out his Epistle to Marcellinus, and that had been a
pretty task of it self, but if I had searched after the fifth Epistle to
Marcellinus I might have pored till the day of Judgment: so that it was great
Fortune that I at first light upon the Edition of Erasmus, where the first
Epistle to Marcellinus happens to be the fifth of that Tome. But now after all
to requite your kindness (I mean your good will) I care not though I confess to
you in private; that I was not ignorant of the passage it self, not that I have
ever read it in St. Austin, or observed it dirtied with the Thumbs of the
Non-conformists, but I remembered that it was much teased and bandied up and
down by the Schoolmen in their taplash disputes upon Sacraments and
Sacramentals, yet I shifted it off upon himself to find out his own Quotation,
because I knew either that he had picked it up at all adventure, or if he had
not, then (which is somewhat worse) that himself knew it to be both false and
impertinent. And I did not think it worth while (as I then declared) to trouble
the World with too industrious a gleaning of all his impertinencies after so
plentiful an harvest, but now those little Misadventures that I then refused to
prosecute for their triflingness, I am forced to expose only to stifle your
more daring and unlearned Clamours. In short then J. O. had made very bold with
his Text, as he always does for his own convenience, and confidently read sunt
Sacramenta instead of appellantur Sacramenta; a good reasonable emprovement of
the Fathers words, and becoming the modesty of the man. And now have you not
raised this great noise upon this little Quotation to very wise purpose, when
all you gain by it is only to discover that your friend has grossly
prevaricated? This might have been your answer had the Quotation served at all
for your purpose, as it does not; for St. Austin speaks not there of the
Institution of signs in general, but only of such as are established by Divine
Authority, and it is these and none but these that he says become Sacraments of
Religion by virtue of their institution. For the plain design and occasion of
his discourse was this: Marcelnus had been disputing with some body in defense
of the Christian Faith (as there are in all Ages a sort of little conceited
Folk, that have no other way to pass themselves for wits than by picking up
Quarrels against Religion.) His Adversary objects to him, that if the Jewish
Sacrifices were at first well and wisely instituted, they ought never to have
been abolisht; if they were not, that then it is certain they were never
instituted by Divine Authority. For a satisfactory Answer to this difficulty he
writes to St. Austin, who flatly denies the consequence, because all sacrifices
are of the nature of Sacraments; and all Sacraments are positive and arbitrary
pledges of some intercourse between God and his Creatures, and so are in their
own nature capable of change and variety, because their goodness and usefulness
is not intrinsic, but depends purely upon their institution. So plainly does
the good Father make Divine Institution, and nothing but that necessary to
erect the office, and confer the dignity of a Sacrament. Who then beside J. O.
could have been so unhappy as to press this passage to vouch that all signs
whatsoever any way appointed and used in Divine Worship without Divine
Institution are and must be Sacraments? I know no man more unfortunate in every
thing he meddles with unless your self, for though you flatly deny (what he
positively affirms) that the Symbols of our Church are really of a Sacramental
Nature, yet are you fond of this Quotation that can prove nothing else but that
they must be so. But (proceed you) not content to affront the Holy Fathers, I
defy the learned Schoolmen too, and that notwithstanding I had before owned
them Page 2^3.
fer the Authors of the Church of Englands Divinity. Bravely sworn Crop! after
this rate such pleasant company as you can never want for proofs; and though
this is no flower of the Sun, yet I am sure it is something that justly
deserves to be called a Rapper. I make these budgefellows the Patrons of our
Church! no, I ever thought them (since I understood them) the greatest enemies
of Christendom next to the Great Turk of Genevah. It is these that are your
implacable Divines, your Jewish Zealots, your Guelphs and Gibellines, that are
always stabbing one another with their Obs and Sols, and though I do not
remember that they were wont very much to frequent Gaming Ordinaries, yet were
they the greatest players of their age at push-pin and picquet, though they
were not so venturous as always to stake pieces, that is for Dignitaries and
Jack-Gentlemen; but they were true Gamesters that loved play for play sake, and
the delight they took in wrangling, and to that purpose ranged themselves into
several Factions, only to exercise their wit in dispute and contradiction. So
that the Schoolmen in general, that were so divided in all points among
themselves, could not be the Authors of the Church of Englands Divinity; and
therefore if it descended from these Doctors of the Game, it must have been
from some particular Cast or Family, as of the Thomists or Scotists, the
Nominals or Reals, etc. for they are branched into as many divisions and
subdivisions as a Jewish Genealogy, or the Millecantons of Fanatiques. Now I
doubt it will be found upon enquiry, that the design of the Church of England
in her Reformation was to casheir all these Scholastic Innovations, and to
retrieve the Old and Apostolical Christianity; and that the platform she
propounded for her direction were not the decisions of the Schools, but the
Holy Scriptures, and the four first general Councils. And therefore (as
confident as you would seem to be in so course an untruth) I shall never be
persuaded that I could ever be so far overseen as to make these brawling and
contentious People the founders of the Doctrines and Articles of our Church.
Who is able to deal with a man that is able to invent at so brave a rate? But
farther yet, I did not put any direct slight upon the Authority of the
Schoolmen, I only rejected J. O.'s quotation out of them for the same reason
that I did that out of St. Austin, in that he was so far from vouchsafing a
particular reference to Book, Chapter and Page, that he did not so much as
deign to name any particular Author, no not so much as a particular Sect. Now I
do verily believe there are very nigh a thousand great Books of Scholastic
Divinity in the world, and then no man, I trow, could think it reasonable that
I should sift so many heaps of rubbish only to examine J. O's integrity in a
matter of such trivial concernment; especially when I was so fully satisfied of
it at much smaller pains. And though it is a long time since I conversed with
the Schoolmen, yet for all that I dare lay your own odds (it is the best
argument in impudent cases) that there is no such idle subtilty in all their
writings as this that J. O. has cast upon them, viz. where words are signs of
sacred things, they are signs of them as things but not as sacred; for though I
have no great opinion of their wisdom, yet I cannot believe them so palpably
foolish. Though if any of them were so, I have already sent them their Answer
by J. O. But here methinks you your self after you have forsaken your Friends,
and renounced their Cause, grow more nice and abstractive than these great
Doctors of subtilty themselves, whilst you tell us, that though these
Ceremonies are no Sacraments, yet are they so applied as if they were of a
Sacramental Nature and Institution, Page 210.
and that therefore they are unlawful. If you mean that they are so applied by
the Church of England as if they were of Divine Institution, you mean
impudently; if you mean any thing else, you mean nothing. Yes, but they are
imposed with Page 218.
so high a penalty, as that they want nothing of a Sacramental Nature but
Divine Institution. That is to say, 1. That they want nothing of a Sacramental
Nature, but a Sacramental Nature. 2. This is no more than what may be objected
against all Laws and provisions of decency whatsoever, that have and must have
a penalty annexed to them to enforce their Obligation. 3. This starts new
Controversies, that were never so much as thought upon by the Schoolmen
themselves, viz. 1. Whether to impose any thing that is in it self no Sacrament
under an high penalty be to make it an as it were a Sacrament; and then 2.
Whether it be unlawful for any Humane Authority to institute as it were
Sacraments. These are weighty Controversies, and will no doubt at the day of
judgment bear out all the enormities of Schism and Rebellion. And now if any
man can play the fool at smaller Game than you have done, push-pin is too high
for him, he is fit for no other employment than to catch shadows and
Jackalents, for though they are mere nothings, yet to Children they appear as
it were something.

But the great thunderclap is still behind, for whereas I concluded that the
Magistrates Power of instituting significant Ceremonies could be no more
usurpation upon the consciences of men, than if the Sovereign Authority should
take upon it self to define the signification of words, little suspecting any
dangerous Plot against the State could have lurkt it self under such a
well-meant and (as I thought in the simplicity of my heart) such an harmless
supposition as this, that a Sovereign Prince might, if he pleased, refine and
alter the language of his Subjects without offering any violence to their
Consciences. But upon this your blood rises, and your zeal kindles, and you
thunder and lighten as if I had shaken the pillars of the Earth, and of the
Government, and blown up the fundamental Liberties and Privileges of the
Subject. Princes have Power over the signification of words! Heavens forbid!
Such a penetration or transubstantiation of Page 231.
language would throw all into Rebellion and Anarchy, would shake the Crowns of
all Princes, and reduce the world into a second Babel. This would destroy all
the Records in the Tower, and Magna Charta, and the Act of Oblivion and
Indemnity, and divide the whole Kingdom into Guelphs and Gibellines. Sure, the
young man is seized with a fit of Lycanthropy, and will certainly run a Muck
before next Full Moon; this is a madder attempt than that of digging through
the separating Istmos of Peloponesus, or making a Communication between the
Red Sea and the Mediterranean; verily it is like continuing a straight line
till it becomes a circle. So ignorant are these implacable Divines of the true
Idea of Wisdom and State Policy. And if there be any Council more precipitate,
more violent, Page 301.
more rigorous, more extreme than other, that is theirs. They never consider to
what woeful straits the great Sancho reduced his Government by usurping to
himself the Empire of Proverbs and Apothegms. Nor how even Augustus Caesar,
though he was so great an Emperor and so Page 230.
valiant a man in his own Person was used to fly from a new word, though it
were single, as studiously as a Mariner would avoid a Rock for fear of
splitting. Is not this one of Bayes's simile's, that was made before you had
thought how to apply it? The Emperor avoid a new word as a Mariner does a Rock
for fear of splitting! If it had been an hard word, it might have born a
quibble, but sure that a new word should be able to split so great an Emperor,
is very strange, unless it were very ridiculous; and any thing would have
served the turn as well as the Mariner. As a Coward shifts a challenge for fear
of being beaten, as a Child avoids a Wasps nest for fear of being stung, as a
Mouse does a Cat, or a Thief does the Gallows, or as any thing does any thing,
for there is nothing but is afraid of something. Ay, but young man this is too
serious a thing to be jested with, what! must you be flouting at the Emperor
Augustus as well as Doomsday and Queen Elizabeth? When you name Augustus, let
me tell you, as I have elsewhere upon the bare mention of Sardanapalus, that
though I would not willingly be such a fool, Page 148.
as to make a dangerous similitude that has no foundation, yet it is manifest
that some body else is intended, for he was a Prince, and his Father was
murdered too; and every similitude must have though not all yet some likeness;
So that whenever Ibid.
you speak any ill thing of Augustus, or Julian, or Sardanapalus, or any other
of your uncontrollable Creatures, we know your meaning, and who it is you aim
at. And thus by this ridiculous way of forcing a mystical sense out of my words
do you take leave to dart such impudent and ignominious reflections upon your
Superiors, as are not to be expiated by whipping posts and Pillories. But now
it is no wonder to see you every where as angry at Roman Empire as at
Ecclesiastical Policy; for that too is perpetually selling you bargains. Would
you but tell me in the simplicity of your heart where you your own self read
this story of Augustus; I am confident it was either in the second Decad of. T.
Livius or the fifth Epistle to Marcellinus. For Sir, whoever imposed here too
upon your ignorance, assure your self there is no such saying of Augustus upon
record in Roman story. But to deal plainly with you and undeceive you, this
passage is fathered upon one Julius Caesar, That was a lover of elegancy of
style, and could endure no man's Tautologies but his own. And yet nothing could
distaste him more than an affected and fantastic word, he would have turned a
man out of his Secretaries Office for such language as this, Lycanthropy,
Trincling, Disvalising, Pick-thankness, ornaments of Deformity, unhoopable
Jurisdiction, etc. and would sooner have split than have been so pedantick
himself. The passage I speak of is a certain fragment of a lost Book that he
writ de Analogia, cited by Agellius l. 1. c. 10. and Macrob. l. 1. Saturn. c.
5. Habe semper in memoria atque in pectore, ut tanquam scopulum sic fugias
inauditum atque insolens verbum. A round and well couched period as it is here
expressed, though as you have translated it, nothing can be more flat and
insipid, fugias tanquam scopulum, i. e. fly from it as studiously as a Mariner
would avoid a Rock for fear of splitting. Your way of translating is not like
fat Sir John Falstaffs singular dexterity in sinking. Even thus Personam
induere signifies to put on the person of, and to put on the person of
signifies to act a part in a Play; so that if our Savior did Personam induere,
or put on the person of a Jewish Zealot, it follows, that he was a Player as
well as a Cutthroat. You have truanted so long about Charing Cross and
Lincolns-inn-fields, that you have forgot all your Latin. Go you old dunce to
your Phrase Book, and there learn the signification of Personam induere. But
what if J. Caesar avoided the affectation of a new word as he would a splitting
rock, it was not out of any reason of State, or for fear of raising Tumults and
Rebellions, but purely out of that aversation that so great a Wit as he could
not but have to pedantry; so that this story is calculated for the use of
Schoolmasters, and not of Kings, and by consequence might have been spared
here. But you proceed, Come, come young man forbear your mirth and mockery,
assure your self this Dominion of words is a dangerous thing. How many millions
of men did it cost your Roman Empire to attain it, did you never read the sad
stories how many childless Mothers were made at Languedoc Page 230.
by the difference between Faves and Haves at one time, and at another between
Crabe and Crabre, with many other bloody tales that might be enlarged upon, if
one would be learnedly impertinent? And do you think you have not Ibid.
all this while been unlearnedly so, to hunt up all these impertinent stories
to no imaginable purpose, unless it be to warn Kings not to provoke their good
Subjects to Rebellion for every trifle, but to condescend to them for
peace-sake, Page 243.
and the quiet of mankind? For you are admirably skilled, no man better, in the
History of Revolts and Seditions, and Princes are obliged to con you thanks for
the pains you have taken to mind them of all the slight causes and pretenses
that have been seized on by wanton and stomachful Rebels, that they may beware
of the like provocations, lest they meet with the like events. And these idle
stories you are continually preaching in the ears of Princes, but not a
syllable of advice or exhortation to Subjects to persuade them to a modest and
peaceable behavior toward their Superiors. No, though Kings, and men of
Courtly breeding and great Quality have or ought to have so much manners and
civility, as to condescend to their Inferiors, Page 248.
and if one have got a cold to force them to be covered, or if a man have an
antipathy against any thing, to be so civil as to refrain the use of it,
however not to press it upon the Person, with many more pretty resemblances,
though (as you inform us) there is no end of similitudes, and as you employ
them no use neither. But alas! such mannerliness as this is not to be expected
from men of private condition and breeding, and if His Majesty be pleased to
stand cap in hand to a highshoon Clown, though he have a cold, who can blame
the Boor if he have not so much Courtship and Ceremony, as graciously to desire
his worship to put on? The Common People are to be pardoned their rudeness for
their want of education: and if at any time they behave themselves stubbornly
and sawcily to their Superiors, they will out of discretion connive at their
infirmities, and out of common humanity yield to their follies. But no wise
Prince will ever by unnecessary impositions disoblige his good Subjects, and
force them to rebellious practices for a trifle or an uncivil word. And what a
lump of History have you here presented to Kings to terrify them from making
too bold, and being too saucy with their people, Page 244, 5, 6? And if we take
away some simpering phrases, and timorous introductions, your Collection will
afford as good Precedents for Rebellion and King-killing, as any we meet with
in the writings of J. M. in defense of the Rebellion and the Murder of the
King. But that which most of all betrays the wretchedness of your design, is,
that you throughout either misreport or equivocate so elaborately, that you
cannot but be fully convinced within your self that you have forged Relations
to no other purpose than to represent the weakness of Government, and the
feasibleness of Rebellion as we shall have occasion to examine hereafter; in
the mean while be your idle stories never so false, they are much more
impertinent. For, what if wise Kings be taught by these examples to condescend
to their Inferiors, and to connive at the infirmities (i. e. seditious
spirits) of their people for fear of daggers and revolts? What if it be as
dangerous for a Prince to take a man by the tongue, as a Bear by the tooth?
What if bloody wars have been occasioned by the difference of an accent or a
syllable? And a letter in the name of Beans and Goats have set a whole Province
together by the ears? And what if Empires have been shipwrackt upon a new word
as Mariners split upon a rock? This only proves that it is an unwise and
impolitick attempt to hazard a Crown out of fondness to an affected word. And
though it may be an usurpation upon the Peoples Liberties, yet certainly it is
none upon their Consciences, if the Sovereign Authority will take upon it self
to define the signification of an uncertain and ambiguous phrase. And that is
the parallel of our Case, viz. That whereas these men have from time to time
and at all times raised such prodigious yells and clamours of Conscience
against the determination of significant Ceremonies, it is enough to show that
their signification is of the very same use and nature with that of words; so
that people have no more ground of offense upon the score of Conscience against
that than this. And yet no man's Conscience howsoever tender or peevish can ever
pretend to be aggrieved with defining the signification of a doubtful word; and
if it cannot, then has he as little ground upon that pretense to complain of
the determination of any significant Ceremony. Though if the change of words
may be of dangerous consequence to the Government of the State, that is a
consideration of another nature, and that concerns not my Analogy between words
and symbols, that are in this debate to be considered only as matters of
Conscience and not of Policy. So that if a new and unpresidented word do not
endanger the shipwracking of a man's Conscience, that is enough to evince that
neither is a new Ceremony a more splitting rock than a new word; and is this
may prove mischievous upon other scores, viz. that it would render all Laws
uncertain, that it would defeat the Act of Oblivion, that it would spoil the
Declaration of Indulgence to tender Consciences, and throw all back again into
Anarchy and Rebellion: Yet what is all this to the signification of Ceremonies,
that may be altered ten thousand different ways without making any alteration
of the Laws? So that howsoever impracticable and of whatsoever ill consequence
the imposition of words may sometimes prove, there is not the least shadow of
ground from thence to conclude (as you do) that of Ceremonies to be no less
pernicious. And this I hope is enough to prove that you have been sufficiently
impertinent, though how learnedly you have been solsuppose needs no proof. And
yet after all this astonishment (if it were to any purpose) this very power of
defining and circumscribing the signification of words, that you fancy so
splitting a rock, has ever been used and challenged by all Lawgivers as an
essential ingredient of the Sovereign Power, in that without it, it is very
difficult if not altogether impossible to avoid ambiguity of Laws. A man of
your humor that had a mind to be learnedly impertinent might heap up
innumerable instances to this purpose. But if you have either will or leisure
to consult the Civil Law, Lib. 50, Digest. Tit. 16. de verborum significatione,
you will there meet with three or four hundred particular examples. I shall
only trouble you that are or may be an English Senator with two or three out of
our own Laws. The first occurrs in an Act of Parliament Primo Eliz. for the
Uniformity of Common Prayer and Service in the Church, and administration of
Sacraments, where it being enacted that the Book of Common Prayer and no other
form shall be used at all open Prayer, the Act it self fixes and defines the
meaning of open Prayer, viz. that by it is meant that Prayer, which is for
others to come unto or hear, either in common Churches or private Chapels or
Oratories, commonly called the service of the Church. And in another Act (as I
take it) of the same year it is positively defined that no matter or cause
shall from that time forward be adjudged Heresy, but only such as heretofore
have been adjudged to be Heresy by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures
or by the first four general Councils, or by any other general Council, where
the same has been declared Heresy by the express and plain words of the said
Canonical scriptures, or such as hereafter shall be adjudged Heresy by the
high Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the assent of Clergy in their
Convocation. And within our own memory there have happened Cases in which the
Parliament have ventured to define not only the signification of words but the
nature of things, as you know they determined not long since without advising
with the Royal Society that Brandee belongs properly and formally to the
specific Essence of Spirits. So that it seems this Power has sometimes been
reduced to practice without throwing all into Rebellion and Anarchy, and
shaking the Crowns of Princes, and reducing the World into a second Babel.
Though such an exorbitant and arbitrary exercise of it, as was challenged by
your Presbyterian Long Parliament, was enough to dissolve all Governments and
break up all societies in the World. For they had the impudence to impose such
bold meanings upon words as flatly contradicted their common and customary
signification. Thus could they make such sentences to be just and legal as were
not fit to pass into Precedent in the like cases, that is to say such as
themselves confessed by their own provision to be unjust and illegal; in that
there can be no hurt or danger in lawful Prescriptions. Thus could they make a
new and unheard of sort of Treason called cumulative Treason, that is a great
many no Treasons to make up a Treason. Thus a Delinquent signified any man that
they had a mind to cut off for his Loyalty; and thus to make open preparations
for Rebellion was to put the Kingdom into a posture of defense against all the
Kings enemies whether foreign or domestic, i. e. against the King himself and
all his friends and Allies. But the dismal Calamities and Earthquakes that
followed thereupon were the Consequences of the abuse of this Power, not of the
Power it self, and so all Power of what kind soever if stretched to the same
degrees of Tyranny, is as naturally productive of the same effects of Confusion.

And now after all these nice and stubborn speculations about the abstracted
and metaphysical Idea of symbolicalness, and after the Champions of your cause
have for so long a time kept up this Ball or rather Bubble of Contention, even
from Cartwright down successively to the present Age, you would like a cunning
Rook turn the Tables upon us, and charge us as the Aggressours in this
ridiculous dispute, i. e. after you have played the Children so long with this
hard word that signifies nothing, and now too late perceive your folly in
raising such an inveterate and implacable War upon such a slender pretense, you
would (just as you dealt with his late Majesty, when you rebelled against him)
lay the War at our doors, and upbraid us as if we had made all this stir about
this wretched trifle, as if it were our Sir Solomon's sword, our dead-doing Tool
wherewith we flatter our selves to have done so much execution upon the Puritan
Cause, and as if I my self had set up this hard word on purpose to be my
Opponent. And thus would you Page 214.
cunningly slide your own wooden Dagger into our hands, when it is manifest
that we are altogether on the defensive part, and are so far from using any
weapons of offense, that we never so much as employed a Shield to ward off your
Thrusts, but have always put them by with neglect or a mere denial, and have
scorned and pityed your simplicity in laying at us so fiercely with such a
wooden tool. The Church of England was never so idly employed as to concern
it self to determine the nature of Symbolical Ceremonies, whether it be
Sacramental or not. It has indeed defined the number of such Sacraments as are
necessary to Salvation, that is to say such as are instituted by Divine
Authority as the perpetual Pledges and Symbols of the Christian Faith. And if
men have a mind to any more Sacraments, they may for her have as many as they
please, provided they pretend not to Divine Institution. And whereas you often
insult upon some great Prelate that (you say) wrote a book of seven Sacraments,
(though there was never any such book written,) he might if he had nothing else
to do have written one of seven hundred, for there is nothing in nature that
may not in the Puritan notion be applied to a Sacramental use, i. e. be
appointed as a pledge and signification of something or other. Keep then your
impertinencies to your selves, you shall not pin them upon our sleeves, and
when you have worn this fools Coat so long till you have worn it threadbare,
think not that we will then suffer you to put it upon our backs. Neither tell
me of setting up an hard word for my Opponent, when it is your own scarcrow;
and withal such a despicable and woeful pretense, that at last I scorned to
dispute against it, I only despised its intolerable silliness, and exposed it
to the contempt of your own Herd; It is below the seriousness of an argument.
And if it be an hard word that signifies nothing, blame not me for mumbling and
mousling it till I have made it contemptible, for it is your own, and you know
I was so little fond of it, that I offered to exchange it for
Syncategorematical, because it is more frightful by three or four syllables,
and rattles through the throat with a bigger and more terrible accent, and any
other hard word that sounds bravely, and signifies nothing and that no body
understands, would serve the turn as well, and I am content (if you are)
hereafter to call them by common consent either flying Dragons or Usinulca's.
Keep your Goblin-nonsense to your selves, we have nothing to do with it but to
despise your folly. And if it be Taplash (as you call it) it is of your own
brewing, and is both the first and the last running of your brains, but
hereafter let us hear no more of it for shame, such thin and spiritless stuff
as this, as it is not worth keeping, so it can never hold tilting.

And now upon review of this whole matter it is well worth our observation how
the state of the question is changed with the state of affairs; The
controversy is not now (as it has been heretofore) between the holy Discipline
and the established Government of the Church of England, that contest has put an
end to it self; but whether men of rebellious spirits, and Democratical
Principles shall under counterfeit shows of tenderness of Conscience be
suffered to work the Common People into a disaffection to the Government. For
it is notorious that the most zealous Agents and Patrons of the Cause are so
far from being seriously scared with their own pretended scruples, that they
have given the world too many undeniable proofs of their being above the most
avowed Principles of Justice and common honesty; and withal that they have
been and still are (for any evidence they have given to the contrary) the most
vehement and implacable enemies to the present Government; and therefore being
stormed and beaten out of all their old pleas of a Divine Right, are forced to
abuse the people (that may be abused with any thing or nothing) with such
grounds of sedition as are not to be removed by all the Wisdom and Power in
the world. It were to some purpose if to all their noise about Conscience in
general, they could assign any principle to justify their clamor beside
printing it emphatically and in great letters; but when every man that
understands common sense or an hard word sees through the vanity and idleness
of all their Cavils, what greater assurance can they give us that there is some
other design lies lurking at the bottom, that they dare not own, till some
seasonable and propitious juncture of affairs shall invite it forth into open
action? In short, their whole Controversy with the Church of England lies in
so narrow a compass, and the exceptions wherewith they assault our present
settlement are so shamefully frivolous, that to me it is one of the greatest
riddles in the world, where they should find confidence enough to bear up thus
long in such a desperate Cause. For as to their general pretense against the
power of Princes in matters of Religion, as if they thereby invaded Gods own
Prerogative, they in many cases forgo it themselves, and acknowledge it
sometimes necessary to the public peace to restrain by force of Law some
Sects and pretenses of Religion; and though they grant it but in one case, as
in the Laws against Popery, or in provisions against the attempts of Prince
Vennor and his forty men, that overthrows the whole force of this Argument, in
that it allows the exercise of this Power without entrenching upon Gods
peculiar Royalty. And then have they nothing to plead but the peril of our
established Ceremonies, and here the whole debate is plainly reduced to these
two questions, whether they except against any but what are symbolical? And
whether they can assign any that are not so? And if they cannot (as it is plain
they cannot) what follows every body sees as well as I. So that when they pitch
upon such grounds of discontent, as they themselves know no Government can
avoid, it is manifest that all this pretended niceness is only made use of to
disguise something worse. And if they would clear their integrity to the State,
or at least hide their hypocrisy under more passable and likely vizards, they
would do well to invent some more material scruples, for which they crave their
Gracious Indulgence; but till then, whilst they keep up such clamorous and
importunate demands of Toleration, though no body knows for what, they only
give their Governors fair warning to beware of the malignity of their
intentions. This I hope they will consider of themselves, or if they will not,
that some body else will do it for them.

And now methinks (Sir) after all your fury you are as reasonable an Adversary
(would you were as modest and civil too) as a man could lightly expect to
encounter; so meek and gentle as to turn both cheeks to correction, and to
accept of being boxt on both sides, for now I hope you your self see there is
not one Paragraph in all your Libell, that pretends to be serious and
argumentative, that is not notoriously both false and impertinent. And that is
too much advantage in such a trifling engagement, for it is scarce worth any
man's while to spend so many words as are necessary to discover both, when it is
to no other purpose than to correct one man's pert and conceited ignorance. But
from the Premises it is manifest that the Body of your whole Book consists of
these three sorts of Materials, 1. Your impudent repetition of the same
enormous pervertings and falsifications; for which I thought I had sufficiently
convicted J. O. of boldness and disingenuity. And this takes in the Grand
Thesis, the six Plays, and the Hoops and Hola's. 2. Your stubborn adherence to
the same dull and childish Cavils, which I refused to rebuke in him because of
their manifest trifling and vanity; as in the charge of Erastianism, perverse
translations of the Scriptures and false Quotations of Authors. 3. Your
starting some new Absurdities of your own so wild and extravagant, that never
any man before your self was frantic enough to believe or assert, as in all
the shattered talk of Sacraments and Symbolical Ceremonies. By all which you
see what brave things a wise man may perform, and how dully a witty man may
come to play the fool by being learnedly impertinent. As for the remainder of
your Book, it is all such course and unserviceable rubbish, that it is not
worth the sisting; it is such loose and empty talk, as is as applicable to
confute any other Book in the world as mine, in so much that I might, if it
would but have recompensed the pains, have turned three parts of your own
Pamphlet upon it self. As all your professed fooling either by way of Similitude
or Rithm or Story; your playing upon single words, your confuting introductions
and transitions, your smutty imaginations, your general and insolent censures,
with abundance more of such bold and immodest stuff, that though it signifies
nothing by it self, yet is almost enough to beat any modest man out of
countenance by pure force of brow and confidence. But in answer to your
Ribaldry I can only blush and say nothing; and as for your rude and uncivil
language, I am willing to impute it to your first unhappy Education among
Boat-Swains and Cabin-Boys, whose Phrases as you learned in your Childhood, so
it is not to be expected you should ever unlearn them by your Conversation with
the Bear-herds of Barn, the Canibals of Geneva, the Boys and Lackeys at
Charing Cross, and in Lincolns-Inn-fields. But as for your bold and general
censures, that you may not pretend that I either baulk or slide by any thing of
weight and moment, or frown it away with bigg and burly looks, as you have
dealt with several modest propositions of mine, that when you have not been
able to produce one Iota of proof against them, yet have rated them with such
an haughty and magisterial assurance, as if you expected to make them sneak and
slink away out of sight by mere sternness of look. That (I say) you may not
complain that I pay you in your own brass coin, I will present you a brief
Catalogue of your own Drama Common places of confidence and leasing, and then
refer it to any Jury of your own empanelling whether such paltry trash can
deserve any other reply than neglect and scorn. First of all (say you) I am
offended Page 320.
at the presumption and arrogance of your style; whereas there is nothing
either of wit or eloquence in all your Books, worthy of a Readers, and more
unfit for your own taking notice of. Then your infinite Tautology is burdensome.
And your profanation Page 321.
of the Scripture intolerable, for though you allege that it is only in order
to show how it was misapplyed by the Fanatics (though I remember no such
Allegation) you might have done that too, and yet preserved the dignity and
reverence of those Sacred Writings, which you have not done; but on the
contrary you have in what is properly your own, taken the most of all your
Ornaments and Embellishments thence in a scurrilous and sacrilegious style
(admirable sense!) insomuch that were it honest, I will undertake out of you to
make a better, that is a more ridiculous and prophaner Book, than all the
Friendly Debates bound up together. I cannot but make use of this admirable way
(like fat Sir Page 191.
John Falstaffs singular dexterity in sinking) of answering whole Books or
Discourses, how pithy and knotty soever, in a line or two, nay sometimes in a
word. And as the Friendly Debate is ridiculous and profane, so I observe Page
279.
that all the Argument of your Books too is but very frivolous and trivial; you
bring nothing sound or solid. For the excellency of your Logique, Philosophy,
Page 263.
and Christianity in all your Books, is either as in Conscience, to take away
the subject of the Question; or as in the Magistrate, having gotten one
Absurdity to raise a thousand more from it. In all your writings you do so
confound terms, leap cross, have Page 158.
more doubles (nay triples and quadruples) than any Hare, so that you think
your self secure of the Hunters. You endeavor so to muddle your self in Page
159.
Ink, that there shall be no catching nor finding you. You so confound the
Question with differing terms and contradictory Page 103.
expressions, that you may upon occasion affirm whatsoever you deny, or deny
whatsoever you affirm. You have face enough to say or unsay any thing, and it is
your privilege, Page 139.
what the School-Divines deny to be within the power of the Almighty, to make
contradictions true. You neither Page 47.
know or care how to behave your self to God or Man, and having never seen the
receptacle of Grace or Conscience at an Anatomical dissection, you conclude
therefore that there is no such matter, or no such obligation among Christians;
you persecute the Scripture it self unless it will conform to your
interpretation; you strive to put the world into blood, and animate Princes to
be the executioners of their own subjects for well-doing. I looked further into
Page 156.
what you say in defense of the Magistrates assuming the Priesthood; what for
your scheme of Moral Grace; what to palliate your irreverent expressions
concerning our blessed Savior, and the holy Spirit; what of all other matters
objected to you; and if you will believe me, but I had much rather the Reader
would take the pains to examine all himself, there is scarce any thing but
slender trifling unworthy of a Logician, and beastly railing unbecoming any man
much more a Divine. You distribute all the territories of Conscience into the
Princes Province, Page 66.
(that is to divide a thing into one part) and make the Hierarchy to be but
Bishops of the Air, and talk at such an extravagant rate in things of higher
concernment (than either Conscience or Government of Church and State) that the
Reader will avow, that in the whole discourse you had not one lucid Interval.
Had you no friends to have given you good counsel, before your Page 61.
understanding was quite unsettled? Really I cannot but pity you, and look upon
Page 163.
you as under some great disturbance and despondency of mind; and in as ill a
case as Tiberius was in his distracted Letter to the Senate. There wants
nothing of it but the Dii Deaeque me perdant, wishing let the Gods and
Goddesses confound him, worse than he finds himself to be every day confounded.
So all that rationally can be Page 70.
gathered from what you say, is that you are mad. You incite Princes to
persecution Page 185.
and tyranny, degrade Grace to Morality, debauch Conscience against its own
Principles, distort and mis-interpret the Scripture, fill the world with Blood,
Execution and Massacre. And as for Subjects, no Pimp did ever enter into
seriouser disputation, to vitiate an innocent Virgin, than you do to debauch
their Consciences. And to harden their unpracticed modesty, embolden them by
your own example, showing them the experiment upon Page 28.
your own Conscience first. Nay, you threaten, you rail, you jear them, if it
were possible out of all their Consciences and Honesty. Really I think you Page
215.
have done the Atheists so much service in your Books, by your ill handling,
and while you personate (i. e. Personam induere) one Party, making all Religion
ridiculous (I mean the serious part of it) that they will never be able to
requite you but in the same manner. It is true, you sometimes for fashionsake
Page 143.
speak of Religion and a Deity, but your Principles do necessarily, if not in
terms, make the Princes power paramount to both these, and if he may by his
uncontrollable and unlimited Universal. Authority introduce what Religion, he
may of consequence what Deity also he pleases. This is a faithful page 209.
account of the sum and intention of all your undertaking, for which I confess
you were as picked a man as could have been employed or found out in a whole
Kingdom. And I have herein endeavored the utmost ingenuity Page 146.
toward you, for you have laid your self open but to too many disadvantages
already, so that I need not, I would not press you beyond measure, but to my
best understanding, and if I fail I even ask your pardon, I do you right. And
so you are a dangerous Fellow Bays, you are an Hypocrite Bays, you are a mad
Priest Bays, you are a Buffoon Bays, you are an Opprobrium Academiae Bays,
you are a Pestis Ecclesiae Bays, Hola Bays, whoop Bays, whoop and hola
Bays; Bays, Bays, ay, and all that Bays. Quod erat demonstrandum. You and I
Sir have hitherto been good Friends, and if you had but told me all this in
private, you had done a friendly office, and upon your advice and admonition I
might have reformed all miscarriages; but whether to blazon them abroad thus
publicly without proof or instance, and before you had made any trial upon my
ingenuity, whether (I say) it were either civilly or discreetly done, because
you are a wise man, and I have a great opinion of your Integrity, I shall refer
it altogether to your own judgment. However if you or any friend of yours can
really think, that such Demonstration as this needs any other Answer beside
being pitied and laughed at, do but signify your minds to me by the next Post
(provided you will superscribe Franck) and I will promise to do you reason and
give you satisfaction. This is but a taste of what I might have transcribed, in
that the greatest part of your Pamphlet is manifestly rather Censure than
Confutation.

But the main and most serviceable topic of impertinency is to picqueer at
single words in Introductions and Transitions, and animadvert upon them with
the Similitude, the Aphorism, the Rithm, the Story, and the Parenthesis; your
wit is strangely fluent upon such passages as are altogether collateral to the
drift and substance of my discourses: Though when you come to any thing of
Argument, your mind runs upon nothing but the day of Judgment, and you grow
reserved for fear of being called to an account for every idle word, and from
hence it comes to pass that you are forced to answer whole Books in a line or
two, like fat Sir John Falstaffs singular dexterity in sinking. What fearful
work have you made with my Introduction to the Preface, you have mawl'd every
word so unmercifully, as if you had undertaken to pound every Period into the
twenty four Letters. And had you held on as you begun with the first forty
lines, the Book of Martyrs had been but an Almanac in comparison to the
Rehearsal.

First I am caught in my own Dilemma for writing at all, after I had declared
that if I must answer every impertinent exception and Cavil, I would write no
more; Now this expression (say you) lies open to my own Dilemma against the
Nonconformists Page 1.
confessing in their Prayers to God such heinous Enormities. This is the only
passage that I find repeated but once more in all your book, I suppose because
you thought it so shrewd and pressing, that it need not be inculcated so often
as some other Remarques that were not so easy and obvious to common
understandings. But (Sir) my promise was conditional, if I must endure the
Penance of answering every peevish Caviller, and I had never broke it, had I
not been absolutely overpowred both against my own Judgment and inclinations to
write this Reply to your self. For which I heartily ask forgiveness, and will
enter into bond, be the condition of the Obligation what you please, never to
commit the same fault or need the same excuse a second time. But what if I had
dispensed with a point of Civility to the public to get an honest Bookseller
(especially if he be importunate too) eight or ten pound in the long vacation?
It was only to give some encouragement to Trade, however you would calumniate
me as an utter enemy to it; and though it is possible I may not have so great
an opinion of the honesty of all of this sort of Tradesmen, as it is possible I
may of some others, and if I fail herein, I ask their pardon, I do them right
and recreate my self with believing that my simple judgment cannot beyond my
intention, abate any thing of their just value. Yet however I am sure it is a
much more honorable way of Livelihood and more serviceable to the
Commonwealth than Gaming or any other lubberly way of subsistence. So that say
what you will it was kindly done of me, and if I made bold with my Reader, I
have made him an Apology submissive enough to excuse my own good nature and
engage his. And what could he desire more? If he be candid and courteous this
is enough of all Conscience to atone his displeasure, if he be not, he is not
concerned, for Prefaces are addressed to none but the courteous Readers. But
after all this solemnity when all things are truly considered, this is no such
serious matter as you would make show of. For though Authors are wont partly
because it is the fashion, and partly because it is an engagement of the
Readers favor (for all people love to be courted) to make them humble
addresses and Apologies in their Prefaces, yet to speak plainly it is more than
they owe them (for if they do not like, they may let it alone) and is at best
no more than a formal complement. So that I do not see but a man may break his
word with his Reader without being concluded indifferent as to Page 2.
the business either of Truth or Eternity; as you have ridiculously aggravated
my Crime, if I had been guilty; such swollen Hyperboles are the Cavils of such
people as want wiser and more material Objections. But now is it not shrewdly
thought on to parallel such a trifle as this against the Non-conformists making
such constant and familiar Confessions to the Divine Majesty of the most
heinous and enormous Crimes, even of all that can be reckoned up, Disloyalty
and Rebellion only excepted, and that no doubt out of pure respect to his
Majesty's Act of Oblivion and Indemnity. Now if they stand really guilty of
their own Charge, they may vye lewdness both with the Spanish, the French and
the English Rogue, (with whose stories, so great an Historian and so
accomplished a Statesman as you seem to be, cannot be unacquainted) and all
their Debaucheries will appear but puny and Schoolboys villainies in comparison
of their daily practice; if they are not, then this is plainly such a trifling
piece of Courtship as is not to be endured in a matter so serious as is our
Devotion to the Almighty. But I see they are incorrigible in their follies. And
though they are convinced past all denial that their common confessions are
plainly inconsistent with their most solemn Pretenses; that the Scripture
Language wherewith they usually indite themselves expresses the lewdest and
most desperate Impieties; that those expressions they borrow out of the Old
Testament are descriptions of no worse people than only such, as had
apostatized from the worship of the true God to Idolatry and all kinds of Moral
Wickedness, and those out of the new are Characters not only of Hypocrites and
wicked Christians, but even of such as had revolted from the Christian Faith
into open Outrage and Blasphemy against it, with many other such horrid Crimes,
that should their own Prayers be turned into Inditements, their Clerkship would
stand them in little stead, and it would never be put into the power of the
Ordinary (no, nor scarce of the Judge or Jury) to do them a courtesy. And yet
notwithstanding all this they will continue still as lavish of their Tongues
against themselves at Church, as they are against their Neighbors and
especially their Governors at home. So that it is no small advantage to a
Fanatique Congregation, when their Holderforth wants fancy and invention, in
that they always come resolved (especially upon more solemn occasions) to load
themselves and the Company with all the sad Texts and Burdens in the Bible;
and the man that is more fluent and eloquent than his Brethren is but so much
the better enabled to slander himself and all his Auditors: And to tell you
plainly were I a brother, and should any man that pewed within my reach tell me
before witness that I am guilty of but one half of the confession, wherewith
the dullest and most costive of them all familiarly charges himself and all
present, I would teach him better manners in Westminster Hall. Every man has
liberty to abuse himself as he pleases, but if he will make bold with my
reputation, I must and am bound to right my self as I can.

But whether it were lawful for me to write at all, or not, is now too late to
enquire; but having written so I began. Though I am none of the most zealous
Patrons of the Press. How! (say you) the Press, it is a Villainous Engine. Why!
What is the matter, did it ever cheat you at Picquet, that the very mention of
it should put you into such a Fit of Lycanthropy, and set you like the Island
of Fayol on fire in threescore and ten places? But why Villainous Engine! fie,
fie! does this Language become a Gentleman that has cleared himself of Froth
and Groans? You learned it at Charing Cross or in Lincolns-Inn-fields. But
however the Engine may have offended or disobliged you, it concerns not my
grand Thesis, and as little my self, having professed to be none of its
Patrons. And it is of Age and parts sufficient to manage its own quarrel (for
it is as old as the Reformation, and yet still as talkative as ever) and
therefore I shall not interest my self in the leaft in it, no more than if John
a Nokes were railed at by John a Styles. Otherwise I have already informed you
that you have more reason than you dreamt of to rail at its Villainy: It has
(Traitor as it is!) after all its pretended Zeal to the cause, betrayed all
your secrets, and produced your own hand-writings against your selves. There is
scarce a crime to be named or thought of, for which it has not an information
ready at any time to prefer against you, notwithstanding the Act of Oblivion
and Indemnity. And therefore I would wish the Non-conformists (as little as you
think I love them) to be always upon their Guard, lest it first Trepan and then
Peach and then hang them; I am sure it is much more likely and able to do it
than my self. I cannot see how it can ever expiate all the mischief it has done
your Cause already, unless it would print the fifth Epistle to Marcellinus. But
be it as perfidious as you please, it is not half so wicked as that villainous
Game of Picquet, that has done more harm to the Church of England than all the
Brawny Printers and Schismatical Preachers of Germany and Geneva: Not excepting
the Assigns of John Calvin and Theodore Beza that live in Chancery Lane on the
South side of the Lake Lemane, as the matter is mended in the second Edition of
your Geography. And thus having treated the Press with as much rudeness and
malice as if you had taken it for a Clergyman; The next thing you chop upon is
the matter of close and comfortable Importance. And here never did Country
Whitefoot stiffen and leer more eagerly upon three legs at any thing in a tuft
of Fern than you do at the meaning of these words. But the leering and the
Ecstasie somewhat abated, they must be reduced to one of these three, either
Salvation or a Benefice or a Female, now for the Jests sake it must be neither
of the former, and therefore for the same jests sake it must of necessity be
the latter. But from hence men of observation will be forward to conclude that
you move far above the troubles of this World as to Honor and Coin and Estate
and all other trifles of humane Life, else you would have found something else
to be important beside a Benefice or a Female, though it were but a Game at
Picquet. You have (I thank you) bestowed upon me a Prebend, a Sine-cure and a
Rectorship, now why might I not at the time of writing that Preface be busied
in attending the Seals for my Sine-cure, and in taking order for the repairs of
my Parsonage Barns, and in providing Goods and Furniture for my Prebend-house.
These I take to be close and comfortable things as well as a female Importance.
And what if beside all this I had newly sold my little inheritance and engaged
in a purchase elsewhere that lay better for my own convenience; and what if at
that very nick of Affairs a stop were put to the payments of the Exchequer, and
my Money in the Bankers hands, do you think it did not closely concern me to
disengage it from their keeping, and whether it would not have been some
comfort to have effected it. But it seems there is nothing so far from the
thoughts of you Gamesters as purchasing of Lands. However you see how short
your induction is from taking in all particular matters of close and
comfortable Importance. Beside, either the meaning you have pitched upon was
mine, or it was not; if it were, I would fain be satisfied where the wit of it
lies, for you to understand the right meaning of my words; if it were not, I
would then be satisfied where the wit of it lies for you to obtrude a wrong one
upon them. But I know your advantage, though thus publicly to betray the mirth
and freedom of private conversation, is but Clownishly done and like a
Jack-Gentleman: you know the meaning of the story better than I do yours of
Pork, and I hope all ingenuous men will take warning by my example to avoid
your company for the time to come that can make such a rude and spiteful use of
an innocent piece of mirth. And if the Remarque be of any value there is
nothing of it beside the malice and incivility that is your own. But after all
suppose for the Jest sake it be a Female, what have you made of it? You are
such a stubble-Goose-wit that you are not able to raise your dull fancy by the
advantage of another man's conceit. One would have expected some handsome mirth
and raillery upon so pleasant a Theme, but you have emproved it so Clownishly
and so phlegmatically, as shows you equally void of all capacity both of wit
and manners. For who beside your self would upon such an innocent occasion have
vented the most spiteful and immodest reflections upon the whole order of the
Clergy? It is the highest Pinnacle of Ecclesiastical Felicity to assuage their
concupiscence and Page 11.
wreck their malice. Though you were not restrained by any fear of the day of
Judgment, you had reasons enough to have baulkt such impudence as this, that
is so far from being a good jest, that it is a public affront to good
manners. And ill manners pass no where for wit but at Charing Cross or in
Lincolns-Inn-fields. Go your way for a smutty Lubber, that can make no other
improvement of so fair an advantage, than to spit your malice and ribaldry;
these are the top of your wit, if they are not the pinnacle of your felicity.
Certainly had the jest been ten times more elevating than it is, any civil or
witty man (especially one that has so many to spare) would have baulkt it for
modesty, though not for Conscience or the day of Judgment. And so you may go
and consider whether you had not only leisure enough but cause too much to have
cooled your thoughts, and corrected your indecencies.

But turn over the leaf, and there you will find that giving the Reader an
account of the heads of the ensuing Discourse, I tell him that I intend to
bestow some Animadversions upon one J. O. But would I had told you of this
fooling at first, for then I had saved you the labor of your first fourteen
Pages. Now is it credible, nay is it not most preposterous to think that you
should begin your Remarques upon my Preface, before you had read (as you call
it) so much as the Preamble? Or that you perused only three or four lines at a
time, and so fell into your Animadversions in the same order that they are
published? No doubt you saw this fooling before you set pen to paper, but had
no power to save the labor of all the former Pages. That had cut off the
pleasant Animadversions upon the Dilemma, the Press and the Importance. This
wit is such a tempting and bewitching thing that a man has not power to forgo a
good jest, unless it be now and then, i. e. very seldom, when he chances to
think of the day of judgment. But though this fooling as if you had finished
your Animadversions upon the first Page before you had read the second be silly
enough, yet it is not altogether so bad as confuting the first part of a
sentence before you came to the full period. For thus, when I affirm, that as
for the danger of the return of Popery into this Nation, I know none but the
Non-conformists boisterous and unreasonable opposition to the Church of
England. Here you stop in the middle of the sentence, and clap down a full
point Page 267.
after I know none. And then if there be none, the consequence is very easy,
what a fool I am for my labor to print a Book upon such an impertinent
Argument, and so away you run with a great deal of insulting and scorn, and
never stop career till you come to p. 271. and there you crave mercy for taking
me a little too short, and so add the latter part of the sentence, and then
gravely confess that this indeed has some weight in it, for truly before you
knew none too. And now though one would think no pretender to Controversial
skill could ever match such trifling as this, yet I remember J. O. served me
just such another trick, that was full as foolish and somewhat more knavish.
Thus discoursing of Christian Liberty I had laid down this assertion. That
mankind have a Liberty of Conscience over all their actions whether morally or
strictly religious, as far as it concerns their Judgments, but not their
Practices. He very honestly mangles this into two distinct propositions: The
first, that Mankind has a Liberty of Conscience over all their actions, whether
morally or strictly religious. And this he closes up with a full period, as if
it were an entire Problem by it self, and then gravely insults, (as well he
might) over so magnificent a Grant; and yet after all was not so ingenuous as
you are, to cry me mercy, but suffers his unwary Reader to go away with an
opinion of its being the Grand Thesis of that Chapter. These are Polemick
Divines for the Pope and the Good Old Cause, that though they can say nothing
for themselves are resolved never to hold their peace, and rather than give out
will tire their Adversaries with such wretched and intolerable trifling as
this. And that was the only intention of your Libell to divert people from
attending to the serious Argument; but you shall not escape so, I will never
leave my advantage to traverse your impertinencies, for I have you all at my
mercy, and there I am resolved to keep you, and assure your selves you can
never gain any thing by offering any resistance. Your Cause is so lamentably
weak and defenseless that you can only betray it, and expose your selves by
giving an occasion to the Controversy.

And now after all this lost labor, that you are of opinion might much better
have been spared, we are at length arrived upon the brink of the Preface: But
here before you leap in, it will be convenient to pitch upon some standing jest
that may give relish and picquancy to all the other insipid and phlegmatic
parts of the discourse; and now because neither Author nor Chaplain nor pink
of Courtesy, nor Priest, nor Buffoon, nor Prince Volscius, nor Cicero are
tuant enough, what think you if three or four times in every page I call my
Adversary Mr. Bays? Will it not be an admirable jest to repeat the word Bays
three or four hundred times for the pleasant conceit, and the pure elegance of
avoiding Tautologies? Yes by all means, it is just as much wit as if the word
had been in the language of Charing Cross or Lincolns-inn-fields plainly
Bastard, or more politely Son of a Whore: Or, as if you had kept to the
language of your own more serious Buffoonry, and the word had been Baals
Priest, or a Locust of the bottomless Pit, or an Antichristian Beast. For
though it might pass for a very trim fancy in Mr. Lacy to fasten this nickname
upon a vain and pedantick Poet, yet for you to borrow it without leave, and
apply it to a Person of a Sacred and Serious Profession without reason, is flat
dullness and impudence. For who can imagine where the conceit of it should lie
to repeat a Word of another man's Invention three or four hundred times
together, and that chiefly for this very reason, viz. to avoid repetitions.
Next to the killing jest of whoop and hola, I never met with any thing like it.
You are such another man! But yet so transporting was the conceit among the
Brotherhood (for they are most implacable wits) that at your first appearance,
there was nothing to be found among them but Joy and Jubilee, the 15th of March
was not a more jovial day, neither was there a greater destruction of
Cheese-cakes in Islington at the opening of the New River. All preciseness was
laid aside, not a gloomy look nor an erected white to be seen, but they let
down their eyelids as their honest neighbors do upon better occasions their
shop-windows. And all upon the sudden they are become the most jolly and most
humorous companions of the Town: And the very mention of Bays is such a
splitting conceit! It even endangers both their spleens and their lungs, yes,
and their Gloves too, they rub them so heartily. There is great hopes that it
will alter their humors and mend their complexions, at least there is no doubt
but it will prove hereafter an admirable specific for Fanatique obstructions.
And for this you were immediately horst upon the shoulders of the people (where
folly and ignorance always rides) and carried off with victorious noise and
uproar, and shown in triumph to your old Companions (that little suspected you
would ever have come to this) in Lincolns-Inn-fields and at Charing Cross, and
there leave you to be preferred to the service of Punchanella, to prompt jests
and repartees to his Puppets, you are just a fit Oracle for such an Audience. I
might easily have requited this civility of yours with twenty more symbolizing
nicknames, but that I both loath and scorn such a Porterly rudeness. For you
that have observed the management of Arguments in the street, cannot but have
taken notice that the Disputants never come to throwing of dirt, or calling of
names till they are basiled, and have nothing else to reply. And if you had
told me all along that I disputed with a dirty Face, it had been full as Tuant.
But if I would revenge my self it is not in my Power, for I cannot now stick
upon you any name that is more ridiculous than you have made your own; that is
already among all ingenious persons become the proverbial term for a dull and
clownish pretender to Wit.

And thus having been all this while hovering about the Brink, you at last
venture to commit your self to the dangerous depths of my Discourse. But after
your diving come up only with a vinegar face and a dirty mouth, you look sowrly
on Bishop Bramhal, and do by no means like his Character, because it is
forsooth too much for one man, and envy will not down with it; and so to
vindicate him from my Scurvy Commendation you have very piously composed 23
pages of studious and elaborate periods to prove him no better than an
undertaking and crackbrain'd Knave. This is the very syrrop of Additional
Civility. Had the Bishop been the Dignitary of Lincoln you could not have
treated him more Scurvily. But of your Piety to his Ashes we have had proof
enough already, and so you proceed to do the same office of kindness to Page 49.
Mr. Calvin's Memory, and by as scurvy a commendation vindicate him from my
scurvy Reproaches; in that whatever I have said to his disparagement is
incredible for two Reasons: 1. Because I do not say true; and 2. Because I lie.
For Mr. Calvin was an honest Divine, and spoke contemptuously of the Liturgy
Page 59.
of the Church of England; and those that will may charitably suppose he
repented of it on his deathbed, though for your part you your self know
nothing of it. To this you might have added, that he scorned to call any body
old Elsibeth so long after she was dead; no, though he too were an implacable
Divine, yet he was more a Gentleman than so, and had the courage to call
another Queen of England Proserpine in the time of her own Reign. But the
greatest thing that can be said in Mr. Calvin's praise, is, that he was the
first founder of that Modern Orthodox Doctrine. That it is the duty of Subjects
to moderate the licentiousness of Kings, and to punish or depose them when they
play the Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the Common People. And now pray Sir
tell me by the way what Bishops they are that you have the honor to be
acquainted with, that differ Page 71.
in nothing from Calvin but in point of Episcopacy. But thus Calvin (in his
Epistle to Cardinal Sadolet, as I remember) justifies the Mayor and Bailiffs of
Geneva, that had wrested the Supreme Authority of the City out of their Bishops
hands, and vested it in their Common Counsel, partly because he had abused his
Power into Tyranny, and partly because he had no other Title but of ancient
Usurpation; and though by virtue of that he had long claimed both the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, yet it was at first extorted from the Lawful
Magistrate, i. e. the Syndicks, and therefore it could be no theft or felony in
them to rob him of their own goods. A plea, if admitted of, that would as
easily overthrow all the established Governments in the world as the Bishopric
of Geneva, seeing there is no Kingdom that cannot within the compass of some
few Ages pretend defrauded Titles against the present Prince as well as Geneva,
and this pretense is so unavoidable, that it is not in the Power of any
established Government to secure it self against it, and therefore it has
always past for a Maxim in all Laws, that long possession or ancient
prescription gives a sufficient Title of Right; and though possibly it is not
in it self sufficient to vest a man in a true and real claim, yet it is enough
that no man after so many years can set up any opposite Pretense without
manifest violence and intrusion: For supposing his Ancestors to have been once
seated in the Throne, yet if they have been displaced whether justly or
unjustly time out of mind, and almost memory too, that wears out their Right;
especially when it rarely if it ever happens, but that if Usurpation may be
objected against the present Possessour, the same exception might as justly
have been put in against the former Title, so that if Prescription be not
sufficient to create a Right, yet it is at least a sufficient Bar against all
Intrusion, otherwise there can never be any fence against this Principle of
Rebellion. And this is enough to secure the peace of the world, and the
settlement of all established Governments and Commonwealths. But however upon
this Principle that is ready to serve alike in all Causes, he was no sooner
established in his Divinity Throne, but he tampers and prevails with the People
to abjure all Allegiance to their Bishop for the time to come, and swear
obedience and submission to his own Discipline.

But the Signiory of Geneva was too narrow a Diocese for his aspiring mind, and
he had no sooner settled his own new model of Government, but he bestirs himself
to obtrude it upon all Churches of the Reformation, Hungary, Transylvania,
Bohemia, Poland, Savoy, France, the Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, Scotland, and
the Church of England. And though he at first looked upon it as a project of his
own devising, and acknowledged it had not any Authority from the pattern or
prescript of the Primitive Church, and begged its settlement at Geneva, only as
an expedient for the present exigence, till they might have leisure and
opportunity of agreeing upon some more Apostolical Platform, yet no sooner had
he brought the Town and Territory of Geneva under his yoke, and established his
Throne there by swearing all the Citizens to a submission to his Doctrine and
Discipline; but he began to think, as all prosperous and ambitious Princes are
wont to do, of enlargement of Empire, and labors might and main to impose his
Discipline upon all Churches of the Reformation; and nothing will satisfy Him
and his Followers unless all Christendom will embrace the device of his warm
brain upon pain of the Divine displeasure, and under an obligation of Divine
Right. And to this purpose he sends his Dispatches and makes his Applications
to all the Courts in Europe, and if any Prince entertained any thoughts of
Reformation, he forsooth must immediately thrust himself into his Privy
Council, and if they were not entirely obedient to his Counsels, he either
rejected them as people that were not in good earnest, or despised them as
people that understood not the management of their own affairs; and all his
Epistles to Princes and Prelates were written with the confidence of Papal
Decrees. You may satisfy your self with a multitude of instances in his
Letters to the King, Princes and Castellans of Poland, to the Prince Elector of
the Palatinate, to the Church of Strasburgh, to the Duke of Wirtenburgh, and to
the Lantgrave of Hess, beside his particular missives and instructions to his
Vicar-Generals residing in several Kingdoms and Provinces. But to keep more
closely to our own concernments, by his Letters Patents to the Exiles of
Francfurt, the English Liturgy was casheir'd to make way for the entertainment
of the Order of Geneva, and Dr. Cox with his Associates, Grave and Reverend
Men, (cum gregalibus suis as he styles them) were rated for endeavoring the
establishment of the Liturgy of the Church of England. And when Mr. John Hooper
Bishop Elect of Gloucester had picked up a quarrel against Caps and Tippets, and
Gowns, and Rochets, and Chimeres, who forsooth must solicit the Duke of
Somerset (then the Great Minister of State) to have these idle scruples
dispensed with in despite of the Customs and Constitutions of the Church, but
John Calvin? Not to mention his Letters to the King, to the Archbishop, to the
Bishop of London, to Cecil, and to the Lords of the Council, in which he very
frankly, and before his advice is asked, makes his exceptions to the English
Liturgy, and finds fault with many Popish and superstitious Rites; and with an
Apostolical Authority advises the Lay-Lords to set aside all prudence and
worldly wisdom in carrying on the work of Reformation, and admonishes the
Bishops to strip themselves of all Secular Power and Jurisdiction, and charges
it upon the Bishop of London in particular, as his duty to inform the Queen
that she ought not to trust or trouble them with any more Authority, than what
they might challenge and exercise purely by virtue of their Spiritual Office.
And all this (I suppose) to make way for the more easy admission of his
Discipline, with a great many stories more that I could tell, and of which
Kings might by the help of their Royal Understandings make excellent use. And
now after all this it matters not much whether Geneva be situated upon the
South Side of the Lake Lemane, or the South-west, or the South-west and by
West, for peace sake I will grant you any point in the Compass, though as far
as I can learn by Maps and Books of Geography, they all inform me that it
stands where it always did on the South Side; and if they are mistaken, it is
none of my fault, for I am no Traveller; and had I been imposed upon in a
matter so collateral and impertinent to my main design, yet no man that had not
been to seek for more material exceptions, would ever have attempted to make so
much noise and advantage of so small a trifle; for though Geneva were removed
at as great a distance as Surat and Grand Cairo, yet for all that Calvin was an
over-busie and pragmatical man, and intermedled with several Affairs foreign to
his Judicature, and out of his Diocese, not only before his Advice was asked,
but after it was refused. And therefore I shall not at all concern my self to
examine the Debates of your Ecumenical Council about the situation of Geneva;
the discourse is Page 51, etc.
suited to the wit and wisdom of the company, that consists (I suppose) of your
particular Friends that you so often remember, Gilian the Cook-maid, and
Abigail the Chambermaid, and Mopsa the dry Nurse, together with some of your
Charing Cross and Lincolns-Inn-field wits, you your self being President, for
after having condemned their remarques for crude and cold conceits, after a
frown or two with your mouth, and some smiling with your forehead (they being
both performed by the same Muscles) you gravely determine that it was well and
wisely done of me to choose a South-sun for the better and more sudden growth
of the bramble. It is such an Oracle! as if there were not a South-sun on the
North as well as the South side of the Lake. And thus having finished your
serious counsels you are at leisure to advance to a dance, and recreate your
self and the company with Anagrams and Acrosticks upon Calvin's Name. And to
confess the truth (for I love wit in an enemy) Lucianus and Usinulca are very
pretty conceits, but yet I have heard of an old Elsibeth one that in my poor
Opinion is more worth than both of them, though I recreate my self with
believing that my simple judgment cannot beyond my intention abate any thing of
the just value of your wit with others. And thus having done you right (as you
did the Bishop) by making you this pious Apology, I will venture to let it out,
and it is Culina, for beside the transprosing Wit that is common to it with all
Anagrams, it is an unhappy Omen to betoken how much his followers should
delight in Dripping pan comforts. For beside our own experience at home, if we
may rely upon the relation of your Travels abroad: The Presbyterians are in
all parts the very Canibals of Capons: in so Page 55.
much that if Princes do not take care, the Race of Capons is in danger to be
totally extinguished. The Race of Capons man! This Geneva certainly is the most
breeding soil (whatever some Travelers may report of Africa) in the whole
Universe. For who ever heard of any other Climate so fruitful, that even Capons
are able to propagate their own Race? But how should Princes take care lest
this Race be totally extinguished by the sharpsetness of the Presbyterians,
when there is no such Race to be found in any Kings Dominions; for as I take it
ever since the Bishops banishment, there has been no King of Geneva. His
Majesty's Curiosity has replenished St. James's Park with all sorts of Fowl
from all parts of the World, but could never yet, that I can hear of, procure
one single Bird of this Capon Race. So that I perceive notwithstanding all his
great Alliances and Correspondences abroad, he has no great interest in the
Court of Geneva. But you Sir have traveled those parts and have no doubt
contracted acquaintance with the good House-wifes of the Country; it would be
a very considerable piece of service to the Commonwealth in general, and to
your dear Presbyterian brethren in particular, whose mouths (you say) hang so
much Capon-way, if you could but help us to some of the Chickens of both Sexes
of this Capon-brood. I am confident it would be so well accepted both in Court
and City, that you might easily obtain a Patent for the Monopoly and a Pension
for the service. Especially when they are of the greatest size of any in the
reformed World, so that if this race should be totally extinguished, it might
prove of fatal consequence to the Growth and Interest of the reformation in
Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia, Poland, Savoy, France, the Netherlands,
Denmark, Sweden, Scotland, etc. for I have heard great Statesmen say, that if
his Holiness were but Housewife enough to rear a larger Race than that of
Geneva, he might easily draw over the whole shole of Presbyterians to the
Church of Rome, because (as they observe) these Canibals are for any Communion
that promotes the Ordinance of Capon-eating. Their Stomachs are so set toward
this Race by an instinct of nature, that (as we read in your Memoirs) they were
no sooner spawned, but immediately they drive in whole sholes for the Land of
Capons. This is their natural food without which they cannot subsist, and
should this Race be ever totally extinguished, they must all starve for want of
their proper nourishment. Is it not then cruelly done of you to instigate
Princes out of a superfluous care for the Race of Capons, to endanger the total
extinction of the Race of Presbyterians? It Is matter of Stomach Sir (and some
Page (...)
say their Conscience is nothing else) and if Kings are so civil as not to
press any thing upon their Subjects against which they have an Antipathy, will
you be such an hard hearted and inflexible Tyrant, as to deny them what they
long for, and without which they cannot live? And not only so, but provoke
Princes to be the Ministers of your cruelty? But they, as they have Gentlemen's
Memories, so have Royal Understandings, and do not think sit to require any
thing that is impossible, unnecessary, or wanton of their People: And are fain
to consider their tempers, their Constitutions and their Stomachs. They reflect
upon the Histories of former times. They have heard how a Roman Emperor was
stabbed for giving the word unhandsomly; How the Parliament of Poland suffered
the Turk to enter, because the King would not suffer them to be his Taylour;
How Alexander the great had almost lost all by forcing his Subjects to conform
to the Persian habit; How the King of Spain is forced to ride bare-leg'd lest
the Biscainers should dismount him; How a certain Queen gave a certain
Broad-seal, of which there came no mischief; How the Queen of Sweden was forced
to resign for an uncivil word; How a sturdy Swiss would not conform; How the
King of Spain lost Flanders (of which he is King still) by the Inquisition; and
an hundred more that I could tell you but idle stories, that you may read at
your leisure in the fifth Epistle to Marcellinus; but however you may think
them but idle stories, yet Kings can tell how to make use of them. And after
all these fatal Consequences of Rebellion, which can only serve as Sea-marks
unto wise Princes to avoid the causes, can you think any of them so precipitate
and unadvised as to provoke such a fierce and cruel Race of Canibals for the
sake of a few Capons? For if once they revolt, there is no withstanding their
fury, but they pour in upon him like Goths and Vandals from Hungary,
Transylvania, Bohemia, Poland, Savoy, France, the Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden,
and Scotland, and enter into Covenant and Arms. And then you know no men fight
so keenly as those whose Courages are whet by their Stomachs. And now how had
the King been served if he had followed your advice to interess his Government
in defense of the Race of Capons? He had run himself into a fine Praemunire, had
he not, to bring all the Presbyterians in Christendom about his Ears? No, let
the Race of Capons shift for it self; it concerns them to secure their own Race
of Kings against these Canibals, they are as great devourers of Kings as Capons.

But under pretense of making Calvin Page 42, 3.
and Geneva ridicule I kill whole Nations, Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia,
Poland, Savoy, France, the Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, England, Scotland,
Charing Cross, and Lincolns-Inn-fields, with six Countries more, and many more,
and a long and caetera beside. This I must confess is more than I was aware of,
and yet if the Inhabitants of all these Countries are Canibals of the Race of
Capons, I defy them all, though you should cast in over and above, Tartary,
China, the great Moguls Country, Prester John, and the King of Guiney. Let but
the great Turk stand Neuter, and I do not fear all the Calvinists in the World
beside. I will make Cimarrs of their very Whiskers, and the Puny Bishops of
Munster, Cullen, and Strasburg shall be my Chaplains. But how comes Geneva to
be the Catholic Church? Or did all these Countries ever submit to Calvin's
Yoke? Why then must they of necessity follow the fortunes of Calvin and Geneva?
I know indeed he endeavored to extend his Empire over all these and many
Countries more, but I cannot find that ever any Prince swore Allegiance to his
Discipline excepting only Mr. Mayor of Geneva. Nor do I know where his
Discipline has any Power at this day, unless in the Netherlands, (if it have or
ever had any there) But that part of my undertaking his Majesty and the French
King have taken out of my hands. And I hope you do not mean them by the two
others that you say I have taken into Partnership Page 44.
with me. For though I am page 42. the Draw-can-sir, that fight single with all
these Countries, yet page 44. I do nothing without the assistance of two
others. This is a pretty contradiction, but what is that to a man that can make
Corollaries to justify Theses, or build superstructures to support
Foundations? But yet what is it we do? What! we club to travesteer the
Scripture, and render all the serious part of Religion odious Ibid.
and contemptible. The serious part of Religion! Why, is there any part of
Religion that is not serious? But it were worth the while to know who these two
wicked men are, why, lest we might be mistaken as to the persons you mention,
you will assure the Reader that you intend not Hudibras. Of all your Apologies
give me this for Civility: that you cannot make mention of any person that is
remarkable for profaneness, but as if the Character suited this Gentleman so
exactly, it were necessary to except him in particular, lest all your Readers
should immediately conclude he was the Person intended. This is such an
ill-favored piece of additional Civility, that an accusatory spirit could
desire no better play than you have given in his vindication. It is a mighty
complement this, though I am speaking of some ungodly Wretches that make it
their business to render all the serious part of Rebellion odious and
contemptible, I beg your pardon Sir, I will assure you upon my word it is not
you I intend at present. This it is to be a person of private condition and
breeding. Had that worthy Gentleman called you to an account for making any
unhandsome reflections upon him, this weeping Apology had been somewhat
excusable, but otherwise (as you excellently observe) there cannot be a more
dexterous Page 266.
and malicious way of Calumny, than by making a needless Apology for another in
a criminal Subject. But yet however you may assure your self that he will never
take any notice of such a despicable yelper as you, unless with a Dog-whip.
Thou Prevaricatour of all the Laws of Buffoonry, thou dastard Craven, thou
Swad, thou Mushroom, thou Coward in heart, word, and deed, thou Judas, thou
Crocodile, thus (though it were in thy greatest necessity) after having
professed wit and rithm these fifty years, to snivle out such a whining
submission in public is past all precedent of Cowardice from the Trojan war to
this very day; but that thou should do it of thy own accord and without any
provocation is more sneaking than the flattery of a Setting-dog. Thou shall
wear a Collar, and thy name shall be Trey.

And so we arrive at the Character of a Noble-man's Chaplain; for having
heretofore (among other your juvenile Essays of Ballads, Poesies, Anagrams and
Acrosticks) laid out your self upon this Subject also, and your Papers lying
useless by you at this time when your Muse began to tire and set, it might be
very convenient to fill up twelve pages with this Character whilst she baited
and recovered Breath. But the greatest part of it is so very trite and vulgar,
that none but a superannuated Wit would ever have accepted of such out worn and
old fashioned Jests. And the rest of it so Garagantuan and Legend-like, v. g.
the raising of a man's Hypocondria into the Region of his Brain, his being
lifted up into the Air so high as to crack his Scull against the Chapel
Ceiling, with a deal more of such wild and incredible Stuff, that I shall wave
it all because I am sure it is impossible that Kings should ever make use of
such idle and extravagant stories. And if I would study revenge I could easily
have requited you with the Novels of a certain Jack Gentleman that was born of
pure Parents, and bred among Cabin-boys, and sent from School to the
University, and from the University to the gaming Ordinaries, but the young man
being easily rook'd by the old Gamesters, he was sent abroad to gain Cunning
and Experience, and beyond Sea saw the Bears of Bern, and the large Race of
Capons at Geneva, and a great many fine sights beside, and so returned home as
accomplished as he went out, tries his fortune once more at the Ordinaries,
plays too high for a Gentleman of his private condition, and so is at length
cheated of all at Picquet. And so having neither Money nor employment, he is
forced to loiter up and down about Charing Cross and in Lincolns-Inn-fields,
where he had leisure and opportunity to make Remarques (among other Subjects)
upon the wheel of Fortune, from whence with the help of a little skill in
Mathematics he at length makes out this new and important discovery in
Politics, as a straight line continued grows a Circle, even so Power
infinitely extended becomes Impotency. Which with many more of his choicest
Observations he at length discharges into a certain Book called the Rehearsal,
which as soon as you have finished this, I would willingly recommend to your
perusal, that you may see how much pains a witty man may take to make others
merry and himself ridiculous. Where you will meet with many more that perhaps
you will think but idle stories, but Kings know how to make use of them. For
how modestly soever the Author may speak of his own private condition and
breeding, his Memoires will be very serviceable to the instruction of Princes.
It is he that first observed how the Clergy have in all Ages obstructed the
Clemency of Kings; how they can deform the whole Reign of the best Princes that
ever wielded Scepters; how by their leasings they keep up a strangeness and
misunderstanding between the Sovereign and his Subjects; how they trinckle with
Parliaments, and by their pickthankness make them expose both their own and his
Majesty's Wisdom to posterity. It is he only that can with Authority from
above (for he could have it nowhere else) ensure Princes, that the reason why
God does not bless the Clergy in affairs of State, is because he never intended
them for that employment. It is he that first discovered the Sea-marks of
Government, and by the Histories and Originals of all former rebellions
instructed Princes how to avoid the like causes. It is he that has informed
them that the body is in the power of the mind, and the mind in the hand of
God, so that to punish either of them is to correct the Divine Majesty. It is
he that has advised them how to humor their Subjects, and not force them to
conform to a fashion or ceremony, for the sake of Alexander the Great, and the
Emperor, the sturdy Swiss, and the Town-seal. In brief, it is he that has
taught them Gentlemen's Memories to forget all injuries, and Royal
Understandings to prevent none. These stories would have been more instructive
to Princes than a pitiful Legend of a cracked Chaplain, and for that reason I
shall not pass them by so lightly, but reserve them to their proper place of
State Policy.

From the Chaplain you are immediately led by a certain train of thoughts to J.
O. upon whom you spend an horrible deal of Abecedarian wit, that was taken out
of his own Primer, as the rest of your Book was out of his Survey. I suppose
the intention of it is to nick all Capacities, for having made the rest to
please fools this was designed for the entertainment of children, and to them I
leave it, only I cannot but observe from your pursuing it to such an irksome
and tedious length, that you have not the judgment of a Jack-pudding to
discern when you have played the fool enough. And here follows the delightful
story of Gill and Triplet, but this too I shall keep cold for your Politiques,
because it is a story that Kings may make use of. And thus are we arrived once
more at the Grand Thesis, that stands just as it did at the beginning. For
whether it were lawful for me to write any more, or not; whether the Press be a
villainous Engine, or not; whether Importance be a Female or not; whether
Calvin were a bramble or not; whether Geneva stand on the South Side of the
Lake Lemane or not; whether there be a Race of Capons propagated there or not;
whether it be possible for a man's Hypocondria to rise up into his head or not;
whether J. O. be an Hee-cow or not; and whether Triplet were legally whipped by
Gill after he could plead adultus or not; I will maintain it against Hungary,
Transylvania, Bohemia, Poland, Savoy, France, the Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden,
Scotland, Geneva, Germany, Charing Cross, Lincolns-Inn-fields, Grubstreet,
Pin-makers hall, J. O. and your Self, and any one man more, I care not though
it be the sturdy Swiss, That it is absolutely necessary to the Peace and
Government of the World, that the Supreme Magistrate of every Commonwealth
should be vested with a Power to Govern and Conduct the Consciences of Subjects
in affairs of Religion. And now to conclude, is it not a sad thing that a
well-bred and fashionable Gentleman, that has frequented Ordinaries, that has
worn Perukes, and Muffs, and Pantaloons, and was once Master of a Watch, that
has traveled abroad and seen as many Men and Countries as the Famous Vertuosi
Sorbier and Coriat, that has heard the City Lions roar, that has staved and
tail'd to the Bears of Bern, that has eaten of the Race of Capons at Geneva,
that has past the Alps, and seen all the Tredescin rarities and old stones of
Italy, that has sat in the Porphyrie Chair at Rome, that can describe the
method of the Election of Popes, and tell stories of the tricks of Carnivals,
that has been employed in Embassies abroad, and acquainted with Intrigues of
State at home, that has read Plays, and Histories, and Gazets; that (I say) a
Gentleman thus accomplished and embellisht within and without, and all over,
should ever live to that unhappy dotage, as at last to dishonor his gray
hairs, and his venerable Age with such childish and impotent endeavors at wit
and buffoonry.

Thus having coursed you through eleven beginnings from the Preface into the
Ecclesiastical Polity, from thence into the Defense, from the Defense back
again into the Preface, from that into Bishop Bramhall, anon into the Preface
to the Ecclesiastical Polity, and straight back again into the Bishops Preface,
and from thence away to Dr. Thorndike, the Friendly Debate, Mr. Hooker, to Mr.
Hales for 10 pages of Rithm to Ism, thence to J. O's discourse of Evangelical
Love and Unity from p. 127 to the end, and then from page the first to page the
127th, and so backward and forward to the conflagration of London, the burning
of the Ships of Chatham, St. Paul's Church, and Diana's Temple, Ben. Johnson,
Horace, the 5 Chap. to the Galatians, and the 5 Epist. to Marcellinus. After
all this I thought I might begin to expect a little rest, and to hope that we
need not despair that you began to design to conclude to begin to draw an end
of beginning to begin, as knowing that all raving fits usually end in a
Lethargy; and it began to succeed just according to my wishes, when I heard all
on the sudden Mr. Bays good night: But whether it is, that some body has
strewed Cow-itch in your Bed, or that your Conscience is very restless, or that
you only slept dogs sleep, immediately in the very next line I am awaked with
good morrow Mr. Bays, and am teased as freshly for a certain Preface showing
what grounds there are of fears and jealousies of Popery, as if this had been
our first salute, and we had never exchanged word before. And here (to borrow
one of your Schemes of Speech) it seems that England is no stranger to rumors
of Popery; it seems that it has been the Puritan Artifice ever since the
Reformation to possess the People with these panick fears; it seems the Church
of England has perpetually been traduced by them as Popishly affected; It seems
I vindicate the Church from this aspersion by pregnant and undeniable instances
of Religious Loyalty and Obedience; it seems I have charged the Rebels as
justly and undeniably with the direct contrary Principles and Practices. It
seems I do not recriminate any designs of Popery to the Non-conformists, but
charge them most righteously with a constant and boisterous opposition to the
Church, thereby creating dangerous disorders and disturbances to the State; It
seems Atheistical and Irreligious Caitifs, out of a peculiar hatred, and most
exquisite malice to the Church and Churchmen, are never wanting to promote and
abett these mischievous disorders; It seems if crafty and sacrilegious
Statesmen join in the Confederacy, they are apt enough to run the Kingdom into
such miserable necessities, that there is no support of their interest without
rapine and sacrilege; It seems that if the Church of England should ever be
hereby destroyed, no other Religion can be established in lieu of it but
Popery, because Fanaticism is so wild and untractable a thing, that it is
incapable of any settlement upon any Principles; It seems all this either is,
or for any thing you are able to oppose to it, may be as true as Gospel, and
though it seems you dare not answer it, because you cannot, yet it seems you
have the confidence to deny it all, and confute it with abundance of censure
and cavil; and more it seems you could have done were it not for falling under
the penalty of a certain Act of Parliament against spreading of false news,
Page 261.
even as you durst not answer what you had quoted out of my Eccles. Pol. for
fear of bringing your self within the Statute of Page 104.
Treasonable Words. Sweet Gentleman! What a misfortune it is when a Godly,
Loyal, tender Conscience, bearing so much awful Reverence and soultry affection
to the Supreme Magistrate, should in all his Disputes so cross with Authority,
that he dares not speak out his mind plainly, only for fear of being hanged.
But were it not for the Statute against Treasonable Words you would make me an
Example to all Generations. But yet though you dare not Reply for fear of these
sanguinary Laws against Treason, yet you can do what is more serviceable to
your purpose, you can take occasion to raise calumny enough from my Discourse
to render my Self and all the Clergy odious to all Interests within the Kings
Dominions; And first you begin with the King himself, and discover, that after
all it was neither the Bookseller, nor Geneva, nor the Trouts, nor the Sprats,
nor the Race of Capons, nor Presbyterians, nor Millecantons of Fanatiques, nor
B. Bramble, nor Usinulca, nor the Hobgoblins, nor J. O. nor Nonconformity, nor
Hungary, nor Transylvania, nor Bohemia, nor Poland, nor Savoy, nor France, nor
the Netherlands, nor Denmark, nor Sweden, nor Scotland, nor Germany; but the
King was the person aimed at from the beginning. Page 264.
And it now sufficiently detects my malice to His Majesty to stir up matter of
such dangerous and seditious Discourse. Though not above a page or two since,
he was abundantly assured and satisfied of my Loyalty, and we were all three
very good Friends, and yet here you tell His Majesty nine times over, how I
bear an evil eye to him and his Government, that I publish Manifesto's against
his Indulgence, that I make his proceedings odious, etc. by raising a public
and solemn Discourse through the whole Nation concerning a matter the most
odious and dangerous that could be exposed. When your Self, and all your
Readers both know that most men's heads were filled with these jealousies, and
all men's mouths with these Discourses before my Preface was published or
thought on; and withal, that I am so far from adding any encouragement to the
fears and jealousies of the people, that my only design was to show that it was
a thing impossible in it self ever to be brought about by any other means than
the folly of the Nonconformists. So that whatever designs the Popish Party
might at that or any other time have upon our Religion, we had no great reason
to apprehend any danger from their attempts, were it not for that advantage
that is given them by the giddy and incessant opposition of the Fanatique
Faction to the Church of England. So that it is manifest by this, that you
intended nothing but cavil and wrangling, thus to charge me with stirring up
this odious Discourse of Popery, when as to that all the Nation are able to
convict you of notorious falsehood and leasing; and whether the Discourse of
that occasioned my Preface no body can know beside my self, but this they all
know, that my Preface never occasioned that Discourse. And now after all, it
seems there was more danger than you or I dreamt of, by that Alarm that the
King and Parliament have taken upon this matter. I know you and your Party will
never acknowledge that my Preface was the cause of this new Act against Popery,
and yet you may do it much more safely, than to make it the original of that
publiok and solemn Discourse that run through the whole Nation upon this
Argument, in that the Act was enacted since my Preface, and the Discourse was
public before it. And now you would do well to charge the Parliament as you
have done the Bishop for being enemies to the State in raising all this din and
obloquy, and disquieting His Majesty's good Subjects with such fears, when
there was no danger. But you are never concerned either as to the truth or the
ingenuity of your Cavils, so they do but reflect some odium upon the Clergy;
and I have very good reason to believe, that as much as you have magnified the
Declaration for Indulgence, and decryed all dangers and suspicions of Popery,
yet had you been a Member of this present Parliament, you would have been as
forward as he that was most so in remonstrating to the Declaration, and voting
for the Act. And now you see what reason you have given the Public to have
any great opinion of your Integrity. Should I have prevaricated at this rate
with the world, have been so inconsistent in all my actions, have thus cut and
shuffled in all my words, and have clapped on so many disguises and contradictory
Apologies upon every thing I say; I must confess I have not face enough to
presume so confidently upon the dullness and simplicity of mankind, as to
flatter my self with any hopes of escaping without discovery and discrace:
every body has wit enough to see through such stupid and inartificial Leasings.

But had you been Solicitour-General to the High Court of Justice, you could
scarce have been more dexterous than you are at framing and aggravating
Inditements out of nothing; they were forced to amass together heaps of
accusations to make up one cumulative crime, but you can hang a man for his
Courtship, and extract Treason out of a Complement. Thus because I suppose it
possible for his Majesty to dye before the day of Judgment, and then that some
Prince may arise in after Ages endued with less Wisdom, and by consequence
possessed with less kindness to the Church of England, that is so admirably
accommodated to the interest of the Crown beyond all other Churches in the
World. This (say you) is pretty plain dealing, it is to take the pillow from
under his head; you should have thought it better Courtship in a Divine to have
said, O King live for ever. What a Miscreant am I! sure I can be no less than
another John Chastel or Ravillac. What draw the Pillow from under my Princes
head, that is dispatch him by fraud or violence before the course of nature
brings on the period of his dissolution? Search the Villain, his pockets are
full of poisoned Daggers and screwed Pistols; for how else could he foretell
that the King must one day dye, unless he were resolved to fulfill his own
Prophecy, for otherwise, if it please God, the King may live for ever. Does
this Language become a Subject, much less a Divine to his Prince, O King you
are mortal and must dye like other men. Is not this to upbraid him with his
Mortality, and to beat down his esteem with the people by informing all the
Nation that he is no more than a man? At least is it civil or dutiful thus
unseasonably to show him his winding sheet, and mind him of the day of
Judgment, to spoil the wit and cheerfulness of his Conversation by forcing him
to baulk good jests for fear of an after-reckoning for idle and profane words.
This sufficiently detects your malice and ill Page 265.
intention to his Majesty's Government, for all your Sleights and Legerdemain,
to take this occasion altogether foreign and unseasonable to raise a public
and solemn discourse throughout the whole Nation concerning a matter the most
odious and dangerous that could be exposed. That no man can pass by a
Booksellers Stall, but he must be minded of the Kings Mortality. These are the
marks and Characters of your displeasure against him; whilst you were pleased
to vouchsafe him your favor and countenance, you were not wont to talk after
this rate; but now because he will not take up Arms upon your Becks, and listen
to your implacable and sanguinary Counsels, and tear in pieces the sacred Act
of Oblivion and Indemnity, there is no remedy but dye he must, whereas
otherwise the complement had been O King live for ever. This is almost as heavy
an accusation as the rudeness you have upbraided me with against Queen
Elizabeth; when suddenly with undaunted Courage down goes your Gauntlet in her
Majesty's quarrel, for though she were dead some years ago, yet it seems she
was much disobliged to be thought old, and if any body called her so, could not
for her heart stay till the day of Judgment, but must up and at'em. And
therefore to revenge this Affront you have let fly at me seven pages of Latin
and English, which had you rendered into Italian or Spanish, might as well have
revenged King John of the Pope, and Scanderbeg of the great Turk, for they
concern us all alike. But certainly never were any Princes wont to be thus
irreverently treated by their Subjects heretofore, as to have the least
suggestion whispered either of their Age or their Mortality.

And yet you are not content to bring me into disfavour with his Majesty and
Queen Elizabeth, but you must expose me to the displeasure of the Privy
Council, and make bate between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Politicians. For
really he Page 316.
does speak of King and Counselors at such a rate, and describe and
characterize some men so, whomsoever he intends, that though I know there are
no such, I dare not touch, it is too hazardous. You tell us, I remember, upon
another occasion that every similitude must have if not all, yet some likeness,
that is to say every likeness must have some likeness, though it does not
follow that if it must have some it must have all as you would improve it in
your conclusion against me, viz. that because Sardanopalus was a King, and a
good Spinster, that therefore every King must be as good a Spinster as
Sardanapalus. But here is a very like Picture, and yet like no body. I describe
and characterize some men so, that though you know there are no such, you dare
not touch, it is too hazardous. Whoop and hola! is all our talk of Duels and
fighting come to this, to be afraid of no body? If there are no such persons,
fear not, they will never challenge you for taking them by the Beard. I did not
set down the first letters of any man's name, nor describe the features of any
man's face, nor give intimation of my knowledge of any man's lodging, I only
characterized the qualities of some Persons that are to be found in all Ages to
oppose the Clergy of all Ages in their opposition to the Clemency of the Kings
of all Ages. Now that any man's qualities should be characterized, when there is
no such man in the World, no man can understand but a man of Contradictions.
For the persons cannot be pointed at but by the Character, and therefore if the
Character happen to suit no body at this time, then it is certain no body at
this time can be characterized. Nor indeed did I ever hear of any such Persons,
who gave the King such Counsels of Sacrilege as I there described, beside your
self, that have nothing to lay to his charge (since the Act of Oblivion and
Indemnity) beside his not seizing the Church revenues, otherwise though the
Clergy are the vilest men in the World, you do not see but that he leads a more
unblameable Conversation. A very obliging Testimony, and when his Majesty wants
a Living, he will no doubt come to you for a Certificate. But to let that pass,
this intimation against the Council is as stabbingly suggested as the story of
Sardanapalus; that a man cannot give a general Character of a sacrilegious
Statesman but some of his Majesty's Privy Council must immediately be glanced
at, this indeed is too hazardous to be touched, and yet you cannot keep in your
fingers from pointing, though you dare not touch. A man of your reading cannot
be ignorant that there are too many of this sort of Vermin in all Ages, and
that there are enough of them at this time, though they dare not appear in
public view, but if ever affairs should at any time seem to require it, they
will be ready and officious to instruct Princes in this dangerous Lesson, to
encourage them to burn Temples, to plunder Churches, to trample upon all the
Laws of Justice, and affront all the solemnities of Religion, to scorn the
pedantiok stories of Honor and Conscience, and to set down to themselves no
other measures of Government but falsehood, oppression, and cruelty. These are
the Sejanusses that I described, and I took my Character from the monsters of
former times, and you may find the men in the deformed Reigns of Nero and
Tiberius. They are engendered under Tyrants, and out of the corruptions of
Government, and they cannot usually lift up their heads under a merciful and
gracious Prince, (though the last King it seems had the ill fortune to have his
whole Reign deformed by being unhappily trinkled with Ceremonies, Arminianism
and Manwaring.) Were it possible that ever his Majesty should degenerate from
the goodness of his own Nature as much as (they say) Nero did, we might then,
but not till then, fear such Favorites and Counselors as should dare to tell
him it is below a Sovereign Prince to submit to the Pedantry of Conscience, and
to be imposed upon with the solemn cheats of Religion; these are fit stories to
trinkle his People into servitude^, but he must own no other Rule of Good and
Evil, Justice and Honesty beside his own pleasure or reason of State; and for
his own convenience he may break Oaths, murder the Innocent, and care not how
he oppress and defraud his Subjects, and sacrifice the welfare of a whole
Kingdom to his own Pride and Luxury. And therefore Sir, you must not stick at
Rapine or Sacrilege for the support or the ease of your Government, but seeing
your Reign is short, be so provident as to make the best advantage of your
Fortune; and seeing you received your Power by the chance of inheritance, and
are no way accountable for the discharge of any trust, make your own days as
pleasant and easy as you may, and burden not your self with a superfluous
care for the happiness of your Subjects or Posterity. Now to say that in such a
general Character of wickedness as this I must speak particularly concerning
King and Counselors is such an height of impudence, that his Majesty can never
sufficiently requite it by assigning you a Nitch in the Old Exchange, that is
honor enough for such vulgar Wits as King James and my self. He can do no less
than perch your Laureated Effigies upon the Imperial Grasshopper. The only
public place that I can think of, where you may sit out of danger of rotten
Eggs and Turnip tops.

But you fall so often into these throws and pangs of Ingenuity, that it is
impossible for me to correct all your Leasings, and therefore I will only
exemplify two or three of the goodliest ones, lest I should be cast and
condemned for baulking a legal Plea. And thus, Imprimis, have Page 307.
I cast a mischievous aspersion upon His Majesty of thinking to convert the
Revenues and Dignities of the Church to his own use. To lay such an heinous act
of Insolence to my Charge without any reference to my Writings, were not to be
endured in any person living beside your self, who when you have cast all the
foulest aspersions in the world upon any special friend whom you design to
treat with an Additional Civility, can easily wipe off all again with an
impudent and counterfeit Apology, it is but protesting, that You recreate your
self with believing that your simple judgment cannot beyond your intention
abate any thing of my just value with others, and then you have done me right
and merited my pardon, though you had accused me of poisoning my Parents, and
eating up all my Brothers and Sisters. But these are your leasings, for it was
but just now that the King and I were very good friends, and that he was
assured of my Loyalty; and yet here am I aspersing him with a calumny the
blackest and most odious in the world. Whereas you cannot but be conscious that
I have given His Majesty as large and fair a Testimonial as he (or any man
else) can desire of his Zeal and Conformity to the Church of England. Though
had I been so dis-ingenuous as to dart this aspersion upon him, yet it had been
less disobliging than your scurvy Commendation; who when you set your self to
strein for elaborate and studious Periods of flattery, the highest Elogy you
can find in your heart to vouchsafe Him, is, that you do not know but he may
lead a more unblameable conversation than the worst and wickedest men in the
world, were it not for one inexcusable fault, his obstinacy in not assuming the
Revenue of the Church to his own Use. So that my aspersion, if it were true, is
upon your Principles so far from detecting any malice to His Government, that
it would clear him of the only blemish that lies upon his Reputation. Sure you
are half Guelph and half Gibelline, you are every where so cross and
contradictory to your self. But as I have asperst the King with the only thing
for which you would commend him, so I have all along appropriated or
impropriated all the Loyalty from the Nobility, the Gentry, and the Commonalty,
and dedicated it to the Church. Why! did any of the Kings Subjects fight for
him beside the Clergy? Had he any Commanders in his Army beside Bishops and
Dignitaries? Were not all his Battles fought under the Conduct of General Usher
and Captain Bramhall against Dr. Cromwell and Dr. Ireton, for with that Title
were they Dubbed at Oxford by one J. O. in their Return from the bloody Conquest
of Ireland? Did not the Kings whole Infantry consist of poor Readers, as the
Kirk Foot did of Mass-Johns, who brought in Covenant and Reformation in
exchange for shoes and stockings. But if you can name any of the Nobility,
Gentry, or Commonalty, that ventured Lives and Fortunes for the Royal Cause, I
believe we shall never be so impudent as to deny them their share of Loyalty
and Service to their Prince. And if you cannot, I am sure I can name amongst
them as gallant Examples of Courage and Integrity as perhaps no Age can
parallel; they fought and they suffered with the constancy and resolution of
Martyrdom, and nothing could in the least abate their zeal and their devotion
to an oppressed and an afflicted Prince; and this because their Loyalty was
founded upon Principles of Conscience and Religion; and that is it that I have
appropriated to the Church of England, that it teaches the duty of Subjects in
absolute and indispensable terms without leaving shifts and evasions for
disobedience, whereas all other Parties tie it on with false and counterfeit
knots, so that by the help of reserves the Subject may be as much as ever at
liberty to obey or disobey as himself shall deem convenient. And when sometimes
they shall have preached up the necessity of Allegiance in the most positive
and comprehensive terms, they will bring themselves off with so many clauses
and exceptions, as must utterly evacuate the obligation of their own Doctrines.
And if at any time they happen to be stubborn in their Loyalty, their Prince is
indebted for that either to chance or interest, or inclination, or some other
uncertain and changeable Principle. But the thing that I have appropriated to
the Church of England is Loyalty upon firm and effectual Principles; in so much
that a man must be an Apostate before he can be a Rebel, and renounce his
Religion and his Duty to God before he can neglect his Allegiance and his Duty
to his Prince. This is the peculiar and distinguishing Article of the Church of
England, so that when you infer that I have impropriated it to the Clergy from
the Nobility and Gentry, you must first suppose that none of the Nobility or
Gentry belong to her Communion. And now are you not a modest and an honest
Gentleman to charge me with such an unsufferable rudeness and disingenuity
against so great a number of the bravest and most gallant spirits in the world.
Though this I know was intended only in pursuance of your Grand Design, by such
impudent Leasings to raise up a misunderstanding between the Clergy and all
other Orders of men in the Kingdom. And that is the bottom of all your malice
and hatred to them, that as long as they are able to keep and make good the
Pulpits Loyalty will be the Religion of the people, and they will not easily be
wrought upon to listen to your Factions and Democratical insinuations. And that
is it (whatever you pretend of the Dignitary of Lincoln) that makes you and
your Partners to gnash your teeth, and knit your fists with so much impatience
against the Order it self. But were you capable of wit in your anger, you would
have let fly at them with some more plausible and probable aspersions, and not
think to bring them into discredit among wise and sober men with such rank and
notorious fictions. For this can only betray your malice and ill intentions,
and though you had right on your side, it would be an invincible prejudice
against your Cause and your Party, that scruple not any Arts, howsoever
dishonest or dishonorable, to do a despite to the Church of England. I
remember another Accusation, which though it be not altogether so impudent as
this, yet when I first read it, methoughts it was somewhat more pleasant, that
my Preface intermedles Page 7.
with the King, the Succession, the Privy Council, Popery, Atheism, Bishops,
Ecclesiastical Government, and above all (it seems this is more saucy than all
the rest) with Nonconformity and J. O. Why truly not unlike; but it seems, if
you had resolved to write a Preface, it is like you would have mentioned
nothing more than your own private affairs, and only informed the Reader of
your losses at Picquet, and the Gaming Ordinaries, your adventures at the
Bear-garden of Bern, your encounters with the mighty race of Capons at Geneva,
your Remarques upon the wheel of Fortune, and whipping of Gigs, and your
studies in the 5. Epist. to Marcellinus. But alas! my breeding and condition
are too private to bless the world with such great and observable Memoires; and
therefore not having the advantage that You and Caesar had of writing my own
Novels, I was forced to intermeddle with the affairs of others; the King, the
Council, and (above all) J. O. And toward them all I have endeavored the
utmost Ingenuity, and if I have failed, I even ask their pardon, I do them
right. And then though I have abused them never so unworthily I make them ample
amends by this clause of additional Civility. But however I have treated them I
must confess I am bound to beg your pardon in particular, because you your self
have intermedled with none of these things. And now did ever any fool in the
world make so much noise and puther to so little purpose?

But of all the Examples that ever I read of the undue and brutish stirring of
Passions, I never met with any like that horrible and boobily noise that you
have raised upon my pitying the folly of some men that can smell Jesuits and
Gunpowder Plots upon every ordinary and Page 170, 71.
accidental firing of a chimney, upon this away you run like a man scared with
the horror of the discovery, crying and roaring out to the Citizens nothing
but fire, fire! and if they enquire where, why it began from some sparkles that
flew out from a late Discourse, and caught hold of your chimneys. Neither is
the Wretch satisfied to lay your City in ashes, but he makes himself sport with
your Calamities. And though that sad Accident is yearly by Act of Parliament
observed with due Humiliation and Solemnity, yet he turns all into mirth and
derision, and bids you the next time your City takes fire to blow up the Thames
to quench it, etc. And then in all your foam and froth you stand astonished
that I am not afraid of the fury of the wild multitude, and that I dare after
my late Severity against Tradesmen so much as touch the fire, etc. What a
ridiculous and discomposed rage is here raised out of nothing, did ever Sophist
or Impostor counterfeit such a mad and foolish melancholy, on purpose to try
how brutish and driving the passions of the Rabble are? Had I been convicted of
setting the City on fire, you could scarce have raised more fierce and
frenetick Rants than you have upon this slight and frivolous occasion. The
Oration of the Old Fellow (that I remember I have somewhere read of, I think in
Apuleius) if it had been as serious, would have been much less ridiculous than
this your brutish bellowing; when he came forth with all the solemnities of
sorrow and a discomposed mind to declaim in the presence of the whole City
against a little Boy. And as soon as he could for sighs and groans, begins with
weeping tears to let them know that he had something to communicate, that
required all their attention as they tendered the preservation of the
Commonwealth; and so proceeds to conjure them by all things both sacred and
civil, by their Altars and their Chimneys, not to let the Murderer escape
unpunished; and having screwed the peoples expectations even to impatience, he
was vehemently desired to declare the crime, that so they might atone the
anger of the Gods, which otherwise they might expect upon their City, if they
should suffer such an horrid villainy to pass unrevenged. At last, after he had
moved all this indignation, he produces three Bottles broken all to pieces by
the young man; here, here (says he) behold the cruel murderer. At which (you
may suppose) all the Audience fell a laughing then as all people do at you now;
only with this difference; that then they laughed at themselves for being
abused into so solemn a passion by a trick, whereas now they laugh at you for
endeavoring with so much seriousness to raise as furious a passion out of such
a nothing. But thus have you after your rate of Oratory done my business both
with the King, the Council, the Nobility, the Gentry, and the Citizens; and no
doubt but they all take you for a most incomparable Booby. I have laid all
these Articles of Indictment together, only to let the Reader see the forces of
your Ingenuity, because as they lie scattered at a distance, they are not
altogether so observable to every ordinary understanding.

Having been thus shrewdly handled for traducing his Majesty's Government, by
stirring this dangerous and Seditious Discourse concerning the Return of
Popery; the very next words you produce against me, are, that for my part I
know none. Was there ever such an unhappy Caviller as you to arraign me of ill
intentions to the Government by aspersing it with jealousies and suspicions of
Popery, and yet in the very next breath laugh at me for saying that I know
none? And if there be none, and that were the design of my Preface to prove
that there were none, I would fain know which way that can be improved into a
reflection upon His Majesty's Government. Both these Cavils can never pass,
they run a-tilt at one another, and yet notwithstanding that they are
contradictory, they have the ill fortune to be both false; for if these fears
and jealousies had overrun the whole Nation, I hope I might concern my self to
lay them, without any ill intention to the Government; and if they were
causeless, I might without any impertinence or absurdity prove that they were
so. But your trifling in this period I have shown already, by cutting it off in
the middle, and confuting the first part before you proceeded to read the
second; for I no where say that I know none: but that I know none beside the
Non-conformists boisterous and unreasonable opposition to the Church of
England. And therefore to railly me for saying absolutely that I know none, and
then to cry me mercy three or four pages after for taking me short, is such a
Scheme of writing that I dare say is peculiar to your self, and without
precedent in any Writer in the world. But however this would serve turn (as you
then thought) to throw odium upon the Bishops, and that is all you aim at, viz.
because they gave Page 268.
the word, and delivered Orders through their Ecclesiastical Camp to beat up
the Pulpit Drums against Popery. That they might do, and yet have no ill
intention against His Majesty's Government, as I am sure now you dare not deny,
but if any of them did issue out any such Orders, I am as sure it is more than
you know; so that in you it is an impudent lie to lay such an action to their
Charge without any proof, only because (as you then supposed) it might be
thought to bring them under some suspicion of illwill to His Majesty's
Government, and whatever they did, they are sufficiently justified. But this is
right Fanatique Ingenuity to bring the Bishops into a Praemunire for their zeal
and watchfulness against Popery; you are true Gibellines, rather than not spite
them, you will side with Antichrist it self; the slander has hitherto been that
they are Popishly inclined, but now their crime is, because you imagined it
might do them a mischief, that they are the very men that oppose Popery: And so
for Ingenuity give me a Puritan- Gibelline! But here upon supposition of this
Alarm you raise such a fearful clattering of Arms and Armor, as if the Bishops
of Munster, Colen and Strasburg were come over to the assistance of the Church
of England. And what the reason of it is I know not, your fancy runs upon
nothing but wars and fighting, and turns every thing into battles and
bloodshed. One while what a din do we hear of Duels, Hectors, giving the Lie,
Brothers of the Blade, blemishes of Honor, Challenges, Quarrels, Combats,
Villain thou lie, sending the length of the Weapon, naming Seconds,
appointing time and place, gaining the Enemies Sword, making home-thrusts, and
dying upon the spot. By and by what a dreadful noise do you make with Camps,
Magazins, Carasses, Habergeons, Culverins, Steel-bonets, Swords, Muskets,
Bandaleers, Match, Bullets, Powder, Back, Breast, and Helmet, taking Alarms,
fortifying Trenches, guarding Approaches, marching up into Counterscarps,
ranging Forces in Battle, placing Cannon, sounding the Charge, giving the Word,
falling on, fighting through Squadrons, beating whole Armies single, mowing
down whole Countries, killing Friend and Foe, and eating up All, Men, Women and
Children. He that came off with Honor in threescore and seventeen Duels before
he was one and twenty, and in forty years more by Land and Sea fought as many
pitched Battles, could not have made a more warlike sound. Certainly you go (as
I have read of one in the 5 Epist. to Marcellinus, for why should not I read
your Fathers as well as you read mine) always hung like a Justice of Peace's
Hall with Pikes, Halberts, Peitronels, Callivers and Muskets. And if you could
but victual your self for half a year in your Breeches, it is not to be doubted
but you would be able to overrun whole Countries, Hungary, Transylvania,
Bohemia, and all the other territories of modern Orthodoxy.

The first Argument I made use of to remove all popular suspicions of Popery
from the Government was the manifest inconvenience to the State that must arise
from any alteration in the Church; and this I proved from those impregnable
principles of Loyalty that are peculiar to our Communion from all other
Dissenters; so that all design of Change being so manifestly imprudent and
impolitick, I thought it too wild a surmise for the Wisdom of the Government,
unless it were not only trinkled but bewitched to expose it self, and therefore
that there could be no other probable ground of danger but from the restlesness
and seditious practices of the Fanatique Party, that might possibly some time
or other make way for the return of Popery by making disturbances in Church and
State. And to this purpose I gave a large Character of the peculiar Genius, and
the distinguishing principles of the Church of England from the Gibelline
Faction. But it seems you do not like my Characters; and what is that to me, am
I obliged to justify them because such Jack-Gentlemen as you do not approve
them? If you have any thing to except, you know the Law and the Press is open,
but your bare dislike will no where pass for a confutation. And to tell us that
you find on either side only the natural effect of such Hyberbole's and Oratory
that is not to be believed, is in a great many words only to say, I lie. It may
be so, but yet that satisfies no body. And yet tell me, can you deny the
Loyalty of the Church of England both in its principles and practices; if you
cannot, whatever I have said in her commendation is undeniably true, and then
it is you that lease. Can you deny that the regular Clergy are the most zealous
Assertours of the Rights of Princes, and that they, and only they teach
subjection to be an indispensable duty of Religion without false reserves and
limitations? Can you deny that those Subjects that stuck to the Communion of
the Church of England ever stuck to hazard Lives and Fortunes out of devotion
to their Prince? Can you prove that every any forsook the Royal Cause in its
greatest distress, that did not first forsake the Church of England? Can you
deny that the main Article that distinguishes ours from all other Communions is
that we vest the Crown in an Ecclesiastical Supremacy (which is one half of the
Sovereign Power) whilst they challenge it either to themselves or some foreign
Jurisdiction, that has no more ground of Claim beside bare confidence to
exercise any Authority in the Kings Dominions than the King has in his? These
are the Elogies I gave to the Church of England. If they are such Hyperboles as
are not to be believed, that is to say, if they are lies, make it good; or else
confess your impudence to call them so, not only without proof or evidence, but
against Experience and Demonstration. And so for my contrary Character of the
Fanatiques, that too is all a lie or such an Hyperbole as is not to be
believed, and so I am answered; but if that be all you have to say, I am very
well satisfied too. You had done them some kindness, if you had undertaken to
prove either that the Preachers never taught the people Aphorisms of Disloyalty
and Rebellion; or that they were never engaged in actual War against their
lawful Prince by their Instigation; or that any of them have renounced their
old Principles, though they could never be prevailed with so much as to
acknowledge their Crime either to God or the King. These are plain Cases of
Conscience, so that till they have done this, if they were ever guilty they are
so still. And therefore when you only tell us that I have dressed them all up
in Sambenita 's painted with all the Flames and Devils in Hell. All the service
you do your brethren is to inform the World that whoever will draw a Fanatique
to the life, must get the Devil to sit for his picture, and if a man cannot
describe them without dressing them up in Sambenita's, I cannot help that; this
I am sure of, that I have not made one false stroke or ill feature, that I
cannot justify to any Artist. I am not concerned how ugly the piece is so it
be but like, and yet you your self have not been able to tell me one fault that
I have committed. I am only sorry that they are so very deformed as you have
represented them, for I never suspected before you informed me either that they
were so bad or the Devil so good.

But I know what it is that so much girds you, though your guilty Conscience
dares not touch it, viz. that I have there proved that nothing but the Good Old
Cause lies at the bottom of all your present Schism; and that the most zealous
Patriots of Conventicles are such as have given the World but very little
ground to suspect them from their professed Principles or open Practices of the
least tenderness of Religion and kindness to Monarchy; so that nothing better
can ever be expected from them than factions and republican Designs. I know
this twinges to the quick; it is so observable all the Kingdom over that as
you cannot endure to hear it, so you dare not deny it. And now your appearance
has amply verified the truth of the Observation. When at the same time that you
come forth to vindicate the Innocence and Peaceableness of the Non-conformists,
and pass your word to the King that they shall never lift up disloyal thought
against him; you cannot forbear to let us see how warmly you are concerned to
justify the late Rebellion. In that the King had turned his whole Kingdom
into a Prison, that many thousands of his Subjects were constrained to seek
habitations abroad, and every Country, even though it were among Savages and
Canibals, appeared more hospitable to them than their own; that his whole Reign
was deformed with Sibthorpianism, i. e. with his affecting an absolute and
arbitrary Government; that himself and his party were the cause of the War;
that the Parliament took up Arms in defense both of their Liberty and Religion;
and that their Cause against the King was (like that of Christianity) only too
good to be fought for, etc. And now when you ensure us that the Fanatiques
shall never rebel, it is for this reason only because there neither is nor can
be any such thing as Rebellion; for if the last War were none, you are safe for
ever forfeiting your Loyalty; and if that cause were too good to be fought for,
it will be hard to find one too bad. It is well you have declared, that if you
can do the Non-conformists Page 282.
no good, you are resolved you will do them no harm, and desire that they
should lie under no imputation on your account. I am confident you intended
honestly, but they are more endebted to your good will than your discretion.
When your very Apology in their behalf brings them under the greatest
imputation. For this not only makes good my suggestion (which you would lay by
your Caveat) that they are acted by men of Democratical Spirits, but withal it
is a stronger evidence of their continuing constant and stubborn to their old
Principles, because as they would never be brought to disclaim them, so now it
seems they are resolved to justify them, and lay the whole guilt of the
Rebellion* upon the King himself. I know you are a wise and wary man, and
designed when you set pen to paper to take upon you the Person, that is,
Personam induere of a Royallist, and not to betray the least kindness to, or
concern for the Good Old Cause. But you are a Gamester and know what vast odds
a man may lay on Natures side.

And thus have I more than enough vindicated every page and period of my
Preface, and yet the main of your business is still behind, for that was the
least of your design to confute me, your Plot was to take occasion to fly out
into invectives against the Clergy of all Ages in general, and of the Church of
England in particular; first, as the cause of the late War, and secondly, as
the hindrance of our present settlement; and then having barred them from
trinkling with State Affairs, and wheadled the King against harkening to their
Counsels, (though you do it so grossly, and with such an impudent malice, that
it is like stalking by the side of a Butter-fly, with a face as broad as a
Brass-Copper) you advise Princes to a more moderate course of Government, and
teach them from many sad examples to behave themselves dutifully to their
Subjects upon peril of their displeasure or worse. I shall as briefly as I can
consider your performance in all these particulars, and so leave you to the
shame of your own Meditations.

First then, having with mighty exultation Page 95.
of Spirit, and words much too good for your heart congratulated His Majesty's
most Happy Restoration, just as Malefactors cry God save the King, because
they have escaped the Gallows; and so do you magnify his Clemency, Mercy and
Goodness for carrying the Act of Oblivion and Indemnity through. But this
serenity is suddenly over-cast, and you knit your brows, and depress your
Superciliums, and at length with much fleering, and more reluctance (for you
are mighty sorry to speak it) yet because it is a sad truth, tell it him you
must that the Ecclesiastical Part would not accomplish Ibid.
his Felicity, and no wonder when the Animosities and Obstinacy of some of the
Clergy have in all Ages been the greatest obstacle to the Clemency, Prudence,
and good intentions of Princes, and the establishment of their affairs. Which
is to say, that the Clergy has not only in all Ages (nay and places too) been
the bane of Government; but more particularly the Clergy of England murdered
His Royal Father, and are more accomptable for His Majesty's and the Kingdoms
sufferings than either the Rebels that took his Crown off of his head, or those
that afterward took his head off of his shoulders. But they shall answer for
themselves anon, we must first traverse your first Bill against the Clergy in
general. But who are you that are thus acquainted with the Clergy of all Ages
time out of mind, sure you can be no less a man than one of the Patriarchs, or
a fifth from Methusalem, or at least Andrew de Temporibus John's elder Brother,
you have so general an acquaintance with the Clergy of all Ages! As for the
Clergy of the Ages before Noah's flood I will not contend, for for any thing
that I know there might be Bishops of Munster, and Cullen, and Strasburg in
those times, and I cannot disprove it but that King Nimrod's Chaplains were his
Hunts-men; but in all Ages since I cannot find that they have been more cruel
than other men. Aaron I am sure was remarkable for his meekness and mercy; for
though the Grand Remonstrance of Corah were intended against himself and his
Bran for trinkling Moses, and the Members of the Sanhedrin, yet did he bestir
himself to atone the Rebellion, and procure pardon for the Offenders. Though I
must confess his Grandchild Phinehas was an arrant Jewish Zealot that is (as
your modern Orthodox Rabbis inform you) a notorious Rogue and Cutthroat. And
as for the Heathen Priests, though they were very famous Trinklers, I do not
find that they were any great Men-eaters. In my Roman Empire I do not read that
they were fiercer Canibals of the Race of Man or Capon-kind than the Laity, nor
I believe can you prove out of your 5 Ep. to Marcellinus, that the Clergy were
the Authors of Julian's Persecution. But the bottom of all this is, that the
Priests have in all Ages, and in all Kingdoms been advanced to places of
greatest Authority next to the Sovereign Power it self. The Druids of Britany,
the Magi of Persia, the Priests of Egypt, Judaea, Assyria, AEthiopia are a
sufficient Indication, that however fanciful men may fool themselves and their
Country with other Philosophical Models and Theories of Policy, yet Religion
and the Ministers of Religion will have the greatest share in the Government;
and the reason is as evident as the experiment is Catholic, in that nothing
can so truly and effectually awe the greatest part of mankind as the dread of
the world to come; and therefore they whose peculiar Office it is to guide and
instruct men in their future concerns, must and will in spite of all the witty
Statesmen in the world have the greatest reverence, power and interest with
the generality of the People. And thus though the Authority of the Clergy of
England be at this time by reason of some malignant effects of the late war, at
as low an ebb as perhaps the power of the Priests ever was under any Monarchy,
yet it is manifest, that for all their* disadvantages all of the Loyal Party,
Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty that are sober and serious in the belief and
profession of their Religion, cannot but have a veneration to their Persons,
and a deference to their Judgments. How else think you, could they be so
easily trinkled? And as for all the several Casts and Clans of Non-conformists
they are perfectly enslaved to the Authority of their several Teachers: So that
do what we can, the Clergy will have a strong influence upon the people; all
the present contest is, whether it be not more beneficial to the Government
that such should be protected and encouraged who profess Loyalty and have given
no ground to doubt the sincerity of their profession, than such as have
heretofore incited the people to Rebellion, and never since gave any the least
assurance of their having renounced their former Principles (which if they had,
they would have done it loud enough) and still as far as they dare venture,
disturb the present quiet and decry the present settlement of the Nation. And
this is the last issue of your Advice to rebate the Power of the Regular
Clergy, thereby to enlarge and advance that of the Non-conformists; for as our
Interest weakens and moulders away, it is unavoidable but that some others that
pretend to the same Office must gain as much Power as we lose; unless people
fall into downright Atheism and contempt of Religion, and that sets them loose
from all effectual obligations of Loyalty to their Prince, and Duty to their
Country, and Honesty to one another; and if the humor grow strong and
prevalent, they in a little time grow barbarous and ungovernable, and with
looseness of manners, and a general neglect of the public quickly bring on
disorders, and for the most part dissolutions of Government. So that this is
plain enough, that no State can be tolerably governed or secured but by the
assistance of Religion. And then if that have so powerful an influence upon
affairs of State, and over the minds of the People, its public Officers that
have the greatest share of Power over that, cannot but have a proportionable
share of Power over them. And for this reason have wise Princes in all Ages
entrusted them with places of greatest Authority and Reputation in the
Government; and good reason too, for if they are but qualified with parts and
abilities equal to others, that makes them as fit Statesmen as any, but then
the interest proper to their Office gives them a mighty and unimaginable
advantage over all. And hence it is that they have in all Ages been envied and
maligned by every proud man that thought himself qualified for the great places
that they filled; and these have always set themselves to asperse their
Government, and to expose them to the hatred of the People, by charging all
necessary severity and just execution of Laws upon their Tyranny. The Prince is
a gracious Prince, but it is these men that thrust him upon these cruel and
sanguinary courses, and were these bloody Counselors once removed His Majesty
would quickly return to His Natural Clemency, and we should see no more of
these Merciless and Arbitrary proceedings. And this has been the cruelty of the
Clergy in all Ages, that they have not trifled with their Authority, but have
been watchful to nip Sedition in the bud, and by a little severity at first
save all those executions that would be necessary to suppress it afterward.
For if once it gets head and form it self into a Party, it is then upon even
terms with the Government, and nothing but the event of War can decide the
Controversy. Whereas all beginnings of mischief are easily withstood, and to
take off one Malecontented Head of Faction, may ordinarily save the lives of
thousands of well-meaning people. And that is the grievance of such as you
would seem to be, that the Clergy have always been watchful upon their
designs, and kept the innocent people out of harms way by snapping the
contrivers of mischief. And wherever their precipitate, violent, rigorous, and
extreme Counsels (as you call them) have been effectually followed, it has
usually saved the trouble and expense of Civil Wars; unless when the storm was
grown too great, before they came to the Helm, and then it is not in their
power to lay it, that must be done by other men and other instruments. It were
easy for them by timely care to prevent Wars, but when the people are prepared
and resolved for it aforehand, they cannot force them to be peaceable by Laws,
and nothing can reduce them but beating them into obedience. And these are the
two things that may make them sometimes seem more rigorous than other
Statesmen, in that 1. They are usually more watchful upon the artifices of
ambitious or discontented Grandees; 2. In that they are more aware of the
Impostures of Religion, and understand the mischiefs of Enthusiasm more
perfectly, than usually Laymen can or (at least) will do; and this puts them
upon that kind of severity, which those that suffer by it though justly, call
Persecution, though it is notoriously manifest to any person of common
prudence, that for the most part the offenders are not punished for their
private conceits, but only for the security of the State, in that either they
themselves carry on ill designs under that pretext, or if they are simple and
well-meaning, they are carried on by those that do. I cannot conjecture any
other grounds you have of charging the Clergy with rigor and obstinacy in all
Ages, unless it be that they are of all Orders of men the most faithful and
zealous servants of their Masters, and the most vehement assertors of the
Supreme Power against popular encroachments. This I am sure was the only ground
of the late Long-Parliaments hatred to the Bishops, because they were (as one
expressed it) the trustiest agents of Tyranny, because of that stubborn and
invincible opposition they showed to their Rebellious and Democratical designs;
and for that reason did the Cabal (that trinkled all the rest of the Members)
petition the People to petition themselves to remove them both from the King
and out of the House, because whilst they stood in the way, they could not come
at the King, that is the Crown. And this too (Mr. Trinkle) is the ground of all
your indignation; for it is purely out of displeasure to the English Clergy,
that you are transported into this modest and mannerly censure of the Clergy of
all the world. And your enmity to them is nothing else than that they preach
Doctrines so contrary to yours, and after all the fatal Consequences of the
late Rebellion will not be prevailed upon to persuade the people that the good
old Cause was the Cause too good. And this becomes your Brazen Modesty to
indite the most sacred and serious Profession in the World of all the mischiefs
and miseries that ever befell Mankind without alleging any instance of proof
unless it be the Clergy of the Church of England, and that 1. because they will
not be reconciled to a good opinion of those men that have been engaged in
actual Rebellion, and yet are so far from acknowledging their Error that they
justify their Cause, 2. because they do not think it convenient to indulge and
connive at the Propagation of such Principles as prepare People for the like
Practices upon the like opportunities.

But in the next place as the Clergy of all Ages have ever been the greatest
Obstacle of the Clemency and Prudence of Princes, so are they not so well
fitted by Education as others for Political Affairs. Page 300.
Good now Sir Pol! what is the defect of their education? Is it that they have
not that liberty that others have to frequent the Gaming Ordinaries, or make
Observations at Charing Cross and in Lincolns-Inn-fields? Excepting these
wonderful advantages, in which you indeed (though very few Gentlemen beside)
outstrip them, I cannot see what breeding other persons can boast of, that
Clergymen may not have as well as they. They are born as other men are with
variety of natural Parts and Abilities, and they may improve them as Kings and
other mortal men do by reflecting upon the Histories Page 243*
of former times and the present transactions to regulate themselves by in
every Circumstance. And though it cannot reasonably be expected they should
have Royal Understandings, because they were never born with them, yet what
hinders but they may have Gentlemen's Memories, and so be as fit for Government
as any of their fellow Subjects? and if they are not as fit as Kings
themselves, that is no disparagement of their abilities, especially when as
they have not the education, so they were not intended for the Trade of Kings.
So that you have shown nothing but the Impotency of your spite and Malice to
pass one and the same censure upon all men of a Profession, when you might with
as much truth and ingenuity have passed it upon all Mankind. However the Clergy
are born capable of Wisdom as well as others, and then why may they not
acquire it too in the same methods with others by Study and Travel, and
Experience, and Observation; and I do not see what greater advantage you have
made of these than any poor Reader might have done, beside being hardened in
Malice, and Impudence, and Shreds of Latin.

But still you improve when next to this Remarque upon the unfitness of the
Clergy by reason of their Education for political affairs, you immediately
add, That they have the advantage above others Page 301.
and even if they would but keep to their Bibles would make the best Ministers
of State in the World. So that it seems by their Education that is peculiar to
them as Clergymen, viz. the study of the Bible, they have the advantage of all
others to make the best Ministers of State in the World; so ridiculous was it
for you to intimate that they are not so well fitted by Education as others for
Political Affairs, when your very next words acknowledge that they are the best
fitted of any men in the World. Was ever Malice so inconsistent with it self?
You have an implacable mind to vent your Spleen and Rancour against the Clergy,
but you are so conscious to your self of Impudence and Disingenuity, that you
are ashamed of the folly and the foulness of your own reproaches, and that
perpetually runs you up into these ridiculous Contradictions. Could any man in
the World beside your self have been so precipitate as to suggest that the
Clergy are less fitted than others by Education for Political Affairs, and yet
in the same breath confess that they have from that Education, that is proper
to themselves as the Clergy, the advantage of all men in the World beside? Yes!
If they would keep to their Bibles, but God therefore frustrates Page 301*
them because though knowing better, they seek and manage their Greatness by
the lesser and meaner Maxims. Good Mr. Insolence! Why not they keep to their
Books as well as such Truants as you? This is but a ridiculous and incredible
Paradox, that those that are best acquainted with the Rules of Justice and
Government should for that reason be under a fatal necessity not to observe
them: But if they are not, then seeing they have the advantage of knowing
better than others, and seeing there is no peculiar reason to hinder them more
than others from making a right use of their knowledge, then it is unavoidable
by the Confession of your own Malice, but that they must be most likely to make
the best Ministers of State in the World. Nothing can possibly hinder unless
God Almighty after he has blessed men with the greatest advantages for Wisdom
and Integrity should by some miraculous and immediate stroke from Heaven blast
and infatuate all their Counsels. Why! rather than fail of your spite to the
Clergy, he shall come down as he did at the building of Babel, to confound all
the contrivances of Churchmen. For truly I think the reason that God does not
bless them in Affairs Page 301.
of State is because he never intended them for that Employment. Good Mr.
Secretary! is there nothing can escape your knowledge? Are you not content to
be admitted into the Privacy of Kings, but you must be God Almighties Colbert,
understand all the intrigues of his Providence, and be of the Cabinet Council
to the Most high? Is it not enough that you are acquainted with the King all
over; you have observed his parts, and given an account of his memory and
understanding, you have kept him company, and given him your Testimony of the
unblameableness of his Life and Conversation, you have been admitted with him
into his Privy Closet, and can tell what he studies, and what books he reads,
what he censures and what he approves. Great favors these for a Gentleman of
private condition and breeding! and yet they are not sufficient to satisfy the
ambition of such a Gonzales as you, but you must be flying to Heaven forsooth
by the help of your Ganzas, even as I would Page 76.
fly thither without the help of Grace. And there you must be prying into all
the secret Councils of Divine Providence, and you can confidently tell all the
thoughts and designs of the Almighty, and write Gazets of what News in Heaven.
Of all the secret ones that ever I met with, give me you for a bold one! No
doubt you are no ordinary Mortal, and have your habitation at least in the High
Places of Armageddon, where J. O. dwelt when he discovered all the Methods and
Maxims whereby God orders the Dispensations and Revolutions of his Providence.
He is the Will. Lilly, (as you are the Poor Robin) of the Churches, in so much
that he is able to give them an exact Ephemeris of all turns and alterations of
Weather, and to advise them in all changes of Affairs still to keep on the same
side with God himself, let him shift parties never so often: when it is
seasonable to sail by a side Wind against the seeming opposition of his
Providence, and when to sing Songs upon Sigionoth, and by some secret
intimations knock quite off with him from any Good old Cause or Good old
Principles. That such bold Impostours should dare to challenge any interest,
how much more familiarity with the Most high! You know that he never intended
Churchmen for Ministers of State! You know what he intends! away you wretch!
if you have any spark of Modesty unextinguish'd, retire into your Closet and
lament and pine away for these desperate Blasphemies. The Ruac Hakodesh dwell
in such a distempered and polluted mind as yours! it may as soon unite it self
to a Swine. Fatuos and hujus terrae filios quod attinet (says a Jewish Zealot)
non magis nostro judicio prophetare possunt quam asinus and rana. Asses and
Tod-poles may as soon expect the Impressions of the divine Spirit as such
dunces and sots as you. And yet you do not think it enough to pretend
acquaintance with the present thoughts and intentions of the Almighty, but you
must be betraying his future designs, and blabbing what shall be hereafter.
Thus you dare Page 162.
divine, augurate, and presage mutual felicity to his Majesty and the Kingdom
from his gracious Declaration of Indulgence, and that what ever humane Accident
may happen, they will, they can never have cause to repent this action or its
Consequences. Amen! I wish you a true Prophet with all my soul, nothing
recreates me so much as to hear of the prosperity of my King and Country. But,
if you should ever live to see this Declaration repented of, would it not be a
sad rebuke to your confidence? I am sure if it were my case, I should never be
able to lift up my head after it. And though we have no Laws against
counterfeit Prophets, because it is rare for any man in these Northern Climates
to arrive to that degree of Impudence and Vanity, yet among the Jewish Zealots
they were punished more severely than notorious Rogues and Cutthroats. And if
you do not pretend to some particular ensurance from Heaven, you add rashness
to your impudence to be thus confident in your predictions of future
Contingencies. For you your own self know how uncertain the success of the best
Page 105.
Contrivances may be, for after all things may be laid with all the depth of
humane Policy, there happens lightly some uggly little contrary Accident from
some quarter or other of Heaven, that frustrates and renders all ridiculous (I
should have been so modest as to say) successess, for wise Counsels are not
rendered foolish by disappointment. Now was it not possible that some of these
little ugly Accidents, that might or might not be foreseen, might spoil all
the success of so wise and so well-laid an Action? And therefore, (I say it
again) it was not discreetly done to ensure success so boldly to so contingent
an Event. There are thousands of little and great Accidents that it is not
possible for humane Wisdom to prevent, that might frustrate all its good
consequences, and there are some that my slender judgment could easily have
foreseen and foretold. It was possible that the Non-conformists might have
made ill use of his Majesty's goodness and condescension to embolden their
Party to more saucy and insolent demands. This I say is possible for all the
King has so obliged them by his late mercy, that if there were any such Knave,
Page 252.
there can be no such fool among them, that would ever lift up an ill thought
against him. I know as well as you that there is not in the World a more
grateful and good natured Generation of men in all other cases but the case of
Loyalty and of the Race of Capons. So that still I say it is possible they may
forget his kindness and their own Duty; and that they will not, I think your
word is no competent security. For you have passed it but once before, and that
with your hand upon your heart, and that was when you protested upon your
Honor and Integrity your own reading of the fifth Epistle to Marcellinus.
Beside as it is possible for the Non-conformists to be unmindful of their Duty
and their Obligation to the King, so is it (you know) possible too for the
Members of Parliament to be some time or other so trinkled, that nothing shall
put them in good humor but cancelling this Declaration or any other Act of
Indulgence to the Non-conformists. And then that (though no other sinister
Accident should intervene) may for all your Prophecy prove an occasion of some
Repentance. You know how much I might here insult over your baffled Impudence,
but this is enough to let you see how unadvised a thing it is to be too
positive in Predictions. And now to return to the Clergy, have you not made an
admirable speech to have them thrust out from all Offices in the State, because
they are unqualified for them by their Education and that because by their
Education they have peculiar advantages to make the best Ministers of State,
were it not that God that has prepared and qualified them above all other men
for that employment will not bless them in it because he never intended them
for it? For a lucky hand at Contradictions you are the man. And had you not
thus demonstratively baffled your own malice, I might have confuted your rash
censures of all Ages by the experience and opinion of most Ages, and shown that
as none are better qualified for State Affairs than Churchmen, so none have
acquitted themselves with greater Art or Success; and that things have rarely
miscarried, but when their Counsels have not been effectually followed (as I
shall show anon in the Cases of Cardinal Granvile and Archbishop Laud) though
when all is done, you know the wisdom of a design is not to be measured by its
success. But your insolence is not worth so much Correction. Only look upon our
next Neighbors o're-sea, and tell me to whose conduct that King and Kingdom
owe their present flourishing condition. Who were they that brought it back
from the very point of dissolution to that Settlement and Grandeur it now
enjoys? Were they not Churchmen and did they not do it by such Counsels as you
think (and perhaps as the case stood were) precipitate and sanguinary, viz.
when the Nation was divided into two powerful Factions by resolving to break
one to pieces for ever, that so they might not be embroiled in Civil Wars upon
every slight occasion, whenever the People grew wanton, or any Great Man happened
to be out of favor, whereas the former Statesmen that were for the trinkling
Policy entailed an hereditary Civil War upon the Kingdom from Generation to
Generation, even, as I remember, J. O. says the Lord had sworn a great while
ago to destroy the Amalekites and the Kerns.

But having taken upon your self the Office of Vicar General to the Clergy of
all Ages, and all Nations, Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia, etc. you are not
content to turn them all out of public employment in the State, but you would
wheedle them out of all the comforts and advantages of life, and persuade them
to strip themselves of all the secular conveniences wherewith the wisdom and
the bounty of former Ages have endowed the Church, and to accept of no other
Interest or Reputation but what they gain by abstracting themselves from the
world, by humility and strictness of Doctrine and Conversation, things being
best preserved by the same means they were at first attained. Yes, yes, the
Authority of the Priesthood consists purely in the peoples Opinion of their
Virtue and Piety, and their Revenues in the Alms and voluntary Oblations of
Christian People, and not in endowments of Lands and Lordships, nor grants of
Secular Powers and Jurisdictions; that is to say, that because the Primitive
Christians were perpetually exposed to Persecutions and Martyrdoms, therefore
bring forth your Rods, and Axes, and Pillories, and Whipping-posts, and
Strappado's, and Cheilostrophia, and Rhinolabides, and boil them, roast them,
crucify them, hang them, for things are best preserved by the same means, they
were at first attained. But then (good Mr. Trinkle) the calamity of those times
was the common fate of all Christian People; Clergy and Laity were equally
involved in the same miseries, and yet I hope no Layman is so weak as to
suppose that when Christianity has got the upper-hand, and the favor and
protection of the Government, that he lies under any obligation to quit those
comforts and possessions of life, that he may honestly and lawfully enjoy,
because it was the hard and unhappy fate of the Primitive Christians to suffer
the loss of all for the sake of their Religion; and why then should the Clergy
be tied more than they to an impertinent and unprofitable self-denial? or if it
be their duty to be poor and miserable, I am sure it is equally the duty of
all. And therefore in all States as Christianity prevailed Churches were
endowed with Lands and Revenues, and Churchmen privileged with exemptions and
immunities; and when it was settled as the Religion of the State, the Clergy
were every where admitted to a share of the Government, as they are in all
other Religions of the World. And indeed who can more safely be trusted with
the welfare of mankind, than such persons whose very profession in prudence
lays upon them peculiar obligations to justice and sobriety, not but that they
are liable (though not so much) to the same miscarriages with other Mortals,
but yet if they have better means to preserve them from unjust practices, they
are less likely to fall into them; for the world is to be governed in humane
ways, and though the Divine Providence may in some rare and extraordinary
junctures over-bear the wisdom of men, yet in its ordinary conduct of things it
makes use of the most probable means, and gives a blessing proportionable to
the natural effects of things themselves. So that it is a pretense only fit for
such as are void of all other pretense, to say that though Clergymen are the
best qualified of all men in the world for the managery of public affairs,
yet God will never bless their endeavors, how good or pious soever, because he
never intended them for that employment. But such is the unhappy fate of the
Clergy, that they must be subjected to the lash of every proud and wanton
pedant, and if there be any man in any Age more remarkably ill-natured, he is
sure to be venting his malice and choler upon the Sacred Office, though in ours
every thing can be laying heavy and unreasonable burdens upon the backs of the
Clergy; and as rare a thing as it was in the time of yore, in our days every
Animal has confidence enough to bray forth his reproofs of the Prophets
madness. And nothing more familiar than for such men as have a mind to exempt
themselves from the great and indispensable obligations of Religion to be
always prescribling idle and unnecessary severities to Churchmen; and though
they indulge themselves in the most licentious courses, yet they will by no
means allow them the common and ordinary comforts of life. It is a crime in a
Clergyman to be happy, nay to be a man. And if he will but be unkind and
uncivil to himself, they will love him for that, though for nothing else. This
is very hard dealing, and one would think very strange, and yet there are two
very obvious reasons of it beside the general principle of ill nature.

1. There are some men that dare not bid open defiance to all Religion, and yet
have no mind to be brought under the obligations of real virtue and goodness,
and therefore in excuse of their own neglect are willing to stretch the
Precepts and Duties of the Gospel to an impracticable severity, and thereby
they make Apology to themselves for their own negligence, in that it is not to
be expected from men of business,) and that live in the world, and in the
midst of temptations, that they should attend so constantly to that height of
rigor and austerity, that (as they will have it) the Laws of Religion require.
No, this concerns Parsons and Churchmen, and such whose Trade it is to profess
and pretend to a greater strictness than their neighbors. But for them it is
enough to be solemn and serious at certain seasons of devotion, and to expiate
all the wickedness of their lives by doing penance now and then in some
childish and unprofitable instances of mortification. People will endure any
thing in Religion rather than be truly virtuous. And this is the great
disadvantage of the Church of England (as to interest) that it teaches men the
plain and practicable precepts of the Gospel, such as concern their lives and
conversations, and does not allow any tricks of eluding or baulking their duty,
it does not feed them with push-pin. Orthodoxy and Scholastic Nothings about
Faith, and Justification, and procat^rtick causes, nor commute Penances and
Prayers for the habitual practice of Virtue and Holiness; but if men will
mortify their own vices and passions, join the love of God with the love of
their neighbor, and endeavor after an entire conformity to the Laws of their
Religion, well and good, she will administer comfort to an uniform and
universal obedience. But these though they are very plain, are grievous hard
sayings; they grate upon men's pleasures and profits, and pluck out right eyes,
and cut off right hands, for there is scarce any man but has his peculiar and
darling vice, for which, so it may be indulged, men are content to make any
satisfaction. And when I discoursed of the Return of Popery I might have
insisted upon this as one of the greatest grounds of danger; that men will not
endure the plain dealing of the Church of England, but they must have a
Religion that will be more compliant with their humors, and reconcile some
vices with the hopes of Eternal Life. And this is the main subtilty of the
Church of Rome, she has found out ways at the same time to ease the
Consciences of wicked men, and to advance her own wealth and grandeur; though
that which is most of all taking is, that their Priests whatever burden they
lay upon the people seem to take the heaviest end of it upon their own
shoulders, and take off their envy by divorcing themselves from some of the
most desirable comforts of life for a state of self-denial and austerity. And
whilst those self-chosen mortifications are looked upon as the main exercises
of Religion, that satisfies the minds and excuses the engagements of others, in
that it is plainly inconsistent with their condition in the world, and
therefore cannot reasonably be required of them but only at some certain
seasons of looking demurely, and with a solemn face, and that quits all scores.
This I say is that which makes some men deal so hardly with the Clergy as to
except them from all the rights of humane nature, and comforts of humane life;
it is only that they may make them their Asses to carry their burdens, and
excuse their compliance by placing their Piety in some foolhardy or slovenly
trifle that is made peculiar to their profession. And then if they are but
nasty or melancholy they are brave men and deserve preferment. But whilst we
deal plainly with the people, and make no distinction between Seculars and
Ecclesiastics as to the necessity and obligation of constant and uniform
obedience to the Laws of Christ, that is intolerable, and in revenge to this
severity, they will task us to some troublesome and impertinent drudgery, and
if we will not submit to the insolence of their folly and malice, rail at us
for refusing to submit to the rules and orders of our own Profession.

This is the first, and perhaps main account of some men's impertinent
impositions upon the Clergy, the second is more obvious and easily betrays it
self, for if at any time we pursue this Doctrine to its Application, we shall
find it preached, and chiefly insisted upon in matters of Right and Wrong
between Churchmen and themselves. If they demand their Dues, oh Sirs!
Ministers must not be covetous and worldly minded, but it seems themselves may
be so and knavish too, for so they are if there be any justice and equity in
the world, when they defraud them of their Legal Rights. If they renew a Lease,
they must abate of the old Rents; for Ministers must be merciful and
charitable, and because they must be so, they must for ever suffer themselves
to be cheated, impair the Church-Revenues to bestow an Alms upon a Great Man,
and commit sacrilege to avoid covetousness. But alas! these are knavish and
ridiculous devices, fit for none but Sots either to use or to regard; as if it
were covetousness in them not to suffer themselves to be oppressed or
defrauded; as if it were hard dealing to keep off private men from preying upon
the small Remainder of the Churches Patrimony; as if it were a sin in them to
demand their Right, but none in others to withold it; in a word, as if the
measures of justice and common honesty were not the same to all men. And yet a
goodly Casuist of the Modern Reformation, viz. from the bondage of Prelatical
and Regal Tyranny, has set it down for a certain rule of Conscience, that in
Ministers of the Gospel, contention (that is demanding their Tithes) though for
their own Right is scarce allowable. These things certainly are too fond and
unreasonable of themselves to be seriously believed by those that pretend them.
But they are resolved to be dishonest, and then it is easy to take up maxims
suitable to their resolution. Though I am apt to think that in you this
Levelling Principle of reducing the Clergy to a Pension according to the Dutch
Modern Orthodoxy, proceeds rather from envy than interest, and yet you may as
well make the same proposal to all mankind to forgo all their Proprieties,
because it was your ill fate to be rookt of your own Fortune at Picquet.

But yet whilst you recommend the virtue of Sacrilege to His Majesty, as he
would clear himself from the only blemish of his Conversation, you do but lose
your labor, and it is well if you do not lose something else. For you must
entertain a very mean opinion of his wisdom and understanding, if you think he
can be so weak and unwary as to be wheadled to divest himself of one of the
strongest and best securities of his Crown. For whilst all Ecclesiastical
Dignities are held immediately of that, all that enjoy them are engaged as well
by Interest as Duty to its Service; whereby the Prince keeps that part of the
Nation at his own Devotion, that ordinarily keep the greatest part of it at
theirs: Whereas if these Preferments were alienated, and the Clergy forced to
depend more upon the Charity and Contributions of the People, they would lie
under some shrewd temptations (I mean as many of them, whose Consciences are
not touched with any high sense of Honor and Loyalty, and men that are poor
and despicable are not wont much to regard those virtues) to carry on any
design to please their proud Masters. And of this our late Rebellion affords a
very remarkable instance, in which none were more conspicuous for Loyalty than
the Dignified Clergy, and none greater Incendiaries than the Mercenary
Preachers and Lecturers, who subsisted purely by the Benevolence and arbitrary
Pensions of the People. All this is so infinitely plain and obvious, that
whoever thinks our Governors capable of any such designs, must first have so
mean an opinion of their Wisdom and Abilities, as to think that they have no
more wit than directly to weaken and enervate their own interest. Neither can I
think so dishonourably of the People of the Nation (Gamesters only excepted) as
to imagine that they should desire the dissolution of the Churches Patrimony;
seeing it is a public inheritance, and of equal advantage to all, in that the
Ecclesiastical Demesns are not confined to a Tribe or a Family, nor entailed
upon the Men but the Service, so that every man has liberty to participate the
public benefit, and here is an handsome provision for any man, that will
render himself capable of it, and there is no Gentleman but may, and ordinarily
does, dispose of one Son to the Church, as well as a second to the Law, and a
third to Merchandise, whereas if it were preyed upon and devoured by hungry
Gamesters, there are few families but would suffer loss as well as the present
Possessors. At least you may much more reasonably envy the Old Gentlemen of
Suttons Hospital than the Dignified Clergy, because that is a provision for
Persons after they are grown useless and unserviceable in the world, whereas
the Dignities of the Church serve to reward and encourage the industry of such
as are of all men the most necessary and useful to the Commonwealth. And yet
so unconceivably spiteful is the envy of the Fanatique Hirelings, that because
themselves are maintained upon the Alms, and out of the baskets of their
followers, labor to raise the peoples indignation against all Ecclesiastical
Revenues; insomuch that if any of them have at any time a mind to exercise
their zeal and malice, they fall a whetting their claws upon Gowns and
Cassocks; and to be always inveighing against any comfortable subsistence of
the Clergy, is the most undoubted symptom and discovery of a Zealous Brother.
And every Mechanic, that for his parts and education is qualified for nothing
higher than the Clerks and the Sextons Office, to tune Psalms or dig graves,
thinks much of the Doctors Allowance as wanton and superfluous, though it be
short of the Returns of his own mean and small-ware Trade. And when an
ingenious Person has spent his Youth, and too often his Estate to fit himself
for this Sacred Employment, this is a great encouragement and a doughty reward
for one of an ingenuous and learned education to be trampled upon by every
illiterate and conceited Clown. And though these men are not much to be admired
for their manners and ingenuity upon any account, yet their barbarity shows it
self in nothing more shamelesly than this insolence toward men so infinitely
their betters by the right both of their parts and their breeding. This is a
rudeness peculiar to themselves from all other Savages in the world beside. And
though we rake the East and the West Indies, there are no People so
prodigiously fallen from all sense of humanity and civil manners, as to think
their Priesthood the most plausible Object, upon which they can wreck their
Spite and Malice, much less to think it an Argument of their Saint-ship and
acceptance with their Gods to affront and vilify the Officers of their sacred
Rites.

But as for your suggesting to the King his right of assuming Church-revenues,
I must confess it is very kindly and obligingly offered, and first like so
great a Patron of the Church of England, that it even joys your heart to hear
any thing well said of her, and secondly like so great a Patriot of the
Subjects Liberties, that out of pure love to mankind admonishes Kings not only
to preserve their Rights but to yield to their Infirmities. Now whatever
Liberties the Subject may claim, they are all founded upon such Grants of
Princes or such Laws of Propriety as are at least confirmed and ratified by
Royal Assent. And then if you look into the most ancient and (as the Lawyers
inform us) fundamental Constitutions of this Realm, I believe you will scarce
find any other Liberties of the Subject so firmly established, as the Rights
and Immunities of the Church; so that by the same right and with the same
honesty that you fancy the King may seize its revenues, he may as well challenge
any man's Inheritance; nay, and reassume all the Demesnes of the Kingdom to the
use of the Crown. So that whatsoever Liberties the Subjects of England may or
do claim, this suggestion subverts them all, cancels all Propriety, and throws
up every man's Estate into the hands of his supreme Landlord. Had it not been
for the unfortunate adventure at Picquet, I am apt to believe you would have as
little approved this Doctrine as your Neighbors. And it cannot but be so
edifying with the Nobility and Gentry, that the Parliament will no doubt at the
next Session think themselves obliged to see you sufficiently trinkled for your
good advice.

But it is time to have done with your censure of the Clergy of all former Ages
and all foreign Churches, and I will say no more in their behalf, because my
age has not given me leave to be acquainted with the Patriarchs that lived
either before or immediately after the Flood, nor my Travels with the Bishops
of Munster, Cullen, and Strasburgh. But your Malice rises against the Clergy of
our own Age and Nation, and for their sakes is it that you have bestowed this
obliging Character upon the Clergy of all former Ages. And here that you may
not be mistaken, you begin with much circumspection, your Oration expurgatoria
to the Body of the English Clergy, who have been ever Page 237.
since the Reformation of the most eminent for Divinity and Piety in all
Christendom. Though by the way I presume you mean not Hugh Peter's for his
Piety because he was hanged, nor J. O. for his Divinity because he deserves it,
nor the Bishops for either, because you esteem them, as you would have us, no
part of the body of the English Clergy. But whoever is meant, be sure there is
mischief at hand, and it is near breaking out, for a Jacal does not more
naturally attend a Lion, nor Murder follow a Long-Parliament Fast, than malice
does your most solemn and sweet-lip'd Apologies. And thus out it comes. Those
you intend are only a Page 238, 9, 40.
particular Bran of persons, who will in spite of Fate be accounted the Church
of England, men that to increase their own Splendor, care not though they set
all on flame about them; men that have divested themselves of all Humanity and
all good manners; men that would never endure any Overture toward the Peace of
the Church and Nation wherein they lived; lastly, men that have always been for
the most precipitate, brutish, and sanguinary Counsels. Now though the
Character agree well enough, and you have ever been a deep Youth, yet I cannot
think you intend either Hugh Peter's his Bran, or J. O's Bran, or the Tryers
Bran, or Usinulca's Bran, or any other Fanatique or Modern Orthodox Bran; but
plainly and sincerely Archbishop Land's Bran, the Bran that deformed the whole
Reign of the best Prince that ever weilded English Scepter, the Bran of
Ceremonies, and the Bran of Arminianism, in short the Bran that will not depart
from the Church as it is by Law established only to save the credit of some
sturdy Swiss that will not conform; for that is your only charge against them
that they will not be brought to temper and moderation, nor make the least
abatement to bring the honest Presbyterians off with some little reputation.
But your meaning is better to be understood by the Apologies you make to the
Church of England it self. She has not a more dutiful and devout child than
you, you cannot name her but you are immediately upon your knees, and begging
her Blessing. And it even joys your heart to hear any Page 270.
thing well said of her, and as it is by Law established has such a stock of
solid and deserved Reputation, that you could even weep for joy. And yet are
you all this while most lovingly inveighing against her legal Establishments;
Her three Ceremonies you will not endure for all the World, because they are
(you know) as it were Sacraments, and that because they want nothing of a
Sacramental Nature but a Sacramental Nature, and so are (as you know too) a
kind of Antisacraments. And so obtruded upon the Church Page 219.
that without condescending to these additional inventions, no man is to be
admitted to partake of the true Sacraments which were of Christ's appointing. A
dutiful expression of your obedience to the Church as established by Law, that
she Tyrannically obtrudes Antisacraments to the prejudice of Christ's own true
Sacraments, than which worse need not be said of the most Antichristian Church
in the World. And thus the Commissioners of the Worcester-house Conference
obstructed his Majesty's felicity and the Nations settlement, because they
thought it reasonable and convenient to stick to the present establishments of
the Church till some proof of their unlawfulness was produced; and because,
when none could be produced, they would not condescend to that temper and
moderation, as to change all her Constitutions without any other reasonable
Motive than to salve the reputation of the Presbyterians, they must be branded
for cunning and revengeful men. And good reason too, because the
Non-conformists demand nothing, but what is Page 275.
so far from doing us any harm, that it would only make us better. And yet all
their demands are against our legal Establishments; of which your worship is so
enamored. And as for the Act of Uniformity, and that superfoetation of Acts
that followed after it, though they were all established by Law, yet were they
procured by trinkling, nay by Bishops trinkling, and for that reason serve only
to expose the Wisdom of King and Parliament to after Ages. Another special
commendation of the Church of England as by Law established, that its Legal
Establishments are so foolish as to be a perpetual Testimony of the Lawmakers
Folly. Find me out a Fanatique in Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia, Scotland,
Geneva, Pin-makers Hall, J. O's Congregation, that may not boast his deep
respect and reverence to the Church of England upon as good Terms as your self.
So that it is plain here you did but Personam induere of an honest Zealot, for
say what you will you must and shall know, that all Zealots are not Rogues and
Cutthroats. And after all your counterfeit reverence you mean no body else by
this particular Bran than the Bishops and the Clergy of the Church of England
as it is by Law established. Upon them it is that you dispense forth this sweet
Character with so much bounty, and in the very spirit of meekness.

And in the first place Archbishop Laud, cannot lie quiet in his Grave, but
after a great many fair and foul words as consistent with themselves as the
rest of your Book, you are pleased at length to score all the miscarriages of
the late Kings Reign, and all the miseries of the late War upon his head and
Conscience. I suppose because he was a man so learned, so pious, so wise, so
studious to do both God, and his Majesty good service, you thought he was
better able to bear it than some others whose reputation was not altogether so
clear and unquestionable. But poor Bishop Laud! this is hard measure, that when
never any man's Innocence cleared it self so gallantly from all the assaults of
Malice and Calumny, his venerable ashes should be thus insolently arraigned by
every bold and Fanatique Blockhead. For notwithstanding the vigor and activity
of his mind, his zeal for the settlement and prosperity of the Church, his care
to reduce Religion to sober and justifiable Principles, his Interest in the
Kings favor and Counsels, yet was he so wise and so pious in the conduct of
all his affairs; that when he was divested of all Power and Protection, when he
was exposed to the violence and outrage of the people, when Calumny was let
loose upon him, when he was treated not only without mercy but justice and
common civility, when Libels and Petitions against him were rewarded, when
tumults and clamours were invited, when he was even overwhelmed with the number
of Slanders, Jealousies, and Accusations, when he was prosecuted by some with
the utmost Fraud and Artifice, by others with an unheard of malice and
violence; when his Murder was decreed with an absolute Doom before his Trial;
when his impeachment was drawn up in the most heinous and aggravating terms,
when the Evidence was managed with an unusual vehemence and animosity; yet
after all this his Innocence appeared so clear, and his Integrity so
unblemished, that not only his Judges but his very enemies were convinced and
ashamed of their own Accusations. For when the particular Articles of his
Charge came to be examined; they proved after the expense of a great deal of
time, and wit, and eloquence so trifling and silly, that they durst not venture
to proceed any farther against him in way of legal Trial, and so were forced to
condemn him (and he was the first and last that was ever so condemned) by
Ordinance of Parliament without any other Formality than bringing him once to
the Commons Bar, for fashion sake; that he might not be condemned unseen as he
was unhear'd; but condemned he was for no other Crime than that of cumulative
Treason, that is what you please, and by this Impudence they might take away
the life of any innocent man, if either they hated him, or he liked not them.
But the Remarque that his Historian has made upon the review of all their
proceedings against him is so just and observable, that all Circumstances
considered, it will appear the highest Act of Malice and Impudence that ever
was before committed (for since it has been outdone) by any Age and under any
Government in the World. Viz. That as the predominant Party in the united The
Life of A. B. Laud. Page 495.
Provinces, to bring about their ends in the death of Barnevelt, subverted all
those fundamental Laws of the Belgic Liberty for maintenance whereof they took
up Arms against Philip the second: So the Contrivers of this mischief had
violated all the fundamental Laws of the English Government, for maintenance
whereof they had pretended to take up Arms against the King. It was (said they)
a fundamental Law of the English Government, and the first Article in the Magna
Charta, that the Church of England shall be free, and shall have all her whole
Rights and Privileges inviolable. Yet to make way unto the condemnation of
this innocent man, the Bishops must be voted out of their place in Parliament,
which most of them have held far longer in their Predecessors, than any of our
noble Families in their Progenitors; and if the Lords refuse to give way unto
it (as at first they did) the people must come down to the house in multitudes,
and cry No Bishops, no Bishops, at the Parliament doors; till by the Terror of
the Tumults they extort it from them. It is a fundamental Law of the English
Liberty, That no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned without cause shown; or
be detained without being brought unto his answer in due form of Law. Yet here
we see a Freeman imprisoned ten whole weeks together before any charge was
brought against him; and kept in Prison three whole Years more, before his
general accusation was by them reduced unto particulars; and for a Year almost
detained close Prisoner, without being brought unto his answer as the Law
requires. It is a fundamental Law of the English Government, That no man be
disseized of his Freehold or Liberties but by the known Laws of the Land. Yet
here we see a man disseized of his Rents and Lands, spoiled of his Goods,
deprived of his Jurisdiction, divested of his Right of Patronage; and all this
done when he was so far from being convicted by the Laws of the Land, that no
particular charge was so much as thought of. It is a fundamental Law of the
English Liberty, that no man shall be condemned or put to death but by the
Lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; that is, in the
ordinary way of Legal Trial: and sure an Ordinance of both Houses without the
Royal Assent is no part of the Law of England, nor held an ordinary way of
Trial for the English Subject, or ever reckoned to be such in former times. And
finally, it is a Fundamental Law in the English Government, That if any other
Cause (than those recited in the Statute of King Edward III.) which is supposed
to be Treason, do happen before any of his Majesty's Justices, the Justices
shall tarry without giving Judgment, till the Cause be shown and declared
before the King and his Parliament, whether it ought to be judged Treason or
not. Yet here we have a newfound Treason, never known before, nor declared
such by any of his Majesty's Justices, nor ever brought to be considered of by
the King and his Parliament, but only Voted to be such (without Precedent or
Example) by some of those Members which sat at West-minster, who were resolved
to have it so for their private ends, etc.

Is not this right Presbyterian Ingenuity, to rebel against the King only for
the defense and maintenance of the fundamental Laws, and yet in all their
proceedings violate not only all the fundamental Laws they pretended to fight
for, but all the more fundamental Laws of nature and humanity? The Archbishop
was to be murdered to please the Kirk, and with his blood was the Covenant to
be sealed; but then to prosecute him with so much violence, to load him with so
much accusation, to tire him out with all the affronts and indignities of spite
and zeal, to rake into his whole Life up to his very Childhood to gather
materials for an Impeachment, and yet after all this, when they were convinced
of the innocence of his actions, and the inhumanity of their own proceedings,
to condemn him as a Traitor and an Execrable Person, without, nay against a
Legal Trial, and then put him to death against all the Laws of the Realm, and
all the Rules of Natural Justice, is such a prodigious piece of impudence as
sufficiently discovers what kind of Creatures they were that were the
contrivers and authors of his Murder. It is true Presbyterian impudence. But
now are not you a right good natured Wretch to charge a man so learned, so
wise, so pious, and so studious of doing God and His Majesty good service, of
deforming the whole Reign of the best Prince that ever wielded the English
Scepter; when the very men that murdered him have left such an irrefragable
testimony of his Innocence and Integrity, in that though they had the
confidence to overwhelm him with Accusations, yet they had not the confidence
to withstand his Defense. And what more ample testimony could they have left to
Posterity than when they had taken so much pains to murder him with some show
of Law and Justice, they should at last be forced to betake themselves to such
illegal and violent proceedings, as were never put in practice before or after?
Is this your additional Civility wherewith you consecrate the ashes of the
deceased? Are these your Elogies of a man so learned, so pious, so wise, so
studious both of the Service of God and the King, that he deformed both? What
accusatory spirit could desire better play against him than you have given in
his Vindication? But however you recreate your self with believing that your
simple judgment cannot beyond your intention (it seems when you print Books
you intend no body should read or regard them beside your self) abate any thing
of his just value with others. And thus you never oil your hoan neither but to
whet your razor, and cut the man's throat whom you would seem to flatter and
fawn upon. These leering and mannerly abuses that are suggested under pretense
of friendship are much more impudent and malicious than downright railing.
Neither is there any hypocrisy so ridiculous, as to shrink back and protest
all the tenderness in the world to a man's reputation, and yet at the same time
of your own accord, and without any asking go about to blast it for ever with
the most spiteful and venomous suggestions, and then think to wipe your mouth,
and by a counterfeit smile or two make amends for all this treachery. And when
you have stabbed a man to the heart, excuse all your officious virulence by
crying, whilst you are giving the mortal stroke, Sir, I beg your pardon, I
intend no harm; and however I may in public make bold to traduce your memory,
yet still I recreate my self with believing that my simple judgment cannot
beyond my intention abate any thing of your just value with others. So that it
seems when you publish any thing to a man's disparagement you do not intend to
be believed. It is a Dove-like Serpent that never stings but when it kisses
too; but yet it is time for shame to give over this out-worn cheat, it is now
too impudent and palpable to impose upon any man's credulity, it did you service
thirty years since, when you dethroned his late Majesty under pretense of
making him the most Glorious King that ever weilded the English Scepter; but
you must not after so long an experience of your hypocrisy and leasings
presume so rudely upon the silliness of mankind, as to think at this time of
day of cheating and abusing them with such ridiculous contradictions.

And now when you remark it as the great weakness of the late King that he Page
302.
trusted his exquisite understanding to the Clergies keeping, it is plain you
mean Archbishop Laud; and I pray with whom could he better trust it than a man
so learned, so pious, so wise, and that studied to do both God and his Majesty
good service? Here are all the Qualifications of an able and an honest
Statesman; so that though the Clergy were not ordinarily so well fitted by
education as others for Political Affairs, yet it is evident Archbishop Laud
was, being both wise, and learned, and pious; and this is as great a character
as can be given of any Favorite in any age. So that whereas you object it as
the great oversight and infirmity of his late Majesty that he committed his
exquisite understanding to the Archbishops keeping, you could not have given a
greater proof of his wisdom than to make choice of a man so admirably qualified
to do him service; neither can you blame him for being ignorant that God would
not bless a Churchman Page 301.
in Affairs of State, because he never intended him for that employment; when
all Princes were as little aware of it as his Majesty, till you were pleased to
inform them. So that it must be consessed that he followed the best Light (that
as J. O. speaks) God held forth as the horns in his hand to the believers of
that Generation; for then he had no reason to suppose that he could do better
than to trust his Affairs with a man learned, and wise, and pious, not being
blessed with your Revelations from the high places of Armageddon. And yet for
all this had the Archbishops precipitate, violent, rigorous, sanguinary, and
extreme Counsels been followed, I am apt to think it had by the blessing of God
been the most likely way to prevent all the mischiefs of the late Rebellion. He
saw plainly enough what the Antimonarchical Faction aimed at, how they had
prepared the People for Confusion, how they had encombred the Kings Affairs,
and that there was no probable way of escape for his Majesty but by some
violent breaking through those difficulties in which they had entangled his
Government. And if the Faction had been convinced by any thing but
Declarations, that the King would not bear such insufferable Affronts against
his Crown and Prerogative, it is at least to be supposed that they would never
have attempted it with such open and impudent endeavors. But though he
committed his exquisite understanding to the Archbishops keeping, he kept his
own sweet-nature and Gentleman's Memory to himself; for being a person of an
incomparable goodness, he was strangely easy to forget and forgive the boldest
injuries; and that was all the use they made of his gentleness to encourage one
another in their disloyal Practices, till at length they proceeded to demand
his Crown; and when for mere peace and goodness-sake he had granted them one
half of it, by virtue of that they fought for the other. And as little as the
Archbishop gained upon them by his Priestly implacableness, the King gained
much less by his Princely Condescensions. They were already resolved upon
Rebellion; and then every thing was an occasion of Tumult, when they were
resolved to tumultuare upon every occasion. And though the War be no more to be
imputed to the Kings goodness than the wickedness of impenitent sinners is to
Gods mercy, yet had they not shamelesly presumed upon that, they (though
Presbyterians) could never have had the confidence to treat him as they did.
Nay, so little did he work upon them by the goodnature of all his
condescensions, that they perpetually set themselves to pick quarrels and take
exceptions at the most obliging words; as for example, in the Bill of pressing
and leavying Soldiers by Authority of Parliament, when he had made a
passionate Speech to them to move their pity toward the lamentable estate of
his Protestant Subjects in Ireland, and to dispatch their supplies for
suppressing the Rebellion, and to avoid dispute and delay, he offers them to
pass their own Bill (that they were then framing) though expressly against his
undoubted Prerogative, so it might be done with a salvo jure, leaving the
Debate to a better and more quiet season. How think you did these meek-natured
men (that had they not been forced to it by Laud and Sibthorpianism could never
have lift up an ill thought against the King) requite all this tenderness and
condescension, but immediately Vote a Petition (i. e. a Remonstrance) to
represent to his Majesty how he had violated the ancient, lawful, and undoubted
Privileges and Liberties of Parliament, by taking notice of any Matter (though
it were Town-talk) in agitation in either House, before it was presented to his
Majesty in due course of Parliament, and humbly beseech (i. e. threaten) him to
make known the Persons, that by their Evil Counsels had induced him to it, that
they might be brought to condign punishment, i. e. be affronted, and severely
handled only for being acquainted with the King. Were not these men resolved
upon it, to renounce all sense of Duty and respect to their Prince, that could
seize such an advantage of discontent in such a sad juncture of Affairs from
such a slight and unjust occasion? And what way was there to deal with them but
by such violent and precipitate Counsels as you impute to the Archbishop? They
were (you see plainly from all their proceedings) proof against all the
obligations of goodness and ingenuity, and then there is no way left but to
suppress them by force and rigor; and if that failed, it was only because the
Faction was grown too strong for the Government. And it is possible, nay likely,
that if the King had through his whole Reign taken contrary Counsels and
Courses, yet the event might have been the same, because however he carried
Himself and his Affairs, they were resolved to pursue their Democratical
designs, and had as the world went Power and Interest enough so to confound his
Government, till they brought him into a necessity of a Civil War.

But the three Rocks upon which this Man so learned, so wise, so pious, ruined
the King and Kingdom, were Sibthorp, Arminianism, and the Scotch Liturgy, so as
not to leave it in the power of the Rebels to prevent the war. For they alas!
Righteous Men! acted in the sincerity of their Hearts, and faithful discharge
of their Consciences, and were only forced into Arms in Defense of the King,
Kingdom and Themselves by Sibthorp, Arminianism, and the Liturgy.

But as for the Story of Sibthorp and the Loan-money, in short, thus it happened:
In all the Parliaments under the late Kings Reign there was always a strong
Cabal of ill-affected persons, that resolved to lay hold on all Advantages,
which way soever Affairs were managed, to embroil the Government, and bring the
King into such streights as should make him obnoxious to their Power; and to
this purpose they put him upon expensive wars, and when they had so done,
obstructed all Supplies by falling to complaints of Grievances, and disputes of
Liberties and Privileges, and Remonstrances against his Government, and
Petitions of Redress, that is to say, by assaulting him with Demands and
Threatenings, and however things were Reformed, yet these Malevolent Persons (as
his Majesty Declar. March 10. 1623.
expresses it) like Empyricks and lewd Artists did strive to make new work, and
to have some disease on foot, to keep themselves in request, and to be employed
and entertained in the Cure, chiefly by raising jealousies and designs upon
their Religion, a wicked Practice (says the King) that Ibid.
they took up not for any care that they had of the Church, but only as a
plausible Theme to deprave our Government, as if We, our Clergy, and Counsel,
were either senseless or careless of Religion; with many other wicked Arts and
Practices that the Declaration recapitulates, p. 8, 9, 10.

But the King being engaged in a foreign War in defense of his Uncle the King
of Denmark by the Counsels and Persuasions of both Houses of Parliament, with
great promises of Assistance and Supply, and these being still diverted by
endless Disputes about Liberties and Privileges, and bold demands to abate the
Powers of the Crown, he saw plainly (as himself declares) That they Ibid.
only made use of the necessities grown upon him by that War, to enforce him to
yield to Conditions incompatible with Monarchy. So that despairing of any good
from the Seditious Spirits of that Parliament, he dissolves them. And in the
interval, his necessities growing upon him by a new and sad disaster that had
befallen his Uncle the King of Denmark; He commands Rusworth's Collect. p. 418.
his Council to Advise by what means and ways he might fitly and speedily be
furnished with Moneys suitable to the importance of the undertaking. Hereupon
after a Consultation of diverse days together, they came to this Resolution,
that the urgency of Affairs not admitting the way of Parliament, the most
speedy, equal and convenient means were by a general Loan from the Subject,
according as every man was Assessed in the Rolls of the last Subsidy. Upon this
Result the King issues out his Declaration accordingly, but assuring the
People, that this way (to which he was forced by the urgency of his Occasions)
should not be made a Precedent for the time to come, to charge Them or their
Posterity to the prejudice of their Just and Ancient Liberties enjoyed under
his most Noble Progenitors: And promising them in the word of a Prince, first
to repay all such sums of Money as should be lent without fee or charge, so
soon as he shall be any ways enabled thereunto. And secondly, that not one
Penny so borrowed, should be bestowed or expended but upon those public and
general Services, wherein every of Them, and the body of the Kingdom, their
Wives, Children and Posterity, have their personal and common Interest.

When the King and his Council had Voted the Loan, they commanded Laud then
Bishop of Bath and Wells to draw up certain Instructions to be communicated to
the Archbishops, Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of the Realm, to stir up
and exhort the People to express their Zeal to the true Religion, their Duty to
the King, and their Love to their Country, by a cheerful compliance with his
Majesty's Commissions. And in this was represented the Afflicted Condition of
the Princes and States of the Reformed Religion in all parts of Christendom
(some being overrun, some diverted, and some disabled to give assistance:) The
distress of his Uncle the King of Denmark, the great danger of losing the
Sound, and thereby the Eastland and the Hamborough Trade; the Confederacy of
the Pope, the House of Austria, and the French King to root out the Protestant
Religion; the great Fleets both of France and Spain at that Instant
endeavoring to block up Rochel; together with their Landforces on the Coast
of Britain ready to invade us. And what more important Motives could have been
pressed to persuade thePeople to a ready and cheerful Contribution? What more
powerful and plausible Arguments could have been put into the mouths of the
Clergy to win their Auditories to a dutiful Compliance both with his Majesty's
Desires and Necessities? And this among other things brought forth Sibthorp's
Sermon; and the man did well, and as became his Function, to persuade the
People that they ought in point of Conscience and Religion cheerfully to submit
to all such Taxes as were imposed upon them by Royal Authority without murmurs
and disputes. But if he intermedled (as it is said he did) with the Kings
Absolute Power of imposing Taxes without Consent of Parliament, according to
the Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom, he went both beyond his own
Commission, and against the Kings Declaration. For what had he to do in the
Pulpit with the Rights of Sovereignty, and the Privileges of Parliament? It
was none of his business to adjust the disputes of his Superiors, and he had
no Authority either from God or the King to interpose in Affairs of State; his
Office was to recommend the Piety, and the Necessity of their Contributions;
and though possibly they were not under any enforcements of Compliance by the
Constitutions of this Realm; yet to urge it upon their Consciences from the
Common Principles and Obligations both of Nature and Christianity, that could
not but effectually enforce their compliance with so good a King in so pious
and necessary a work. But if he exceeded his Commission by taking upon him to
teach the Laws of the Land, and determine the Rights of the Prerogative, though
he cannot be justified, yet he ought, as circumstances then stood, to be in a
great measure excused; because he did it at a time, when the King could not in
the usual Parliamentary method obtain sufficient supplies to preserve his
Honor and Safety, but by Concessions shamefully contrary to both; and that
might provoke a warm man to lavish out beyond the bounds of prudence and
discretion. And as for Manwarings Case I need say little to it, in that it was
the very same with Sibthorps, only it is observable, that his Prosecution was
carried on with all eagerness by such Members as Pym and Rous, men that took
advantage of such imprudences, only to give countenance to their own clamours;
and confirm the jealousies they had blown into the People against the King, by
the indiscretion of a Country Vicar: though if there were at that time any
designs of absolute Government, it was to be imputed to their Impudence, for
when they assaulted the Royal Power with their bold and unreasonable demands,
they forced it to stand upon its own guard, and then it was none of the Kings
fault if he were necessitated to act sometimes by virtue of his mere
Prerogative, because there was no other way left to preserve himself or his
Government; in that they had brought things to that pass, that nothing must be
done unless he would either grant away all his Power to them, or keep it all to
himself; for they would not share the Sovereignty with a single Person, and
under pretense of privileges of Parliament assumed the Royal Supremacy; and as
soon as they had Power and opportunity, it is well known how confidently they
put in practice the very same courses, which they resisted as Acts of Arbitrary
Government in the King; so that if He were at any time to have recourse to
extraparliamently proceedings, it was not from his own choice or inclinations,
but purely from the rudeness and insolence of their demands, which were so
insufferable, that the case was plain, that he must sometimes govern without
them or not govern at all. And what is to be done in that case the Law of
self-preservation determines. I know this may be pretended, where there is no
such necessity, but that I cannot help if men will abuse a just pretense to
authorize unjust actions. It is enough to my purpose that it is plain in the
case of the last King, that he never made use of his Prerogative till the
Parliament began to challenge it; and then he could make use of nothing else;
and the dispute then was not whether the Prerogative should govern, but whether
it were vested in him or them, and that brought forth the War; they fought for
the Crown, and when the Parliament had won it, they were resolved to wear it,
and exercised all the Jurisdictions of Sovereign Power by virtue of their
Parliamentary Supremacy.

But to return to Manwaring, it is a great instance of the Presbyterian
Humanity, that though the poor man had begged their pardon with all the
expressions of sorrow and humility, yet no less punishment would appease their
fury, but to be imprisoned during their pleasure, (i. e. for ever) to be fined
a thousand Pounds, to be suspended three Years, and to be made incapable of any
farther Ecclesiastical preferment, with many other heavy tokens of their
displeasure, and all this only for his too eager Zeal and forwardness in the
Cause of Loyalty, and so his Majesty understood it, and therefore punished him
with preferment accordingly, to defy their pragmaticalness, and to encourage
such as promoted his and the Kingdoms service, though they might fail in a
point of Prudence. But as for those persons that openly refused the Loan, and
affronted the Kings Commissions, and would rather suffer Imprisonment than
comply in so easy and reasonable a Demand, they plainly showed they had forgot
that respect they owe to their Prince, and that duty they owe to God; who so
severely requires them to obey, not for their wrath only, but for Conscience
sake, so that it was a manifest and unpalliable Breach both of Loyalty and
Religion. Especially when it was so very manifest that the King was forced upon
all extraordinary courses purely by the stubborness of Presbyterian
Parliaments; and when they had such unquestionable assurance both from his own
Temper, that he could do nothing but what was just and honorable, and from his
Royal word that he would be always as tender of his Peoples ancient and just
Liberties, as of the Rights of his Crown and Sovereignty. In these plain
Circumstances as things stood between him and his Parliaments, punctilios of
Law were superseded. For when it was so manifest that their demands were
disloyal and unreasonable; and withal that on one hand their designs were worse
than their Declarations, and on the other that his Majesty never intended any
thing but the Peace and prosperity of his Kingdoms, that was sufficient motive
to overrule all good Subjects and ingenuous men not to endanger all by standing
too curiously upon precedents and and niceties of old Custom. But when these
men first put the King upon his necessities, and then defeated him of his
supplies, and so forced him upon extraordinary courses, and then resisted his
Authority, and affronted his proceedings, and animated the people to stand it
out against his Commissioners, and raised a disturbance and discontent through
the whole Nation; and all this when they knew his Majesty's occasions so
urgent, and his designs so just and pious; I dare determine that whatever they
were by the Laws of the Land, they were most notorious Rebels by all the Laws
of the Gospel, though what they proved afterward we all know, it being these
very men, I mean as many of them as persisted in their stubborness (for some of
them were converted to a more orderly temper by the mere power of shame and
modesty) that were the great Authors and Ringleaders in the Long-parliament
Rebellion.

The next fatal Rock upon which this man so learned, so wise, so pious ruined
both King and Kingdom is the Rock of Arminianism; for it seemed he and the
Bishops had in order to setting up a new Page 297.
kind of Papacy of their own here in England, provided themselves of a new
Religion in Holland, Arminianism, which though it were the Republican Opinion
there, yet now they undertook to accommodate it to Monarchy, etc. But I beseech
you (Sir) that are so deep a Statesman to inform a poor sucking Divine which
way Arminianism is concerned for or against Monarchy. As for its Orthodoxy I
have not a word to say, especially when it has been so sufficiently determined
by the Synod of Dort and the Assembly of West-minster, i. e. all the Modern
Orthodox Divines of Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia, and so downward to
Pin-makers Hall; though how it should at all conduce to Popery, I must confess
it is beyond my comprehension, when the controversy has been always more or
less disputed in all Nations, under all Governments, by all Sects and all
Religions; and is bandied as much by the Divines of the Church of Rome, as by
those of the Reformation. And therefore when you upbraid us that in the late
beating up the Pulpit Drums against Popery, some were so ignorant as to fight
the Papists with Arminian Arguments, you would have done well to tell us the
Ear-mark of an Arminian Argument. I always thought they had been equally
concerned with other Protestants against the Pope, and that the Arminians
(howsoever otherwise heterodox) agree no more with some Papists in some things,
than the Calvinists agree with other Papists in other things; so that their
differences have no relation to their common Cause against Popery. But to what
purpose is it to talk to a Gamester of matters of Divinity? For you understand
none of these things but write purely by roat; you find grievous outcries of
Arminianism in the Long-Parliament Speeches and Declarations, and you thought
you might serve your turn of it as they did theirs. It was an hard word that
the people understood not at all, i. e. as little as themselves did the thing,
only they taught them to hate and abhor it as Children do Bugbears and
Hobgoblins. So that in those days Arminianism and Popery went always hand in
hand, and if they had a mind to blast any man's Reputation, it was but sticking
this name upon him and his business was done; and among other Artifices to give
better Countenance to the Cheat, a counterfeit Letter was framed to the Rector
of the Jesuits in Bruxels, in which they inform him with what Art and success
they had planted here the Sovereign Drug of Arminianism to purge the
Protestants from their Heresies, and to make a Party against the Puritans, that
were their only dangerous enemies, with abundance more of the like impudent
stuff, though by whom it was written, it was never yet discovered, yet by
several passages in favor of the Puritan Faction it is evident enough to all
sober men, that it was a mere Gullery of their own devising. And agreeably to
this they were always very liberally bestowing their strokes upon the Monster
of Arminianism. I desire (Mr. Speaker) that Mr. Rous his speech in the Parliam.
1628. ^ Rush. Collect. Page 646.
we may consider the increase of Arminianism, an error that makes the Grace of
God lackey it after the will of man; yea I desire that we may look into the
very belly and bowels of this Trojan Horse, to see if there be not men in it
ready to open the Gates to Romish Tyranny and Spanish Monarchy: for an Arminian
is the spawn of a Papist, and if there come the warmth of favor upon him, you
shall see him turn into one of those Frogs, that rise out of the bottomless
Pit; and if you mark it well, you shall see an Arminian reaching out his hand
to a Papist, a Papist to a Jesuit, a Jesuit gives one hand to the Pope, and
another to the King of Spain, etc. These were wonderful tricks for the deep
Worthies of those times, but now nothing but an incorrigible blockhead could
either believe that they were very serious, or if they were, that they were not
very silly. And yet however Arminianism (whatever it is) may stand in relation
to Popery, it was a new Religion that the Prelates brought from Holland, and
though it were the Republican Page 297.
Opinion there (because that Faction was there accused of designs to reduce
that Commonwealth under the Spanish Government) they undertook to accommodate
it to Monarchy. And they were no doubt deep Youths that could reconcile a
Republican Religion to a Monarchical Interest; nay not only so, but make that
the very Engine to screw up the Prerogative to an absolute Power. They must be
very cunning men, and certainly could never have miscarried as they did, were
it not that God is resolved never to bless Churchmen in their Statetrinklings.
Otherwise I would request you to tell me in the name of Machiavel which way the
Kings Prerogative is concerned, whether God Almighty decreed from all Eternity
to create ten Myriads of men, nine whereof he peremptorily resolved to doom to
everlasting misery for the Glory or rather Ostentation of his uncontrollable
Power and Dominion, and that they might not frustrate the purpose of his
Good-pleasure (as they call it) resolved again by one device or other to draw
them, or rather than fail by his own irresistible Instigation to drive them
into such practices as might deserve, and by consequence justify the severity
of his proceedings. Though this seems to make very much for the lawfulness and
the divine Right of arbitrary Government, yet I never heard of any Calvinist
that urged his opinion in this matter in behalf of the absolute and unhoopable
Supremacy of Kings. Neither do I understand what it imports to any form of
Government, whether a man be a Supralapsarian or a Sublapsarian, and suppose he
proceed as far as Gomarus in asserting absolute and irrespective Reprobation, I
would fain know wherein lies the Republicanness of his opinion, and by what
trinkling distinctions and subtilties the Bishops were able to accommodate it
to Monarchy. At least all these Speculations of absolute and arbitrary Dominion
are easily defeated and overruled by Calvin's practical Doctrines of
Government, viz. that it is the duty of the Common people and their Trustees to
assert the liberty of Subjects against the Tyranny and wantonness of Kings, and
that if they grow licentious and exorbitant in the use of their power, it is
then incumbent upon the popular and inferior Officers to restrain and moderate
their Excesses. One such blunt assertion as this is enough to baffle all the
dry and speculative Consequences of notional Decrees; for these only swim in
men's fancies, whilst there are perpetual or at least too many occasions of
reducing that to practice. And though the Consequence is very obvious that if
God disposes of his Creatures by an arbitrary Decree and without regard to the
merits of the Cause (for so he acts according to the Predestinarian Doctrine,
by which he pre-ordains the greatest part of his Creatures to everlasting
Destruction, and that he may not be defeated, pre-ordains them too to as much
sin as may deserve it) that then his Vicegerents may govern the World by his
own measures, and destroy any of their Subjects as they see cause for the
Interest and Glory of his or their own Empire. Yet how it comes to pass I do
not know, or perhaps I do know, the followers of Calvin have always been as
eager in decrying Civil as Ecclesiastical Idolatry, and to avoid the very peril
and suspicion of it, have every where treated Kings as roughly as if they had
taken them for a Race of Capons. It were easy to add a great deal more gloss
upon this hard word, but this may suffice to convince a wiser man than you (if
he needed it) that it had not the least real concernment in the disputes of
Monarchy or Popery; but being some Foreign Monster that no body understood, it
might conveniently serve at all turns for a standing pretense of jealousy and
suspicion.

The third Rock, upon which this man so learned, so wise, so pious ruined both
King and Kingdom, was, the imposing Page 303.
the English Liturgy upon the Kirk of Scotland. Now as to this (to be short)
you must know that this very thing was covenanted and subscribed to by the
first Reformers, when they Petitioned Queen Buch. Hist. Scot. l. 19.
Elizabeth's aid to expel the French; and was in some measure put in practice,
till in the Minority of King James the Scotch Reformation was (as all the rest
were) overrun by the Bramble, and so the Liturgy was by degrees neglected, to
make way for the new invention of extempore Prayers, in which (if we may rely
upon the Kings word) the Mass John's prayed Large Declar. concern. the tumults
in Scotland, printed, 1629.
sometimes so ignorantly, as it was a shame to all Religion, to have the
Majesty of God so barbarously spoken unto; sometimes so seditiously, that their
Prayers were plain Libels, girding at Sovereignty and Authority; or Lies, being
stuffed with all the false Reports in the Kingdom. But King James as soon as he
came to the use of his Royal Understanding, reflecting upon the rudeness and
sedition of their Prayers, immediately as became a religious Ibid.
Prince, bethought himself seriously how his first Reformation in that Kingdom
might begin at the public worship of God, which he most truly conceived could
never be happily effected, until such time as there should be an unity and
uniformity in the public Liturgy and Service of the Church established
throughout the whole Kingdom. And to this end a public Liturgy was compiled
by the Bishops and others of the most Eminent Clergy, and presented to the King
by Archbishop Spotswood, and being approved and ratified by Royal Assent was
sent back for the use of the Kirk; though (as it happened) it took no great
effect, by reason of his Quarrel with Spain that followed immediately upon it,
and of his Death that followed not long after it. But upon some Addresses from
the Clergy of that Kingdom his late Majesty resolved to pursue the Pious and
Princely design of his Royal Father, to which purpose he caused the same
Service Book to be sent back to himself, that after his perusal and alterations
(if any should be foundnecessary and convenient) it might likewise receive his
Royal Authority and Approbation. And after many and serious Consultations with
the Bishops and Clergy of that Kingdom, it was at length approved and
published, special care being taken (I still rely upon the Kings Ibid,
word) that the small alterations of it, in which it differs from the English
Liturgy should be such, as might best comply with the minds and dispositions of
the Scots, and prevent all grounds of fear or jealousy, and chiefly to avoid
all misconstruction, that some Factious Spirits would have put upon it as a
badge of that Churches dependence upon the Church of England, if it had been
the same with the English Service Book totidem verbis. And this was the Liturgy
that no doubt might be an occasion of exasperating the Bramble-Faction that
were already ripe for Rebellion, and resolved to improve all disgusts whether
just or unjust, real or pretended to authorize their disloyal resolutions.

But to let you into the main Mystery; the circumstance that gave life and
vigor to their designs was the Act of Revocation that it seems happened to be
set on foot not long before, by which the King intended the Revocation of those
Lands of the Church, that in the minority of King James the Great Men had to
the prejudice of the Crown seized on and shared among themselves, to which the
Occupants having no other Title beside impudent Sacrilege and Usurpation, the
King thought he might justly challenge them for his own Use at least from the
present Possessours. A course warranted (as himself still tells me) both by the
Laws of that Kingdom, and the frequent examples of his Royal Progenitors. And
this (you may believe) was provocation enough to put them into an uproar, and
the People were persuaded (as I am informed by a good Author from the mouth of
a Noble Lord) that the intendment of the Act was to revoke all former Laws for
suppressing of Popery and settling the Reformed Religion in the Kirk of
Scotland; and this raised such Tumults that the King was forced to desist from
the prosecution of the Act under that Title, and to carry it on, though with
much opposition, under another Name of a Commission of Surrendries; a thing so
offensive to the stomachs of the Lords of the Erection (as the Lay
Impropriators were there called) that they could never digest it; but first
(according to the usual method) vented their choler in Libels, and then in
Rebellion. For though they were satisfied for their Tithes to the utmost
farthing, according to the Rates of purchasing in that Kingdom; yet this
fretted them, that they saw themselves robbed of the dependence of the Clergy
and Laity upon their Power, and of that Sovereign Command and Superiority which
they had by the tie of Tithes exercised over them several ways (as the King
will inform you.) And this was the reason of State, beside the ease of his
Subjects, that moved his Majesty to issue out this Commission: For before the
greatest part of the Laity were Vassals by Tenure, and all the Clergy slaves by
custom to the Nobility. And therefore they immediately set themselves to work
the People to a disaffection to his Majesty's Government, and to persuade them
that these were the contrivances of the Bishops, and that under them there were
dangerous innovations designed upon their Religion. So that it is plain (as the
King observes) that before either the Service Book or Book of Canons, so
tragically now exclaimed against, were thought on, the seeds of Sedition and
discontent were sown by the Contrivers of the Covenant, first upon the
occasion of the Revocation, next upon occasion of the Commission of Surrenders,
and lastly, upon occasion of his denying honors to some of them at his last
being in that Kingdom, of which he has there given a large and particular
account; and this brought forth first private traducing his Government, and
then public Libels. And now by this time Sedition was grown so ripe and ready
to seed, that it wanted nothing to thrust it out, and make it shoot forth into
an open Rebellion, but some fair and specious pretense: They could not yet
compass the Cloak of Religion, whereby to siel the eyes, and muffle the face of
the Multitude, for by none of the three former Occasions could they so much as
pretend, that Religion was endangered or impeached: But so soon as they got but
the least hint of any thing, which they thought might admit a misconstruction
that way, they lost no time, but took Occasion by the fore-lock, knowing that
either that or nothing would first facilitate, and then perfect their designs.
Now the occasion they took of fetching Religion within the reach of their
Pretenses was the new Liturgy. And this produced (I still rely upon the Kings
Authority) the late wicked Covenant, or pretended Holy League. Though following
the pattern of all other Seditions they did pretend Religion, yet nothing was
less intended by them. For when they had (says the Royal Understanding)
received from us full satisfaction to all their desires expressed in any of
their Petitions, Remonstrances or Declarations, their persisting for all that
in their tumultuous and rebellious Courses, does demonstrate to the world their
weariness of being governed by us and our Laws, by our Council, and other
Officers put in Authority by and under us, and an itching humor of having that
our Kingdom governed by a Table of their own devising, consisting of Persons of
their own choosing: A Plot of which they are very fond, being an abortion of
their own brain, but which indeed is such a monstrous birth, as the like has
not yet been born or bred in any Kingdom, Jewish, Christian or Pagan. Of which
he afterward describes a particular Platform, as Page 54.
it was put in practice at Edinburgh. And thus observe it; you shall still find
a Commonwealth and Sacrilege at the bottom of all Rebellion, that appears
under the mask and pretense of Religion. And it was these men that raised the
Tumults, and trinkled the Rabble into all those disorderly courses that by
degrees brought forth the Covenant and the War. And it is pretty observable,
that the first Remonstrance at Edinburgh was made in the name of the Men,
Women, Children and Servants, who being urged with the Book of Service, and
having considered the same (the Children as well as the rest) humbly show, etc.
These were followed by the Burghours, and the Burghours by the Gentry and
Nobility. And so at length did the Scotch-war break out, in which the Liturgy
was no more concerned than the Children of Edinburgh, whose tender Consciences
(it seems) were offended at it, though in truth they deserved to be soundly
whipped for beginning a War for the Cause, when the Cause was too good to be
fought for.

And now consider whether you had not been better advised to let this business
of the War alone, when you can no other way bring your Clients off with
reputation, unless the King will be content to suffer Himself, his Royal
Father, and his Loyal Subjects to be impeached of their Rebellion? For the
blame of it must light somewhere; and therefore if the Covenauters Cause were
too good to be fought for; as little Logic as I understand, I understand so
much, that then the Kings was too bad to be fought for; and that is enough for
one Conclusion. But whatever was the occasion of the War, whether the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the Vicar of Brackley, as you will have it; or
Ignoramus and Mr. Seldom as a second concludes; or the Schoolmen and the
Universities as a third observes; whether (I say) any or all of these accidents
might contribute to it, I am not concerned, because occasions of mischief are
unaccountable for their being so, in that men that have a mind to it may make
any thing an Occasion, and yet still the occasion shall be as innocent as (I
believe) the Children of Edinburgh were: But if instead of the Occasion you
desire to be satisfied in the cause of the War, seeing you have been at so much
pains in transcribing an huge Gazet to Page 280.
give me satisfaction, I think my self at least a little obliged to give you my
opinion, and if that be not sufficient to satisfy you, I shall only advise you
to take heed of being too inquisitive, for assure your self your Party will
have but little reason to con you any thanks for demanding any farther
satisfaction. Inprimis then it happened in this War (as it does in all others)
that there were some general Causes that were set on work by some particular
Circumstances. As,

1. The unusual ignorance of the Common People concerning their Duty and
Obligation to the Government, every man supposing himself as much Master of his
own Estate, as if he had lived out of all Society; and expecting that the King
should be able to maintain the Common Safety without his particular
Contribution, and this (you may easily imagine) makes them apt to murmur and
tumultuate in all such straits and necessities of the State as require Money
and Taxes.

2. The seditiousness of Persons of broken and shattered fortunes, and as there
are great numbers of such at all times, so are they always with the foremost to
promote Disturbances in all States, because it is very possible they may make
their Condition better, but impossible they should ever make it worse.

3. The great numbers of well-meaning men, that are usually carried down with
the stream, so that though possibly they were never disobliged at Court, nor
infected with Seditious Principles against the State, nor addicted to Fanatique
Factions against the Church; yet are easily overborn with the noise of a whole
Kingdom to join with that Party that pretends with most confidence to zeal for
the public good. These with many others are the Materials and common
Principles of all Rebellion, but they never or very rarely come into action,
unless they are put upon it by some other particular and emergent Causes. And
these were plainly

The Insolence and Seditiousness of the Presbyteran Preachers; for it seems the
Clergy of all Parties as well as all Ages can be mischievous enough, because
those that can do most good may for the same reason do most harm, and therefore
it is as ordinary for some to obstruct the Clemency of Subjects as it is for
others to obstruct the Clemency of Kings. Now it is certain these men had
gained a mighty esteem and reverence with the People, partly by the confidence
of their pretenses, stiling themselves Gods Ambassadors, and chalenging as
much submission to their Doctrines, as if they had wrought Miracles, or
produced written Credentials from Heaven; partly by the vehemence of their tone
and gesture, and the particular manner of acting their Sermons; but chiefly by
the subject matter of their popular discourses, in which they were always very
sparing of their reproofs against the gainful vices of tradesmen, such as
fraud, cozening, and covetousness; and on the contrary very prodigal of their
declamations and suggestions against such miscarriages as were proper to the
Government: And by inveighing perpetually against oppression, they seemed to
take part with the People against their Superiors. But that which gave them
more Authority than all this over their minds, was a certain way they had got
of raising unreasonable and unavoidable troubles of Conscience, by which means
they continually kept great multitudes of well-meaning persons in perfect
slavery and subjection to their own good-pleasure. Now by the advantage of all
these Artifices it was easy for them to infuse any poison into the minds of
their Proselytes. And what Principles they taught them in reference to the
established Government, they are so vulgarly known, and so sufficiently
recorded, that I suppose it is now very superfluous to inform the world: It is
enough that there is not one Aphorism of miscief and rebellion, that they did
not impose upon the People under the obligation of a Christian duty; as it is
largely and distinctly proved out of their own words in the Book of dangerous
Positions and Proceedings, that is an exact Collection of all the Treason in
the world. Do but read it over, and then tell me what peaceable and orderly
Subjects they are like to prove, whose Consciences are acted by such lewd and
desperate Principles. But though the Puritan Preachers from their very
beginning never spared themselves nor their lungs against their Governors; yet
under the late Kings Reign by reason of the remiss Government of Archbishop
Abbot, they became more bold and boisterous than ever, and especially when they
perceived his Majesty so sincerely addicted to the Church of England, and so
resolutely bent to reduce all Factious Dissenters to order and obedience, they
began to think the cause brought to its last gasp, if he proceeded without
check to his designs; and therefore they bestir themselves, and thrash the
Pulpits to exasperate the People against the Government of the Church, and
inveigh in the coarsest and most bitter expressions against that of the State.
And thus by the zeal and madness of these men, were the People at length
preached out of all sense of their Duty and Allegiance, and by the perpetual
roarings and bellowings of these Geneva Bulls were perfectly amazed into
Rebellion. And that indeed was their powerful preaching to raise Armies, and
beat up the Alarm to a Civil War. If any man shall be at leisure to peruse
those Humiliation-Sermons, that were contrived to sanctisie the Cause, he shall
meet with such wretched and horrible abuses of Religion, as the wickedness of
all former Ages is not able to parallel. What horrid work did they make with
the Word of God? How shamelesly did they urge the Prophesies of the Old
Testament, in defiance to the Precepts of the New? And with what intolerable
presumption did they load his Majesty with every burden they could pick up
against Moab or Babylon? Their impertinence was almost as bold as their
impiety. And the People were rarely taught any thing beside Treason and
Blasphemy. And thus were they preached into Arms, and converted into Rebellion;
they pressed Horse and Foot out of every Text, and then armed them with Spite
and Zeal, and that (you know) is an over-match for wisdom and courage. And if
the Pulpit were their Poast (as you say it is) they in the strength of modern
Orthodoxy, immoral Grace, and Capon grease made it good against all Enemies
whatsoever.

These were the Trumpeters to the War, the next are the Leaders, and they were
first ignorant and half-witted men that were blown up with a great conceit of
their own sufficiency in Politiques, that had made Remarques upon Aristotle and
Tacitus, that could tell stories of the Grecian and Roman Commonwealths, and
begin a Speech with Sparta and Lycurgus, and talk an hour together of the power
of the Tribunes, and the privileges of the People of Rome, and demonstrate out
of History, that when Augustus taxed the whole World, he did it not by virtue
of his own Imperial Prerogative, but that it was granted to him by Vote and
Authority of the Senate; that he being a wise Prince avoided all appearances of
Absolute Sovereignty, that he submitted the management of his Power to the
censure of so discreet a Consistory; and sometimes labored to resign all his
Authority, and lay Himself and his Diadem at their feet, and at last was not by
all their importunity to be entreated to accept of the Empire, but with a
proviso of resigning his Charge, as soon as ever he had settled the
Commonwealth in Peace and Safety, and therefore only renewed the Lease of his
Government every tenth year at the petition of the People. Beside, that he
avoided the Titles of Dictator, and Rex and Dominus, as much as a Mariner does
a Rock for fear of splitting, setting the fate of his Father Julius before him
(for he too was murdered) as a Sea-mark not to affect too great and glorious
Attributes, lest he might have ship-wrack'd both the State and Himself upon the
Rock of a proud or an offensive Title. This (Mr. Speaker) was the moderation of
wise Princes in former Ages; they had a deference to the wisdom of this house,
and a fatherly care for the Liberty of the Subject; They were not wont to call
Parliaments, only when they were forced to it by their own necessities, to be
the spunges of the Commonwealth, and by their means to squeeze the Subjects
money into their own Coffers, and when they had served their own turns disband
them; but to advise and consult with their great Council about the great
Affairs of State. We have (Mr. Speaker) a Gracious Prince, but he is abused and
misled by Evil Counselors; we owe all the Mis-governments of the State, and
the Affronts of this House to their Tyranny and Insolence. And if they will not
know their Duty, however let not us forget our Trust. We have now an
Opportunity put into our hands, his Majesty is engaged in an expensive War, and
cannot hold out without Supplies, and therefore before we Vote that, let us
present him our Remonstrances, and grant him Subsidies upon no other condition,
than that he will first redress all our Grievances. This (Mr. Speaker) was the
wisdom of Sparta and Athens, and by this method of proceeding they kept the
Liberties of the Commonwealth inviolable against all the attempts and
encroachments of Tyranny. This was the language of Parliaments in the late
Kings Reign, and by these pedantick stories did the ill-affected Members of the
Puritan and Republican Faction obstruct and embroil all Affairs, till they
plainly run the Kingdom into a necessity of a Civil War. Not that I believe
they had all of them any formed design to subvert the Government, no doubt many
of them were wonderfully satisfied if the Company would but take notice of, and
admire their learning; and to this purpose the same Speeches would serve
indifferently at all times, and upon all occasions, whether they had or had not
cause of complaint. And to deal plainly with you, I have read most of the
Long-Parliament Speeches over, and though I know you will chide me for calling
a whole Parliament Coxcombs, yet it is better to call them so than worse; yet
this censure I dare pass upon them without any suspicion of arrogance within my
self; That they were for the most part no better than Schoolboys Declamations,
that seemed to be made for no other end than the exercise of Wit and
Rhetorique, and the Topics from which they raised their Harangues were equally
serviceable in any Cause pro or con, such as Aphorisms; Similitudes, and
Sentences out of ancient Authors, but as for true reasoning they rarely seemed
to pretend to it, or endeavor after it; in short, all their Discourses were
much like yours, and accommodated to People that took Confidence for Reason,
Nonsense for Mysteries, and Rudeness for Wit; and a judicious man that
compares them would almost suspect your Book to be only a Rehearsal, or rather
an Epitome of their Speeches, though I am not apt to conclude that you read
them over on purpose to write after their Copy, because I know I it is as
natural for bad wits to jump as good. There is a way of popular and impertinent
talking, that is common to the pedantique Haranguers of all Ages. But they
declaimed so long upon idle stories of Rome and Athens, and little sayings of
Cato and Seneca, till they in sober earnest challenged so much of the Sovereign
Power, under pretext of Liberty of the Subject, and Privilege of Parliament,
as left nothing of Prerogative to the Prince, beside a little Pageantry of
State and an empty Title. So that unless his Majesty would tamely have resigned
his Crown, and disclaimed all Regal Authority, he had no other way left to
defend it from violence but by force of Arms. They had already begun to seize,
and there was no way to make them unfasten but by knocking off their fingers.

But that which contributed as much as any thing to these disorders was the
great resort of our young Gentry about that time to Geneva for Capons and
Education; where being thoroughly instructed in the principles of Modern
Orthodoxy (and there every Tradesman and Lay-Elder was able to inform them)
they generally returned home disaffected to the established Government both of
Church and State, and furnished with Doctrines of Divinity suitable to their
Principles of Policy; and by this means Calvin obtained as great an Interest
and Power in the House of Commons as Lycurgus, and scarce a Speech could be
made without his Institutions, and the distich of Praeter Apostolicas, etc. And
so (Mr. Speaker) though Mr. Calvin the ablest Divine in the world since the
death of the Apostles, exact an entire obedience to all Princes whether good or
bad without exception or dispensation. So that suppose Instit. l. 4. c. 20.. 24.
a negligent and slothful Prince, who has no care at all of the public
safety; who is so intent of his own private, as to make markets of all Laws and
Privileges, and to expose his Justice and Favor both to open sale (so that
according to Mr. Calvin, a Prince cannot take money for any place in Court
without Tyranny) who drains his Peoples purses to no other end, than to
maintain a vain and wastful Prodigality; and who spends his time in nothing
more, than either the rifling of the Subjects houses, the deflouring of their
Wives and Daughters, the slaughter of the innocent, etc. And though it be
always implanted in the Souls of men not more to love and reverence a just and
virtuous Prince, than to abominate and detest an ungodly Tyrant. Yet even in
this case he requires Duty and Obedience from the Subject to such a Magistrate
as the Minister of God. And to this purpose (Mr. Speaker) he has admirably
explained all Texts both of the Old and New Testament in favor of the
Prerogative and Supremacy of Kings. But then (Mr. Speaker) we must understand
both him and our selves aright, that when he restrains us from executing
vengeance upon Licentious Princes, this must still be understood of private
persons. Sect. 31.
For if there be now any popular Officers (and such he knows there are every
where without an if) ordained to moderate the licentiousness of Kings (such as
the Ephori of old set up against the Kings of Sparta, the Tribunes of the
People against the Roman Consuls, and the Demarchi against the Athenian Senate,
and with which Power perhaps, as the world now goes (and yet he knows the
Christian world now to go so every where without a perhaps) the three Estates
are furnished in each several Kingdom, when they are solemnly assembled:) So
far am I from hindering them from putting a restraint on the exorbitant Power of
Kings, as their Office binds them, that I conceive them guilty rather of a
perfidious dissimulation if they connive at Kings, when they play the Tyrants,
or wantonly insult over the Common People; in that they basely betray the
Subjects Liberty, of which they know they were made Guardians by Gods own
Ordinance and appointment. This (Mr. Speaker) is our Case, we are entrusted by
God and our Country with the Peoples Liberties, and we must give an account to
both for the faithful discharge of our Trust. And wherever the fault lies I
dare not pretend to know; but this I do know, that we have (God be praised) as
Gracious a Prince as ever wielded Scepter, and yet I know not by what means,
though perhaps I do know, his whole Reign is deformed with Tyranny and Absolute
Government. Mr. Speaker, it concerns us to look about us, our Lives and
Liberties and (what is dearer) our Religion lies at stake, let us then take
Courage, and whatever it cost, see this licentiousness curbed, and the force of
Law restored. No doubt but the King will be advised by his great Council; or if
he will not, it is our duty to snatch him from a Precipice; however we must not
be so slothful and perfidious as to betray the Subjects Liberty, of which (we
know) we were made Guardians by Gods own Ordinance and appointment. And thus
had they got out of Mr. Calvin a Jus Divinum for the Long-Parliament Rebellion;
and under this pretense of being Trustees for the Peoples Liberties, they
plainly usurped the Kings Supremacy. Nothing must be done in the Government of
the State without their Advice and Approbation, and any proceedings that they
disliked (and yet they disliked all that were done without them) became
immediately illegal, and till they are redressed all Government must be laid
aside, and if the King happened at any time to do any thing contrary to some idle
precedent of Sparta and Lycurgus, it was a manifest subversion of the
Fundamental Laws. And thus by this fooling, and the help of Calvin came they at
length to challenge the Sovereignty to themselves, and to set the Crown upon
their own heads, that is (as we all know) to suffer the King to do nothing
without them, and to assume a Power to themselves (as often as they judged it
expedient) of doing every thing without the King, and this made these Pedants
as troublesome in their demands as were the Rebels by design, till they had
challenged every branch of the Regal Power.

Both these and the Zealots were excellent Tools of Sedition, but they were no
more than Tools, the Master-workmen were the cunning and reserved Members of
the Republican Faction. For it is plain enough, that all things were governed
in both Houses by a Cabal of such as had from the beginning (as appeared
afterward) a design upon the alteration of the Government. And these men were
able upon all occasions to form themselves into all shapes and all parties to
drive on their designs; and it was not so much their business to make Speeches,
and complain of Grievances, as to perplex and obstruct the Kings Affairs, and
by any artifices make him obnoxious to their Power, and when that was grown
great enough they understood their own work. Their usual trick was to appear
always with the first to comply with the Kings designs and desires; and when
by that means they had brought him into straits, they still left him; v. g.
they were perpetually putting the King upon expensive wars by great promises of
assistance, and accordingly seemed always the most cheerful and liberal voters
of Taxes; but yet they were sure to raise so many disputes and difficulties
about other matters, that the supply was either altogether diverted or came
always too late. This was the particular unkindness that the King complained
of in all his Parliaments. But by leaving him thus perpetually in the lurch,
they forced him at length to make use of some extraordinary courses; and then
they presently made their advantage of that, to raise their clamours and
complaints of Arbitrary Government, and nothing could stop their mouths till
his Majesty had not only done severe penance, but made ample Restitution by
some special Act of Grace, whereby he granted away some considerable Branch of
his Power. And so they would for a while receive him into favor again, and
then anon play the same game over again; and by this means they at length grew
so much upon him, and gained so many advantages of him, till perceiving their
own strength they command him to resign his Regal Power into their hands, or if
he refuse, to stand upon his own guard, and defend himself as he can by force
of Arms. And that was the contest of the war, who should wear the Crown, He or
They.

It was these men chiefly that invited back the Kirk-Army after they had agreed
to Articles of Pacification, and returned home satisfied with the Kings
Concessions, and the abolition of Episcopacy, that was indeed the pretense of
the Covenanters Rebellion, but very far from being the end of those men that
set them on. Their business was only to bring the King under a necessity of
calling a Parliament for Money, and for that he was to pawn his Crown into
their hands, and buy supplies at the price of his Sovereignty. And it succeeded
accordingly, for the King having been at a vast expense in his first
Expedition, was forced to summon a Parliament for fresh Supplies; but they no
sooner met than they justified their Dear Brethren (as they called) the
Kirk-Rebels, and so fall to their old complaints of Grievances and Arbitrary
Government, and the illegal Proceedings of the Kings Ministers of State; and
these things they must and will have redressed, before they will take any
business of money into consideration, and so long baffled the Kings
expectations, that he having no hope of any Supply from them, dissolves them,
and resolves to cast himself upon the assistance of his better affected
Subjects, and accordingly finds the greatest part of his Gentry and Nobility so
sensible of their own Duty and Loyalty, and of those affronts that were put
upon his Regal Power by these men in the late and former Parliaments, that by
their own voluntary Contributions they raised an Army more than sufficient to
have reduced the Rebels to obedience. But being overruled by the advice of
some that were always too near to all his Councils, and that were no friends
to his Prerogative (though perhaps they were no enemies to Monarchy) he
condescends to a Treaty, and that concludes (as these men would wish) in
referring the whole Controversy to the decision of a Parliament. And this
produced the fatal Long-Parliament, that chiefly consisted of the most
Seditious Members of all his former Parliaments. For though the greatest part
of the Gentry were loyal and dutiful enough, yet it so happened, that the
Commonalty had been preached into malecontentedness by the Puritan Preachers,
they thought no man a Patriot of his Country, or fit to be trusted in
Parliament, that was not a professed enemy to the Prerogative, and that did not
oppose Taxes and Tyranny: And if any one had been so stubborn as to deserve
punishment for Sedition, and had been imprisoned or gone to Law with the King
for the non-payment of a Sess of twenty or forty shillings, that gained him the
hearts of the whole Country; and so upon the merit of their sufferings it came
to pass that the most eminent Persons of the Presbyterian Faction came to be so
generally elected Knights and Burgesses in this as well as all other
Parliaments of his Reign; but now their discontent was heightened partly by
their former (just) imprisonments, partly by that affront, that (as they
supposed) was put upon them in the dissolution of the late Parliament; And
therefore having once again got possession of the House, and perceiving the
Kings necessities to be greater than ever, and withal their own Party to be
stronger and more numerous than ever, they resolved to appear more boldly than
ever, and to make something of so great an advantage. And so they immediately
fall upon accusing the King and his Ministers of all the crimes that could
render them odious to the people; they charge him with designs of
reestablishing the Roman Religion, of subverting the fundamental Laws, of
setting up Arbitrary Government, of laying aside all Parliaments, with a
Thousand other Clamours and Calumnies, making use of every Accident to raise
matter of Accusation. And if you will look into the grand Remonstrance of the
state of the Kingdom (that was the first Declaration of the War) you will find
that they imputed all misfortunes whatsoever to the King and his evil Council.
The loss of the Rochel Fleet, the diversion of the War from the West Indies to
the successess attempt upon Cales, the Peace with Spain, the breach with
France, the dissolving of former Parliaments for their stubbornness; the
destruction of the Kings Timber in the Forest of Dean, the Monopolies of Soap
and Salt, the Sale of Nuzances, the design of Coining Brass money, the
depriving seditious men of the comfort and conversation of their Wives by close
Imprisonments, Misdemeanors in all Courts of Justice, Bribery, Extorsion, and
buying of Offices, Suspensions of painful, learned, and pious Ministers, the
decay of Trade, the loss of Merchants Ships by the Pirates of Dunkirk, with all
other good or bad Accidents that befell the Government, were imputed 1. To the
Jesuited Papists who hate the Laws, as the Obstacles of that change and
subversion of Religion, which they so much long for. 2. To the Bishops, and the
corrupt part of the Clergy, who cherish Formality and Superstition, as the
natural Effects and more probable Supports of their own Ecclesiastical Tyranny
and Usurpation. 3. To such Counselors and Courtiers, who for private ends
engaged themselves to further the Interest of some foreign Princes or States,
to the prejudice of his Majesty and the State at home. Though the Root of all
this mischief was a Malignant and pernicious design of subverting the
fundamental Laws and Principles of Government, upon which the Religion and
Justice of this Kingdom are firmly established. And then the common
Principles, by which they molded and governed all their particular Counsels
and Actions were 1. To keep up a misunderstanding between the King and his
people by their Leasings. 2. To keep down the Purity and power of Religion. 3.
To bring in Arminianism. 4. To trinkle the King against his Parliaments. Where,
by the way, you may see that you are not the first Author of your own notions;
your whole Book is but a short Rehearsal of the Remonstrances, Speeches, and
Declarations of the Rebels. But now must all things stand stock still till
these and a Thousand grievances more are redressed; his Ministers must be
impeached of high Treason; and if he expected any comfort from them, he must
buy it with the blood of his best Subjects and his fastest Friends. But you
cannot here reasonably expect a complete account of all their Injustice, their
Folly, their Impudence and their Hypocrisy, when the whole World can scarce
contein the History of their Wickedness, I am sure it can never equal it.
However it is plain that they were now resolved upon the Rebellion, and so made
demands accordingly. For the sum of all their Messages, Remonstrances, and
Declarations was only to challenge the Sovereign Power it self, and all the
parts and branches of the Prerogative. They petitioned no more than that the
King would be pleased to betray and give up his Friends to their Malice, as in
the Pique of the five Members; that he would deliver up all Castles and Forts,
and the whole Power of the Militia into their hands; That they might have the
choosing of all the Lords of his Council, and of all great Officers of State,
the Government and Education of his Children, the Power to hang Delinquents as
they shall think fit, and the liberty of excepting whom they pleased out of the
Kings general Pardon; and that no Peer be permitted to sit in the house of
Peers but by consent of both houses. Upon these and the like Terms, to which
they stuck with an impregnable Obstinacy from first to last, they would apply
themselves to settle his Revenue, and supply his necessities, and make him the
most glorious King that ever wielded the English Scepter. But otherwise if he
should offer to relieve himself by any extra-Parliamentary courses it was a
breach of his sworn Trust, and a dissolution of the Government; and if any of
his Subjects obeyed or assisted him, it was Treason against the fundamental
Laws of the Land. This was as much as if they had plainly told him (and the
King understood them so) Sir, it is in vain to expect Peace or Money from us
unless you will be content to forgo your Crown and Royal Dignity, and to resign
all your Power into our hands. This was right Presbyterian Loyalty, and is I
hope sufficient to cap your idle stories of Sibthorp, Arminianism, and the
Scotch Liturgy. At least I am sure it is, after all your Hectoring and
Achillizing about the late War in defyance of the Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, another brave cast of your Modesty to upbraid my Insolence for
summoning in all Page 75.
the World, and preaching up nothing but Repentance, and so frequently calling
for Testimonies, signal Marks, public acknowledgments, satisfaction,
recantation, etc. For as I take it here are sufficient materials and motives
for Repentance. They are obliged to repent of casting away an hundred thousand
Lives only to dethrone the King, and erect the Scepter of the Lord Christ; a
cause, that they themselves now confess by deserting it, as foolish as that was
knavish. And this is at least suspicion of guilt enough to oblige men to look
about them and reflect seriously whether it may not lie upon their Consciences.
Nothing cries so loud either for Repentance or Vengeance as Blood, it requires
the deepest Sorrow and Contrition to wash it off; so that if they were at all
sensible of their Crime, or thought it a Crime at all, they would never put us
to call for tokens of Repentance, they would overdo enough of their own accord
in Expiation, and by the Frankness and Ingenuity of their Confessions quickly
satisfy all the World of the sincerity of their change. But when they will not
be brought to take any notice of their former practices, or to make any
acknowledgment of their former Crimes: when some of the most serious and
upright of them protest their Non conviction of any guilt, and declare
themselves so well satisfied in all their actings in the War that they cannot,
nay that they dare not ask God forgiveness (and yet they did not think the
Cause too good to be fought for.) When none of them have been so ingenuous as
to beg their Princes pardon, or to make any promise of better behavior for the
time to come; in short, when they have given us all the symptoms of hardness of
heart and impenitence, and yet notwithstanding all this boast the merits of
their party and challenge their Princes favor and indulgence from the great
security that he ought to have of their peaceable and loyal demeanor, this I
think is a very impudent affront both to the Clemency of their Prince, and the
Ingenuity of Mankind. Especially when after they had beheld all the dire
consequences of their rebellious Acts and Ordinances they were so far from
acknowledging their folly, that upon the Restoration of the secluded Members
by the General, one of the first things they voted was to vote themselves
innocent, and to lay all the mischief and wickedness of the War upon their
murdered Prince. Thus far the Presbyterians and Independents were equally
concerned, but that the Presbyterians were no farther concerned, they may thank
the Ambition and Treachery of Oliver Cromwell more than their own good
intentions. They had stripped the King of his power, they had imprisoned his
person, and what had they to do more after all the affronts and indignities
they had offered him, than what the Independents did after they had wrested the
Supremacy out of their hands? For it is certain there was no living for them in
safety if ever he (whom they had reason to suppose their irreconcilable enemy)
were restored to his Throne and Sovereign Power, and then if they had behaved
themselves so that they could not safely trust him, that was an unremoveable
Bar to his restitution. And though it is possible that they never intended to
attempt his life, yet they carried things so high through the whole Progress of
their Rebellion, as at least to make it expedient, nay necessary for their own
preservation; and if they had intended it they could scarce have used him more
scurvily than they did. They caused his own great Seal to be broken, and a new
one to be made in defyance to his Authority. His propositions of Peace and his
offers of personal Treaty were often denied; an Ordinance was made, if he
presumed to come within the line of Communication to secure i. e. seize his
person; It was voted Treason and death without mercy for any of his Subjects to
harbor and conceal him, and when Sir Thomas Fairfax was made General, the
Clause for preservation of his Majesty's person was left out of his Commission.
And in the Scotch Declaration of 46. all their concern and care of the Kings
person was only conditional, viz. as far as it was consistent with their own
designs, that is (as they word it) the Preservation and defense of the true
Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms. That is, as you may see by their
propositions that they made as the only terms of Peace, if he would resign his
Crown and (which is worse) take the Covenant, they would suffer him to live;
otherwise they were absolved from all Obligations toward his person, and for
the preservation of his life. And when he was fallen into the hands of the
Independents and so in danger enough, the question was propounded to the Kirk,
whether it were lawful for them to assist the King in the recovery of his
Kingdom, and it was resolved in the Negative, and in answer to that Clause in
the Covenant that was objected to them, for defense of the Kings person, they
determined it was to be understood in defense and safety of the Kingdoms.
These men no doubt are fit to be trusted that can think to satisfy themselves
and the World with such an impudent and ridiculous interpretation of Oaths as
this. But however they intended to dispose of his person, the Rebellion as far
as they avowed it put him out of his Throne, and settled all the Regal Power
(which they called arbitrary Government) upon themselves. And for Subjects to
take away their Princes Authority by force of Arms is little less impudent and
wicked, that after that to take away his life.

Thus far the Presbyterians and Independents were equally guilty, and went hand
in hand like dear Brethren; they both combined to depose the King, though, when
that was done, the perfidious Independents did not only shake off their dear
brethren, but turned all their ownweapons upon themselves. And thus as they
entered into Covenant in defense of King and Parliament, so did these enter
into an Engagement in defense of the Parliament and Army; meaning (as they did)
that as the King was virtually in the Parliament, so was the Parliament
virtually in the Army. And thus was their silly and senseless Distinction of the
King's personal and politic Capacity turned upon themselves. And the same
Articles and Demands that the Parliament sent to the King, they sent to the
Parliament, and baffled all their Excuses by Precedents from their own
Principles and Proceedings; v. g. Their Charge against the eleven
Presbyterian-members by the Example of the Archbishop and the Earl of
Strafford, when they pleaded that they could not legally proceed against them
till the particulars of their Crime were specified; and so they acted over all
the same Knavery again, till they at length proceeded to crown all their
wickedness with the Kings murder. But the fraud and malice, the injustice and
folly, the impudence and hypocrisy of these men is so notorious that it need
not be reported, and yet so, unconceivably horrid that it would scarce be
credited. They committed all the boldest impieties in the world not only under
the greatest shows of Religion, but by Authority of divine Impulse: they still
sought the Lord for all their wickedness, and they were directed to all their
Murders and Perjuries by his deep and hidden discoveries of himself to his
secret Ones: They made no more of an Oath than other men do of a Complement;
they would swear an hundred times backward and forward to follow the
Revolutions of Providence; and the Rump, when they had murdered the King,
absolved themselves by their own Vote from Perjury; it was but voting the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance to be null and void, and they were as innocent as
if they had never taken them. But to say all in one word; their Rebellion was
not only against the King, but against Monarchy it self, that is to say,
against all Kings. And I remember I have seen an humble Testimony for God in
this perilous time, by a few, who have been bewailing their own and others
Abominations, and would not be comforted, until their Redeemer, who is holy, be
exalted in Righteousness, and his Name, which has been so much blasphemed, be
sanctified in the sight of the Nations, subscribed by J. O. and some other
secret ones. In which, having witnessed against all the Backslidings and
Abominations of many from the Public Good Old Cause, and bemoaned the Rebuke
that was poured forth upon the Rump and Barebones Parliament, they proceed to
witness in all humility and fear against the setting up or introducing any
Person whatsoever, as King or chief Magistrate, or an House of Lords, or any
other thing of like Import, under what name or title soever, or any other Power
arising from the Nation, as a Nation upon the old corrupt and almost ruinated
Constitution; apprehending that the great Work of taking the Kingdom from man,
and giving it to Christ, has had its beginning in the Revolutions we have been
under. And then positively they do witness for andhumbly assert, that the Right
of making and giving Laws unto Men is originally in God, who has given this
Power as well as the Execution thereof, unto Christ as he is the Son of Man,
and therein made universal Lord and Sovereign over the whole World; and under
Christ as his Ministers a certain number of men qualified and limited according
to his Word, ought to be set apart to the Office of chief Rule and Government
over these Nations as part of Christ's universal Kingdom. So that you see J. O.
is a professed enemy to the present Government of the State upon the same
Principles that he is a Nonconformist to the present Establishment of the
Church. He is bound in Conscience to abhor and oppose Monarchy in pure
Obedience to the Institutions of Christ, as King of Saints and Nations, having
appointed in his Word a certain number of Men to be set apart for the Office of
chief Rule and Government over these and all other Nations in the World. Now I
think it is convenient that men who have openly witnessed such Principles as
these, should at least be bound to unwitness them, before they are too
confidently trusted by the present Government. J. O. was absolutely for the
divine Right of a Commonwealth but a very little before his Majesty's
Restitution; for this Declaration was published after the Cheshire
Insurrection, upon occasion whereof he threatens to witness with full evidence
to the Conviction of all Upright ones against the abominable Malignity,
Treachery and Enmity of many in eminent Power and in the public Ministry; and
then I dare appeal to your self whether it would not become him to recant such
a positive Principle of Rebellion as this, before he can with any modesty boast
his own and his Parties Allegiance to the present Government. At least if he
refuse this when he is upbraided to it, that is an undoubted evidence of his
Constancy to his old Principles, and then judge you whether it is fit for such
a man to claim a Liberty of public talking in any Commonwealth, when he is
under a tie of Conscience to subvert it. And yet it was upon this occasion that
I fell to preaching Repentance and calling for signal Marks and
Acknowledgments, etc. when with all the scorn and indignation in the World he
spit at my bare suspicions of their Loyalty, in that (as he has the confidence
to affirm) they give all the security for it that Surveigh, p. 296.
mankind can desire, from their professed duty, principle, faith and doctrine.
And this Impudence I must confess provoked me to deal somewhat more roundly
with him, and to let him see how great and how many obligations himself and his
party lay under to a public Repentance. Of all which you have taken no notice
but only to wonder at my Insolence, and that signifies nothing but only to show
your own. The grounds and motives that I have laid before you to exhort you to
this duty are plain and undeniable; they are too many to be here repeated, you
may (if you please) find them in my Reply to J. O. from p. 629. to p. 641. If
you can quit your selves of them (as I am sure you never can) I will give you
as many more; but till the old Scores are discounted, there is no need of a new
Reckoning; and as you love your selves be advised never to call for any. And
now you see upon what reason I demanded signal Marks, it was none of my own
Motion but his Challenge; though without that, it had been pertinent and
ingenuous enough, unless they would learn more sober Principles. However I had
never taken any notice of his former Blasphemies, had I not been driven to it
by his own Impudence. I was not so disingenuous as to object his or any man's
personal Miscarriages to the disparagement of a public Cause, though you have
raked up the faults (as you suppose them) of several particular Members of the
Church of England against the Church it self; such Topics as these are too
dirty to be used in any but a bad and a baffled Cause. And as for J. O.
himself, though I have heard many strange stories of him, I scorned to publish
any one Report to his disadvantage, and have charged nothing upon him but what
himself thought good to publish to the World: Neither in truth should I have
done that, but that (you see) I was forced upon it by his own provocation, as I
would clear my own Candor and Sincerity. And I protest that if he can convict
me of any one Forgery, it shall not suffice to ask him forgiveness upon my
Knees, but I will make him as public a Recantation, as I think he owes to his
King and Country. And as for the truth of all those Principles of Blasphemy
and Rebellion that I have produced against him out of his own Writings, I will
appeal to his own Conscience and Ingenuity. And if my Citations are true, I
shall trouble my self no more about them, but leave it to the company to judge
of the consequences of such Tenets, and to himself to consider under what duty
he lies to the public upon their account. And how far you your self were
engaged, or whether at all I scorn to enquire; and though by the Principles of
your Book you seem to be full as bad as he, yet really I think him as much
worse than you as a well-meaning Zealot is more cruel than a Soldier of
fortune, you only fight for pay, but he for spite and zeal. And now what if I
do Page 251.
inculcate the late War and its horrid Catastrophe, and will needs have it to
be upon a religious account? And so I will, and you know too well how
demonstratively I have proved it out of their own Declarations. In answer to
all which you are only so civil as to suspect that I have been better
acquainted with Parliament Declarations Page 280.
upon another account. But it is no matter upon what account I came acquainted
with them; whatever it was, this I learned into the bargain that Religion was
the main pretense of their Rebellion, or as J. O. expresses it, their only
design was to set on foot the great work of taking the Kingdom from men and
giving it to Christ. But sure you think the Children of England as forward as
the Boys and Girls of Scotland were, when you suppose me formerly so well
acquainted with Parliament Declarations. I was no doubt an Arch-rebel when I
was a Schoolboy, and when I should have been conning my Lesson was drawing up
Remonstrances, and was at least one of Iretons Adjutatours, and assistant at
the penning the Armies Remonstrance from St. Albans. Unless I were so pregnant
a Youth, it can scarce be suspected how I should be so well acquainted in
former times with Parliament Declarations. For unless this formerly relate to
the time before his Majesty's Restoration, it loses its malice (and that is
all it was intended for) in that there can be no very great ground of suspicion
of any great design of mischief in perusing them since; however be that as it
will, this no doubt is susficient to bring J. O. off when he is plainly
baffled, and you have not one word to say in his defense, then to drop any rude
suggestion, and that will or may serve turn to divert people from attending to
the Argument. Be it therefore known unto all men, that J. O. had so much
confidence and so little wit as to affirm, that the Cause of Religion was not
pretended or concerned in the late War, and that I have demonstrated this to be
no less than impudent Leasing. And so Sir you may proceed. This horrid
Catastrophe Page 251.
was twenty four long years ago, and after an Act of Oblivion, and for ought
you can see, it had been as seasonable to have shown Caesar's bloody Coat, or
Thomas a Beckets bloody Rochet. Twenty four long years ago! that is almost
beyond my memory, but if it had been so many hundred years ago, and if J. O.
had denied that the King was murdered so long since by Fanatique Rebels, I
would have convicted him of impudence, though there had been ten thousand Acts
of Oblivion; and if he had denied that Caesar too was murdered, I would have
shown his bloody Coat; and when I have to do with the Papists, I will hang out
Thomas a Beckets bloody Rochet too; it is a very good instance, to show the
inconvenience of having the Clergy of any Kingdom subject to a foreign Power;
and if ever the Pope recover his Authority in England, it will always be so
again, and sometimes worse, because they must be bound to obey his Decrees, not
only above, but against the Kings Commands. But yet whilst I have to do with
Fanatiques, such as J. O. and your self, that instead of having any compunction
for the late horrid Catastrophe, discharge its guilt wholly from your selves
upon the King and his Loyal Subjects, to such (I say) I must and will show the
Scaffold at Whitehall. Especially when notwithstanding it was twenty long years
ago, many of the same men that were notorious instruments in that bloody
Rebellion, are still in spite of gratitude and Mercy mustering up the People
under their ancient Heads and old Principles. Yes! but the Chief of the
Offenders have long since made satisfaction to justice. Now Page 251.
you say something, when you can assure us that they are hanged indeed, that
(whatever Harrison threatened at his execution) is some competent security, and
I think for that reason, the King for the time to come need never fear the same
High Court of Justice that murdered his Father. We are satisfied then as to
the good behavior of all that are dead, but can you undertake for the
Survivers? Oh yes no doubt. For they are all so weary that he would be knocked
on the head Page 252.
that should raise the first disturbance of the same nature. This is only the
security Mr. Calvin has given us for the peaceable deportment of single
persons, and it is very likely that if any one man should begin a Civil War, he
would be knocked on the head. And I believe if Colonel Venner, or the
Cow-keeper, though they had forty men to assist them, should cry hey for
Woodstreet! hey for King Jesus! it is not improbable but that they may have
their brains beaten out. But the thing we fear is lest whilst they take liberty
to propagate their Principles, and enlarge their Party, they should in time
grow once more into a body strong enough to fight the battles of the Lord, and
set up the Kingdom of Christ, that is (as J. O. has explained it) a
Commonwealth. And what though at present you are so weary, yet you may have
time to gather breath, and if you have, then it seems we have no security, when
it is only your being tired and out of strength that keeps you from being
unruly. But what is it that you are so weary of? nothing but Laws and
Government, as is too manifest from your restlesness and impatience under all
restraints. Are you weary of your Principles? Do but assure us of that and we
shall never desire any more security; but if you are not, as soon as you can
get wind, we are still just as we were. But the King has so obliged the
Non-conformists Page 252.
by his late mercy, that if there were any such Knave, there can be no such
fool among them, that would ever lift up an ill thought against him. Now indeed
you have nickt it to purpose, next to their being hanged nothing can secure
their Loyalty like gratitude and goodnature. They lift up an ill thought
against the King after he has so much obliged them! It is impossible! It is
against the nature of the Beast! Away with the Guards! Save so much money! the
Presbyterian has passed his word, and can you desire a better hostage? Oblige
him but once, and he is your own for ever. It is not in his power to do an
ungrateful action, and now he is so much beholden to the King, he is no more
able to lift up a disloyal thought against him than to remove mountains. This I
must confess goes a great way, and as far as any thing next to the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, but yet after all it will not do so effectually as
hanging, for what if the King should ever happen to disoblige them again? why
then, unless they are very weary there is an end of all the Presbyterian
Loyalty. I know (though I have not the honor to have that intimate
acquaintance that you have with him) he is a very civil and well-bred
Gentleman, and knows how to condescend to their infirmities, and to humor them
like Children, and when they have caught cold, desire them to be covered, but
yet I know withal that they are so peevish, and so apt to take exception, that
let him carry himself never so swimmingly, he can never avoid it, but that
sometime or other he must before he is aware fall under their displeasure, and
then (if ever they get him within their power) they will be disposing of him as
they were all along of his Father according to the Covenant. But what strange
News is this? The Fanatiques obliged! I could scarce have believed it, though I
had read it in the Gazette, I am confident it is more than the King himself
knows. Will you give me leave to carry the information to any of his
Secretaries of State, and when I have done, will you promise to justify it? I
must confess his Majesty's Indulgence (all things considered) was a very
obliging kindness, yet I am sure his Royal Father laid upon them ten times
greater Obligations than that amounts to; he granted them every thing they
asked even to one half of his Kingdom, and yet how he obliged them we all know.
And (as I understand it) the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion was none of the
smallest Obligations, at least it was much greater than the Declaration of
Indulgence, as much as it is really more comfortable for men to enjoy their
lives and estates than to have their wills. Yet I cannot find any remarkable
effect it ever had upon their ingenuity; but that they still continue as
peevish and unpeaceable as ever. Not but that they have suffered as well as
ever men did, and are ready to'do so still, only that it is so hard a Chapter
for men in their condition Page 252.
to suffer extremities patiently, that some think it impossible, and therefore
though they are never so angry at the Government, and impatient of the Laws,
yet for all that they may be, and (if we may take your word) are of as meek and
passive tempers as any men in the world beside, seeing it is impossible to
flesh and blood to bear the extremities, that they suffer, patiently, so that
in the result of all, it seems they suffer as patiently as any men living, only
because it is impossible for any men living to suffer patiently. Yes, but if
there were any such Knave, there can be no such fool among them. But of their
wisdom we are secure enough already, and only desire a bond of their honesty.
And since fools (as you think) are less dangerous than Knaves, the kindness had
been greater, if you would have been surety to his Majesty against their more
possible Knavery. And yet though you had given us these and ten thousand
ensurances more of their Loyalty, they would not do without testimonies, signal
marks, public acknowledgements, satisfaction and recantation, because men
that have been so deeply engaged in so heinous a crime, if they are sensible of
it, can never be supposed to satisfy themselves with a slight repentance; and
therefore whatever other assurance they can give from their being hanged,
wearied, and obliged, it is of no force nor use to the public, in that if
they are in good earnest, these would be the beginnings and first pangs of
repentance, so that when they plainly refuse to acknowledge their fault, there
needs no other proof of their being hardened in it, and whenever they have
opportunity, returning to it. But it seems they have done more than all this.
For no sooner has the Page 275.
King shown them his late favor, but I and my Partners reproach them for being
too much friends to the Prerogative. They friends to the Prerogative! just as
the Devil was to the Scriptures; they make the same use of it to the King, as
he did of them to our Savior, only to persuade him to break his own neck. Do
we not know their Principles too well to believe that their seeming acceptance
of his Majesty's Indulgence proceeds not from any acknowledgement of his
Supremacy to make or suspend Ecclesiastical Laws? Do they not challenge these
Immunities as due to them by Divine Right, and which were before wrongfully
detained from them? Their end in magnifying the Kings Indulgence is not to
confirm his just claim of Supremacy in Church-concerns, when they deny nothing
more vehemently, but because they hope by this seeming compliance so to
increase and strengthen their own Party, as that they may be able to distress
the Episcopal Government, and then the Royal Supremacy. So that we are so far
from reproaching them with being too friendly to the Prerogative, that their
seeming compliance with it upon their Principles is the greatest evidence of
their treachery against it. When they claim by Divine Right an absolute
exemption from this part of it, and if the King or Parliament exercise any of
this Jurisdiction over them, they call it Tyranny and a violating of the Divine
Majesty. So that they Page 250.
fight for the Prerogative, just as they did for the King, against it self. And
they cannot but be zealous Assertours of it above the Laws, when as they will
not obey the Laws, so they will not acknowledge that. And therefore it is not
out of any friendship that they have to the Prerogative, that they thus
magnify the Kings pardons and dispensations, but only out of hatred and
opposition to the Government, because by this means they suppose some part of
the supreme power to be lopt off, and then they are hearty friends to any thing
that abates of that. They are right Gibellines, for any thing or any interest
to make disturbance; for King or Parliament, or either or neither for their own
ends and to oppose the Guelphs. In the late War when the King declared against
them and the Parliament for them, they then fought for the Parliament against
the Prerogative. But after all the fatal Consequences of that Rebellion the
King and Parliament both observing their Sea-marks join together to root up
their principles of Schism and Sedition, and then they declare against both for
the Prerogative of God and every man's Conscience. And now the King lately for
reasons of State, and perhaps to make an experiment of their good nature, being
inclined to suspend for a while the Penalties of the Laws in force against
them, then hey for the Prerogative above all Laws and Parliaments; and they
preach up nothing but Sibthorpianism and Absolute Government, because it was
the Rock on which the last King ruined. They care not what becomes of King and
Parliament and Kingdom too, so they may gratify their own Pride and
peevishness. Not that I believe they have all formed designs against the State,
(they are most of them too simple to entertain thoughts so great) but yet they
are easily acted by those that have; they are conceited and froward, and apt to
pick quarrels and take offense at the present management of affairs, be it what
it will. And if they are not courted as well as humored by their Governors
their proud hearts are liable to a certain Infirmity, that is very troublesome,
and they are presently reflecting upon the Histories of former times, the Roman
Emperor, the King of Poland, Alexander the Great, the King of Spain, the Queen
of Sweden, the Flea Tyrant, and the sturdy Swiss, and a thousand more not such
idle stories, but that they can tell how to make use of them as well as Kings.
And if Kings will not be instructed by these Examples to behave themselves
dutifully toward their Subjects, they know how to take an Antipathy to Regal
Government, and then he is bound to be so civil as to refrain the use of it,
however not to press it upon them, but if he have so little sense of common
humanity as not to yield to their Weaknesses, he makes himself an hard hearted
and inflexible Tyrant; and if he have so little discretion as to trust his
Understanding to the Clergies keeping, and to know nothing beyond Ceremonies
and Sibthorpianism (i. e. to take any care for the Execution of Ecclesiastical
Laws) if he ruin his Government upon that Rock by forcing them to rebel
(shrewdly against their Wills poor Innocents!) he may thank himself and his
implacable Divines. This is all your friendship to the Prerogative in matters
of Religion, to make all exercise of Ecclesiastical Power Acts of Tyranny. And
you are so far his Majesty's friend as to advise him to be so satisfied with
the abundance Page 246.
of his Power, as to abate of its exercise by his discretion. But though you
are always excusing your self from meddling with State affairs by reason of your
private breeding, your modesty, and your not having been bound Prentice to the
Trade of Kings; and on the contrary accusing me for presuming to instruct and
advise Princes, yet are you always too prescribing to them Rules of Wisdom and
Discretion, teaching them when it is requisite to screw up, and when to let
down their Prerogative, how to humor their Subjects, to condescend to their
Infirmities, and bid them to be covered in their presence, and sometimes (as
here) to be content with having their Power without exercising it. Whereas I
have no where read them any Lectures how to govern their Islands, but have only
(as became a dutiful Subject) asserted their power against your principles of
Anarchy and Rebellion. And if they will forgo any part of it to condescend to
your Infirmities, they are more competent Judges of their own actions than I
am, and therefore I shall never censure them for it, though I must confess they
would be better natured than I think I should be in their Cases. Though alas!
it is pity but you should be humored, after all this experience they have had
of your meekness and simplicity, and after all that assurance you have given
them of your peaceable resolutions and principles, viz. that whereas you have
heretofore embroiled the Nation in a civil War for nothing, and though you are
now convinced of it your selves, yet you will not so much as acknowledge it,
because (forsooth) it would be a blemish upon your Reputation, and therefore
you will admit of no terms of Peace unless we will condescend to your
unreasonable humors only to save your paltry credit. And if we will not, we
may look to our selves, you will make good your own party. And then if upon
this the Government shall think it a little necessary to restrain you in these
bold and factious courses, it is Tyranny and a violation of the Divine Majesty.
You and your Consciences are exempt from all their Laws and are in the hand of
God alone; and that is all your real owning of the Prerogative. Though if at
any time it lets you alone in all your extravagances and suffers you to break
the Laws, you are then such friends to it as no men more. You are for or
against any thing so you may but have the comfort of affronting Authority. All
that I have hitherto discoursed concerns only those Non-conformists that at
least pretend to Sobriety; but as for all the inferior Sects though they never
agreed in any thing but in their implacable Zeal against their Prince, yet I
never troubled my self so much as to exhort them to Repentance, because they
have the privilege of all other mad men to do mischief without being
responsible for it, and therefore are not to be discoursed or advised into
their wits, because being insensible of the mischief they do, they can only be
bound and restrained from doing it; and to give them their Liberty is not only
to suffer them to act any extravagance they have a mind to, but to spread and
propagate the Infection of their Madness: For there is no Frenzy in Religion
that the lower sort of the People are not too apt to be tainted with; so that
instead of allowing them Conventicles it were more proper to build them
Bedlams, nothing can govern them but Chains and Keepers.

But as for your own part we are willing to excuse you from signal Marks, etc.
because you have given such mighty proofs and demonstrations of your Loyalty
and Good Will to the King by that wonderful Zeal that you have upon all
occasions shown for the Act of Oblivion and Indemnity, which as you have
ordered the matter was enacted purely in favor of himself and his own Party.
You have brought things to that pass, that were it not for that, you might
erect a new Court of Justice, and hang them all for any thing they have to
plead in their own defense. For as you tell the story, they are the only guilty
persons in reference to the late Rebellion. Your Charge against his Royal
Father is the very same with the Indictment that was peferred against him both
by and before the high Court of Justice, only the manner of your Expressions is
suited to the alteration of time and circumstances. But he fought against a
Cause that was only too good to be fought for, he began a War against the
Religion and the Liberty of his Subjects, and forced them to take upArms in
their own defense against Tyranny and Arbitrary Government; for so you would
have called it had you written in those happy days, though now the word is
Sibthorpianism, i. e. (as you describe it) an endeavor to invade his Subjects
Proprieties and subvert the Fundamental Laws, and for that Cause only involve
his Kingdoms in a long and bloody War. And though he were sworn to maintain all
the Ancient Constitutions of the Realm, yet he deformed his whole Reign with
indefatigable pains to destroy them, and when he perceived that he could obtein
his wicked and tyrannical Ends no other way, he pursued them through all parts
of his Dominions with Blood and Violence, and at last upon this Rock ruined
himself and his Kingdoms. So that all the mischiefs of the late War are to be
scored purely upon his head; but as for all those that took up Arms against
him, their Cause was so over-just and warrantable, that it was only too good to
have been fought for. And now what could you have said worse of the worst
Prince that ever wielded Scepter, than what you have here said of the very
best? However, this methinks is but an odd way of ensuring the good Behavior
of the Non-conformists for the time to come, when you stand upon the
Justification of their Innocence for the time past. And it shows you to be a
man of Judgment, whilst you have so little Wit as to appeal to their former
Practices as a sufficient Security of their future Peaceableness, and by their
harmlesness (poor Lambs!) in reference to the late War encourage us to trust to
their good Nature and Modesty for ever. For if they were so innocent as to that
Rebellion, saving that they fought for a Cause only too good to have been
fought for, they are safe enough from ever fighting for any Cause too bad to be
fought for. And yet I shrewdly suspect we owe this very declaration of the
Causes being too good to be fought for, rather to your Cowardice than your
Loyalty; for it seems you think all Causes cost too dear when they are bought
with danger or blood, and though both their Religion and their Liberty were
invaded you would have advised them rather than fight to let them both go. And
as little as you would have fought for the Good old Cause, you would have
fought much less for his Majesty's Restoration in that it was forsooth to do
it self without our Officiousness, you had Page 303.
not leased if you had said against it too. However his Majesty, for any thing
you would have had done for him, might have been beyond Sea still, unless God
would have been pleased to have restored him by miracle, and have marched
before him as he did before the Camp of Israel, and rained down fire from
Heaven upon the Rump and all their Adherents. For Page 304.
men ought to have trusted God, and not have taken the Work out of his hands by
their own Officiousness, he knows how to bring all things about in their best
and proper time. And these are pretty good evidences of your good will to his
Majesty's Government. First, in that you scarce commend any thing of it since
his Return beside the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion; and then secondly, in that
you are so much concerned to disclaim the Merits of those Persons that were
Actors and Instruments in it, by denying the Efficacy of any humane means
toward bringing it to pass, and casting it entirely upon the immediate Care of
divine Providence. So that if it were to do again you would advise his Subjects
to forbear all endeavors of his Restoration, and leave it to be brought to
pass by the Providence of God, or suffer it to do it self without their
Officiousness. We understand you. But now have you not made an admirable
Apology for the Loyalty of the Non-conformists by denying that they can
possibly be ever guilty of any such thing as Rebellion? for if the late War
were none, it is certain there never was nor will be any, and I think upon this
supposition, and upon this alone, we may pronounce them both innocent and
secure as to this Crime. But thus we see that whenever the Cause of
Nonconformity appears at top, the Good old Cause ever did and ever will lie at
bottom; or (as your self express it) if it were a War of Religion, i. e.
Fanaticism at top, it was a War of Liberty, i. e. a Commonwealth at bottom.
That is, your old and your new Cause, and you sink into it with the dexterity
of fat Sir. John Falstaff. In a word, it is your close and comfortable
Importance. And now after all your kind and courtly Expressions almost in every
page toward the Act of Oblivion and Indemnity, and on the contrary rating me
for showing no more respect to it than to remember some old stories in despite
of its Authority, and lastly commanding me to let all Page 253.
those things of former times alone and mind my own business: You your self
have not made bold with it at all, by reviving the Adventures of Sibthorp and
Manwaring, and raking into all the Deformities of the late King's whole Reign,
and transcribing a long History out of a certain long Gazette of the true Cause
and Original (as you dream) of the Rebellion. So that we now perceive your
meaning in all this idle noise about the Act of Oblivion is to limit the
Remembrance of the late War to such occurrences as you think may be of
advantage to such as acted in and for the Rebellion; but as for the suffering
and loyal Party, they* must be obliged and conjured to seal up their Lips and
smother their Resentments; however if I had been profane or disingenuous in
offending against the sacred Act of Oblivion, I am sure you have outgone me,
have done that and more. For that looks back no farther than the year 37. but
yet there are some old Sibthorpian Gentlemen still alive that might possibly
have had an hand in carrying on Impositions of money in the late Kings Page 282.
time, and thereby contributing not a little to our late Wars; now these men
are still obnoxious to Justice for all their Misdemeanors notwithstanding the
Act of Indemnity; and therefore if Ceremonies and Sibthorpianism were the Cause
of the War, the guilt of all that blood that was spilt in it must lie upon
their heads, and the King may bring them to Trial for all the Miseries they
brought upon his Kingdoms, for the Murder of his Father and the loss of an
hundred thousand Subjects, and all for Sibthorpianism and Laud. Is this your
Gentleman's memory to remind his Majesty of things too old for an Act of
Oblivion, so old that if you would let them alone, they would be forgotten of
themselves without it? And though you would oblige him (as he is a Gentleman)
to forget that ever the Presbyterians rebelled against his Father and took away
his Crown and Sovereignty; to forget that ever the Independents beside that
took away his Life; to forget that they and all the other Sectaries joined
forces to expel himself out of his own Kingdoms, and keep him in banishment for
ever, and that he was restored in spite of all their zeal and malice; and
lastly to forget that since the time of his Restoration none of them ever had
the Grace to ask Forgiveness for their former Leasings or to give him any
Assurance of their future Allegiance. A man had need learn the Art of
Gentleman's Memory to forget all these things that are so fresh in the minds of
men; but yet notwithstanding all this you your self do and would have him
remember some old Gentlemen of those times that are still alive, that were the
cause of all our miseries, that deserve to be brought to condign punishment,
and that his Majesty may at any time do it, any thing in the Act of Oblivion
and Indemnity notwithstanding. And now upon review of all these stories that I
have told you of former times, you would as I take it have done much more
wisely if you had altogether let them alone and minded your own business.

And thus far have I vindicated the wisdom and the honesty of the Clergy of all
Ages from Noah's flood through all the four Empires quite down to the late
Rebellion, the fatal consequences whereof a wise man would have thought might
have served as sea-marks to direct them to avoid the Rocks, but the former
Civil Page 240.
War it seems cannot make them wise, nor his Majesty's happy Return
good-natured, but they are still for running things up unto the same extremes:
So that by their behavior ever since his Restoration they have given him no
encouragement to Page 305.
steer by their Compass; with a great many more sad stories that represent them
as such fierce and cruel Beasts of prey, such inhumane Page 240.
and hungry Canibals, that one would expect to hear how they every where eat up
their Parishoners Children; as fast as the Presbyterians do the Race of Capons.
But these are no more than general words that any man may throw out against any
man, I against you, or you against me, or a third against us both, and a fourth
against him, and so on eternally, eternally in infinitum; and therefore they
signify no more than all the rest, and as little need as they deserve any
Answer. But beside these you have given us in some of their particular
misdemeanors, and them I shall a little consider, and because it is time to
have done, run them off with all possible speed and brevity. First then it has
been observed, that whenever Page 310;
his Majesty has had the most urgent occasions for Supply, they have made it
their business to trinkle with the Members of Parliament, for obstructing it,
unless the King would buy it with a new Law against the Fanatiques. And hence
it is, that the wisdom of his Majesty and the Parliament must be exposed to
after Ages for such a superfetation of Acts, etc. But this concerns not me, let
the King and Parliament answer it, as they will clear themselves from the
imputation of folly, and if they have no more wit than to be overreached by
being trinkled, yet certainly they have more than to suffer you to call them
fools for it, for they tell me that none but fools expose their wisdom. But
pray, how do they trinkle the King and the Members? Do the Bishops play with
him at Picquet in the Parliament House, and give the sign to each other? If
they do, they do it among themselves, and then neither you nor I are privy to
their underhand dealings, and their false play, and so can give no competent
account of the course of the Game. At least I think it better becomes us both
to leave these things to the Gamesters themselves; and I am sure it is not done
like a Gentleman, that has had his breeding in the Ordinaries, when he is no
more than a By-stander, and has not so much as a Bett at stake, to raise
quarrels among the Gamesters by throwing in his own impertinent jealousies and
suspicions of foul play. Had you gone but half a Crown with King and Parliament,
and then have given the sign when you spied the Bishops trinkling, you might
have done very honestly, but yet very ungentily. But when you were quite blown
up long since by the Dignitary, and have now nothing left to be cheated of, and
cannot have the least concern how the Game goes, unless it be now and then to
pick up a Barato or so, for such an one as you (I say) to meddle is an
insufferable piece of impudence and ill-breeding; and had you done the same ill
office between Gentlemen at an Ordinary, as you have between the King,
Parliament, and Bishops, you would have been kicked out of doors. But as for my
part I dare not touch any thing that is done within those walls; though as for,
their behavior out of the house, I could never perceive but that they are very
honest and wel-bred Gentlemen, and you have nothing to object to the contrary,
but that they are a little uncivil to the Non-conformists, in that they will
not allow them the liberty of having their own Wills, though they know how much
their nature and constitution requires it. Especially when they demand Page 275.
nothing (that you know of) but what is so far from doing us any harm, that it
would only make us better. You know what they demand! If you do, you know more
than themselves, or at least more than they would ever yet declare. This is but
an idle thing, still to give us your peremptory opinion of things in general,
without abetting it with some particular proof or instance; If you had
undertaken to tell us what alterations they do demand, and then shown that they
would be so far from doing us any harm, that they would only make us better,
you had done something to some purpose, but otherwise you have only declared
your own opinion, as any confident man might have done as well as you, and if
he had, he might as well have held his tongue too. But now by the leave of your
Insolence, though I know not all their demands, yet this I know, that some
things that they do demand, would be so far from making us better, that they
would over-turn not only the Church of England, but all the Churches in the
world. Their main grievance (you know) is at the three Ceremonies, and that
upon this Principle, because they are unscriptural Symbols, so that their
quarrel against them would not be superseded by their bare removal, in that
there would remain behind other significant Ceremonies as unscriptural as they,
and by consequence as liable to the same exception. And therefore it is to no
purpose to condescend to any of their particular scruples, unless we could
withal remove the Principle upon which they are bottomed. But that is made
plainly impossible from the very nature of things, seeing there are (as I have
often told you, but am forced too often to rub up your dullness, because you
have no list to understand) no Ceremonies determined in the Scriptures saving
only the two Sacraments, and seeing it is impossible to perform any Divine
Service at all without some other exterior Solemnities. Let them choose what
they please, they cannot avoid falling under the same exception, and the very
simplicity that they seem so much to affect can plead as little precedent from
the word of God as any custom or fashion whatsoever. And it is too notorious,
and has been too often told them how they themselves continually practice
against their own principle in all the circumstances peculiar to their own way
of worship, and if they do not apply it as well against themselves as the
Church of England, it is only because they are humoursom as well as
unreasonable. At least this exception is so infinitely nice and peevish, that
though it can, yet it never will be satisfied. What trains and labyrinths of
distinctions are they forced to plant only to defend their Argument, when they
should be proving it. Some Ceremonies are natural, some customary, some
catholic, some topical, some lawful, and some unlawful, that are all but idle
stories of their own devising, rather to excuse than justify their pretense.
And what Master of them has skill or authority enough to range all Ceremonies
under their proper heads? and when he has done it, what ground has he to
determine the lawfulness of these and the immorality of those? With innumerable
more such curious nothings, as had never been so much as thought of, had not
these men been so proud and stubborn, as to think, that when they had once
started an absurdity, they were obliged to stand to it. But their discourses
upon this Argument are in your judgment so frivolous, that though that is none
of the deepest, nor your self the most modest man in the world, yet you are
ashamed to own them. For when you come to that part of the Controversy, you
positively disclaim and defy their master-objection as too ridiculous in it
self, and below the wit and wisdom of the men that make it, and have not
ventured to justify any thing in that whole matter beside the nipping
Quotation out of the 5th. Epistle to Marcellinus. So great a Cast is it of your
arrogance to tell us, that you know of no enmity the Non-conformists Page 275.
have to the Church it self, but what it was in her power always to have
remedied, and so it is still. When it is so little in our Power to remedy their
Grievances, that it is not in the power of nature; and though we change and
reform as much as they would have us, and as often as they have done
themselves, it will do nothing toward removing their enmity, if they have any
other grounds for it beside humor and peevishness, and if they have not, I am
sure it is least of all in our Power to remedy that. We may convince them, but
we can never make them good-natured, unless they will give their minds to it.
And whereas you upbraid us so perpetually with the Conference of Worcester
house, as if His Majesty's Commissioners had cunningly and revengefully
obstructed the Accommodation, when the Abatements demanded by the
Non-conformists were so reasonable, and might so easily have been complied
with; Do you at all know what were the abatements they demanded to bring them
off with Conscience? To let you see your considence, I tell you they demanded
none at all, but the question being solemnly put to them (and that as I am
told) in his Majesty's presence, whether they knew of any thing in the Liturgy,
with which they could not comply without sin, they all declared their own
satisfaction, but only desired some abatements for the ease of weak Brethen, or
rather as you tell us bluntly, to bring themselves off with some Page 306.
little reputation. For they as well as all the rest of mankind are men for
their own Page 275.
ends too. What an Apology is here, that these men who had trinkled the whole
Nation into a Covenant against Prelacy and Antichrist, who had drawn vast
numbers of well-meaning People into Rebellion against the best Prince that ever
wielded English Scepter; who had contributed to involve their Native Country
in a bloody war, and brought upon it such an heap of calamities, as we all know
succeeded one upon the neck of another, and all this under pretense of the
necessity of Reformation. And yet now when they were convinced in their own
Consciences that they had so horribly abused both themselves and the people,
and had thrown away the lives of an hundred thousand men for nothing, instead
of condescending to any acknowledgement of their error, and doing something
toward preventing the like mischiefs for the time to come, they on the
contrary resolve to persist in their Schism and opposition to the Church,
unless she will condescend to them in some unreasonable demands, and that too
only for fashion sake to salve their Reputation, i. e. to make the people
believe that there was some reason for all the disorders of the Rebellion, and
to leave it upon Record to Posterity, that the Church at last saw it reasonable
if not necessary to condescend to their demands, and to redress their
Grievances. Do you think they had not come off with much more Reputation, if
they had honestly confessed their mistake, and endeavored to disabuse the
people, and shown the uprightness of their intentions by the frankness of their
Repentance, than thus openly and impudently to prevaricate with the World by
declaring that though they knew no sufficient ground for Separation, yet
because separated they were and that into Rebellion as well as Schism, they
must keep their party together, and secure them for ever returning to the
peaceable Communion of the Church, unless something by all means be first done
to bring them off with Reputation, that the people might not have any cause to
abate the great opinion they had either of their wit or their honesty. Surely a
right modest and tenderhearted petition, that no terms of Peace and
accommodation may be thought of, unless they may first be publicly declared
innocent, and then you know as well as I, who are thereby declared guilty. Here
the conference begun and here it ended. The Presbyterians themselves have
printed an account of all proceedings of the Commissioners of both persuasions.
And there you may see that one of the first things proposed to them was that if
they had any thing to object against the Liturgy as any way sinful and unlawful
for us to Sect. 5.
join with, it is but reason that this be first proved evidently, before any
thing be altered; it isno argument to say that multitudes of sober pious
persons scruple the use of it, unless it be made to appear by evident reasons
that the Liturgy gave the just grounds to make such scruples. For if the bare
pretense of scruples be sufficient to exempt us from obedience, all law and
order is gone. To this what do they reply but that possibly it might be
unlawful for them to impose it, though not for others to join with them in its
use when it was imposed. Though for the proof of this they thought good to
refer it (as they still do all their disputes when they are baffled) to the day
of Judgment, till which time they resolve to continue peevish and quarrelsome.
But if they had undertaken to prove it, yet still it was but possible, and that
not upon the exceptions of wise men but the scruples of weak brethren; to which
it was replied, on the contrary we judge that Sect. 6.
if the Liturgy should be altered as is required, not only a multitude, but the
generality of the soberest and most loyal Children of the Church of England
would justly be offended, since such an alteration would be a virtual
confession that this Liturgy were an intolerable burden to tender Consciences,
a direct cause of Schism, a superstitious usage, which would at once both
justify all those which have so obstinately separated from it, as the only
pious tender Conscienced men, and condemn all those that have adhered to that
in Conscience of their Duty and Loyalty, with their loss or hazard of Estates,
Lives, and Fortunes, as men superstitious, schismatical, and void of Religion
and Conscience. But for all this they boldly give in their exceptions against
every part of the Liturgy, not upon any pretense of Conscience, but because it
was not conformable enough to their own Directory, and for that reason must the
book of Common Prayer be wholly laid aside, and instead of it a new form of
their own compiling imposed. These were their least demands and they were very
modest ones. And no doubt but upon a little moderation and temper of things, i.
e. upon the least abatement to bring them off with Conscience Page 306.
(though there was no such thing as Conscience pretended in the case) and which
insinuates into all men, some little Reputation, they would never have stuck
out. That is to say, do but give them their wills to all intents and purposes,
and upon those terms it is possible they may condescend to an accommodation.
But what did these implacable Divines of the Church of England do to defeat
this design of establishing a new Heaven and a new Earth? Why! to show that
they were men Page 306.
like others, even cunning men, revengful men (beside their drilling on and
trinkling out the foolish Act of Uniformity) they made several unnecessary
Additions only because they knew they would be more ungrateful and stigmatical
to the Non-conformists, v. g. in the Litany to false Doctrine and Heresy they
added Schism, though it were to spoil the Music and Cadence of the Period.
This Bran is never to be refined, and this obstinacy of the Clergy ever will be
(as it ever has been) the greatest Obstacle of the Clemency, Prudence, and good
Intentions of Princes, and the establishment of their affairs. When all things
and all persons were so towardly prepared toward an accommodation, if they
would but once have consented only to abolish the established Liturgy, and set
up a Geneva Directory, and what had all that been, had not they always been for
the most brutish and precipitate Counsels, but instead of yielding to so
reasonable a demand, they like cunning and revengeful men, foist in a new
Prayer against Schism, because they knew it would be stigmatical to the
Non-conformists. Though you knew the reflection lights purely upon the Church
of England, because as you have admirably demonstrated out of Mr. Hales, Schism
rhimes to Ism. But let them look to that, your grievance is that they have
spoiled the Music and Cadence of the Period. If they have, far be it from me
to patronize such Crimes, I must confess I have no very good Ear, but yet as
far as I am able to discern, the Period runs off as roundly as ever. But if
Schism do offend your ears, yet however that is no offense to your Conscience,
though it seems Rebellion (another word you might as well have excepted
against) is offensive to neither. And now in this whole Affair compare the
Precipitate Counsels of the Church of England with the yielding Temper of the
Presbyterians, and then judge you what Party it was that obstructed the Kings
design of Accommodation. He issues out his Commission to reform the Liturgy, if
there were any need; now (say the Presbyterians) nothing will ever do it but
our our old thorough way of Reformation utterly to abolish and lay it aside for
ever; that was their easy Method, and the result of all their moderate
Counsels. No, say the Bishops, unless you will find something sinful and
unlawful in the Liturgy we are well enough already, and need nothing more than
to join heartily in our Prayers to Almighty God against Schism and Rebellion.
And what could be more cruelly and revengefully done than to enjoin
Presbyterians but to pray against Schism and Rebellion, and rather than ba^e
them that (though it were to save their Reputation) spoil the Music of a
Period? They will never leave these precipitate, brutish and sanguinary
Counsels; Neither the civil War, nor the King's Return, nor the softness of the
Universities, nor the gentleness of Christianity can make them wise or
good-natured. And though they have had so much experience, how excessively the
Non-conformists are to be obliged by Condescensions, and how easily the last
King won their hearts by yielding to their demands, in so much that from the
year 40. to 48. they would sooner have been knocked on the head than have lift
up an ill thought against him, and had he not fatally ruined himself, whether
they would or no, they had made him the most glorious King that ever wielded
the English Scepter. What ungrateful Creatures then are these Church-canibals,
when the Non-conformists have all along done his Majesty such signal services,
yet now after such an happy Restoration (happy, I say, because it did it self
without their Officiousness) they should not suffer him to comply with their
Infirmities. Nay they are grown so unreasonable, that they will not destroy the
Church as it is by Law established only that the Leaders of the Factions may
have their wills and save their credits. Were there ever such inhumane Canibals
as these? Were ever any Beasts of prey so fierce and cruel to those of their
own Kind as these men are to their dear Brethren? Deny a Presbyterian his Will!
it is a cruelty not to be equaled by all the Engines of Torture, the
Podostrabae, the Dactylethrae and the rest; it exceeds the Tyranny of Julian's
Persecution, and the inhumanity of a Jewish Zealot. I see they are
incorrigible, and it is not in your or my Power to help it, and should we go
about it, they would be too hard for us, for they are cunning men and
understand how to trinkle; and therefore let us let them alone and leave them
to the implacable hardness of their own hearts, and the irreversible doom of
the day of Judgment, when J. O. hopes to rejoice in seeing all the Vengeance
and Indignation that is in the right hand of God poured out unto Eternity upon
the souls of such wretches as these. And thus have I (I think) sufficiently
displayed the rudeness of your spite and malice against the Clergy of all Ages,
but of your own in particular; I shall make no farther reflections upon it,
seeing that has always been their Fate ever since Balaam's days, that is the
first Precedent we meet with of the preaching of such Creatures as you, and as
I cannot hear that ever you spoke before, so I believe you had never opened
your Mouth at all now but only to censure and reprove the Blindness of the
Prophets. I have detected spite and malice enough against the Clergy, and now I
think it worth the while to discover the* Bottom of all this wrath and
Indignation, and certainly it can not be any matter of less importance than the
fortunes of Caesar and the Roman Empire, and if you will listen, in short this
it was. It Page 282,
is not many years ago that you used to play at Picquet; and there was a
Gentleman of the Robe, a Dignitary of Lincoln, very well known and remembered in
the Ordinaries. Now you used to play Pieces, and this Gentleman would always go
half a Crown with you, and so all the while he sat on your hand, he very
honestly gave the sign, so that you were always sure to lose. You afterward
discovered it, but of all the money that ever you were cheated of in your life,
none ever vexed you so, as what you lost by this occasion. And ever since you
have born a great grudge, etc. You imagine he gave the sign, but how do you
prove it? I have been informed by impartial Bystanders that he did not give
the sign: But that (as all Gamesters are wont to do) when you lost your Money,
you were angry and railed at him; whereas (as they tell me) his Eyes were so
bad that without Spectacles he was not able to discern a Spade from a Club;
unless this sinister Accident happened a great many years ago, and then to
remember it now is a disparagement to a Gentleman's memory, if not an Affront to
the Act of Oblivion and Indemnity. But does this become the Modesty of a
Gentleman of private Condition and Breeding to think that Kings have nothing
else to do than to concern themselves and their Crowns in your gaming Picques?
Is this your manners because you have upon good reason (i. e. because you were
once cheated) taken up a Particular Aversion against the Clergies disposing
your money, that therefore all wise Princes must take this for a warning to
shut the Bishops out of the Lords house, and to keep them from fingring their
Subjects money? I am confident you have some Clergy-blood running in your
Veins, your malice is so implacable. Some one of your Ancestors has as well as
the Emperor Julian been in Orders sometime since the Flood, if not since the
Reformation; and then no wonder if his indelible Character have for ever sowr'd
and tainted the Gentility of his Family. Otherwise certainly it is impossible a
Gentleman should ever wreck his Malice against a single Dignitary upon the
Clergy of all Ages. However this runs you up into one of your own petty
Dilemma's; for if you descended of Clergy-ancestors, then (as you know) you are
no better than a Canibal to be so fierce and cruel against your own kind; if
you did not, then what a sad blemish is it to a Gentleman's Memory and Breeding
(though never so private) to wreck your revenge upon the whole Order from the
beginning to the end of the World for the fault of one man? But Picquet, that
vilainous Game that has done more mischief to the Discipline of our Church than
Printing or Gunpowder. 'Twas an happy time when the Clergy understood no other
than the old Elsibeth Game of Post and Pair, and never played higher than two
pence a dozen, so that if any of them were so ungrateful or so dishonest as to
cheat his Patron or his Patroness, it made no great Commotions in the
Commonwealth. But since the Invention of the vilainous Game of Picquet, at
which Gentlemen, though of private Condition and Breeding are wont to play
Pieces, such is the mischief, that a Clergyman cannot rook one of them, but an
Address must immediately be made to King and Parliament to keep their hands off
from fingring the Subjects money, and a Book must be written to prove that all
that wear Canonical Coats in all Ages are worse Robbers than Thieves and
High-way-men. What ill fortune preferred this unhappy Dignitary of Lincoln,
that by one Wink in a Corner has done more harm to the Church of England than
an hundred schismatical Divines with all their sweaty preaching. Happy had it
been for the King, happy for the Church, and happy for himself, that is to say,
thrice happy had it been, had he never climed that Pinnacle. But thus we see
from what small Beginnings the greatest Actions and Alterations take their
rise; the late bloody War was begun by the Pickthankness of a Vicar of
Brackley, and for any thing we know the Kingdom may be embroiled afresh by the
Pickpocketingness of a Dignitary of Lincoln; for if ever J. O. and your self be
able to trinkle the secret ones into Rebellion, we may thank this cheating
Dignitary for all that follows. O Picquet! Picquet! how have thou disturbed the
peace of mankind! That Gamesters should be more implacable than Divines! Modern
Orthodoxy, Manwaring, and Sibthorpianism have not caused so great disturbance
in the Commonwealth, as the Picques of Losers against those that rook them.
Bless me from this accursed Game, if I cannot win a few pieces but I must
endanger the Church and all, and its Revenues must be seized to revenge your
injury, and repair your fortune. Sir, this is too implacable for a Gentleman's
Memory. But poor wretch were thou cheated! It was the very grievance of
Bartlemew Cokes, he too poor Gentleman could not endure this Naughty Town,
because he could not go to a Gaming Ordinary, but he was sure to be rook'd of
all his money. But Bat yet was a good-natured Gentleman, and easily reconciled,
and it is the common fate of all Gentlemen of private condition and breeding.
Come, come then be friends and say no more, and we will buy thee a new Muff and
Peruke, nay rather than fail, we will present thee with Coach and Horses and
Liveries, and thou thy self instead of coarse Drugget shall wear Sympathetick
Silk, thy Pockets shall be full of Guinies, and thou shall again frequent the
Gaming Ordinaries with as much credit, and as big looks as ever, we will buy
off such an implacable Gamester at any rate. And if ever hereafter any
Clergyman shall presume to cheat you, then write on and spare not, we deserve
no mercy if we will take no warning. And if we will not, paint us out in our
own colors, dress us up in Sambenita's with all the flames and devils in hell.
Tell all the world, that the highest pinnacle of Ecclesiastical Page 11.
felicity is to assuage their Concupiscence and wreck their malice. That the
Page 239.
same day they take up Divinity, they divest themselves of humanity, etc. That
the Page 241.
reach of their Divinity is but to Persecution, and an Inquisition the height
of their Policy. That they are the only men, who in an affair of Conscience,
and where perhaps Page 249.
it is they are in the wrong, are the only hard-hearted and inflexible Tyrants,
and not only so, but instigate and provoke Princes to be the Ministers of their
Cruelty. That they are so exceeding pragmatical, so Page 299.
intolerably ambitious, and so desperately proud, that scaroe any Gentleman may
come near the tail of their Mules. That they are enough to deform the whole
Reign of the best Prince that ever wielded Scepter; that they make it their
business by their leasings to keep up a misunderstanding between Kings and
their Subjects. That they trinkle Page 310,
with the Members so shamefully, as to expose the wisdom of his Majesty and the
Parliament to After-ages. That is to say, the Clergy (as such) are a company of
proud, and leacherous, and cruel, and inhumane, and bloody, and tyrannical, and
leasing, and trinkling Knaves. This I think is revenge enough for a more
implacable Provocation, than being only a little trinkled at Picquet,
especially for one, that were it not for this sinister accident (I wish this
Dignitaries eyes had been out when he overlooked your hand) is so great a
lover of the Church of England, that it joys his heart to hear any thing well
said of it, and so great an Page 277.
admirer of the English Clergy, that he believes that ever since the
Reformation Page 237.
they have been of the eminentest for divinity and piety in all Christendom.
And so true a friend to the Bishops of England, that he has for their Function,
their Learning, and their Persons too deep a veneration to speak any thing of
them irreverently. To what strange passions will this gaming transport men! Who
could ever have thought that one that loved and honored the Clergy at this
rate could ever have been betrayed into such rude and abusive expressions by a
little bad fortune at Picquet? Who could suppose it, that one that was educated
in the Church of England should for the loss of a few Pieces become such a
fierce and over-doing Renegade, as to spit in the face of every Clergyman that
comes in his way, to curse solemnly his Parents for his birth as well as his
education, and to animate all his acquaintance to the massacring of the whole
Order? This I believe is such an height of revenge and cruelty, that with all
your reading you will never be able to find out an example to equal it among
the Clergy of all Ages, unless the Priests of AEthiopia, who were wont to send
peremptory Commands to their Kings to dye at their pleasure. From whom I am apt
to think the Canibals of the Race of Capons descended, because of their
antipathy to the Race of Kings: For if they do not so openly claim, yet they do
as confidently exercise the same tyranny over them.

But beside this unhappy adventure at Picquet, there is another weighty reason
of your displeasure against the Clergy of all Ages, which though it be not so
broadly expressed, yet it is sufficiently intimated, viz. That in some age or
other they have been a little uncivil to Gentlemen, for it Page 294.
was come they tell you to Jack Gentleman. They tell you; what they tell you?
They of Charing Cross, or they of the Secret ones? The former they (wise men
say) never say true. The latter they (all men know) are sadly addicted to
leasing; but though it were both they, nay though it were all they of the
Modern Orthodoxy, Hungary, Transylvania, etc. what they soever it were, we have
no very great encouragement to trust your Report, and that for two very good
Reasons, first, because it is possible that they might misinform you; and
secondly, it is not impossible but that you might misreport them to us. Did not
they tell you, that the very minute of the conception of my Preface Page 13.
was immediately upon His Majesty's issuing his Declaration of Indulgence to
tender Consciences? Did not they tell you that about the days of Bishop
Bramhal, there Page 43.
were a sort of Divines of the Church of England, who could never speak of the
first Reformers with any patience? Did not they tell you that some of my Books
are already Page 46.
sent beyond Sea for curiosity to the scandal and heart-burning of the Reformed
Churches? Did not they tell you that Cats are wont to whet their Claws against
Page 81.
the Chairs and Hangings? But the Virtuosi tell me it is false, and that they
only stretch themselves by hanging their claws in them when they grow sleepy.
Did not they tell you that the main designs of my Ecclesiastical Policy were to
assert the unlimited Power of the Civil Magistrate, and the absolute subjection
of Conscience to all his Commands, to destroy the Grace of the Gospel, and turn
it all into a Fable, to recommend the Persecution of tender Consciences, and
the Toleration of Debauchery? Did not they Page 123.
tell you that Julian was the most bloody persecutour of all the Roman
Emperors? Did not they tell you that there were no Page 148.
Non-conformists and Presbyterians in Sardanapalus his days? when there have
always been ill-natured People from the beginning of days. Did not they tell
you that I who slew all men with my own single strength had two Assistants? Did
not they tell you that without the sign of the Cross our Church will not
receive Page 219.
any one to Baptism. Did not they tell you that there was a great Prelate of
the Page 218.
Church of England that writ a Book of the Seven Sacraments? Did not they tell
Page 230.
you that Augustus Caesar, though he was so great an Emperor and so valiant a
man, was yet withal so shameful a Coward, as to be as much afraid of a new
word, though it were single, as a Mariner of a rock for fear of splitting? Did
not they tell you that the King has so obliged the Non-conformists, Page 252.
that they can never hereafter lift up an ill thought against him? Did not they
tell you that the Bishops did upon the Page 268.
publishing the Declaration, give the word, and deliver Orders through their
Ecclesiastical Camp, to beat up the Pulpit-drums against Popery? Did not they
tell you that I have all along impropriated all the Page 279.
Loyalty from the Nobility, the Gentry, and the Commonalty, and dedicated it to
the Church? Did not they that have seen both tell you, that in Archbishop
Lauds time our Church did exceed the Romish in Ceremonies Page 297.
and Decorations? Did not they tell you that I have cast this mischievous Page
307.
aspersion upon* His Majesty of thinking to convert the Revenues of the Church
to his own use? Did not they tell you that you writ your Book against the King
and the Clergy, and the Church of England without Page ult.
profaning and violating those things which are and ought to be most Sacred?
With an hundred idle stories more that I could tell you, if any body would
believe them. But these are their leasings, and by these you may see that you
have as little reason to trust your Friends as we have to trust you. It is
plain, you have not declined the acquaintance, nor Page 280.
avoided the Company of the Non-conformists, you are abundantly furnished with
Leasings. And we may a little judge of the Truth and Ingenuity of the rest by a
Rapper that is still behind, and that I had almost forgot, viz. That it was an
Aphorism Page 139.
of a great Prelate in the last Kings time, that the King had no more to do in
Ecclesiastical Matters, than Jack that rubbed his Horses heels. I have heard,
that one, who was since a great Prelate, was brought into the Long-Parliament
Inquisition for such a saying as this, and that the Indictment was managed
against him by Pym and Rous, and the rest of the Modern Orthodox Members that
would not be trinkled, and though he was proceeded against with an unheard of
Malice and Violence, and all the pains and arts in the world were made use of
to make good the Accusation, yet the tale was so destitute of all manner of
proof or evidence, that they themselves were convinced of its falsehood, and
forced for shame (though sore against their wills) to let fall the Charge and
acquit the Gentleman. So modest a wretch are you still to keep up a calumny
that has been so notoriously convicted of falsehood and impudence by nothing
less than a Long-Parliament scrutiny. But this it is when men will pick up
their Stories in the streets, at Charing Cross and in Lincolns-Inn-fields, and
report things upon the mere credit of vulgar hearsay, without ever examining
their truth, nay with resolving to put on a bold face for emproving the lie to
their own purpose. Somewhere in all your Travels, or some time in all your
life; you have heard some body tell some such story of some Clergyman, though
whether a Prelate or no Prelate you do not remember, and whether the Person
that told it you, thought it credible or not, you as little care. The story
would serve your turn, and gratify your spite, and so you resolved the first
Book you writ to set it off with all aggravating circumstances that the world
may thereby take notice of the insolence of these Prelates. And in the strength
of your confidence it might have passed hereafter without controwl for no
unlikely story, were it not a Lie upon Record by having been luckily brought
into Parliament. But after all, what if it were come to Jack Gentleman? when it
was only spoken of such ill-bred Clowns as you, that thought it the mark of
their Gentility to despise a Clergyman, and abuse Mr. Parson, and that would
affront their own father, if they had met him upon the Road in his Canonical
habit. And such (especially if they are broken Gamesters) I still say are no
better than Jack Gentlemen, I am sure there is no true Gentleman but would
scorn and abhor such Porterly rudeness, so that none can be concerned in or
oftended at the Expression, but such Jacks as had their Breeding at
Charing Cross or in Lincolns-Inn-fields.

And thus your Gibellineship having unloaded your whole Leystal upon the
Clergy, and dressed them all up in Sambenita's, painted with all the flames and
Devils in Hell, as if they purely by virtue of their Office and Character were
more addicted to all kinds of wickedness, especially revenge, falsehood, and
cruelty, than all other Orders and Professions whatsoever. Which if it were
true, you have said enough to prevail with Kings, never hereafter to suffer
such vile men to trinkle and tamper with their affairs, and though it were
possible that they should light upon a man of Learning, Piety, and Wisdom, yet
he will be sure to deform their whole Reigns by his Ignorance, Knavery, and
Folly. Thus (I say) having rescued their Royal and exquisite Understandings
from the Clergies keeping, you, notwithstanding that you were never bred up to
the Trade, that you are not a competent Judge of their actions, that you are
conscious to your self of talking impertinently when you meddle with such
matters, that you correct my presumption for taking upon me to instruct Princes
in the Rules and Measures of Government; Notwithstanding all this you your self
take them all to task, tutor them like Schoolboys, read them long politic
Lectures from Precept and Example, and as if you were the Skipper of the State,
talk to them of nothing but Sea-marks, and Buoys, and Rocks, and Sands, and
Charts, and Compasses, etc. And if they will not steer by your Compass, and
abate of the exercise of their Power by their discretion, they are sure to
ruin all upon the Rock of absolute Government. And to gain the greater Credit
and Authority to your wise Instructions, you vaunt your own great and long
Experience; I my self have oftentimes seen Page 242.
Kings do strange things and unreasonable in my Opinion, and yet a little
while, or sometimes many Years after, I have found that all the men in the
World could not have contrived any thing better. Now it seems you think your
self for all your counterfeit and impudent modesty, a competent Judge of their
Actions. But here is Andrew de temporibus again, what a general acquaintance
have you with Kings time out of mind as well as with the Clergy of all Ages?
And now by virtue of your long Experience and shrewd Observation you think your
self qualified, and no man more, to be Sir Pol. to all the Princes in
Christendom, and you have advised them as gravely as Sancho himself could have
done how to govern their Islands. Such is your miserable stupidity that there
is not the least imaginary Error that you have falsely objected to me, into
which you have not precipitated your self with all the Circumstances and
Aggravations of an affected Cox-comb. And whoever compares your Lectures must
conclude Sancho to be much the deeper Politician. For the result of all your
Instructions to Princes how to govern well is to advise them not to govern at
all; because the Body is in the power of Page 250.
the mind, and the mind in the hand of God, so that to punish the body for the
mind is to make the Innocent suffer for the Guilty, and to punish the mind,
when it is in the hand of God is to violate the Divine Majesty. And now if both
the minds and the bodies of his Majesty's Subjects are entirely exempt by
Divine Right from his Authority, what a mighty Emperor was Sancho in
comparison to the Kings of England, for you know how he served Mr. Doctor Pedro
Rezio of Agnero when he would not suffer him to eat his meat at quiet, and
though his body were in the power of his mind, and his mind in the hands of
God, yet for all that his Highness made bold to lay his Doctorship neck and
heels for his Impertinency, whereas according to your Measures, when the King
suffered the Law to pass upon Hugh Peter's and Colonel Venner, he did not only
violate his own but the Divine Majesty. And though the Cow-keeper declared War
point blank for God himself, yet he had his outward Tabernacle fairly
suspended; by a mere carnal, humane Institution, for which the judge must
expect to give an account at the day of Judgment for violating the Divine
Majesty. But in truth this solemn and frowning Nonsense is so horribly
ridiculous, that I am perfectly ashamed to expose it. And yet it is the result
not only of your own Book, but of all the Books of your own Party, whilst they
make the Conscience subject to God alone, and impute all the Actions of the
outward man to that inward Principle, and then what has the Magistrate to do
with any of his Subjects, when their bodies are purely in the power of their
minds, and their minds in the power of God. There is avast deal more of such
wretched stuff that I shall pass by, because I perceive every body has wit
enough to discern it at first sight by their own natural Sagacity. Only one
deep Aphorism I cannot omit, no more than you can your idle stories, because
Kings may make use of it for their own advantage, viz. that as reasonable men
are to be governed by reason, so are Conscientious Page 250.
men by Conscience. What you mean I neither know nor care, but this advantage I
can make of it for the use of Kings, that then his Majesty's Conscience (if you
will allow him any) has a Sovereignty over the Consciences of his Subjects, and
since blashemous Consciences have been conscienciously burnt, and rebellious
Consciences conscienciously hanged, it is a powerful Evidence of the Necessity
of a Conscientious Government in the Kingdom of Conscience, and that his
Majesty as he knows best may conscienciously reduce all sturdy Consciences to
acquiesce conscienciously in his and the Churches most conscientious
Discipline. For as he has a royal Understanding and a Gentleman's Memory, so has
he an imperial and superlative Conscience, by virtue whereof he is able to
exercise a Conscientious Dominion over ten thousands of his Conscientious
little Kings, and by virtue of this it was that Hugh Peter's being a reasonable
man was reasonably hanged, and a conscientious man was conscienciously hanged;
and if ever hereafter the Consciences of any Subjects shall drill them into the
like conscientious Freaks against the sovereign Conscience, that may inflict
the same conscientious Punishment upon them by virtue of its conscientious
Authority; and this I take to be the only Conscientious meaning of these words
that Conscientious men are to be dealt with only by Conscience. And thus though
by your former Maxims you had deposed him from exercising any Authority over
his Subjects, yet now by this you have reenthroned him in his full Power by
making his Conscience King of their Consciences; so that it concerns him to
look to his Conscience lest he lose his Kingdom, in that they will not have
their Consciences governed by any thing but Conscience. But seeing there is
little hopes of persuading his Majesty out of his Government, you proceed in
the next place to prescribe him worshipful Rules and Measures how to manage it
discreetly by a preposterous duty and slavish regard to the Will and Insolence
of his Subjects. Not a word, in all your Book, of exhortation to them to be
obedient, all your Advice is thrown away upon Kings to be discreet and to
connive, and not like the hard-hearted-inflexible-tyrant Clergy exasperate the
People to Rebellion by the extravagancy of their just Power, but to be so
satisfied with having abundance of it, as to be content to abate of its
exercise by their discretion. To condescend for peace sake and the quiet of
Mankind to such things as would break a proud heart before it would bend (you
are all for humbling of Kings;) not to exact obedience too much to the
established Laws, lest they require things impossible, unnecessary and wanton
of their People: upon all Occasions to give them good words and humor them
like Children, to consider the Temper of the Climate, the Constitutions of
their Bodies and the Antipathies of their Stomachs. And if all this will not
prevail, but his Majesty still prove a stubborn and untractable Pupil, he must
be taught to reflect upon the histories of former times, and consider the
Catastrophes of such pragmatical Kings and Governors, as would not humor
their Subjects like Children nor consider their Infirmities, and when they had
got a Cold force them to be covered. Sir, what do you mean by all this? Do you
not think the King a well-bred Gentleman that you read him these Lectures of
Civility, as if he were not respectful and mannerly enough to his Subjects? If
you Page 278.
do not mean mischief, why do you speak of it in his time? Why stir such an
odious, seditious, impertinent, unseasonable discourse? Page 318.
Why take this very minute of time but that you have mischief, to say no worse,
in your heart? This is plainly written with Page 264.
an evil eye and aim at his Majesty, and the measures he has taken of
Government. For if he be so uncivil as not to condescend to his Inferiors, so
indiscreet as not to connive at their Infirmities, so inhuman^ as not to yield
to their Weaknesses, so ill-bred as not to desire them to be covered when they
have got a Cold. Nay if he be so hard-hearted as when any of them have an
Antipathy to any thing (for instance a Flemish Antipathy to Monarohy, a
Conscientious Antipathy to Obedience and a Fanatic Antipathy to Morality) as
to cram these things down their throats in spite of their stomachs, he is an
hard-hearted and inflexible Tyrant, and then every body knows the stories of
the Roman Emperor that was stabbed, of Alexander the Great that had almost lost
all, of the Queen of Sweden that was forced to resign, of the sturdy Swiss that
would not conform, and all the other idle stories, that they know how to make
use of, if Kings will not. But I beseech you what grounds have you for these
fears and jealousies of Incivility? Did his Majesty ever turn his Kingdom into
a Prison? Did he ever weary out his Subjects so at home, as to constrain them
to seek a more hospitable habitation among Salvages and Canibals abroad? This
was the incivility that deformed his Fathers Reign, and the Rock upon which we
all ruined; but the King observes his Sea-marks, and has learnt more manners,
and is not so uncivil as Alexander the Great and his Royal Father were, as to
force them to rebel by forcing them to conform. And though I have not the
honor to be so intimately acquainted with his Majesty as to give him a
Testimonial of the unblameableness of his Life and Conversation, as you have
very obligingly done, yet thus much I dare say for him, that he is as civil and
good-natured a Prince as ever wielded the English Scepter, so that you need not
doubt but that he will upon all occasions give his Subjects good-words, though
they give him bad ones, and humor them like Children, though they are never so
froward and deserve to be scourged. And therefore, during his Reign, you have
no more ground to fear any danger of Incivility than I have of Popery; so
unnecessary and unseasonable are your Lectures of good manners at this time,
when his Majesty (God be praised) is as well provided of a Royal Nature as a
Gentleman's Memory. Thus far have you instructed him how to govern his Island by
way of Precept, but now we proceed to the more instructive Topic of Example;
and here you have strung up (as Sancho did his Proverbs) an hundred idle
stories of the fatal Catastrophe of ill-bred and uncivil Kings, to fright him
into meekness and good manners; to which you might (in my opinion) have added
one more, how the Subjects of Great Britain (because their King would not
humor them like Children, when they had a mind to play with his Crown) nip'd
his Prerogative, sucked his Blood, subverted his Government, and set up a
glorious Regiment of their own. I verily believe to have trumpeted this in his
Majesty's ears (as much as I am out of your Books for it) would have been a
more pertinent story for the use of Princes than Alexander the Great that had
almost lost all, the Roman Emperor that was stabbed, the sturdy Swiss that
would not conform, and the frolicksom Queen that gave the blank Town seal, of
which there came no harm. But yet from these you threaten Kings with as much
Effrontery, as if you had them standing before you upon the Stool of
Repentance, whilst you lecture to them with the state of King Gill Scotch
modern Orthodoxy, with politick-Notes and Observations upon Emperors Roman and
Grecian, Kings and Queens, Schoolboys and Schoolmasters. I shall as briefly as
I can examine them, to prove you as very a Rat-historian as I have proved you a
Rat-divine.

Your first Tale is of a Roman Emperor, who when his Captain of the Lifeguard
Page 244.
came for the word, by giving it unhandsomly, received a dagger. I suppose you
mean Caligula, who (as Suetonius relates) was stabbed by Sabinus, whilst he
gave the word (not as you will have it) for giving it unhandsomly, the murder
having been plotted aforehand, and though Josephus (you know) had a peculiar
grudge against that Emperor, as a most implacable enemy to the Jewish Nation,
and therefore to disgrace him as much as he can, affirms that he was stabbed
immediately upon giving for the Word the name of a lewd woman (though in
Suetonius the Word is Jupiter, the most sacred Word in their Religion) yet will
you there find that it was the execution of a premeditated Conspiracy, and that
the main cause of it was his frequent railing upon this Captains cowardice.
This is a Caveat to Kings, not to presume too much upon their own Wit, and
their Subjects good nature, and if they will be drolling upon them, they may
thank themselves if they receive a Dagger for a Repartee. I have heard of
another Roman Emperor, who gave the Sword to the Captain of his Guard,
requiring him to use it for his defense, if he governed well; but if not, to
turn the point of it against himself. As also of a Prince of Brabant, who
granted to his Subjects, if himself or any of his Successors should ever
attempt to violate their Ancient Privileges, a full Power of proceeding to the
Election of a New Governor, what disturbances ensued hereupon, and how Kings
approve the example I know not, but this I do know, that it was very weakly
done to submit their Actions so entirely to the judgment of their Subjects,
and put it within the power of any Malecontent either to murder or depose
them. But being got into the Roman Empire, I am (you know) in my own kingdom,
and therefore when you ask me, whether had I lived in the days of Page 241.
Augustus, I should not have made an excellent Privy Counselor to him? for
his Father too was murdered. I would have been Privy Counselor to Augustus
with all my soul, were it not that he reigned so long ago; so that had I ever
been of His Privy Council, I must either have been dead fifteen hundred years
since, or at least have been so very old, that by this time I should have been
altogether unfit for any public employment, though I had descended of your
family of the de Temporibus, otherwise I know not any Emperor of them all of
whose acquaintance I should have been more ambitious. He was a Prince admirable
for the wisdom and magnanimity of his mind, for the sweetness and facility of
his manners, he was one that delighted in nothing more than the entertainments
of wit and ingenuity. Virgil, and Horace, and Varius were admitted into his
retired and cabinet Conversation, as well as Agrippa and Mecaenas, they were
not only his Domestics, but his Familiars and his Confidents, they conversed
and laughed together as friends and companions. And now who would not take it
kindly to be honored with the favor and familiarity of so great a Prince, a
Prince of so good and so sweet a disposition, a Prince so free from froth and
groans, a Prince so much to be admired, for that Majesty which sat upon the
forehead of his Masculine Truth and generous Honesty. But had I been of his
Privy Council, I am confident I should never have given him my Advice to
sacrifice three hundred of the Nobles and Citizens of the best Quality to the
Ghost of his murdered Father, because his Natural Father old Octavius was not
murdered, but being a Civil Gentleman of private condition and breeding, and
never having suffered any of his Tenants to be uncovered when they had got a
cold, dyed quietly as he lived. But as for his Uncle J. Caesar his adopted
Father, the case is plain, he was a bold and venturesom Gamester, that
out-trinkled the Senate, and cheated them of the Empire of the whole world (for
it was an usual thing for the Gamesters of those days to throw at all.) Now
this was too great a stake to be rook'd of, and they such implacable Gamesters,
that out of pure revenge, when they had lost all, and he would refund nothing,
they made no more ado but stabbed him, though as for your part you are the most
irreconcilable Loser I ever heard of, you are not content to wreck your malice
upon the man that cheated you, but for his sake you run a muck at the whole
Profession, and vow the destruction of all Clergymen dead or alive, that ever
were or ever shall be. However had I been Mecaenas, I would have strugled a
little more than two days before I would have suffered him to abandon Cicero
to Mark Anthonies revenge, whom it seems (for he was a great Gamester too)
nothing would satisfy but his enemies life, only because he had so horribly
paid him off in the Parliament House with sharp speeches, which it seems the
Great Man when he was run down called railing. But Augustus was bound in honor
to protect him, not only out of respect to his wit and eloquence, but because
he was the Creator and first Patron of his own fortune. In that by his means
he first gained the good affection of the Lords of the Senate, and by their
means (you know) he at length obtained an unhoopable Empire. Though indeed some
of your State-Politicians are willing enough to excuse him, in that, first, if
Cicero did him any service, it was not out of any love to him, but out of
hatred to Anthony (for Senators too are implacable in their Picques as well as
Divines and Gamesters) but chiefly out of affection to the Senate, because it
seems there himself Reigned, just as the Presbyterians, when it was too late,
would have joined with the Royalists, not out of any Kindness to the King and
his Party, but hatred to Cromwell and his Sectaries, and zeal for their holy
Discipline, by which they hoped at last to rule all, and set their feet upon
the necks of Kings. And secondly, because it was necessary to remove the
fiercest of all Factions out of the way, for the quiet and establishment of his
new designed Monarchy. In that the most obstinate both of the Nobles and
Commons being singled out in this bloody Proscription, and the odium of the
cruelty (by the cunning behavior of Augustus) lying upon Anthony and Lepidus,
when he had once rid his hands of them, he was pretty secure ever after from
being troubled with any attempts of the old democratical Gentlemen to recover
the old democratical Liberty: So that by this means he had no need of one of
your High-Courts of Justice, that ungrateful work was done to his hand by these
wicked men. Or if he had been put to it, he would never have been so bloody as
the late Tyrant was, who would not be satisfied with the Kings murder, but
went on to assassinate such other of the Nobility, that had been most eminent
for Courage and Loyalty, only to terrify the Kings Loyal Subjects from all
attempts of their duty, and indeed to affright them out of the Kingdom, when
they saw their lives every day at the mercy of a rude and a spiteful Tyrant.
And you know when it was put to the question at a Council of War, whether all
the Royallists should be massacred, and carried in the negative by no more than
two Votes. But now how all this story of Augustus comes in, I cannot imagine,
for I do not remember that I have any where persuaded the King to a
Proscription, at least it might have been pertinent before the Kings Judges had
made satisfaction to Justice, but to what purpose it serves now, I profess
again is past my understanding. The next shred of History belongs to the King
of Polands Taylour-Parliament, who because the King would not near their Mode,
have suffered Page 244:
the Turk to-enter, as coming nearer their fashion. If the King of Poland have
a Taylour then he is no unhoopable Prince. But in this (as I take it) you are
flatly contradicted by the more authentic testimony of your own Gazets, and I
do not believe this is yet recorded in any other History, However Parliaments
may learn from hence, if the King will not be ruled to ^all in Turks and Scots,
and that is another Principle of Modern Orthodoxy. And it has so vile an
Innuendo (as Lawyers speak in actions for scandalous words,) that if it have
any reference to our King, of whom you are speaking all along, and bringing
your reasons and re-inforcements for gratifying the Non-conformists, it is an
impudent entrenchment upon his Majesty's Crown and Prerogative. For the Polish
Kingdom being Elective and not Hereditary, the Parliament deal with their
Kings, as the Subjects of King Gill, and King Osbolston are wont at certain
seasons of the year to deal with their Sovereign Masters, bar him out, and
keep him out, till he subscribe first to what Articles and Conditions they are
pleased to prescribe him, or else there is no coming in there for him to play
Rex among them. Friend, you dance upon the high-ropes, and by your Politic
Lectures endanger your head as well as your neck. It Is unsafe to play tricks so
high, as you do when you meddle with his Majesty's Crown, and compare it with
that of Poland (for else you bring it in impertinently) when our English
Constitutions know no Interregnum, nor is it in the Power of our Parliaments to
choose or refuse what King they please. Take heed, remember what the Turk did
when he mounted the high Rope, if you will be showing your ambitious Activity,
it is lightly you will some time or other break your Neck.

From the King of Poland according to the method of your Chronology you march
over all the Roman and Turkish Empire, and there find 1900. years ago an
Instance to prove of what dangerous Consequence it is to impose new fashions
upon the People, for even Alexander the great had almost lost all he had
conquered Page 244:
by forcing his Subjects to conform to the Persian habit. Take it for a
warning, O ye Kings, (how great soever) how you impose fashions whether of
Tunicks or Pantaloons upon your Subjects, for even Alexander the Great lost all
the East- Indies, Medes, Persians, Asia, Africa, as far as the Mountains of the
Moon, and the Head of Nilus, died a beggar, was outed of all his Conquests, and
all for forcing his Subjects to conform. If you would have a Law enacted that
no man shall hereafter dare to bring over any new Fashions from France, but
that Vests, Perukes, Tunicks, Cimarrs, etc. shall continue the English fashion
inviolable and unaltered to all Ages, let the Tire-men and Tire-women look to
it, and see you answered, I am not concerned. But he that runs may all along
read your design of Modern Orthodoxy, and instructing wise Princes to look to
it, have a care what they do, and force not their Subjects to conform to any
habit civil or sacred, in that Alexander the Great had almost lost all he had
conquered by forcing his Subjects to conform. But this is one of your leasings,
for Alexander the Great never lost a foot of what he had conquered, and
therefore not almost all, but died unconquered, and to his dying day lost not
one foot either by seeming Friend or Foe, Grecian or Persian, by forcing his
Subjects to conform or not conform. Will you never be ashamed of your Leasings?
But as for the great danger that Alexander was in, as I remember, it followed a
fair time after and arose from another Cause, viz. that he disowned Philip for
his Father, and would by all means be complemented as the Son of Jupiter, it
was this which gave occasion to the sedition for which Philotas died. But if
this goodly story were true and you would prove any thing out of it, it
signifies nothing but against King and Parliament for making a Law to force all
Subjects to conform to their habit and fashion, and is only a sly insinuation
against the foolish Act of Uniformity, by which they have not only exposed
their Wisdom to after Ages, but endangered all at Present; for Alexander the
Great, etc.

The next Story is of the King of Spain, Page 244.
who, when upon a Progress he enters Biscay, is pleased to ride with one Leg
naked, and above all to take care that there be not any Bishop in his Retinue.
From hence be advised O Kings, whenever you take a Pilgrimage for Scotland, to
travel barefooted, and to take no Bishop in your Retinue, as you would avoid a
solemn League and a Kirk-rebellion. Though if you will yield to stand upon the
Stool of Repentance, and there suffer Mass John to rate both your self and your
royal Ancestors for a Succession of Lowns and Tyrants, and acknowledge the sins
of your house and your own former ways, and give satisfaction to the People of
God in both Kingdoms, and take all this with Kingly wisdom and meekness, they
may perhaps present him as the Biscains do the King of Spain with a leather-bag
full of Maravides (60. whereof make a Crown) but yet withal forbid him to touch
it with the end of his Lance. Or if his English Subjects should grow so
capricious, that nothing will please them but the King must appear ridiculously
before them to make them sport and humor them like Children, he must be wise
and gratify their Childishness, as the King of Spain does the Biscainers, lest
they grow touchy, angry and rebel. And as for what you suggest of their Scotch
Antipathy to Bishops, from thence it is come to pass that they are become the
most Barbarous People of all Europe, always excepting the afore-excepted the
Canibals of the Race of Capons; so as that they will not have any Traffic with
any other Countries, nor mix with any other People for fear of corrupting their
Language and Gentility, though that is little better than wild Irish, and they
little better than Jack-gentlemen. And though they have some dark and general
Notions of Christianity still remaining among them, yet are they since their
Picque against Bishops fallen into such rudeness and ignorance, that they have
scarce any knowledge at all of the particular Articles of their Faith and
Precepts of their Religion; and so it must be, wherever there is no superior
Clergy, the poor Parish Priests will in process of time become as ignorant and
barbarous as the Common People.

The next Story is of a Certain Tyrant Page 244.
that demanded subsidies of so many Bushels of Fleas. But because you will not
or cannot tell us when or where this same Tyrant does or did live, nor what his
Name is or was, I have good reason to suspect either that it is but an idle
Story or he some Jack Gentleman. Though what you would make of it I cannot
devise, unless it be that if the King should impose some trivial things and
ceremonies as are in your Judgment not worth a Flea, and fine or punish the
People for Non-payment of such Niceties, he had as good be quiet, and would get
but little by distraining, and should be called Tyrant for his pains. So that
if the King exact Obedience and Uniformity to the established Laws, he is worse
than the Flea-tyrant, seeing the Non-conformists cannot pay it in Conscience,
and seeing withal they desire no Alteration, but what is so far from doing us
any harm, that it would only make us better.

The next is a Story of a certain Queen that being desired to give a Town-scal,
sat down naked on the Snow and left them Page 245.
that Impression, and other Town-seal could they get none for their hearts, if
they would be content with that, well and good, she would part with no other,
and though it caused no disturbance, yet Kings do not approve the Example. But
if it caused no disturbance the Story might have been spared. But how come you
to know that Kings do not approve of the Example, that you dare thus
confidently publish their Opinion, when I dare say you cannot name two Kings
that ever heard the story. Will you never learn Modesty? But why do you not
tell us the Name of this Queen, and City, and Country? It could not be the
Queen of the Amazons, because her whole Territory, as Travelers, that have
been there, tell me, lies within the Tropicks and just under the Equinoctial,
and there they tell me too it never snows. So that I doubt it must be the Queen
that reigns in Terra incognita, Dowager to the Tyrant that has his subsidys
paid him in Fleas by the Bushel, measured to him in good Tale by Jack
Gentleman. But whoever she was or wherever she lived the Politic Emprovement
of her story runs thus. There was a certain German Princess (bold Bettrice by
name) that being either mad or maudlin played a sluttish Trick somewhere before
the worshipful Mr. Mayor and his Brethren, and though their Worships were not
so implacably offended at her Majesty's rudeness, as presently to pass a Vote
of common Council for taking up Arms to revenge the Affront, so that there
followed no disturbance in the State from the extravagance of the frolic, yet
Kings that never heard of it do not (as they have told you their minds) approve
of the Example. But rather take it for a warning to behave themselves mannerly
and modestly before their Subjects. Though I cannot see why they should be so
much deterred from it by this Example, when no harm that we read of ensued upon
this freakish use of her Prerogative. But had the Consequences proved never so
fatal, I am apt to think that Kings, though you had not represented them, would
not have been very forward to approve or follow the Example, because Royal
Sense can never be much delighted with sitting upon the cold Snow.

The next is a Queen too, and she almost as bold a Virago as the former whoever
she was, and it is the Queen of Sweden Page 245.
who said Io non voglio governar le bestie, but afterward resigned. But I
don't believe she understood one word of Italian before she went to Rome, or if
she did it is certain the People of Sweden did not, so that though she did
speak to her People that displeasing word Bestie, I do not see how that could
cause her Resignation. But the true and manifest Reasons of it were on her
Subjects part, their natural fierceness and inclination to wars, that made them
loath to be bestrid by a Petticoat, and therefore they leaned to her Kinsman
the General, and her declared Successor; and on her own part a capricious
desire of foreign Travel and Conversation with more refined wits. But however
from hence let Princes be instructed to flatter the meanest of the People, lest
if they speak contemptibly of them, they depose them for their moroseness and
want of breeding.

The next Novel is of the Revolt of Switzerland from the Emperor and its
turning Commonwealth, only upon occasion of imposing a civil Ceremony by a
capricious Governor, who set up a Pole in the highway with a Cap upon the top
of it, to which he would have all passengers to be uncovered, and do obeisance.
But one sturdy Swiss that would not conform, thereupon over-turn'd the
Government, as it is at large in history. One sturdy Swiss that would not
conform -- this is your Modern Orthodox Language -- that would not conform --
so Alexander the Great had almost lost all, because he would force his Subjects
to conform -- But to what would he not conform? not to a Civil Ceremony; a
Civil Ceremony! how much less to a Religious Ceremony, that is no less than an
as-it-were-a-Sacrament. But however to give you the short of the story it runs
thus. The Switzers were declared a Free People some hundreds of years before
for their good service against the Saracens, and at the time you speak of they
had no desire to renounce their dependence upon the Empire, but upon the House
of Austria as an Hereditary Fee. And their casting off their Obedience to the
Prefect sent by the Emperor Albert of that Family, was contrived long enough
before the Hat was set upon the Pole, and this not by a Rout and Tumult, but by
the direction of the Chief Magistrate the Baron of Altinghuse. But the Prefect
knowing of the design (to make short work of it) set up the Cap and Pole as a
trial and discovery of the Malcontents. So that this was no more the cause of
their revolt, than the Kings setting up the Royal Standard at Nottingham was of
the long-Parliaments Rebellion, who had before in several cases challenged, and
as far as they were able, seized on, his Power, and by consequence deposed him
from his Sovereignty. From hence let wise Princes beware of forcing their
Subjects to be uncovered unseasonably, i. e. whenever they have got a cold, or
are out of humor; and it is good advice to the Parliament to have a special
care that they enjoin not the Quakers nor others to put off their Hats, whether
in Courts of Judicature, the Parliament House, or Chambers of Presence, nor
enjoin them a Leg, or a Cringe, or a Bow as they love the Kingdom, for one
sturdy Swiss that woul'd not conform, etc. And that which is more material good
Sir Pol. you may hence infer, that they had need make a Law, and Enact, that no
Wagg by any trick, wile, or stratagem in earnest or jest use any endeavors to
make men put off their Hats, as they pass by the three Poles at Tyburn, for
fear of turning the Kingdom into a Commonwealth again, if they will be wise,
see the consequences, and observe the Sea-marks, for one sturdy Swiss that
would not conform. This is right Modern Orthodoxy, and you had done well to
have added the judgment of a Professor of it in the Corporation of Losarne,
situate on the Lake of Lemane, on what point of the Compass (you Travelers
are so critical) I dare not determine, though this I dare, that it is not far
from the Town of Geneva. Viz. That it was well done of the Switzers to free
themselves Bucan. loc. Commun.
of their subjection to the House of Austria, when the Princes of that House
had exercised more than ordinary cruelty in most parts of the Country; as
David might lawfully have killed Saul, though he did forbear to do it, lest he
should give an example to the people of Israel of killing their Kings, which
other men prompted by Ambition might be like enough to imitate against himself
and his Royal Posterity.

The King of Spains losing Flanders is the last piece of News that makes up
this Gazet, and this happened (according to the information of your
Correspondent) by setting up the Inquisition. But this story is so like that of
Alexander the Great, that I need only deny it, and say, that as Alexander dyed
seized of all his Acquists and Conquests; so neither has the King of Spain lost
Flanders by the Inquisition, because it is in force there to this day, as you
may see and feel too, if you will but take a voyage to Ostend with an English
Bible in your hand, and talk there as freely of the Clergy of the Church of
Rome as you have here of the Clergy of the Church of England. And as for the
United Provinces it is evident that he was stripped of them by the Fate of War,
and whatever was the cause of the War was the occasion of his loss. And that
(as it usually happens in the like cases) was set on foot by diverse concurrent
accidents, as bringing in Spanish and Italian Forces by Charles the fifth in
his Wars against France, a grievance unknown to the Flemmings in the Reign of
former Princes, and it was against these foreign Troops that the States made
the first Remonstrance. The natural Insolence of the Spaniards that could not
but exasperate the peoples hatred against their pride and oppression. The
peculiar haughtiness of Philip the second, that made him neglect and disoblige
the Natives, and confer all Offices of Trust and Honor upon Strangers. His
absence from the Provinces, and leaving them to the Government of a subordinate
Minister, whereas they had always shared in the residence of all former
Princes. And if you will consult the Prince of Oranges Declaration in the head
of his Army, you will find the main grievance to be this, that the States of
the Provinces were forcibly restrained from holding, according to custom, their
general Assemblies. But besides all this the Netherlands were the very
Sanctuary and Rendevouz of all the Calvinists from England, France, and
Germany, and the Anabaptists from Westphalia and other parts, and these quickly
poisoned the people with their own principles of Sedition and Anarchy, so that
being, before the Government was aware, grown strong and numerous, that made
work for the Inquisition, which though it soon checked their growth, yet it did
little toward a total suppression of the Party, partly by reason of the
tenderness of the Duchess of Parma the then Regent, and partly by the Envy and
Ambition of the Belgic Lords, who underhand opposed all proceedings against
Sectaries and Heretics, and encouraged their seditious practices, so that
between them both the wise and resolute Ministry of Granvel was rendered not
only successess but withal odious to the people. For as he was a man of
extraordinary Wisdom, Courage, and Fidelity, that sincerely pursued his
Masters interest, faithfully executed his Commands, and kept up the height of
his Authority; so being an Implacable Divine, he saw to the bottom of the
Projects that were carried on by the discontented Lords, and foresaw the
tendency of Factions in Religion to disorders and seditions in the State. And
therefore was severe and rigorous in the execution of Laws, as knowing that
nothing else could ever reduce the people to any peaceable temper after they
were once possessed with such ill Principles and ill humors. But for this by
the advice of the Duchess and importunity of the Lords he was removed, and the
rigor of Edicts remitted, and that for the present seemed to appease all
tumults and discontents. But by that means the dissenting and discontented
Party in a little time grew so considerable as to put the King upon his former
resolutions of force and rigor, but it was now too late, they were grown too
strong for the Government. When the Venom was too far spread, they applied the
Antidote, that did then rather irritate than expel the Poison. And now too late
the Duchess of Parma saw and bemoaned her loss of Granvil. But so the War
broke out with that brutish rage and fury of the people, that their Leaders
repented their own rashness, and joined when it was to no purpose with the
Governess to suppress Tumults and Insurrections. And what were the Events and
Traverses of that long and bloody War you know better than I, it is enough that
at length in the midst of these Confusions the Estates of the Provinces take
an opportunity to seize the Government into their own hands, and set up a new
Commonwealth and a new Religion. And this (as an ingenious Gentleman tells me)
was not a little advantaged by a particular Accident, viz: Whereas in most, if
not all other parts in Christendom, the Clergy composed one of the three
Estates of the Country, and thereby shared with the Nobles and Commons in
their influences upon the Government; That order never made any part of the
Estates in Holland, nor had any vote in their Assembly, which consisted only of
the Nobles and the Cities, and this Province bearing always the greatest sway
in the Councils of the Union, was most inclined to the settlement of that
Profession, which gave least pretense of Power or Jurisdiction to the Clergy,
and though he applies the Observation only to Religion, yet it is as true of
the Government, in that as we all know the Estates of Holland were the head of
the Rebellion: so that after all your Politiques you see that the King of Spain
lost the United Provinces purely for want of Trinklers. But supposing the truth
of your story, the consequence you would make of it is to deter Princes from
exercising an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the Consciences of their
Subjects, lest they exasperate such as are tender into Rebellion. Or because
the Church of Rome abuse their Government into Tyranny, therefore we must have
none at all.

And now it were worth while to know what your meaning should be to beat up and
down thus industriously through all Histories for such idle stories as these,
and then to apply them as Caveats and Sea-marks, and directions to Princes,
without ever being in the least concerned to caution Subjects against the like
wantonness upon the like occasions. What else can your meaning be but to inform
the world what slight pretenses will serve the turn at some lucky junctures of
affairs both to cause and to warrant Rebellion. And the result of all your
discourse as addressed to his Majesty amounts to this, that by these examples
he may learn to condescend to the childish humors of his Subjects, and give
place to their follies and extravagances whenever they grow headstrong, and
have a mind to take advantage of being quarrelsom for every trifle. It Is wise
advice, and such as would quickly make him so glorious a King, as the
Long-parliament made his father, who gained so little by his condescensions to
their peevishness that he thereby only emboldned them in their Impudence, till
in a little time no less would satisfy them, but to demand the whole
Sovereignty it self, and when it was denied them, to fight for it. In short, I
can make neither more or less of all this politic Lecture to his Majesty than
I can of Bradshaws speech at the High Court of Justice, where he justifies
their proceedings by raking up (as you have done) Examples Ancient and Modern
of killing and deposing such Tyrant and Traitor Kings, as would be forcing
their Subjects to conform. But beside the wise instructions you have dropped
upon his Majesty and all other Sovereign Princes to humor their subjects like
Children, and to use their Power with so much caution and tenderness, that they
may not have any pretense of disturbance howsoever capricious and unreasonable,
i. e. in short to beware of governing their people for fear of offending them.
Beside this general care for the welfare of Mankind, your sage Wisdom extends
it self to the Kingdoms of Gill and Osbolston, and wonderfully concerned you
are to settle and preserve a good Understanding between Ushers and Schoolboys,
and to this end have you enriched the Politiques of the World with diverse
shrewd and enlightening Observations against the Illegal and Arbitrary
Government of whipping Schoolmasters. I never remarked so Page 88.
irreconcilable and implacable a Spirit as that of Boys against their
Schoolmasters or Tutours. The quarrels of their education have an influence
upon their Memories and Understandings for ever after (then they are not
Gentlemen.) They cannot speak of their Teachers with any patience or civility,
and their discourse is never so flippant nor their Wit so fluent as when you
put them upon that Theme. Nay, I have heard old men, otherwise sober,
peaceable, and good natured, who never could forgive Osbolston, as the younger
are still inveighing against Dr. Busby. It were well that both old and young
would reform this Vice, and consider how easy a thing it is upon particular
Grudges, and as they conceive out of a just censure to slip either into
juveline Petulancy or inveterate Uncharitableness. It Is all remarqued like a
Senator, that Page 243.
reflects upon the Histories of former Times and the present transactions to
regulate himself by in every Circumstance. Though yet here, methinks, you show
more kindness to the Prerogative of Schoolmasters than to that of Kings, in
that you address your advice of Peace and Condescension as well to the Subject
as the Sovereign, whereas in your former Admonitions you applied your self and
your sage discourses of Moderation to the Government alone, without the least
intimation of advice to Subjects to beware of peevishness and incivility to
their Superiors. However it is to be hoped that Schoolmasters will hereafter
lay aside their Rods and their Ferula's to avoid these implacable Grudges of
juvenile Petulancy, and learn by the Example of their brother Kings to
condescend to their Boys for peace sake and the quiet of Boykind, and upon all
occasions to give them good words and humor them like Children, and from all
these fatal consequences of whipping, which can only serve as sea marks unto
wise Schoolmasters, to avoid the causes. And never hereafter to brandish their
Rods against Truants, Loiterers and Rob-orehards, remembering the implacable,
Ballads of Tom Triplet, the stabbing of the Roman Emperor, the
Tai-Ior-Parliament of Poland, the danger of Alexander, the King of Spain's
progress into Biscai, the Resignation of the Queen of Sweden, the Revolts of
Switzerland and the Low Countries, and an hundred more that I could tell you
but idle stories, Page 246.
and yet Kings and Schoolmasters can tell how to make use of them; for where
there is so great a resemblance in the Effects, there Page 87.
must be some parallel in the Causes. (You have put Tacitus his nose out of
joint for sententious Politics.) But above all it concerns them to consider
that God has instated them in the Government of their Page 249.
Subjects with that encumbrance of Reason, and that encumbrance upon reason of
Conscience (as if Conscience were an encumbrance upon Reason and Reason upon
Government.) Men therefore are to be dealt with reasonably and conscientious
men by conscience. And then that the Body is in the power of the Mind, so that
corporal Punishments do never reach the Offender, but the innocent suffers for
the guilty. And the mind is in the hand of God, and cannot correct those
persuasions which upon the best of its natural Capacity it has collected, and
therefore to punish that is to violate the divine Majesty. To what purpose is
it to scourge the outward Boy, your corporal punishments never reach the
Offender but the innocent suffers for the guilty: it is the mind that is the
truant and the dunce, and if that will not con its Lesson, is it justice that
the poor innocent Backside should do penance for another sloth and idleness?
It is only for implacable Divines to be thus cruel and sanguinary. And then as
for the Mind that is in the hand of God, and cannot correct those false
Concords and unlucky Tricks which upon the best of its natural Capacity it has
collected, so that to punish that is to violate the divine Majesty. And now lay
by your Rods, my Masters, break your Ferula's, burn your Grammars, tear in
pieces your Dictionaries and your construing Books, mure up your School-doors,
leave your declining of Nouns and Verbs, construe no more Greek and Latin,
break up School, and keep an universal Play-day throughout the whole Nation,
for Truants must not be whipped, and if you attempt to take down their Breeches,
you offer plain violence to the Laws of Nature and of God. For he has put their
Bodies into the Power of their Minds, and their minds he keeps in his own
hands; and therefore if you scourge them you do not only punish the Innocent
for the Guilty (which no sort of men are so brutish to do beside the Clergy)
but the disgrace and the blame of all lights at last upon the divine Majesty,
in that the Mind is wholly in his hands, and all its Actions whatsoever must be
entitled to his Providence. A blessed Account of Government this! but yet such
as is absolutely necessary to the exemption of Conscience from the Commands of
Authority, by ascribing all the Extravagancies of Mankind to the Will of God,
that has put upon them a fatal Necessity to do whatever they do. And then it is
in vain for the Civil Magistrate to think of forcing his Subjects to Obedience
by Penalties, when they are overruled to the contrary by an almighty and
irresistible Power. This is a fit Cover for so foul a Cause.

But now if you had come to me, I could have told you an hundred more idle
stories, that you and Kings and Schoolmasters would know how to make use of
that would better have filled up your Politic Lectures, and done more
advantage both to your cause and your self than all that you have raked
together. I will recommend but one to you, in which I am sure the King and
Parliament, the three Kingdoms with the Isles adjacent, together with all the
Plantations that lie out of hearing are more nearly concerned than in any of
your Politic Tales, not excepting the Queens own Broad-seal, and to make you
expect no longer it is the famous story of Massanello. And if ever you come to
be a Parliamentman, because you may be modest at first and fearful of speaking,
I care not if I lend you a Speech before I conclude. And thus you must manage
it and your self.

First you must rise up and take out you Gold-watch (if it be not at pawn for
the Picquet disaster) and though it do not go, or be down, yet look on it in the
first place however, not transiently, but stay your Eye upon it, till you
cannot longer do it handsomely without too apparent Prostitution of your design,
than combing your Wigg shake it with a Grace, make up your Mouth betwixt a
smile and a simper, look upon the Presence with some Pity but more scorn. And
then begin, Mr. Speaker, and there pause again, for it becomes you to seem
modest at first; and so after a frown or two more with your mouth, and as many
smiles with your Forehead, proceed in good earnest without any more faces and
prefaces to be wail the evil, the fatal, the sad Consequences, the mischiefs
many and great, that threaten the Kingdom's ruin and turning it to a
Commonwealth again, by the Apple-mongers and old Women in the Strand,
Charing Cross, and all along by White Hall as far as Westminster in the Face of
the Street and all Bystanders, selling and exposing to sale from day to day
whole baskets full of Pippins, Paremains, Russettings, and old Apple John's.
Whereas one sturdy Swiss (for I am sure he will run in your head) and here you
must beg Mr. Speakers pardon, and correct your self, and say you meant one
sturdy Fisher-boy (and that you must observe for a certain Rule, though you are
out never so much, yet for all that still to go on) I say Mr. Speaker one
sturdy Fisher-boy by that fatal occasion of over-turning an Apple-womans
basket, over-turn'd all Naples, his name was Massanello, and the story is true.
And though Mr. Speaker you may at first think it but an idle story, yet all
circumstances duly weighed, it may some time or other prove of fatal and
dangerous consequence to the Commonwealth. There is Mr. Speaker beside
Punchanello's Audience a great concourse of Boys whipping Giggs, and of
Lacqueys playing at the wheel of Fortune, as I my self have often remarqued, or
if you will not rely upon my single observation, my Lord Chief Justice, and
Sir Edmond Godfrey are able to inform you. Now Mr. Speaker, beside what may
ordinarily happen at any time in scuffles between the Boys, or the Lacqueys, or
the Porters, it may so fall out that some pleasant and humorous Gentleman, one
of the Cock-wits of the town, as he is passing on by Charing Cross to
White Hall, either for the intrinsic wit of the frolic it self, or to make a
noise by boasting the adventure in the privy Gallery, should either by himself,
or the officious Ministry of his Footboy over-turn a whole Settle of
Apple-baskets; that must of necessity make a scramble, a scramble a scuffle, a
scuffle a tumult, and then that may lightly come to pelting of Apples, and that
to tumbling in the kennel, and that to bloody noses, and then be sure (Mr.
Speaker) hell is broke loose, as I have observed in my Book of Aphoisms and
Similitudes, when the Scots entered England upon as slight a Cause, viz. to
fight for the Jure Divino of throwing Cricket-stools at Divine Service. And
what followed thereupon is yet Page 148.
within the compass of most men's memories. Mr. Speaker, I would not willingly
be such a sool as to make a dangerous similitude that has no foundation, for
every similitude must have if not all, yet some likeness. That is to say, (for
it will be sometimes requisite for so deep a Statesman as you to explain your
self) there is no likeness without some likeness. But this (Mr. Speaker) I am
sure of, that War was begun by the Women and Children and Servants of
Edinburgh, as you may see in the first Remonstrance presented in their names to
the Lord Chancellor of Scotland. And so if it should happen upon this occasion
at Charing Cross, that any Massanello (and believe me Mr. Speaker all Kingdoms
are full of Massanello's) should head the Tumult, what else can lightly be
expected, but that they should either betake themselves to White Hall, and
there revile the King to his face, for requiring things impossible,
unnecessary, or wanton of his people, for not considering the Laws and Customs
under which they have been formerly bred (as when under the Long-Parliament,
the Rump and Committee of Safety they had the Privilege of raising Tumults
against their Governors) for not giving them good words upon all occasions,
and humouring them like Children; for not being so civil as to condescend to
their infirmities, and if at any time they have got a cold, forcing them to be
covered; in brief, for not observing the constitution of their bodies, and the
antipathy of their stomachs. But if they shall pass by White Hall (as Mr.
Speaker no body knows the motions of Tumults) then what can be expected, but
that they should immediately to Westminster one and all, and so beset this
House, and offer violence to the Members for being so foolishly trinkled, and
burthening the Subject with such a superfetation of Acts. And therefore (Mr.
Speaker) to be short, my humble motion is, etc. But here you know how to go on
by your self, it is only to move and desire the House for a quarter of an hour
together by repeating the same Premises all over again, that neither Apples,
nor Pears, nor Nuts, nor any other incentives of scrambling may be sold between
Charing Cross and Westminster Hall for fear of Massanello's and sturdy Swisses.
Do but speak it confidently, and with a good Grace, and then I am sure the
Speech it self deserves more regard, and is of closer importance to the King,
Parliament, and Government, than all your idle stories from Alexander the Great
down to the Great King Gill. I am content (if you will keep your own counsel)
you should have the honor of the Motion, and I doubt not but it will be
thought so serviceable to the Commonwealth, that if your Effigies be not set
up in the next Nich to King James in the Royal Exchange, yet you can never fail
of having your Statue erected among the foremost of the Dirt-basket-Justices.

And now I have done, and hope by this time you perceive, that though one night
may make some men gray, yet threescore years cannot make others wise. And
therefore I would advise you to meddle no more with Ecclesiastical Polities,
for I plainly perceive that Divinity is a Trade (that God be thanked) you are
not of. And that truly the reason why God does not bless you in tampering with
matters of Religion, is, both because he never intended you for that
employment; or if he did, you have neglected to fit your self for it by
Education. So that if you must be scribbling, betake your self to your own
proper trade of Lampoons and Ballads, and be not so unadvised as to talk in
public of such matters as are above the reach of your understanding, you
cannot touch Sacred things without profaning them. To conclude, though it was
the Opinion of most wise men, that there was nothing more needful to answer
your Libel, than only to desire the world to compare it with my Discourses; yet
others, who overpowr'd me to this Reply against the bent of my own
inclinations, thought it expedient that I should lay you thus open, though it
were only to let those weak People, that once seemed to admire and applaud you,
know that they had so little judgment as to approve the most despicable
Trifler that was ever guilty of ink-shed. And as for what concerns your self I
shall say no more, than to assure you, that if you will learn modesty by this
Correction, and so give over Transprosing and the Good Old Cause, you shall
ever hereafter find me as much your friend as ever heretofore. But as for my
Reply I fear it not, for if you will keep to the Reason of the Argument, I know
You and all your Party cannot answer; and if you will play the fool again, that
will not serve your turn a second time; the very people that once magnified
your Wit, now laugh at the silliness of your Pamphlet. At least, I think I have
so sufficiently chastised your folly, that if you should be so rash as to
continue troublesome, there will be no need of a second Correction, you will be
laughed at, and scorned enough without being exposed by any beside your self.
However I have something else to do than to write a Book against every ignorant
and conceited man that has nothing else to do than to throw out his impertinent
scrible against me. And therefore I shall only desire you to recommend me to
all your Friends at Charing Cross and in Lincolns-inn-fields, and so bid you
heartily farewell.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
Reader, Thou art desired to pardon those few faults that have escaped the
Press, by reason the Author had not the Revising of the sheets.


