A CAVEAT TO Conventiclers: BEING A Letter from an English Gentleman in
STOCKHOLME, TO A Person of quality in LONDON: RELATING The Manner of the DEVILS
appearance in the Duchy of FINLAND.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCLXX.

A CAVEAT TO CONVENTICLERS: BEING A Letter from an English Gentleman in
STOCKHOLME, TO A Person of Quality in LONDON, etc.
Sir,
I Am not a little amazed to find it pass without contradiction here, that the
whole Duchy of Finland is possessed by the Devil, and that he is now received
and acknowledged by the people there, having made his public entry upon the
seventh of March last into the Town of Strixbourg (vulgarly called Oulenstadt)
in this equipage. The Sky seemed at first to darken in a horrid manner; and
after an unheard of Tempest of Thunder and Lightning, the Van couriers appeared
in number about half a score, clad in a duskish Soot-coloure sort of Shamoy;
their Shape and Figure was much like those Pictures, which we see here upon
Earth of the Devil. For it is supposed that he sat to Michael Angelo when he
drew the Landscape of Hell; and all those Pictures that go about of him, are but
Copies of that Original that hangs in the Vatican. These were grim visaged,
Sawcer-ey'd, Broad-ear'd, Cloven-footed, Long-tail'd, Sharp-teeth'd, and all
over Hairy. As for their Stature, we can give no certain standart of it,
because that as they approached toward the Town, they seemed to grow higher
and higher; nay, there are those that will depose upon oath that some of them
shot up to that prodigious height, that their heads appeared above the highest
Chimnies; none of them but were above the ordinary pitch of a man. It was
observed, that one of them struck the hat off the first man he met, intimating
(as it is supposed) that they were all to be uncovered.

This dreadful appearance was followed by another no less terrible, which was
ushered in by the winding of Horns, whose sound was so doleful and ominous, as
would make any ones heart fail: This music was made by half a dozen close
Mourners, in bulk and stature far exceeding the former; Cloven-footed they also
were; but the exact shape of their body we could not discern, because it was
hid under their long Cloaks: but still as they went along, they nodded their
heads at the people, as it were foreboding some evil to them.

But that which of all was most dismal, a Herald now appears in a
party-colored Coat with the Devils own Effigies pictured in it (and therefore
we suppose he gives no other Arms.) This Herald, as soon as he came to the
Gates of the Town, with a loud and hollow voice denounced Woe to the people,
which struck no small terror into them; nevertheless, their curiosity
overcoming their fears, they were resolved to abide the issue of this Pomp,
which seemed rather a Funeral then a Triumph.

After this, was heard a confounded discord of winde-Musick, which seemed to
result from disagreeing Flajeolets, Flutes and How boys; these were his Guards,
a Troop consisting of about two hundred, all very well armed and mounted: some
wore Rapiers, but the major part Scimiters; and therefore it may be very well
imagined that they were slain Turks which the Devil had raised at the Siege of
Candia: and to confirm the suspicion, some thought they wore Turbants: but of
this we suspend our belief.

In the midst of this Troop rode the Devils Grace himself on a
milk-white-S^eed; he wore a very fair Periwig (as the mode is) and a plume of
white Feathers, a fringed Crevat about his neck, his Sword drawn and brandisht
in the Air. Those that observed the lines of his Face, say, that his presence
was grave and majestic, but seemed something in years: his stature did not
much exceed that of ordinary men; his body somewhat full and corpulent; one of
his Feet was cloven, and tipped with a horny substance like that of an Oxes
hoof, the other was like the huge Claw of a Bird armed with dreadful long
Talons. He had great Sawcer-Eyes, and long Ears and Tail: some that had
formerly seen him, say, that his visage then was nothing so horrible as it used
to be at other times; possibly he put on this pleasing guise, to win the
people, and take off those frightful apprehensions which the Pulpits had raised
of him.

The Fields were all covered with the Infantry, which by their Manners, Habit,
and Dialect seemed Wild Irish; for they were great drinkers of Usquebaugh, wore
long Trouses, and their Speech was much in the Throat: besides, those that
conversed with them, say, that for ought they can understand by them, they were
very superstitious, and easy of belief; for they do in a manner acknowledge,
that they were Spirited out of their Bogs and Woods, and transported hither
with vain hopes of preferment: though some of them seem to talk odly, as if
they had dropped out of the Sky.

This was the manner and order of his approach to the Town; where being
arrived, he alighted, and went into an open Chariot that stood ready to receive
him. He was no sooner seated, but he gave a loud Hollow through the Air;
presently after which, the Heavens turned as black as pitch, as if his breath
had over cast them: The people run into their Houses, barred up their Doors and
Windows; and there was such a general consternation, that the most daring Bully
Rocks amongst them became speechless, few or none being so present to
themselves, as to think of their Prays; for they were indeed so stupefied,
that they lost the use of their senses. This horror having lasted above two
hours, the Heavens began to clear again, the people to recover themselves and
look abroad, where nothing appeared but a serene Sky; the Devil and all his
Fiends vanished, and left no mark or sign of their being there.

This Relation we had from Strixbourg in Finland, which truly I gave but light
credit to at first; but finding it confirmed by every Post from those parts,
and having discoursed with several that were present, who did all agree in
every circumstance of the story: I confess my curiosity was seduced so far as
to consult a Conjurer in this affair; and it was my good fortune to light on
one that held very good intelligence with the Devil. He told me that his last
Advices from Hell gave him this Character of the person that invaded those
parts. He pretended great sobriety and moderation in his outward carriage, but
was in his heart a Murderer, Thief, Leacher, and indeed given over to all
manner of vice and debauchery; and (which rendered his wickedness more
dangerous) he was undoubtedly a great Scholar, having been adored by the
Schoolmen at Athens, when Learning most flourished in Greece; and to all those
persons that resorted to him, he made so plausible a plea to justify all that
he did, that he removed all scandal from them, and sent them away fully
convinced and satisfied in the integrity of his Life and Manners; such is the
power of his wit and dissimulation! yet he seems to be contemplatively given,
being for the most part in retirement, and not to be seen or spoken with, but
at certain hours which he sets apart for business, in which his expedition is
admirable; for he is of so quick an apprehension, that when he sits in
judgment, all matters brought before him, though never so perplexed, he reduces
to a certain point, and dispatches immediately: for though he appeared in
warlike equipage, he is rather a Gown-man then a Soldier; yet of few words,
for he never opens his mouth, but when it is much to the purpose: none ever
observed him laugh or smile.

Then I asked him whether he might not be Antichrist ^he said, No, for there
appeared no marks of the Beast about him; but guessed him rather to be one of
the Silenced-Ministers of darkness, who judging by the multitude of Souls
hourly transported to Hell, that there was a general Toleration of all things
here upon Earth, came hither for Liberty of Conscience: but he finds himself
as much deluded in his expectation, as those NON-CONFORMISTS are, who go to
Hell for the same reason, it being indeed out of the Drying Pan into the fire;
for in the Swedish Dominion they allow but one way of Worship.

That he is a Phanatick no man questions, for he seldom fails to be present,
and to exercise his gifts at Private Meetings. Having understood that there was
a Conventicle held in a Barn near Strixbourg, at such time as he made his
solemn appearance, he came into the House invisible, where he found indeed some
half a score poor wretches, (frighted perhaps with the horrid face of things,
and apprehension of the day of Judgement's approach) at an Exercise: one of
them, little imagining him to be present, unadvisedly got into a Tub, to hold
forth to the rest. Now whether he looked upon this as an usurpation of his
Office, or whether the Doctrine held forth was repugnant to his Tenets, is a
doubt worthy of the Brethrens QVERIES. Certain it is, that he seized the poor
mortal, and hurried him away in the Air, to the great affrightment of the whole
Congregation; who being too well assured by the guilt of their Consciences,
that the Delinquent was fallen into the hands of Justice, immediately dissolved
the Meeting.

Policy is his Religion, and therefore it is believed he would turn Papist, if
he might have been chosen Pope; but despairing to be promoted by a Christian or
Catholic interest, and finding that the Queen of Sweden (whom he had reason to
believe was his enemy) had a great influence over the Squadrone Volante, where
he placed his main hopes; he endeavored to breed as much division in the
Conclave, as might be; and therefore is believed to have put it into the Wench
of Riminie's head, to pretend a Revelation in favor of Cardinal Barbarin: but
though his designs took no effect, yet those that rightly understand things
say, it is most certain that had the Squadrone Volante carried the Election, he
had been Pope.

But failing here, be s^ts up for himself, and defies all Religion, Preaches
nothing but Liberty and Atheism, which may be a probable reason, that he has a
multitude of followers wheresoever he goes.

Some thought at first that his business here upon earth was, in the Devils
name, to take possession of the Duchy of Finland, as an appurtenance of Hell,
because it is a damned Country, and not fit for any Christian, or indeed living
soul to dwell in: but upon better reflection, they were convinced that that
Duchy could not belong to Hell, because the torments of the damned there
proceed from cold, and not fire; though perhaps the Devil may have a just Title
to some Mines of Sulphur and Arsnick lately discovered in those parts.

I confess this discourse of the Conjurer did much amaze me; and therefore to
settle a right understanding in me of these things, I desired him to raise this
Devil before me; which he courteously did, together with the whole procession
of the Cavalcade, which I have caused to be cut in brass, and intend shortly to
print, and publish for the satisfaction of the World. Sir, this is all from

Stockholm, April 10. 1669/70. Your humble Servant J. P.

FINIS.

