A DISCOURSE Sent to the Late King James, To persuade him to Embrace the
Protestant Religion, BY Dr. SAMVEL PARKER, Late Lord Bishop of OXFORD.

To which are prefixed TWO LETTERS; The FIRST, From Sir Leolyn Ienkins, on the
same Subject; The SECOND, From the said Bishop, with the DISCOURSE.

Printed from the Original Manuscript Papers, without Observation or Reflection.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall.
MDCXC.

To the READER.
THese Papers accidentally falling into my hands, 'twere injustice to conceal
them from the World, when so much benefit may be reaped from their Publication;
and though there are many Reasons to be alleged for Printing so useful a
Discourse, yet none was so prevalent with me as the thoughts of doing our dead
Author Justice, at least as to that part of his Accusation wherein he has been
adjudg'd, if not professedly, yet a well-wisher at least to the Roman Catholic
Religion; that he was so to the Person he sends these following lines, is
evident from the Design of them, which was to bring him over to the Communion
of the Church of England; a Design, considering the Circumstances of those
distracted Times, so very seasonable and honest, that the D -- Himself was
forced to acknowledge as much, and afterward thanked the Dr. for it, and had
God given it its due Effect, we might all have thanked him too: But however the
Discourse may have missed of its aim where intended; I hope it may not want
some Proselytes of the same Persuasion, for whose sake it is chiefly published.
As to what concerns the Author himself, I shall be wholly silent, the World
laboring under too great a Prejudice to hear his Panegyric with Patience: The
following Tract, with his other Learned Writings are his best Orator; but if
any Man's Curiosity should lead him to a farther desire of knowing his
Character, if he pleases, he may better take it from himself.

DEPOSITUM SAMUELIS PARKER Nuper Episcopi Oxoniensis: Qui hoc Elogio posteris
commendari voluit.
SImultates, and privatas inimicitias
Non modo non fovi,
Sed contempsi.
Sola integritate fretus,
Nec vivere
Erubesco;
Nec mori reformido.
Divinam Providentiam
Non minus credo, quam opto.
Hanc vitam, utcunque sustineo,
Meliorem expecto;
Fide non infelix,
Spe felicior.
Multa legi, cogitavi, scripsi
Omnia ab ipsis rei cujusque Principiis exorsus;
Nec tamen ulla scire videar melius
Quam quae per fidem accepi.
Sir Leolyn Jenkins His Letter to the late King.
THIS Discourse (or what else you please to call it) was brought me by the
Canterbury Carrier; your R. H. will see in the loose Leaf joined to this, how
it comes to be addressed to my Hands. The Author I have known long since; he
was Chaplain to my late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, his Name is Dr. Samuel
Parker, (at present) Archdeacon of Canterbury; as I have not had any
Communication with him of any kind, these many Years, so the coming of this
Treatise to my Hands is a perfect Surprise; yet seeing the Subject matter of it
is that which we pray and contend for, I durst not but commit it to this
present Conveyance, beseeching Almighty God to give a Blessing upon it.

For Sir Leolyn Jenkins.
SIR,
HAving been lately confined with a great Indisposition of Health, and not
knowing how the Divine Providence might be pleased to dispose of me, after I
had settled my own private Affairs as well as I could, an Extravagant. Thought
thrust it self vehemently upon me to leave a Legacy for His Royal Highness,
which in those better Intervals I enjoyed, I composed, and out of that eager
Zeal. I have for the true Settlement of the Church of England, cannot forbear
to present it. And in order to it make bold (...) it to your Honor, and if your
Curiosity will support your Patience to peruse it, I submit it entirely to your
Wisdom to dispose of it as you please. And though I have no reason to expect
any success from so weak on Endeavor, yet the very (...) of the Design in a
Priest of the Church of England* will at least (...) it self for I have only
addressed my self to His Royal Highnesses Conscience without any regard to his
worldly Interest; and that is a thing that any Churchman that has any sincere
love for his Religion is not only authorized, but obliged to do; and as for the
Event of such unlikely Attempts, they are to be entirely left to the over
ruling (...) god. I request the favor of your Perusal, and if you (...) utterly
ridiculous, to convey it to His Highness. If you are tempted to smile at my
Folly, I beseech you to impute it to my present Weakness, and when I am in a
better Condition of Health, for which I thank God I am now in a very fair way,
perhaps I shall be as forward as any to laugh at the oddness of the Attempt.
But whatever it is, I am sure it has the warrant of a good meaning from, Sir,

Your most Humble Servant, S. PARKER.

SIR,
WHat Addresses, or whether any at all, have been made to Your Royal Highness
by the Divines of the Church of England, for the Satisfaction of your
Conscience, I am altogether ignorant. Tho I cannot suppose that none have been
made, because I know great numbers of Learned Men of our Communion, both
Zealous for their Religion, and also for Your Highnesses Service here, and
Souls welfare hereafter. But then this I have too much Reason to fear, that
some of them may not have taken that Method; nor have proceeded upon those
Principles that they ought. For the Men that have ever since his Majesty's
Return, been, or at least appeared, most forward, in defiance of the Church of
Rome, have been so unhappy in their Zeal and Opposition against it, as together
with the Papal Usurpations, to dig up the very Foundations of the Christian
Church: or, at the same time that they endeavor to pull down the Pope's present
high and uncanonical Pretenses, destroy all that Divine Authority that was
vested by our Blessed Savior in the Apostles and their Successors, for the
Guidance and Government of Souls; so as to make every private Person the only
Judge of his own Faith, without any defense to the Direction of his Spiritual
Guides and Governors: which is in effect no less than really to cancel that
Promise that our Blessed Savior made to be assistant to them in the Execution
of their Office, to the End of the World; for if he make good his Promise, that
alone is more than enough to challenge the regular Submission of private
Christians to their Decrees, as they would not Rebel against our Savior's own
Institution. This I know has been the great stumbling Block to the Roman
Catholics, that the Church of England neither pretends to, nor owns any such
Power, as that of a living Judge; but that it either resolves all its Authority
into the State, or leaves all its Members at their own entire liberty, to
choose their Religion as they please, without being accountable to the Church
for it.

These, I must confess, are very common Opinions among us, but then they are
very new too, and as great Strangers to the Church of England, as to the Church
of Rome: being at first started about his Majesty's Return, when some young Men
that had been fanatically Educated, seeing the Church of England Restored, and
either having a mind to its Preferments, or to bring themselves off from the
Principles of their Education, pretended that there was no such thing as any
particular Form of Church Government, settled by our Savior or his Apostles;
and therefore that it was left entirely to the power of the Civil Magistrate to
Establish what Form He Himself liked best. And for that Reason, and for that
alone, seeing his Majesty was pleased to restore Episcopacy, they thought it
their Duty to submit to that as to all other Civil Laws and Constitutions. But,
alas, these are not Church, but State-Divines, and not only Traitors to the
Liberties of the Church of England, but professed Enemies to the very Being of a
Christian Church; which as such, subsists merely upon our Savior's own Charter
and Institution, by virtue whereof all Christians are bound to associate in a
visible Society, and to submit to the Decrees and Ordinances of those Governors
that he has set over it. This, I say, is the first Principle of a Christian
Church, and is owned by all Men, that either own any such thing as a Church, or
understand what they mean by the word. So that the only true State of the
Controversy in this Case between Church and Church, is to discover how the
Government of the Catholic Church was at first settled by our Savior: how it
descended to after Ages, and who at this time stick closest to the Primitive
Institution.

And for Your Highnesses full Satisfaction herein, I will make a faithful
Representation of the true State of the Primitive Church, and then compare the
present Constitution of the Church of England, and the Church of Rome; and
thereby show how enormously the Church of Rome, notwithstanding all its high
Pretenses, has departed from it, and how honestly the Church of England
endeavors to keep to the original Platform; and when I have done this, I shall,
with all Humility, submit it to Your Royal Highnesses Wise and Impartial
Judgment: For I know that in matters relating to Your Souls welfare, You design
nothing but Truth, and the best way to secure it. This I am assured of, not
only from the famed Integrity, and Generousness of Your Princely Temper, that
scorns to admit of the Alloy of Secular Interest into the great Concerns of
Conscience, but by that great Courage and Resolution You have shown for the
Maintenance of Your present Persuasion (whatever that is) to Your great
Detriment and Disadvantage of Your Affairs in this World. But though I think it
most apparently Your present Interest to quit that Church, yet I think it too,
a very Ignoble, as well as Irreligious Attempt, to make that an Argument for
it. And I am afraid, That is one of the highest Prejudices that Your Royal
Highness may have conceived against the Church of England, that some Men in it
have insisted upon Your worldly Interest too much in a point of Conscience. And
yet if by a true and sincere Account of things, I can bring Your Conscience
over to the Church of England, though I shall not bring Your Conscience to Your
Interest, yet I shall make them meet: for if that were satisfied, it is obvious
on which side the Advantage lies. And though upon the Supposition of Conscience
being satisfied, Interest might be admitted as an accessional Motive; yet I
shall entirely wave all worldly Considerations, and disdain any Assistance that
is Foreign to the cause of Religion, and if I did not, I am sure Your Highness
would.

And therefore I shall only humbly crave leave to represent the true State of
the Christian Church, and from thence remonstrate to Your Princely Wisdom, that
Your Highness can have no Reason either as a Christian Man or a Christian
Prince, to concern Your Self for the Interest, or join with the Communion of
the Church of Rome, and that on the contrary you have all the Reason in the
World, upon both Accounts, to love and value the Church of England.

First then Christianity supposes the Temporal Power of Princes, Civil
Government being settled in the World by the general Providence of God
antecedently to our Savior's particular Institution. And as he found it, so he
left it, with an express declaimor of any Pretense to it, in the first place
declaring that the Kingdom that he came to establish was not of this World:
that is, that he was not invested with any Temporal Jurisdiction. And the truth
is, if he had laid claim to any such Power, his Religion had stood upon no
better foundation than Mahumetanism it self, that was at first propagated, and
has been hitherto maintained merely by the Power of the Sword. But the Design
of our Savior's Institution, was pure and unmixed Religion, and therefore
abetted it Self and its Laws with no other Sanctions than only the Rewards and
Punishments of the Life to come. And the same Power that he exercised himself,
he devolved upon his Apostles, from them to descend upon their Successors to
the End of the World; so that all their Power, whatever it is, is of the same
Nature with that which himself claimed whilst on Earth, that is purely
spiritual and void of all temporal Coertion. And for this Reason it is evident,
that if any Church pretend to any such Power by Virtue of his Grant or
Commission, that it is not only a Contradiction to the Nature of Christianity,
but an Atheistical Abuse put upon the whole Design of his Institution.

Now upon this Supposition, there are and must be in all Kingdoms and
Commonwealths where Christianity is entertained and protected, two distinct
Jurisdictions, so as that if one entrench upon or invade the other, it is an
equal Violation of Christianity; for if the temporal Prince assume to himself
the Exercise of that Power that is peculiarly invested in the Officers of the
Church, instead of governing the Church he destroys it: when every Church, as a
Church, is capable of no other Government but what is purely spiritual, and
delegated to it by our Savior's special Commission, after the full Settlement
of the Power of Princes. And the same Violation of Christianity is it, if any
of the Governors of the Church should challenge any such Power by Virtue of our
Savior's Authority, for that were to turn a spiritual into a temporal Kingdom.

Now these two Powers being so plainly distinct both in their Nature and
Original, they must continue so notwithstanding the Union of Church and State
into one Society. For if the Prince take upon him the sole Government of the
Church as such, he acts not only without but against our Savior's Commission,
who has appropriated that Power to another Order of Men; and if the Priest
challenge any temporal Jurisdiction as derived from our Savior, he in effect
disclaims him, in that he becomes our Savior purely by Virtue of his spiritual
Power, and Supremacy over his Church; and therefore to pretend to any other
Power derived from him as Head of it, is another way of turning Christ into
Mahomet.

But tho the Civil Magistrate have no share of spiritual Authority, yet has he
a Sovereign Supremacy over the Ecclesiastical State; otherwise he would abate
of his Power by the coming of Christianity into the World; which contradicts
the first Principle of a Christian Church, that it makes no Alteration as to
Civil Rights: but then this Power over the Church is purely civil too, and
relates only to the Ends of Peace and Government in this Life, and is the same
that every Prince would have had, tho our Savior had never come into the World;
but as for that which he has peculiarly granted, as he has granted no part of
it to the Civil Magistrate, so it is plain that he has designedly settled it
upon another Order of Men, and it is they alone that have any Right to exercise
it. But notwithstanding this new Power, they are never the less Subjects than
they were before; and therefore all Christian Princes have the same Supremacy
over all the Powers of the Church, as to the Ends of Civil Government, and as
far as concerns the Affairs of this Life, as they could have had if there were
no such Powers at all.

The grand Difficulty in this Case is the Danger of Competition between these
two Powers; for if they happen to contradict each other, as they too often do,
Which shall overruled? If a Man obey his Prince contrary to the Prescription of
his spiritual Guide, he may endanger his Soul; if he obey the Bishop, he
disobeys his Prince, and so deservedly forfeits his Neck to Justice. But this
Difficulty, as big as it may appear, is clearly removed by this one
Consideration, That the Christian Church, and all the Authority in it, is
founded upon the Cross of Christ, and that not only claims no Power in this
World, but obliges to an entire Submission to all the Powers of it; so that no
Opposition can lawfully be made, even to the most unlawful Commands of
Sovereign Princes, but all Christians are still bound to do as they did in the
Primitive Times, to lay down their Lives with all manner of Meekness, if their
Governors, whether right or wrong, require it. This is the true and honest
State of the Christian Church, That every Christian Man be faithful to the Laws
of his Religion, and if he suffer for it he shall be compensated for it with
those Rewards that his Religion promises. So that in all Cases of Competition
both Powers so prevail, as to attain their respective Ends. The Civil Power
overrules as to all Effects of this Life, and being thus gently submitted to,
secures the Peace and Quiet of this World, and that is the End for which it was
instituted. And the spiritual Power attains its Effect as to the World to come,
the Salvation of the Souls of Men by their conscientious Loyalty to their
Religion; and that is all that it aims at, or pretends to; and every Man that
professes Christianity, takes it up upon this Condition. So that all
Resistance to secular Powers upon pretense of Religion, is a direct
Contradiction to the nature of the Christian Faith, and another open Apostasy
from Christianity to Mahumetanism: And that I am afraid will prove a gross
Blemish upon the Church of Rome, that it pretends to a Power not only equal,
but superior to Princes: so that the Popes, as the Vicars of Christ, may not
only contend with them by force of Arms, but may in some Cases depose them from
their Thrones; which if truly considered, is no less than rank Blasphemy
against our blessed Savior, by turning his pure Religion into an Artifice of
secular Interest.

But beside this, this Point of Competition is to be chiefly determined by the
Matter about which it is employed. If the Contest be about an Article of Faith,
or any Fundamental Rule of Religion, and the Prince will interpose his Power,
tho no Man is obliged to obey him, because it is certain he never was entrusted
with any such Power by our Savior, yet is he to be submitted to with all
Meekness, by virtue of the former Principle, that requires peaceable Submission
to Government from Christians in all Cases, for the quiet of the World. But if
the Contest be about a Ritual of Worship, or an emergent Rule of Discipline,
about which the Governors of the Church have a Power in themselves to make
Canons and new Provisions, yet are they indispensibly bound to submit the
Exercise of it to their Prince, because that is the first Principle of
Christianity, as far as they can without Violence to the Laws of their
Religion, to comport with Civil Government; so that tho this Power be seated
properly in the Church; yet out of that great Respect and Duty that the
Christian Law requires to Princes, they are bound to make use of it with all
Deference to Sovereign Authority; especially because the Church is accountable
to it for its peaceable Behavior in the Commonwealth, and therefore ought to
give Security that it will neither disturb the State, nor invade the Sovereign
Prerogative upon this Pretense; which because it is possible for them to do,
and some have done, they are concerned both in Duty and Modesty to submit all
their Proceedings to his Judgment. And this, as far as I understand, is the
true State of the Church of England, in the Act commonly called the Submission
of the Clergy, in which they do not alienate ar grant away their Power of
making Canons, but only for preventing all future Jealousies in the State
against them, they give all the Assurance they can, that they will not presume
to publish their Decrees without their Sovereign Lord's Consent and
Approbation. This short Account is the true State of the Bounds of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and that being settled, the next thing to be
considered, is to find out what was the true and original Settlement of the
Christian Church; and by that we shall be able to inform our selves of the good
or bad state of any present Church, as it agrees, or disagrees with it.

First then, there is no one thing more clear and evident in the Christian
Religion, than that our Savior vested the whole Apostolical Order with a
Supremacy of Power over his Church, and that they in pursuance of this his
Divine Institution ordained Bishops to succeed them in their Supremacy of Power
through all following Ages.

That the Apostles were superior to all other Officers in the Church, is out of
question, and granted on all hands; and that the Bishops succeeded them, is as
unquestionable, from all the clearest Records of Antiquity; their Succession,
especially in the most famous Churches, being derived by the most ancient
Writers from the Apostles themselves, and was as easily and certainly known to
those Men that have transmitted it to us, as any learned Man may know the
Succession of the Archbishops of Canterbury, from the Reign of Queen Eliz. to
this time.

But as this Power was at first given to the Apostles, so was it equally
divided among them; so that every one exercised supreme Power within the Bounds
of his own Jurisdiction, Epist. 52.
and all together in the Catholic Church; or as S. Cyprian states it, that as
there was but one Church founded by Christ throughout all the World, but this
Church was made up of several distinct Members, so was there but one
Episcopacy, and that consists in the Agreement and unanimous care of all
Christian Bishops: So that the whole Body of the Church was governed by the
whole Body of the Apostles and their Successors, but the several parts of it
were allotted to the Charge of single Bishops, who governed them with
particular Care, but so as to have regard to the Peace and Unity of the Whole.
This is the only Notion that this wise and good Man (than whom there is not a
more eminent Example for both upon Record) seems in all his Writings to have
had of the Catholic Church. And as for the Apostles, who were the first
Representatives of it, I cannot find the least Footsteps in all the holy
Gospels of any particular Prerogative granted to one above the rest. It is true
indeed that our Savior often addresses himself to S. Peter in particular, but
then it is evident, that this is done upon particular Occasions, and as evident
too, that all the great things that are occasionally spoken of him, are in the
Scripture ascribed to all the other Apostles. Thus whereas Matthew. xvi. our
Savior gives him the Keys of Heaven, upon his confessing him to be the Messiah,
He vests all the Apostles with the same Power, and that with particular
solemnity, John xx. 21. And whereas he styles S. Peter the Rock, or Foundation,
upon which he would build his Church, the same Title is given to all the
Apostles in other Scriptures, as Ephesians. ii. 20. Built upon the Foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone.
And Revel. xxi. 14. The Wall of the City had twelve Foundations upon which were
the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. And in all the Gospels, unless
when he applies himself particularly to S. Peter upon the Occasion of his Zeal,
and Forwardness in the Faith, our Savior invests them all with an equal Power,
especially when he gave them their grand Commission to convert all Nations,
Matthew. xxviii. 19, 20. So that the Men of the Church of Rome strein the
Scriptures with too forced a Violence, when out of such slight and accidental
Occasions of our Savior's particular Speeches to S. Peter, they would settle
such great and high Privileges upon his Person, so as to make him sovereign
Lord of all the other Apostles, and sole Monarch of the Universal Church. This
Foundation is too slight for the Weight of so great a Building, and so big a
Claim requires somewhat a clearer Evidence of Title; and if our Savior had
intended any such absolute Sovereignty to S. Peter, and made that the
Fundamental Principle of his Church, certainly he would have declared it a
little more expressly, and not have left so weighty a Point to be merely
surmis'd out of occasional Discourses, of which there are such easy and
obvious Reasons to be given, without his ever intending any such design: So
that in truth to make so much Noise as the Romanists do about the personal
Privileges of S. Peter, upon such poor and slender Pretenses, is at once to
impose upon the Wisdom of God, as if he had laid the Foundations of his Church
so slightly, and to affront the Understandings of Men, as if they thought them
so weak as to be persuaded to any thing by such poor and precarious Arguings.

But yet however I will grant more than can with any decent modesty be demanded
from these Texts, and yield that our Savior designed some considerable
Precedence to S. Peter, above all the other Apostles. Yet what is this to that
omnipotent Sovereignty that his Holiness challenges over the whole Christian
Church, who takes upon himself not only the supreme, but almost the sole
Disposal of it; whereas it is too well known, that S. Peter, after the
Privileges granted to him, was commanded by an Order of the other Apostles,
Acts viii. 14. which could never have been done, if his Power had been
Monarchical over them all. Neither do we find him any where exercising any such
Sovereignty over them; for tho by reason of his ready Faculty of Speech he was
usually the first Speaker, yet we do no where find, that he either challenged
or practiced any other Precedence. So that tho he was the first that delivered
his Opinion in the Council of Jerusalem, yet it was S. James that determined
and pronounced the Decree, in that he was Bishop of the Place, as is undeniably
evident from the most undoubted Records of Antiquity. Which yet he ought not to
have done, if S. Peter had been endued with the same Superiority over all the
rest of the Apostles, that the Bishop of Rome challenges over all the other
Bishops of the Christian Church. But not to insist upon these remote and
obscure Footsteps of S. Peter's Primacy in the Scriptures, I will freely grant
him out of the Holy Text it self some considerable Precedence: tho when I have
done that too, what is it to the Bishop of Rome, more than it is to the Bishop
of Antioch or Alexandria, or the Bishops of several other Places, in which S.
Peter first planted the Christian Faith: so that the Bishops of all those
Places have as fair a Title to be S. Peter's Successors as the Bishop of Rome.
And yet this great point I shall be so civil as to admit, and grant that the
peculiar Right of Succession to the Privileges of S. Peter (if any such there
were) was appropriated to the Sea of Rome; but still, What is this to that
universal Jurisdiction that is challenged by the Bishops of this to this See,
as the supreme and infallible Governors of the Catholic Church? For after all
other Disputes, it is this that is the only dividing Point between us; it is this
that is the only Fundamental Article of their Church; it is this for which they
load us so heavily with their honorable Titles of Heretics and Schismatics.
And so no doubt are we, if his Holiness be vested by Divine Right, with that
universal Supremacy that he challenges over the whole Christian Church. In a
word, if we take this one Controversy away, I, for my part, know no other
difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome as to
Ecclesiastical Constitution. But now if this one Point of the Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome were the great Foundation of the Christian Faith, (as it must
be, if his pretenses to it by divine Right are true) it is a very strange thing
that there should not be so much as the shadow of any such Authority in all the
Records of the Primitive Church. Is it not very odd, that when so many
Controversies were started in the Christian Church, both in the Apostles own
time, and in the Ages next and immediately following, and that when Almighty
God had appointed S. Peter and his Successors in the Sea of Rome, the certain
and undoubted Judges for ending all Controversies, that yet none of the
Apostles or Primitive Doctors of the Christian Church, that labored so much
against Schisms, Heresies, and Divisions, should ever so much as think of or
mention such an effectual nay infallible Remedy against them all? One Appeal to
the Bishop of Rome had put an End to all further Trouble, and certainly had God
vested him with that Power over the whole Christian Church, they could never
have been so stupid, as never to have taken any notice of it, And yet we find
not the least mention of it for many hundred years, after the settlement of
Christianity in the World. And perhaps the Bishops of Rome themselves had never
thought of it, had it not been first put into their Heads by the Bishop of
Constantinople, by whom it was (as I shall show in the sequel of this
Discourse) first claimed. Some small glimmerings indeed we meet with of some
honorary Preeminence or Dignity allowed to the Church of Rome upon the score of
its being the Imperial City, and by reason of the great resort to it, of its
being one of the most competent Witnesses of the true Tradition of
Christianity: But that it should have any Jurisdiction over any other Churches
out of its own Province, much more such an universal power over all Churches in
the World as is now challenged, is a Notion so utterly strange and unknown to
all Antiquity, that the bare silence of it alone is an irrefragable
demonstration of the Novelty of the Pretense. But for the greater Evidence of
this thing (which indeed is the first point of Controversy between us) I shall
make bold as briefly as I can, to give Your Royal Highness a true and impartial
account of the State of the Christian Church from the beginning: and then of
the several and gradual Alterations that were by Ecclesiastical Constitutions
made in it in after times: and lastly how, and how late the Popes of Rome
climbed up to that infinite Authority, that they have for some Ages exercised,
and still claim over the Christian Church. And when I have done all this, I may
safely leave it to Your Royal Highnesses Princely Wisdom to judge, what
Obligation You can have in Conscience to leave the Communion of the Britannick
Church for that of Rome.

And in the first place, there is nothing more evident in all the Records of
the Primitive Church, than that the Apostles and first Doctors of the Christian
Faith modeled the first Settlement of Churches according to the then present
State and Division of the Roman Empire. For though our blessed Savior settled
the Supreme Government of his Church upon his holy Apostles and their
Successors, yet he no where prescribed the bounds and limits of every Man's
Jurisdiction, but left it, as indeed the Nature of the thing required, to
Humane Prudence ot divide the Provinces among themselves, as they should judge
most convenient for the Advantage of their common Christianity. And accordingly
we find from the very beginning, that they formed the Jurisdiction of Churches,
according to the Civil Judicatures of the Empire; common Prudence directing
them so to do, not only for the more speedy Propagation of Christianity by the
resort of all People to the Metropolis of the Province, which they therefore
constituted the Mother Church of it, but that whenever the Powers of the World
should come in to own Christianity, the better Correspondence might be
maintained between the States, Civil and Ecclesiastical. And beside this by
making the Head City of every Province the Metropolis of the Church within that
Province, upon which the inferior Cities depended as the Center of Communion,
they thereby admirably secured the Unity of the whole Body, while every
Episcopal Church exercised ordinary Jurisdiction within it self, but was bound,
either in cases of great Difficulty, or such as concerned the common
Christianity, to have recourse to the Mother Church.

And this was apparently, the Original of the Privilege and Preeminence of some
Churches above others from the beginning; not that they ever pretended to any
Sovereignty over them in their particular Jurisdictions, but only as the Center
of Ecclesiastical Unity, so as to decide Controversies, whenever any inferior
Church appealed to them for their Advice, or to summon Councils, and preside
over them in all Debates that concerned common Christianity. And that this
Distribution of Provinces and Bishoprics was settled by the Apostles, seems
evident from their own Writings, who every where describe the bounds of
Churches, according to the Constitution of the Empire. Thus St. Peter directs
his Epistle to the several Churches of the Christian Jews, with respect to so
many several Provinces, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia, which
as they were distinct Provinces in the Civil Division of the Empire, so were
they from that time forward, so many distinct Provincial Sees, in the Communion
of the Church. And nothing is more obvious in the Epistles of St. Paul, than
that whenever he makes mention of any Church, he either calls it by the name of
the Province it self, or the Metropolis or Head City of it. And as this design
of conforming the Ecclesiastical State to the Civil, was first set on foot by
the Apostles; so was it carefully prosecuted by their Successors, of which we
have an eminent Instance in the Apostolical Canons, (which though they were not
compiled by the Apostles themselves, yet they were by Apostolical Men, and such
as immediately succeeded them) where it is decreed in the 34 Canon, That the
Bishops of every Nation should acknowledge their Primate or Metropolitan, and
honor him as their Head, and do nothing of moment in the Christian Church
wthout his consent, nor he without theirs. Now that this was prescribed by the
Apostles themselves, is evident in that, as this Canon was made a very short
time after their Decease, so it is not a new Law, but a Ratification of an old
Custom, as indeed most of the Apostolical Canons seem to be. This was
apparently the Constitution of the Christian Churches in all places of the
Empire for the first three hundred years, or the whole interval of time from
our Savior to Constantine, that as every City was governed by its own Bishop,
so was every Province by its own Metropolitan in his Synod of Bishops, of which
there are many Instances in the Records of the Church, though I shall mention
but one, as the most eminent of all, and that is, the several Synods that were
called about the Paschal Controversy, not long after the time of the Apostles
themselves: which as it was canvassed all the World over, so was it debated in
so many Provincial Synods in each whereof the Metropolitan presided; in
Palestin, Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea; in Pontus, Palma Bishop of Armastris;
in the Proconsular Asia, Policrates Bishop of Ephesus; in Italy, Victor Bishop
of Rome; in France, Irenaeus Bishop of Lions; where every Synod judged for it
self, and made its own Decrees, only Victor would have been meddling with the
Church of Asia, though as far as appears from records, not from any Authority
he pretended to over it, but out of an intemperate Zeal for his own Opinion.
But in this he is quickly checked by the other Churches especially that of
France, though of the same Persuasion with himself as to the matter of the
Controversy, as he would not break the Unity of the Christian Church, which
was to be maintained by no other means, than keeping up the Rights of every
part of it. And this they admirably preserved by their communicatory Letters
between Church and Church, so as no Member of one Church might be admitted to
Communion with another without his Letters Testimonial, whereby it was so
ordered, that whosoever was Excommunicate out of a particular Church, was shut
out of the Church Catholic. Neither could a Bishop exercise any part of his
Office in any other Diocese than his own, much less any other Province; and if
he did, his own Metropolitan was obliged to throw him out of Communion, and all
other not to take him in. And this was the occasion of that sixth famous Canon
of the first Council of Nice under Constantine the Great, that confirms to the
three great Churches of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, their ancient Privileges
and Preeminences. For though some learned Men both within and without the
Church of Rome have been pleased to dispute that the Power here abetted in this
Canon was Patriarchical, and not merely Metropolitical, yet that it was not
Patriarchical is notoriously evident, because there is not the least mention of
any such Office in all the Records of the Christian Church before the Council
of Calcedon, which was above an hundred years after that of Nice, and yet this
Nicene Canon only confirms the old, and accustomed Rights of Churches. And that
this power was Metropolitical, is manifest, because it was made purely in
pursuance of the forementioned 34th Apostolical Canon, that requires the
Subjection of all other inferior Bishops to their National or Provincial
Bishops. The occasion of it was this, That Meletius Bishop of Nicapolis, within
the Province of Alexandria, being deposed by his Metropolitan in a Synod of
Bishops, as for diverse other Crimes, so particularly for Sacrificing to Idols,
notwithstanding that takes upon him to Ordain new Bishops himself, and so
violates all the Preeminences of his Metropolitan, both by slighting his
Censure, and invading his Power. Now complaint hereof being brought to the
Council, they decree that the ancient Prerogatives of the Church of Alexandria
over the inferior Churches within its Province, shall be kept as inviolable as
those of Rome, and the same for Antiochia, and not only so in those great Sees,
but in all other Provinces whatsoever, for so the Canon expressly runs, that not
only at Antiochia, but that in all other (...) or Provinces their ancient
Privileges should be preserved. So that here is nothing peculiar to these three
great Cities determined, because the Jurisdictions of all other Provinces that
were in force at that time, were as much ratified by the same Authority and
that was only this, That whatever Superiority greater Churches had by long
Custom enjoyed over less, should stand confirmed for the time to come. And
accordingly we find it decreed in the second Canon of the second general
Council held at Constantinople as a clear Interpretation of the sixth Canon of
Nice, that all Bishops should contain themselves within the known Circuit of
their Jurisdiction, and not thrust themselves into other Diocesses, especially
that the Bishop of Alexandria should be confined within the Diocese of Egypt,
and Antiochia within that of the East, and that the Churches of Asia, Pontus
and Thracia, should enjoy the ancient Power of Government within themselves, as
well as those that had invaded their Right; this being the occasion of the
Decree of the Council, that Miletius Bishop of Antiochia, had made Gregory
Nazienzen Bishop of Constantinople, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria had done the
same for Maximus, whereas Constantinople was in Thrace, that was a Diocese by
it self in the Civil Division of the Empire, and therefore exempt from the
Jurisdiction of those great Prelates, having the same supreme and independent
Power within it self, as they had within their Provinces, as had also the
lesser Asia and Pontus, which that they might not be encroach'd upon, or
swallowed up by their Potent Neighbors, were here guarded and settled by the
Decree of the Council in the Possession of their ancient Rights, against all
future Invasions. And the same Decree we find in the next general Council held
at Ephesus, Canon the eighth, upon the like occasion, the Bishop of Antioch
taking upon him to Ordain in the Isle of Cyprus, that was an head Province by
it self; This Usurpation therefore the Council severely censures and forbids,
and withal orders that no Metropolitan should challenge any further extent of
Jurisdiction that he could not prove by long and immemorial Prescription, lest
under the Pretense of their Priestly Office, they should introduce a secular
Sovereignty into the Church.

Infinite are the Instances in the Records of the Church of the Metropolitical
Supremacy of Churches, but these that I have already alleged are enough to
show the true Primitive and Apostolical Constitution of the Christian Church,
which lasted the same even as to the bounds of Jurisdiction till the time of
Constantine the Great. But the casting the Civil Government of the Empire into
a new Model, gave occasion to the Church in pursuance of its Primitive Rule of
conforming to the Civil Government, to add to the old Ecclesiastical Hierarchy;
for the whole Empire being divided into thirteen Diocesses, each Diocese
containing many Provinces, in all to the number of 120, and every Province
several inferior Cities. And therefore as every City had its Judge for Civil
Government, so had it its Bishop for Ecclesiastical, and every Province its
President, so its Metropolitan; and every Diocese, which then contained several
Provinces, its Lieutenant, so its Primate. Which indeed was nothing else, but
raising up a superior Order of Metropolitans in conformity to the new Model of
Civil Government; and therefore was at first nothing else but an honorary Title
that gave them Precedence to the Metropolitans, but not Jurisdiction over them.
For the very first time that we meet with any mention of any such Order in the
Church is in the second Canon of the second general Council held at
Constantinople under Theodosius the Great, where at the same time that it
institutes this new kind of Dignity, it secures the old Jurisdiction of
Metropolitans. So that notwithstanding this new Order was brought over their
heads in conformity to the Empire, yet was every Metropolitan Church to be
governed by it self, and its own Synod, in the same manner as it was accustomed
of old, and was confirmed by the decree of the Council of Nice. Which Council
positively asserts the Supremacy of Power, to every Metropolitan within his own
Province. And therefore all the Preeminence of this new Order of Men above them
could consist in nothing but Title and Dignity. And it is sufficiently known to
all that know any thing of the ancient Records of the Church that they had
their (...) their Preeminences of Respect, and (...), their Preeminences of
Power and Authority. And it was usual upon particular occasions to give the
former without conferring the latter, as the great Council of Nice gave to the
Church of Jerusalem, Metropolitical Honor, because it was the Mother of all
Churches, without giving it any Metropolitical Jurisdiction, for that was
reserved entirely for the Bishop of Caesarea, which after the Destruction of
Jerusalem had been made the Civil Metropolis of Palestin by the Emperor
Vespasian, so this present Council of Constantinople, of which we are speaking
in the Canon next following that we last mentioned, gives the (...), the
Preeminencies of Honor, next to the Bishop of Rome, to the Bishop of
Constantinople, because Constantinople was new Rome, and yet gives it nothing
of Metropolitical Power, because it expressly confirms the old Rights of the
three Metropolitans of Asia, Pontus, and Thrace, to which it belonged, in the
Canon immediately foregoing. In short, all the Privileges of the ancient
Metropolitans were divided into two sorts, those of Honor and those of Power;
the former the Fathers of this Council gave to the Bishop of Constantinople out
of Complement to the new Imperial City, but neither could nor would give any
thing of the latter; because that was not to be done without violating and
alienating the real Rights and Privileges of other Men. But yet however, when
once they had gor an higher Title, it easily made way to advance themselves to
an higher Power, insomuch that in a short time after he swallowed up all the
three Metropolitans of Thrace, Pontus, and Asia, into his own Jurisdiction.

And now this superior Order of Primates to Metropolitans, being thus set up by
Ecclesiastical Constitution, it in a little time made way for the Patriarchical
Dignity; the Title whereof was at first borrowed from the wandering Jews of
those times, who wherever they settled in any considerable Number, after their
dispersion from Jerusalem, chose a supreme Governor, whom they styled their
Patriarch; but about the fourth Century, or somewhat after, this Title and
Authority was taken from the Jews, and applied to the new supra-Metropolitan
Bishops, that it seems as yet had obtained no peculiar Name in the Christian
Church. Thus Socrates, the Historian of the Church at that time, reckons up
Nectarius of Constantinople, Helladius of Pontus, Gregory of Nyssa, Ottreius of
Melitina, Amphilochius of Iconium, Optimus of the Pisidian Antioch, Timotheus
of Alexandria, Pelagius of Laodicea, Diodorus of Tarsus, and many more. Tho in
a little time the Title came to be appropriated to the five most eminent Sees,
Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem; and they were made
superior, not only in Title, but in Jurisdiction to all Metropolitans within
their Diocese, because it seems, those Cities being the five chief Cities in
the World, had their Claims to higher Dignity in the civil Government than all
others. Rome, the Seat of the Empire; Alexandria, the head City of Africa, and
Seat of the Great Ptolomys; Antiochia, Queen of the East, and Seat of the Great
Seleucus and his Successors; Jerusalem, the Mother City of all Christian
Churches; and Constantinople, the new Rome of the Empire, that had at that time
over-topt old Rome in Greatness and Authority. Now the Rights that were
peculiar to these Patriarchs above Metropolitans, were these,

First, that wherever they presided, they had many Metropolitans under their
Jurisdiction.

Secondly, that they only had right to ordain the Metropolitans within their
own Patriarchate, as Metropolitans had Bishops within their own Province.

Thirdly, that as Metropolitans had power to call the Bishops of their Province
to Synods, so had Patriarchs to call their Metropolitans.

Fourthly, that they were the supreme Judicature within their own
Patriarchates, no farther appeal being to be made from a Patriarch.

And thus was the Church for a long time governed, every Patriarch enjoying
supreme Power within his own Precincts, and no farther; insomuch that the Rule
was adopted into the imperial Law, A Patriarcha non datur Appellatio; No Appeal
from a Patriarch; and yet that alone is a plain Bar to the Supremacy of the
Pope, or any other, over the whole Christian Church.

But then, as for the Bounds of Jurisdiction, they still followed the Division
of the State; and there it so happened, that the Bishop of Rome, tho for the
sake of the old imperial City, he had Precedence in Honor above all the rest,
had one of the narrowest Jurisdictions of all, his Patriarchate extending, at
the farthest, not beyond Italy and the adjacent Islands; tho according to the
true account, it was not at first above half so great, Italy being divided into
two Parts under two Governors, one residing at Rome, who governed the
Suburbicarian Provinces, so called, because of their lying nearest to the City;
the other at Milain, who governed the more remote Parts. And after the same
manner was the Government of the Church divided into the Roman Diocese, that
was subject to the Bishops of Rome; and the Italic Diocese, of which Milain was
the Head; over which we do not find that the Bishop of Rome, in ancient time,
ever pretended any Patriarchical Supremacy; nay, on the contrary, that S.
Ambrose was ordained in the Year of our Lord 555. Bishop thereof, by a Synod of
Bishops of the Italic Diocese, which he could not have been, had the Bishop of
Rome been his Patriarch, the power of Ordination being the chief Branch of
Patriarchical Jurisdiction. But how great or little soever was the Circuit of
his Patriarchate, it was limited within certain Bounds, as the other
Patriarchates were. And as the Patriarchs were Supreme within their own
Diocese, so were most of the Metropolitans within their own Province: For tho
where Patriarchs were erected, the Metropolitans, within the compass of their
Patriarchate, were subject to them, yet all the other Metropolitans of the
Christian Church enjoyed their own ancient Supremacy, and continued, as they
were before, Head-Churches, exercising Supreme Power within themselves: Of
which there were great Numbers in the World, and some of as large Jurisdiction
as the Patriarchates, especially in Asia. But as for the Patriarchate of Rome,
it never extended its Power beyond Italy, and its adjacent Islands: And
therefore it is very observable, that the Writers of the Church of Rome, care
not that it should be known to the Christian World: So that hereafter, all
their Brags of Universal Pastorship, when they come to make it out, their
Manuscripts still fail them. Carolus a Sancto Paulo has taken most Pains of
any in this Argument, and has done well enough in other Parts; but when he
comes to the Church of Rome, there his Manuscript is so worn out and defective,
that it was not worth publishing.

Now does not this look oddly, that their Books should fail them thus, only in
their own Cause; and does it not rather give suspicion, that themselves are too
well aware, that they would do them no real kindness. However, it is a very
preposterous thing, for a Man to pretend to a Title to a great Estate by virtue
of some ancient Writings, and yet when he comes to try his Title, should only
plead, that indeed such Writings there once were, but that they are now so
impaired that they are not legible. And yet, this is the very Case of the
Church of Rome here. All Christendom, at least the Western Empire, ought to be
subject to him as their Patriarch. Why so? Because he ever was so. How does
that appear? By the ancient Notitiae of the Church. Produce them. So we can for
all the other Patriarchates, but those that concern the Church of Rome are
unhappily lost. Are they so? Then you have lost the Evidence of your Title, and
for ought you do, or can know, never had any.

But instead of this shifting and prevaricating that we meet with in the
Writers of the Church of Rome, there is not long since published by a very
learned and a very honest Gentleman of our own Church and Nation, Mr. Beveridge.
an accurate Description of all the Patriarchates, out of an ancient and
authentic Manuscript, which reckons to the Patriarchate of Rome, only Italy and
the adjacent Islands; but not a syllable of Spain or Germany, or Gaul, or
England, or any other of the large Territories in Europe; which, if they had
belonged to this Patriarchate at that time, could never have been omitted in
this exact Catalogue, that has so carefully set down every petty City in Italy.

In this posture stood the Government of the Church for many Years, without any
considerable Alteration: For tho some of the Bishops of Rome would have been
usurping upon the Churches of Africa, by pretending to a Right of Appeals from
them, they were repulsed with great Shame and Dishonor. And were it not that I
am unwilling to trouble Your Highness with any more Disputes, than what
concerns our own Church with the Church of Rome, there is nothing more easy
than to show, that this Controversy with the African Churches is a notorious
Instance of both the Frauds of the Roman Church, and of other Churches
abhorring his remotest aim at any Supremacy. But tho he missed his design at
that time, his Successors were ever after watchful of all other Opportunities
to compass it: And to that purpose they happened to have two very lucky
Advantages; the first was the fatal Division of the Empire into East and West,
from whence S. Gregory Nazienzen, a Man both wise and pious, foretold a more
fatal Division in the Church; and accordingly, in a little time it came to
pass, that the whole Body of it was divided into East and West, as well as the
Empire; and the Division was quickly heightened by the mutual Jealousies of the
Emperors, who would not suffer the Bishops under one Government, to repair to
Councils convened under the other: And that in a short time grew to alienations
of Minds; so that they kept their Councils apart, and if any Bishop of the East
repaired to a Synod of the West, and so for the contrary, He was looked upon as
a Betrayer of his own Church. And this was the occasion of the after-greatness
of the Church of Rome in these Western Parts; because that alone of all the
five Patriarchates happened to go along with the Western Empire. For having no
Competitor for the Supremacy, or so much as the equality of Power in the
Western Church, it was no hard matter to advance it self to any degree of Power
that it pleased to challenge, especially when the Western Churches were forward
enough of themselves to advance its Dignity, for the Honor of their own
Patriarchate, in opposition to that of Constantinople; which being the Seat of
the Empire, and enjoying the Favor of the Emporors, soon over top'd all the
other Eastern Patriarchates; so that all the Competition that remained was
between Rome and Constantinople: Till at last in the Sixth Century, John Bishop
of Constantinople first obtained of Mauritius the Emperor, the Title of
Universal Bishop, which very Title was quickly and vehemently opposed by
Gregory Bishop of Rome, as a Piece of Antichristian Pride and Insolence. But
Mauritius being murdered by Phocas, and Cyriacus then Bishop of Constantinople,
being fallen under the new Tyrant's Disfavor, for declaring against his
execrable Murder, the Bishop of Rome seizes that Opportunity to flatter and
caress him in all his Wickedness; for which Civility the Usurper takes the
Title of Universal Bishop, and settles it upon the Sea of Rome. And when once
they had obtained the Title, they resolved to make it good, by gaining the
Power too. Tho by what degrees they encroach'd upon other Churches, it is not
at all to my purpose here to represent, it is enough to have shown the late
Original of the Title, which was never given them till above 600 Years after
our Savior.

This then being the true and real state of all the Christian Church, the
Conclusion plainly makes it self, as to any English Christian's Obligation to
communicate with the Church of England or the Church of Rome. For as it is the
indispensible Duty of every Man to join in visible Communion with the Society
of the Church, so is the first visible Society of the Church settled in the
Communion of the Bishop of the Diocese. And thence evident it is, that the
first Duty of every Christian, as to external Communion with the Church, is to
join in Communion with the Bishop of the Place where he lives. For if our
Savior settled the Government of the Church in the Apostles, and if the
Episcopal Order succeeded them in their Office, then has every Bishop
Apostolical Authority. And then is every Christian Man bound to submit to his
Bishop, as to an Apostle, from whence the Bishop derives the Succession of his
Order and Authority. So that the Episcopal Society is the first visible
Communion of the Christian Church, and a Man becomes a Member of the
Church-Catholic, by joining in visible Communion with the Church-Episcopal; for
it is impossible to be a Member of the Universal Church, without being first a
Member of some particular Church, both because the Universal Church is made up
of the Combination of particular Churches, and because there is no way of
Communicating in the Offices of Religion, but under some limited Societies. The
Bishop then in every Diocese is, as Successor in the Apostolical Office, Head
of the Communion within his own Diocese, and for that Reason, the ordinary
Judge and Guide to all Christians within his Jurisdiction. So false is that
Calumny, of which the Romanists pretend to make so much Advantage against the
Constitution of the Church of England, that She does not so much as pretend to
any living Judge of Faith: For what Judge She owns, as to the Catholic Church,
I may show in its proper place. But as for every particular Christian, She
commits him to the Care of his Bishop, as his ordinary Guide and Governor in
the things that concern his Salvation.

Now if this be the settled Constitution of the Christian Church, as it was from
the beginning, I cannot understand how any Christian can leave the Communion of
his own Bishop, to communicate with any other, without being guilty of Schism
against the Church that he lives in.

For tho he may advise with any other Bishop about the Welfare of his Soul, and
follow his Advice as a Friend; yet by the original Constitution of the Church,
none but his own Bishop can have any authoritative Commission for his Guidance
and Instruction. So easy is the Answer to that solemn Question, Who is the
living Judge and Guide of your Faith? For if it be put to a private Christian,
it is plain, that from the Constitution of the Catholic Church, as it was
settled by the Apostles, that it is the Bishop under whom he lives, to whom God
has committed the ordinary means of the Salvation of his Flock, and promised
to be assistant to him and the Successors in his Office to the end of the World.

This is the first visible Society or Communion of a Christian Church, and was
evidently laid and designed by our Blessed Savior in his Institution of the
Episcopal Office. The next is founded upon Apostolical Prescription, and that
is the Association of the Bishops of a Province with their Metropolitan; for in
the Plantation of Churches, as they cut out the Communion of Christians into
particular Bishoprics, so they again united the several Bishoprics of every
Nation into one Communion under one Head; who as he is superior to every single
Bishop within his Resort; so is he is his Synod of Bishops Supreme Judge of all
Controversies within the Province. These Provincial Assemblies, I have shown,
were the highest Power of the Primitive Church in all Places; neither indeed
(setting aside the Promise of divine Assistance to them) is there need of any
further Appeal upon humane accounts; for the Controversives in Christianity are
not so monstrously difficult, but that a competent Number of grave and sober
Men, may determine well enough, without calling together all the wise Men in
the World; and if Twenty are not sufficient to decide any Controversy, I know
not what Number is. And as this was the standing ordinary Jurisdiction in the
first Ages of the Church, so the Christians of those Times supposed the means
of Salvation sufficiently secured in such Hands, and certainly, that which was
sufficient to them, is so to us.

And as this was the highest Government in the Church for the first three
Hundred Years, so those more diffusive Assemblies, that were afterward
summoned, and that we call general Councils, were really of the same nature;
for as a Provincial Assembly was national, so were these Imperial, and
therefore subject but to one civil Government. So that as the Empire was indeed
but one great Kingdom, so was the Church in it but one great Province, they
being both under the same extent of Government. And this is the true Use of
Councils, whether greater or less, by the Decree of the Representatives of
Churches to bind those Churches that they represent. And that is but a
reasonable thing in all Societies, that they should be determined by their
Governors, especially when they are set over them by the appointment of God
himself. Neither is it so very material, how large Councils are, as to their
Obligation; for whether they be greater or less, they equally bind all that are
involved within the compass of their Authority. And tho there may be greater
Presumption in the Decrees of the greater Councils, yet are they for the most
part meetings rather of Grandeur than Necessity, but especially those that we
call General Councils, are now so difficult to be summoned, that they are
become almost impracticable. Whilst indeed the Roman Empire stood entire, it
was not so hard to convene them, yet even then was it a Business of so much
Time and Charges as made it too burthensom to be born, by any thing less than
the Roman Greatness, and that too in very rare and extraordinary Cases.

But if so, it could never then be intended for the standing and perpetual
Government of the Christian Church. But now that Christendom is divided into so
many civil Governments, the Difficulties are so great and so many, through the
various Interests of Princes, either to promote or hinder it, as to render it
next to impossible. Tho if it could be fairly had, the Church of England would
not refuse her Concurrence in it, both as being assured of the Goodness of her
Cause, in that she owns no other Rule of her Reformation, but the Practice of
the Primitive and Apostolic Church, and as well knowing that the greatest part
of the Church of Rome, would as willingly rid themselves of those Abuses that
have been put upon them by the Court of Rome, as we have done. And this the
Spanish and French Bishops had carried through, even in that packed Council of
Trent, had not the Pope poured in a number of Titular Italian Bishops to
overvote them. But it is none of my present Business to rake into the Faults of
the Church of Rome; it is enough to my purpose to vindicate the Communion of the
Church of England. Granting therefore the Church of Rome to be a pure and
uncorrupted Church, yet because it is a Foreign Church, no Man can be under any
Obligation, to leave the Communion of his own to join with that.

In this one point I fix the State of this whole Address, and say nothing at
present to persuade any Person that lives within the Communion of the Church of
Rome, to forsake that; my only Concernment is with the Members of the Church of
England, to keep them to their own Church, according to the Rule from the
Beginning. If it be objected, That the Church of England be a narrow Thing in
comparison of the Catholic Church; I answer, That the Church of England does
not pretend to be the Church Catholic, but only a Member of it: and in that
Station it is as large a Church as any were in the Primitive Times. Neither
then did the Communion of the Catholic Church consist in an Union of all
Churches, under one Head, but in brotherly Love and Correspondence with one
another: and for that the Church of England is ready to offer it to the Church
of Rome, or any other, upon the old Condition, that they will give her leave to
admonish them of their Faults and Miscarriages, as Churches did one another of
old. But this is a Civility that the Church of Rome is too proud to accept of;
it must be all Churches, or it will be none at all. It allows no Equals in
Communion, and condescends to no Treaty but upon Terms of absolute Subjection:
neither is it content to enslave all its Neighbors to its own imperious
Decrees, unless they be submitted to as the infallible Dictates of God himself.
Now this seems too much for Men to swallow that have any sense or care of their
Salvation: for by this means the whole Faith of Christendom shall be left
entirely at the Disposal of one single Person, and the Pope alone shall be the
whole Catholic Church. This I say seems too much to venture upon one single
Security, especially unless it were confirmed by some clearer Commission than
those remote and obscure Texts of Scripture that are alleged for the Papal
Supremacy. But to return from the Pope to the Church; As the first Constitution
of Churches was conformed to the civil Government, so indeed no other is
practicable. For upon that Supposition, that Christianity makes no Abatement as
to the civil Rights of Men, especially of Princes; provincial Churches cannot
be justly extended beyond the Dominion of the State; because in that case if
Metropolitans or Patriarchs have power to call their Subject-Bishops to
Councils, the King's Subjects may be summoned out of his Dominions without his
leave, which is not only to diminish, but to destroy his Power over his own
Subjects; for when they are out of his Dominions they are none of his. So that
the very State of Christianity naturally implies, as it would not be
inconsistent with it self, the Conformity of the Church to the State in its
bounds of Jurisdiction. And this is the true meaning of that known Saying of
one of the Fathers, That the Church is in the Commonwealth, and not the
Commonwealth in the Church; for the Civil Government being first constituted,
and the Church being afterward taken into it, it must for that Reason keep it
self within it, otherwise it breaks down its old Bounds of Settlement. But
beside that the Nature of Government confines every Church within the Prince's
Dominions in which it is; so it is highly convenient, if not absolutely
necessary, to the due and effectual Exercise of Discipline, that the Society of
the Church be confined within some moderate Circuit of Government: for great
Governments are slow and unweildy in their Motions; the very distance of Place
makes all Proceedings uneasy, and Determinations difficult; and of this our
Nation was sufficiently sensible, when all Ecclesiastical Appeals were carried
to Rome; the Journey was tedious and chargable; and by reason of the distance
of Witnesses, and other Inconveniences, Proceedings infinitely dilatory, I
might say endless, Causes depending there from Age to Age: this is too
notorious, from the sad and open Complaints of those Times; and I my self enjoy
a small Office in this Church, wherein my Predecessors had a Suit for a
Privilege belonging to it, hanging in the Court of Rome for some hundreds of
Years, till the very time of the Dissolution of the Pope's Power.

These are intolerable Grievances to Mankind, and heavier Burdens than were
ever imposed upon them by the most barbarous civil Government. If therefore his
Holiness will challenge a Supremacy over all Christian Churches, let him not
exercise his Jurisdiction in ordinary Causes, that is contrary to all the
Canons of the Church and Quiet of the World. We will not contend with him about
his Patriarchical Pre-eminence, if that would give him Satisfaction, tho we
know he has not the least pretense of any claim to it over us. But when under
that Pretext he takes to himself the Office of Universal Bishop, that is, to be
all the Bishops of Christendom, it is that exorbitant Usurpation that is not our
Complaint alone, but the universal Complaint of Christendom it self. And
therefore if he would keep within his Patriarchical Bounds and Privileges,
which yet he enjoys not by divine Right but humane Institution, we would give
him all that Respect and Reverence that is due to the Primacy of his See. But
if instead of Brotherly Communion with us, nothing less will serve his Turn
than absolute Dominion over us, and if Submission to that must be made our only
Title to the Catholic Church, as if we had no Right to Christianity but by
Subjection to the Bishop of Rome: these cannot but seem too hard Terms of
Communion; or if they are not, it is enough that they are unwarrantable; or if
they are not so, it is enough that they are not necessary. And that they are
not, is evident from the Premises, where I have demonstrated, that the first
Duty of every Christian, as a Member of the Christian Church, is to join
Communion with his own Bishop, as the first Political Society of a Church. And
that the next is a Combination of all the Bishops within one civil Government
under one Metropolitan. That this Polity was set on foot by the Apostles
themselves, and every where put in practice in the Primitive Church; that the
Ecclesiastical Province cannot extend beyond the Precincts of the Civil without
infringing the Authority of Sovereign Princes, and therefore, that no foreign
Prelate can have or exercise any Ecclesiastical Power over his Majesty's
Subjects, because that would give them Power to command them out of his
Dominions: So plainly does the Nature of Civil Government set Bounds to
Ecclesiastical Societies; which one thing, if duly considered, must cut off
all Claims of Papal Supremacy over this Church, because, by virtue of it he
would have such a kind of Power over His Majesty's Subjects, as the Christian
Religion does by no means allow any its Officers. And as this was the
Settlement of National Churches from the beginning of Christianity, so is it
the present Constitution of the Church of England, that is or would be governed
by its Metropolitan in his Synod of Bishops subject to one Civil Government.

And as this is all the Political Society that a Christian Church is capable
of, so all the Communion that it can have with other Churches, consists in
brotherly Love and mutual Correspondence. And this way was the Christian
Church, in the first Ages of it, preserved in competent Peace and Unity. And
whatever other Power was afterward erected in the Church, was founded upon
humane Institution, and therefore is alterable in it self, at least not
necessary to the Being of a Christian Church. Of this nature were the several
Patriarchates; so that whatever Power the Bishop of Rome can challenge by
virtue of his Patriarchical Dignity, is of an humane Original, and so not
necessary to the Constitution of a Christian Church.

Nay, tho he once had such a Power, yet upon the Dissolution of that Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government that gave it him, it ceases with it. For it was
granted him by the Emperors, and Imperial Councils, and so extended only to the
Subjects of the Empire; for they could not give him any Power in other Princes
Dominions. The Empire therefore being broken into many independent Kingdoms,
the Patriarchate dissolves with it, because otherwise a Foreigner would have an
Authority in all Princes Dominions to the Prejudice of the Sovereign Power,
which is the first thing that Christianity disclaims, and therefore is
principally inconsistent with it. But however if the Pope have his old
Patriarchical Power still, he had it not of old over us, and therefore cannot
have it now, and though he have, yet it is but of Humane Institution. And then
we are a true Church without it, and if we are, then can no Man be obliged in
Conscience to forsake the Communion of this Church, that is settled as all other
Churches were by the Apostles, to join with one another, only for the sake of
some alteration made in it by Humane Authority.

And thus having truly and impartially laid before Your Royal Highness the
State of the Christian Church, especially as to the prime Controversy between
the Church of England and the Church of Rome concerning the Guide of Faith, I
have so great confidence in the Power of Truth, over an upright and generous
Mind, as to flatter my self with some Hopes of settling Your Royal Highnesses
Conscience in the Communion of this truly ancient and Apostolical Church. Nay,
I hope not only to see You a Zealous Son, but an eminent Patron of the best,
but most abused Church in the Christian World, so as to be the principal Author
of rescuing her from those horrid Indignities and Oppressions that she daily
suffers from the Barbarity of popular Atheism and Profaneness.

But whatever the Success of this small Endeavor may prove, it is not a little
Satisfaction that I reap, from having done my Duty to Your Royal Highness and
mine own Conscience. For I have no other design than to promote the Salvation
of Your Soul and my own. But though I am so fully conscious to my self of mine
own Integrity, yet when I reflect upon what I have done, I blush and am
confounded in my self at the Presumption of obtruding my crude Thoughts upon
the Wisdom of a Mighty Prince, and therefore had utterly stisled them after
they were finished, had not the great Fame of Your Highnesses Princely Candor
emboldned me to present them, as being at least secure of a gracious Pardon to
a well-meant Presumption.

I intended, when I had shown the No-Necessity of Comminion with the Church of
Rome upon his own Terms, because its Pretenses are a manifest Usurpation upon
the Christian Church* in the next place to have represented the gross Abuse
that his Holiness puts upon Christianity, by pretending some way or other,
directly or indirectly, to a temporal Power over Sovereign Princes; whereas to
pretend to it, by virtue of any Power derived* from our Savior, only over
Subjects, is no less than Blasphemy my against him; but over Princes, it adds
to that Rebellon. (So that how many Notes soever there may be of a true Church
this is an infallible Note of a false one). But then considering with my self
that Your Royal Highness is the second Branch of an Imperial Family, and Heir
to several Crowns, I thought my self obliged, according to my Resolution
declared in the beginning, to wave the Advantage of this Argument: because Your
Highness is here a Party, and it concerns Your worldly Interest more nearly
than Your Conscience, to which alone I have made bold to make this Address, and
in it I assure my self, that (...) the Kingdoms in the World would weigh
nothing. And therefore without giving Your Royal Highness any farther trouble
more than once more of craving Pardon for this great Presumption;

I shall submit the Consideration of the Premises to Your (...) and impartial
Thoughts, and daily pray for Your Happiness both here and hereafter, and while
I live shall ever be

Your Royal Highnesses Most Humble and Devoted Servant.

FINIS.

