THE CASE OF THE Church of England, Briefly and truly stated, In the three
first and fundamental PRINCIPLES Of a Christian Church. I. The Obligation of
Christianity, by Divine Right. II. The Jurisdiction of the Church, by Divine
Right. III. The Institution of Episcopal Superiority, by Divine Right.
By S. P. a Presbyter of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Faithorne and John Kersey, and sold by Walter Davis
in Amen-Corner. 1681.

A Scheme of the general CONTENTS.
PART I.
THree popular Principles destructive of the Church of England Page 1. The
absurdity of Mr. Hobb's Principle, that the Sovereign Power is the only founder
of all Religion in every Commonwealth p. 7 Mr. Seldens account of the
Jurisdiction of the Church to be merely Civil p. 27 His account of
Excommunication from Adam to Moses considered p. 37 The same from Moses to the
Captivity, and from the Captivity to the time of our Savior p. 42 The same in
our Saviors time, and, first, as to its Usage p. 54 Secondly, as to the Right,
which is proved to have been neither Judicial nor Imperial, but purely Divine
p. 62 Excommunication in the Christian Church proved to have been of
Apostolical Antiquity p. 71 The Texts of Scripture upon which it is grounded,
carry in them true and proper Jurisdiction, and appropriate its exercise to the
Church p. 76 And that by Divine Institution, not mere voluntary Confederacy p.
89 All Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction left entirely by the Christian Emperors to
the Ecclesiastical State, and that the Imperial Laws, extant both in the
Theodosian Code and Justinian, are no new Laws, but only the Canons of the
Church, ratified with temporal Penalties p. 91
PART II.
AN account of the birth of the Opinion, that there was no Form of Government
settled in the Christian Church by Divine Institution Page 117 That our Savior
founded his Church in an imparity of Ecclesiastical Officers demonstrated; this
imparity proved to consist in a superiority of Power as well as Order, and the
Institution of it shown to be of perpetual obligation p. 124 The Authority of
the Apostolical Practice vindicated against diverse exceptions. The vanity and
absurdity of the Objection from the ambiguity of the names, Bishop and
Presbyter. The divine Obligation of Apostolical practice in this matter proved
p. 135 The practice of the Primitive Church in the Ages next and immediately
after the Apostles. The pretense of the defect of the Records of the Church in
the first Age falls as foul upon Christianity it self as the Form of Government
p. 143 The Argument, first, from the defect as to places considered and
confuted p. 148 Secondly, front the defect as to Times and Persons p. 150 The
constant Tradition of the Church proved, first, by the Testimony of St. Clement
of Rome. Secondly, of Ignatius; his Epistles demonstrated to be genuine p. 155
The same proved from the Apostolical Canons, and the Canons proved to be of
Primitive Antiquity p. 177 The Testimonies of the Ancients vindicated from the
pretense of ambiguity; and first, in that they have not informed us whether the
Succession were only of Order, or of Power p. 183 Secondly, In that it is not
universal; but whether it be or not, it is sufficient, in that there are no
Records against it, and the Records of all the chiefest Churches are clear for
it p. 189 Thirdly, In that this Succession is sometimes attributed to
Presbyters; this shown to be apparently false, and if it were true, frivolous
p. 203 That the ancient Church owned Episcopacy as of Divine Institution, and
not Ecclesiastical p. 213 St. Jeroms Authority thoroughly considered, and turned
upon himself, so as to make this Objection out of him against it the strongest
Argument to prove the Divine Institution of Episcopacy p. 216 The Custom of the
Church of Alexandria of the Ordination of their Bishop by Presbyters refuted,
and the Story of Eutychius concerning it shown to be false and foolish p. 231
If we take away the Divine Right of some Form of Church Government, it
unavoidably resolves the Church into Independency and Confusion p. 243 The
Government of the Church by Episcopacy as settled by Divine Right the only
effectal Bulwork against Popery p. 252 A Postscript p. 263
PART I.
WHEN I consider on one side with what triumph the Church of England was,
together with His Majesty, restored, with what Laws guarded, with what Vigor
asserted, with what Zeal defended: and on the other with what folly and
peevishness opposed; that none of its implacable Enemies have ever been able to
discover any the least real Defects or Corruptions in its Constitution. That,
by the confession of all wise men, it approaches nearest of any Church in the
World to the primitive Purity; that it is free from all Impostures and
Innovations; that it does not abuse its Children with Pious Frauds and Arts of
Gain, nor sacrifise the Interests of Souls to its own Wealth and Grandeur; that
it asserts the Rights of Princes against all Priestly Usurpations; that it does
not enrage the People with Enthusiasm on one hand, nor enslave them with
Superstition on the other. That its Doctrins are Pure, Simple, and Apostolical,
and its Discipline Easy, Prudent, and Merciful. In a word, that it is a Church
that wants nothing but only that we would suffer her to be what she professes
and desires to be. When (I say) I considered all this with my self, it could
not but strike me with wonder and amazement that a Church so unanimously owned,
so powerfully protected, so excellently constituted, so approved by all wise
and good men, should in all this time be so far from obteining any true and
effectual settlement, that it should be almost stripped naked of all the Rights
and Privileges of a Christian Church, exposed to scorn and contempt, deserted
by its Friends, trampled upon by its Enemies, and truly reduced to the state of
the Poor despised Church of England. But then considering farther with my self
what might be the grounds and occasions of such a wild and seemingly
unaccountable Apostasy, I quickly found three very prevailing Principles
utterly inconsistent with the being of a Christian Church, wherewith the
generality of men's minds are possessed, and especially those that have of late
appeared the most Zealous Patriots of the Church of England. No wonder then if
the building be so weak and tottering, when it is erected upon such false and
rotten Foundations; so that whilst these treacherous Principles lie at the
bottom of the Work, it is plainly impossible to bring it to any sure and
lasting settlement. And it is these false and unhappy Principles that I shall now
endeavor to represent and by plain reason to remove. They are chiefly these
three; the first is that of Mr. Hobbs and his Followers, that own the Church of
England only because it is Established by the Law of England, and allow no
Authority either to that or any other Religion than as it is injoined by the
Sovereign Power. Though a Religion that claims no higher Obligation confesses
it self to be no Religion, for none it is unless Enacted by Divine Authority.
The second is that of Mr. Seldom and his Followers, that acknowledges the
standing Laws of the Christian Church to have been derived from a Divine
Institution, but derives all manner of Government and Authority in it from the
Civil State. The third is the Opinion of some Learned and Moderate Divines,
both at home and abroad, that grant indeed the necessity of some kind of
Government in the Church, but deny it to have been settled and fixed by our
Savior in any one Form, or upon any certain Order of men, and leave it wholly
at somebodies disposal (though who that somebody is they have not as yet
clearly determined) to appoint Officers and Governors, as shall be thought
most prudent and suitable to the present Circumstances of things. Now upon any
of these Principles it is not at all material whether we assert any such thing
as a Church of England or not, for they are all but so many Contradictions both
to the being of a Church and to themselves, at least if we pursue each party to
the bottom of their Opinion, they only assert the Shadow or Ghost of a Church,
upon such Principles as are directly inconsistent with the Fundamental
Constitution of all Christian Churches, and so have, as it were, stolen away the
Church of England from itself, setting up the name against the thing, the Idea
against the Reality, and the Notion against the Practice. For the first
supposes a Church without Religion; the second a Society without Government;
the third a Government without Governors. And what can be more absurd and
inconsistent? For a Church without Religion is no Church; a Society without
Government is no Society; and a Government that is not lodged somwhere is no
Government. So that though these Opinions are not equally wicked in themselves,
the first being open and avowed Atheism, yet are they, equally destructive to
the Fundamental Constitution of the Christian Church, as it is a Society
founded not by any human Authority but Divine Right.

With Mr. Hobbs and his Church I shall be very brief, because his Notions here
(as indeed they are every where) are no better than gross and palpable
Contradictions.

Neither should I spend much pains upon the second opinion, because the
absurdity of it is so easily demonstrable from the Nature of Society it self,
but seeing Mr. Seldom, a very Learned Person, has taken infinite pains in the
Argument, searched all Authors and all Records to heap together every thing
that might serve his cause, I shall wait upon him through all the material
parts of his Discourse. But with the third sort I intend to treat more largely,
because that is the Church at this present in fashion, and is become popular
and plausible by the Authority of some Learned men, that have owned and
asserted it. And therefore I shall carefully demonstrate its vanity and
falsehood from our Saviors express Institution; from the certain practice of
the Apostles; from all the most undoubted Records of the Church; and lastly
from the great inconveniences that would unavoidably follow upon it. And when
we have gained these three Fundamental points, we may then and not till then
proceed to farther proposals for the true settlement of the Church of England;
for without them, whatever men may talk of it, all their Discourse of a Church
is no more than a Notion and a Phantasm, a Platonic Commonwealth, and a World
in the Moon.

First then, as for Mr. Hobbs his Opinion, it is scarce worth any man's
Confutation, because it so plainly confutes itself. For what can be more absurd
and ridiculous than to make (as he does) the serious Belief of Religion
necessary to the security of Government, and yet discover to all those that he
would have brought under the Power of this persuasion, that it is in reality
nothing but an useful and necessary Imposture. And yet into this preposterous
course of Politics does Mr. Hobbs suffer himself to be driven by his pedantick
Pride and Vanity. That though it be above all things necessary to the Empire of
our Sovereign Lord Leviathan that the common people be abused with the Belief
and scared with the dread of invisible Powers, yet lest they should be tempted
to think the great Philosopher himself so weak as to be betrayed into the same
Opinion, he Publishes a Book to all the World to no other purpose (beside
Flattering the Tyrant Cromwell) than to declare that neither himself nor any
wise man ought to regard the Tales of Religion, and that they are only designed
to abuse the ignorant and the silly. Just as if this great Statesman should go
about to fright Birds from his Corn (as he speaks) with an empty Doublet, an
Hat and a crooked Stick, but yet lest the Jack-Daws should take him for one of
their own silly Flock, he should take special care to inform them that himself
knows it to be only a man of Clouts. This alone is sufficient to discover the
vanity and the danger of the Hobbian Religion, when it is nothing else but an
open Declaration of Atheism and Impiety. Though indeed this way of trifling is
so natural to Mr. Hobbs that, as much as he loves his own Opinions, he always
contradicts them. And this is a plain Demonstration of the Ignorance of the
pretenders to Wisdom in this Age, that so Inconsistent and Unphilosophical a
Writer should obtain so much Credit and Authority among them. For though he
have a very facetious Wit, and is the Author of many pleasant sayings, yet he
was never Master of one Philosophic Notion. But for their conviction I shall
challenge them to show me more incoherent and inconsistent reasonings than are
his undoubted and Mathematical Demonstrations against the Being of God and the
Principles of Religion. First then, would you believe that there is a God, or
not? Mr. Hobbs gives you your choice. Choose which you please, he will
demonstrate either by the same Topic. Will you have no Deity? It is manifest
there can be none, because Phys. c. 26.
there can be no first Mover, because nothing can move itself, and therefore
when men go about to prove a Deity from the succession of Causes and Effects,
they prove nothing but the necessity of Eternal motion, for as it is true that
nothing can move itself, so is it true that nothing can move any thing else
unless itself be first moved. Here then the Demonstration is pregnant, that
there can be no first Cause, because nothing can move it self, and because all
motion is Eternal. But will you have a Deity? The Demonstration of it is as
undeniable: For he that from any effect Leviati^. c. 12.
he sees come to pass should reason to the next and immediate Cause thereof,
and from thence to the Cause of that Cause, and plunge himself profoundly in
the pursuit of Causes; shall at last come to this, that there must be (as even
the Heathen Philosophers confessed) one first Mover, that is, a first and an
Eternal Cause of all things; which is that which men mean by the name of God.
Could any man think it possible that both these Demonstrations should drop from
the Pen of the same infallible Philosopher? or that the man that can
demonstrate after this rate should be so confident as to boast of nothing lower
than Mathematical Demonstration in all his Writings? But though Mr. Hobbs be
able to demonstrate Contradictions, yet himself can hold but one side, and that
is always the wrong one. For it is the only scope of all his Natural Philosophy
to affirm (I do not say to prove) that there can be no other Cause or Principle
in the Universe beside the mere Aggregate of Natural Causes. By which Topic he
plainly demonstrates there can be no such Being as a Deity. For if there is,
either he is a Corporeal or an Incorporeal substance; but an Incorporeal
Substance is the same with an Incorporeal Body: If Corporeal, then either the
world or a part of it, for there can be nothing beside; but it can be neither,
because by God is meant the Author of the World, and therefore they who say the
World or any part of it is God, say it has no Cause, and so that there is no
God. What Demonstration can be fuller and plainer than this, that the Deity can
be no Being distinct from the Universe, nor the Universe itself, nor any part
of it, and therefore is nothing? But though it be demonstrable from the Nature
of Things that there is no God, yet he tells us the belief of a Deity is
necessary upon the Authority of Revelation, and out of reverence to the Public
Laws. Though he has peremptorily determined that none can know the truth of a
Revelation made to another, but they to whom God himself has revealed it
supernaturally, so that no Revelation, unless immediately made to my self, can
be of any use to me in this Enquiry. And though he had not thus carefully
prevented its proper efficacy, yet when he comes to it we shall find him as
much concerned to destroy the Grounds of believing any Revelation, as here he
is to take away the Proof of a Deity from the Nature of the Universe, and as
for his Reverence to the Public Laws, it is nothing else but his Declaration
of Atheism repeted, viz. that though I Thomas Hobbs have no ground to believe
that there is any such Being as a Deity in the World, nay though I am able to
demonstrate the contrary to all the World, yet for Fashion-sake, and out of
compliance with the Custom of my Country, I care not though I say that there is
one, only I desire all people to do me the right as to observe that I only say
so, and not think me so mean a Philosopher as in good earnest to believe so.

And in the same manner that he has destroyed the Evidence of a Deity, has he
taken away the Obligation of all his Laws of Justice and Honesty, by supposing
such a State of Nature, in which mankind being exempt from all Government may
do whatever they please without the violation of any Law. Which to suppose is
to suppose no Deity; for if there be a Deity, there can be no supposition of
any such State of Nature in which Mankind can be exempted from his Government.
And here too he demonstrates contradictions from the same Topic. All men being
by Nature of equal Power, and therefore mutually fearing each other, right
reason dictates to every man to defend himself by force and hostility. And yet
because all other men are of equal power with himself, and that state of
Hostility is very unsafe and uncomfortable, therefore the very same right
Reason dictates to every man to seek the Friendship, as much as in him lies, of
all men. But though right Reasons Natural State of Peace be so Mathematically
demonstrated, yet in the supposition of its more Ancient State of War lies the
whole mystery of Mr. Hobbs his Morals and Politics; which being founded upon
the former supposition, that there is no Governor of the World, that alone for
ever takes away the Obligation of all the Laws of Nature.

For though he afterward in his contradictory way to himself, would, when men
have entered into compacts, bring them all under the Laws of Justice, yet as he
goes about to establish them, he would have them bind without any Sanction,
that is, without any power of binding. For having no Obligation but by virtue
of mutual Compact, and this mutual Compact being entered into only for private
Interest, as every man for that reason may observe them, so for the same Reason
whenever he apprehends it beneficial to himself, he is obliged, as he will be
true to his Fundamental Principle of Self-Interest, to break them.

So that the Laws of Nature, as he has founded them, are but so many Artifices
of Craft and mutual Hypocrisy, whereby mankind pretend and profess faithful
Obedience to the Rules of Justice, and a sincere endeavor to procure the good
and welfare of the Community, yet every man resolves inwardly within himself,
that he will do neither, but merely when it tends to his private Advantage, and
so he can any way advance that, what cares he what mischief he does either to
the Private or Public Interest of all the men in the world beside: An honorable
account this of Mr. Hobbs his honesty. But of his Notions of Natural Religion I
shall not here discourse any farther, finding it done more largely elsewhere,
and therefore I have here made this brief representation of it only, that I
might give at one view a complete account of the Hobbian Religion. But our
present business is to enquire into his Principles concerning the Church of
England, or rather the Christian Church, the Church of England being nothing
but that part of it, that is planted in the Kingdom of England. And here all
his Notions of the Church are resolved into one Fundamental Principle, that the
Sovereign Power in every Commonwealth is the sole Founder of all revealed
Religion, and that whatever pretenses, true or false, may be made to Divine
Revelation, they can have no Obligatory Power, unless they can obtain it from
the Sovereign Authority, and if they can, then whether true or false, they are
of equal Force and Obligation to the Consciences of men. Which is in express
words to affirm that all revealed Religion is no Religion. And yet he is every
where so plain and peremptory in this rank assertion, which concludes our
Blessed Savior a profligate Impostor, that I can not but charge it as a
reproach upon the Church of England, that such open Blasphemy should be
suffered so long to pass so freely without Censure or Punishment. For having
first been so impudent as to define all Religion to be nothing else than the
allowance of some Public Tales, from thence he proceeds in his Mathematical
method to inform us, that the Christian Religion neither is nor can be of any
Authority in any Commonwealth, otherwise than as it is owned and ratified by
the Supreme Secular Powers: so that if Cromwell or any other Sovereign Prince be
pleased to command his Subjects only to renounce their Savior and their
Christian Faith and declare themselves Jews or Mahumetans, in that Case they
are indispensably bound to Obedience, in that it is not possible for the
Christian or any other Law to have any binding force than what it receives from
the Arbitrary Power of the Civil Magistrate. And agreeable to that General
Proposition the Philosopher is pleased to inform us, Leviath. c. 23. 14
that the whole Power of instructing the people in any Religion is derived from
the Sovereign Prince. That the c. 26.
Subjects of every Commonwealth ought to receive every thing as the Law of God
that the Civil-Laws declare to be so. That by the Doctrine which the c. 35.
Sovereign commands to be taught we are to examine and try the Truths of those
Doctrines, which pretended Prophets, with Miracle or without, shall at any time
pretend to advance. That c. 42.
Moses made the Scripture Canonical, as civil Sovereign of the Commonwealth.
That our Savior gave his Apostles power to Preach and Baptize in all parts ib.
p. 311.
of the World, supposing they were not by their own lawful Sovereign forbidden.
That the new Testament had not ibid.
the force of Law, till it received it from the Authority of Constantine the
Great. That the civil Magistrate has originally in himself, and by virtue of
his Sovereign ibid.
Supremacy a power of ordaining Priests and administering Sacraments. That
Christian Kings are the only Pastors of the Christian Church, and that c. 43.
the faith of all their Subjects depends only upon their Authority. And he is
so entirely possessed with this notion of Kingly power, that he allows no other
Authority to God himself. And thus when he appoints the punishment of death to
false Prophets, because they tempt the People to revolt from the Lord their
God: These words (he tells us) to revolt from the Lord your God c. 32.
are equivalent to revolt from your King; for they had made God their King by
Pact at the foot of Mount Sinai. So that had they not obliged themselves by
that Covenant, it had been no sin to worship other Gods, i. e. it is all one in
itself to worship the true and to worship false Gods, which is plainly to say,
there is none at all. And as for the worship they paid to the God of Israel, it
was not due to him as Sovereign of the Universe, but only as their King by
Pact; and so is no more than what every Subject owes to his Sovereign. And c.
35.
therefore he in express terms defines the Kingdom of God to be a civil
Kingdom, and to this purpose he expounds the third Commandment, That they
should not take the name of God in vain; that c. 42.
is, that they should not speak rashly of their King, nor dispute his Right,
nor the Commissions of Moses and Aaron his Lieutenants. And this was the end of
our Saviors coming into the World to ibid.
restore unto God by a new Covenant the Kingdom, which being his by the old
Covenant had been cut off by the Rebellion of the Israelites in the Election of
Saul. And the same account he gives of Christianity it self; that it is only
receiving our Savior for King. So that when St. Paul says to the Galatians,
That if himself, or an Angel from c. 3^.
Heaven preach any other Gospel to them, than he had preached, let him be
accursed. That Gospel was, that Christ was King, so that all Preaching against
the power of the King received, in consequence to these words is by St. Paul
accursed; for his speech is addressed to those, who by his Preaching had
already received Jesus for the Christ, that is to say, for King of the Jews. So
that it seems we owe no other duty to our Savior than if he had been only a
temporal Messiah, seeing all that is due to him is only by virtue of that
covenant, whereby we receive him for our King. Neither is this Kingdom c. 42.
of his present, but is to be established upon the Earth after the general
Resurrection, and therefore by virtue of that Pact that the faithful make with
him in Baptism, they are only obliged to obey him for King, whenever he shall
be pleased to take the Kingdom upon him.

Now barely to represent this Train of absurdities is more than enough to
confute them, in that they all resolve into this one gross Contradiction: That
for the ends of Government we are obliged to believe and obey the Christian
Religion as the Law of God: And for the same ends of Government, we are to
understand that we owe no other Obedience to it, than as it is enjoined by the
Law of man. But though such manifest Trifles deserve not the civility of being
confuted; yet it is fit to let Mr. Hobbs his credulous Disciples (and in all my
Conversation I never met with a more ignorant or confident Credulity)
understand after what a childish rate their mighty Master of Demonstration
proves these, and indeed every thing else; For he has but one way of proving
all things: First, to define his own Opinion to be true, and then by virtue of
that Definition prove it to be so. And for an undeniable proof of this, we will
take a review of all the forementioned propositions, where we shall find all
his Mathematical Demonstrations to be nothing else but so many Positive and
Dogmatical Tautologies. Thus when he proves there can be no first Mover,
because he has already defined, that nothing can move it self, from whence it
demonstratively follows, that all motion must be Eternal; for otherwise, if we
assert an Eternal first cause, we run upon that desperate absurdity that
something may move it self. He had argued full as Mathematically, that nothing
can move it self, because I say nothing can move it self. So again when he
proves that God is neither the Universe, nor a part of it, nor something beside;
he had argued as well, had he said, That there is no Being distinct from the
Fabric of the World, because there is none. So again those Books only can be
Law in every Nation, that are established for such by the Sovereign Authority;
because a Law, as I have already defined it, is nothing else than the Command
of that man, or Company of men that have the Supreme Power in every
Commonwealth, from whence, says he, it unavoidably follows that nothing can be
a Law, but what is Enacted by the Sovereign Power. And so it would have
followed as unavoidably, if he had only said, That the Sovereign only can make
Law, because the Sovereign only can make Law. And yet upon this one mighty
Demonstration are built all the other bold assertions, that I have collected
out of his Books, that the Sovereign Prince is Sovereign Prophet too, that he
is sole Pastor to the People of his Kingdom, that he has the only Power of
ordaining Priests, and interpreting Scripture; That Moses and Constantine by
virtue of their Kingly Power made the Scriptures Canonical and all the rest,
which is no more than to say, That there can be no Law of God, because there
can be no Law beside the Law of man. And therefore it is needless to pursue
them singly, only I cannot but observe that when he makes teaching any Doctrine
against the Will of the Sovereign Prince, to be a certain sign of a false
Prophet; he has obtained his design of insinuating, that both Moses and our
Savior were manifest Impostors, in that they both proceeded contrary to the
Commands of the present Powers, and that is the true Account of Mr. Hobbs his
Religion: That though they were indeed Impostors and Rebels to the State, yet
having had the Fortune to gain Authority in the World, and being owned by the
Laws of Christendom, they ought to be acknowledged by all men as Divine Persons
as they pretended to be. And as his honorable notion of mankind was, that
notwithstanding all their pretenses to Justice and Honesty, they were only a
pack of dissembling Knaves; so his notion of a Christian Church is nothing else
than an association of Atheistical Hypocrites professing Christianity, but not
believing it. He had better have said, that there is no Church at all. And so
when he tells us that it is lawful for a good Christian to deny his Christian
Faith when his Sovereign commands him; he had better have expressly said, that
there is no such thing as a good Christian at all. For the Reason he gives that
profession with the Tongue is but an outward thing, and no more than any other
Gesture, whereby we signify our Obedience, which may be honestly done, so we
hold firmly in the heart the Faith of Christ; this Liberty, if once allowed,
would authorize all the Villainy in the world; for Perjury it self is but an
external thing, and will by this means become lawful, so a man believe in his
heart the contrary to what he says with his mouth. But when to this he adds,
that indeed such Persons as have a calling to Preach, are obliged, if called to
it, to suffer Martyrdom for their Religion, but none other, no more being
required of private Christians but their own Faith; He little considers that by
this new kind of privilege, that he out of his great kindness grants the
Clergy, he has contradicted his whole design. For if they may lawfully persist
to death in Preaching the Gospel contrary to the Commands of the civil
Sovereign; then the case is plain, that all Subjects are not bound to profess
that Religion which the Sovereign enjoins, which once granted, the whole cause
of Leviathan is overthrown. And as by this particular kindness to the Clergy,
he has run himself upon a flat Contradiction to his whole Design, so has he
renounced his Argument against Martyrdom. For when he proves that a Christian
may deny his Faith, because profession is but an outward Ceremony; it is no
more in a Clergyman, and therefore as lawful and innocent in him as in any
other. However they are very much obliged to him for this singular kindness and
civility to them, especially at that time when they enjoyed this his privilege
so highly as they did at the time of publishing his Book. All the Orthodox
Clergy being then treated with a more barbarous cruelty than the ancient
Christians were by any of the Heathen Persecutors, great numbers of them being
then stinking to death in the holes and bottoms of rotten Ships. And therefore
when the Clergy were in that woeful Condition, for him so impertinently to
suggest, as he does immediately after; That no man is required to die for every
Tenet that serves their Ambition or Profit; to speak very gently, this was not
done like a Gentleman. And Mr. Hobbs could not have taken a more unseasonable
time to revile the Clergy than he did. For whilst they were in Prosperity
endowed with good Revenues, and entrusted with great Power, if he had fallen
upon them then, Envy might have been some ground for his Malice. But at that
time when they were trampled upon by the very Scum of the People, ruined and
undone, he could have no other Temptation to do it, but mere Hatred and Malice
to the Function it self. But however, though it be a foolish thing for any man
to die for the Ambition or Profit of the Clergy; yet it was a truly noble thing
both of the Clergy and others to sacrifise their Lives and Fortunes in the
Cause of their lawful Prince against Rebels and Traitors. And it will be an
eternal blemish upon Mr. Hobbs's Name and Memory, that when, beside the general
duty of Loyalty, he had received many particular Favors and Obligations from
his Prince, he should not only desert him himself, but should publish this Book
on purpose to persuade the whole Nation, that it was so far from being any way
bound to adhere to their lawful Prince, that they were brought under an
Obligation of Allegiance and Loyalty to the then brutish Usurper; whom he
flattered to so high a degree of Tyranny as to advise him to require of all
men, not only a Submission to his brutal Power, but an Approbation of all his
wicked Actions, a thing so infinitely vile and dishonorable, that it exceeded
the wickedness of the Tyrant himself. Now men of these irreligious Principles
are so far from being fit Members of a Christian Church, that they are not
worthy to live in any humane Society, in that they blow up the foundations of
all Government, as well as Religion. For Loyalty or a sense of duty to lawful
Governors is founded upon no other Principle, than the Obligation of
Conscience toward God; So that those men that set Subjects loose from that,
turn them loose to Rebellion. And therefore, though the notion of a Deity be
nothing else than an empty Doublet, an Hat, and a crooked Stick set up by
Princes to scare fools to Obedience, it concerns them to keep those men out of
their Fields, who go about to destroy the Reverence of their Scarecrow. However
these men are not to be admitted to any Disputes about Church Government, who
will not allow any such thing as a Church, when the Dispute proceeds only upon
that Supposition. And therefore I shall leave them to enjoy the vanity of their
own Conceits, and proceed to the second Adversary, who grants a Church founded
by Divine Right, but no right of Government within it self.

And as in the former we have seen the power of Ignorance joined with Pride and
Vanity, so here may we see the Impotency of Learning joined with Prejudice and
Passion. For this learned Gentleman has spared for no pains in this Argument,
he has ransackt all Authors, and all Languages to serve his Cause; he set aside
many years for composing his Work, and indeed seems to have made it the main
design of his Life. And whatever first engaged him to undertake the Argument
(and it is usually reported that the Provocation was so very slight, that I
cannot but think it beneath the Spirit of so great a man) he has prosecuted it
with greater Zeal and Keenness than he expresses in other Writings. Nay, he
cannot forbear upon all occasions digressing into this Subject, insomuch that
this is the main matter of his Preface to his Book de Anno Civili, the Subject
whereof, one would think, is remote enough from this Argument. And yet after
all his expense of Pains and Learning, he has been so far from serving the
purpose of his Design, that he has directly opposed it. And if he had only
studied to furnish the Church with Arguments to justify her Authority and
Jurisdiction, he could not have done her more service than he has done by this
violent Attempt upon it. This, I know, cannot but seem a very strange Charge
against a Person of his Parts and Learning; but therein, I say, appears the
strength of Prejudice and Partiality, that it puts men beside the use of their
Natural Understandings, and hires them to set their Wits on work only to serve
a Cause or gratify a Passion. And when once a man has taken up a Falsehood to
defend, the more Skill and Learning he spends upon it, the worse it is; for
when an Error is but slightly maintained, the mistake may proceed from
Inadvertency, but when it is asserted with great Industry and long Study, that
discovers the man to be under a settled and habitual misunderstanding. And when
all is done, every thing will be True or False as it is, whether we will or no.
And if the Power of the Church be settled upon Divine Right, it is not all the
Wit, nor all the Eloquence, nor all the Learning in the World that can unsettle
it; the Winds may blow, and the Waves may beat, but they can never shake it,
because it is founded upon a Rock. For a proof hereof I shall, first, give a
brief Account of this learned Authors method of Discourse; and then, secondly,
in the same way of arguing, by which he endeavors to destroy the Original
power of the Church, I shall undertake to make out a demonstrative proof of its
Divine Authority. Only I must premise, that whereas he treats only of the Power
of Excommunication, that Dispute must involve in it all other Acts of
Government, in that they are all supposed by the Power of inflicting Punishment.

Now Mr. Seldens Account of the rise of Excommunication is briefly this, that
it was never established in the Jewish Church by any Divine Command; that there
was no use of it, whilst they enjoyed the Civil Power among themselves; and
therefore that we meet with no Footsteps of it till after the Babylonian
Captivity; and that then and there it was first taken up among the Jews by
Confederacy and mutual Compact. For being then deprived of all judicial Power,
and zealous for the honor of their Nation, they covenanted among themselves to
punish all contumacious Offenders against their Laws and Customs by
Excommunication. Which consisted of two things, First, solemn Imprecation of
the Divine vengeance. Secondly, Separation from their Converse, that partly by
the fear of the Wrath of God, and partly by shame and modesty they might be
brought to Repentance, which as it was no proper Jurisdiction, so it could take
no effect not only against the will of the Sovereign Power, but of every
refractory Offender, that might, if he pleased, despise their Sentence and in
spite of it, enjoy the liberty of his own Conversation. And therefore to make
the Sentence appear more terrible to the People, they expressed it in the same
forms of Speech, in which Moses expressed Capital punishments, which is the
thing that gave the Occasion to learned men of mistaking, as if the same
Phrases had signified the same thing from the beginning, though the only
intention of the Jews was thereby to declare, that they would no more own
Excommunicate persons to be Members of their Society, than if they had been cut
off from it by a sentence of Death; and that if it were in their Power, they
would not spare to do it according to the Law of Moses. That this sentence
related only to their Civil Liberties, and was no abridgment of their freedom
as to public Worship; and though the Offender upon whom it passed, was said to
be cast out of their Synagogue, yet that is to be understood as it was their
Court of Judicature, not their place of Worship, and so signifies Civil
Out-lawry, not Ecclesiastical Excommunication. But though this Device was at
first made use of in this case of necessity for want of more effectual
Government; yet having once obtained the Power of custom among them, when they
were restored to their Country and Civil State they reserved it among their
Civil Penalties, and used or omitted, altered or abated its Exercise according
to discretion, as is wont to be done in all other Acts of humane Judicature.
That this was the State and Notion of the thing in the time of our Savior and
his Apostles, who took it up in imitation of the Jews, and therefore expressed
it by the same forms of Speech, so that in their Discourses it signified no
other Separation than what it did among the Jews. That thus the Use of it
continued till the open breach between the Jews and Christians, and then the
Christian Church being wholly separated from the Jewish into a Society by it
self, they entered into such a Confederacy among themselves, as the Jews did in
the time of their Captivity, of inflicting censures upon such as by their
unchristian Practices should bring scandal upon the Church. That this Power at
first resided in the whole Congregation, not in any particular Officer, and
that thus it continued till the Ambition of the Bishops wrested it into their
own hands, and for it pretended the Authority of our Savior's Commission. And
so they enjoyed it till the time of Constantine the Great, who taking the
Church into his Care and Government, reassumed this Power to himself as a
natural Right of the Sovereign Prerogative; and so it descended to all his
Successors in the Empire, who, as appears by the Records of every Age, varied
its Use and exercise at their own pleasure. And as Princes came into the
Church, this Right of course Escheated to them, and was accordingly challenged
by them, as is largely proved by the History of Europe, and particularly of our
own Nation. This is the short Account of his long Performance; the sum whereof
is, That Excommunication had no Divine, but merely an humane Original, and that
it is no Ecclesiastical, but a civil Punishment, and therefore that it
appertains not to the Church, but to the civil Magistrate.

Now to Answer, or rather Confute all this, I need only to represent, That the
Christian Church is a Society founded upon the immediate Charter and Command of
our Savior, whereby he has obliged all the Members of it to the open
profession of the Christian Faith, and to Communicate in the Sacraments and all
other Ordinances of public Worship; which Society is so far from having the
least Dependence upon the Civil Power, that it was at first Erected not only
without the Allowance, but against the Edicts and Decrees of all the Powers of
the Earth; and subsisted so apart from all Kingdoms and Commonwealths for
above 300 years; all which time, though it borrowed no Force or Assistance from
the Imperial Laws, yet by virtue of our Saviors Divine Authority it obliged
all Christians to embody together into a visible Society. Which Obligation is
not only distinct from, but antecedent to all humane Laws that require the same
thing. And therefore in a Christian state men are not Christians by virtue of
the Law of the Commonwealth, but it is the Law of God that constitutes the
Being and Formality of a Christian Church. Now this being granted me, which
cannot be denied without denying the foundations of the Christian Faith, the
whole cause of Erastianism is run upon a palpable Contradiction. For if the
Church be a Society founded upon Divine Right, it must have at least as much
Power of Government within it self as is necessary to its own Peace and
Preservation; otherwise it is no Society, much less of any Divine Appointment.
And if it be endued with a Power of Government, it must have a Power of
inflicting penalties upon Offenders, because without that the common sense of
mankind will tell us, that all Government is ineffectual. And then as it is a
Society, so it is no civil Society, as appears by our Saviors own Declaration,
that his Kingdom is not of this World; and by the fundamental Principle of
these men, that for that very reason maintain it cannot be endued with any
juridical Authority. From all which, viz. That it is a Society, but no civil
Society; that every Society must have Government, and all Government a Power of
inflicting Penalties: what can more demonstratively follow, than That its
Penalties are distinct from those that are inflicted by the civil Power; and if
so, that then Excommunication in the Christian Church, whatever it is, must be
something distinct from all civil Inflictions? So that methinks Mr. Hobbs his
Notion is much more Coherent with it self, for whilst he allows the Church no
Right of Society, but what is granted it by the civil Government; it is but
reasonable, that the Power upon whose Charter it subsists, should retain to it
self the Authority of governing it according to the Laws and Rights of its own
^^stitution. But to derive all its Rig^^ of Society from God, and at the same
time allow it no Power of Government, but from the State; is that gross
Contradiction I charge them with, in that Society without Government, is no
Society. So that this one Notion, That the Church is a spiritual Corporation,
distinct from the Commonwealth, and antecedent to its being embodied to it,
prevents and anticipates all the Erastian Arguments, because that alone plainly
infers, that it must be endued with a jurisdiction distinct from the civil
Government. And indeed the main Dispute depends upon this one Principle,
Whether the Church be a Society founded by Divine Institution? if it be, that
alone vests it with a Power of Excommunication; if it be not, it is in vain to
strugle against Conclusions, when we have once owned the Premises, for then are
we clearly returned back to the Church of Leviathan, that stands uponno other
Foundation than that of humane Laws. Now upon this immovable Principle, I join
Issue with our learned Author, and shall wait upon him through all parts of
his Discourse, and through all Ages of the world, as he has divided them into
six Epochas (1) From Adam to Moses (2) From Moses to the Captivity, (3) From
the Captivity to our Savior, (4) From our Savior to the end of the first
Century, (5) From the end of the first Century to the Reign of Constantine, (6)
From Constantine to our own Age; of all which he has endeavored severally to
prove, that there was either no such thing as Excommunication in Use; or if
there were, that it was a mere humane Invention. First, he undertakes to prove,
Cap. 11.
that there was no such punishment as Consistorian Excommunication in all the
interval from the Creation to Moses. For whereas it is the custom of some
zealous men to fetch all things from the beginning of the World, they have here
it seems exemplified this matter in the Fall of Lucifer from Heaven, in the
expulsion of Adam from Paradise, and in the banishment of Cain from the Society
of mankind. Now in answer to these, he replies two things, First, that these
punishments were not properly Excommunication; Secondly, that if they were,
examples are not enough to make a Divine Law. I will freely grant him both, and
yet infer from hence, what is enough to my purpose. The necessity of Government
to the preservation of Society, and of inflicting penalties to the preservation
of Government. When it appears from hence, that even God himself, who is endued
with infinite Wisdom and Power, has no other moral way, but this to govern the
world. And that is all, that in this part of the Dispute can be material to our
present Argument; for the Dispute being divided into two parts, Whether there
be such a punishment as Excommunication, and Whether the Power of inflicting it
be appropriate to certain Officers of our Saviors appointment: I suppose no
man ever pretended to prove that our Savior at the beginning of the World
instituted an Apostolical order of men for the government of Religion, so that
here all the Controversy that can be, is, Whether there were not an absolute
necessity of some jurisdiction in this, as well as all other matters of humane
life? and for it we have our Author's full suffrage, proving in his first and
second Chapters, that the sons of Noah, and the Patriarchs, who lived before
the Law, must have had their Courts of judicature, tam circa Sacra quam
Profana, from the nature and end of Society, in that without this Power it must
unavoidably fall into disorder and confusion. Utrum aurem praefecturae fuerint
illis tunc temporis juridicae, tametsi nulla omnino restarent earundem in
sacris literis alibive vestigia, non magis esset dubitandum, quam, utrum in
societatem vitae civilem coalescerent tunc ipsi, atque animalia, ut genus
humanum reliquum, essent politica, recteque ac honest, pro seculi persuasione,
vivendi rationem omnino inirent; atque ut Dubia, Lites, Controversiae cum
effectu civili, i. e. judiciorum executione dirimerentur, scelera ac delicta
cohiberentur, adeoque in Officiis contineretur quisque suis curaret. And
therefore he makes all Government to be established by the Law of Nature, as
being absolutely necessary to the preservation of all humane Society. Which if
he would but have applied to the case of the Christian Church, it would have
prevented the pains of all his ensuing Discourses; for that being a Society of
it self, as founded upon Divine Right; and Power of governing it self, being
necessary to Society, what can be more evident from the nature of things
themselves, than that the Church must be endued with such a Power? So that once
supposing Society, that alone infers Government, and all the acts of it; and to
this purpose our Author observes out of the Jewish Doctors (if their Authority
be to any purpose) that whereas there were six Laws given by God to our first
Parents to oblige all mankind, the last was de Judiciis, for as much as without
that, all the rest would have been ineffectual; thus whereas Idolatry and
Blasphemy, which refer only to the Worship of God were forbidden by the two
first, they could never have had the force of Laws among mankind, unless some
Persons were endued with a power of judging of the nature of those Crimes, and
inflicting punishments in pursuance of their Sentence, which he styles not only
the Soul of Government, but the noblest faculty of that Soul, and the noblest
act of that faculty. And therefore when our Author disputes, whether the
Christian Excommunication were taken from the Jews or the Heathen, and leaves
the case doubtful, in that it was in Use among most nations, civil and
barbarous, as well as the Jews, as he proves by a vast collection out of the
Records of the Greeks, the Romans, Arabians, Germans, Gauls, Britans and
others; his most proper conclusion would have been, That so universal a
Practice could be derived from nothing less than the common sense of mankind.

The two next Periods are from Moses to the Captivity, when the Jews enjoyed
the civil jurisdiction of their own Commonwealth; and from the Captivity to
our Savior, when they were either wholly deprived of it, or limited in its
exercise according to the pleasure of the Princes to whom they were subject. In
the first interval, he proves at large, that they had no such punishment as
Excommunication strictly so called, but that all Officers whatsoever were
punished with a loss or abatement of their civil Liberties But being deprived
of the power of the Sword, or the civil Government in the time of their
Captivity, they were forced, having no more effectual way, to punish Offenders
against their Law by shame and dishonor. As pregnant proofs, both these, of
the necessity of Excommunication in the Christian Church, as a modest man could
well have desired! For what can follow with greater clearness of Reason, than
that, If the Jewish state had no Use of mere Excommunication, whilst it was
endued with a power of restraining vice by the civil Sword; and that when it
was deprived of this Power, it was forced by the mere necessity of the thing to
make Use of this punishment, that therefore the Society of the Church having no
Power of temporal coercion to punish offenses against the Laws of the Society,
must be vested with some other power of punishment suitable to the nature and
end of its Constitution? Otherwise it would be a Society founded by God
himself, without sufficient means to govern, that is, preserve it self. And if
it have a Right or power of Discipline within it self, that is the only thing
that the Church demands, and that our Author denies.

But of these two long Periods, the account as to our purpose is very short;
for as for the first, it is granted on all hands, That the Rights of Church and
State were granted by the same Charter, and the power of Government vested in
the same Persons; and therefore all their acts of jurisdiction carried in them,
according to the nature of the Society, both a civil and Ecclesiastical
Authority. Whereas the Christian Church is of a quite different Constitution:
It is a Kingdom indeed, but not of this world, endued with no temporal power,
and instituted purely for spiritual ends, and therefore its Government (if it
have any) must be suitable to its Institution, distinct from that of the civil
State, and enforced by such penalties as are peculiar to the Society; the
greatest whereof is, to be cast out of it, which answers to putting to death by
the civil Sword. So that the different constitution of these two Societies
being considered, it unavoidably follows, Because the Jewish Magistrates had a
complete jurisdiction in all things, that therefore the jurisdiction proper to
the Church that has no civil Power, must be merely spiritual; and if it have
any jurisdiction proper to it self, that is enough to our purpose against them,
who say it has none.

As for the second, that Excommunication was taken up in the time of the
Captivity, merely to supply the want of the civil Sword; it is as clear an
Instance as could have been produced of the necessity of this, or the like
punishment in all Society, where there is no other coercive Power. But here, by
the way, though I do not doubt that this punishment was then first made Use of
upon this ground, yet I must confess, that I am not satisfied of the Account
that our Author, and other learned men give of it out of the Talmudical
Writers. For, beside that, they all writ when their Nation was debauched with
Misnical and Talmudical Fables, than which it is hard to invent any thing more
absurd and silly; they, who were in comparison but very modern Writers, had no
other means of knowing what was done from the time of the Captivity, but from
the writings of the Prophets, and the Histories of those times; and therefore
their Reports can have no Authority, but as justified by those ancient Records.
And whereas Mr. Seldom tells us, for the Reputation of his own Learning, Si cui
De jure not. and Gent. l. 2. 2. Comment in Eutych p. 54. V. Scaliger de
emendat. temp. 1^.
hic dubium forsan occu^rat, utrum corpori and scriptoribus talmuai^is
hujusmodi in rebus quatenus historicae sunt, id est quatenus in eis pro jure
qualicunque Ebreis veteribus recognito atque usitato tra^untur, fides sit
habenda, eo scilicet quod corpus illud quo jam habetur contextum, scriptoresque
illi caeteri saeculorum sunt Templi urbisque excidio recentiorum, is for san
etiam dubitabit de Justiniani seu Triboniani fide dum Modestini, Papiniani,
Florentini, Alpheni, Proculi, Celsi, ejusmodi aliorum, qui trecentis aut
circiter sunt Justiniano annis vetustiores, sententias atque scita juris alibi
non reperta. He might have observed that these two cases were vastly different;
for there were certain Records and Reports of those famous Lawyers, which were
conveyed by writing from age to age, as were the writings of other Authors.
Whereas there are no footsteps of any Monuments for the Rabinical Fable; and as
they have no ancient Authority, so they discover themselves by their own
foolishness, to have been the inventions of a very barbarous and degenerate
Age. so that our Author, if he would have found a parallel case, ought not to
have compared the Talmudical Traditions to the Digests of Justinian, but to
some of the old British History (not to mention the Monk of Viterbo) who give
us large Accounts of the exploits of their Country, and the succession of their
Princes from Adam to Brute, without any assistance of former Records. And this
I take to be the case of the Talmudical Doctors, in whose Reports there is
nothing creditable concerning the ancient Jewish Church, farther than as it is
confirmed by the ancient Writers. And therefore I find no reason to accommodate
their forms or customs of Excommunication to the old Jews, because I find no
Records of them older than themselves. And for this reason I suspect it to be a
great mistake in Grotius, and the learned men that follow him, who whatever
they find in the Talmudical Writers concerning Excommunication, immediately
apply it to some text of Scripture, as if it were originally taken thence. Of
which (though it is not much material to my purpose) I shall give a brief
Account. The Talmudists then had their degrees of Excommunication, some say
three, Mr. Seldom says but two, neither was it inflicted only by the Court of
Judicature, but by any single Person; and that either upon another, or upon
himself; and that either waking or sleeping. For if any man pronounced himself,
or his neighbor Excommunicate, it was as binding, as the Decree of the great
Sanhedrim, or if he only dreamed that he was Excommunicate, either by the
Court, or any private Person, it was as effectual, as if it had been done with
all the formalities of Law. And as any man had power to Excommunicate himself,
so had any Rabbi to absolve himself, and if a man were Excommunicate by the
great Sanhedrim, he might be absolved by any three men whatsoever; with diverse
other ridiculous Formalities, which discover themselves to be mere inventions
of the Talmudical Age, when all sense of Religion was run into idle and useless
Pageantry. And therefore passing by all the rest as absurd enough of it self, I
can find no Traces of their several degrees of Excommunication more ancient
than themselves, and therefore I suspect them, not to have been in Use in the
ancient Jewish Discipline. And though Grotius interpret several texts of
Scripture by them, it is manifest that he brings his Interpretation along with
him from the Rabinical Writers, without finding any ground for it in the Text
it self, as will best appear by particulars. Thus that Text, Ezra 10. 8. That
whosoever would not come within three days according to the counsel of the
Princes and the Elders all his substance should be forfeited, and himself
separated from the Congregation of those that had been carried away; seems not
to have any reference to the power of Excommunication, but only an exercise of
that absolute Authority that Ezra had received from the Persian King, Chap. 7.
26. That whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death, or to
Banishment, or to confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. Now the
Proclamation in the 10. Chap. being in pursuance of this Authority, can
signify nothing, but first, an exclusion from the privileges granted by
Artaxerxes to the Jews, which, as things then stood, amounted to nothing less
than Banishment, and then Secondly, a confiscation of their Estates, and
because the Estates to be confiscated were to be devoted to the service of
Religion, the thing is expressed by the word (...) that signifies Consecration,
as well Destruction. For whereas it properly and originally imports nothing but
utter Ruin, yet because in most cases, where the People were designed to final
Destruction, the Goods were reserved and dedicated to the service of God,
thence the same word came to signify Destruction and Consecration. Neither
does that Text of Nehemiah sound any more to the purpose, c. 13. 25. And I
contended with them, and cursed them, etc. which seem to signify nothing more,
than as Grotius himself expresses it, Nehemiam gravibus verbis etiam cum ir ae
divinae comminatione usum in istos legirupas, chiding with them severely, and
threatening them with the wrath of God. Much less is that of Daniel to this
purpose, Chap. 12. 2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth,
shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt, i. e. says Grotius of these latter sort, erunt alij in Nidui, alij in
Cherem. For supposing with him that this passage ought to be understood of the
punishment of those, who under the persecution of Antiochus had Apostatised
from the worship of the true God, yet there is no imaginable foundation, were
not men's minds prepossest with Talmudical Conceits, to understand it of these
forms of Excommunication, especially that of Nidui, which was not separation,
but only a keeping the distance of four paces from others, was certainly a very
small punishment for the greatest of sins among them, i. e. Idolatry. And
lastly, (to mention no more) that of St. John the 9. and 22. seems least of all
to the purpose. That the Jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess,
that he was Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue. Which Grotius
expounds of Nidui, because, says he, the second degree of Excommunication was
not inflicted upon the followers of Jesus, till after the Resurrection. But it
looks very uncouth, that the great Sanhedrin who looked upon our Savior as an
enemy to Moses and their Religion, an Impostor, an Apostate, a Samaritan, which
was much worse than an Heathen, should deter the People from being seduced by
him with no greater penalty, than of keeping four paces distance from their
Neighbors; however when those that were under it, were notwithstanding
admitted into the Synagogue keeping their due did ance, they could not be said
to be cast out of it. In short, when there are no footsteps of the Talmudical
degrees of Excommunication, neither in the Scripture, nor Josephus, nor in the
practice of the Essenes, nor in any ancient Record; we have no reason to
believe it was then in use, but on the contrary, that it was not, because
otherwise, so obvious a thing could not have escaped their notice. The truth
is, the plainest account we have of this thing, is from the Scriptures of the
New Testament, as I shall show when I come to that head, particularly from
their custom of casting out of the Synagogue, which signifies discommoning
Offenders, and is commonly expressed by the word (...) by Josephus (...) to
cashire out of the Society, of which we have an eminent instance in the third
Book of Maccabees, where the Egyptian Jews excommunicated those that under the
Tyranny of Ptolomy Philopator had sacrifised to Idols, accounting them (...) as
no better than enemies to their Nation. This was the simple practice of this
thing, as far as I can find in those times, to expel them out of their Society,
without variety of lesser or greater degrees, but whoever were excommunicate,
were to all intents and purposes degraded from being Jews. But herein perhaps I
am mistaken, and whether I am, or am not, I am as little concerned as my cause,
to which I now return. And here all that our Author has to the purpose is, that
Excommunication among the Jews, was only an abatement of their Civil, not their
Sacred privileges, which if true, would do very little service to his
Conclusion, that therefore it must be so in the Christian Church, where there
are no privileges but what are Sacred, but the principle it self is altogether
ungrounded, without Authority, and without reason, and that too, though we
understand it of his Talmudical Excommunication; for as he justifies the Truth
of it by no Authority, so the reason he gives, is as good as none, viz. That
those under Nidui were admitted into the Synagogue. And so they were, as they
were admitted to civil Conversation, keeping their distance of four paces, and
from thence alone it is reasonable to conclude, that as the sentence proceeded
higher, so it was raised in both kinds of punishments. However there is one
Argument to prove the Jewish Excommunication to be a sacred, as well as civil
Interdiction, and that so very obvious, that it is impossible that our learned
Author could have overlooked it, had not his eyes been so wholly fixed upon his
own Hypothesis. And that is this, that they looked upon all excommunicate
Persons as no Jews, or as we cited before out of the third Book of the
Maccabees, as enemies to the Jewish Nation; and then it is sufficiently known
to all men, That no such were admitted to the public service.

And so we come to the Period of the Christian Church, which is divided into
three Ages, the first, during the time of our Savior and his Apostles; The
second, from their death, or the end of the first Century, to the Reign of
Constantine; The third, from the Reign of Constantine, down to our own times.
And that Excommunication in the first age of the Church, was of the same nature
with that of the Jews, our learned Author demonstrates, because our Savior and
his Apostles practiced it in imitation of their Discipline. Though for my part,
I cannot understand how any thing can follow more plainly than that
Excommunication, if it were a civil punishment among the Jews, must be merely
Sacred among the Christians. For if the Jews took it up, as our Author will
have it, only to supply their want of civil Government, it must therefore, as
he rightly infers, be used by them as a civil Penalty. Then when our blessed
Savior instituted the same in his Church, it must not be a civil, but a sacred
Penalty, because his Church is no civil, but a sacred Society. If indeed
Christians, as Christians confederated together to maintain their secular
Interests, that would make temporal punishments necessary to the preservation
of their Confederacy. But when they enter into a Society, purely to enjoy some
spiritual Rights and Privileges, then all separation from the Society by way
of Punishment, can be nothing else than debarring them from those Rights and
Privileges. So that if Excommunication among the Jews was, as our Author
contends, the same with Out-lawry as to their civil Rights, what can be more
evident than that it can be no such thing among Christians, because as such
they have no civil Rights to lose. And for this reason, whereas he concludes,
that because Excommunication was taken up into the Christian Church in
imitation of the Jewish Discipline, that therefore it was the same, if he had
considered things instead of words, he would have been so far from making his
own Conclusion, that he would have concluded that, if one were civil, the other
was not. So that when our Savior established the Customs of his Country in his
Church, it is manifest from the nature of his Church, which was a spiritual
Kingdom, that he never intended it should be exercised in any other matters,
than what were peculiar to his Religion; or if he did, that he lost his
Intention. And therefore it seems no better than mere obstinacy in our Author,
to insist upon it so importunately, that Excommunication in the Christian
Church must be the same with the Jewish, because borrowed from it, when for
that reason alone it must be different, because so were the Societies, to which
they related. And he might as well have argued that the Christian Baptism was
the same with that of the Jews, because it is the form of Proselytism in both,
whereas by one men become Jews, by the other Christians. And of the same nature
is Excommunication, for as by that we are admitted into the Church, so by this
are we cast out of it. And whereas our Author will have it to have been the
same thing both among Jews and Christians, because it is expressed by the same
Phrases, it is as absurd, as if he should go about to prove that no man can be
banished out of England, because he may be banished out of France, for though
banishment out of both Kingdoms be the same punishment, yet were their
banishments out of different Kingdoms: so by Excommunication among the Jews
(passing Mr. Seldens account of it) were men cast out of the Commonwealth, and
all the Rights of it, and among the Christians out of the Church, and all the
benefits belonging to it. And therefore, unless he could prove that there is no
difference between the Christian Church, and Jewish Common wealth, it is in
vain for him to insist thus weakly upon the fignification of words, for that is
determined by the nature of things, and therefore where they are different,
there is no avoiding it, but that the words by which they are expressed, must
signify different things.

But this being premised, our Author divides his Discourse into two parts,
First, to enquire what was the use of Excommunication in the Apostolical Age;
Secondly, upon what right it was founded; as for the first, he alleges several
Texts of Scripture, as Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any
other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
Anathema. 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema, Maran Atha. But to what purpose this, is past my Comprehension: For
the only design of the Argument, is to prove that the Apostolical
Excommunication was merely Jewish, as he had before proved that the Jewish was
merely civil. Now can any man imagine that such dreadful Curses as these should
signify no more than a separation from Neighbors Commerce? especially, when
it is evident, that St. Paul strained for the highest expressions of misery;
and therefore to heighten his sense, he supposes an impossible thing, that an
Angel from Heaven should teach a false Religion, which, says he, if he should,
let him be Anathema, i. e. says our Author keep him not Company, a dreadful
punishment to an Angel. As for the second Text, it is so high a Curse, that all
Authors are at a loss for its meaning, though among all the Conjectures about
the signification of Maranatha, I think none more probable than that of
Grotius: Ea voce oratur Deus ut quamprimum talem maleficum and seductorem
tollat ex hominum numero. It was a casting out of the Church attended with a
prayer to Almighty God to take the Offender out of the World; which was rarely
done, and only in such cases, as is here supposed, when men were not only
wicked, but powerful Agents, and Instruments of Wickedness; as in the case of
Julian, whom the Christian Church did not only Excommunicate for his Apostasy,
but because, beside that he set himself to destroy Christianity, they prayed to
God, that for its preservation he would speedily remove him out of the World.
But whatever it signified, it was something more than a mere Restraint of
familiar Conversation, or it was nothing at all. For what punishment could it
be to any man, who disowned Christianity to be deprived of the Conversation of
Christians, in an heathen City, where the Religion was a Novelty, and when
their Company was so far from being desirable, that it could only expose a man
to contempt and scorn? But however, granting this slender Interpretation of
these Texts, what can be more absurd, than that the Apostle only by virtue of a
Jewish Power, should Excommunicate all that opposed our Saviors Religion, both
when he had no such Power, and when the Jews were the main enemies that opposed
it? And yet that is the only thing that our Author undertakes in this Chapter,
That there was then no Excommunication in the Christian Church, but by virtue
of the Jewish Authority.

The last instance of Apostolical Practice, is St. Paul's proceeding against the
incestuous Corinthian, which, one would think is as clear a Precedent, of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as could have been left upon Record. And yet this
must be rejected as a miraculous and extraordinary case, and is not to be
understood for the power of Excommunication, but for the then Apostolical power
of inflicting Diseases, though nothing can be expressed in plainer words, than
St. Paul's commanding the Corinthians, to put such an one from among them, for
what else can that signify than to expel him their Society? And what if any
miraculous Effect followed it? that was not the punishment which the Apostle
enjoined the Corinthians to inflict upon the Offender, for they were not, as is
agreed on all hands, endued with any such Power. But all that he required of
them, was to cast him out of their Church, and therefore in his second Epistle
upon the offending parties Repentance, he counsels them to restore him, 2 Cor.
2. And that, whatever delivering to Satan may otherwise import, was all the
Jurisdiction they exercised, as gathered together in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Apostles Spirit, and if any extraordinary inflictions ensued
upon this sentence, that was only a Divine Ratification of the Churches decree.
But when upon this occasion, the Apostle enjoins the Corinthians not to
accompany, no not so much as to eat with scandalous Offenders, that says our
Author, signifies no more than David's saying, Blessed is the Psalm. 1. 1.
man that walks not in the counsel of the wicked: And I have not sat with
vain Ps. 26. 4.
persons, neither will I go with dissemblers; this brought no alteration upon
the state of Offenders, but only signifies the Resolution of particular men, as
to their Conversation. It is very true, that a man's Resolution is his
Resolution; but then a Command too is a Command; And that, whatever David's case
was, is the case here, where St. Paul commands them in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by his Apostolical Authority to expel all wicked pretenders to
Christianity out of their Society. And that, it is plain, was a manifest change
of their state in the Christian Church, or the same thing with Excommunication.

But this for the Usage; as for the Right, our Author will allow none, but what
was purely Judaical or Imperial, and this he proves very largely, both because
at first all Christians were Jews, and none else were admitted into the Church,
but Jewish Proselytes, so that notwithstanding their Christianity they
continued the same national Interest, and exercised the same acts of
Government, of which Excommunication being one, it was common both to the
Believing and Unbelieving Jews. That is his evidence of the Jewish Title to
Excommunication; his proof of the Imperial, is this, That the Emperors in their
Edicts, by which they granted or abated their Privileges, understood both Jews
and Christians, and therefore by virtue of their grants, the Christians as well
as Jews enjoyed their old power of Excommunication. But to what purpose all
this, I must confess, I cannot divine: For it is true, that the Christians and
Jews then kept up the same National Interest, but what is that to
Excommunication in the Christian Church, which was both distinct from that of
the Jews, and concerned no civil Rights? And that is our only enquiry what that
Excommunication was, that was peculiar to Christianity. For when the Christians
continued among the Jews as to their civil Society, the question is, that
seeing notwithstanding that they exercised this power among themselves as
Christians, whether that must not be distinct from the same Act as exercised
among them as Jews. For (as our Author informs us) they were Jews to all
intents and purposes, Nisi exceptis rebus illis quibus a Judaeis non
credentibus necessario atque e disciplina Christiana singulari divinitus
praescripta discriminarentur, that is to say, they were Jews to all intents and
purposes, but of Christianity. Upon such preposterous absurdities are men
forced, when they will right or wrong maintain their own Prejudices. We are at
great pains to prove that the Christians had no discipline by Divine Right, and
that what they had, they had in common with the Jews, and now after all, we
except only that which was peculiar to the Christians, and that too instituted
by Divine Right. And thus I find that our Author is forced every where upon
this Argument, to contradict his Assertion in a Parenthesis. Thus, Chap. 13. p.
494. Quidnam ibi quo minus tum regimen circa tam sacra Christiana quam
prophana, publicum, tum ipsa excommunicatio, ut ante (causis tantum aliquot
novis pro persuasionis discrimine introductis) utpote inter mores Judaicos
illibata, undiquaque ab illis exerceri, nec aliter debuisset. Our whole design
is to prove, that there was no Excommunication among the primitive Christians,
but that of the Jews, nor none among the Jews, but what was purely civil, and
now at last we except in a Parenthesis as it were by the by, all cases that
came in upon the account of their new Persuasion, that is to say, all cases
that concern the Christian Church. So p. 207. Et qui annis proximius
sequentibus e Gentilibus sine Judaismi Proselytismi Christi disciplinam
amplexati sunt, Judaeorum nihilominus nomine ita simul cum reliquis Judaeis
parit^r veniebant eorumque diu juribus aliis non paucis ita utebantur, ut non
videatur omnino dubitandum quin, inter jura illa et^am hoc de excommunicatione
Judaica, quantum ad species ejus seu gradus (nam quantum ad causas, necessum
erat ut alit^r se res haberet, quod nemo non videt) pariter a cunctis ut ante
pro re nata adhiberetur. But if the causes for which Excommunication was
inflicted in the Christian Church, were (as the Parenthesis informs us) of a
different nature from those for which it was inflicted among the Jews, then
without any farther dispute, it is evident, that the exercise of the Christian
Excommunication was distinct from that of the Jews. So lastly (to mention no
more) p. 225. Nec disciplina illa apud eos alia quam Judaismus vere reformatus
sen cum fide in Messiam seu Christum rite conjunctus. Unde Judaei omnimodi
quantum ad hanc rem, in (...) credentes and (...) non credentes tribui
solebant. We are here proving that there was no discipline in the Christian
Church, but what was in the Jewish state before Christianity, but now it is the
discipline of reformed Judaism, i. e. of Christianity. But passing by these
humble concessions, or rather contradictions, it is enough to our purpose, that
though all Christians were Jews, all Jews were not Christians; so that though
the Christians enjoyed the same Rights in common with the Jews, yet they must
have some Rights peculiar to themselves as Christians. Non aliter (as our
Author expresses it) atque is qui Civis Romani aliusve Reipublicae seu
sodalitii p. 12^.
ali^ujus socius jura pristina retinet, utcunque in persuasionem aliquam inter
suos singularem pro libitu transeat. In the same manner as a Citizen of Rome
retains his former Rights, notwithstanding he enters himself into any new
Society; to which ought to be added, that the rights of the Society into which
he enters himself, are distinct from those wherewith he was antecedently vested
as a Citizen of Rome. And therefore all this long discourse is quite beside the
purpose, that because the Christians enjoyed the same privileges with Jews,
that therefore they enjoyed none as Christians, which is to say, that there are
no Christian Privileges. And so is that of the Edicts of the Roman Emperors,
who it seems knew nothing of the difference between Christians and Jews. What
then, was there none because the enemies or strangers to the Church were
unacquainted with its peculiar Constitutions? And yet here too our Author is
quite beside the purpose, not only in matter of Right, but in matter of Fact,
as to the Authorities he alleges, the first and chiefest whereof is the Edict
of the Emperor Claudius for the banishment of all Jews from Rome, by virtue
whereof (says he) Aquila who was a Christian was banished too; and very good
reason, because he that was a Christian was a Jew too, and if he was banished as
a Jew, it is no matter whether he were a Christian or not, when the Edict was
made against the whole nation of the Jews. His other instance is out of Celsus,
who objects it both against the Christians and Jews, that all that great
difference they made about their Messiah was about a very trifle. But does Mr.
Seldom think that Celsus his Authority is sufficient to prove it so? If he
does, then I must confess that Celsus and himself seem to have been much of the
same opinion, for he frequently tells us that the Christians and Jews were the
same men, only that those were believers, these unbelievers, as if the
difference were as inconsiderable, as Celsus made the coming of the Messiah.
But if his Authority be not sufficient, as I suppose no good Christian will
grant it is, especially in this case, then it is here alleged apparently to no
purpose. And whereas he adds that Origin answers, that the Jews, who believe in
Jesus, do not withstanding live according to the Laws of their Nation, he ought
to have added too, that they live according to the Laws of their Messiah. For
it was that great and sacred Law of the Gospel that made a vast difference
between a Jew and a Christian, which was so great, that it was not greater
between a Jew and a Gentile. But however, if there were any difference at all,
it spoils all our Authors discourse, that proceeds upon this only principle,
that there was none, which is so absurd, that it has all along forced him upon
the forementioned cowardly contradiction, viz. That there was none but what was
made by Christianity.

But, suppose that the Christians exercised a Jurisdiction among themselves by
virtue of the imperial Edicts to the Jews, as he tells us: what if they had
never been authorized by any such Edicts, would they have had no Authority to
censure or Excommunicate scandalous Offenders? Did St. Paul proceed against the
incestuous Corinthian by the grant of Claudius to the Jews to govern themselves
by their own Laws and Customs? If he did not, then he acted by virtue of some
other Authority, if he did, then when any of the following Emperors reverst
this Edict, the Authority of St. Paul in this matter had ceased. What then
became of the Church when Nero presently after, forbad the exercise of
Christianity, or any part of it in the Roman Empire, was not then
Excommunication in the Christian Church an unlawful thing? No, says our Author,
because this Decree was made against the Christian Church in particular, and
therefore did not deprive them of those privileges, that belonged to them in
common with the Jews. But however upon this principle it is manifest that it
debarred them of this Power as peculiar to the Christian Church, and then
whatever Jurisdiction they exercised as Jews, they had no right of exercising
any Discipline in the name of the Lord Jesus, as St. Paul commands the
Corinthians. And then all the Ecclesiastical Discipline that was executed in
the times of their several Persecutions was open Rebellion against the State.
But beside, what if he had been pleased to reverse all privileges granted to
the Jews, then the power of Ecclesiastical Discipline must have ceased among
Christians. And lastly, when he adds for his last reserve for keeping up a
Discipline in the Church, contrary to the commands of the civil Power, the
confederacy of the primitive Christians, who obliged themselves by mutual
compacts and covenants to submit to the Discipline of the Church, he should
have considered that all such confederations were upon his principles nothing
less than conspiracies against the Government. For if the Church have no right
of exercising any Discipline within it self, but by the grant of the Empire,
then the grant of the Empire being reversed, it has none at all. And thus has
he fairly brought this confederate Discipline of the primitive Church, which he
has contrived purely to avoid any Government founded upon Divine Right, into
downright Rebellion. And no wonder, when all Confederacies against the
Commands of the Sovereign Power can be no better, unless, when warranted by
Divine Authority.

And now it is no wonder, if after these Premises our Author begins his next
Chapter with a Confession, that it does not appear when the present form of
Excommunication began in the Christian Church. Quandonam primo discrepantia
ejusmodi inter Christianae and Judaicae seu vetustioris Excommunicationis
effectus inciperet, non quidem satis liquet. Sed ante Origenis ac Tertulliani
etiam and Irenaei tempora, juxta jam dicta, effectum, quoad Sacrorum
communicatinis negationem, inolevisse non dubitandum. Though I should have
thought it a sufficient proof that it descended from the Apostles when we find
it in the Church immediately after them, and find no beginning of its
Institution, especially when it could have no other, because the Apostles
challenging no Civil Authority, they could have no other power but a cutting
off from the Spiritual Privileges of the Christian Church. And here I cannot
but remark it as the peculiar disingenuity of all the Adversaries both of the
Government and Governors of the Church, i. e. Excommunication and Episcopacy,
that they will allow their usage in all Ages of the Church but only that of the
Apostles, and because they imagine that in their time there are no
demonstrative evidences of their Practice, for that reason destroy their
Reverence and neglect their Authority, whereas had these men the common modesty
of Mankind, they would revere them for their so ancient and Catholic Practice;
and when with all their search they cannot discover any later beginning of
them, they would conclude it at least a very fair probability that they
descended from Apostolical Prescription. And in our present case one would
wonder that when our Author has traced this usage both in the Eastern and
Western Churches into the Age immediately after the Apostles, without being
able to discover any other time of its first Institution, how any man should
doubt of its Apostolical Antiquity. What Records can be more evident than the
Canons of the Apostles, the Writings of Irenaeus and Tertullian, that lived in
the first Century after them, and St. Cyprian in the second, who do not only
mention this Power of the Church as a thing then in common use, but speak of it
as an ancient Right derived from their Ancestors. I shall give one Instance for
all, because our Author has the boldness to quote it, and yet to overlook the
Consequence, and that is out of Irenaeus, who expostulating with Victor Bishop
of Rome, about his rash Excommunication of the Asiatick Churches, thus bespeaks
him, (...): never were any men Excommunicated after this rate: Upon which our
learned Author observes Excommunicationis usus qualiscunque ut ab anterioribus
seculis illuc propagatus utrinque pariter tunc admittitur, from hence it
appears, that on all sides the use of Excommunication was admitted as
descending from the foregoing Ages, after this, could any man think it possible
that when he had allowed this Testimony of Irenaeus, who by his own computation
flourished about Seventy years after St. John, that he should ever doubt of its
being an Apostolical practice? Or could any man desire to reduce his Adversary
to a greater absurdity than is here so frankly owned, that Irenaeus who lived
in the age immediately after the Apostles should speak of this thing as the
custom of former ages, and yet that there should be no such custom in the
Apostolical age? And of the same nature is his discourse of the time when this
power was first appropriated to the Christian Bishops, which he confesses to be
altogether unknown, though he finds it in common use in the time of Irenaeus
and Tertullian; and that is time enough to give it right to Apostolic
prescription, especially when he does not so much as pretend to any Record that
the Keys were ever in the Peoples hands. Neither has he any ground for this
Imagination, but only his old conceit, that among the Jews every man had this
power, and therefore among the Christians. Whereas there is not the least
ground of surmise that there was any such custom among the ancient Jews, but
that it was a mere offspring of the Talmudical folly. Or if there were, yet it
was too foolish to be admitted into the serious discipline of the Christian
Church; for of what use could it be when any man might Excommunicate whom he
pleased, and when he might be absolved from the heaviest sentence of the Court
by any three persons that he could pack together; such ridiculous trifling is
at first view too absurd to be entertained in the Christian Church. And as it
does not appear, that the People ever exercised this power de facto, so neither
does it, that they could ever challenge it de jure, in that we do not find, that
our Savior ever vested the Body of Believers in any Power of governing his
Church, but on the contrary, that when ever he gives out his Commissions, he
ever addresses himself to particular Persons. And thus are we fallen upon the
main Controversy, where we ought to have begun, and where we might have ended,
but he that pursues an Adversary must follow his motion, otherwise certainly
the matter of right ought to have been determined before the matter of Fact,
and therefore the first question ought not to have been, whether the primitive
Christians exercised any such Jurisdiction, but whether they received any
Commission from our Savior for their Authority, which if either proved or
disproved would prevent the following dispute concerning the practice of the
Church, but seeing our Author is pleased to take this method, we shall tread in
his steps, and thus he brings it in, that when the Bishops had unwarrantably
assumed this Power to themselves, they justified their usurpation by pretended
Patents made to themselves in several Texts of Scripture, as the Power of the
Keys, and of binding, and loosing, and if any man hear not the Church, let him
be unto thee as an Heathen and a Publican. And now to elude the true meaning of
these and the like passages, what infinite pains has been taken by our Author
and other learned men I need not represent, but whatever shifts men may invent,
their true meaning discovers and clears it self by this one plain and obvious
consideration, viz. That our Savior had already set up his Kingdom or Society
of his Church, upon which supposition all these grants can signify nothing
less than a donation of Power. Thus when he chooses Officers under him, and
gives the Keys of his Kingdom into their hands, what can that possibly
signify, but their Power of Government in and over the Society, especially
when it was so familiar a thing in Scripture to express power by Keys, and our
Author himself has observed it, and proved it by a multitude of Instances. But
then says he, this Power of opening and P. 237.
shutting the Kingdom of Heaven is exercised by preaching the Doctrine of the
Gospel, by administering the Sacraments, by admitting fit Persons into it by
Baptism, and by not admitting such as are unfit, and by retaining such as are
already admitted. That is to say, our Author will allow the Governors of the
Church all other Acts of Jurisdiction, but only this one of Excommunication,
notwithstanding that it is evidently employed in them all: Thus, if the
Governors of the Church be entrusted with a Power of Judging what Persons are
fit to be admitted; then certainly, if they perform not those conditions upon
which alone they are admitted, it must be in the Power of those who let them
in, to turn them out. So plainly does the Power of Baptism infer that of
Excommunication, and the Power of judging who are fit members of the Church
infer both. So that the Gentlemen of the Erastian persuasion would have been
much more consistent with themselves, when they would not give the Church all
the Acts of Power, if they would have given it none at all, for they are
inseparable. And therefore the learned and pious Mr. Thorndike has very
judiciously observed, that the Epil. B. 1. c. 12.
Leviathan has done like a Philosopher in making the question general, that is
general indeed, though by so freely and generously declaring himself, he has
made his Resolution more subject to be contradicted. But yet they that only
dispute the Power of Excommunication, as they are of the same opinion, so are
they pressed with greater difficulty, only they express not so much of their
meaning: for they are nevertheless to give an account what Right the secular
Power can have to appoint the Persons, that shall either determine or execute
matters of Religion, to decide controversies of Faith, to administer the
Sacraments, than if they resolved and maintained all this as expressly as the
Leviathan has done.

And in the same manner does the following Text explain it self, If he hear not
the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen, and a Publican; if we will
observe upon what subject our Savior was then discoursing, for though our
Author to make the matter appear the more ambiguous, has given us a large
Critical account of the words that signify Church in all Languages; if instead
of that he had only minded our Savior's Discourse, he must have seen that by
the Church here could be understood nothing but the Christian Church, this
being one of the Laws whereby he would have the Subjects of his Kingdom to be
governed. But our Author tells us that the Notion of the Christian Church was
not then understood, it being a thing to come, and it is not likely that our
Savior in a matter of familiar and daily use, should direct them to such a
means as no mortal man could possibly understand. To which it is very easy to
answer, that all our Savior's Discourses proceed upon the supposition of the
being of his Mat. 4. 17.
Church. He began at preaching the Kingdom of Heaven, and all his Sermons and
Instructions after that, are but so many Laws and Institutions for its
Government, and therefore our Savior's Words are so far from being doubtful or
obscure, that they were not capable of being applied to any other Society, than
that which he was now establishing in the World. And whatsoever was the vulgar
meaning of the word Ecclesia, yet when used by our Savior, it can be applied
to no other company of men but that of his Church, and it was so far from being
then a new word, or a new notion to the Apostles, that our Savior had sometime
before used the same Expression to St. Peter: Upon this Rock I will build my
Church, which he promised him as a peculiar reward of his forward Faith. Now it
cannot be supposed that our Savior would make his promises to his Friends and
Servants in unintelligible Language, and therefore it must be supposed that the
Notion of the Christian Church was an intelligible thing. But if this will not
do, our Author proceeds, that this Text gives no jurisdiction to the Church,
but only directs private Christians how they shall behave themselves toward
Offenders; as if the Emperor should have made an Edict, that if any Subject
should not submit to the decree of his Prefect, he should be accounted by his
fellow Subjects as no member of the Commonwealth; this gives the Prefect no
new Power, but only concerns the opinion of the People. Very true, but it
supposes his old Power, and so if our Savior had antecedently vested his
Church with this Power, this was no new grant but only a supposition of a
former one; if he had not, then this was their Patent, when he refers his
Subjects to their Judicature. But whatever may be the Notion of the Church,
what is there, says our Author, in the following words, Let him be to thee as
an Heathen and a Publican, that sounds like Excommunication, either in the
Jewish or Christian use of it? Nothing at all in the Jewish, for Heathens were
never Excommunicate as having never been of the Society; neither were Publicans
put out of the Synagogue upon the account of their being Publicans. But though
Heathens were not Excommunicate Persons, yet Excommunicate Persons were as
Heathens, and that is so plainly the meaning of the words that nothing but mere
peevishness could have made the exception, and it is the same as if our Savior
should have said of an Apostate, let him be unto thee as an Infidel, and our
Author should have replied upon him, How can that be? When an Infidel is one
that was never a Member of the Church, and an Apostate once was, And then as
for the Publicans, though they durst not at that time Excommunicate them for
that reason, for fear of the Romans, yet it is notorious that they thought them
worthy of it, and that they were esteemed as no better than scandalous Sinners,
Heathens, and Idolaters. But this supposed too, it is no act (says he) of the
Church, but every private man, who was hereby permitted to treat the Offender
as a vile Person. But this act of his supposes the power of Judicature in the
Church, for this advice relates to the known power of the Sanhedrin, that were
wont to Excommunicate refractory Offenders, and thereby to put them into the
state of Heathen Men: And such it seems was to be the Authority of the
Apostles, who were the great Sanhedrin in the Christian Church, as appears by
the plain design of our Savior's discourse, when he refers all Christians to
their Judicature, and commands them that if any man be obstinate against their
Authority, every man should look upon him as an Excommunicate Person, and by
the sentence of the Court reduced into the state of Idolaters. But also by the
words immediately following, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound
in Heaven. Which words plainly declare a Power of binding in the sentence of
the Church, and withal who the Church is, viz. The Apostles or Governors of
it, to whom our Savior addresses his speech, and vests them, and them alone
with that Authority in which he had before enstated St. Peter, and promises to
ratify not the opinion of the People, but their acts of Judicature, when the
People appeal to their Authority.

But neither, Secondly, (says our Author) can these words relate to the
Christian Excommunication, for what punishment could there then be in being
accounted of as an Heathen, when a great number of the primitive Christians
were Heathens, or such as came into the Church without Circumcision. What in
our Saviors time? did you not take a great deal of pains in the foregoing
Chapter, to prove not only that then, but during all the time of the Apostles;
all Christians were Jews, but now it will serve your turn, the greatest part of
them were Heathens. But not to insist too much upon such weak pretenses, it is
certain, that in our Saviors time all that were not Jews by Circumcision were
esteemed as Heathens, i. e. Idolaters, and vile Persons, not fit to be admitted
into their Church or Commonwealth, and therefore it can be of no other Import
in the Christian Church: Our Savior here accommodating, as he does every
where, the known customs of the Synagogue to the Constitution of his Church, so
that considering the vulgar manner of speaking at that time, I cannot
understand, if our Savior had designed to establish this Power, in what other
words he could have expressed himself with more plainness and less ambiguity,
even to the capacities of the People.

Of the Third Text, Math. 18. 18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, etc.
Though it is answered already as appertaining to the second, our Authors
account is briefly this, that the words of binding and loosing, are either to
be taken in their large sense of all manner of binding, but then it seems very
strange to express one act of it by such comprehensive words, and it is like
describing the Ocean by a drop of Water, or the Universe by an Atom. Or if they
are taken in the peculiar sense of the Jewish Writers, they then do not
signify any Jurisdiction, but only declaring what is lawful, what not, or
answering cases of Conscience. To which I answer, that in whatever sense the
words are taken, they will include in them the power of Excommunication. In the
larger sense they signify Jurisdiction, and all the parts, branches and
appendages of it, and then the Power of inflicting penalties, which (as is well
known, and our Author has often observed) gives force to all the rest, is to be
understood in the first place. And therefore he might have spared his wonder,
that so large a word should be taken in so narrow a sense, when that narrow
sense necessarily infers all other things, that it does or can signify. But
however, to prevent this vain objection for the time to come, these words are
not insisted upon as limited merely to Excommunication, but as a general
donation of Power, and therefore of this in particular, which is so
considerable a branch of it. And that is it which we assert, that seeing by the
Power of the Keys, the Scripture so often expresses greatness of Power,
therefore the Power that is exercised by virtue of them must carry with it the
full force of obligation: So that the words mutually explain each other, for if
by the Keys given in the Sixteenth verse is signified Authority, then by
binding and loosing, by which the acts of them are expressed in the Eighteenth
verse, must be understood authoritative obligation; for though the word binding
simply put may not infer Authority, yet binding by the Keys, signifies the same
thing as binding by Authority. And this would have prevented our Authors other
notion (of which some learned men are so very fond) of binding only by
answering cases of Conscience, because, though binding alone may signify only
so much, yet binding by the Keys must signify more. But it is notorious, that
the word it self no where in the old Testament signifies any other binding than
by Legislative or judicial Obligation, and whereas it is pretended that in the
Talmudical Writers it signifies only an interpreting of Laws without
jurisdiction, it is so palpable a mistake, that in them it can signify nothing
less than authoritative Obligation, when it is so evident that their Rabbis
equaled their interpretations to the Law it self, and bound them upon the
Consciences of men, by virtue of the Divine Authority, and under penalty of the
Divine displeasure. But however if our Savior constituted his Apostles to be
only Doctors and Casuists, yet he has annexed Authority to their Office by the
promise made at their Instalment, that whatever they bind on Earth shall be
bound in Heaven, for I am sure all binding there is Obligatory; so that it
seems if they are Casuists, they are authoritative Casuists, and that is the
same thing as if they were endued with proper Jurisdiction. And now having, as
I suppose, sufficiently vindicated these Texts, I cannot but remark it as some
defect of Ingenuity in this learned Gentleman, to have wholly omitted one Text
more, which he could not be ignorant to have been as commonly as any of the
other insisted upon in this Argument, and if he would have taken notice of it,
would have prevented his Evasions. And that is St. John, Chap. 20. v. 21, 22,
23. As my Father has sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this,
^e breathed on them, and says unto them, receive ye the Holy Ghost;
whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye
retain, they are retained. Here our Savior gives his Apostles the same Power
that he had received from his Father, and then for the discharge of it, the
same Ability wherewith himself acted, and lastly declares to them wherein lay
the Exercise of it, and what were the Effects of it, forgiving and retaining of
Sins, which answers to the power of Binding and Loosing in the other Gospel.
And this if attended to, would have prevented that poor slender Notion, that
the power of Binding and Loosing signifies only the Office of Interpreting, or
declaring what is lawful, what unlawful; for to retain, or remit Sins (as the
truly pious and learned Dr. Hammond observes) will not be to declare one man's
sins unlawful, another lawful, which it must do if this interpretation be
applied to this place.

After all this, it will be but superfluous industry to spend pains upon our
Author's Conceit, wherewith he concludes this Chapter, viz. That the Authority
of the Church arises from mere consent or voluntary confederacy, for beside as
I have shown, that all such Confederacies are upon his principles downright
Rebellion, it is manifest that if our Savior appointed Officers over his
Church and vested them with a power of Government, that then he has brought all
the members of it under an Obligation to submit to their Authority antecedent
to their own consents. But though we had no such clear evidence of this Divine
Institution, yet I am sure we have not the least footsteps in Antiquity of this
confederate Discipline. He tells us indeed of Compacts and Covenants, that the
Primitive Christians are said to have made among themselves; but he could have
told us too, that these Compacts were nothing else but the celebration of the
Eucharist, at which they were wont, as all devout men do, to renew their vows
and resolutions of Obedience to the Laws of their Religion. And this
Confederacy, we all know, is founded upon a Divine Institution, and not only
this, but all other Assemblies for the public Worship of God. To which all
Christians are bound by an Obligation higher than merely their own consent; and
such a Confederation we grant the Church still to be, a company of men
Covenanting among themselves to worship God according to the Ordinances, and
obey him according to the Laws of the Gospel. But then they are bound by the
Command of God, both to take this Covenant, and to keep it. And this is all the
confederacy I know of (unless we must believe Celsus his Calumnies, for he too
is quoted upon this occasion) in the Primitive Church; so that whereas our
Author every where compares the confederate discipline of the Christians with
that of the Jews in their dispersions, it is manifest that the Jews had no
other engagement beside their own mutual consent, whereas the Christians were
particularly obliged to enter into their Confederacy by God himself; and this
difference is so manifest, that I shall say no more of it.

And now having thus firmly established the Churches Power upon Divine Right,
that supersedes all farther enquiry into the practice of after-Ages. For in
matters that are determined by Law, all Presidents are either nothing to the
purpose, or to no purpose, if they are against the Command, they are nothing to
the purpose, being only so many Violations of the Law. If they are for it, they
are to no purpose, because they derive all their goodness and authority from
the Law it self, and therefore can give it none. Thus if the power of
Excommunication be founded upon the Command of God, the contrary practice of
all the Princes in Christendom is of no weight against the Word of God; if it
be not, the practice of all the Churches in the World can never establish a
Divine Command. So that the controversy concerning matters of fact from the
Reign of Constantine to our own Times, the matter of Law being already cleared
from our Savior's Time, carries in it more of Ostentation than Usefulness. But
because our Author has been pleased to prosecute it so largely, and with so
much learning and confidence, we are obliged to follow him, especially when it
is so notorious even from his own relations, that the whole practice of
Christendom, unless perhaps in some enormities of the worst and most barbarous
Times, runs directly cross to his design.

First then, he presents us with many Instances out of the Imperial Law,
whereby the Emperors exercised this Authority themselves, but to all this
himself immediately gives a sufficient Answer without making any Reply, viz.
That such Excommunications were merely declaratory, whereby they only declared
their detestation of such Persons or Doctrines, or rather declared their assent
to the Sentence already denounced by the Church; for I do not find that they
ever made any new Ecclesiastical Laws of their own, but only adopted the Canons
of Councils into the Laws of the Empire, and added to the Anathema's of the
Church, what civil Penalties they deemed most suitable to the Offense. The
Theodosian Code is an excellent collection of the Constitutions of sixteen
Emperors ab Anno Dom. 312. or the first Year of Constantines Conversion, ad
Annum 438. when it was compiled by the command of Theodosius junior, in all
which I think I may safely challenge any man to assign one Law relating to
Religion, that was not antecedently determined by some Council. Almost all the
Laws of this nature are contained in the 16th Book under their several Titles,
De fide, de haereticis, de apostatis, etc. in all which, whoever will be
pleased to peruse them, he will find that the several Emperors enacted nothing
but merely in pursuance of Ecclesiastical Canons, adding for the most part to
Excommunication in the Church the punishment of Outlawry in the State. Thus for
example, Theodosius the Great, in that famous Ecclesiastical Edict, published
by him in the second year of his Reign, and the first of his Baptism (and
therefore styled by the Interpreters of the Justinian Code, filiam
primogenitam) only established the Nicene Faith. Ut secundum Apostolicam
disciplinam evangelicamque doctrinam Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti unam
deitatem sub parili Majestate and sub pia Trinitate credamus. And when the Year
after, he published another Edict to the same purpose, he vouches his Law by
the Authority of the Nicene Council, as may be seen Tit. 5. de Haereticis, Leg.
6. So that his design was not to make any new Law, but only to abet an ancient
Law of the Church with a civil Penalty, as he concludes his Edict, that
Offenders against it should not only be obnoxious to the Divine Veneance
denounced by the Council, but should also be punished at the Emperors pleasure,
for that I suppose to be the meaning of Motus nostri ultione plectendos. But
the most express Ratification of the Canons of the Church, is that Edict of
Theodosius the Younger, to the Governor of the Eastern Illyricum, Lib. 16.
Tit. 2. L. 45.
Anno Domini, 421. Omni innovatione cessante vetustatem and Canones pristinos
Ecclesiasticos, qui nunc usque tenuerunt, per omnes Illyrici Provincias,
servari praecipimus: Tum si quid dubietatis emerserit, id oporteat non absque
scientia viri reverendissimi sacrosanctae legis Antistitis urbis
Constantinopolitanae (quae Romae veteris praerogativa laetatur) conventui
sacerdotali sanctoque judicio reservari. It Is not material, whether this Law
refer to the Canons of the General Councils, or to the particular Canons of
that Province, which is a Dispute among learned men: For be it this or that, it
is manifest that the Emperor designed to follow the Decrees of the Church, and
to refer Ecclesiastical Controversies to its own judgment and determination.
Having intimated this account of the Theodosian Code, I need add nothing of the
Justinian, because it only repeats all the Laws of the former that were not
obsolete, as may be seen not only by comparing the Books themselves, but by
that exact collation of their Titles and Constitutions, that is prefixed to
Gothofred's Edition of the Theodosian Code. And as for his own Novels, he
frequently makes particular reference to the Canons of the Church, challenging
to himself a power of punishing Offenses against the Ecclesiastical Canons by
virtue of this one general Law, which he declares to have been the sense of
himself and his Predecessors, (...), Nov. 6. c. 1.
That the Canons of the Church ought to have the force of Laws. And accordingly
he begins his Laws, concerning Ecclesiastical matters, (...): Nov. 131. c. 1.
We enact that the Canons of the Church, i. e. the four first general Councils
shall be received into the number of our Laws. And by that Edict alone, if
there had been no other, they were all Constituted Laws of the Empire. And
according to this Principle he declares in the Preface to his 83 Novel that he
only follows the ancient Canons and Constitutions of the Church. And
particularly in his 137 Novel, where he endeavors the restitution of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, he only enjoins the observation of the thirty sixth
Apostolical Canon, viz. That the Bishops of each Province meet twice a Year for
the more effectual Government of the Church, and this he professes to do, not
as Author, but as Protector of the Ecclesiastical Laws; and therefore in the
Preface to this Novel, he challenges to himself (...), the power of Legislation
in reference to the Civil Laws; but in reference to the Laws of the Church,
(...), the power of Patronage, or Protection. This seems to have been the
Constitution of the Church in those happiest and most flourishing Ages of it:
whereby it appears that the Emperors of those Times were so far from assuming
the power of Excommunication to themselves, that they would not so much as abet
any matter of Religion with their civil Sanctions, that was not determined
beforehand by the Spiritual Power. Whether they ever exceeded their own bounds,
I think not my self obliged to enquire, they being liable to that, as well as
to other mistakes and misearriages of Govenment. Though I remember not any
instances of that kind till the latter and degenerate ages of Christendom, when
barbarity was introduced by the incursions of the Goths and Vandals and other
salvage Nations. It is enough to my purpose, that the Power of the Keys in the
Church was acknowledged by the Christian Emperors from Constantine to
Justinian; and it is more than enough, in that whether they owned it or not, it
was settled by our Savior upon the Apostles and their Successors to the end of
the World.

But secondly, Emperors, Kings and Princes have limited the Ecclesiastical
Order in the exercise of this Power, and assigned them either larger or
narrower bounds of Jurisdiction, as they judged most consistent with reasons of
State; by which they evidently declare what was their opinion of the censures
of the Church, for if they had supposed Church Officers to have acted by a
Divine Authority, they durst never have presumed to set bounds to the Power of
God by their own arbitrary Decrees As if it were not possible for the
Governors of the Church to go beyond their Commission, and under pretense of a
Divine Authority, encroach upon that power that God has committed to Princes.
Which if they can do, and some have done, what affront is it to the Authority
of God himself to restrain his Ministers within those bounds of Jurisdiction
that he has prescribed to them? Nay, is not this very thing a very plain
confession of a distinct Authority, when to limit a power supposes it? So that
it is so far from being any Argument of their disowning the Divine Institution
of an Ecclesiastical power, that it is a demonstrative and undoubted proof of
their acknowledgment of it. This being granted, I shall not concern my self to
enquire into the warrantableness of the several Precedents alleged, though
most of them relate only to the restraint of dilatory, vexatious and
uncanonical proceedings; for my only business is to gain the suffrage of the
Princes of Christendom to my Cause, for which I am no ways bound to prove them
free from all errors and miscarriages of Government: so that if they might at
any time bear too hard upon the power of the Church, especially when the Church
has given them too much reason so to do, that is so far from being any
prescription against its due exercise, that it is a declaration of these
Princes that have been most unkind to it, that they own its Power, provided it
be kept within its due bounds. But what the general sense of Christendom has
been concerning the distinction of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers,
sufficiently appears by those great differences, that have been raised about
the bounds of their Jurisdiction. And though the Christian Emperors have of
later times been forced from time to time to struggle against the encroachments
of the Bishops of Rome, yet they never questioned (that I know of) the divine
Right of their Episcopal Authority. And therefore neither here shall I concern
my self to examine the particular precedents pleaded by both Parties for the
advancement of their respective Powers, when it is certain that both Powers
may, and often have exceeded their just limits, which yet is such an
inconvenience, that, considering the passions and partialities of men, is
utterly unavoidable. And we cannot expect that God should give such Laws, as
that it should not be in the Power of humane liberty to break them, for then
the Laws were given to no purpose; it is enough that they are sufficient to
guide those, that will resign themselves to be governed with honesty and
integrity; and it is not in the power of Laws to effect more. So that it is a
very frivolous objection, much insisted upon by some ill-minded men, that
seeing the competition of these two Powers has been occasion of creating so
many mischiefs and inconveniences to Christendom, it were better that one of
them were removed; which, beside the bold way of arguing, that because they
think in their great wisdoms that God ought not, that therefore he has not
constituted two distinct Powers; it is such an Objection that no constitution
can possibly avoid: for which way soever the Government of the World may be
settled, there is no remedy but that through the corruption and folly of
mankind, it may and often will be liable to abuses. And particularly in this
case there is no difficulty in discerning the bounds that God has set to these
two Powers, if men would be honest and upright; and if they will not, it is no
fault of the Law that they will break it: For Christianity is wholly founded
upon the Doctrine of the Cross, which obliges them in all cases, either to obey
or to suffer peaceably. So that how great soever the Authority of Churchmen may
be, there is no danger of its interfering with, or entrenching upon the
Prerogatives of Princes, unless they misuse it; and if they do, as they go
beyond their Commission, so they deserve their punishment in this l^fe among
the worst of Rebels and Traitors, and are sure to have it in the next. For as
their Power is not only purely spiritual, void of all temporal force and
coercion, so are they in the first place, and above all things forbidden to use
any violence, or raise any disturbance against Government. So that if any
Prince think good to oppose them in the Execution of their Office, and to
punish them for so doing, they are not to oppose him, but only to sacrifice
their lives in justification of their cause and submission to his will, and for
so doing, they shall have their Reward. But if they shall make use of any other
Weapons whatsoever, beside Prayers, and Tears, and Sufferings, they then suffer
deservedly as disturbers of the public Peace: And so much the more in that
they have been so expressly forewarned by our Savior, that whosoever shall draw
the Sword in his cause, shall be sure to perish by it. And as upon this
principle he founded his Church, so upon it his Apostles built it, when in pure
obedience to his command, they preached the Gospel all the World over. And if
any Prince were pleased to countermand them, they did not plead any exemption
from the Government, much less did they Libel it, but only represented the
Innocence and Justice of their Cause; and if he were not satisfied, declared
their readiness to submit to his pleasure and the penalty of the Law. And in
this they enjoyed no other exemption from the Prerogative of Princes, than what
is or ought to be challenged by every private Christian, who is indispensably
bound to make profession of his Christian Faith; and if the Laws of his Country
so require, to seal it with his Blood. This was the constitution of the Church,
and the practice of it in its first profession; and is the constitution of the
Church of England in its Reformation. For whereas a foreign Italian Bishop had
for a long time usurped wel-nigh all, both secular and spiritual Power into his
own hands, and by an exorbitant abuse of it had enslaved the Prince and
impoverished the people only to enrich himself and his own Courtiers; they that
were concerned, after long patience and much provocation, at last resolved
(upon what motives concerns not us) to resume their Rights. The King that Power
which was exercised by the Kings of Judah of old, and by Christian Kings and
Emperors in the primitive Church: And the Bishops that Power wherewith they
were as immediately entrusted by virtue of our Saviors general commission to
the Apostolical Order, as any other foreign Bishop or Bishops within their
respective Diocesses whatsoever. And to prevent all jealousy in the Prince,
lest they should play him the same game that his Holiness had done, who in
ordinc ad spiritualia, had finely stripped him of almost all his Temporal
Jurisdiction, by excepting all Ecclesiastical, both Persons and Causes, from
his cognizance. They therefore freelv declare him Supreme Governor, first,
Over all Persons, so that no Ecclesiastical Subject might as formerly appeal
from his Tribunal. And in all Causes, so that every Subject whatsoever was
bound to submit to his Decrees and Determinations, so far forth as either to
obey his Laws, as long as he owned and protected true Christianity, as the
Christian Bishops of old did to the Christian Emperors. Or if he opposed it,
cheerfully and peaceably to submit to their Penalties, as they did to the Roman
Persecutors.

And whereas from the Precedent of the Apostles in the first Council at
Jerusalem, the Governors of the Church in all Ages enjoyed a power of making
Canons and Constitutions for Discipline and good Order, yet by the example of
the Primitive Church, they submitted the exercise thereof to his sovereign
Authority, protesting in verbo sacerdotis, as it is stated in that famous Act
called The Submission of the Clergy: That they will never from henceforth
presume to attempt, alledg, claim, or put in ure, enact, promulge, or execute
any new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances provincial, or other, or by
whatsoever other name they shall be called in the Convocation, unless the
King's most royal Assent and License may to them be had, to make, promulge, and
execute the same; and that his Majesty do give his Royal Assent and Authority
in that behalf. Whereby they do not pass away their power of making
Ecclesiastical Canons, but only give security to the Government, that under
that pretense they would not attempt any thing tending to the disturbance of
the Kingdom, or injurious to the Prerogative of the Crown. Which in truth is
such a submission as all the Clergy in the World ought in duty to make to their
Sovereign, at least in gratitude for his Protection, and that without any
abatement or diminution of their own Authority, viz. The standing Laws of
Christianity being secured, to submit all other Matters to his sovereign Will
and Pleasure. Whereby as they would bring no damage to the Church, in that this
power is exercised merely in matters of Order and Discipline; if the Prince did
not approve of their Constitutions, it would be no difficult thing to provide
for Decency some other way; so they would bring great security to the State,
when the Prince was assured that under that pretense, they would not (as the
Roman Clergy had done) distu^b or undermine his Authority. And as they parted
not with their Spiritual Legi^lative Power, so not with any other Power proper
to their Function; as the Power of preaching the Christian Religion,
administering the holy Sacraments, and conferring holy Orders Neither did any
Prince in the least ever claim, or exercise any of them. And because the
Romanists in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, made a mighty noise
with this Objection, as if by virtue of her Supremacy her Majesty had
challenged a Spiritual or Ministerial Power in the Church, the Queen has with
great indignation disowned any such Power, and defied the Calumny. And yet when
she had made her disclaimour of any Spiritual Power in the Church, she parted
not with her Royal Supremacy over those that had it, as we are particularly
instructed by our Church in her 37th Article. Where we attribute to the Queens
Majesty the chief Government, by which Title we understand the minds of some
dangerous Folks to be offended, we give not our Princes the ministering either
of God's Word or the Sacraments, the which things the Injunctions lately set
forth by Elizabeth our Queen, do most plainly testify; but that only
Prerogative which we see to have been given always to all godly Princes in holy
Scriptures by God himself; that is, that they should rule all Estates and
Degrees committed to their Charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and restrain with the civil Sword the stubborn and evil doers. And
lastly (to mention no more) whereas the witty and learned Cardinal Perron run
upon the same mistake (and it is a mistake that they all wilfully run upon)
King James in his Reply, lets him know that though Christian Kings and
Emperors never arrogated to themselves a power of being Sovereign Judges in
matters and controversies of Faith; yet for moderation of Synods, for
determinations and orders established in Councils, and for discipline of the
Church, they have made a good and full use of their Imperial Authority. And
that for this very good reason (that very much concerns all Princes) that they
might see and judge whether any thing were done to the prejudice of their Power,
or the disturbance of the Commonwealth. And much more to the same purpose. And
therefore for further satisfaction, I shall refer the Reader to the excellent
Discourse it self. It is enough that I have given a plain and easy account of
the distinct powers of Church and State, and shown that whoever denies the
distinction, disowns Christianity, that our Savior has vested his Church with
a Power peculiar to it self; that the Church has in all Ages exercised it, that
the Christian Emperors never denied it; and lastly, that the Church of
England, and the Reformed Princes thereof have remarkably owned it.

But, Thirdly, Constantine and his Successors took upon them the Title of
Pontifex Maximus, to which according to the Constitution of the Roman Empire,
appertained the supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisd^ction. By virtue of which
Authority they granted to the Church, among other Privileges, this power of
Excommunication, in the same manner as Claudius, and other Heathen Emperors,
gave leave both to Jews and Christians, to govern themselves by their own Laws
and Customs. And though the Emperor Gratian refused to wear the Pontifical
Habit as a piece of Pagan Superstition, yet it no where appears that he refused
the Dignity it self. And this Discourse our Author prosecutes with much Zeal
and Learning. But what do these men make of the Christian Church, or rather of
Christ himself, that he should make no other provision for its Government, than
to leave it wholly to the superintendency of Heathen Priests? This is such a
wild conceit in it self, that I must confess I could never have imagined any
learned man could ever have made use of it against the Constitution of the
Christian Church. And yet this learned Gentleman is not only serious, but
vehement and confident in it; he urges it over and over, and though he repeats
every thing that he says, so that indeed one half of his Discourse is nothing
but a Repetition of the other, yet here he doubles his Repetitions, and every
where lays this Principle as the foundation of the practice of all After times.
But can any man believe that Constantine the Great took upon him the power of
Government in the Christian Church, if he really believed in Christ himself, by
virtue of a Power derived from the Usurpation of Julius Caesar? Or that he
could imagine that the Heathenish Priestly Power belonged to him after his
owning Christianity, when by that, the whole frame of the old Roman Religion
was declared to be Idolatrous? so that the Roman High Priest was nothing better
than the supreme Head of Idolatry. An Honor certainly which no Christian
Emperor would be very fond of astuming to himself. Julian indeed challenged
both the Title and the Dignity as the greatest Ornament of his Imperial Crown;
but the Reason was, because he was so vainly fond of the Pagan Religon. But how
any man of common sense, that had renounced Paganism, should yet own himself
High Priest by virtue of that Religion that he had renounced, seems too great a
Contradiction for any man of common sense to believe. But what if they accepted
of the Title? (as our Author very well knows they did of Divinity it self) or
rather what if it were customarily given to them by others? For I met with no
other Monuments of it, but some old Complemental Inscriptions, so that it being
a customary Title of Honor, it might easily for a time pass in the crowd of
the other Imperial Titles. For it seems it continued not long, being rejected
by Gratian, who lived about fifty Years after the Conversion of Constantine.
And though our learned Author affirms, that the pious Emperor only refused the
Vestment, but not the Dignity; it is very obvious to any man of much less
understanding than himself, that the Emperor could have no reason to refuse
one but for the sake of the other: for the Case is plain, that there was no
superstition in the Vestment, but only upon the account of the Office, and for
that reason there was little if any use of the Title afterward.

But lastly, the Power of Judicature was first granted to the Bishops by the
favor of the Christian Emperors, and especially by an Edict of Constantine
the Great, whereby he grants the Bishops a full Power of hearing and
determining all causes Civil as well as Ecclesiastical, and withal declares
their Decrees to be more firm and binding than the sentence of any other
Judicature, and from this great indulgence of the Emperor, it is not to be
doubted but that among other forensique penalties they made use of
Excommunication. Of the inference I shall give an account by and by, but as for
the Edict it self, if it could do any service to our Authors design, it at last
proves supposititious, as is fully proved by Gothofred in his excellent Edition
of the Theodosian Code, his reasons are too many to be here recited, I will
give but one for all, viz. That this Law is contrary to all the Laws of the
Roman Empire; for though several Emperors do in their several Novels give the
Bishops Power to decide causes by way of Arbitration or the consent of both
parties, which Power they enlarged or contracted as they pleased, and to this
all the other precedents produced by our Author relate; yet that one party
should have liberty of appeal from the civil Court at any time before judgment
given without the consent of his Adversary, is such a wild and extravagant
privilege, as is inconsistent with all the rules of the Imperial Law. And yet
that is the only design of that Edict. Quicunque itaque litem habens, sive
possessor sive petitor erit, inter initia litis, vel decursis temporum
curriculis, sive cum negotium peroratur, sive cum jam coeperit promi sententia,
judicium eligit sacro-sanctae legis Antistitis, ilico, sine aliqua dubitatione,
etiamsi alia pars refragatur, ad Episcopum cum sermon litigantium dirigatur:
Which I say is such an absurd liberty as would utterly destroy all the Power of
the civil Magistrate, if the humor or perverseness of any man could so easily
baulk their sentence. But beside the absurdity of the Law it self, there is no
such Edict extant in the Justinian Code, nor any mention of it in any ancient
Writers of Ecclesiastical History. For as for that passage of Sozomen, l. 1. c.
9. in which some learned men fancy they find some footsteps of this Law, it is
quite to the other purpose that I but now mentioned, viz. the Bishops Power of
determining causes by the mutual consent of Parties. When this Edict was
forged, and by whom it is uncertain, but it is probably conjectured by
Gothofred from the Barbarity of its style, and great likeness of it to that of
Constantines Donation, to have been forged in the same Shop and by the same
hand. But if this Edict were as true as the rest are, which give Bishops Power
to sentence causes praeeunte vinculo compromissi, yet where do we find any
Edict for enabling them to enforce their decrees by Excommunication? Not one
syllable of that in all the Roman Laws, but on the contrary the Civil
Magistrates and their Officers are commanded to put the Bishops Sentence in
execution. Is it not then a very forced way of Arguing, that because the Roman
Emperors granted the Christian Bishops some jurisdiction, they must of
necessity have granted them the Power of Excommunication, though there is no
such Edict extant in all their Laws? They conferred many Privileges upon the
Clergy in the Titles, De Episcopis, Ecclesi^s, Clericis and de Religione, yet
there is nothing in both the Codes, and all the Novels, to vest them with any
power of Excommunication, and therefore as those other they enjoyed by the
Emperors favor not by any antecedent Right; so seeing they exercised this
Power, and that not by virtue of any Imperial grant, it is evident that they
received their Authority from some other hand. So that to conclude, there
cannot be a more pregnant Argument against our Author's opinion than the body
of the Imperial Law, in which there is not one Instance recorded, that ever any
Emperor pretended to this Power himself, or granted it to his Bishops; for
from thence it unavoidably follows, that if they had it at all, they had it
from some other Commission. And thus am I come to the conclusion of this
Argument, for though there are many Precedents of latter Times, yet I am not
concerned to justify what was done by Huns, Goths, and Vandals, whose
practices were the mere effects of Ignorance and Barbarity; and oblige us
rather to pity than to follow their Examples.

PART II.
HAving hitherto treated with the false Pretenders to the Church of England, I
come now in the last place to treat more amicably with some of its mistaken
Friends, and they are those that own a Government in it, but without
Governors; allowing indeed that there ought to be some sort of Government
established in the Church, but then they deny any particular Form of it to have
been settled by Divine Right, or Apostolical Constitution, and leave it wholly
to the choice and determination of Humane Authority. So that though the Church
of England happen to be at present governed by Bishops; and though upon that
account we may owe duty and subjection to them as our lawful Superiors, yet
they are not set over us by any Divine Commission, but purely by his Majesty's
good Will and Pleasure, who at his Restitution to his Kingdoms, might have
forborne to restore the then Abolished Order of Bishops, and instead of that
have established some other Form of Government, that he judged most suitable to
the present state of things; which if he had done, that then had been the
Church of England. Now the Birth of this Opinion seems to have happened on this
manner. Mr. Calvin having founded his Geneva Platform upon Divine Institution,
as he particularly does in the Fourth Book of his Institutions, Chap. 11.
though some men, that are more his Disciples than they are willing to own, are
pleased to deny it. And in pursuance of this Decree, Beza and all the other
first Apostles of his Church having spent all their pains in endeavoring to
make it good out of the Word of God, the learned men that came after them, both
in the French and Dutch Churches, because they must needs go beyond those that
went before them, proceeded to advance the Argument from Scripture to
Antiquity; and have with infinite industry sifted all the Writings of the
Ancients, to prove that there was no other Form of Government in the Church but
by Presbyters in the first Ages of it, next and immediately after the Apostles.
The chief Laborers in which Cause among many other less learned, were Blondel,
Salmasius, and Dalle, who spent the greatest part both of their Life and
Learning, upon this Argument. But they proceeding for the most part in a
skeptical and destructive way, not so much relying upon the Testimony as
impairing the credit of Antiquity, which it seems they supposed the best way to
maintain their Argument, this soon gave occasion to some Learned men conversant
in their Writings, to conclude against all pretenses to the Divine, or
Apostolical Institution of any unalterable and perpetual Form of
Church Government whatsoever, and so to think of allaying those Controversies
about a Jus Divinum, that had been lately and still were managed among us with
so much heat and noise, by leaving it (as they say our Savior and his Apostles
did) to the prudence of every particular Church to agree upon its own Form, as
it judges most conducing to the end of Government in that particular Church.
This is the state of the Question as they determine it, and the Opinion is
grown popular and plausible, in great Vogue both among the Learned and
Unlearned, and is almost become the Rule and Standard of all our Ecclesiastical
Polity. In so much, that there are many worthy Gentlemen (as any one may
observe in his ordinary Conversation) that were stout and loyal Confessors to
the Church of England under its Sufferings, that at this time look upon it as
an Arbitrary and indifferent thing. And therefore in pursuance of my design in
behalf of the Church of England, I am obliged to examine the reasons and
Principles upon which it is founded, and to show that it is so far from tending
to the Peace of an Established Church, that it is destructive to the Being and
Settlement of all the Christian Churches in the World. And though here I have
many learned worthy men for my Adversaries, yet I hope to manage the Dispute
with that Candor and Integrity, that none shall have any reason to complain of
any more unkindness, than what is absolutely necessary to my doing right to the
Church of England. And this I am sure can give no Offense to good men, how much
soever I may chance to cross with their particular Sentiments and Opinions. And
as for bad men (for there are of both sorts engaged in the Opinion) I were not
true to my own Integrity, if I suffered my self to be in the least swayed by
their good or bad Opinion; for I write not to please but to convince them,
which I know as long as they continue bad is but to provoke them. And with this
honest resolution, I now proceed to vindicate one of the most evident, but most
injured Truths in the World. And in it I shall be much briefer than at first I
intended, for when we have lopt off all that is not directly pertinent to the
Enquiry, as we shall reduce the Debate to a narrow compass, so may we easily
bring it to a speedy issue. And therefore I shall purposely pass over all those
things, that relate only to the occasional exercise, and outward administration
of Church Authority. And particularly that wide argument of Dispute, whether
the distribution of Provinces and Diocesses were through the Roman Empire,
framed by the division of the Civil Government. For whether it were, or were
not, that concerns not the question of the Institution of a Ruling Clergy, but
only the manner or fashion of administering their Power when reduced to
Practice. For the extent of their Jurisdiction, is is but accidental to the
supremacy of their Power, and whether the Circuit of a Monarchs Government be
little or great, it is all one as to the nature of Monarchy. So that it is not
at all material how the bounds of Diocesses came to be assigned; how Churches
extended themselves from great Cities into the adjacent Territories, till they
sometimes swelled into Provinces, and how Bishops came to be subject to
Metropolitans, and Metropolitans to Patriarchs; all which, and diverse other
particulars, though they are very copiously insisted upon by Learned men in the
present Question, are yet altogether useless as to its Determination, because
they only concern the outward and accidental Exercise, and have no reference to
the essential Form of Church Government. So that the only thing concerned in
our present enquiry is, as Mr. Seldom has rightly stated it, Utrum ex ipsa pura
puta Praefat. in Eutych.
Origin, seu prima ac mera nascentis Ecclesiae Christianae Disciplina,
Episcopalis seu Ordo, sive Dignitas, sive Gradus, Presbyterali seu Sacerdotali,
superior vel alius, aut ei neutiquam dispar seu idem fuerit habendus. That is
in short, whether the Church were at first founded in a superiority and
subordination of Ecclesiastical Officers to each other, or a parity and
equality of all among themselves; so that if we can prove the preeminence and
superiority of one Order above all others in the Government of the Church from
the beginning of it, we shall thereby make good all that is essential to that
Power and Authority, that we challenge as proper only to the Episcopal Order
and Office. And this we doubt not but to perform with clear and demonstrative
evidence from these three Topics.

I. Of our Savior's own express Institution.

II. The practice of the Apostles in Conformity to it.

III. The practice of the Primitive Church in the Ages next and immediately
after the Apostles.

And First, As to our Savior's Institution it is manifest, That he founded his
Church in an imparity of Ecclesiastical Officers, in that he did by his own
immediate Appointment, authorize and set apart two distinct Orders of men for
Ecclesiastical Ministries, the Twelve Apostles, and the Seventy Disciples,
whose Office, if it were the same, to what purpose were they distinguished? And
why when a place was vacant in the Apostolate, must one be substituted by
Divine Designation to complete the Number? Why should not one of the Seventy
without any further Election, have served the turn, seeing he was qualified
with an Identity of Office and Order? Nay to what purpose should they be
reckoned apart under different Names and in different Ranks, if there were no
difference intended in their employments and commissions? And why were they not
all comprehended in one number, and ranged in one Catalogue? If the Twelve were
nothing more than the Seventy, and the Seventy nothing less than the Twelve, to
what purpose do we hear so often of the Twelve and the Seventy, or of the Seventy
two (for of that the learned dispute) and not rather of the Eighty two, or
Eighty four? For do we think that our Savior would distinguish the Officers of
his Kingdom by mere Words and empty Titles? And yet the Apostleship could be
nothing more, if it carried in it no superiority of Office above the Seventy.
Some inequality we must discover, and that intended too by our blessed Savior
himself, else shall we never be able to give our selves any imaginable Account
of their Institution. And now, what clearer evidence can any man demand for a
Divine Right of Superiority and Subordination of Church Officers, than our
Savior's own express and particular Institution?

Yes (say they) but the Inequality between the Twelve Apostles and the Seventy
Disciples consisted in a superiority of Order and Office, not of Power and
Jurisdiction. Very good! This grants all that we can desire or demand, to prove
the Supreme Authority of the Supreme Order, because every Superior
Ecclesiastical Order as such is Authoritative, and therefore an eminency of
Order must not only infer, but include a superiority of Power, seeing the Order
it self as such (if it be any thing) is the proper and immediate seat of
Authority, and all the Jurisdiction of the Bishop, whatsoever it is, is claimed
and exercised by virtue of his Order. So that if the Apostles were the highest
Order of Ecclesiastics, they were for that Reason alone, though there were no
other, the highest Judicature. And in the same degrees of proportion that they
were advanced above others in dignity of Title, they were so in supremacy of
Power, because their Dignity as such, is nothing elie but so much Power in the
Church of God; divest them of that, and they immediately return to the
condition of Ordinary and Unconsecrated men: And the Apostles themselves were
no more than all other common Believers, but by virtue of their Commission to
rule and govern the Church; reverse that, and they are degraded from their
Order, as well as stripped of their Jurisdiction. So lamentably do these learned
men entangle themselves by distinguishing so vainly in this case between a
superiority of Order and Power, when the one is not only the very Ground and
Foundation, but (to speak in the language of the Schoolmen, from whom these
Metaphysical nothings are taken) the very Formality of the other, and the
Apostolical Power is Formally, and as such, the very same with the Apostolical
Office. So little real difference is there in this distinction, that it is not
possible to frame one in Notion and Conception, but whoever pretends to
conceive one, must of necessity conceive both, or conceive nothing. And
therefore I would very fain know wherein consists this superiority of Order and
Dignity, without any superiority of Power: For what do men mean by Power, but a
right to Govern? and what by Order but a superiority of some as Rulers and a
subordination of others as Ruled? What then is the difference between an
inequality of Order and Power, when they both equally signify Superiority and
Subjection? And therefore these Persons that rely so much on this distinction,
would have done very well to have considered with themselves, wherein consists
the Essence of Order when separated from Power, which if they had done, they
would soon have discerned, that they had only deceived themselves with an idle
and an empty Word. However it were worth their while, to define what it was
that was peculiar to the Apostolical Order, beside the Supreme Government of
the Church, especially when (as it is acknowledged by all Parties) the Apostles
enjoyed during their own lives, the supreme Power in the Government of the
Church, and that the Parity of Presbyters arose not till after their Deaths,
they having appointed no Successors in their Apostolical Supremacy. From
whence, what can be more apparent than that their Office could not possibly
consist in any thing less than a superiority of Power over all the other
Pastors of the Church. And now when our Savior himself has thus expressly
Established the Government of his Church in an imparity of Order and Power,
what farther Prescript would men have for the continuance of his own
Establishment? That alone is sufficient to prescribe to all Ages and Nations,
and if any man shall dare to remonstrate to its Obligation, he must have
confidence enough to presume that he is endued with more Wisdom, or entrusted
with more Authority than our Savior himself. For otherwise he cannot but think
that he is obliged in Conscience and Modesty too, rather to esteem this Model
than any one of his own, or any others Contrivance. Yes, but though it be
proved that the Apostles had superiority of Order and Jurisdiction over the
other Pastors of the Church by an Act of Christ, yet it must further be proved
that it was Christ's intention, that Superiority should continue in their
Successors; or it makes nothing to the purpose. For a bare Divine Command, say
they, is not sufficient to make a Law immutable, unless there be likewise
expressed, that it is the Will of God that it should always continue. No, no,
you are too nice and shie of your Obedience in this particular Case, and may
upon the same ground set your selves loose from all the Laws of the Gospel that
are not enjoined with an express declaration of their being Immutable, and
thereby you have quit your selves of the greatest part of your Christian Duty.
For we shall find but very few Precepts, either of our Savior or his Apostles
tied with this double Knot, and it seems without that, they are not strong
enough to tie any man to Obedience. Neither do I see how upon this Principle,
we can avoid that frivolous Objection of the Socinians against the perpetual
necessity of the Sacrament of Baptism, viz. That seeing it was Instituted by
our Savior only to pass men from Judaism and Gentilism to Christianity, it is
therefore now of no necessity among Christians, unless our Savior had
declared, that it was his Will and Intention that it should always continue in
his Church. Especially when this Ceremony was taken up from the practice of the
Synagogue, where when any man had once renounced Heathenism, and entered himself
into the Jewish Church, it was never after repeated in any of his Posterity,
but they were all by virtue of their Forefathers Baptism, esteemed as born in
a state of Holiness and Regeneracy. But however this general Principle is so
far from Truth and Sobriety, that it is a plain thrusting our own Presumptions
upon the Will of God, which being once declared, it binds us for ever, till
himself is pleased to reverse it, his mere Institution is its own perpetual
Obligation, and whatever he commands no Power can take it off, but that which
bound it on. And therefore it is a vain scrupulosity (if I may call so
skeptical a pretense by that name) to require of him not only to fasten his
Laws by enacting them, but as it were to clinch them too by declaring their
perpetuity. In all other Cases but this, it is supposed that whatever he
commands, he commands for ever till he declares the contrary; for though his
Positive Laws be revocable in themselves, yet being revocable only by God
himself and his own Power, since he has already in his Word fully revealed his
Will, unless therein he has declared when their Obligation shall cease, they
continue Irreversible. It therefore being once granted that the Apostles had a
superiority of Jurisdiction by an Act of Christ, it plainly follows that
without any farther declaration of its perpetuity, their Power is irreversible.
Especially when the Rule whereby we are left to judge of the mind and intention
of the Lawgiver is the Reason of the Law, viz. That the Reason continuing the
Law should remain in force; though I cannot see of what use this should be to
those who will give leave to demand no other reasons of any Divine Positive
Laws beside the Will of the Lawgiver: For if that be the only reason of the
Law, then it is in vain to pretend to judge of it by any other. But yet however
I shall close with them upon their own Principle, and to save farther trouble,
I would only put them to assign what particular Ground and Reason there was of
establishing a Superiority and Subordination of Church Officers then; that is
ceased for all succeeding Ages of the Church; and till they can give themselves
and us some competent satisfaction in this, desire them to acquiesce in our
Savior's Institution. But alas, this was never so much as attempted, and is
manifestly impossible to be performed; for that man no doubt would make wise
work of it, that should undertake to give the World a satisfactory Account of
the particular Grounds and Reasons that should make an inequality of Power in
Ecclesiastical Officers necessary in our Savior's Days, and needless ever
since. But if this cannot be done (as it is certain at first view, that it
never can) then certainly the mere Institution of our Savior in a matter of so
great moment to the Church, is sufficient of it self to pass a perpetual and
indispensible Obligation upon all Ages of it. And now upon these Grounds that I
have already obtained from our Savior's express Institution, I need not
dispute with our Adversaries (for that is one of their little shifts) whether
the Missions of the Apostles and the Seventy, were only Temporary. For whether
they were, or were not, it is from thence evident what Model of Government our
Savior framed for his Church; and that is all that is needful to my purpose.
And therefore I will freely grant that our Savior's design in Lifetime, seems
to have been not so much to found Churches himself, as to have prepared and
instructed his Disciples, how to do it after his departure. So that he rather
made a Specimen of the Constitution of his Church, than erected any standing
Fabric of it. For the Foundations of it were to be laid in the evidence of his
Resurrection from the dead. And therefore we do not find that the Apostles
acted with a plenitude of Power, till he had given them a new Commission after
his Resurrection, and it is remarkable that in St. Matthew 16. 19. he vests
them with the power of Binding and Loosing in the Future Tense. But in St. John
20. 23. after his Resurrection it is expressed in the Present Tense. Then it
was that he gave them that Authority which himself had exercised whilst he
remained on Earth. But then, when immediately in pursuance of their new
Commission, the Apostles thought themselves obliged to choose one into their
Order, to supply the Vacancy made by the death of Judas; What can be more
evident than that they thought the Apostolical Office by our Savior's
Appointment, distinct from and superior to all other Offices in the Church? So
that it is manifest that the Form observed by the Apostles in the Planting and
Governing of Churches, was Modeled according to our Savior's own Platform; and
after that it is not at all material to enquire whether he only drew the Model,
or erected the Building. But whichsoever he did, it is improved into an
impregnable Demonstration from the undoubted Practice of the Apostles, and from
them the perpetual Tradition of the Catholic Church, in that it is plain that
they thought themselves obliged to stand to this Original Form of
Church Government. For the Apostles (we all know, and all Parties grant) during
their days, kept up the distinction and preeminence of their Order, and from
them the Bishops of the First Ages of the Church claimed their Succession, and
every where challenged their Episcopal Authority from the Institution of
Christ, and the Example of his Apostles.

And now are we entered upon the second main Controversy, viz. The Authority
of the Apostolical Practice, against which, three things are usually alleged:
That neither can we have that certainty of Apostolical Practice which is
necessary to constitute a Divine Right, nor secondly is it probable that the
Apostles did tie themselves to any one fixed Course in Modelling Churches; nor
thirdly, if they did, does it necessarily follow that we must observe the same.
And the first of these is made out from the equivalency of the names Bishop and
Presbyter; secondly from the Ambiguity of some places of Scripture, pleaded in
behalf of different Forms of Government; thirdly from the Defectiveness,
Ambiguity, Partiality, and Repugnancy of the Records of the succeeding Ages,
which should inform us what was the Apostolical Practice. But as to the first,
I shall wholly wave the dispute of the signification of the words, because it
is altogether beside the purpose; and if it were not, our other Proofs are so
pregnant, as to render it altogether useless. Neither indeed would this ever
have been any matter of Dispute, had not our Adversaries for want of better
Arguments, been forced to make use of such slender pretenses. But how
impotently Salmasius, and Blondel, who were the main Founders of the Argument,
have argued from the Community of the Names, the Identity of the Office, any
one that has the patience to read them over, may satisfy himself. As for my
own part I cannot but admire to see Learned men persist so stubbornly in a
palpable Impertinency, when from the Equivalency of the words Bishop and
Presbyter in the Apostles time, they will infer no imparity of Ecclesiastical
Officers, notwithstanding it is so evident and granted by themselves, that the
Apostles enjoyed a superiority of Power over the other Pastors of the Church,
which being once proved or granted (and themselves never doubted of it) to
infer their beloved (...) or Parity of the Clergy from the Equivocal
signification of those two words, is only to outface their own Convictions and
their Adversaries Demonstrations. For if it be proved, and themselves cannot
deny it, that there was an inequality of Offices, from the Superiority of the
Apostles, it is a very Childish attempt to go about to prove that there was
not; because there were two Synonymous Terms whereby to express the whole Order
of the Clergy. But to persist in this trifling Inference, as Salmasius has (who
when he was informed of its manifest weakness and absurdity, would never
renounce it, but still repeated it in one Book after another, without any
improvement but of Passion and Confidence) is one of the most woeful Examples,
that I remember, of a learned man's Trifling, that has not the ingenuity to
yield, when he finds himself vanquished not only by his Adversary but his
Argument.

Neither shall I trouble my self with other men's disputes about particular
Texts of Scripture, when it is manifest from the whole Current of Scripture,
that the Apostles exercised a superiority of Power over the other Pastors of
the Church, and that is all that is requisite to the Argument from Apostolical
Practice; for as yet it is nothing to us whether they were Presbyters or
Bishops, that they set over particular Churches; that shall be enquired into
when we come to the Practice of the Primitive Church, it is enough that they
were subject to the Apostles, for then by Apostolical Practice there was a
Superiority and Subordination in Church Government. And therefore I cannot but
wonder here too at the blindness of Walo Messalinus, who in pursuance of his
Verbal Argument, produces this passage out of Theodoret, and spends a great
deal of the first part of his Book in declaiming upon it. (...), (...). Then
the same men were called Presbyters and Bishops, and those that we now call
Bishops, they then called Apostles, but in process of time the name of
Apostolate was appropriate to them who were truly and properly Apostles, and
the name of Bishop was applied to them who were formerly called Apostles. Than
which words (beside that they contain the true state of the Question) there is
scarce a clearer passage in all Antiquity to confound his cause. For what can
be a plainer Reproof to their noise about the Equivalency of words than to be
told that it is true, that the words Bishop and Presbyter, signified the same
thing in the Apostles time, but that those that we now call Bishops, were then
called Apostles, who exercised the Episcopal Power over the other Clergy, but
that afterward in process of time they left the word Apostolate to those who
were strictly and properly so called, and styled all other Bishops; who in
former times were styled Apostles. What I say can be more peremptory against
his Opinion, that concludes from the equivalency of Names, to the parity of
Power, than this, that notwithstanding the words were equivalent, yet the
Episcopal Power was then in the Apostles, whose successors in their supremacy
came in aftertimes to be called Bishops? And if so, then is it evident that
there was the same imparity of Church Officers in the Apostles time, as in
succeeding Ages. Nay, our friend Walo is not content to make this out for us
only, as to the Apostles themselves but as to their immediate Successors, whom
they employed in the settlement of Churches, and to whom they committed the
Apostolical Power for their Government, and these too he proves were styled
Apostles, such as Titus, Timothy, Epaphroditus, Clemens, Linus, Marcus, so that
not only the Apostles, but the Evangelists (as they called them) were
distinguished from the other Clergy, and endued with a superiority of Power
over their respective Churches, and hereby we gain the authority of Apostolical
Practice, not only for themselves, but for their Companions and Successors,
which does not only extend our Argument, but joins together the practice of the
Primitive Times, of which we have certain Records with that of the Apostles,
and so prevents all their fond Dreams of an unknown Interval immediately after
the death of the Apostles; for if these Apostolical men supplied their Places,
it will be very easy to find out who supplied theirs.

Neither, thirdly, need I trouble my self with any long dispute concerning the
Obligation of Apostolical Practice, for whether or no mere Apostolical Practice
be obligatory by virtue of their Example, is very little material to our
Enquiry; for some things are too trifling, or too transient in their own
Natures to deserve to pass into prescription; but it is enough in this case,
that what the Apostles did, was in pursuance of our Savior's Institution, and
that in a matter of perpetual concernment to the Church; and they who require
to the Obligation of such an Apostolical Practice, an express Law to declare
their intention that it should bind for ever, are guilty of the same
fantastic niceness as they that require the same for the perpetuity of every
Divine Law, and therefore have been considered already. And for that reason I
shall add nothing more to what I have already said as to this particular, than
to grant that whatever the Apostles either commanded, or practiced upon some
particular temporary and occasional Cases, was not sufficient to found any
universal and unchangeable Obligation, because the reason of the Precept was
apparently transient, and the goodness of the action casual. But otherwise if
there were any Prescript, or Practice of theirs (though it were not founded
upon any Divine Institution) that did not relate to peculiar Occasions and
Circumstances, but are or may be of equal usefulness to all Places, Times, and
Persons, that is a certain and undoubted evidence of their constant and
unabolishable Obligation. And therefore here I shall only put them to their
former task to assign what particular ground and reason there was of
establishing a Superiority and Subordination of Church Officers in the times of
the Apostles that is ceased in all succeeding Ages of the Church, and till they
can discharge this Task, advise them not to depart rashly from so sacred and
venerable a Prescription.

But that which improves the Argument both from our Savior's Institution and
the Apostles Practice, into a complete Demonstration, is the practice of the
Primitive Churches, in the Ages next and immediately succeeding the Apostles;
For if the Government of the Church were by our Savior founded upon Divine
Institution in an inequality of Church Officers, and if the first Governors of
it thought themselves obliged to keep close to its Original Platform; and if
their immediate Successors conceived themselves as much obliged to observe the
same as imposed upon them by the Command of Christ, and delivered to them by
the Example and Tradition of his Apostles, that certainly may serve for a very
competent proof of its necessity and perpetuity. Now then as for the power and
pre-eminence of the Episcopal Order, it is attested by the best Monuments and
Records of the first and most remote Antiquity; and we find such early
instances and evidences of it, that unless it descended from the Apostles
times, we can never give any account in the World whence it derived its
Original. And this brings us upon the main sanctuary of our Adversaries, viz.
The defectiveness of Antiquity in reference to the showing what certain Form
the Apostles observed in settling the Government of Churches; and here they run
into a large common place, of the deep silence of antiquity and the
defectiveness of the Records of the Church in the interval next and immediately
succeeding the Apostles. But here in the first place I must desire them to
consider, that if this Objection be of any force against the certainty of
Apostolical Tradition in this particular, it will utterly overthrow all the
testimony of the Ancients as to all other matters of Faith, and particularly as
to the certain Canon and Divine Authority of the Scriptures, for if they are
not (as is pretended) competent Witnesses of the practice of the Apostles,
because of their distance from the time of the Apostles, neither for the same
reason are their reports to be relied upon with any confidence, as to the
certainty of any of their Writings. It is not to be expected that I should here
reprent how false this exception is de facto, and how unreasonable de jure,
either against the Constitutions, or the Authentic Epistles of the Apostles,
it is enough that they stand and fall together, so that whoever opposes the
Divine and Apostolical Form of Church Government as delivered to us by the
Primitive Church, does upon his own principles defeat and reject all the proofs
of the Divine Authority of the holy Scriptures, in that those skeptical grounds
and pretenses he is forced to urge against one, fall as dangerously on both.
And this may serve to prevent and invalidate the force of their Argument
without answering it; when if they should deal as rigorously in any other case
as they are pleased to do in this, the most certain and undoubted Records
cannot escape the severity of their censure. Though our comfort is that neither
of them are liable to such wild and wanton Objections, in that (as I shall
show) the Tradition of the Church was always constant and uninterrupted, and
that there was no such Chasm, as is pretended, between the times of the
Apostles and the next Christian Writers. For (to say nothing here of the Canon
of the Scriptures) though the men of that Age left us no formal Histories and
Catalogues of the succession of Bishops in all their several Sees, wherewith
some men unreasonable enough upbraid us, when it is so manifest that it was at
that time too young for that care, in that as yet there was scarce any
succession. Yet were they no less than Apostolical men that vouched the
Apostolical Order and Jurisdiction of Bishops, and this one would think enough
to satisfy any modest or ingenious man of their Institution from the
beginning. When it is asserted, or rather supposed by the very first Writers of
the Church that were capable of attesting it. So that whoever can withstand
their Evidence, is proof against all Evidence of matter of Fact, and may, if he
please, laugh at all the Tales and Legends that are told concerning the
succession of the Roman Empire from Augustus to Constantine. But to wave all
other parallel Cases, that which I have already propounded is irrefragable,
viz. That those men that beat about in the Writings of the Ancients to start
skeptical pretenses against the use and institution of Episcopacy, would do
very well to consider the consequences of this rude and licentious way of
Arguing. And (as the Reverend and Learned Doctor Hammond long since remarked
it) they that so confidently reject the Epistles of Ignatius, shrewdly endanger
(if they will stand to their own principles) the credit and authority of the
sacred Canon; when these are vouched for the true and authentic Epistles of
Ignatius, by as strong a current and unanimous consent of the Fathers, as most
of the Canonical Books of Scripture. And therefore it is observable, that the
proud Walo Messalinus does with the same ease and confidence, pish away one of
the Diff. 1. cap. 1.
Epistles of St. Peter, as he does all these of this Apostolical Martyr; and
might in the same pert and pedantick humor, and with the same evidence of
Reason huff all the rest after it into the Apocryphal Rubbish. But because our
Adversaries main strength lies in this Objection, and some ill-minded men will
be hasty to seize on it for worse purposes than they intended, I shall consider
it in its full force and glory, The defect then pretended is threefold, as to
Places, as to Times, as to Persons.

1. As to Places, and here they tell us we can have no certainty without an
universal Testimony. For if but one place varied, that is enough to overthrow
the necessity of any one form of Government, and therefore seeing we have not
an account of what was done by the Apostles in all Churches, we can have no
sufficient certainty of their practice. But certainly never was any thing so
hardly dealt with as Antiquity by these men; for unless we could be certain
that every thing that was done in the Church 1500 Years ago was recorded, and
made known to us by some unquestionable way, all that is recorded, be it never
so certain and evident, can be of no use for our Information. If this hard
condition be put upon us, I must confess that we not only have no certainty of
the Primitive Practice, but that it is impossible that we should have any
either in that or any other Record. But this certainly is too rigorous
proceeding with the authority of Precedents, that let us produce never so many,
they shall signify nothing as to their use, unless we can demonstrate that
there never was, or indeed could be one contrary Example in the World. But I am
very apt to believe that all ingenuous men will be fully satisfied with this,
that all the precedents that are recorded are for us, and therefore till our
Adversaries are able to produce some against us, to rest in the certainty of
those Records that are preserved, without a vain enquiry after what might or
might not be in those that are lost. And therefore our Adversaries in stead of
making such wild and skeptical demands, if they would prevail upon the minds of
men, should in the first place have proved the variety of Apostolical Practice,
and that indeed would have disproved the necessity of any one Form; but that is
a thing they never attempt. When therefore we have this uniformity of practice
in all Churches, whose settlement is known, it betrays an unreasonable
partiality in men to put us upon giving an account of what St. Andrew did in
Scythia, and St. Thomas in India, for certainly all impartial men will be
satisfied with the uniform practice of all the known Churches of Europe, Asia,
and Africa. And that is enough in answer to the first pretended defect of
Antiquity as to Places.

The second defect is as to Times. And here they fall directly upon the credit
of all Ecclesiastical History, and in particular upon Eusebius the Father of
it; who, they say, lived at too great a distance from Apostolical Times, and
wanted sufficient Records for his Information. But this I must answer that I
know not any Historian furnished with better and more certain accounts of the
things they write of, than Eusebius. The Tradition of the Church being conveyed
down to him in the most uninterrupted and undoubted manner possible. St.
Polycarp, St. Ignatius, St. Clemens of Rome, were familiarly acquainted with
the Apostles themselves; Irenaeus, Tatianus, Theophilus Antiochenus,
Athenagoras, Justin Martyr, and many more converst with them, as they did with
the Apostles; to these succeed Origin, Clemens, Alexandrinus, Tertullian,
Minutius Faelix, Lactantius, Ar nobius, Dionysius Alexandrinus, Gregorius
Thauntaturgus, St. Cyprian, beside many other excellent Writers, whose Works he
enjoyed, though some of them are since perished, who all lived in the first and
second Centuries after the Apostles. Now out of these Eusebius collected his
History, and to their genuine and undoubted Writings ever refers himself to
justify his own Fidelity, quotes no Author for any matter of fact but what was
done in his own Age, as particularly in the beginning of the second Book the
Reader is desired to observe, that he collected the materials of it from the
Writings of Clemens, Tertullian, Josephus, and Philo, and the same Preface he
might have set before every particular Book. And as he always refers to good
Authors, so he rejects many things as counterfeit and spurious for this reason
only, because he finds no account of them in the Ancient Writers. But beside
the Writings of the Doctors of the Church, and the Epistles of Bishops, the
Originals whereof were then reserved in the Archives of their several Churches,
he made very great use of the Acts of the Martyrs, that were then preserved
with great care and sacredness, though afterward it being the most valued part
of Ecclesiastical History, it was the most improved into fabulous Legends and
Stories. And beside all this he was furnished with many excellent materials of
the First Times (which alone he could be supposed to want) by Hegesippus, who
wrote five Books of Commentaries, of the Acts of the Church about the Reign of
Marcus Aurelius, which was scarce eighty Years after the death of St. John. So
that it is no better than a very rash censure of such an Ancient and
Apostolical Writer, to say that his Relations are as questionable as those of
Eusebius himself in reference to those elder Times, when he lived almost in the
very eldest times, and so near to the Apostles, that it was scarce possible
that any matter of Fact, that happened in that Interval, could escape his
knowledge. Now last of all, the Heathen Records themselves were not a little
useful to him, as himself informs us. (...), Lib. 3. cap. 18.
(...), etc. In the^e times (that is, about the Reign of Domitian) the Doctrine
of the Christian Faith was so flourishing, that the Heathen Writers have left
exact Records of the Persecutions and Martyrdoms. As for Eusebius his saying
(which is so triumphantly insisted on to blast the L. 3. c. 4.
whole credit of Antiquity) that it is difficult to find out who were the
Successors of the Apostles in the Churches planted by them, unless it be those
mentioned in the Writings of St. Paul, it is evident from his own words, that
the difficulty arises not from the deficiency but from the too great plenty of
Successors. (...), For he had a thousand Helpers, or as he was wont to call
them Fellow Soldiers. So that the reason why it is so difficult to assign whom
he appointed to preside over the Churches that he converted, is because he had
such an innumerable company of followers, that whom he set over what Churches,
it is not possible to define, than as himself has happened to name particular
Persons, as Timothy, Titus, Crescens, Clemens, Epaphroditus, etc. which alone
are a sufficient evidence of the Apostles care to settle Successors in the
greater Churches. However this passage can by no means be made use of to blast
the credit of Antiquity as to the matter in debate, because it concerns not the
uncertainty of the form of Government, but only of the Persons who succeeded in
the Apostolical Form in some particular Churches. And that alone is answer
enough to the third defect as to Persons, viz. That granting the Catalogues of
the first Bishops to be defective, that is no proof against the certainty of
Episcopal Government, unless at the same time that we cannot find the Bishop,
we could find some other form of Government. Nay further, those particulars
that we have, are a sufficient Testimony to the general Truth that we assert,
in that it is attested by all the Records that are remaining, and that is
enough to satisfy any reasonable or impartial man, especially when in the
greater and more known Churches we have as certain an account of the
Succession, as we have of the Bishops of England from the Reign of Henry the
VIII, to Charles the II. But that concerns the Argument of Personal Succession,
which though I have prevented, I may consider in its proper place: At present
in order to the confuting of this Objection from the defect of Time, I shall
show that we have as certain and uninterrupted a Tradition of the matter in
hand, as the most curious and diffident enquirer can demand for his full
satisfaction.

And first, What can be more ancient, or is more evident, than the Testimony of
Clement of Rome, in his famous Epistle to the Corinthians, where exhorting them
above all things to Peace and Unity, which indeed was the main Argument in the
first Writers of the Church, one chief way that he propounds in order to it, is
that every man keep his Order and Station, where beside the Laity, he reckons
up three distinct Orders of the Christian Clergy, which he expresses by an
allusion, as was the custom of the Apostolical Writers, to the Jewish
Hierarchy, viz. The Office of High Priest, Priest and Levite. The passage is
very full and pregnant. (...). The High Priest has his peculiar Office assigned
him, and the Priest has his Station bounded, and the Levites have their proper
Ministries determined, and the Layman is obliged to his Lay-Offices. My
Brethren, let every one in his Place and Order, worship God with a good
Conscience, not transgressing the settled Canon of his Duty according to the
rule of Decency. Where it is manifest that he describes the several Ministries
of the Christian Church at that time, by alluding to the Offices of the Mosaic
Institution. For why else should he conclude with this Exhortation; [And
therefore, my Brethren, let every one of you keep his own Order,] unless this
distinction of Officers concerned the Corinthian Christians. So that though it
be expressed by alluding to the Ordinances of the old Jewish Institution, yet
it is a description of the present state of the Christian Church among those to
whom he writes, otherwise it were very impertinent to exhort them to keep those
Stations, if there were no such among them. But the great Witness in this cause
is that brave Martyr St. Ignatius, Pupil to St. John, and by him ordained
Bishop of Antioch, and chief Bishop of Asia, who whilst he was in his way to
his Martyrdom (being sent from Antioch to Rome, to be devoured by wild Beasts)
in his journey wrote several Epistles to several Churches, in which he gives
such a plain Account of the Constitution of the Hierarchy in his time by the
Orders of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, as plainly demonstrates it to have
been of Apostolical Antiquity. And this is so evident that there is no way of
avoiding the Testimony but by flatly denying it: And therefore our Adversaries
will upon no terms allow these Epistles to be genuine, and take infinite pains
to prove them, if it be possible, supposititious; so that this is become the
great point in this Controversy, and has been eagerly disputed by many Learned
men on both sides. The two last that engaged in it are a learned Prelate of our
own, and the famous Monsier Daille, in whose Books the whole cause is not only
contained, but I am apt to think, decided. For though Daille was a Person of
more Judgment, Temper, and Learning, than most of his Brethren, yet they were
strangely overborn by the strength of Prejudice; and it is plain to any man
that ever looked into him, that he was first resolved upon his Opinion, and
then right or wrong to make it good, and because he was well aware that these
Epistles alone, were so clear and full a Testimony to the Apostolical Antiquity
of the Episcopal Order, that they plainly prevented all Attempts and Arguments
against it, he therefore set himself with all vehemence, and made it the
business of his Life to destroy their Credit, and with infinite pains sifted
all the Rubbish of Antiquity, to find out every shred and atom of a Criticism,
that might any way be made use of to impair their Reputation. Yet after all
this Drudgery, are his Exceptions so plainly disingenuous and unreasonable,
that they would fall as well upon any other ancient Record whatsoever, not only
that ever has been, but that ever could have been, though upon no other score
than purely that of its Antiquity. But this Cause has breathed its last in
this man, and this advantage we have gained by his zeal to maintain, and his
ability to manage it, that it has put an utter end to this Controversy, in
that all his forces have been rebuked and overthrown with such an irresistible
strength of Reason and Learning, that for the time to come we may rest secure
that never any man of common Sense, or ordinary Learning, or any Modesty will
dare to appear in such an helpless and bafled Cause. For the particulars I
refer to the learned Authors themselves, but as to the general Argument, I
shall give a brief and distinct account of it, and then leave it to the Reader
to judge, whether he could desire or contrive more evidence for the authority
of any Book, than is produced for the Epistles of Ignatius. St. Polycarp then
who was his particular Friend and Fellow-pupil under St. John, and St. Irenaeus
who was Disciple to Polycarp, give in full and clear testimony to the Martyrs
Epistles Polycarp sent a Copy of them to the Church of Philippi, as appears
both by his own Epistle still extant, and by Eusebius his Quotation out of it,
and that at a time when it was vulgarly known and commonly read in the Churches
of Asia. Polycarp's Epistle was never called in question by any good Author,
was immediately attested by Irenaeus, read with Veneration in the Churches of
Asia, even to the very time of Eusebius and St. Hierom. So that I know not what
more undoubted or public Testimony Monsieur Daille could demand for his
satisfaction, and indeed it is hard to conceive what more effectual evidence
could have been provided to secure their Authority. For when St. Polycarp's
Epistle was so universally known, it was impossible to corrupt it. And yet in
this wild Supposition, is Monsieur Daille forced at last to shelter himself; he
allows his Epistle it self to be of undoubted Credit, and the greatest part of
it to have been written by Polycarp, but that a certain Impostor a little
before the time of Eusebius, had foisted in that Paragraph in which this
passage concerning Ignatius his Epistles is found, which Eusebius meeting with,
he took it to be of the same credit with the rest of the Epistle. Which is all
so very ungrounded and precarious, that with the same liberty he might deny, or
destroy the validity of any ancient Record whatsoever; but beside this, the
Epistle was so public, so exposed to the view of all men, so known to the
Learned and Unlearned, that it were as easy to poison the Sea as for a private
man to corrupt it. Or if he would attempt to do it, how was it possible for
Eusebius and all the World beside, to be deluded by so bold an Imposture. Does
not Eusebius himself inform us, that it was read in the Churches of Asia at the
time of his writing? Did he not then know what was read there, and therefore if
this passage were not read, could he be so stupid as to be imposed upon by one
single private man against the authority of all the public Books, or if he
were, could all the Fathers, whom Daille will have to have followed his Dance,
be so prodigiously blind and careless as in a thing so known and common, to be
deceived by him, and that no man (if we may believe him) should discover the
mistake till Nicephorus, who lived five hundred Years after him? But granting
the Testimony to be true, he denies it to be effectual, because Polycarp only
says that Ignatius wrote Epistles, but no where affirms that those we have are
the true ones. So that it seems unless St. Polycarp had written particularly
against Mounsier Dail^e himself, and declared that those very Epistles that he
opposes with so much zeal, were written by his Friend the Martyr, it was not
possible for him to give sufficient testimony to their truth. And yet that
could not have been a more ample proof than this amounts to. For he declares
not only that Ignatius wrote certain Epistles, but that himself made a
Collection of them, and this Collection was seen by Eusebius and others of the
Ancients. Now when we consider the Reputation of the Martyr both for his
acquaintance with the Apostles, his eminent dignity in the Church, the
gallantry of his Martyrdom; when we consider the time and occasion of his
writing, which was at the approach of his Death, and as it were his dying
Exhortation to the Churches; when we consider how they were recommended by
Polycarp, whose Epistle was publicly read in their Assemblies; is it any way
credible that these true Epistles should all perish before the time of
Eusebius, and other counterfeit ones rise up in their room, and among all those
learned men that then were very inquisitive after Ancient and Apostolical
Tradition, none should ever discern or discover it? Nay, that Eusebius, a man
so thoroughly versed in all Ecclesiastical Antiquities, so conversant with the
choicest Libraries, should be so grossly and so easily cheated by a double
Imposture contrived in his own time, as to take the new invented Epistles of
Ignatius, for the old authentic Writings of that holy Martyr, and then to
vouch it by a forged Passage foisted into Polycarp, against the authority of
all the vulgar Books. So many hard Suppositions, one would think, were enough
to shame any modest man out of his Opinion.

The second Witness to these Epistles is St. Irenaeus, whose testimony is no
more to be doubted of than the former, being extant both in Eusebius, and those
pieces of Irenaeus, that are preserved down to our times, though most of his
works are perished. But to this Monsieur Daille answers that Irenaeus
cautiously expresses his Quotation of the holy Martyr by Dixit, and not
Scripsit, and thence conjectures that he quotes it only as a Saying or
Apothegm, and not as a Citation out of his Writings. But, (1.) There is no
Record of any such Saying as this, neither in that particular Quotation, that
is preserved, could we know whom Irenaeus means, did we not find the same
sentence in Ignatius his Epistle to the Romans, so that it is a vain and a
frivolous thing to forsake that, and to fetch the business from unknown and
unheard of Reports. And. (2.) This is the very form of all Irenaeus his
Quotations, who never uses the word Scripsit, but always Dixit. But then why
does he not cite some Testimony against the Heretics out of Ignatius, in whom
there were so many apposite to his purpose? I answer for the same reason that
he does not cite other as pertinent Authors as Ignatius. For out of all the
Ecclesiastical Writers that lived before him, he has in his surviving Works but
four Quotations, of which that out of Ignatius is one. Neither would this way
of disputing have been at all pertinent in the days of Irenaeus, when the
Heretics against whom he wrote, allowed no Authority to the ancient Doctors of
the Church, but always recurred to certain wild Apocryphal Books of their own,
and therefore it had been but a vain thing for Irenaeus to have pressed them with
this Topic. The next Witness is Origin, who quotes him by name, but against
this Testimony we have these two Exceptions: First, That it is at too great a
distance from the time of Ignatius: Secondly, That those Writings, in which he
is quoted are none of Origens. First, As to the first we would grant the force
of the Objection, if this had been the first Testimony in the cause; but
following Polycarp and Irenaeus, it proves the constant opinion of Learned men
before Eusebius, and his Impostor. Secondly, It overthrows Daille's great
conceit that these Epistles appeared not till two hundred Years after Ignatius,
whereas by his own confession Origin writ within one hundred and forty Years.
Thirdly, It cuts off the great pretense, that Eusebius was the Founder of this
mistake, whereas it hereby appears, that if it were one, he only followed his
Predecessors in it. But the main of the Controversy here is the second thing,
Whether those Books ascribed to Origin, in which Ignatius is quoted, are really
his, or not. Daille says, No; but his learned Adversary has with no less than
evidence of Demonstration proved they were, though if he had not done it, St.
Jerome has done it long since, who plainly tells us that himself translated them
out of Origen's Greek into Latin. And now after these I need add nothing of
the Testimony of Eusebius and those that follow him, for if he be mistaken
their Authority is of no use, if he be not it is of little necessity, but that
he is not, is demonstrated from these more ancient Testimonies. Though if any
man desire more Witnesses, I shall refer him to my learned Author, who has
summoned Part. 1. Cap. 2.
them out of every Age, from that in which the Epistles themselves were written,
down to that next our own.

But to all the Testimonies of the Ancients, what do our Adversaries oppose?
irst, Salmasius opposes the (...) of Nicephorus Patriarch of Walo Messal. p.
252.
Constantinople, by which, says he, the Authentic and spurious Books of the
Church were distinguished, and among many others the Epistles of Ignatius are
censured for Apocryphal Books. But to this it is replied by the Pious, the
Reverend, and the Learned, Dr. Hammond, Diss. 2. c. 1. 2.
that the opinion of one Author, especially of later date (for Nicephorus lived
not before the ninth Century) was not of weight and authority enough to oppose
to the consent of so many ancient Writers. Secondly, That the word Apocryphal,
which is used by Nicephorus, does not always signify Spurious, but it is very
often used by Ecclesiastical Writers as opposed to Canonical, and so is given
to Books, whose Authors were never questioned, only to seclude them from the
Canon of the Scripture. To the first it is replied by Daille, and that I must
say Lib. 2. Cap. 4.
with impertinency enough, that the authority of Nicephorus is at least equal
to Dr. Hammonds, as if the Dispute were between them two, whereas the Dispute
was between Walo and the Doctor, who when he had produced the Testimonies of
the Fathers of all former Ages, could not but think it very hard that the
opinion of one late Writer should be opposed to all their Authority. To the
second he replies, That it is true that the word Apocryphal is oftentimes
opposed to Canonical, yet it is very frequently too used by Ecclesiastical
Writers as equivalent to Spurious and Counterfeit, and that therefore the
Doctor in vain takes refuge in the Ambiguity of the word. But certainly, it is
the manifest design of these men to tire out their Adversaries with verbose
Trifles. For who could have expected this Answer, that when Walo had argued
from the word Apocryphal, as if it only signified Spurious, and that when to
the Argument the Doctor had answered that it no ways follows, because it as
often signified not Canonical; who, I say, after this would have expected that
his Adversary should upbraid him with taking Refuge in the ambiguity of the
word, when the Ambiguity of the word alone was not only a full answer to, but a
clear confutation of the Argument? But he replies, secondly, That some of the
Books joined with it are confessed by all to be Supposititious, and therefore
as they were censured for that reason, so must the Ignatian Epistles. But this
is manifestly false, and though if it were true, it follows like all the rest.
For the Censure has no regard to their Author, but whether Spurious or Genuine,
to their Authority, and only designs to shut them out from creeping in among
the Canonical Scriptures. For that was the only danger it aimed to prevent;
least the Books that either were or pretended to be of Apostolical Antiquity
should creep into the Canon. And it is plain from the Decree it self, that
Nicephorus intended nothing else than to determine the Canonical Books of
Scripture, and prevent all others that came nearest to them in Age, from
obtaining sacred Authority. But, says Daille, Pope Gelasius when he defines
what Books are Apocryphal, he does not confine it merely to the Canonical
Scriptures, but to all other Ecclesiastical Writers not allowed of, and
therefore this must be the meaning of Nicephorus. That is to say, that because
Gelasius in his Decree determines what Ecclesiastical Books of what kind soever
are to be reputed Orthodox, what Heterodox, that therefore Nicephorus, when he
distinguishes the Canonical Books of the New Testament from the Apocryphal,
does not mean as himself declares, but must be understood in the sense of
Gelasius.

And yet when all is done there is no such Testimony, but the whole Story is a
mere Dream of their own, who catch at any shadow that may seem to serve their
turn: For, sirst, it is certain, That Nicephorus was not the Author of the
Stichometria. Secondly, That the Author of it, whoever he was, did not pass
this censure upon Ignatius his Epistles. For we find in it only the name of
Ignatius, without any mention of his Epistles; Which indeed cannot in Daille's
sense be called Apocryphal, because they were never esteemed Canonical. For
that is the true Original of the distinction, that whereas there were some
Books written by the Followers of the Apostles, as Clemens, Barnabas, and
Hermas, left these by reason of their nearness to the Canonical Books, should
in process of time be reckoned with them, the Church was careful to range them
in a Classis by themselves: And whereas there were many other Books that
pretended to be dictated by the Apostles, and written by their Disciples, lest
they should gain the Authority they pretended to, it concerned the Church to
give them the Apocryphal Mark. Seeing therefore Ignatius Epistles were never
upon either of these accounts in any probability of being accounted Canonical,
it would have been a needless Caution to refer them to the Apocryphal
Catalogue. And though to Ignatii Daille after his usual way of making bold with
his Quotations adds Omnia: It is probable that (...) should be added as it is
in another Index of Apocryphal Books in the Oxford Library. It being the custom
of some idle men of those times to make Institutions of Divinity, and then
fasten them upon Apostles and Apostolical men, out of which as our learned
Author with great probability conjectures, was afterward made that Collection,
which goes under the name of Apostolical Constitutions. Now these spurious
pieces pretending to Canonical Authority, it was very requisite to prevent and
discover the Imposture. But whatever probability may be in this Conjecture, of
which we stand in no need, I am sure there is as little modesty as reason in
Salmasius his Argument, when he opposes the single authority of Nicephorus to
the concurrent Testimony of the Ancients. But much less in Dailles defense,
especially when we consider with what state and confidence he ushers it in,
Ecce Auctores habemus and multis ante nos seculis denatos, and ab omni contra
Hierarchiam suspicione semotos, qui omnia Ignatii scripta rotunde ac sine ulla
haesitatione ad Apocrypha relegarunt in stichometria Georgio Sincello in libro
antiquissimo praefixa. For what confidence can be more enormous than that when
these Epistles have been attested by some of the best of the ancient Writers,
ters, to pretend to destroy their Authority by a multitude of Writers, and yet
produce but one, and he at the distance of seven hundred Years. But the last
aggravation of his confidence is, when he professes that he produces the
authority of this Stichometria not to prove his own Opinion, but only to remove
the prejudice of its Novelty, and yet cite no other Authors in its behalf. For
all the rest of his Proofs are drawn from Negative Authority, in which he is no
more happy than in his many one positive Testimony. For when he argues that
these Epistles were unknown to every Writer that does not quote them, methinks
it is an hard condition that he imposes upon all Authors to cite all the Books
that they read. But, says he, because of that great authority that Ignatius had
in the Christian Church, when any Christian Writers had any fair occasion for
it, it is very likely that they would have appealed to his Authority, which
because they have not done, we may justly presume that there were no such
Writings extant in their time. This is the whole force of his Negative
Argument; and yet when he comes to particulars, he is so unhappy as only to
produce those Authors whose custom it is to avoid this kind of Quotations, as
we have already shown concerning Irenaeus. And so for Clemens Alexandrinus, who
though he is a great quoter of Heathen and Heretical Writers, yet no where
cites Ecclesiastical Authors, unless such as he supposed to belong to the
sacred Canon. And so for Tertullian, who too is frequent in the Testimonies of
Heathens, or Heretics, but scarce ever mentions any Ecclesiastical Writers,
and when he does, it is not to prove or confute any Doctrine by their
Authority. And this in the last place is the case of Epiphanius, who makes no
mention of a great number of Ecclesiastical Writers that lived before him, and
when he does it in his Book of Heresies, it is only in an Historical way,
either to spare his own pains, or to justify the truth of his own Relations
out of other Histories, but never (as Daille requires of him) to prove the
truth of his Opinion. I mention no more of his Negative men, who make a great
show in the Contents of his Chapter, in that they are alleged altogether
impertinently to his purpose, because all those Passages which he imagines they
were obliged to have quoted, belong not to the ancient Copies of Eusebius, but
are taken out of the late Interpolations.

And now comparing the Testimonies on both sides, we may very safely turn any
honest man loose to judge of the Authority of these Epistles, and that being
once established, we can neither have nor desire a more ample Testimony than
they give us of the Primitive Practice of Episcopal Superiority. The holy
Martyr every where founding the Peace and Security of the Church against
Schisms and Heresies upon the Bishops supreme Authority, which he, as our
Adversaries fancy, magnifies so highly (though not more than the other Orders
of the Church in their respective Function) that they think that alone the main
objection against the truth of his Epistles. Though in truth, setting aside all
Testimonies, the Argument and Spirit of them are no small proof of their
genuine Antiquity. Being composed of two Arguments peculiar to the first
Writers of the Church; a vehement zeal for Unity, and a passionate sense of
Immortality. They were possessed with a serious belief of the reality of our
Savior's Promises, and therefore they lived in this World purely, in order to
the Rewards of the World to come, And how earnestly the Author of these
Epistles thirsted after it, no good Christian can read without great pleasure,
and being affected with some workings of the same Passion. And as for his way
of securing, Peace, and Unity in all Churches by obedience to the Bishops, and
under them to the Presbyters and Deacons, (for his fundamental Rule was, that
nothing was to be done without the Bishop) he derives it from our Savior's
Commission and Promise to the Apostles and their Successors for ever, when he
constituted them Pastors of his Flock, and promised to be perpetually assistant
to them by his Divine Providence in the execution of their Office. And
therefore he does not refer the Government of the Church to them for the
greater Wisdom, greater Learning, or any other natural Advantages of the men
themselves, but only upon the account of our Savior's express Institution, who
had sent them as his Father had sent him, and had therefore engaged himself to
be present with them to the end of the world, so that upon that security to
follow the Bishop was to follow Christ, because he had undertaken to be the
Bishops Guide. And this being the state of the case between Ignatius and his
Adversaries, their Objections will not reflect upon his discretion but our
Saviors Integrity, and when the cause is brought to that, Ignatius is secure,
and if any man be pleased to raise any further controversy, it is only between
our Savior and the Leviathan. And there I am content to leave it.

The next proof of the Primitive and Apostolical Practice of Episcopacy, that
we meet with among the Ancients is in the Apostolical Canons, i. e. a
Collection of the Decrees of Synods and Councils between the time of the
Apostles and the Council of Nice; so that they may not improperly be styled the
Code of the Canons of the Primitive Church. And now concerning them the case of
the Controversy is much the same with that of Ignatius Epistles; for the
Testimony that they give in to the Episcopal superiority is so full and plain
that it is undeniable. And therefore there is no avoiding them but by
impeaching their Antiquity and Authority; and as the state of the controversy
is the same, so is the success too; for it has been thoroughly disputed between
the said Monsieur Daille and a very learned Divine of our own Church, and that
with the very same inequality of reason too. I shall not give any large account
of the engagement, because the Books are so lately published, and may be so
easily perused, and therefore I shall rather refer to the Authors themselves,
especially because I am not a little zealous to recommend one of them as an
incomparable treasure of Ecclesiastical Antiquity. And therefore omitting
Daille's beloved Negative and internal Arguments, which his Adversary has for
ever routed with a prodigious force of reason and dexterity of learning, I
shall only give an account in short of the main rational point of the
Controversy. That is, what ancient Testimonies are to be alleged either for
or against their Antiquity. On the one side they are frequently owned and
quoted by all the first general Councils, and therefore must have been enacted
in the Interval between the Apostles and the Council of Nice. They are cited by
many of the most ancient Fathers, as Canons of the first and most early
Antiquity. And they are expressly referred to by the most famous Emperors in
their Ecclesiastical Laws. All which concurrent Testimony any moderate man
would think sufficient to give Authority to any Writing, and yet it is all
overruled by a single Decree of Pope Gelasius supposed to be made Anno Domini
494. in which the Apostolical Canons are reckoned among the Apocryphal Books.
But first, is it reasonable to set up the Opinion of one man against many that
were more ancient, and so much the more competent witnesses than himself?
Secondly, it is uncertain whether any such Decree as is pretended were ever
made by Gelasius, in that we never hear any thing of it till at least three
hundred years after his time. Thirdly, if there were any such Decree, it is
certain that this Passage concerning the Canons of the Apostles was foisted
into it, it not being found in any of the most ancient Copies; and Hincmarus, a
Person of singular learning in his time, that makes mention of this Decree of
Gelasius as early as any Writer whatsoever, expressly affirms that there was no
mention of the Apostolical Canons in the whole Decree. De his Apostolorum
Canonibus penitus ta^uit, sed nec inter Apocrypha eos misit. Where he expressly
affirms, that in the Decree these Canons were altogether omitted, and ranged
neither with the Orthodox, nor with the Apocryphal Books. This Testimony is
given in with as peremptory terms as can be expressed, and therefore Daille,
for no other reason than to serve his cause, quite inverts the Proposition, and
changes misit into omisit, that is, turns I into No. But men that can deal thus
with their Authors, need never trouble their heads with Testimonies of
Antiquity, for after this rate it is in their power to make any Author affirm
or deny what they please. But fourthly, suppose Gelasius had made any such
Decree, how does that destroy the Antiquity of these Canons, when he has
condemned the Books of Tertullian, Arnobius, Lactantius, and Eusebius for
Apocryphal? And yet Tertullian lived three hundred years before the Decree, and
therefore why may not the Apostolical Canons be allowed their reputed Antiquity
too notwithstanding that Sentence, which only relates to the Authority his
Holiness is pleased to allow them in the Roman Church, and not at all to their
Antiquity, unless perhaps he designed to declare that they were not framed by
the Apostles themselves, as he might fancy from their Title, not knowing that
whatever was of prime Antiquity in the Church was by the first Writers of it
styled Apostolical, as being supposed to descend from the Tradition of the
Apostles themselves. Fifthly, will Monsieur Daille allow this Decree of
Gelasius sufficient to give any Book the Apocryphal stamp; If he will, then he
must reject many of the best Fathers, and in their stead admit the Acts of St.
Sylvester; the Invention of the Cross, and the invention of St. John Baptists
head, for whilst the History of Eusebius, together with the other Fathers, is
rejected, such Fables as these are warranted by that barbarous and Gothish
Decree. And that is enough, though there were nothing else, to destroy the
Authority of this man's censure, his mere want of Judgment. Now comparing this
one pretended Testimony of Gelasius under all the disadvantages that I have
represented, with the express counter-testimony of so many Councils, Fathers,
and Emperors, if any man be resolved notwithstanding all to stick to it, I
will say no more than this, that his Cause is much more beholden to him than he
to his Cause.

And now having given this account of these Apostolical men that conversed with
the Apostles themselves, or immediately succeeded them in the Government of the
Church, if we descend to their Successors from Age to Age, we are there
overwhelmed with the crowd of Witnesses. But because they have been so often
alleged and urged by learned men, I should have wholly waved their citation,
had not our Adversaries made use of several shifts and artifices to evade their
Authority. And therefore though I shall not trouble the Reader with their
direct Testimonies, yet to show the vanity of all our Adversaries pretenses, I
shall endeavor to vindicate the credit of the Ancients against all their
Exceptions. And here the first pretense is the ambiguity of their Testimony,
which is endeavored to be made out by these three things: First, That personal
succession might be without such superiority of order. Secondly, That the names
of Bishop and Presbyters were common after the distinction between them was
introduced. Thirdly, That the Church did not own Episcopacy as a divine
Institution, but Ecclesiastical; and those who seem to speak most of it, do
mean no more. First then a succession there might be as to a different Degree,
and not as to a different Order. Before we distinguished between Order and
Power, now between Order and Degree, and by and by between the Power of Order
and the Power of Jurisdiction. But these distinctions are only the triflings of
the Schoolmen, whose proper faculty it is to divide every thing till they have
reduced it to nothing. For what does the degree of a Church Officer signify
but such an order in the Church, and what order is there without a power of
Office according to its degree, and therefore it is plain prevaricating with
the evidence of things to impose these little subtilties upon the sense of
Antiquity, they (good men) meant plainly and honestly, and when they give us an
account of Apostolical Successions, they were not aware of these scholastic
distinctions, and intended nothing else than a succession in the government of
their several Churches. Thus when Irenaeus gives us a Catalogue of twelve
Bishops of Rome, Successors to the Apostles in that See, what did he mean but
the supreme Governors of that Church, when that was the only signification of
the word Bishop in his time. He never dreamed of their being stripped of the
Apostolical power, and so only succeeding them in an empty Title, in the mere
name or the metaphysical notion of Bishops, and they were no more, if they had
no more power than the rest of the Clergy. But secondly, This new distinction
spoils the former evasion, viz. That the Apostles were superior in order, not
in power over the LXX. but now a superiority of order is made equivalent to a
superiority of power, for that from the time of our Saviors Resurrection is
granted them by our Adversaries, though it is denied their Successors. Thus we
enlarge, or abate, or evacuate that Commission that God himself has given them
at our own mere will and pleasure. If it be convenient for our cause to assert
in one place that they were vested with no superiority of Power, they shall be
put off with an empty superiority of order separated from power: If in another
that Assertion seem not so convenient to our purpose, they shall be presently
advanced to an absolute supremacy over the other Pastors of the Church, but
then that must last only during their lives, and as for their Successors we
are pleased to degrade them from the Apostolical both Order and Authority; and
allow them nothing but an empty degree of I know not what; but to say no more
of the difference between Order and Degree: As for the distinction between
Order and Jurisdiction, though in one place I affirm that the Apostles were a
distinct Order from the other Clergy, without any superiority of Jurisdiction,
yet in another, if my cause require it, there shall be but one order in the
Christian Clergy, and no difference but what is made by Jurisdiction, and the
Bishops themselves shall be equal to Presbyters in order by Divine Right, and
only superior in jurisdiction by Ecclesiastical Constitution. For so I read,
that for our better understanding of this, we must consider a twofold power
belonging to Church Officers, a Power of Order, and a Power of Jurisdiction;
for in every Presbyter there are some things inseparably joined to his
Function, and belonging to every one in his personal capacity, both in actu
primo, and in actu secundo, both as to the right and power to do it, and the
exercise and execution of that power; such are, preaching the Word, visiting
the Sick, administering Sacraments, etc. but there are other things which every
Presbyter has an aptitude, and a Jus to in actu primo, but the limitation and
exercise of that Power does belong to the Church in common, and belongs not to
any one personally, but by a further power of choice or delegation to it, such
is the power of visiting Churches, taking care that particular Pastors
discharge their duty; such is the power of Ordination and Church Censures, and
making Rules for Decency in the Church. This is that we call the power of
Jurisdiction. Now this latter power, though it belongs habitually and in actu
primo to every Presbyter; yet being about matters of public and common
concernment, some further Authority in a Church constituted is necessary
besides the power of Order; and when this power, either by consent of the
Pastors of the Church, or by the appointment of a Christian Magistrate, or
both, is devolved to some particular Persons, though quoad aptitudinem, the
power remain in every Presbyter, yet quoad executionem it belongs to those who
are so appointed. Whatever truth there is in this, the Assertion is plain, that
our Savior appointed but one order in the Clergy, and that the difference
which has since been made by the consent of the Church consists in nothing else
but Jurisdiction. And this is very consistent with the former Assertion, that
there was no difference between the Apostles and the LXX. beside distinction of
order, when now there is no more by divine appointment than one order in the
Church. And yet after all this their fluttering between Order and Power, Degree
and Order, Power of Order and Power of Jurisdiction; all superiority of Order,
so much as it is, is so much superiority of Power. Thus to take their own
Instance of the (...) at Athens, the (...), or the President of the Assembly
was so far superior over his Colleagues in Power as he was in Order: For
whatsoever was peculiar to his Office gave him some more advantage in the
Government of the Commonwealth than they had; for the very power of calling and
adjourning Assemblies, presiding and moderating in them is no small degree of
Power in a Republican Government. But seeing the difference between a
superiority of Order and Power is thought to be made out best by these parallel
Instances of Commonwealths, let us run the parallel with the Apostles and the
LXX. for if to be superior only in Order is to be President in an Assembly, or
Prolocutor in a Convocation, and if this were all the Office peculiar to the
Apostles, then when our Savior appointed seventy Disciples, and twelve
Apostles, he made twelve Prolocutors over a Convocation of seventy. Seeing
therefore that is too great a number of Speakers for so small an Assembly, it
is manifest that when he separated them for a distinct Office, he intended
something more by an Apostle than merely a Chairman in a Presbytery; and
whatever it is, it is either an higher power than others had, or it is nothing
at all. Secondly, This Succession is not so evident and convinced in all places
as it ought to be to demonstrate the thing intended. For it is not enough to
show a List of some Persons in the great Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome,
and Alexandria, but it should be produced at Philippi, Corinth, and Caesarea,
etc. This I perceive to be our Adversaries darling Objection, being the only
matter made use of to shift off several heads of Argument: This was the proof
of the defect of the Testimony of Antiquity as to places; and is now here the
only evidence of its ambiguity; and by and by will be called in as the only
instance of its Repugnancy. But certainly their fondness to it is not grounded
upon any great virtue that they see in it, but they are only forced for want of
more material Arguments to lay a mighty stress upon such poor pretenses, as in
any other dispute they would be a shamed to own. For first, supposing the
Succession cannot be shown in all Churches, is that any proof against the
Succession that can? And suppose I cannot produce a List of Bishops at
Philippi, Corinth, and Caesarea, shall I thence conclude against the
Succession, though I have very good History for it, at Jerusalem, Antioch,
Rome, and Alexandria? This is such an Inference as rather shows a man's good
will to his Opinion than his Understanding. But I have already proved that it
is highly reasonable to conclude the customs of those Churches that are not
known from those that are; and apparently absurd to question the Records of
those that are preserved for the uncertainty of those that are not. But
secondly, What though we do not find in all Churches an accurate Catalogue of
the succession of all Bishops, do we find any Instance in any one ancient
Church of any other form of Government? If we can, that were something to the
Argument, but that is not pretended in the Exception. But otherwise because the
exact succession of Persons in any Bishopric has not been preserved with that
care and diligence that it ought or might have been, to conclude that therefore
there was no certainty of the Episcopal form of Government, is the same thing
as to conclude, that there never was any ancient Monarchy in the world, because
in all their Histories there are some flaws, or defects, or disagreements as to
the names of Persons in the succession. But we think it enough, that where we
find an established Monarchy, though we meet with some intervals of History, in
which the Princes names that then reigned are uncertain or forgotten, and meet
with no Records that the Government was at that time changed into a
Commonwealth, to conclude that the Monarchy was all along preserved. And that
is the case of Episcopal Government in the Church, in that in all times and
places, where and when Records have been preserved, we find the same Form
practiced, and therefore ought to conclude, that the same was observed in those
short intervals of time (if we suppose there were any such) in which they were
lost) Though I do not find that the Register of particular Persons is so
defective as is pretended, but that in most Churches their very names are
accurately enough recorded. Thus first, for the Church of Jerusalem, in which
we find a succession of fifteen Bishops before its destruction, attested by the
best and most ancient Writers, of the validity of whose Testimony we have no
reason to doubt. For it is no Objection that so many Bishops should be crowded
into so narrow a Room, that many of them could not have had above two years
time to rule in the Church, When almost all that time the Jews were in
Rebellion against the Romans, continually provoking them by their Insurrections
to the utmost severity both against Jews and Christians, for as yet the Romans
understood no difference, nor were they broken into any open division among
themselves, all these Bishops being as formally circumcised as any of the most
zealous Retainers to the Jewish Religion. So that it is no more wonder that so
many Bishops should succeed in so short a time, than that such an incredible
number of Jews should perish by the Sword. But secondly, It is less material to
enquire (as Scaliger Animad. In E^^o. Chron. N. MMCXL.
does) where the Seat of the Bishops of Jerusalem was from the time of the
destruction of the City by Titus till the time of Adrian. For what if he had no
Palace, was he no Bishop? Or what if we cannot tell where he assembled his
Flock, was there no Church? Perhaps it was in a Cockloft at Pella; but because
we cannot tell where it was, was it no where? And therefore to return the
Quere, Was there then a Church of Jerusalem? If there was (whether Episcopal,
Presbyterian, or Independent, or all together) I would fain know where it was;
and if you cannot tell me, conclude, as you do, that there was no Church at
all. And so he has answered his own little Objection himself, that the Church
follows the Bishop, and is not confined to stone Walls, and therefore that the
Church of Jerusalem was then at Pella, though there was no such place as
Jerusalem, as at this day the Patriarchal Seat of Antioch, is at Meredin in
Mesopotamia, and that of Alexandria at Grand Cairo. As for the succession at
Antioch, I find not the least ground to doubt of its truth, for I think it no
objection, that though it be clear, it is not certain whether they succeeded
St. Peter or St. Paul; for be it either, or both, or neither, it is all one so
it be any; that is enough, that there was a succession though we did not know
the particular Founder of the Church in whom it began; and whoever of the
Apostles it was, whether one or more, they had Apostolical Authority over it,
and whoever succeeded them, succeeded in the same form of Government. As for
the Church of Rome, all the difficulty is about the succession of Linus and
Clemens, being both reckoned in the first place, but the conjecture is very
probable that Clemens succeeded St. Peter in the Church of the Jews, as Linus
did St. Paul in the Church of the Gentiles, and that surviving both Linus, and
Cletus that succeeded him till the union of the two Churches, he governed both.
For whatever ground there is for the conjecture that there were separate
Churches of Christian Jews and Gentiles in other Cities, there is a very
probable foundation for it at Rome in the Apostolical History, Acts xxviii.
where St. Paul expressly declares to the Jews that from thenceforth he would
preach only to the Gentiles, and so in all probability gathered a distinct
Church of them by themselves. And therefore it is observable, that in that
famous passage of Irenaeus, in which he derives the succession of the Bishops
of Rome from St. Peter and Paul down to Eleutherius his Cotemporary, that he
speaks not of the Church of Rome in the single number, but Ecclesiae Petro and
Paulo Romae fundatae and canstitutae, as if they had been several Churches. And
to this purpose it is a pretty observation of Mr. Thorndike that St. Paul's
being buried in the Ep. l. 3. chap. 18.
Way to Ostia, and St. Peter's in the Vatican (as we understand by Caius in
Eusebius) seems to point them out Heads, the one of the Jewish Christians, the
other of the Gentiles, in that the Vatican was then the Jury of Rome, and
notorious for the Residence of Jews. But though these first Records could not
be fully made out, we have no reason to doubt of the History, but rather to
suspect some mistake in aftertimes, or the omission of some circumstance that
might, if it had been recorded, have removed the difficulty. For it is very
hard, that when Irenaeus (to mention no more) gives us a Catalogue of the
Bishops of Rome from St. Peter down to the time when himself was at Rome, and
who lived not at a greater distance from St. Peter than we do from the first
Archbishop in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, that we should suspect the whole truth of
his Relation, because we cannot give an account of all the particular
circumstances of the Succession. This I say is too hard dealing with any
ancient Records, though the conclusion is much harder, that because we have no
certainty of all the Persons that succeeded in Church Government, and of the
particular manner of their Succession, that therefore we have no certainty of
the particular Form of it, notwithstanding we have no Record of any form but
one. As for the Church of Alexandria, there the Succession is acknowledged to
be clearest (as indeed it is unquestionable) only it is imputed to the choice
of Presbyters; but of that in its proper place; the evidence of personal
Succession is enough, and all that is pertinent to our present debate. And the
succession of Ephesus might have been as unquestionable, but that one Leontius
pleads at the Council of Calcedon, that all the Bishops thereof, to the number
of twenty seven, had been ordained in the City it self; but that it seems,
proving a false Allegation, he has given us no reason to believe him in his
Tradition. An Inference much like this; that supposing two persons to contend
for their rights, and the Advocate of one of them shall in his plea allege a
false prescription, his Adversary should thence conclude upon him, that he had
no reason to believe that there was any such Person in the world as his Client.
For this is the case, The matter of the dispute was where the Bishops of
Ephesus ought to be ordained according to the Canons? At Ephesus, says
Leontius, by constant Prescription. No, says the Council, for many of them have
been ordained at Constantinople. Now is it not awkerd to infer from thence,
that the Council denies the certainty of the Succession it self; when as the
debate was grounded upon the supposition of it? It being granted on both
sidesas a thing undoubted, that there was a succession of Bishops at Ephesus;
and the Controversy was only about the accustomed place of their Consecration.
Now from the variety of that to conclude, that it is uncertain whether there
were any such thing as Bishops at all, is such a forced Argument as proves
nothing but that we have a very great mind to our Conclusion. I might proceed
to the Succession in other Churches, of which we have certain Records, but I
will not engage my self in too many particular Historical Disputes where I know
it is easy, if men will not be ingenuous, to perplex any matter with little
critical scruples and difficulties; and therefore I will cast the whole of this
Controversy upon this one Principle: That though the Records of the Church
were as defective as is pretended, yet seeing all that are preserved make only
for Episcopacy, and that our Adversaries are notable to trace out one against
it, that is evidence more than enough of its universal practice; and if that
will not serve the turn, it is to no purpose to trouble our selves on either
side with any proof that may be had from the Testimony of Antiquity; for if
upon that account we have not any, it is not possible either for them or us to
have it in this or any other Controversy whatsoever.

Thirdly, The Succession so much pleaded for by the Writers of the Primitive
Church was not a Succession of Persons in Apostolical Power, but a Succession
in Apostolical Doctrine. Whether any Persons succeeded in Apostolical Power has
been already considered, and therefore all that is here requisite to be
enquired into, is, by what Persons the Apostolical Doctrine was conveyed. And
if it be pleaded by the Writers of the Church to have been done by Bishops as
the Apostles Successors, that proves the Succession of Persons as well as
Doctrines. But seeing this is to be done, as our Adversaries instruct us, by a
view of the places produced to that purpose, let us view them too. The first is
that of Irenaeus, Quoniam valde longum est in hoc tali volumine omnium
Ecclesiarum enumerare successiones, maximae and antiquissimae, and omnibus
cognitae a gloriosissimis duobus Apostolis Petro and Paulo Romae fundatae and
constitutae Ecclesiae, eam quam habet ab Apostolis traditionem, and annunciatam
hominibus fidem, per successiones Episcoporum pervenientes usque ad nos,
indicantes, confundimus omnes eos, etc. Where we see, that whatever the
Argument of Irenaeus was, his design was to prove that the succession of the
Apostles was conveyed down by the hands of the Bishops that were Successors to
them in their several Sees. So that it is evident, that he designed to prove
the Succession of the Doctrine by the Succession of the Doctors; and therefore
if he does not prove it, he does more; he supposes it, and by the undoubted
evidence of it, demonstrates the truth of the Doctrine, in that those Persons
who were appointed by the Apostles to oversee and govern the Churches have
conveyed the Apostles Doctrine down to us by their Successors. And what fuller
Testimony can there be of a Personal Succession of Bishops to the Apostles? And
yet Irenaeus does more than this, he derives the Personal Succession from the
Apostles down to his own time, and they all succeeded the Apostles as they
succeeded one another; and as Linus was their Successor, so was Eleutherius,
who sat at the same time that Irenaeus wrote; and therefore if Linus was
Successor to the Apostles, so was Eleutherius, and if Eleutherius was Bishop
of Rome, so was Linus: So that it was one and the same thing to succeed in the
Bishopric and the Apostolical Authority. And to the same purpose is the
passage of Tertullian, Edant origines Ecclesiarum suarum, evolvant ordinem
Episcoporum suorum, ita per successiones ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille
Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis aut apostolicis viris habuerit Authorem and
Antecessorem. Hoc modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt; sicut
Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum a Joanne conlocatum refert, sicut
Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit, proinde utique and ^aeterae
exhibent, quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos Apostolici seminis
traduces habeant. The whole design of which passage is to prescribe against the
Heretics by the Authority of the Apostolical Successors, and that being
expressly appropriated to single Bishops, I hope I need not now dispute whether
they succeeded them only in Degree, and not Order; or in Order only, and not
Jurisdiction; all that I desire from this Testimony is, that they succeeded
them in their several Churches (for though he instances only in the Church of
Rome, yet he declares himself able and ready to give the same account of all
other Churches) and by virtue of that warranted the truth of their Doctrine.
Than which I must confess I cannot understand what more can be desired to
justify their Succession in the Apostolical Authority. Especially from
Tertullian, who was neither Thomist nor Scotist, and so was utterly
unacquainted with those fine distinctions of Degree, Order, and Jurisdiction,
but spoke like a plain and a blunt African, when he called the Bishops in their
several Diocesses the Apostles Successors. And so all the Writers of the same
Age understood by a Bishop, one superior to subject Presbyters; for whatever
was the signification of the word in the Apostles time, it was now determined
to this Order, and so used in vulgar speech; so that when we meet with it in
their Writings, we must understand it in the common sense. And therefore by a
Bishop we must mean the same thing from the Apostles downward, and a Bishop in
their time was superior to Presbyters, and the Apostles are granted to have
been superior to the other Pastors of the Church, so that the Succession from
first to last continued in superiority of Jurisdiction. And now when this
Succession is so expressly derived down by single Persons, and when the truth of
the Apostolical Doctrine is vouched by the certainty of this Succession, it is
a very cold answer to tell us, that the Fathers talk only of a succession of
Doctrines, and not of Persons.

Fourthly, This Personal Succession so much spoken of, is sometimes attributed
to Presbyters, even after the distinction came in use between Bishops and them.
I pray by whom? Why, by Irenaeus. But does Irenaeus, when he speaks of the
Bishops and Presbyters of his own time, confound their names and offices, or
any other Author of the same Age? Nay, do they not carefully distinguish them
from each other; though when they speak of things as done in the Apostles
times, they may speak in the language of those times. The names therefore of
Bishop and Presbyter being not then distinguished, it was but proper for them
to express things, as they were then expressed. So that though Irenaeus never
would style a Bishop of his own time by the name of Presbyter, but ever
carefully distinguished the two Orders; yet when he speaks of the Bishops of
the first time, it is neither wonder nor impropriety, if he call them
Presbyters; for I will yield so far to our Adversaries, that they were so
called till the death of the Apostles; and then succeeding into their Power, it
was but fit that they should be distinguished by some proper name from the
inferior Clergy. And there lies the root of all our Adversaries pretenses,
that they will have the Office of a Bishop to have been born at the same time
with the distinction of the Name. Which if we will not grant them (as without a
manifest affront to the Apostles we cannot) their whole Cause sinks to nothing.
For that is the only proof alleged in behalf of the sententia Hieronymi, that
the Offices were not distinguished before the names. But of that in its due
place already, at present I challenge them to produce any one Author, that
treating of things after the separation of the words was made, ever calls a
Bishop a Presbyter, or a Presbyter a Bishop. And in that I am very much their
friend, for if they can, it utterly overthrows their main Argument, that
Bishops and Presbyters were the same in the Apostles times from the promiscuous
use of their names, in that we find them promiscuously used after the
distinction. But that by the word Presbyteri, Irenaeus does not mean a simple
Presbyter, is plain from the words themselves, in which he prescribes against
the novelties of the Heretics by the undoubted antiquity of the Churches
Tradition, which he says was conveyed by the Apostles themselves to the
Ancients who succeeded them in their Episcopacy; so that by his Presbyteri he
means, as he explains himself, such of the Ancients, qui Episcopatus
successionem habent ab Apostolis, i. e. the Ancient Bishops. This is all that I
meet with material upon this Head, for when they go about to prove by the
Authority of Ignatius himself that Episcopacy is not a Divine, but an
Ecclesiastical Constitution, they are to be given up for pleasant men that will
attempt any Paradox in pursuit of the Cause. And it exceeds even the rashness
of Blondel himself, who that (as he speaks) his St. Jerome might not stand
alone, like a Sparrow upon the house top, has, after his rate of inferring,
fetched in all the Fathers to bear him company, except only Ignatius, whom it
seems he despaired of making ever to chirp pro sententia Hieronymi; but now it
seems at last, that the holy Martyr himself might not be made the solitary
Sparrow, by being deserted by all the Fathers, he is brought over to the Party,
but with such manifest force to himself as plainly shows him to be no Volunteer
in the Cause. Thus when he commends the Deacon Sotion for being subject to the
Bishop ut gratiae Dei, and to the Presbytery ut legi Jesu Christi. By the Law
of Jesus Christ we are taught to understand divine Institution, but by the
grace of God only humane Prudence; though that too was directed to it by the
special favor or Providence of God as the only means of preserving peace and
unity in the Church. Be it so, the grace of God no doubt is as firm a ground of
Divine Institution as the Law of Christ; so that if Episcopacy was established
by Gods special favor, we are as well content with it as if it had come by the
Grace of Christ. Neither does this Interpretation derogate any thing from the
Episcopal Order, but very much from our blessed Saviors Wisdom, viz. that when
he had established Presbyteries in his Church for the Government of it, that
establishment was found so ineffectual for its end, that Almighty God was
afterward constrained, for preventing of Schisms, and preserving of Unity in
the Church, in a special manner to inspire the Governors of it in after-ages
to set up the Form of Episcopal Government. And yet that was no less
disparagement to himself than his Son; for seeing what our Savior did in the
establishment of his Church, he did by the Counsel of his Father; if its
Institution proved defective for its end, it was an equal oversight of both;
and the After-game of Episcopacy was only to supply a defect that they did not
foresee, but were taught by Experience. A very honorable representation this
of the Wisdom of the Divine Providence. However, take it which way we will, we
cannot desire a plainer acknowledgment of Divine Institution, for so it come
from God, it matters not which way he was pleased to convey it to us. And now
have we not reason to wonder, when we see men attempt to bring this holy Martyr
off with such slights so expressly against his own declared Opinion, who every
where grounds his Exhortation of Obedience to the Bishop upon the command of
God, and adds even in the words following the forecited passage; (...) (...).
And yet not to him, but to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ Christ, who is
the Bishop of us all, and therefore for the honor of him that requires it, it
is our bounden duty to be obedient without hypocrisy. What can be plainer than
that the power of the Bishop stands wholly upon the command of God? So again in
the Epistle to the Ephesians, (...). Let us take care not to oppose the Bishop
as we would be obedient to God, and if any man observe the silence of his
Bishop, let him reverence him so much the more: For every one that the Master
of the Family puts into the Stewardship we ought to receive him as the Master
himself, and therefore it is manifest that we ought to reverence the Bishop as
we would our Lord. And therefore it is a great oversight to affirm, that there
is not one Testimony in all Ignatius Epistles that proves the least semblance
of an Institution of Christ for Episcopacy, when in every Epistle he so plainly
enforces his Exhortation of obedience to the Bishop purely by virtue of the
command of Christ. And thus have I cleared the Records of the Church from the
defect of ambiguity grounded upon those four pretenses, That the Succession
might be only of a different degree; That it is not clear and convincing in all
places; That where it is clearest, it it meant of a succession of Doctrine, and
not of Persons; And lastly, That if it were of Persons, yet Presbyters are said
to succeed the Apostles as well as Bishops. By which last we have already
cleared the next thing objected, to show the ambiguity of the Testimony of
Antiquity, which was the promiscuous use of the names, Bishop and Presbyter,
after the distinction between their Office was brought in by the Church; which
I have already shown to be false, and that if it were true, it utterly destroys
their Argument of the Identity of a Bishop and a Presbyter in the Apostles
times, from the promiscuous use of the names. But because new Instances are
here brought to prove the same thing, we must follow. And first, as for the
passages cited out of Clemens Romanus, he is confessed to have written before
the distinction of the names, and therefore is here cited to no purpose. But
the great and only Testimony is that of the Gallican Church, who in their
Epistle to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, give Irenaeus the title of Presbyter,
though he had been nine years Bishop of Lions. And this looks very big, if it
were true, but it is a mere Chronological Blunder of Blondel against the
clearest Apol. p. 23.
Testimony of all Antiquity. For first the Martyrs of Lions in their Epistle to
the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, speaking of their Bishop Pothinus, they give
give him that Title; but in this Epistle to Eleutherius they (or as Blondel
will have it, the Church of Lions) give Irenaeus only the Title of Presbyter,
and both Eusebius and St. Jerome affirm, that he was no more, at the writing of
it. To all which Blondel objects, that they both place the Martyrdom of
Pothinus and his Frenchmen immediately after that of Polycarp and the
Asiaticks, which was in the seventh year of Marcus Aurelius, and therefore the
other was about the same time; so that when Irenaeus went to Rome with the
Letter to Eleutherius, which was in the seventeenth year of that Emperor, he
had been so long Bishop. But to this it is easily answered, that though the
Relation of these two Martyrdoms immediately follow one another in Eusebius his
Cronicon, and St. Jeroms Translation, yet it does not at all follow that they
immediately followed in time. Because these two Martyrdoms are all that they
mention concerning the fourth Persecution, which lasted the greatest part of
the Reign of Marcus Aurelius; so that though one were in the seventh, the other
might be in the seventeenth of that Emperor, and therefore we ought to follow
Eusebius his more accurate account in his History, who there expressly places it
in the seventeenth year, and withal affirms, that Irenaeus was then only
Presbyter, rather than from so weak a surmise from the V. Vales. Annot. in
Eusebius. hist. l. 5. Prooem. and cap. 4.
nearness of the Stories in his Chronicon to bring confusion upon the whole
History, especially when it so fairly clears it self, in that this Letter was
directed to Eleutherius, who succeeded in the Church of Rome in the sixteenth
year of Marcus Aurelius; and in the same year that he came to that See, the
Gallican Persecution began, and therefore it was impossible that Irenaeus could
be advanced to the Bishopric before that time; so that it is like the rest of
Blondels stretches to infer from a remote guess that the Persecution was in the
seventh year, when it is evident from the clearest Story, that it was not till
the sixteenth or seventeeth: And now this Chronological mistake being removed,
this Testimony is clearly evacuated, and so this business is wholly ended.

The last thing alleged to prove the Ambiguity of the Testimony of the
Ancients, is, that the Church did not own Episcopacy as a Divine Institution,
but Ecclesiastical. But of this Argument I shall choose to discourse in the
last place in answer to the sententiae Hieronymi, because it is the only
positive Argument that they produce in their own behalf. And for that reason I
refer it to the last place, that when I have made it appear that they have
nothing material to except against what they oppose, I may then show that they
have as little to confirm what they assert, and both together will prove more
than enough to put an end to this controversy. As for the other two things
that remain to show the incompetency of the Testimony of Antiquity, viz. its
Partiality and Repugnancy, little or no answer will serve their turn. For, as
for the Partiality, all the proof that is material to our Argument, is, that
the Fathers judged the practice of the Apostles by that of their own times. And
very good reason too, because they conformed the practice of their own times to
that of the Apostles. But if our Adversaries would infer, that the Fathers had
no other ground of judging of the Practice of the Apostles but merely by the
prejudice of their own customs, it is only a precarious Assertion, and a direct
impeaching them of a more than vulgar folly and ignorance. But the Fathers here
glanced at are St. Chrysostom, and the Greek Commentators that follow him. Thus
who can imagine any force in Chrysostoms Argument, that the Presbyters who laid
hands on Timothy must needs be Bishops, because none do Ordain in the Church
but Bishops, unless he makes this the medium of his Argument, that whatever was
the practice of the Church in his days, was so in Apostolical times. But there
is no need of that poor medium to enforce his Argument, the force of it lies in
the universal practice of the Church; for it was never heard of that mere
Presbyters took upon them the Power of Ordination, and therefore the mere
exercise of that Power is a manifest proof that those that had it were somewhat
more than Presbyters; and even St. Hierom himself, who will have them sometime
(though when he knows not) to have shared with the Bishop in all other parts
and branches of Jurisdiction, excepts the Power of Ordination, as peculiar to
the Episcopal Order. And there lies the force of St. Chrysostoms Argument, in
the practice of the Church in all Ages, not in in the custom of his own. And
when he is vindicated, it is not to much purpose to add any thing of the Greek
Commentators, because they all follow him; and though they may sometimes fall
short in their reasonings, yet it is manifest that they believed Episcopacy to
have been received by the Catholic Tradition of the Church, and that is all
the deposition they are capable to give in this cause. The last thing objected,
is the repugnancy of the Testimony, and this is proved from the difference of
some accounts concerning the Succession of some Bishops. But this has been
objected two or three times already, and as often answered; and therefore at
present I shall say no more to it, than only granting the truth of the
Premises, to mind the Reader of the weakness of the conclusion, that from the
uncertainty of some Persons in the Succession infers an uncertainty of the form
of Government it self.

And now am I come to our Adversaries only positive proof in their own behalf,
that is, the Authority of St. Jerome; for though they pretend to one or two
Authors more, yet still at the last push St. Hierom is the only man. And the
sum of all that is pretended from him is this, That though the Apostles
exercised a superiority over the other Pastors of the Church during their own
lives, yet immediately upon their decease, having, it seems, provided no
Successors in that Power that themselves enjoyed, the Church was every where
governed by the whole Body or Common Council of Presbyters; but this Form of
Government being quickly found very apt to breed Schisms and Divisions, it was,
for the better prevention of them, agreed upon all the world over, to choose one
Presbyter out of the rest, and settle a Supremacy of Power upon him for the
more effectual Government of the Church. Antequam diaboli instinctu studia in
religione fierent, and diceretur in populis, Ego sum Pauli, Ego Apollo, Ego
autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur. Postquam
vero unusquisque eos quos baptisaverat suos putabat esse, non Christi, in toto
Orb decretum est ut unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris; ad
quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret, ut schismatum semina tollerentur. From
whence it is inferred, that though this Form of Government happened to be set up
in the after-ages of the Church, yet it was not upon the account of any Divine
Right or Apostolical Constitution, but purely upon prudential motives, and by
the Churches discretion, that might have instituted either that, or any other
alterable Form, as it judged most tending to its own peace and settlement.
Before I come to answer the whole Argument, I cannot but observe what
disingenuous advantage these men make of the hasty expressions of that good
Father; let him in the heat and eagerness of dispute but drop an inconsiderate
word that may reflect upon the Records, or the Reputation of the ancient
Church, it immediately serves to justify all their Innovations. And thus I
remember Monsieur Daille, in his shallow Book, of the Use of the Fathers,
frequently makes good (as he thinks) his charge against them all only by
impleading St. Hierom; but though he is made use of to serve them at all turns,
yet in this Argument they devolve the whole credit of all the ancient Church
upon his single Authority. And is it not very strange, that two or three hasty
passages of this single Father, not only against the concurrent Testimony of
all the ancient Church, but against his own express Opinion, should be seized
upon with so much zeal and greediness to give defiance to all the practice of
Antiquity? That is bold enough, but it is much more so, to force all the rest
of the Fathers against their own Consciences and Declarations to subscribe to
his Opinion, as Blondel has done, who having first placed St. Jerome in the
front, and flourished all his sayings with large Commentaries, ranges all the
rest of the Fathers under his Colors, excepting only Ignatius (though since he
too has had the honor to be admitted into the service) but he has drawn them
into the Party by such a forced and presumptuous way of arguing, that I know
not a greater Instance of the power of Prejudice in a learned man. I once
thought to have taken him particularly to task, but his trifling is so grossly
palpable, that there needs no more to expose it to any man's contempt, than that
he can endure the Penance of reading him over. And how was it possible for any
man to discourse after a wiser rate, that undertakes to prove, that Clemens
Alexandrinus, Origin, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Epiphanius, Eusebius, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Theophylact were Presbyterians. It is just such another design, as
to go about to prove that Calvin, Beza, Blondel, Salmasius, Daille, and all the
other Calvinian Fathers have been zealous Assertors of Episcopacy. And yet this
task too some men have undertaken, and I suppose, will make good by the same
Topics, and doubt not but they will both gain belief together. Now in answer
to the great Authority of St. Jerome, there are many things alleged and
insisted upon by learned men; some plead, that it is contrary to his own
express and declared Opinion, and therefore is not to be taken for his settled
and deliberate sense of the thing, but only for an hasty and over-lavish
expression. Others endeavor to expound him to a good sense, consistent with
himself, and the rest of the Fathers, viz. that writing against some proud
Deacons, that would set themselves above Presbyters, he tells them, that it was
much the same insolence as if they should go about to prefer themselves above
the Bishop, in that the distance was much the same, they alone being reckoned
in the Priesthood with the Bishop, whereas the Deacons had no higher Office in
the Church than to serve Tables and poor Widows. So that the difference was the
same as in the Levitical Priesthood, the Bishop and the Presbyters being as
Aaron and his Sons, who alone were accounted into the Priestly Office, whereas
the Deacons had only the Office of Levites, that were no better than Servants
to the Priests. And though Presbyters at that time exercised no Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in the Church, yet they were formerly joined with the Bishop
himself in the Government of it, and shared in all acts of Power and
Discipline, excepting only Ordination. And for this reason, because they were
placed so near to the highest Order, that they were capable by virtue of their
own Order to exercise almost all the Offices of that, it was not to be endured
that such inferior Ministers, as the Deacons were, should prefer themselves
above them. Quis patiatur ut mensarum and viduarum minister supra eos se
tumidus efferat, ad quorum preces Christi Corpus sanguisque conficitur. Though
this probably was all the design of St. Jerome, yet because he seems to have
said more than he designed, I shall not contend about his meaning, but shall
give my Adversaries the whole advantage of his Authority, and let them make the
best of it. Neither shall I go about to overthrow it by the contrary Testimony
of the Ancients; for though that were easily done, the cause does not require
it; but granting the Authority of St. Jeroms Opinion, and that it was never
contradicted by any ancient Writer, I will demonstrate the falsehood of the
Opinion it self from its own absurdity. And therefore in answer to it, I will
at present only return these few brief Considerations, each whereof will be
enough to satisfy men, if they will be reasonable, and altogether more than
enough to silence them, if they will not.

The first ill consequence then of this Opinion is only this, that it charges
our Savior and his Apostles of not making sufficient provision for the lasting
peace and settlement of the Church; so that had not After-ages supplied their
defects in such things as were absolutely necessary to the Government of it,
there had been no remedy for curing or avoiding eternal schisms and divisions;
for according to this account of the Original of the Episcopal superiority, all
the world were by sad experience convinced of its great necessity for the
prevention of factions and confusions. Now, what a dishonorable reflection is
this upon the Wisdom of our Savior and his Apostles, to institute a Society of
men in the World without providing a competent Government to secure its
continuance in peace and unity?

But then secondly, whilst this Conceit explodes the claim founded upon Divine
Right, it is forced to grant a necessity founded upon natural Reason; so that
acccording to it Episcopal Government is made necessary by virtue of all those
Laws of God and of Nature that provide for the Churches peace, and the
preservation of Society. For if this were the ground of that universal
agreement in the Institution of Bishops that St. Jerome speaks of in his toto
Orb decretum est, viz. ut schismatum semina tollerentur; and if there were no
remedy for the prevention of this evil whilst the Government of the Church was
administered by the whole Body of the Presbyters, the consequence is
unavoidable; that though our Savior, or at least his Apostles, had no more
discretion that to leave all Church Officers in an equality of Power, yet the
light of Nature, and the Laws of Society made it necessary to establish a
superiority of one Order above another. Ecclesiae salus in summi sacerdotis
dignitate pendet, cui si non exors quaedam and ab omnibus eminens detur
potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur schismata quot sacerdotes. The security
of the Churches peace depends upon the pre-eminence of the Bishops power, which
were it not supreme and paramount in reference to the other Clergy, we should
quickly have as many Schisms as Priests, says St. Jerome. Setting aside the
Authority of the man, the reason and experience of the Argument it self is
unanswerable. For in such a vast body of men as the Clergy, it is obvious to
every man's understanding, that considering the passions of mankind there could
be no possible agreement, and by consequence no Government without a
superiority of power in some above others. Now this is another pretty handsome
reflection upon the wisdom of our Savior and his Apostles, that they were so
shamefully defective in their first settlement of the Church, as showed them to
be so far from being directed by any divine and infallible Spirit, that they
fell short of the principles of common discretion. For though any man of an
ordinary understanding might easily discern how impossible it was to avoid
Schisms, while the Power of the Church resided in the whole Body of the Clergy,
partly by the bandying of the Presbyters one against another, partly by the
siding of the People with some against the rest; partly by the too common use
of the Power of Ordination in Presbyters, by which they were more able to
increase their own Party by ordaining those who would join with them, and by
this means perpetuate Schisms in the Church; when, I say, these inconveniences
were so obvious, what a prodigious neglect or weakness must it be to leave the
Church through all Ages in such a shattered and tottering condition, insomuch
that it must unavoidably have perished, had not some that came after them
invented better means to prevent or redress mischiefs than they had left them?
For upon this it was, that the graver and wiser sort considering the abuses
following the promiscuous use of this power of Ordination, and withal, having
in their minds the excellent frame of the government of the Church under the
Apostles and their Deputies, for preventing future Schisms and Divisions among
themselves, unanimously agreed to choose one out of their number, who was best
qualified for so great a trust, and to devolve the exercise of the power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction to him; so that it seems we are more obliged to
those wiser and graver sort, than to the Apostles for their care in preventing
Schisms and Divisions through all Ages of the Church.

But thirdly, this conceit bottoms upon no better foundation than a bold and
presumptuous conjecture. And there is no dealing with such men as are able to
blast the credit of all the most undoubted Records of ancient times with an
imaginary and sinister suspicion, for when we have pursued the Succession of
Bishops through all Ages of the Church, up to the very times next to the
Apostles, it requires somewhat a bold face to tell us, that though this perhaps
may be sufficiently evident from the practice of the Primitive Church, and of
the Apostles and their Deputies, yet there was a dark interval between the
death of the Apostles and the time of the most ancient Fathers, in which it was
abolished, and a new Form of Government set up, but that being found
inconvenient, it was thought good, and agreed upon in all Churches, to lay that
aside, and restore the old Apostolical superiority. These are very hard
conceits, especially when they cannot so much as pretend to give us any the
least probable account, where, and when, and by whom this was done. And this is
pretty modest to bear up so confidently against all the current of Antiquity
without so much as any pretenses of ground or evidence to rely upon. But so it
happened once upon a time in which toto Orb decretum est, though when that time
was, we have no more certain knowledge than we have in what degree of Latitude
this totus Orbis lies. Perhaps it was (as Blondel will have it) about the
thirty fifth year after the death of St. John, and what if he had been pleased
to have said the fifteenth, or sixty fifth year, the guess had been altogether
both as learned, and as well grounded. However, is it not a pleasant thing to
tell us boldly, and at all adventure, in toto Orb decretum est, without so
much as telling us when, or where, or attempting to prove the matter of Fact;
especially when it is plainly impossible that so universal and remarkable a
change should be so unanimously agreed upon and effected, and that upon such
great and urgent reasons, without ever being so much as taken notice of. Why
may we not as well discredit any Record (choose what you please) by pretending
there once was, or perhaps might have been an unknown time, in which all
mankind conspired to put an abuse upon all their Posterity? As to say in this
case, that there once was such a season, in which all the world agreed, though
no body knows when, or where, to make an universal and perpetual alteration of
the Form of Church Government. But to conclude, grantting these men all that
they contend for, I would fain know what greater advantage any reasonable man
can desire, either to make good the title, or to enhance the excellency of
Episcopal Government than St. Hierom and Blondel give us, viz. that it was
practiced by the Apostles, but that upon their decease their Authority devolved
upon the Body of Presbyters, which Form of Government was every where found so
incompetent and inconvenient, that all Churches in the world were within the
space of thirty five years, or thereabouts, convinced of the necessity of
retrieving the old Apostolical Inequality, as they ever intended to secure the
peace and unity of the Church. This is pretty well, and advantage enough to
satisfy any modest or reasonable man, and therefore with it I shall rest
contented. Only I cannot but remarque the strange partiality of our Adversaries
in this cause, not only to set up this absurd suggestion of St. Jerome
concerning the unknown time of an universal alteration of Church Government,
and that not only without the Testimony of any Record (for if there had been
any then, it had not been unknown) but against the faith of all History, and
the most certain Tradition of the Church; there being nothing more clear in
Ecclesiastical Story than the succession of single Persons in the Government of
the Church from the Apostles down to his own Age, especially in the greatest
and most eminent Churches, such as Rome, Jerusalem, Antiochia, and Alexandria;
so that there could have been no such universal change as St. Jerome dreams of,
when in these great Churches Episcopacy was established antecedently to any
such supposed alteration. But beside this, they oppose the custom of one
particular Church, and that attested only by one Author, to the known practice,
not only of all other Churches, but of that particular Church it self. Thus
because the same St. Jerome says, with the same have and inconsideration, that
there was a custom in the Church of Alexandria, from St. Mark down to Heraclas
and Dionysius, for the Presbyters of that Church, in the vacancy of the Sea, to
choose one out of their own number, and from thence-forward call him their
Bishop, in the same manner as when an Army makes their own General, or the
Deacons may choose one out of themselves, and constitute him their Archdeacon.
Now, I say, supposing this Story to be true, is it not very severe by the
singular practice of one Church to overthrow the Constitution of all other
Churches? For what if at Alexandria they had a peculiar, or a corrupt custom,
does that impair or destroy the Catholic practice of the Christian Church? It
is possible not only for one particular Church to deviate in some circumstances
from their Primitive Institution, but that is no Argument against a certain
right. Yes, but, say they, this custom was derived from St. Mark himself. But
that would require some better proof than the bare Assertion of St. Jerome; For
it is possible there might have been a preposterous practice in aftertimes,
which he, to give the more Authority to it, might in his lavish heat ascribe to
the Founder of it. But granting the truth of the whole Story, what was this
custom? Was it for Presbyters to ordain their Bishop? St. Jerome seems willing
to say so, but dares not, and therefore expresses himself in odd ambiguous and
general terms, Unum ex se electum in excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum
nominabant; which signifies nothing certain; but that he intends not Ordination
is evident by the words that immediately follow: Quid enim facit excepta
ordinatione Episcopus quod Presbyter non faciat? Which words, upon whatsoever
account they are added, come in here very impertinently, if he had by the Story
spoke of Ordination. At least out of these general words nothing more can be
collected, than their right or custom of electing their own Bishop, as was the
custom of Cathedral Churches afterward. Nay, that too is more than is true, or
can be proved, for St. Jerome does not say, that the Bishop was chosen by the
Presbyters, but out of the Presbyters, so that he does not give them so much as
the right of Election, but only appropriates to them the capacity of being
elected, and that was all the peculiar privilege of the Presbyters of that
Church, that they alone were qualified to succeed in the Sea, and if any one
will from hence infer, as Mr. Seldom is pleased to do, Comment. in Eutych. p.
27.
their power not only of Election, but Ordination, he may thank himself, and
not St. Jerome for his conclusion. For there is not any the least ground for the
inference beside the learned Gentleman's resolution to have it so; and therefore
when he gives us an account of several both Divines and Lawyers, that
understand no more by this passage than merely capitular Election, he confutes
them with no other argument than only by saying positively that they are ipst
Hieronymo adversissimi: But alas, wise men will not quit their own Opinions,
only to submit to the confidence of other men's Assertions, and therefore he
ought either to have proved more, or to have said nothing. Nay, so far were
they from having any power of Ordination that they had not that of Election,
when it is so very well known that the Patriarch of Alexandria was of old time
chosen, not by the Presbyters, but by the People; so that to ascribe their
Election to the Presbyters is plainly to contradict the known custom of that
Church. But be that as it will too; it is very strange, as Mr. Seldom Prefat.
in Eutych. p. 6.
himself observes, that there are not to be found the least footsteps of this
Alexandrian custom in any legitimate ancient Author but only St. Jerome. For if
there had been any such custom in this Church, of which we have as good and as
many Records as of any other Church in the world, it is scarce credible but
that upon some occasion or other some Writer should have taken notice of it,
and therefore so universal a silence cannot but bring a very great suspicion
upon the truth of St. Jeroms relation; at least it is very unreasonable upon
the single report of one hasty man concerning the peculiar custom of one
Church, to renounce (as our Adversaries do) the known practice of all the
Churches in the world beside.

But to avoid this heavy Objection of singularity, our learned Adversary has
taken vast pains to find out a second Witness, and then two Witnesses, we know,
according to our Law can prove any thing, and at length he has discovered an
Arabian Author, and with more than ordinary joy and transport immediately
publishes the particular Story by it self, with large and learned Notes upon
it; but not content with that, he procures the translation of the whole Book,
and is so satisfied with it, that though it were done by another hand, yet he
adorns the Frontispiece with his own Picture. Now certainly one would take this
valued piece to have been a work of prime Antiquity, and undoubted Authority.
But as for its Antiquity, the Author of it lived no higher than the tenth
Century, and that is so distant from the Primitive Age, that he had not been a
more incompetent Witness, if he had lived in our own. As for his Authority, it
is manifest that he was a very careless and injudicious Writer, his whole Book
being every where stuffed with childish fables and absurdities, and particularly
this Paragraph having as many falsehoods in it almost as words. For whereas St.
Jerome continues this custom only to Heraclas and Dionysius, he continues it to
Alexander, the immediate Predecessor of St. Athanasius, which is above an
hundred years difference; and beside that, if such a notable change had been
first made in the preferment of Athanasius, we could not but have had some
notice taken of it in a Person whose life and story is so well known; so that
Eutychius could not have begun this new custom more unhappily at any one Bishop
that ever sat in that See than at St. Athanasius, the proofs of whose Election
by the People were debated and passed in general Council. Again in the same
Story he tells us, that there were no Bishops in all Egypt beside the
Patriarch of Alexandria until the time of Demetrius, which is most grossly and
notoriously false. I might add many more proofs of ignorance, that are
collected by the learned Doctors, Hammond and Pearson, Dissert. 3. cap. 10.
Vindic. l. 1. c. 10.
but I shall instance only in one that they have omited, viz. that there were
no less than 2048 Bishops present at the Council of Nice. And yet from this
gross mistake Mr. Seldom is resolved to bring him off, though he confesses
there are not so many Bishops in the Christian world, for, says he, Diocesses
were Page 38.
not then divided as now they are, but before the conversion of the Roman
Empire, they were of a much less extent than they were afterward, when they
were modled in conformity to the Civil Government. Whether the Allegation be
true or not, I need not now enquire; for though it be true, it is to no
purpose; for what if it is possible that there might then have been so many
Bishops in the world, when it is certain there were not so many at the Council
of Nice, in that (as he confesses in the same place) all the Writers that
either lived in, or near the same time, and some of the Council it self give in
a much smaller number, and therefore it it is a very odd attempt, to bring him
off from so gross a mistake against such pregnant Evidence of what was done
only by the possibility of what might have been done. We will grant this
learned Gentleman that there might have been ten thousand Bishops there, if he
please, whilst we are secure that there were not many more than three hundred;
and therefore when his Author, with some other of his Arabian Friends, raise
the number to above two thousand, it is a manifest instance of Oriental
Ignorance. But waving all other Exceptions, his Novelty is an unanswerable
Objection, though Mr. Seldom, to magnify his Author, is pleased to style him
the Egyptian Bid, but if Bid had betrayed as much Barbarity as this Author
has done, he would have justly deserved the Title of the English Eutychius. For
it is evident that this man scraped together his Annals, not out of any certain
Records, but out of a variety of Authors without judgment, still adding to them
the customs and fashions of his own age; and hence it comes to pass that he so
frequently contradicts himself in the same Story, because whilst one Author
tells it one way, and another another way, he follows both. But still, I say,
setting aside his Barbarity, I would have excepted against Bid himself as a
competent Witness of any matter of fact that was transacted at the same
distance from his Age, as this was from the time of Eutychius, unless he had
confirmed the truth of his Relation by some ancient Testimony, and then it is
not Bid, but his Author, that I rely upon, and therefore unless Mr. Seldom
could have vouched the addition of Eutychius to St. Jerome concerning the
Presbyters Ordination by imposition of hands and benediction, he might have
spent his pains as usefully, if he had wrote Commentaries upon some of the old
Welsh Antiquaries, who tell us what their Ancestors were doing from year to
year many thousand years before the coming of the Romans. And thus we see in
short into what wonderful evidence the whole opposition of Episcopacy is at
last resolved, a vain imagination from Nicephorus Stichometria opposed to the
most ancient Fathers concerning the Ignatian Epistles; a supposed Decree of
Pope Gelasius opposed both to the most ancient Fathers, Councils, and
Historians concerning the Apostolical Canons; an apparently false Assertion of
St. Jerome, opposed to all the Writers of the Primitive Church concerning the
Original of Episcopacy; lastly, a barbarous tale of a modern Arabian concerning
the Ordination of the Bishop of Alexandria by Presbyters.

And now, if we lay all the Premises together, it will I hope amount to a
competent demonstration of the matter in debate. For if our blessed Savior
first founded the Government of his Church in a real imparity of
Church Officers; if the holy Apostles, during all their time, conformed their
practice to his Institution; and if the Primitive Church every where, as far as
their Records are preserved, followed their prescription; if no credible
account can be given of the Original of Bishops, unless we derive their
Succession from the Apostolical Age; if their Institution be (as it is
confessed to be) necessary to the peace and unity of the Church; if there be
nothing to make it suspected for being merely of humane Appointment, but such
bold, such groundless, and such disingenuous surmises, as may be as well
objected against all or any the best Records of Antiquity in the World: If, I
say, all this be true, I hope it will be no presumption to add, that it is a
sufficient not only defense, but proof of the Episcopal superiority against all
Exceptions that are close or pertinent in Blondel, Walo Messalinus, Daille, or
any other Authors that are worth naming or reading. For as for the little
People among ourselves, that have for so many years waged so fierce and
implacable a War against Prelatry (as they call it) they are so invincibly
ignorant, that it is utterly needless to confute, and impossible to convince
them: And how little they were all able to perform, is notorious from the great
Smectymnuan Mouse, that was brought forth by the clubbed labor of so many of
their greatest mountains. And therefore wholly neglecting them, and all their
poor Endeavors, I have confined my self to the discourses of men of sense and
learning, i. e. no Smectymnuans, and have distinctly considered, and I hope
confuted all their material pretenses against the Episcopal superiority in the
Premises. But as for Grammatical Criticisms, and Historical Digressions, they
concern not us, because they concern not our Enquiry. And if learned men would
but come up roundly, and keep ingenuously to the main point of the
Controversy, they must rub their foreheads pretty hard to outface the
evidence of our cause. But alas! the custom of them all is to range up and down
through the whole field, or rather wood of Antiquity, and pursue every thing,
little or great, that starts within their view. And they seem to make choice of
this Subject, rather from it to take occasion of showing the variety of their
Reading, than with any design to make good the undertaking of their Title Page.
And it is very observable, that among the many thousand Pages that have been of
late years wasted in the Anti-episcopal cause, it will be very hard to find
half an hundred directly to the purpose. And that of it self is Argument enough
that they have but very little to say against it. And what that is, I have in
the Premises fully represented; for I protest, that, as I will answer it to
Almighty God, I know no other pretenses, that are at all pertinent or material,
besides those that I have considered.

But in the last place, beside the direct and positive Argument that I have
thus far pusued from ourSaviours own express Institution, the undoubted
practice of the Apostles, and the most unquestionable Records of the Primitive
Church. I come to the last Topic propounded, those enormous inconveniences
that unavoidably result from the contrary Opinion, I shall represent only two.
The first is this, that if the Form of Government in the Christian Church be
not settled by the Founder of it, that then we are at a loss to know by whom it
may or ought to be determined. For the Society of the Church being founded upon
an immediate Divine Right, no Person can justly challenge any Authority in it
as such, unless by virtue of some Grant or Commission from the divine Founder
of it. If therefore those Commissions that were granted by our Savior to his
Apostles do not descend to some certain Order of men, as their Successors in
that Authority, wherewith they were invested, who shall challenge the exercise
of it after their decease? To this we never received any certain Answer, but
are only told in the general, That the particular Form of Government in the
Church is left wholly to the prudence of those, in whose power and trust it is
to see that the peace of the Church be secured on lasting foundations. But then
I would fain know who those are that are entrusted with this Power. It would
have been very well worth their pains to have determined the particular Persons
expressly appointed by God to this Office. Especially when it is laid down as a
fundamental Principle, that all things necessary to the Churches peace must be
clearly revealed in the Word of God; and if so, then no one particular Form may
be established in it by any Authority whatsoever, because no one particular
Form (as is all along pleaded) is prescribed by the Word of God, and yet it is
plainly necessary to the Churches peace (if Government be so) that it be
governed by some one particular Form. But yet however, when we come to enquire
after these Trustees to whose power it is left to see the peace of the Church
secured on lasting foundations, the answer is ever ambiguous and unconstant.
Sometimes it is the Civil Magistrate, and sometimes the People. But this very
uncertainty where this Power is lodged is both in it self, and according to the
fundamental Notion of the Hypothesis that we oppose, a manifest confutation of
the whole design. For if our Savior have not determined to whom it appertains,
that is evidence enough that he never intended by this way to provide for the
peace and settlement of his Church. For if he had appointed such Feoffees in
Trust as is imagined, he would at least have left it certain who they were that
he intended; which not having done, that is demonstration enough that it was
never his intention to set any such pretended Guardians over his Church. But be
it where it will, it is very strange that these Learned men should be so intent
upon the fineness of their Model, as never to consider the wild consequences of
either way, when reduced to practice. For be it in the Civil Magistrate, they
would first have done very well, according to their own Rule to have searched
for some Commission in the Word of God, whereby our Savior entrusted this
power with him. We find indeed Prophesies and Predictions that Princes should
become Patrons and Protectors of his Church, but that they should be vested
with a Power of instituting and abolishing Church Orders and Offices at
pleasure is such a wild conceit as will not find any the least countenance from
the Word of God. Secondly, By what Authority was the Church governed from our
Savior to the Reign of Constantine, when if he had appointed the Civil
Magistrate Overseer of his Infant Church, there was then none that cared to
execute his Office. Beside thirdly, If Church Officers derive their Authority
in the Church from the mere appointment of the Civil Magistrate, they are then
only of Humane Institution, and derive not their Power from any appointment of
our Savior, and so are only Ministers of State, and not of the Gospel. But to
put it into the power of any mortal man to alter the whole frame of Government
in the Church as he pleases, is the most improper way in the world to provide
for its peace and settlement. For by this means it will be ever in the power of
any Commonwealth lawfully to overturn all manner of Ecclesiastical Order at
pleasure: If to day perhaps the Bishops, either by chance, or by virtue of some
Grant from the Civil Government, enjoy the Supreme Power in the Church, it may
with good Authority to morrow depose them, and translate their Power to the
Presbyters, from the Presbyters to the Deacons, from the Deacons to the People,
and from the People to the Pope; and it would be very consistent no doubt with
the wisdom of Christ in founding his Church, and providing for the peace and
settlement of it, to leave its whole frame of Government thus at the Mercy of
any man's Power or Will. We have one example of this project put in practice
upon Record in the Long Parliaments Midsummer-Model of Reformation, when they
vote, June 12. 1641. that all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction should be put into
the hands of such Commissioners as their Worships should think fit. In
pursuance of which they vote, June 21. that six of the Clergy and six of the
Laity should be appointed in every County for the settling of Church Government;
but July 9. that nine of the Laity and three or the Clergy in every Diocese
should have power to exercise all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as shall be
ordered by Parliament, and to have their monthly meetings for that purpose;
that five of the Commissioners shall be a Quorum, and have full power to try
all Ecclesiastical Causes, and to appoint Deputies under them in several
places, and that if any of the nine Commissioners should die or resign, that
five or more of them are to choose another presently. Thus far they proceeded
under the Government of Midsummer-Moon; but about the beginning of the Dog Days
they vote, that no Clergyman shall be of the Commission, and that the
Committee shall be empowered to appoint five of the Clergy in every County,
under them to grant Ordinations. Now all these Proceedings, as ridiculous as
they are, and destructive of the very Being of a Church, yet, had the King
joined with his Parliament, had upon this Principle been justifiable. And so it
will be in their power to vote up, and down what Orders and Offices in the
Church they please, to day Episcopacy, to morrow Presbytery, next day
Independency, then a Committee, and that of Laymen too, and if they please, at
last to abolish all Orders of the Clergy, in that there are none by this
Principle established by Divine Right; these are excellent models of
Church Government, and admirable methods of providing for the peace and
settlement of it.

But if this trust be vested in the People, beside that this too would require
some proof out of the Word of God before it be granted, and that it is liable
to all the former inconveniences, in that the putting the power of the Church
into their hands makes the peace and settlement of it to depend upon the most
giddy, most ignorant, and most uncertain thing in the world. Besides all this,
I say, this is so far from destroying any divine and unalterable Form of
Church Government, that it sets up the Socinian model of Independency (for F.
Socinus was the first founder of it) by Divine Right. In that according to it
all Societies of Christians are by our Savior entrusted with a Power within
themselves of electing of Church Officers, and governing Church Affairs, as
they shall judge most conducible to Peace, Order, and Tranquillity, which is
the exact model of Independent Government. Now this model if they will own, it
is not the Church of England that they plead for, but Independency; and if it
is that they assert, let them say so, and not carry on the Cause of the
Congregational Churches under the name of the Church of England; but if they
disavow it (as they all do) I shall only challenge them how to avoid it. But to
conclude this Argument, in this one Principle do all the Enemies of the Church
lay their groundwork, that there is no known and settled Seat of Ecclesiastical
Power, and therefore that whoever happens to have its present possession,
seeing he never received it by any Commission from our Savior, he may without
any offense against the standing Laws of Christianity be deposed from it. The
inconvenience whereof is so great, that it seems to me a very forcible Argument
from the nature and necessity of the thing it self for some certain divine
establishment of Church Government, in that without it, it is plainly
impossible either to secure any peace, or exercise any Authority in the Church;
because whoever obtains it, has it not from any divine Commission, and if no
Commission, then no Authority. However, I cannot but admire that those learned
men who take away the divine right of some particular Form of Church Government
have not all this while been aware that they run us into all the exorbitancies
and confusions of Independency, in that when they have once removed the
settlement by Divine Right, they leave it, do what they can, entirely in the
Peoples power to set up their own Form of Government. Seeing then, that unless
the Christian Church be subject to Government, it can be no more than a Rabble,
and a Riot: Seeing unless the Government thereof be vested in some certain
Order of men, it must be for ever obnoxious to unavoidable disorders and
confusions; and seeing it was with particular care settled by our Savior on his
Apostles, and conveyed by the Apostles to the Christian Bishops as their proper
Successors. I cannot see how the Divine and Apostolical Right of Episcopacy,
if the providence of God had designed to make it unquestionable, could have
been made more evident either from Common Reason or Catholic Tradition.

But secondly, As the taking away of the divine and perpetual Right of
Episcopacy does on one hand open a door for Independency, so it does on the
other for Popery. For next to rescuing the Kings of England from the Usurpation
of the Popes of Rome upon their Crowns; under the pretense of an oblique or
direct Supremacy over them; and the reforming of many Superstitions both in
Worship and Doctrine; the main design of our endeavored Reformation was to
assert and retrieve the Rights of the Episcopal Order against his illegal
encroachments. For whereas the Original Government of the Catholic Church was
vested in the Apostolical Order, whereby as every Bishop had supreme ordinary
Power within his own Diocese, so a general Council of Bishops had supreme Power
over the Universal Church. So that whatever privileges or preheminences were
granted to the Bishops of particular Churches by Ecclefiastical Constitution,
yet their essential Power was equal, and could no way exert it self as to the
Catholic Church but in Council; and so the Church was governed for many
hundred years, till the Bishop of Rome, taking advantage of those peculiar
privileges and preheminences that were granted to his See as the seat of the
Empire, did by degrees assume to himself an absolute Sovereignty over all the
Pastors of the Universal Church, transferring all Ecclesiastical Government to
the Court of Rome, where it was managed by himself and his Officers with all
the arts of Tyranny and Oppression. And here first began the breach, our
reforming Bishops at first not disputing the pre-eminence of his See (because
that concerned not them) which he had for a long time enjoyed in most other
parts of the Western world, and perhaps might still have done, would he have
been contented with it: But alas they were no more fond even of the Title of
Patriarch, as great as it was, than they are of their mock Title of Servus
servorum Domini. Nothing less would satiate their ambition than a sole and
absolute Sovereignty over all; and to this purpose they impudently applied all
those promises that our Savior made to his Apostles and their Successors, of
being for ever present with, and assistant to them in the exercise of their
Office to the Popes Person; and they having once assumed this Power, resolved
to keep it, and for many Ages reigned absolute Monarchs over the Christian
World. And here, I say, began the breach, the lopping off of that infinite
power, and by consequence, the stopping of those vast treasures that
continually flowed from all parts of Christendom into the Popes Coffers. Though
many other corruptions that were crept into the Church, partly by the
negligence of the Popes, while they alone governed in it; partly, by the
Incursions of barbarous Nation^, they as justly complained of, and might
probably have had them all reformed, if they would have yielded to him his two
fundamental points, Wealth, and Empire. And as that was then their just
complaint, so is it still of all the Bishops, that are by force kept in his
Communion. Not only all their Revenues, but, which is much more dishonorable,
all their Power being taken from them, they being every where (unless such as
retain to the Court of Rome) little better than the Popes Curates; nay, not so
much; being stripped of all Authority, and the Government of their Diocese
wholly put into other hands. And here comes in the great Mystery of Jesuitism,
for this complaint was so Universal, that it was impossible for the Pope alone
to withstand it, and therefore this project was at last fixed upon, being at
first started by a fanatique Soldier, to set up a new Order of Ecclesiastics,
exempt from all other Jurisdiction, and immediately dependent upon, and
absolutely subject to the Pope, and by them chiefly to manage all the Affairs
of Christendom. And there lies all the strength of the Jesuits, in their Vow of
absolute Obedience to their Superior, and of their Superior to the Pope, so
that whatever they are commanded, be it never so unaccountable to their own
Consciences, they are implicitly bound to execute upon pain of damnation. And
this device has taken so successfully, that notwithstanding all that opposition
that has been made to the Order, they have for many years exercised an absolute
Tyranny, not only over all the People, but almost all the Governors of that
Church. And to justify these irregular proceedings, the Bishops are by little
tricks, and senseless distinctions of the Schoolmen, degraded into the same
Order with the Presbyters, and then the Priests of the Jesuits Order are as
well qualified to exercise Jurisdiction as themselves, especially, if licensed
thereto by the Popes Dispensation, according to the Decree of Innocent the IV.
Ex delegatione Domini Papae quilibet Clericus potest, quicquid habet ipse
confer. So that by this device they may be enabled to give Priests Orders, as
well as exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction. This design was all along aimed at in
the Institutions of their Regular Priests, but never effectually compassed,
till the foundation of this Society. So that you see that the whole mystery of
Jesuitism at last resolves it self into Presbytery, and the fundamental
Principle of both consists in slighting and opposing the Episcopal Order. And
therefore it is a little observable, that they were both born into the World at
the same time, it being the year 1541. when Calvin made himself Pope of his
Lay-Cardinals at Geneva; and Ignatius obtained to be made Superior of his
Order at Rome. Since which time, between them both, Christendom has enjoyed
very little peace or quiet, and particularly, by their joynt-malice was wrought
just that time an hundred years, viz. 1641. the overthrow and destruction of
the Church of England. And if the Church of Rome could but get rid of the
Church of England by the help and zeal of the other Factions, she would quickly
scorn and defy all their little Pretenses. For when they have run into all
their sub-divisions, there can be no more than two other Forms of Government;
either the Genevian of Presbytery, or the Racovian of Independency; but both
being so palpable Innovations in the Christian Church, and withal of so very
late a date; it will be no difficult matter for the Church of Rome to defend
her own Title, how bad soever, against such upstart and absurd Competitors. But
when they have to do with the Church of England, they are then apparently
bafled with the undeniable practice and constitution of the Primitive Church.
And this is so observable, that I do not remember any learned Writer of the
Church of Rome, that has undertaken to charge any fault or defect upon the
Constitution of our Church it self. Here their only Topic is to upbraid her
with those abuses, that have been put upon her by other by-designs, in which
indeed she is very much concerned as a Sufferer, but no way guilty as an Actor.
For what is that to me if, when I see gross and scandalous abuses in the
Church, I endeavor to remove or reform them, other men that pretend to come in
to my assistance, shall under that pretense design nothing but Plunder and
Sacrilege? That lies wholly upon their Conscience, but I am innocent, and it
is very disingenuous, and foolish too, to load me with their wickedness. Let
them prove that there were no corruptions in their Church that needed
Reformation, and then I must confess I am convicted; but if they cannot, then
the baffle lies plainly at their own doors, and it is in vain to charge me with
the miscarriage of other men. This, I say, is the state of the Controversy
between the Church of England and the Church of Rome as to this point, and
whilst we keep to this Station, nothing is more easy than to maintain our
ground, but if once we quit it, we fall under all the disadvantages of
Innovators. And however we may afterward annoy the Enemy, we can never defend
our selves. And that, I say, is the case of all other parties in their
opposition to the Church of Rome, excepting the Church of England, and those
that stick to the same Primitive Constitution: As therefore we are concerned to
fortify our selves against the Romans, let us secure this Bulwark, that they
can never force; but if we once forsake it, we have nothing left but to
encounter Innovation with Innovation, and then when both Parties are in the
wrong, it is not much material who overcomes.

This is all I think good at this present to propound in the behalf of the
Church of England, and when these Principles are laid at the foundation of the
building, it will then, and not till then, be seasonable to proceed to more
practicable Propositions; and therefore I shall say no more at present than
only to summon in all good and honest men to the maintenance of this just
Cause, as they will one day answer it to Almighty God, against all the present
open and wicked attempts of Atheism and Superstition; and as they have any fear
of God or man, as they love their Country, or their Posterity, as they have any
sense of Interest, or Honor, or Conscience, neither by their carelessness, nor
their cowardice to betray the best Church in the world to the fury and the
folly of the worst of men. And in this case let no man make excuses, or raise
difficulties from the badness, or the opposition of the times; the worse they
are, the more they require our zeal to oppose and to reform them. And it is
never more seasonable to assert the Rights of the Christian Church than when
they are most disowned. Let us but do our duty, and God will do his work, and
let us not betake our selves to tricks and shifts upon any pretenses (if any
such there are) of loss or danger, the Church of Christ subsists upon no other
Politics than Courage and Integrity. Let us then be true to those two
fundamental Principles of Christianity, and our Savior has undertaken for the
event, that the Gates of Hell, much less Rome or Geneva, shall never be able to
prevail against it.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have thus far adventured to state the Case of the Protestant Religion as it
is established by Law in the Church of England. Thereby to declare what it is
that we contend for in our Disputes against all sorts of Recusants and
Dissenters. For it is not at all material what we oppose, but what we assert;
and there would be no harm in Error, were it not for its Contrariety to Truth.
So that, before we defend the Church of England, it is necessary to define the
true state of its cause, otherwise we contend about we know not what. For as
for the general Term of Protestancy, it is an indefinite thing, so that if all
the men in England that are Enemies, or no Friends to the Pope of Rome may be
listed under that name; we have some Protestants that believe there is a God,
and some that believe there is none; some that believe they have a Savior, and
a Soul to save, and some that laugh at both; there are Hobbian Protestants,
Muggletonian Protestants, Socinian Protestants, Quaker Protestants, Rebel
Protestants, Protestants of 41, and Protestants of 48. All or most of which are
as different as Popery it self from the true Protestancy of the Church of
England. And therefore it is necessary to stick close to that, both as it is
established by the Law of the Land, and by the Law of Christ. For unless we
limit it to the Law of the Land, we may in time have a Church consisting of
nothing but Protestants dissenting from the established Religion, that is, a
Church not only without, but against it self. And unless we derive the
Authority of that Religion, that is by Law established, from the antecedent Law
of Christ, we may quickly be (as we are in a fair way to be) a Reformed Church
of Protestant Atheists, that is, a Church without Religion. And therefore all
must be built upon this one Bo^^om, that the Church owned by the Law of
England, is the very same that was established by the Law of Christ. For unless
we suppose that the Church was originally settled by our Savior with divine
Authority, we deny his Supremacy over his own Church; and unless we suppose
that the supreme Government of the Kingdom has power to abett and ratify our
Saviors establishment by Civil Laws, we deny his Majesty's Supremacy over his
Christian Subjects; and therefore both together must be taken in to the right
State and Constitution of the Church of England. And that, do what we can, will
involve the Leaders of our present Separation in the guilt both of Schism and
Sedition; of Schism in the Church, in that they withdraw themselves and their
obedience from those who are vested with a power to command them by virtue of a
Divine Commission; of Sedition in the State, in that they needlessly, and
without any justifiable pretense, violate the Laws of the Commonwealth. Though
the truth is, their Dissension is somewhat worse. For as they manage it, it is
not only Sedition, but Rebellion, in that they do not only disobey the Laws,
but disavow their obligation; standing resolutely upon that one Principle, that
no Magistrate whatsoever has any power of establishing any thing relating to
the Worship of God. So that the Act of Uniformity is not so much faulty for the
particular matters contained in it, as for the unlawful and usurped Authority
of it. And when the King and Parliament enjoined the Book of Common Prayer to
be used in all Churches, they challenged a Power to which they had no right,
and invaded the Prerogative of God himself. This is the first ground of the
Separation, as it is stated by the chief Ringleaders of it, and it is a plain
renunciation of their Allegiance as well as Conformity. I can with all the
streinings of Charity make no better of it, and should be heartily glad if I
could see them without shufling and prevarication clear themselves of so
pernicious a Principle.

To conclude, methinks Religion has been long enough trifled with in this
Kingdom, and after so long and so sad experience of our folly, it is time to
return to some sense of discretion and sobriety. Before the late barbarous War
we had the Scepter of Jesus Christ and the divine right of Presbytery to
advance, but now, after the murder of an hundred thousand men, that Cause has
proved so ridiculous. as that it is grown ashamed of it self. However the
pretense was great and solemn, but at this time the People are driven into the
same excesses against the Church, no body knows for what, unless it be that
some men among us are too proud or too peevish to recant their Follies. And
therefore I conjure them in the name of God to lay their hands upon their
hearts, and without passion seriously to consider what it is for which they
renounce the Church in which they were baptized into the Communion of the
Catholic Church, tear and rend it into numberless pieces and factions, scare
multitudes of silly and well-meaning People out of it, as they tender the
salvation of their souls, and put the whole Kingdom into perpetual tumults and
combustions about Religion; and when they have considered it, I shall only bind
it upon their Consciences, so to answer it to themselves now, as they hope to
answer it to their Savior at the last day.

As for the foreign Reformed Churches, I have said nothing of them, because
they are altogether out of the compass of my Argument, which is confined within
the four Seas, and concerns only those that either are, or ought to be members
of the Church of England. But if in any thing any other Churches deviate from
the Primitive Institution, they must stand and fall to their own Master. And
God forbid we should be so uncharitable as to go about to un-church them, or
renounce brotherly communion with them, or to think that our blessed Savior
should withdraw the promise of his Grace and Protection from them. For if every
defect from his Institution should forfeit the Rights of a Christian Church,
there never was, as we may find by the Apostles account of the Churches in
their times, nor ever will be such a thing as a Church in the world. For in
this life it is not to be expected that any thing should be absolutely perfect,
the very nature of Christianity supposes Imperfection, and accepts of
Integrity, and as long as with sincere Affections men adhere to the Principles
of the Christian Church, they are within the promise of the grace of God.
Neither beside this does it appear that they in the least refuse communion with
the Episcopal Church, which is the main charge against our Separatists; nay, on
the contrary, it is too evident, that they unanimously condemn our Diffenters
for their Schismatical departure from it. But being, it seems, accidentally
cast into another Form of Government in the midst of State-tumults, they
continue in it, either, first, through the power of prejudice and
prepossession, which are strong things, and more or less to be allowed to all
men. Or, secondly, for want of opportunity to new-mould themselves after the
platform of the Episcopal Churches, which if they should attempt in Popish
Countries, it is easy to foresee with what fury it would be opposed. Or else,
thirdly, for want of due information of the Primitive Institution, supposing
that as our Savior has founded the Society of his Church upon Divine Right, so
he has left it in the power of every particular Church to model it self, as it
shall judge most convenient to its own circumstances. Or lastly, out of that
reverence they bare to the Authority of some learned men, who at the beginning
of the Reformation unfortunately happened to mistake the true Form of the
Primitive Government. Or for whatever other reason it is, we ought to be so
charitable as to think that they are not convinced of the divine Institution of
Episcopacy, or if they are, we ought to be so civil as to think that they would
not refuse it, and then as long as their mistake proceeds from want of
information, it were an unchristian thing to deny them our Charity, much more
Gods Grace and Mercy; for though his Laws are perfect and unchangeable, yet in
the execution of them, he condescends to the errors and weaknesses of his
Creatures, so that it is but a lamentable way of arguing against any divine
Institution because such and such Churches have departed from it; this were to
set up their Authority, not only above, but against that of God himself.
However, it is to be hoped that in a little time they may come to a right
understanding of this thing, for the controversy about it has not been till
very lately thoroughly sifted in the Latin Tongue, but now it is determined
with that strange weight of Reason, that they cannot but discern, when they
come impartially (as in time they will) to examine it, on which side the truth
stands. I pray God to assist and direct them and us to a right understanding of
things, that all parts of his holy Catholic Church may daily grow more and
more into Unity among themselves, and more and more conform their holy
Discipline to the purity of the Primitive Institution.

Amen.
FINIS.

