THE Covenant of Nature made with ADAM DESCRIBED, AND Cleared from sundry great
mistakes.

And thereby Proving,

I. That the kind of Death that was threatened in that Covenant, in Genesis 2. 17.
ought not to be understood of any other kind of Death but of a double spiritual
death, 1. By depriving Adam of Gods concreated Image: And 2. By corruption of
nature that followed thereupon.


II. Proving that the said Covenant was totally extinguished and made utterly
null, as soon as Adam had but tasted of the forbidden fruit, and received the
said threatened punishment.

III. Expounding Gal. 3. 10. and proving that the curse therein threatened must
not be understood of the curse of the said Covenant of Nature, but of that
curse that is threatened in the Covenant of Grace to the fallen posterity of
Adam, for their not doing of Moses Law by Faith in Christ, which was given to
them for the Covenant of Grace ard Reconciliation only.

IV. Expounding Genesis 3. 15. of a double warlike Combat; 1. Between the Devil
and the now converted and believing woman with all her believing Seed. 2.
Between the Devils potent Seed, and the one single Seed of the Woman, [Christ.]


V. Expounding Dan. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27. for the fuller Explanation of the time
and manner of confirming the Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation.

VI. Explaining the true Nature of Gods Forgiveness, and how it makes believing
sinners to be perfectly righteous in Gods sight, from Chapter 15. to Chapter 23.

VII. Expounding every word in Isa. 53. 5. in Chapter 24.

VIII. Expounding Romans 8. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 6, 6, 8. in Chapter 25.

By WILLIAM PYNCHON.

Buy the Truth and sell it not,

Prove. 23. 23. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of the fool to get
wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it,

Prove. 17. 16. London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the
Bishops-head. in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

To the Judicious READER, Grace and Peace.
ANy one that has but read Mr. Nortons Book of Christ's Sufferings, (in Answer
to my Book of the meritorious price of man's Redemption) may soon see that I
have a necessary Calling to vindicate those blessed Truths from his charge of
Heresy which he, in his said Answer has cast upon it.

I printed a Reply to him in the beginning of An. 1655. but then through some
necessary have in setting out that Reply, I did not so fully reply to some
Particulars as I desired: and from that time till now I have waited to see what
further Answer he was able to give to my said Reply (of the Meritorious Price
of man's Redemption,) for the better proving of his said charges.

But seeing in all these six years time, I do not hear of any further Answer
from him: and, 2. Seeing he has builded the whole weight of his Answer upon
that kind of death that is threatened in the Covenant of Nature, in Genesis 2. 17.
as undergone by Christ, the Surety of the Elect, for their Redemption: I have
in this Book enlarged my former Exposition of that kind of Death, by a more
through examination of the true sense of it in Genesis 2. 17. And, 3. Seeing he
makes the Law at Mount Sinai to comprehend three distinct and differing sorts
or kinds of Laws, and to comprehend two dist^nct and differing sorts or kinds
of Covenants, (and seeing he does upon these fictitious foundations build the
great point of Christ's satisfaction, and the great point of a sinners
Justification) I have in this Book enlarged my former Reply, for the better
understanding of those different Laws and Covenants: And, 4. Seeing Genesis 3. 15.
is the Foundation-Scripture wherein the Covenant of Reconciliation was first
declared, and unto which only the Church had relation for 2083 years (when this
promise was again renewed unto Abraham) I have in this Book showed, that it
does from hence necessarily follow that all the after Scriptures which speak of
the Sufferings and of the Death of Christ, must be referred to Genesis 3. 15. as
to their Standard, for their true sense and meaning: and therefore I have in
that respect made a more particular search and examination into the true sense
of every word of that Text: And, 5. I have also vindicated sundry other
Scriptures from his unsound sense, by a true Exposition of them from the
Context. And, 6. I have given the Reader a more full Information of many other
Blessed Truths.

2. Luther professes in one of his Epistles to Stampitius, that he had rather
be accounted any thing, than to be accused of wicked silence in Gods cause, Let
me, says he, be accounted proud, covetous, yea a Murderer, yea guilty of all
vices, so I be not proved to be guilty of wicked silence, whilst the Lord and
his Cause suffer.

3. The Apostle Jude told the Godly in his time (in verse 3.) that it was
needful to write unto them, and to exhort them to contend earnestly for the
faith that was once delivered to the Saints. Which Faith, (in the former part
of the verse) is called the common Salvation, or, the common Faith, in Titus 1.
4. to distinguish it from that unsound way of salvation which was taught by the
false Apostles: For they taught that the believing Gentiles could not be saved
by Faith (in Christ) alone; unless they did join thereunto the works of the
Law, Acts 15. 1, etc. But the Apostles did teach, that Faith in Christ alone,
without the works of the Law, was the only condition that God in his Covenant
of Grace did require to be performed on their part, for their perfect
Justification from sin to life; and thereupon the Apostle does exhort them, to
contend earnestly for this common Faith that was once delivered to (their
Forefathers) the Saints.

3. Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 3. 11. But yet in v. 19. the Apostle has affixed this Caveat, Let every
man take heed how he builds thereon; for even the Elect themselves (through
Satan's subtilty and their own weakness) do oftentimes build false Tenants upon
this Foundation.

P. Martyr says, That true Doctrine is compared to most noble and most
excellent things (namely, to Gold, Silver, and precious Stones) And on the
other side (says he) they that build Wood, Hay, and Straw, declare that Christ
who is the Foundation, is more or less disfigured and dishonored by strange
Doctrines.

But I entreat the Reader to remember, that the Apostle speaks here of such
Builders only, as hold firm to Christ, the Foundation: And so says P. Martyr,
here only (in v. 12.) is entreated of those Builders which have not forsaken
the Foundation, though they build Wood, Hay, and Stubble, which are unsound
Opinions; and says he, in Com. pl. p. 241. seeing Gold, Silver, precious
Stones, Wood, Hay and Stubble are spoken of by way of Allegory; there is no
doubt but that fire also (spoken of in v. 13.) is to be understood in the like
allegorical sense, namely, for the trial of the true sense of all Doctrines by
the blessed Scriptures rightly expounded: and therefore, says he, it is not
sufficient that Doctrines should be tried by the Judgment of men, but by the
fire and by the daylight of a divine examination, which is a clear beholding,
and a certain trial, whereby at length the truth of Doctrines, and also the
guilefulness of them is made known; for it is the property of fire to make
trial what is pure metal, and what is Dross: And (says he) from this fire no
Builder is exempted, whether he has builded well or ill; all must be proved by
the same: And (says he) those things which are corruptly taught, cannot
always be hidden, for there is nothing hidden that shall not be revealed, Mat.
10. 26. And although such Tenants as are corrupt, are not presently made
manifest, yet as the Light of the day comes on, they shall be made manifest;
and this (says he) we may see to be true by experience, because many blessed
Truths are now brought to light, that have lien hid for many years past.

The thing I aim at, is this, That by Builders, Paul does not mean such only as
do build sound Doctrines, but unsound Doctrines also upon Christ the
Foundation, and yet nevertheless that they shall be saved, because they do in
the main matter of Faith rest upon Christ the Foundation; and also because at
length they shall, by the purifying fire, and by the daylight of Gods Word,
perceive, that their unsound Tenants are confuted and condemned; or else in
case they die before they discern it, God will accept of their general
Repentance for all their ignorances, to the saving of their Souls; and so says
the Apostle in v. 15. If any man's work (of building unsound Tenants upon
Christ) shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved,
yet so as by fire.

Upon these considerations, I do not think it meet to thunder out the censure
of damnable Heresy upon Mr. Nortons heterodoxal Tenants, as he does upon my
sound Scripture Tenants (in p. 13. and in p. 267. and in other places.) Though
I could cite several Orthodox Authors that do roundly and peremptorily call his
grand Tenent (of Christ's suffering the Torments of hell) Heresy. 2. Neither
can I from the said considerations approve of the harsh censures of some godly
Ministers and others, that do reproach such as do hold some unsound Doctrines
with the odious name of Heresy; seeing many godly Martyrs have lived and died
in several unsound Tenants; for here we know but in part, and prophecy but in
part, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 13. and yet nevertheless such are eternally saved, because
they do by Faith build their salvation upon Christ the Foundation: We ought
therefore to have two eyes in our head, to consider not only what is to be
desired touching Uniformity in the several Points of Faith, but also what is
attainable in relation to misled Christians; seeing there have ever been, and
ever will be differences in Judgment between the godly in several Particulars;
as for example;

1. When Christ told his Disciples, that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer
many things of the Scribes and Elders, and that he must be put to death, Mat.
16. 20. Peter did then hold a contrary Opinion to this fundamental Truth, and
from his erroneous Judgment he rebuked Christ, and said, Be it far from thee
Lord, this shall not be unto thee: But in case Peter had but rightly understood
the true sense and meaning of Gods declared Combat of Christ's sufferings in
Genesis 3. 15. or in Psalm. 22. or in Isa. 55. (as Simeon did in Luke 2. 34. 35.)
he would not have opposed, but would have much approved of this blessed Truth
which Christ propounded to them: But it seems that Peter did not understand
the true sense of the said places, to speak of the Sufferings and of the death
of Christ from the Devils potent Seed; and yet Christ did not call his
fundamental Error a Damnable Heresy, nor yet give him any such like odious
term.

2. The Apostles in general held that their expected Messiah should sit upon
the Throne of David, and reign as a stately conquering King over the whole
world, and in the confident expectation thereof, the Mother of James and John
desired this Favor o^ Christ, that the one might fit at his right hand, and
the other at his left in his Kingdom, Mat. 20. 20. But Jesus answered and said,
in v. 22. Ye know not what ye ask; you show your selves to be ignorant of the
true nature of my Kingly Reign: his Reproof was solid and gentle; he did not
reproach this corrupt Tenent of theirs with the odious name of damnable
heresy; but in v. 25. he said thus to them, The Princes of the Gentiles do
exercise Lordly dominion over their people, but it shall not be so among you;
but whosoever will be great in esteem amongst you, let him get it by his
diligent and painful Service: and Christ did not only once, but often reprove
them for this unsound opinion, and yet they were so blinded with this error,
that they persisted in it, not only until his death, but also after his
Resurrection, Luke 24. 21. yea even until the time of his Ascension; for then
they said unto him, Lord will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to
Israel? Acts 1. 6.

3. Presently after the days of the Apostles, there were so many Errors
broached, that Irenaeus, one of the ancient Fathers did write a Book against
the several Heresies of those times, and yet himself was much mistaken in some
of his Censures; for he does censure some Orthodox Truths to be Heresy, as it
is noted by Mr. Wotto^, in his Epistle de Reconciliatione, and as it is also
noted by P. Martyr, in Com. pl. p. 323. Irenaeus (says he) said, that it is
the part of Heretics to persuade themselves that immediately after death the
Soul does pass into the Heavens to him that rules all things, and are carried
to the sight of the Father without waiting for the Resurrection of the dead,
(and it seems to me that Mr. Calvin was infected with this unsound Tenent of
Ireneus; for in his Iast. l. 3. c. 25. Sect. 6. and in Genesis 6. 24. in his
Answer to the first Objection, he says, that when Enoch was taken away, he was
not received into celestial Glory, but only loosed from the miseries of this
present life) and Irenaeus does not only censure the said orthodox Truth for a
heresy, but he does also call them Heretics that hold it; whilst himself was
guilty of that gross error of the sleeping of Souls until the Day of Judgment;
which error, with some other errors of his, are well confuted by the poor
man's Library, part 3. fol. 68. and it is worthy of all observation, that it
does often fall out, that such as are infected with great Errors (which in
their deceived Judgment they think to be true) do count such as hold the
contrary Truth to be pest^lent Heretics or Sectaries.

4. Irenaeus (and several others of the ancient Divines) held two sorts of
infernal places; into the uppermost of which they held that the Souls of the
Saints did go, and should there abide until the time of the Resurrection, and
that after that, they should come to the sight of God; this is observed by P.
Martyr, in Com. pl. p. 374. and in p. 243. he affirms also that the greatest
part of the ancient Divines were inclined to this Opinion, and that there is a
Purgatory.

5. Irenaeus held another gross error, namely that Faith shall continue in
Heaven, and in lib. 5. that Faith and hope do remain after this life; this is
also noted out of him by Carlisle.

6. He held another great error, namely, that Christ lived upon earth until
near 50 years; this is also noted by the poor man's Library, fol. 124.

7. P. Martyr says, that in ancient time there have been many Christians which
have thought that the (terrestrial) creatures should remain after the coming of
the Lord, and that they shall serve for some use unto the Elect; and that when
Christ shall return, there shall only be the Resurrection of the godly, which
they call the first Resurrection; between the which, and the latter
Resurrection, when the wicked shall be raised, there shall be the space of a
thousand years; and that during this time, Christ shall wholly reign in this
world together with the Saints, and that in all this space the Devil shall be
bound, as it is described in Apoc. 20. 3, etc. And this opinion (says he) was
received not only of the common sort, but even of the principal and most
eminent in the Church; and this Opinion for the substance of it, is held by
many godly persons even to this day.

This Tenent, though I conceive it is a great Error, yet I do not like that P.
Martyr and others should censure such to be Heretics, that hold it, as he
does, in com. pl. part 4. p. 51. and in other places, seeing it is found by
experience that many godly persons do hold it; though I do also perceive that
they are not uniform in that Opinion, but do differ from one another in certain
particulars, as they did also in ancient time: For it is observed by Vines, in
his Annot. on the City of God, l. 20. c. 7. that all Sects did not agree in
one, as touching this 1000 years, but each one taught that which seemed
likeliest to himself, and no wonder (says he) in so vain a fiction.

8. Though Cyprian died a godly Martyr, yet he also held many gross Errors:
For, 1. He held the Doctrine of Rebaptizing, and which is worse, he held
free will to good; and also that Penance made satisfaction to God for sin; for
he says in one of his Sermons, that the Lord must be appeased and pacified
through our satisfaction, namely, by open Confession and Repentance; and he
also held that there is no hope of pardon left him that does offend after he
has once known God; and yet he does also profess, that he would not bear
malice against any man that was of another Judgment. This was a brave
Resolution in him, and I heartily wish that this Christian Resolution might
find the like ready entertainment in the minds of all godly Ministers and other
Christians.

9. Epiphanius wrote a Book against 80 Heresies (it seems the world did swarm
with more Heresies then, than now, in our days) and he endeavored to confute
and refell those Heresies; and yet himself was much addicted to some
superstitious traditions; for he affirmed that it was a Constitution of the
Apostles always to fast, Pentecost only excepted, and that six days before
Easter, men should eat no other thing than Bread, Salt and Water, etc.

10. Several others of the ancient Divines did also write against the Errors
of their times, and yet themselves did also hold sundry Errors: But for
brevities sake I will omit them, and come to Luthers days: for he says in his
Preface to the Galatians, I have been now in the Ministry of Christ about 20
years, and I can truly witness that I have been affailed with more than 20
Sects; but because he does not name them, I cannot judge of them; and therefore
I dare not believe that all those 20 Sects were damnable Heretics, nor yet
that all their Tenants were heresies; neither yet was Luther himself free from
some gross Errors; for he held a kind of personal union between Christ and the
godly, and from that Union he made Christ to be guilty of all the sins of the
godly; and upon that erroneous Foundation he makes Christ to be the greatest
sinner in the world, as I have showed it more at large in this Book; and I
believe that none are free from some gross Error or other that are most
severe in censuring the Errors of others.

11. I find in the Book of Martyrs and in other Church-Histories, that diverse
Martyrs have died not only in different, but also in contradictory Opinions.
Dr. Barnes the Martyr held against the Morality of the Lords Day, he held that
every day ought to be as a Sabbath to Christians (contrary to other Martyrs)
and good Calvin was not far off from that bad opinion. 2. Others of the Martyrs
held against Infant Baptism, contrary to others; and other unsound Tenants were
held by others, as the Articles that are recorded against them, and their
Answers thereunto do witness; and yet these Martyrs were everlastingly saved,
because they believed in Christ the Foundation of their Salvation: Therefore it
can be no less than a very unchristian censure to call such as do now hold the
same or the like differing Tenants damnable Heretics, or to call those Tenants
Heresy; I rather think that such harsh censurers should account it their
happiness if they could attain to such a lively and operative Faith as many of
them have attained to.

12. When Jerome of Prague was accused of many heresies by the Council of
Constance, he pleaded, that many times the most learned and wisest men in the
world, in matter of Faith were of diverse opinions, not, said he, to overthrow
the Faith, but to find out the Truth: And, says he, Austin and Jerome
dissented, and contradicted each other in diverse things without any suspicion
of heresy: and I do also find that although Austin dissented from Jerome, yet
he was united to him in brotherly and in Christian affections; for he says
thus unto Jerome, in Epist. 19. I reckon, my Brother that you would not have us
read your Books as if they were written by the Apostles and Prophets.

These things considered, I cannot but wonder at the sharp censures of some
godly ones against others that differ in some Particulars from them, seeing
they are builders together with us by faith on Christ the foundation of their
and our salvation. I think it is an unchristian behavior to be so violently
transported with passion as some are at such differences, as if some new and
strange thing had befallen unto this generation that never did befall any other
generation before this; seeing I have made it evident that it has ever been,
and ever will be the condition of the Church here in this world to have such as
will differ from others in some point of Faith or other.

13. The Apostle does tell us that there must be also Heresies (or rather
Sects) among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you,
1 Cor. 11. 19. namely, that their Graces (and not their harsh censures) may be
made manifest by trial from others Errors.

14. The persons of the godly ought to be loved, though their Errors ought to
be wisely confuted; but yet I see that many times Christian Love to such
persons, is extremely eclipsed, through their detestation of their Errors: I
confess that bosom Love cannot be well showed to such as are of an opposite
Judgment; yet such a degree of Love must rule over displeased passions, as may
evidence that we are the children of God by extending some affections of Love
to all such as are begotten of God to believe in Christ. M. Capel says on
Tentations, part 4. p. 28. That Christians may be said to love all true
Christians, albeit they do not only forsake some particular Christians for a
time, but in a fit persecute them too; and, says he, two particular
Congregations may separate each from other, and refuse Communion one with
another, and yet be both the Churches of Christ: So I have read, and hold it to
be true, that in the ancient Church there fell out bitter Conflicts, betwixt
Chrysostom, Theophilus, Alexandrinus, and Epiphanius, and yet no wise man dare
question, but that they were all four the most excellent servants of God; and
(says he) one would think the Prison should reconcile all betwixt good men;
yet we read that one Miletius and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, being in the same
prison for the same cause, upon a slight and light matter fell into such a fit,
that they refused to hold communion one with another, and yet both very good
men, and both suffered Martyrdom for the Christian Faith; but yet I say also
that the Devil laughes in his sleeve when he can prevail so far, as to make
such distances of Affection between the godly; and therefore it is to be
lamented that such distances are so much cherished and practiced by such as
profess the same Faith in Christ for salvation.

14. I do delieve that the word Heretic and Heresy is not so clearly
understood by many that do commonly use it (as it ought to be) in detestation
of many errors: Mr. Gataker differs from most in his critical Observations.

2. Dr. Alley says in his poor man's Library, fol. 26. that the Schoolmen call
him an Heretic which does institute or make, or follow any new Sect against
the Foundation of Religion. And say they, three things do always c^neur and
meet together in Heresy. 1. ^alse Belief. 2. Perverse Will: and 3. O^stinacy.
By this (says he) they do signify, that he is not straight to be taken for an
Heretic, which holding false things for true, does err; if there be not a
perverse will, and an obstinate mind to persist and resist: for as the Learned
Doctor (Austin) says, I may err, yet I will not be an Heretic: It is written
in the Law, that whosoever defends their sentence and Opinion, although it be
false (so it be not of an obstinate boldness) but does carefully and warily
seek the truth, being also ready and willing to be corrected and return when
they have found the Truth, they are not to be accounted among Heretics.

3. P. Martyr says in Judges, fol. 58. The Word Heresy is derived of a Verb
which signifies to elect or choose unto ones self some certain Opinions, which
are against the holy Scriptures, and stubbornly to defend the same; and the
causes of this their choice, for the most part are, either because they are
ignorant of the holy Scriptures, or else if they do know them, they despise
them, and being driven by some covetousness they apply themselves to the
invention of some Errors; wherefore Austin in his Book De utilitate credendi,
writes, that an Heretic is he, which for the love of Gain or Rule, either
brings up, or else follows new Opinions.

The Definition therefore of Heresy is

A Choice, and stubborn defending of Opinions which are against the holy
Scriptures, either by Reason of Ignorance, or else contempt of them; to the
end, the easilier to obtain their own pleasure and Commodities. In this
Definition,

1. The Choice, and stubborn defending is in stead of the Form. 2. The Opinions
disagreeing from the holy Scriptures, serve for the Matter. 3. Pride and
Covetousness make Heresy, 4. The obtaining of Dignities, Gain and Pleasures,
are appointed for the Ends of this so great a Mischief.
By this Definition (says he) it is manifest enough (as I think) who be
heretics.

13. Bishop Davenant says, ad hort. ad pac. c. 13. p. 153. Whatsoever is by
Antagonists defamed by the name of Heresy, is not forthwith to be put into the
Catalogue of Heresies: For mine own part (says he) I think no man can free the
Divines of one side or other, from all Errors in their Polemical W^itings:
Therefore, we which know how by a favorable interpretation to mollify the
unmeet sayings of our own D^vines, ought not more to wrest the crooked Opinions
of those whom we oppose, and of any errors to make foul and horrible Heresies.

14. I cannot but wonder that Mr. Norton in his undertaking to prove damnable
heresy in my Dialogue, does make such cursory and slighty expositions of the
blessed Scriptures for the proving of his heterodoxal Tenants: and I make no
question but the Judicious Reader will find it to be so by my present
examination of them; and that he does often times give the sense according to
the bare sound of the words, and not according to the true sense of them from
the Context; and I conceive that it is a received Maxim, that he that is not a
good Text-man, cannot be a sound Divine; but being misled, will be apt to
mislead others, which is a great Judgment; for Moses does tell us, in D^ut. 27.
18. that it is one of the Curses of the Covenant of Grace to make the blind to
err out of the way (by a false Interpretation.)

15. In case it be Objected by any, that I have departed from all Writers in my
exposition of the kind of death that is threatened in Genesis 2, 17. I Answer that
it is not so: but I have cited some ancient Writers that concur with my
Exposition; and I believe that a good Library will find out more. 2. I have
cited some late Writers that do question what kind of death it is that is meant
in Genesis 2. 17. And, 3. Though my Exposition does differ from the most late
Writers that I have seen, yet when all Circumstances are well considered, it
will be sound that there is a just cause for it: And then as Mr. Gataker says,
It is no heinous matter in some things to depart from all Writers that are
known to us, that are gone bofore us: For (says he) sure I am that Junius and
Tremelius in translating and expounding some Passages of Scripture, have
departed from all known Interpreters that have gone before them; as in that
place of Mal. 2. 16. [He hates putting away] this Assertion of Mr. Gatakers is
true in relation to all former Christian Writers, but not true in relation to
the former ancient Ebrew Doctors: For it is observed by Mr. Broughton, in his
Epistle to the Nobility, in p. 54. that the Jerusalemi and Barbinel, do check
us rightly for Mal. 2. 16. [For he hates Divorcements, the Eternal says.] Mr.
Bro. says, that here the Rabbis Authority is the strongest of all humane,
because it is for us, against themselves: and Mr. Ainsworth does show how it is
against their practices, in Deuteronomy. 24. 1. and in Nam. 5. 30.

16. Dr. Gouge says in Heb. 7. 1. That the common received Opinion is, that
Sem the Son of N^ah was Melchisedech; and Mr. Broughton our Countreyman (says
he) brings 22 Rabbis for this Opinion; and infers that it was the common
Opinion of the Jews: But yet I do also say, that when Mr. Bro. does first
assert it, it was counted for no other but a new and strange opinion, though
now it is generally received for an approved Truth: And in former times
Epiphanius did reckon this Opinion among the Heresies which he ascribed to the
Sarmatians; and says Dr. Gouge, he labored to disprove it, by an Argument
wherein himself is much mistaken: For he affirms, that Melchisedech died 20
or 30 years before Abraham rescued Lot [which is false] for says Dr. Gouge, it
appears by the 600 years which Sem lived (being duly counted by the Genealogy
of Sems posterity in Genesis 11. 10, 11.) it will be found that Sem lived 100
year, in Isaac's time.

From these and many such like Considerations, which I might add if need
required, it is evident that the said Objection made from Novelty is of no
force to contemn such Expositions as are grounded on the true sense of the
Context; and therefore I may say as Bro. does; It is no fault to differ from
all Churches for the good of all Churches: For Churches (says he) do carry no
sway above the Word of God, but the Word of God (rightly expounded) above all
Churches.

17. The Apostle says unto me, and unto all that fear God, as well as unto
Titus, Speak thou the things which become sound Doctrine (Tit. 2. 1.) showing
uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity, sound speech, that cannot be condemned,
having no evil thing to say of you, Tit. 2. 7, 8. In this Treatise I have as
near as I can, followed the Apostles Directions; therefore I advise the Reader
not to condemn the whole or any part thereof before due trial.

18. My main scope in this Treatise is to vindicate the true sense of the word
Death, in Genesis 2. 17. and of sundry other Scriptures also, from the great
Errors that are held forth in Mr. Nortons Answer. But in case any Reader will
be pleased to make observations of any Errors they find in this Reply, I shall
account it a Christian kindness to advise me of it; that so I may examine it
anew, and amend it as there may be cause; or if it pleases M. Norton or any
other to print any thing in way of confutation, I shall rejoice at it, provided
it be done to the advantage of the Truth; yea I shall kiss his lips that gives
a right Answer, Prove. 24. 26. yea my reins shall rejoice when thy lips speak
right things, Prove. 23. 16. For if I know mine own heart, I desire nothing so
much as that the Truth may be advanced, though I be vilified: But yet I cannot
think that any cursory Readers can undertake this Task; it is too laborious for
such Readers: therefore if any thing be done to any good purpose, it must come
from such only as will take the pains of the mind in a more than ordinary
serious manner, to examine things thoroughly from the true sense of the blessed
Scriptures: The wise man says, The heart of the Righteous will study to
answer, Prove. 15. 28. And Job makes this Reply to his zealous Confuters, Ye
comfort me in vain, seeing in your Answers there remains Falsehood, or
Transgression, Job 21. 34.

19. Or in case the Reader cannot or will not take the said pains of the mind,
then my desire in the next place is, that they will be pleased to embrace what
they judge to be sound and good, and to pass by the rest: This Advise was
formerly given by Basil to the Readers of his time: We must (says he) be
partakers of other men's Sayings wholly after the manner of the Bees; for they
fly not alike to all Flowers, neither where they sit, do they crop them quite
away, but snatching so much as shall suffice for their honey-making, take their
leave of the rest: Even so we, if we be wise (says he) having got out of
others so much as is sound, and agreeable to the Truth, will leap over the
rest; which Rule (says he) if we keep in alleging the words of the Fathers
(or others) we shall not swerve from our (Christian) profession, and the
Scripture shall have the Sovereign place, and yet the Doctors of the Church
shall lose no part of their due estimation.

These Cautions and Considerations being well observed, will benefit the godly
Reader, and I hope also the Church of God; to the preserving of Amity in
Affection, and Unity among them: especially in the substance of the Faith,
though they are and ever will be of differing Judgments in some Particulars, as
long as we live here; because as long as we live here, we know but in part, and
prophecy but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12. And so I rest,

From my Study in Wraysbury, Feb. 10. 1661. Thy humble Servant in the Faith of
Christ, WILLIAM PINCHO^.

Authors cited.
Austin, p. 16. ter. 17, 28, 29, 48, 50, 60, 61, ter. 75, 85, 86, 87, bis. 103,
127, 237, 262, 272, 276, 282, 285, 288, 306, 309, 325, 329, 337, 341, 350 bis.
351 bis. 353 ter. 398, 437 ter. 461, 512, 520. Ambrose, p. 15, 64, 74 87, 101,
243, 285, 292, 335, 390, 397, 398, 516. Annot. p. 3, 17, 19, 63, 183, 188, 193,
249, 279, 303. 316, 318, 322, 370, 385, 386, 395, 417, 435, 475, 483, 494, 499,
502, 515. Auspurge Confession, p. 481. B. B. Alley, p. 50, 60, 100, 152, 166,
171, 201, 389, 305. D. Ames, p. 47, 62, 86, 97, 276, 388. Arch. B. B. Alfricus;
p. 349. M. Ainsworth, p. 3, 7, 14 ter. 20, 30, 55, 64, 66 bis, 67, 69, 71, 76,
86, 104, 137, 138 bis, 139 bis. 140, 143, 144, 146, 155, 171, 177, 183, 184;
185, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191, 202, 206, 208, 211 bis. 214, 215. 216, 221. 224,
226, 234, 236, 240, 241, 256. 266, 268. 272, 273, 289, 293, 296, 298. 303, 304,
307, 309, 313. 330. 345. 346, 350, 355. 369. 372 bis, 375. 377. 381. 383. 390,
400 ter. 402. 409. 411. 412, 413. 415. 416. 422. 428, 429. 430. 431. 432. 439.
441 ter. 442. 444. 448. 451. 455. 457. 467, 469. 470. 472. 474. 475. 485, 493,
497. 503. 523. 525 526 ter. 528. Aquinas, p. 328. 329. 337.
B.
Bernard, p. 282. 283. 355 bis. 426. Beda, p. 63. 102. Bibliander, p. 244. B.
B. Bilson, p. 31. 59 ter, 153. 274. 276, 501. Beza, p. 11. Broughton, p. 11.
49. 52. bis. 55. 63. 66. 86. 89. 143. 202 bis. 212 247. 305 bis. 309. 313. 369.
398. 370, 373. 374, 377. 380. 381. 384. 394. 396. 402. 404. 406. 407. 409 bis.
410. 311. 414. 415. 417. 418 bis. 420. 421 bis. 423. 424 ter. 447. 449 457.
470. 524. 526. 527. Bullenger, p. 240. 261. 303 bis. 353. 448. 508. Bucer, p.
353. Berbaldus, p. 410 bis. 313. Dr. Barnes the Martyr, p. 209. 243. 461. 530.
Bradshaw, p. 168. 171. Bucanus, p. 34. 35. Mr. Ball, p. 48. 65. 68 ter. 261
419, Mr. Baxter, p 31. 33. 39 bis. 40. ter. 41. 49. 62 bis. 69. 75. 77. saepe.
78. 82. 93. 129. 134. 170. 179. 259. 261. 262. 264. 269. 279. 282. 331. 382.
432. 472. 479. 480. Mr. Burges, p. 47. 51. 63. 109. 110. 111 bis. 112. 113.
171. 206. 401. 464. 503. Mr. Bolton, p. 45. 223. Mr. Buroughs, p. 49. 313, Mr.
Blake, p. 112. Mr. Bridge, p. 270. Bithner, p. 31.
C.
Chrysostom, p. 154. 248. 288. 351. Cyril, p. 8. 506. Cyprian, p. 280. Chalde
Paraphrase, p. 186. 346. 394. 415. 525. 147. Calvin, p. 30. 35. 59. 102. 159.
168. 178. 188. 216. 303. 378. 441. 459. 460. 476. 477. Camero, p. 44. 189. 202.
516. Cassiodorus, p. 285. Causanus, p. 255. Chamier. p. 81. Chauser, p. 100.
Nr. Clendon. p. 80. 91. 94. 98. 480. 594. Mr. Capel, p. 62. Carlisle, p. 34.
386. 500. Chibal, p. 456.
D.
Damasen, p. 102. ^. B. Davenant, p. 255. Daneus, p. 20.
E.
Ebrew Doctors, p. 14. 28. 36. 49 54. 55. 66. 72. 139. 140. 142. 143. 144. 155.
191. 202. 214. 269. 293. 304. 305. 313. 345. 355. 380. 381. 384, 401. 402. ter,
421. 431. 449. 466. 472. 485. 501. 525. 526. Epiphanius, p. 373. Eucherius, p.
19. Erasmus, p. 26. Mr. Estwicke, p, 288. 264.
F.
Fulgentius, p. 506. French Confession, p. 480. French Academy, p. 30. 34. 285.
Io. Frith the Martyr, p. 302. Mr. Fox, p. 380. D. Field, p, 464. Mr. Io.
Forbes, p. 151. 152. 282. 337. 388. 481.
G.
Gregory, p. 19. 102. 282. 354. Gualier, p. 102. M. Gataker* p. 82. 83. 95.
154. 160, 167. 169. 170. 172. 254. 281. 345. 391. 431. 480. 520. 317. D. Gouge,
p. 50. 52. 141. 233. 249 bis. 265. 267. 268. 381. 429. 430. 439. 448. 459. 462.
501. 509. 515. 516. 517 bis. 527 ter. Grotius, p. 45. 263. 273. 274. 275 276.
277. 279. 482. M. Io. Goodwin, p. 283. 508. 170. 174. M. Tho. Goodwin, p. 101.
508. M. Greenhil, p. 432. Gibbons, p. 63. 306. M. Grayle, p. 81.
H.
Hylary; p. 506. Haymo, p. 1. 56. D. Hammond, p. 201. 322. 399. 448. 455. 411.
B. B. Hall, p. 388. M. Hotchkis, p. 2. 50. 347. 432. M. Ed. Holyoke, p. 106.
128. 255 371. 411. 517.
I.
Irenaeus, p. 112. Justin Martyr, p. 288. Jerome, p. 63 ter. 338. D. Jackson, p.
97. 255. 268. 288. 340. 386. 464. B. B. Jewel, p. 437. M. Jeanes, p. 110. M.
Jesop p. 225. K. Kircherus, p. 69. 370. 374. 375. 438. 469. 471. 501.
L.
Luther, p. 81. 90. 160. 161. 163 166. 216. 241. 250. 254. 258. 280. 303. 436.
487. 491. 492. ter. 513. 530. D. Lightfoot, p. 138. 388. M. Lawson, p. 25. 41.
to p. 44, 128. 150. 154. 170. 255. 261. 319. 388. 478.
M.
P. Martyr, p. 2. 8. 13. 15 ter. 16 17 bis. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 64. 74 86. 89.
97. 98. 99 bis. 102. 155. bis. 218. 235. 247. 261. 262. 271. 276. 284. 286.
288. 289. 298. 317. 318. 321. 323. 335. 337 bis. 341. 342. 350. 351. 353. 358,
373. 378. 416. 432. 436. 441. 447. 456. 461, 462. 483. 491. 505. 509. 5^^.
Maymony, p. 135. 143. 202. 215 272. 342. 355. P. Du Moulin, p. 35. 73. 94.
Munster, p. 378. Musculus, p. 388. Marloret, p. 483.
P.
Pareus, p. 83. 160. 261. 302. Du Plessis, p. 55. 90. 144. 421, Philo, p. 19.
Perkins, p. 8. 99. D. Preston, p. 75.
R.
D. Reynolds, p. 269. 274. 432. 479. M. Rutherford, p. 40. 45 bis. 46. ter. 67,
68, 69, 80. 125 bis, 131. 157. 188. 261. 266. 302. 304. D. Rivet, p. 63.
Rolloc, p. 513.
S.
Seventy Interpreters, p. 96. 267, 272, 293, 323, 330 ter, 345 bis 346, 394,
413, 315, 428, 432. 433 ter, 434 ter, 435 ter, 442 ter, 443 ter, 444, 446, 447,
449 451, 452, 454, 455, 457 bis, 462, 465, 467, 468, 469, 470, 475, 486, 491,
496, 497, 500, 501, 505, 525, 528, Symachus p. 63 bis, 65, 306. D. Sibbs, p.
51. M. Shepherd, p. 110, 113. 159, M. Jo. Smith of Clavering, p. 50, Socinus,
p. 130, 148, 287, 329, Confess. of Saxony, p. 440.
T.
Theodotian p. 330. Theophilus p. 288. Theophylact p. 102. Tertullian p. 384,
392. Tyndal p. 155, 227, 247, 302, 434, 441, 467, 475, 516. D. Twisse p. 263,
441, 448, Tremelius p. 395, 430, 434, 451 465, 467, 528, M. Tailor p. 354. M.
Trap p. 59. 63, 385, 387, 388, Traheron, p 155, 430,
V.
B. B. Usher p. 16, 17, 283, 287. Vines p. 63, 306, 309, Ulpian p. 338.
W.
D, Willet p. 11, 18, 19, 50, 56, 64, 97, 175, 278, 344, 386, 407, 415, 416,
421, 529, 531. M. Wotton p. 45 bis, 52, 68, 80, 94, 163, 174, 215, 203, 225,
248, 252, 263, 284, 319, 463, 476, 477, 479, M. Woodbridge p. 6, 25, 31, 41, 47
bis, 72, 74, 112 bis, 147, 148, 154, 168, 171 bis, 189. 203, 209, 215, 226,
218, 224, 260, 261, 264. 282, 297, 331. 343. 431. 441. 456. 461. 478. 479 bis.
481. 482. 508. M. Warren p. 94, 215, 296 bis, 319, 327, 394, 463. M. Wilson p.
1. 49, 64. 269, 505, 516. D. Wilson p. 242, 253. M. Walker p. 35, 46, 47, 92,
112 113, 121, 122, 130, 157. M. Weames p 18. 33, 35, 47, 48, 61, 87, 108, 350.
M. Watson p. 49.
Z.
Zanchy p. 121, 122. Zaleucus p. 274. Zuinglius p. 352.
CHAP. I.
Proving, 1. That the kind of Death that was threatened in the Covenant of
Nature in Genesis 2. 17. must be understood of no other kind of Death, but of a
double kind of Spiritual Death in this world only.

2. That the Covenant of Nature was totally extinguished, as soon as Adam had
transgressed it, by his first tasting of the forbidden Fruit. Norton does
expound the Death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. of three several kinds of Death, in
page 21. 22. his One and the same word in one and the same Text, can have no
more but one proper sense in that place.
threefold exposition I find to be exceeding erroneous: For, 1. It is a
received maxim in Divinity; that one and the same word, in one and the same
Text, is not capable of any more proper senses, but of one only: though the
same wo^d in other Scriptures may have several other differing proper senses.
Mr. W^^son in his Theological Rules, for the right understanding of the
Scripture, says in his 41. and 131. Rules, that every Scripture has but one
certain and fit meaning, which by all means is to be searched after, and rested
in. 2. Says he, all interpretations must be fit as well as true; for one place
of Scripture can have but one fit and proper interpretation, which is very hard
sometimes to hit upon.

This precious rule of a right exposition Mr. Norton does approve, (though yet
he does also transgress it, in his exposition of the word Death in Genesis 2. 17.)
1. He does approve it, and does also make use of it to confute a short passage
in my Dialogue, because I do therein give two several senses of the word Death
in Ebr. 5. 7. First, that Chirst does there pray to be delivered from his
natural fear of death; and this exposition I believe is sound and good, and
accords to the true meaning of the word Death in that Text: and this
exposition I did chiefly insist upon: but yet 2. I said also, that Christ did
there pray to be delivered from the dominion of death by his Resurrection: and
this exposition is also given by Haymo in Ebr. 5. 7. and it is sound Doctrine
in it self, and it is no more but three lines that I speak of it: and yet by
the said rule of a sound exposition, (cited there by Mr. Norton) I do freely
confess, that both my expositions of the word Death in that Text, cannot be
there meant: and therefore my last exposition must be removed from Ebr. 5. 7.
and placed in Acts 2. 24, 27. where it is most fit and suitable.

But O that Mr. Norton had been so happy as to have kept close to this approved
rule in his exposition of the word Death in Genesis 2. 17. but alas he has most
inconsiderately transgressed it: for in his Book of Christ's Sufferings he has
in page 21. expounded it of three several sorts of Death, in three differing
proper senses. 1. Of a bodily Death. 2. Of a spiritual Death in sin, and 3. Of
an eternal Death in Hell.

But in case the said received maxim be a sound rule of a right exposition, (as
I believe it is) then his said three distinct sorts and kinds of Death cannot
be comprehended under the word Death in Genesis 2. 17. seeing they differ from
each other, not only in degree (as many unlimited words may do in the same
Text) but in kind, because they do arise from two several threatenings, from
two several and opposite covenants: for 1. the Death threatened in Genesis 2. 17.
does arise from the Covenant of nature only; and it is no other but a double
kind of Spiritual Death, as I have opened the matter more at large in Sect. 2.
and 3. But the Death of the body, and the eternal Death of the soul and body in
Hell, do arise from the threatening of the Covenant of Grace only: namely,
after it was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. then a bodily Death was first
threatened in verse. 19. to all the fallen Sons of Adam, as a punishment for
Original sin: and then an eternal Death in Hell does follow to all that live
and die without faith in the seed of the Woman for their redemption.

2. Mr. Nortons said exposition of three distinct sorts of Death in Genesis 2. 17.
The death threatened in the Covenant of nature must not he expounded in any
larger sense, then is intended by that Covenant.
is also contrary to another precious rule of a sound exposition, which Mr.
Hotchkis does give in his Exercitation, page 21. we must (says he) beware that
we do not in our conceptions about Scripture (words and) phrases suprasentire,
not understand more in them then what is fit, or in reason is possible to be
understood. We must be careful (says he) not to sense them above their scope
and intendment: for when they are over senced, they are no part of Scripture,
but of his erroneous conceptions that does over-sense them: and therefore I
add that seeing the Death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. is confined to the Covenant
of nature only, it ought not to be expounded in any larger sense then is
intended by that Covenant.

2. P. Martyr does also give this very same rule of a right exposition in his
Com. pl. p. 108. namely, that sentences of Scripture must not be more largely
understood, then the place it self wherein they are written may bear: for
otherwise (says he) we may be soon led into error. This precious rule of a
right exposition is the more strictly to be urged and observed, because it is
too too commonly transgressed by many Interpreters, who do labor to graspe in
as many senses as they can, into the same word of the same Text, to the utter
confounding of the true sense of that place; and therefore the said rule does
advise the prudent Expositor, to beware that he does not expound the word Death
in Genesis 2. 17. in any larger sense then is intended by the threatening of the
Covenant of nature; especially seeing I have showed in Sect. 4. and elsewhere,
that that Covenant reaches no further in its promise and threatening, then
either to a happy natural life, or to a miserable kind of a double spiritual
death in this world only, without any bodily death: and from thence it
follows, that the said threatening of the Covenant of nature cannot camprehend
under it neither a bodily death, nor yet an eternal death in Hell: and
therefore those two sorts of death were not threatened, until after the Covenant
of grace and reconciliation was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. but then as soon
as Adam was converted to the faith by that declaration. A bodily death was
first threatened in verse. 19. as the proper punishment of the second sort of
Adams sin, now commonly called Original sin in Romans 5. 12. or Inhabiting sin,
Romans 7. 17. 20. And then 2. When God did first threaten a bodily death in Genesis
3. 19. he did together Genesis 3. 19. Ebr. 9. 27.
with it appoint a particular day of Judgment to follow it, to each departed
soul (in relation to the new Covenant of reconciliation) as the Apostle does
assure us in Ebr. 9. 27. He there tells us, that it is appointed unto men once
to die, and after that the Judgment (i.e.) unto such as die in the faith of
their redemption, by the promised seed of the Woman, a judgment to an eternal
life in Heaven: but to all the rest that die in the unbelief thereof, a
judgment to an eternal death in Hell. And from thence it follows, that it can
be no less then a foundation error in Mr. Norton, to build his whole book of
Christ's sufferings, upon the threatening of that kind of death that is
threatened in the Covenant of nature only, seeing that Covenant is totally
extinguished; and seeing when it was in being, it threatened no other kind of
death, but a double kind of Spiritual death only. 1. By deprivation, and 2.
By corruption of nature, as I shall declare it more at large by and by.

3. Mr. Nortons exposition of the word Death in Genesis 2. 17. to be meant of Both
Scripture and reason does sometimes teach us to restrain the sense of general
words, to the proper sense of the place where they are used.
three distinct sorts and kinds of death, is contrary to another most precious
rule of a right exposition, given by Mr. Ainsworth in his preface to Genesis in
page 4. In our expounding of the Oracles of God, (says he) we are taught to
take absolute and indefinite speeches in the largest sense, unless there be
some special reason of restraint. This caution of restraint is of special
consideration to guide Expositors in their exposition of sundry words, and in
particular in the right sense of that kind of death, that was threatened in the
Covenant of nature in Genesis 2. 17. for though that word be indefinite in it
self, yet in Genesis 2. 17. (and in sundry other Scriptures) reasons from the
context does teach us to restrain it to that kind of death that is threatened
in the Covenant of nature only.

From the premises I infer.

1. That the word Death cannot in any one text of the Bible be expounded of all
the said three sorts of Death in a proper sense.

2. That no other Scripture does threaten the said double kind of spiritual
death to Adam, and to all his natural posterity, but Genesis 2. 17. only.

3. That no one Scripture that is not typical, does in a proper sense threaten
both a bodily death, and an eternal death in Hell, but the one properly, and
the other by consequence only: as for example, God threatened Elies House with
some untimely death or other, 1 Samuel 2. 29, 30, 31. and he did also confirm his
1 Samuel 3. 14.
threatening with his unalterable Oath, 1 Samuel 3. 14. and this threatening was an
unlimited and a definitive threatening; and yet for all that God did not by that
death threaten them with an eternal death in Hell, for their presumptuous sins:
but upon their unfeigned repentance he would free them from an eternal death in
Hell, as it is also well observed by our Annotat. in 1 Samuel 2. 25. And on the
other hand, when an eternal death in Hell is threatened in a proper sense, as it
is in Ezekiel. 3. 18, 19, 20. and Ezekiel 18. 20, 21, 23, 24, 26, 31, 32. John 8. 51.
there a bodily death is not then properly threatened; but by consequence only
from the first general threatening in Genesis 3. 19.

4. My abovesaid three rules of a right exposition, do not only confute and
confound Mr. Nortons said exposition of three senses and kinds of death to be
threatened in Genesis 2. 17. but they do also confute and confound his threesold
exposition of the word Law at Mount Sinai: for he does expound it of three
differing sorts and kinds of Laws, and of two differing and opposite sorts of
Covenants, quite contrary to the said approved rules of a right exposition: and
for the further confutation of which, see my replies in chap. 5. and in chap. 6.

5. My said three rules of a right exposition, do also confute his twofold
exposition of the word, her Seed, in Genesis 3. 15. for he does expound it: 1. To
signify Christ, and 2. To signify all the Godly; both which, says he, are
the seed of Eve. But for the confutation thereof, see my exposition of Genesis 3.
15. in chap. 12.

6. For want of observing the said rules of a right exposition, he has
misinterpreted the word Sheol and Hades in Psalm. 16. 1. To signify the grave
to Christ: Body, and 2. To signify Hell torments to his soul, as I have showed
it also in my former Printed reply, page 109. and diverse other words he has
over senced, as the word Anazed, in Mar. 14. 33, etc.

Mr. Nortons exposition of the word Death in Genesis 2. 17. more paticularly
examined.

1. Says he in page 21. For the better understanding of this Text consider
these three things.

1. What is here intended by death. 2. The distribution of death. 3. The
application of that distribution.

1. (Says he) the death spoken of is the wages of sin, Romans 5. 21. Romans 6. 23.

2. (Says he) the commination is not particular concerning some kind of
death; but indefinite, and therefore equivalent to an universal, comprehending
all kinds of death. Bodily death, Genesis 3. 19. Romans 8. 10. Genesis 26. 10. Exodus
21. 6. Spiritual death, i.e. the death of the Soul in sin, 1 Timothy 5. 6. 1 John
3. 14. and Eternal death, John 8. 51. Ezekiel. 33. 8.

And says he in page 22.

This death in Genesis 2. 17. is either death in sin, or death for sin: And

1. He does distribute death in sin. 1. To the elect as a correctively poenal
and temporary punishment only. 2. To the reprobate as a proper poenal
punishment in a way of satisfaction to Divine justice: And

2. Death for sin, i.e. the separation of the soul from the body; he does
distribute it to three sorts of persons.

1. To the elect, as a temporary and castigatory punishment. 2. To Christ, and
3. To the reprobates.
To both these alike, without any difference: namely, as a temporary and proper
poenal punishment.

And this kind of death for sin he does apply not only to the Body, but also
to the soul of Christ, in a twofold sense.

1 By separating the good things of the promise from the Soul of Christ. 2. By
inflicting the evil things of the commination upon the soul of Christ.
And this twofold death of the soul he does distribute to three sorts of
persons.

1. To the elect, as a partial, temporary and castigatory punishment. 2. To
Christ, as a total, temporary and properly poenal punishment. 3. To the
reprobates, as a total, perpetual and properly poenal punishment.
Genesis 2. 17. is many ways exceeding heterodoxal.

1. It is quite centrary to the three foresaid rules of a right exposition. 2.
It does occasion him to misinterpret several Scriptures, to prove his said
heterodoxal exposition. 3. Because it does occasion him to distribute this
death unto Christ, as the surety of the elect in the Covenant of mere nature.
I will in the first place show that his several proofs are misinterpreted.

Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death. Here the Reader must take special
notice, that the wages of every kind of sin does not include Romans 6. 23.
every kind of death. For first some kind of sins are committed only against
Gods arbitrary and transient positive Laws, and not at all against any Moral
Law; and such was Adams first sin, it was not a transgression of any Moral Law,
but it was a transgression only of Gods transient positive Law: Eat not of the
Tree of knowledge of good and evil: and these punishments are all arbitrary and
very various. But the sin which is spoken of by Paul in Romans 6. 23. is not of
that kind, neither is the death there spoken of, the same kind of wages that
is spoken of in Genesis 2. 17. He that has but half an eye may see that the
Apostle does not speak of Adams first sin, in eating the forbidden fruit, (the
wages whereof was only a double Spiritual death) but that he speaks of that
kind of sin, which is now commonly called Original sin: and more especially he
speaks of the prevailing power of Original sin, as it blindes the mind, and
keeps the soul in its unbelief of redemption, from Satan's head-plot by the seed
of the Woman [Christ:] and therefore the wages of that sin must necessarily be
understood of an eternal death in Hell, to all those that live and die the
servants of sin, under the Covenant of grace and reconciliation, John 8. 51. It
is no small abuse therefore of the true sense of Romans 6. 23. to cite it for the
proving of all the three sorts of death to be intended by Genesis 2. 17. as the
proper wages of Adams first sin against the Covenant of nature only, by his
transient act of eating the forbidden fruit.

2. The death threatened in Romans 6. 23. must be understood of that kind of
death that is threatened in the Covenant of grace, to such as live and die in
the unbelief of their redemption by Christ, because the life tha^ promised in
the Antithesis of the Apostles arguing, is expressly called eternal life. The
gift of God (faith the Apostle) is eternal life, i.e. the free gift of Gods
forgiveness, whereby all believers are freed, i.e. justified from their sins)
is eternal life: therefore by the Antithesis, that kind of death that is here
threatened, must necessarily be understood of an eternal death in Hell, to all
such as live and dye unbelievers, through the reigning power of their Original
sin,

2. His other proof is Romans 5. 21. Sin has reigned unto death. Romans 5. 21.


Adams first sin, and therefore consequently he does not at all speak of that
kind of Spiritual death (by deprivation) that was at the first threatened only
for the breach of the Covenant of nature in Genesis 2. 17. But on the contrary the
Apostle does speak only of that kind of sin, which is now commonly called
Original Sin, and of that kind of death which is called bodily death, which
was first threatened in Genesis 3. 19. as the wages of Original sin, even to the
elect as well as to the reprobate: as the context from verse. 12. does direct us
to understand it.

2. Though Original sin did reign over our first parents, (as soon as ever God
had deprived them of his concreated image) for their first sin in eating the
forbidden fruit, yet a bodily death did not immediately follow from thence by a
natural necessity: but in Gods time it followed from Gods special appointment;
and it was the good pleasure of God to delay the appointment of it, until he
had first declared his new Covenant of grace and reconciliation in Genesis 3. 15.
by which declaration Adam and Eve were converted, and God was reconciled, Genesis
3. 15. 19.
by the undertaking of the seed of the Woman: and then it was the good pleasure
of God to threaten a bodily death in verse. 19. as a common punishment for
Original sin, to all Adams natural posterity, as I have showed it more at large
in Chap. 2. at Obj. 3. and elsewhere.

3. From the premises it follows that the true meaning of the Apostle in Romans
5. 21. is this: namely, that Original sin has reigned unto a bodily death to
all the natural children of Adam, and consequently that an eternal death in
Hell will follow to all such as live and die under the reigning power of
Original sin, without regeneration, and without faith in the promised seed of
the Woman: and to this sense does the Antithesis carry it, saying, Even so
might grace reign through righteousn^ss, (i.e. through that negative
righteousness of Gods free forgiveness) unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our
Lord: and to this sense does the context direct us to understand this reigning
power of righteousness through grace, from verse. 15. 16. namely, of the free
gift (of Gods forgiveness) of many offenses to justification; and this
justification from sin is also called the justification of life, in verse. 18.
as it is also in Romans 6. 23.

Mr. Woodbridge says, that in justification there is a right given to
deliverance from punishment, (which is the terminus a que) in which respect
(says In his method, page 59. John 6. 51, 52, 53, 54.
he) it is called pardon and non-imputation of sin; of which the Apostle gives
an instance out of David, in Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. and a right to the more positive
blessings of heavenly and eternal life by the promise, (which is the terminus
ad quem) in which respect it is called justification of life, Romans 5. 18. And
says he in page 175. justification or pardon of sin is the principal blessing
included in the life promised ^^ John 6. 51, 52, 53, 54. and in Mat. 26. 28.
Ergo, says he, remission of sins is that life which the flesh and blood of
Christ gives to the world.

From the premises then I conclude, that neither of these two Scriptures do
prove that God did threaten the three said distinct kinds and sorts of death
in the Covenant of nature, to all Adams natural posterity alike; as Mr. Norton
does most erroneously make them to speak.

2. Mr. Norton does deny the commination of death in Genesis 2. 17. to be
particular concerning some kind of death; and affirms it to be equivalent to
an universal comprehending all kinds of death.

Chap. 10. that the death threatened in the Covenant of nature is a particular
kind of death; namely, it is no other but a double Spiritual death; of which
see more in Sect. 3.

But Mr. Norton* erroneous exposition is so rooted in him, and in others also,
that there is great need to enforce my said reply with some other considerable
arguments.

1. Then consider that the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. does belong only to
the Covenant of nature, and not to the Covenant of grace; for that Covenant was
reserved in the secret mind of God, and was not as yet declared.

2. Consider that the said Covenant of nature was ordained to last no longer,
then until Adam had transgressed it, by his single act of eating the forbidden
fruit; and therefore nothing of it does now remain, but the execution of that
threatened punishment of a double Spiritual death: of which see more in Sect. 3.

3. A bodily death was not threatened, until God had ordained a remedy to save
souls: and in that respect it was not threatened, until after that God had
declared his new Covenant of grace and reconciliation in Genesis 3. 15. But then
(as soon as Adam and Eve were converted by the powerful preaching of that
declaration) it was threatened in verse. 19.

4. Consider, that unless these two opposite Covenants, and the several sorts
of death that are in them threatened, be carefully distinguished, much Divinity
and many Scriptures will be most miserably confounded: and from thence it comes
to pass, that Mr. Norton has most miserably confounded the right
understanding. 1. Of the great point of Christ's satisfaction, and 2. Of the
great point of a sinners justification. But of this I shall speak more in other
places.

3. In his order of setting down his three sorts of death in Genesis 2. 17. he
begins first with a bodily death: and he proves it by Genesis 3. 19. and Romans 8.
10. and by other places.



2. One of his proofs for a bodily death is, Romans 8. 10. which says thus, If
Romans 8. 10.
Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin. I grant that sundry learned
writers do take the word Dead as Mr. Norton does, for a bodily death: but yet I
find that sundry other learned writers do take the word Dead for the Spiritual
death of the corrupt affections of the body by regeneration, or by the Spirit
of holiness; See Ains. in Genesis 6. 3. ult. And in my apprehension this last
sense does best agree with the context. But in case this text be not a clear
proof of a bodily death, yet there are other Scriptures that do abundantly
prove it: but not one Scripture that does prove it to be threatened in Genesis 2.
17. and therefore all those Scriptures which he has cited to prove it to be
there threatened, is nothing else but the taking of Gods Name so many times in
vain.

4. His proofs that a Spiritual death was threatened in Genesis 2. 17. are, 1 Timothy
5. 6. 1 John 3. 14.

Genesis 2. 17. For that Spiritual death as it is there threatened, for the Genesis 2.
17.
transgression of the Covenant of nature, has two parts.

1. The deprivation of Gods concreated image, and likewise in moral
perfections: and this deprivation is that which is most properly (and in the
first place) called death in Genesis 2. 17. And this deprivation was Gods act,
namely, it was the immediate act of his justice, which he inflicted on Adam as
a proper poenal punishment for his first sin in eating the forbidden fruit.
This punishment there fore is truly and properly called death in Genesis 2. 17.
not that Adams soul (says Mr. Perkins) was now utterly abolished, but because
it was as though In his right way of dying well, page 490. In Homil. 10. de
exitus animae. The death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. has two parts; and in that
respect it may be fitly called a twofold Spiritual death; and so on the
contrary, in case Adam had but first eaten of the tree of Life, he should have
been confirmed in a twofold natural life: as in Reply 23.
it were not, and because it ceased to be in respect of righteousness and
fellowship with God. And indeed (says he) this is the death of all deaths,
when the creature has subsistence and being, and yet is deprived of all
comfortable fellowship with God. And says Cyril, that is not properly death
which severeth the soul from the body, but that which severeth the soul from
God; and therefore he that is separated from God is dead. This assertion of his
is true, not only in relation to the separation of the soul from God in Hell,
but it is as true also in relation to Adams first death, when his soul was
deprived of Gods concreated image.

This is the first part of that Spiritual death that was threatened in the
Covenant of nature only; and this first part is no where else expressly called
death in any other Scripture, but in Genesis 2. 17. only. And 2. This part must
not be called death in sin: for Gods act was pure justice, and no sin was in it.

2. The second part of that death that was threatened in Genesis 2. 17. as it is in
the consequent of the first part, [Is called Death in Sin.] This second part
was not inflicted from the immediate hand of God, as the first part was, but it
did necessarily follow it, as an accident to it. For as soon as God had
deprived Adam of his concreated image of moral perfections, which God had
annexed to his immortal soul in his creation, as an accident to its subject,
for the rectitude of his whole man, in a perfect conformity to the moral Law of
his nature, Adam (from this deficient cause) could not otherwise choose, but
instantly act irregularly against every branch of his said concreated moral
principles: and this sinning quality of his will is that which is now [called
Death in sin] but it is most commonly called Original sin, and by Paul it is
called Inhabiting sin, in Romans 7. 17, 20.

And this matter of Original sin does continually dwell in us, and passes Romans
7. 17, 20. The matter of Original sin passes not away, as the matter of actual
sin does. And yet though actual sin has no physical or natural existence,
after it is committed it has a moral existence by its guilt or desert of
punishment.
not away as long as we live in this world, as the matter of actual sin does,
as it is rightly observed by P. Martyr: and in that respect this Inhabiting sin
will not suffer the most godly that lives in this world, to be masters of their
own affections and actions: In his Com. pl. p. 243, 565. For this Original sin
does make every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart to be only evil, and
that continually, Genesis 6. 5. But says P. Martyr in page 233. At the time of
death this kind of sin shall altogether be abolished; for in the blessed
resurrection we shall have a new made body, made fit for eternal felicity.

Now Mr. Nortons two forecited Scriptures do agree to this second part of our
Spiritual death in sin; but they do not at all agree to the first part: and
thence it follows, that they are no proofs of the whole of this death which
was threatened in Genesis 2. 17. they are no more but half proofs.

3. Hence it follows, that in case Adam could have kept himself from any
further sinning against the moral Law of his nature, after he had transgressed
the positive Law of the Covenant of nature, he should never have suffered any
other kind of death, but the first part of his Spiritual death only. But as I
have showed, he being deprived of Gods concreated image, (for his transgression
of the Covenant of nature) could not after that keep himself from further
sinning against the moral Law of his nature: but his blinded will being of an
active nature, was like a blind Horse that is full of mettle, which made him
run continually into dangerous act^ngs against every branch of the said moral
Law.

4. As the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. did consist of two parts, so the life
promised in the Antithesis, did in like sort consist of two parts. For first in
case he had but eaten of the tree called Gnets, Caijm, (which signifies the
tree of the twofold life) he should not only have enjoyed his concreated life
of moral perfections after Gods image, as an accident to the essential life of
his soul, but also his essential life should have been so confirmed thereby in
moral perfections, that after that he should not have been subject to have been
deceived by any temptation to sin, and so consequently he should not have been
subject to any kind of death, but he should for ever have lived a sinless
life, in the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise.

5 His other Scriptures which he has cited to prove, that an eternal death in
Hell was threatened in G^n. 2. 17. are Joh* 8. 51. Ez^k. 33. 8.

Genesis 2. 17. for Adams transgression of the Covenant of nature: the death that
is threatened for the breach of these two Covenants, is of differing kinds; and
therefore the ground of Mr. Nor^ons error does arise from his confounding of
the Covenant of nature with the Covenant of grace: but had he been but so
happy, as to have observed a right distinction between them, he could not have
erred so much and so often as he has done: and therefore his misunderstanding
of the said distinction must go for no less then a grand error, both in the
right understanding of the great point of Christ's satisfaction, and of the
great point of a sinners justification: seeing he does build these two great
points upon his misunderstanding of the said distinction, and of that kind of
death that is threatened for the breach of the Covenant of nature in Ge^. 2. 17.

6. He has also as much erred from the true sense of the Covenant of nature,
in his distribution of the word Death in Genesis 2. 17. For he does first
distribute it to the elect, as a corrective poenal punishment only, in page
22, 23.



2. Though ^t is most certain that God made no difference at all between the
elect and reprobates, in the threatening of the Covenant of nature, yet he was
pleased to make an exceeding wide difference between them, in his after
threatening of a bodily death, as soon as he had declared his new Covenant of
grace and reconciliation. For as soon as he had declared that new Covenant in
Genesis 3. 15. he did ^resently annex thereto three general threatenings, (whereof
a bodily death (...) one) for the punishment of Adams new habit of sinning by
his said Original sin, in verse. 16. 17, 18, 19.

But this Covenant of grace, and these three general threatenings were wholly
Three general punishments are annexed ^o the Covenant of grace, which were
ordained to be but ^h^stisements to the elect, and yet to be for vindic^tive
punishments to the reprobates.
hid from Adam in the secret mind of God, as long as he stood under the
Covenant of nature. But after he had broken that Covenant by eating the
forbidden fruit, and had received the threatened punishment of a double
Spiritual death, it was the good pleasure of God to make a new Covenant of
grace and reconciliation with him, and with all his posterity; and then he made
a wide difference between the elect and reprobate, in his threatening of the
said three general punishments.

1. He declared the person that should come from the seed of the Woman.

2. He declared the manner how he should break the Devils head-plot for man's
redemption, and that he expressed to be by his performing of a warlike combat
with his envious combater Satan, in performing of obedience to the articles of
the combat, until he had made his death to be accepted as a most pleasing
sacrifice, even at the same time when the Devil had a liberty of power given
him, to pierce him in the footsoles as a sinful Malefactor on the Cross: and
from hence it comes to pass, that as many of the fallen posterity of Adam, as
shall at any time believe in this seed of the Woman, for the procuring of their
said redemption, shall be regenerated and have a new nature while they live in
this world; and by that means all the said three general threatenings shall be
but correctively poenal punishments unto them. And 2. That when their bodies
shall come to die, their souls shall pass from this life, to live an eternal
life in Heaven: But all the rest of the world, that shall live and die in the
unbelief of their redemption by the said seed of the woman, shall not only
abide under their said Spiritual death in sin, without any change, but also
they shall live and die without any sanctisied use of the said three general
punishments; and so they shall become proper punishments unto them. And 2. When
they come to die, their souls shall be judged to an eternal death in Hell. This
difference is only made in the Covenant of grace, but not at all in the
Covenant of nature: but in the Covenant of nature the elect are threatened as
much as the reprobates, with the same punishment of a double Spiritual death,
without any difference, and that also in a way of satisfaction to Gods relative
justice in that Covenant. And this truth I have also testified in my former
printed Reply, in page 121. where I say thus in my Reply to his fourth Argument.

It is as true as salvation it self, that all the elect do in themselves suffer
that dreadful Spiritual death, that was denounced to man's nature in general,
in case Adam the head in that Covenant did transgress it, by his act of eating
the forbidden fruit; and that death is the only essential punishment that is
threatened in that Covenant, as I have there showed it in Chap. 2. Sect. 3.

3. Though by virtue of the absolute Covenant of grace, the elect do at one
time or other before death, come to have their corrupt nature renewed here, by
the grace of regeneration; yet they are not so perfectly renewed, (but that
their double Spiritual death does still remain upon them, as a satisfaction to
Gods relative justice in the Covenant of nature) as long as they live in this
world; as I noted it a little before from P. Martyr, in Reply 7. For in case it
should be granted, that that vindicative punishment might be wholly taken off
in this life in regeneration, it would from thence follow, that the threatening
of a Spiritual death in the Covenant of nature, was not a definitive
threatening: but I have elsewhere showed, that it was denounced as an absolute
or definitive threatening to Adam, and to all his natural posterity: and
therefore that all the regenerate must undergo it as well as the unregenerate,
as long as they live in this world: and in that respect all the regenerate have
just cause to cry out as Paul does in Romans 7. 24. O spo^led man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this Romans 7. 24, 25. with Romans 8. 1.
body of death (in sin)? But yet the same Apostle gives this satisfactory
answer to his said interrogation in v. 25. I thank God thro^gh Jesus Christ our
Lord, because I shall at the end of this life, come by his mediation to be
perfectly delivered from this body of death, or from this sinning body: and
this truth the Apostle does further confirm by his next concluding words in
Romans 8. 1. There is then no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: and
the reason is, because death does put an end to this sinning body; then, and
not till then, this kind of Original sin shall be altogether abolished to such
as are in Christ Jesus by faith: and so says P. Martyr, in the blessed
resurrection we shall have a new made body, fitted for eternal felicity. But
still it must be remembered, as I said before, that though such as are
regenerate are in part renewed here through grace, yet that grace of
regeneration is not so perfect, as to free them from the vindicative punishment
of their double Spiritual death, but that the thoughts and imaginations of
their heart will be evil, and only evil, and that continually, even as long as
they shall live in this world: yea, though the regenerate part of their mind
does make continual war against their unregenerate part; and in this respect it
was that regenerate Paul said; I see another law in my members, Romans 7. 23, 24.
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law
of sin which is in my members, Romans 7. 23. O spoiled or wearied man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death (in sin) (...) is translated
Spoiled by Mr. Bro. But Doctor Willet and B^za say, it signifies one that is
wearied with continual combats, like as a Champion, which striving a long
time, is like to be overcome by his adversary, unless he be helped. And by this
exclamation he shows the greatness of his combat with his Original sinning
nature, out of the which he was not able to wrestle by his own strength: and
therefore he earnestly desires to be perfectly delivered, redeemed, or just
fied from this body of sin, by the merits of Christ at the end of this life,
and at the general resurrection, before the bar of Gods Judgment.

4. In case Mr. Norton had been so happy as to have observed the said
distinction between the threatening of the Covenant of nature, and the
threatening of the Covenant of grace, (as he ought to have been, before he
answered my Dialogue, considering what hints I gave him of it in my said
Dialogue) he might have found, that though God did make a wide difference
between the elect The elect themselves do bear the punishment of the death of
the Covenant. of nature, as a satisfaction to the justice of God in that
Covenant.
and reprobates, in the threatening of the Covenant of grace, yet that he made
no difference between them in the threatening of the Covenant of nature; and
then he might by that means have found out, that the essential part of that
threatened punishment was the execution of that justice, which proceeded from
the said curse considered absolutely in it self, without any respect to the
elect in the threatening of that Covenant, according to his own first
distinction in page 7. And this essential punishment of deprivation, which is
an effect of justice, and of the which God was the Author, as himself also
says in page 8. in depriving Adam and all his elect posterity, as much as his
reprobate posterity of his concreated image of moral perfections, never more to
be restored to their nature in this world, nor in the world to come, because
our nature shall then be made supernatural.

But Mr. Norton seems to contradict this, because he says in his next words,
that the elect suffer no part of poenal punishment; and yet it seems to me,
that he does also contradict this assertion, for he says in page 255. that
Original sin is the poenal effect of Adams sin; i.e. it is so by consequent, as
I showed before: and thence also it follows, that even the elect as well as
the reprobates do suffer the same poenal wrath of God, that was threatened only
in the Covenant of nature. And 2. Thence it does also follow, that it is as
true as Gods definitive threatening is true in the Covenant of nature, that the
elect do satisfy the vindicat^ve justice of that Covenant in their own
persons; and consequently that Christ was not Adams surety in that Covenant, to
suffer that definitive curse for his redemption, as Mr. Norton does affirm, and
so he does also The obedience of Christ does not discharge the elect from the
guilt and punishment of Adams first sin, but yet it does discharge them from
the guilt of their moral sins.
affirm another gross error in page 137. line 10. namely, that the obedience of
Christ discharges believers from the guilt of that first act of Adams
disobedience in eat^ng the forbidden fruit. But in case this assertion were
true, ^hen believers should be restored to that natural image of God, in the
which Adam was created: but I have showed the contrary, namely, that all
believers are under the guilt and punishment of Adams first act of disobedience
against the Covenant of nature, being utterly deprived of Gods said concreated
image, even as long as they live in this world: and from thence it follows,
that seeing they do bear that vindicative punishment in their own persons, that
the obedience of Christ was not ordained to discharge the elect from the guilt
and punishment of this first sin of Adam: and yet I grant that the obedience of
Christ was ordained to dis^harge all believers from the guilt and punishment of
Adams second sort of sin, which is commonly called Original sin: but that kind
of sin was not forbidden, neither by the Law of nature, nor yet by the
transient Law of the Covenant of nature; it was not condemned, but only by the
first new Covenant of grace. These are mysteries in Divinity, which whosoever
does not understand, cannot be so so and a Divine, as else they might be.

5. I conclude from the premises, that the kind of death that was threatened
for Adams transgression of the Covenant of nature in Genesis 2. 17. was not
correctively poenal, but vindicatively poenal even to the elect by nature, as
much as to the reprobates. And 2. That God ordained this punishment to be
executed as a definitive punishment, for the satisfaction of his justice for
Adams transgression of the said Covenant of nature.

But says Mr. Norton in page 25.

Whilst you acknowledge that God in Genesis 2. 17. laid down a rule of justice to
Adam, you must needs imply the surety of the elect to have satisfied the rule
of this just^ce, and consequently to have suffered the wrath of God: and in his
conclusion he says, you tacitly contradict your self, and act our cause.

Adams transgression of the Covenant of nature, even as a satisfaction to Gods
justice in that Covenant: and from thence it does follow, that seeing the elect
bear it in their own persons, Christ was not Adams surety to bear it for him,
in a way of satisfaction to the curse of the Covenant for their redemption from
it.

2. In case it could be proved that Christ as Mediator was Adams surety in
Christ could not be the surety of the elect in the Covenant of nature, because
none else are the subjects of the Covenant, but the natural generation of Adam
only.
the Covenant of nature, to bear that cu^se for his redemption, thence it will
follow, that that Covenant was a Cove^^nt of grace and reconciliation. And 2.
That there never was a Covenant of nature, but of grace only. But doubtless
it is a dangerous error, thus to confound the Covenant of grace with the Covenant
of nature.

3. I have given four sound reasons in my Dialogue in page 4, 5, 6. to prove
that Christ could not be the surety of the elect in the Covenant of nature, to
satisfy Gods justice, by suffering the same threatened punishment for their
redemption from it.

And 5. The Sun at noonday is not more clear then this reason is, because no
other person is comprehended under the Covenant of nature, but Adams natural
generation only: and thence it follows, that seeing Christ is none of Adams
natural generation, he cannot be comprehended under that positive and
transcient Covenant of nature, as the surety of the elect, to do the command,
and to suffer the essential curse of that Covenant, as Mr. Norton does affirm
(though most erroneously) in his first foundation proposition, in page 2. and
of this more in Reply 12. ult.

4. Paul says in 1 Cor. 15. 47. The first man is of the earth Earthy, the
second 1 Cor. 15. 47.
man is the Lord from Heaven. P. Martyr says in Com. pl. p. 603. that Christ
may be said to come from Heaven, even as touching his humane nature, seeing his
body had no Original from the seed of man, but from the Holy Ghost, Luke 1. 35.
and from thence I infer, that in this respect also Christ could not become
Adams surety in the Covenant of nature.

Norton, you tacitly contradict your self, and act our cause.

I wonder at this inference: I heartily wish that Mr. Norto^ does not willingly
misinterpret the sense of the Dialogue, on purpose to cast an odium upon it,
and also to amuse the less wary Reader, seeing I have in page 5. so pla^nly
distinguished the Covenant of nature in G^^. 2. 17. from the Covenant of grace
in G^n. 3. 15. But in stead of working this obvious distinction between the two
Covenants, and their threatened punishments, he does by a fallacy confound them;
and then he makes his Reader believe, that whilst I acknowledge that God laid
down this rule of his justice to Adam in Genesis 2. 17. that I must from thence
needs imply, that Christ was the surety of the elect, to satisfy that rule of
Gods justice, by suffering that curse of that Covenant for them. But any one
that will but read my Dialogue in page 4. 5. may see that I have there showed,
that the threatened punishment of that Covenant was nothing else but a Spiritual
death, by being deprived of Gods image of moral perfections, and that the elect
themselves do bear it: and therefore I did infer, that it was altogether
needless, and also senceless, that Christ should be their surety to bear it for
them: yea, it is no less then horrid blasphemy to affirm (as Mr. Norto^ does by
necessary consequence) that Christ did bear it: for he does affirm that Christ
did bear the essential curse of that threatened death in Genesis 2. 17.

I conclude therefore, that Mr. Norton does beguile both himself, and his less
wary Reader, in affirming that I do tacitly contradict my self, and act his
cause; but the indifferent Reader will soon see the contrary, and the Lord I
hope will in much mercy keep my soul from acting such an heterodoxal and
dangerous cause as his is.

But Mr. Norton does proceed in page 22. to distribute [Death for Sin.]

1. To the body of Christ. 2. To the soul of Christ.
Genesis 2. 17. to the body of Christ, seeing that death was no bodily death, but
a Spiritual death only, in being deprived of the image of Gods moral
perfections.

2 It is another grand error to affirm, (as he does) that the bodily death of
The bodily death of Christ was not a proper vindicative punishment, as the
death of reprobats is; neither was it a castigatory death, as the death of the
elect is, but it was a death of Covenant only, that so it might be performed
and accepted as a propitiatory sacrifice.
Christ was such a vindicative death, as was threatened to the bodies of
reprobates: for in page 22. he makes them both alike in their bodily death,
without any difference. It is, says he, a temporal and properly poenal
punishment in Christ; and so says he, it is a temporal and properly poenal
punishment in the reprobates. This odious comparing of the bodily death of
Christ to the bodily death of reprobates, does strongly taste of heresy in my
palate.

3 In case the bodily death of Christ had been inflicted from the vindicative
wrath of God, as it is upon reprobates for their inherent sin, then I wonder
how it could be accepted of God as an expiatory sacrifice, seeing it is the
declared Law of God, that no sacrifice shall be accepted of him, in case it
have any spot or blemish in it. And the ancient Ebrew Doctors do tell us, that
there are above fifty blemishes that did disable a Lamb from being offered in
sacrifice. See Ains. in Exodus 12. 5. Lev. 22. 21, 22, 24. Numb. 19. 2. and
Deuteronomy. 17. 1. with 1 Pet. 1. 19. And the only reason why such Sacrifices were
commanded to be perfect and without blemish, was, because they were ordained to
be types of Christ's sinless sacrifice: See Ains. in Lev. 1. 3, 10, etc. And 2.
A Sacrifice is not accepted of God, unless the Priest that offers it be holy
and harmless, and separated from sinners, Ebr. 7. 26. Ebr. 9. 14. See Ains. in
Exodus 28. 2. Lev. 4. 3. Lev. 9. 7. Lev. 16. 33. Lev. 21. 17. Numb. 16. 5. Numb.
20. 26. In these respects it may be concluded for an Orthodox truth, that the
Death and Sacrifice of Christ was not inflicted on him, as a proper punishment
from the demeritorious cause of sin imputed, as the death of reprobates is.

4. In case the death of Christ was inflicted on his body from Gods wrath, as
it is upon reprobates as a proper vindicative punishment, then I wonder who was
the Priest in that kind of death and Sacrifice? Declare it who can, for I
cannot: only in the negative I can truly say, not himself; for in that kind
of death that is inflicted as a proper punishment, man must not be an agent,
but a patient; and thence it must follow, that either God the Father must be
the Priest, to put him to death by his own vindicative wrath, or else the Devil
and his Instruments, the Scribes and Pharisees, Pilate and the Roman Soldiers
must be the Priest in his death: this odious consequence does necessarily
follow from his said distribution of death to the body of Christ, in the same
vindicative sense as it is to reprobates.

5. I have showed in my former printed Reply, in page 52, 145, 146, 147, 195.
etc. That Christ's death and Sacrifice was not formally effected from the
threatening of any Law that was given to fallen man, and that himself was both
the Priest and Sacrifice in the formality of his own death: and therefore his
death must be distinguished from that kind of death that was inflicted for the
punishment of Original sin on fallen man.

6. I have also abundantly showed in my aforesaid printed Reply, that no s^n
was imputed unto Christ by God, as the demeritorious cause of his death: and
thence it does also follow, that the death of Christ was not inflicted on him,
neither from Gods proper poenal wrath, as it is upon reprobates, nor yet from
his castigatory wrath, as it is upon the elect for Original sin: and the reason
thereof is as clear as the Sun, namely, because Christ not being any of Adams
natural generation, was not guilty of Adams sin, (nor yet of any other man's
sin) for he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and therefore he could not come
under that cursed Spiritual death, that was threatened to Adam, for the
transgression of the Covenant of nature, nor yet under the curse of a bodily
death. The Apostle says, That the sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15. 56. His
meaning is, 1 Cor. 15. 56.
that the second sort of Adams sin (called Original sin) was ordained to be the
sting of a bodily death to all the natural sons of Adam: but seeing Christ was
none of the fallen Sons of Adam, he could not be stung to death by that sin,
namely, not by the justice of Gods threatening for Original sin, as it is in
Genesis 3. 19. much lefs by the threatening of the Covenant of nature in Genesis 2.
17. The In Com. pl. page 608.
people of Romans (says P. Martyr) yielded (reverence and obedience) unto
Curtius, and unto the Decij, because they had vowed themselves to death for the
safeguard of the people. But these things (says he) being compared with
Christ, are nothing, for those men should otherwise have died; Unto which Law
Christ was not bound, seeing in him it was as well to lay down his life as to
take it again.

Hence you see, that in P. Martyrs judgment Christ was not bound to d^e by any
Law that was given to man: and of this see more in Chap. 12. and in my former
printed Reply, page 296. 333. And says Ambrose, de bono mortis, c. 9. The soul
which sins dies, but the soul that sins not dies not: and therefore
seeing Christ was no way guilty of sin, he dyed not by the justice of any curse.

2. Says P. Martyr in his next Section, Jesus of Nazareth suffered death upon
the Cross: but that he was made a Sacrifice for our sins, that is not proved by
the sense or reason of man's judgment. In these words he does distinguish upon
the death of Christ, as it was made a Sacrifice, from his death which he
suffered as a malefactor on the Cross, by the hand of many: and therefore the
death of Christ in the formality of it, was no more like ours, then his
incarnation is like ours; as I have observed it in my former Book, page 147.
426. It was of necessity (...) Christ should die, by necessity of the eternal
Covenant only,] Luke 24. 46. Acts 2. 23. Ebr. 2. 10 17. Matthew. 1^. 19. Luke 2.
49. In Com. ^l. par. 3. page 66. 67. and par. 1. page 57.


3. Though it was of necessity that Christ should die, yet it was not from the
necessity of any sinful nature, as the death of fallen man is; but it was by
the necessity of the eternal Covenant only. It was of necessity (says P.
Martyr) that Christ should die by supposition of the divine providence and
counsel, because God had decreed it should be so, Com. pl. p. 175. It is
written in John 10. 35. The Scripture cannot be broken; that is to say, it
cannot otherwise be, but that it must be fulfilled concerning the death of
Christ.

4. P. Martyr speaking of the kind of fear that was in Christ, says, that he
could neither fear sin, nor Hell fire, nor yet the Fatherly chastisements of
God. This precious assertion is worthy to be written in Letters of Gold; and it
does fully prove, that many of Mr. Nortons assertions are no better then
Copper: from this assertion it follows, that P. Martyr could not hold that our
sins were so imputed to Christ, as to make him a guilty sinner in Gods sight.
2. That all his suffering and his death was not inflicted on his body, as a
proper vindicative punishment, as it is upon reprohates, no nor yet as a cast
gatory punishment, as it is upon the elect: and therefore his mean^ng can be no
other, but that Christ underwent them, according to the declared Covenant in
Genesis 3. 15. as the meritorious price of man's redemption. And says P. Martyr in
page 57. no man is chastised or afflicted without sin: for this thing only our
Savior suffered, namely, he suffered most grievous punishments without any
fault of his (his chastisements therefore were chastisements of trial) and not
correctively poenal.

5. Austin says de Tri^^. l. 4. c. 12. We came by sin to death, but Christ by
righteo^sn^ss: and so where our death is the punishment of sin, his death is
the Sacrifice for the sin. And says he in the City of God, lib. 10. chap. 24.
Our good and true Mediator made it apparent, that it was not man's fleshly
substance, but sin that is evil: and then says he, the flesh and soul of man
may be both assumed, kept, and put off without any guilt. And says he ^n l.
13. c. 7. bodily death being once propounded as a penalty for sin, is now
elected by Christ as a deliverance and expiation of sin, to the crowning of
justice with glorious victory: but this kind of justice is despised by Mr.
Nortons legal justice.

6. From the premises it follows, that it is no less then blasphemy in the
highest degree, to affirm as Mr. Norton does, that God imputed sin to Christ,
as the demeritorious cause of his death. Seeing God does not impute sin to any
The meritorious cause of Christ's death was his performance of it according to
covenant: his death was not effected through the dem^ritor^ous cause of sin
imputed,
but to such only as are actually guilty of the breach of his law, Romans 5. 13.
Romans 4. 15. Romans 7. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 56. But Christ was no Law-breaker, neither
under the Covenant of nature, nor yet under the Covenant of grace, neither did
he break the Law of the eternal Covenant, no not in the least circumstance,
therefore no justice in Gods revealed will could impute any sin to him as the
demeritorious cause of his death and sufferings: but of this I have spoken more
at large in chap. 13. and elsewhere.

But Mr. Norton does proceed to distribute (Death for sin) to the soul of
Christ.

Genesis 2. 17. he does make him to suffer a double Spiritual death. 1. By
depriving him of Gods image of moral perfections. And 2. By consequence to be
dead in Original sin: and therefore to make Christ's soul dead, according to the
true meaning of that threatened death, is to make his soul dead in sin, which is
the highest degree of blasphemy that can be uttered. But to avoid this, Mr.
Norton runs into another erroneous exposition of that threatened death, namely,
that Christ suffered the essential torments of Hell in his soul, in page 56.
115, 120, 213 but I have confuted this exposition of the word Death in my
former printed Reply, and in this Book also, to the which I refer the Reader
for further satisfaction.

2. I will here recite the judgment of that eminent Bishop of Armach. 1. He
expounds this question in his e^ghteen Sermons on Redemption, page 388.

Q. Did Christ suffer the pains of Hell?

A. He suffered those things that such an innocent Lamb might suffer; but he
could not suffer the pains of Hell: the reason is, because one thing which
makes Hell to be Hell, is the gnawing worm of an accusing conscience. Now
Christ had no such worm, (he had a clear conscience) as that he could be stung
with any such evil.

2. Another great torment of Hell is desparation, arising from the apprehension
Doctor Usher does make eternity to be an essential part of Hell torments.
of the perpetuity of their torments, which makes them to curse and blaspheme
God, and to carry an unexpressible hatred against him: but Christ could not do
so; he did not hate God: God forbid that Christ should be liable to these
passions.

In these words Doctor Usher does make eternity (to be not a circumstance to
Hell torments, as Mr. Norton does but) to be an essential property to Hell
torments.

2. P. Martyr does also make eternity to be essential to Hell torments: It is
In com. pl. par. 3. p. 389. 318.
said (says he) touching the punishments of the damned, That their worm shall
not be extinguished, Mar. 9. 43. And that Christ at the last judgment will
throw the damned into eternal fire, Matthew. 25. 41. But says he, if thou will
cavil at this word Eternal, because some things that continue long, are by a
figure called Eternal, whereas otherwise they have an end, and at length break
off: he answers thus; if this be not manifest, (namely, that eternity is put
for a long time) let us (says he) always understand Eternal in its own proper
signification.

3. Says P. Martyr in page 318. if death in Hell be not eternal, it cannot
properly be called death.

4. Unto this I add, that the separation between the places of Heaven and Hell
is eternal, so that they cannot pass from one to another, Luke 16. 26.

5. The soul of man was created to continue immortal after the death of the
body; therefore it must be continued either in the place of essential glory, or
in the place of essential torment: and thence it follows, that eternity is as
essential to Hell torments, as it is essential to glorified souls in Heaven.
Death in Hell and life in Heaven are both essentially eternal, that is to say,
infinite in length though not in right. But seeing Mr. Norton does affirm, that
eternity is not essential to Hell torments, it is meet that he should show by
what authority of the sacred Scriptures he does assert it, and not run only to
humane similitudes of imprisoned debtors, as he does, or else he will presume
to know above what is written. The word of God tells all that have ears to
hear, that he has joined eternity to Hell torments, but no where does the word
sever Hell torments from eternity.

6. Austin makes eternity to be as essential to the pains of Hell, as the
pleasures City of God. lib. 21. cap. 23.
of Heaven are to the godly: he says they are both alike included in one and
the same sentence, namely, in Matthew. 25. 46. They shall go into everlasting
pains, and the righteous into eternal life. In this sentence (says Austin)
Christ does make them parallels: here is everlasting pains, and there is
eternal life: now he that will say that this life shall never end, and yet that
those pains shall end, is grossly absurd: wherefore (says he) seeing the life
of the Saints shall be eternal without end, so by consequence shall the pains
of Hell be endless and everlasting: and see our Annot. on this Chapt. where he
also quotes Austin to the said sense.

7. To this purpose the Dialogue did propound sundry queries, touching Christ's
suffering of the torments of Hell in his soul, in page 77, 78.

1. Did Christ at any time feel the gnawing worm of an accusing conscience?

2. Was he at any time under the torment of desparation?

Mr. Norton does thus answer in page 119, 130. As Christ was guilty of sin by
his voluntary undertaking thereof as a surety, so also he was sensible of an
accusing conscience: and (says he) Doctor Willet says, If Christ did truly
bear our sins, he sustained also the grief of conscience for them, which is the
inseparable companion of our sin.

2. (Says he) desparation is not of the essence, but accidental in poenal
wrath. But I have confuted this assertion, not only in this place, but also in
my former printed Reply, in page 55, 71. and elsewhere.

8. I will add to these what Mr. Weames says in his Portraiture, page 214.
Christ (says he) had no grief of conscience, which is an adjunct of sin in the
wicked; so neither had he despair: he agrees with Doctor Usher above cited. And
it is a divine conclusion, that none else can suffer the second death, but
those only, whose names are not found written in the book of life, Rev. 20.
15. and thence it follows, that such as affirm that Christ suffered the second
death, do also affirm that his name was not written in the book of Life.

SECT. II.
I Come now to prove my affirmative; namely, that the kind of death that was
threatened in Genesis 2. 17. must be understood only of a double kind of
Spiritual death.

My reasons are grounded on two considerable circumstances in the Text.

1. On the circumstance of time: In the day, etc.

2. On the Antithesis of the said death, namely, on that kind of life that was
implicitly promised, in case Adam did but first perform the condition of the
Covenant of nature on his part, by his first eating of the Tree of the twofold
life.

But 1. My Argument from the circumstance of time is thus framed.

What kind of death soever it was that was threatened in Genesis 2. 17. was most
Argument 1.
strictly and fully executed in that very day [or time] in the which Adam did
but first taste of the forbidden fruit, because it was delivered in the nature
of a definitive, or of an absolute, or of a concluding threatening; being double
in the Ebrew: In dying thou shall dye in the day thou eatest thereof.

But no other sort or kind of death was strictly executed in that very day [or
time] in the which Adam did first taste of the forbidden fruit, but the said
double kind of Spiritual death only.

Therefore no other sort or kind of death was threatened in Genesis 2. 17. to be
strictly executed in that very day or time, in the which Adam did first taste
of the forbidden fruit, but a double kind of Spiritual death only.

1. I shall not need to say much for the proof of the assumption, because I
believe that there is no deliberate man that will say, that any other kind of
death was strictly executed in that very day or time, wherein Adam did first
taste of the forbidden fruit; especially seeing it is as evident by Genesis 5. 5.
(as the Sun at noonday) that a bodily death was not then strictly executed,
because he still lived in body 930 years after that day: and several old
Authors do interpret the word death in Genesis 2. 17. as I do of a Spiritual death
only: and they give this reason for it, because Adam died not in body the same
day, but lived 930 years after that day. Doctor Willet in Romans 5. does cite
these three Several old authors have expounded the word Death in Genesis 2. 17. of
a Spiritual death in sin only
Authors for it; 1. Philo. lib. de Alegor. legi mosaic. 2. Eucherus l. 1. in
Genes. 3. Gregory in Epist. 31. ad Eulog.

These ancient writers have given the right sense of the word Death in Genesis 2.
17. though Doctor Willet does not stick to their exposition: and I do also
find, that sometimes it does come to pass, that some ancient Orthodox
expositions are passed over, and not so well marked as they ought to be; either
because they give but a brief hint of the true exposition, or else because some
latter Expositors, which are not so sound, are too too commonly received for
true; by the means whereof the judgment of others is forestalled.

4. I will add unto these three ancient writers, what Mr. John Goodwin says
in Vindiciae Pidei, in page 104, 105. Upon deeper consideration (says he) it
will happily be found to be nearer the truth to hold, that in these words, Thou
shall die the death: Gods meaning was not to threaten eternal death, either
according to the Letter, or by way of equivalency: but to have the word Death
understood by Adam, as it indifferently signifies that evil of punishment,
which was represented to him by the name Death.

5. Mr. Baxter says in his Epistle to his Aphorisms; I am not so clear and
confident in my self, as to the nature of the death threatened in the first
Covenant (made with Adam.)

2. As touching the proportion, it is so clear in it self, that I conceive
there are none that are of a deliberate judgment, will deny it to be rightly
grounded on the said definitive circumstance of time; in the same day, or in
the same point of time, in the which Adam did but taste of the forbidden fruit.
In dying thou shall die; namely, thou shall certainly die, even in that point
of time without any delay: and to this sense of the word Day does Ains. expound
it in Lev. 7. 35, 36.

3. This sentence, In dying thou shall die, is exactly limited to the very day
The Ebrews do place much emphasis in the doubling of Verbs, and therefore when
threatenings are doubled, it notes them to be definitive.
or time of eating, because it is delivered in a doubled form of words; namely,
as a definitive, or as a concluding threatening: as it is also well observed by
our larger Annot. on 1. King. 8. 13. The Ebrews says the Anxot. does place
much emphasis in the doubling of Verbs; and there the Annot. does explain it in
six particular places of doubling, and at last does refer this doubled phrase,
In dying thou shall die, in 2 Kings 1. 4. to the same phrase in Genesis 2. 17. The
Anno^. does first speak of this doubled phrase, In building I have built, 1
Kings 8. 13. and there it says, the Ebrews do place much emphasis in the
doubling of Verbs; for by that doubling of Verbs they do imply; 1. Certainty,
Exodus 3. 7. 2. Abundance, Genesis 22. 17. 3. Diligence, Exodus 2. 19. 4. A full or
a through deing of a thing, 1 Samuel 26. 25. 5. Certainty and Speed, 1 Samuel 27.
1. 6. The finishing or perfecting of a thing, as in the said cited place of 1
Kings 8. 13. In building I have built; that is to say; I have perfectly
finished the building. 7. Seeing this doubled phrase, In dying thou shall die,
in 2 Kings 1. 4. is the same with Genesis 2. 17. it implies the like definitive
certainty in both places, though these two places speak not of the same kind
of death, but of two several and differing kinds of death: for that in 2 Kings
1. 4. speaks only of a bodily death, and Genesis 2. 17. speaks only of a double
Spiritual death.

8. God said thus to Abraham in Genesis 15. 13. Thou shall knowing know; that is,
says Ains. Thou shall know assuredly: and there he does refer this doubled
phrase for the certainty thereof, to the like double phrase of certainty in
Genesis 2. 17. and therefore our last Translators and the Geneva do render it,
K^ow of a surety, because the said phrase does imply, A short or an assured
certainty.

9. Mr. Ains. does observe the same rule of certainty from the doubling of The
word Day in Genesis 2. 17. must not be taken for a time to come, but for the point
of time in that very day in the which Adam should but taste of the forbidden
fruit.
the word in Genesis 2. 17. This doubling of words (says he) is often used in
Scripture for more earnestness and assurance, and to signify in things to come
a speedy performance, Genesis 41. 32. Exodus 24. 16. Genesis 19. 19.

10. (Says he) in Genesis 17. 13. the doubling of the command [He shall be
circumcised with circumcision] was added both for the thing it self, and also
for the time thereof, which was to be done in the eighth day after the birth:
and so say I, the doubling of the threatening, in the day thou eatest thereof,
In dying thou shall die, was added both for the certainty of the thing it self,
and also for the punctual time of the execution thereof.

11. The like doubled threatening God denounced against Abimelech, in case he
did not presently restore unto Abraham his Wife Sarah: Restore thou the Wife to
the man, for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and live thou, and if
thou restore her not, know that in dying thou shall die, Genesis 20. 7. This
threatening was doubled for the assured certainty of his bodily death, in case
he did not restore her: and in regard of the certainty, Ains. does refer it to
Genesis 2. 17.

12. Mr. Ains. also says in Genesis 3. 4. the Devil does impugn the certainty of
Gods word, which had threatened assured death, in case Adam did but once eat of
the forbidden fruit. This double threatening therefore, In the day thou eatest
thereof, in dying thou shall dye, was to assure Adam, that it was a definitive
or a concluding threatening.

13. And as touching the propriety of the word Day, and the punctual time of
eating, I refer the Reader for his further satisfaction to Chap. 2. in my
Answer to Objection 3.

14. God had so strictly limited the execution of his said definitive
threatening, to the very punctual time of that very day of Adams eating, that he
could not repent of it, without the violation of his said difinitive
threatening: For Gods repentance is nothing else, but his willing of the non
execution of his threatened punishments, upon man's repentance. But God had not
ordained any repentance in the Covenant of nature, to be performed by Adam as
the condition on his part, to move God for the non execution of his said
threatening: and thence it follows, that seeing God did not will any such
change in Adam, that his said threatening was an absolute definitive threatening,
and no way reverseable; and therefore it was fully and formally executed at the
very point of time of that very day in the which he did but taste of the
forbidden fruit.

15. Daneus says in Jonah 3. 9. that the sentence of God is of two sorts; the
first comminatory or of threatening only, the other difinitive and absolute:
this latter, says he, can never be revoked, the former may (by repentance,
etc.)

This distinction between Gods threatenings or sentence of punishment, makes it
is clear as the Sun at noonday, that the threatening in Genesis 2. 17. was not
delivered as a comminatory threatening, but as an absolute definitive
threatening, and therefore it was fully executed in the very punctual time of
Adams eating, because God did at that instant time deprive Adam of his image of
moral perfections, and no repentance was ordained for his restoration to his
said concreated lite.

16. As it was Gods good will and pleasure freely to constitute the punishment
The death that was threatened in Genesis 2. 17. has two parts, as in Reply 7. The
glorious Church of Christ upon earth, which some do say shall be without sin
for a thousand years, is justly consuted by the definitive death in sin, that
is inflicted upon all Adams posterity to the end of the world in Genesis 2. 17. It
is no less then blasphemy, if it be not heresy, to affirm that Christ was our
surety to suffer that kind of death which is threatened in the Covenant of
nature. Romans 5. 12.
of a two^old Spiritual death, to be executed on our first parents, in the very
punctual time that Adam should transgress the Covenant of nature, by eating of
the forbidden fruit: and also that the said twofold death should in like sort
fall upon all his natural posterity successively to the worlds end, as soon as
they should become persons in the womb as Adam was, when he tasted of the
forbidden fruit: so in like sort it follows from the Antithesis, that God did
promise a twofold life to be continued to Adam and to all his natural
posterity, in case he had but first eaten of G^ets Caijm the tree of the
twofold life, as I noted it before in Reply 7. and also in Sect. 3. Reply 22,
23.

17. This precious rule of certainty, touching Gods definitive threatening in
the Covenant of nature, Mr. Norton does not observe, and therefore he does
confound this Covenant, and this threatened Spiritual death, with the other
kinds of death that are threatened only in the Covenant of grace, to the urter
confusion of sundry points of Divinity, and of the true sense of many
Scriptures: for he does affirm in his first foundation proposition, in page 2.
that God did constitute Christ to be Adams surety in the Covenant of nature,
for two main ends. 1. To do the command of that Covenant in a way of works,
(which indeed required no other work, but to eat of the Tree of life in the
earthly Paradise in the Country of Eden) and 2. To suffer the essential
punishment of that cursed death, which was no other but a twofold Spiritual
death, as I have explained it in Reply 6. and therefore it can be no less then
blasphemy, if it be not Heresy to affirm that Christ was Adams surety to
suffer that twofold Spiritual death.

18. All such as are willing to embrace the truth in the love of it, may soon
see that God has put none else under the threatening of the Covenant of nature,
but Adam and his natural generation only, by Romans 5. 12. and Ephesians. 2. 1, 2,
3, 5. and thence it follows, that seeing Christ was none of Adams natural
generation, he cannot come under the Covenant of nature, as the surety of the
elect, to do the command, and to suffer the curse of that Covenant for man's
redemption: neither is there any redemption at all from the first part of the
Spiritual death, but even the elect themselves do suffer it as long as they
live in this world. And for the fuller confutation of his said heterodoxal
tenent, I gave four reasons in my Dialogue, in page 5. why Christ cannot be our
surety in the Covenant of nature; and those reasons stand still in their full
force, like mount Sion, notwithstanding what Mr. Norton has answered, or can
answer: but when God shall enlighten his understanding, to distinguish the
Covenant of nature from the Covenant of grace, then, and not till then he will
see the strength of them. And 2. I have also showed in my former printed Reply,
that Christ could not be our surety in the Covenant of nature, in page 86, 150,
152.

1. The word Surety in Ebr. 7. 22. is applied by the Apostle to the everlasting
Ebr. 7. 22.
Priesthood of Christ, by his intercession in Heaven for all believers; and not
to the Covenant of nature.

2. That thing which does make Christ to be an everlasting surety (or
certainty) for believing sinners, in Heaven, is Gods unchangeable Oath: for it
is by that unchangeable Oath that Christ is made a sure, a steadfast, an
unalterable, an unchangeable, and an eternal High Priest, even now after his
resurrection and assention into Heaven: for (says the Apostle in verse. 24.)
this man (i.e. this sure High Priest) because he continues ever, has an
unchangeable Priesthood; wherefore he is able also to save them for evermore,
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them,
Ebr. 7. 24, 25. with Ebr. 10. 12. See also at Reply 10.

3. He was made a Priest of a better Testament, then the outward typical
Testament of works was; for that Testament which was made only with the
national Church at mount Sioa, was confirmed with no other blood but the blood
of beasts only, Exodus 24. and those typical Priests, and those typical works
of the Law, were ordained but to justify their bodies only, from their
ceremonial sins, by the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the unclean Ewes, did sanctify no other ways to the purifying of
their flesh or bodies from their ceremonial sins. But Christ was made a High
Priest of a better Testament, which he also confirmed by his own bloody death
and sacrifice, for the purifying of the soul or conscience from moral sins: and
now by his resurrection and assention into Heaven he continues to be a sure
High Priest of the better Testament.

4. Others do expound the word Surety in Ebr. 7. 22. that Christ as Mediator,
did undertake on Gods behalf to perform his Covenant toward us: and 2. That he
also undertook on man's behalf, that they shall perform that obedience which God
requires of them in his Covenant of grace. This assertion is in it self a most
precious truth, as it does arise from the word Mediator: but this truth does
not arise from the word Surety in Ebr. 7. 22. and therefore I believe that my
former exposition is most agreeable to the true sense of the word Surety in
Ebr. 7. 22.

5. Mr. Norton does all along confound the word Surety of the better Testament,
with the mere Covenant of nature made with Adam, which was not any Testament,
as the typical Covenant of works was with the Jews; neither is it now in being:
but it was totally extinguished as soon as it was transgressed, so extremely
heterodox is his exposition of the word Surety in Ebr. 2. 22. But of this text
see more in Chap. 11.

But says Mr. Norton in page 11.

Ebr. 7. 22.) but not in relation to the Covenant of works: for (says he) we
are to know that the Covenant of grace it self obliges us to fulfill the
Covenant of works in our surety, Romans 3. 31. There are many great errors in
this assertion.

1. It is a common misleading error to call the Covenant of nature the Covenant
of works; as I have showed it more at large elsewhere.

2. It is another great error, to say that we are to know that the Covenant of
grace it self does oblige us to fulfill the Covenant of works in our surety,
seeing it commanded no other work, but once eating of the tree of life, for the
fulfilling of it: neither 2. does the Covenant of grace oblige our surety to
suffer that threatened punishment, seeing it was no other but a double Spiritual
death.

3. It is another great error, to say as he does in page 11. that we cannot
fulfill the righteousness of the Law in our surety by believing, (For says
establishes the Law, Romans 3. 31.) If it were not a truth that, he fulfilled
the Covenant Romans 3. 31.
of nature, which he calls the Covenant of works, for us; he cites Romans 3. 31.
to prove that Christ fulfilled the Covenant of nature, which he does corruptly
The Covenant of nature made with Adam was ordained to last no longer, then till
Adams obedience or disobedience was tried by one transient act of eating only.
call the Covenant of works. But in case he did cite an hundred Scriptures more
to prove it, he should but so often take Gods Name in vain: for I have showed
in Sect. 3. that the Covenant of nature made with Adam was wholly extinguished,
as soon as Adam had but tasted of the forbidden fruit, and had but received the
threatened punishment of a double Spiritual death. The date of that arbitrary
and transient Covenant, was but like the date of the Kings arbitrary Letters
Patent, which was ordained to stand no longer in force, but to such a day, or
to such a point of time only, or to the event of such an action; and then the
date being expired, the said Letters Patent do cease to be any longer in sorce;
and just so was the date of the Covenant of nature: it was (as I showed before)
to stand no longer in force, then till the first act of Adams eating, either of
the tree of the twofold life, for the confirmation of his concreated
perfections after Gods image, or for his deprivation of his concreated
perfections by eating of the forbidden fruit: And therefore,

In case Cain or Abel had found any fruit on the said trees in their days,
their eating of the former forbidden fruit had been no sin, because the said
Covenant was not then in force, but it was made utterly null, as soon as Adam
had received the threatened punishment of a double Spiritual death.

4. It is another great error, to affirm that Christ's obedience to the moral
Law of nature, was the fulfilling of the first Covenant made with Adam for our
justification; seeing the Law of nature was not ordained to be the Covenant of
nature for Adams justification. But in case Adams obedience to the Law of
nature, had been ordained to be the condition of his fulfilling the Covenant of
nature, then he could not have transgressed it, because his soul and body were
created in perfect moral perfections; so that his understanding, will, and
affections could not sin against the Law of his nature, until he had first
transgressed the arbitrary Covenant of nature, which was founded only on his
transient act of once eating of the forbidden fruit: and thence it follows,
that that transient Covenant was to last no longer, then till the trial of
Adams obedience, or disobedience was made by the said transient act of once
eating only: it was not made for the woman's first act of eating, because not
she, but he was ordained to be the head of that Covenant; therefore it was not
the woman's first act of eating the forbidden fruit that did break that
Covenant, as it would have been, in case her act of eating had been a sin
against any branch of the moral Law of her nature, seeing her single person was
created after Gods image in a perfect conformity to every branch of the moral
law of nature, as much as Adam was, as I have showed it more at large in Chap.
4.

But says Mr. Norton in page 26.

That which is of the essence or substance of the punishment of Adams sin, is
primarily in the curse; and therefore it is primarily to be understood: and
from thence he infers, That death for sia, and not Death in sin, is of the
essence of the punishment of sin.

And immediately before, he said thus; All that you say concerning Spiritual
death befalling Adam, in the day that he sinned, as primarily inflicted, is
vain and impertinent, because it denies not the inflicting of eternal death to
be intended afterward: nay, says he, it rather argues, an eternal death (in
Hell) to be primarily intended, because not executed according to that
proposition. That which is first in intention, is last in execution.

There are many great errors in these answers.

Adam and all his natural posterity, with an eternal death in Hell: but I think
I have made it evident before in the beginning of Sect. 2. that the death
threatened in Genesis 2. 17. (of what The death threatened in the Covenant of nature
cannot be understood of an eternal death in Hell, because that death was not
strictly and poenally executed in the time of Adams eating, as a Spiritual
death in sin was.
kind soever it was) was a definitive threatening; and therefore that it was
most strictly and formally executed in the very same point of time of the same
day, wherein Adam did but first taste of the forbidden fruit; and God does
still continue to execute the same death most strictly, upon all Adams natural
posterity successively, in the very same point of time, wherein they do become
persons in the womb: and that death is executed as much upon the elect, as upon
the reprobate, as a satisfaction to Gods justice for their breach of the
Covenant of nature.

2. In case God had intended (or ordered) to threaten an eternal death in Hell
to Adam and to all his natural posterity, by his said definitive sentence, as
he did a double Spiritual death, he should have thrown Adam and Eve into Hell
in the very time of his eating, and then the world had been made and destroyed
within the compass of the first six days: but seeing God had elected a certain
number of Adams fallen posterity to an eternal life in Heaven, he could not
condemn them to Hell by that definitive sentence in Genesis 2. 17. for then he
should both elect them and reject them from all eternity; which is to confound
Gods decrees. Yea Mr. Norton himself does affirm in page 27. that eternal death
was never intended as concerning the elect, and yet he seems to contradict that
assertion by this forecited assertion.

3. It is another presumptuous error in the highest degree, to judge of Gods
secret and eternal intentions, touching his definitive threatening in Genesis 2.
17. as if he intended an eternal death in Hell by that threatening, whiles Adam
stood in his innocence; for in the time of his innocence there was no other
revealed Law or Covenant that threatened death, but the revealed Law of the
Covenant of nature in Genesis 2. 17. And in the beginning of this Section I have
showed that law did not threaten any other death but a double Spiritual death
only.

4. It is another grand error, to affirm that the primary punishment of a
Spiritual death, denies not the inflicting of an eternal death in Hell to be
intended afterward: nay (says he) it rather argues that eternal death in
Hell was primarily intended, because not executed according to that
proposition: that which is first in intention, is last in execution.

Adams first sin in eating the forbidden fruit.

2. (Says he) eternal death was primarily intended, because it was not
executed according to that proposition; that which is first in intention is
last in execution.

Esa. 36. 6. for this proposition is soundly confuted by Mr. Lawson. In his
Body of Divinity. page 118.


There be (says he) two propositions, unworthy to be made principles in the
doctrine of Gods decrees, (or of Gods secret intentions.)

The first is, Quod primum in intention, id ul^imum in executione, that which
is first in intention, is last in execution.

The second is, Ordinate volens, prius vult finem, deinde media ad finem, he
that acts rationally and orderly, first wills the end, then the means to the
end.

These (says he) are made principles in Divinity, and must be the measure and
rule according unto which we must understand the word of God, speaking of his
high and misterious decrees.

Yet (1. Says he) these do not agree unto God, but applied unto him derogate
from his glorious perfections.

2. (Says he) they are neither truly understood, nor rightly applied to the
decrees of God.

3. (Says he) the first (taken out of the blasphemous Commentator, whom some
think to be Averoes, or some other) is falsely understood, and otherwise
interpreted then the Author first meant it, as Occam tells us: for thus some
expound it; that which is the chiefest thing in intention, is that to which all
things in the execution are ultimately referred: and what is this to their
purpose who use it, or rather abuse it?

This interpretation does not only confute Mr. Nor^ons inference, but it does
also much strengthen my exposition of the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. to be
intended of no other kind of death, but of a Spiritual death only: for unto
the execution of that death (by depriving Adam of his concreated life of moral
perfections) all things in the Covenant of nature is to be referred, and not to
those other kinds of death, which were not threatened until the after Covenant
of grace was first declared) His second I omit, because it does not concern my
present Reply.

4. Says Mr. Norto^, that which is of the essence or substance of the
punishment of Adam sin, is primarily in the curse; and therefore it is
primarily to be understood. And from thence he does infer, That death for sin,
and not Death in sin, is of the essence of the punishment of sin.

Genesis 2. 17. is the only essence and substance of that punishment that was
inflicted on Adam, and on all his natural posterity successively to the worlds
end, as a satisfaction to Gods justice in that Covenant.

But says Mr. Norton in page 27.

Eternal death was never at all intended concerning the elect: however, certain
it is, that death for sin, as concerning the essential poenal part thereof, is
sol^ly intended concerning Christ.



This double-dyed error I have sufficiently confuted before, in Reply 12. and
in Chap. 11. and in my former printed Reply in Chap. 4. and often in that Book.
And says Mr. Woodbridge in his Method, page 2. 33. It is certain there is some
kind of evil in the curse executed on sinners, which was never executed upon
Christ, as an exclusion from all interest in Gods favor, the defacing of his
image in their souls, rage and despair of conscience, and the like. And P.
Martyr says, when Christ was even now dying, he said, Father, into thy hands
In Com. pl. par. 3. page 344. Erasmus cited by Doctor All in Poor man's
Library. Tom. 2. page 75.
I commend my Spirit: from whence he concludes thus; they which be in the hands
of God undoubtedly are not tormented with the pains of Hell. And Erasmus says,
whereas the Schoolmen do teach, that Christ by reason of the complexion (or
temperature) of his humane body, (which in him, say they, was most subtle, and
consequently of most quick and sharp feel^ng) did suffer more grievous and
bitter pains, then any man may possibly suffer; the pain of them only excepted
which are perpetually damned in Hell: He does exempt Christ from suffering the
pains of Hell. And of this see more in my former printed Reply, page 294. And
now I advise the Reader to remember the caution which our Savior gave to his
Disciples, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces,
i.e. of their corrupt tenants, Matthew. 16, 6, 11, 12. and mark this, that our
Savior did double his charge, because the danger was great; and this caution
is suitable to such as corrupt their own and others judgments, by confounding
the Covenant of nature with the Covenant of grace, in their promises and
threatenings; for thereby many dangerous errors are hatched. The prudent Reader
therefore had need to be more then ordinary careful to remember this caution.

5. But for the further clearing of that double Spiritual death that is
threatened in the Covenant of nature in Genesis 2. 17. I will make some use of Mr.
Nor^ons two Queries, to my sense.

1. What is vindicative justice, strictly taken in the Covenant of nature?
Quere 1.


It is that peculiar justice that God did freely constitute for the breach of
the Answ.
Law of that Covenant; namely, it was a twofold Spiritual death, as I have
opened it before in Reply 7. Now the essence of a Law does consist in this,
that it is the declared will of the Lawgiver, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Deuteronomy. 30, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, etc. It is not his undeclared or secret will that determines
what shall be our duty to do, and what rewards and penalties shall be due unto
us: but it is his declared will or law only.

Now the threatening that was annexed to his declared Law of the Covenant of
nature in Genesis 2. 17. was an act of Gods good pleasure, from whence did follow
his proceeding with Adam, according to that condition which he freely
constituted between him and Adam in that Covenant; namely, that in case he did
transgress that arbitrary Law and Covenant, by eating of the forbidden fruit,
then in the same day or time of his eating, In dying he should die; namely, he
should certainly die at that time: and it is certain, that he died no other
death at that present, but a double Spiritual death. 1. By the loss of Gods
image, and 2. By his new habit of sinning against the Law of his nature; and
therefore no other death was threatened by that Law and Covenant.

What was the supreme and first cause why God did threaten Adam and all his
Quere 3.
natural posterity successively, with the strict execution of the said twofold
vindicative Spiritual death, seeing none of Adams posterity did actually eat of
the forbidden fruit with their teeth, but Adam only?

It was the free constitution of Gods arbitrary will, to make such a Law and
Ans. 2.
Covenant. The principal and whole reason of this mystery depends (not upon
Gods moral Law, but) upon his arbitrary will. It was the good pleasure of his
arbitrary will, to make such a Covenant with Adam, and all his natural
posterity Gods arbitrary will made it just, that in case Adam the head of the
Covenant did but first taste of the forbidden fruit, it should i^volve all his
natural posterity both in his sin, guilt, and punishment: but this a^bitrary
Law, and the justice of it does ^ot alike bind posterity to the sin, guilt, and
pu^ishment of Adams transgression of Gods moral Law. Jos. 6. 2, 18. Jos. 7. 11,
12.
successively, his will was the rule of his righteousness in that Covenant: it
was the cause of all causes, the reason of all reasons; and in one word, all
reason in one reason. P. Martyr says, no cause can be given of the will of
God, though sometimes in some cases some reason may be showed of the will of
God; which though they may be called reasons, yet (says he) they ought not to
be called causes, especially efficient causes: and accordingly one chief reason
why God made man mutable, and why he suffered him to transgress his said
arbitrary Law and Covenant, was to make manifest the riches of his grace in
Christ, for the salvation of sinners: and to this sense I have cited Mr. Warren
in Chap. 12.

3. Take notice that this positive Law and arbitrary Covenant is singular,
because it is no where else to be parallelled in all its circumstances: and yet
^t may in some measure be exemplified by that arbitrary and transient positive
Law and Covenant, which God was pleased to make with Joshua for all Israel;
namely, that in case any of the soldiers which Joshua sent to destroy Jericho,
did but actually take the least quantity of any of the Silver or Gold that was
in the City, to their own private use, which God had consecrated, sanctified,
or set apart, for the only use of his Tabernacle, Jos. 6. 19, 24. then it
should not only make that person guilty, but it should also make all Israel
guilty of that sacrilegious transgression.

This Law was declared unto Joshua only, as he was now constituted to be the
bead of all Israel, that were now incorporated into a national Church: and
therefore God made this law to be binding to all Israel; namely, that in case
any one of the Soldiers did but transgress this declared arbitrary Law and
Covenant, in should involve the whole corporation under the guilt and
punishment of that sacrilegious transgression, Jos. 7. 11, 12. compared with
Jos. 6. 2. 18.

4. From the constitution of this arbitrary Law and Covenant it came to pass,
that though Achan alone did commit the trespass with his hands, by taking some
Silver and a wedge of Gold in a private way for his own use, yet by Gods
relative justice in that Covenant, though all Israel were ignorant of his sins,
yet every person of them (by virtue of Gods positive Covenant) became guilty of
his transgression: and therefore Achan alone did not perish in his iniquity,
Jos. 22. 20. compared with Jos. 7. 14, 15, 24, 25.

5. It is worthy of all observation, that this supreme arbitrary Law is twice
over called a Covenant; namely, with the Nation, and in that respect it was
given to Joshua as the head of all Israel: and from that Covenant it came to
pass that all Israel were involved in the gu^lt of Achans sin.

1. It is said in verse. 15. that Achan did transgress this Covenant, because he
was the only actor of the transgression with his hands, (as Adam was with his
teeth.)

2. It is also said in verse. 11. that all Israel did transgress this Covenant,
because God by his supreme will had made all Israel parties in that Covenant,
and so consequently they were made parties with Achans sin, guilt, and
punishment: (just as all Adams natural posterity were) and therefore God might
as justly have destroyed all Israel for their transgression of that Covenant,
as he did the children of Achan; for by Gods relative justice in that Covenant,
all Israel were as much guilty as Achans children were; though it pleased God
in much mercy to accept of their repentance, and to remit the rigor of his said
relative justice to Israel, though not to Achans family: and all Israel had
formerly vowed the destruction of the Cities, and of the persons of the
Canaanites, and their goods to the Lord, Numb. 21. 2. compared with Lev. 27.
28, 29.

6. This kind of justice is peculiar only to Gods supreme will, in his
arbitrary Laws and Covenants, in a far differing manner from his relative
justice in his common moral Laws: for by the justice of his common moral Laws,
the children might not be put to death for their fathers moral transgressions,
Deuteronomy. 24. 16. but by those Laws the particular person only that sinned was to
be put to die. And because this positive Law was very far different from the
common Law of nature, therefore the punishment threatened was also far different.

7. Though this transient positive Law and Covenant does not fully parallel the
transient positive Law and Covenant of nature, made with Adam and his natural
posterity, yet it gives much light thereto: and in that respect I did propound
it to the Readers consideration in my former printed Reply, in page 276. and
again in this Treatise, in Chap. 5. Sect. 2. where I have also observed many
other sorts of transient positive Laws and Covenants, which do also give much
light to the nature of that transient Covenant thas was made with Adam: and in
some place of this Book I have instanced that arbitrary Law and threatining
against the unwitting infant, (and not against the knowing parent) for the said
infants break^ng of Gods positive Covenant, in case it were not circumcised on
In the City of God. li. 16. c. 27 See Ains. in Genesis 17. 11. Gods arbitrary Laws
and Covenants must be obeyed, (or else the threa^ned penalties will be
executed) though many times they cannot be obeyed, unless the moral Law be
transgressed: and thence it follows, that Gods positive Laws may be called his
supreme Laws.
the eighth day after his birth, see Ge^. 17: 14. This positive Law did so
amuse Austin, that he made circumcision to belong to the first Covenant made
with Adam. But P. Martyr cites two exposit^ons of this positive threatening in
Romans 4. 11. First, (says he) it did belong to the child when he came to full
age, in case he should then neglect to be circumcised: Secondly, says he, God
is not to be accused of injustice, if sometimes he killed the infant that was
brought up uncircumcised. But in the third place I conceive that Maymony does
expound it best; he says, that if the father or master does transgress, and
circumcise not, they break a Commandment, but are not guilty of cutting off;
for cutting off belongs but to the uncircumcised person himself. And P. Martyrs
second answer agrees well to this of Maymony; Gods arbitrary will is the only
rule of justice in all his supreme arbitrary Laws.

8. It Is worthy of all observation, that Gods positive Laws and Covenants are
many times so strictly commanded, that they must be obeyed, though they do
sometimes command things to be done contrary to the moral Law of nature, or
else the threatened penalties will be most strictly executed: for by the moral
Laws of nature Abraham was commanded to preserve his sons life; but yet God did
by his supreme positive Law command him to kill his son for a sacrifice.

2. Adam was not forbidden by the moral Law of nature to eat of the tree of
knowledge, because it was good food by creation, and therefore by the Law of
nature he had a liberty of power to eat of it: but yet it was by Gods supreme
Law and arbitrary Will, made unlawful to be eaten, and in that respect he might
not eat of it, under the penalty of a double Spiritual death, to be assuredly
executed upon him in the very time of his eating it.

9. The moral Law of nature and nations commanded Gideon to gather a numerous
Army, to encounter the numerous Army of the Midia^ites; but by Gods supreme
positive Law he was commanded to send away his numerous Army, and to take no
more but those three hundred men that lapped water in their hands: and in
obedience thereto God promised him the victory.

These and such like positive Laws and Covenants cited in Chap. 5. do tell us,
that Gods positive Laws and Covenants are not grounded in, or from the justice
of the moral Law of nature, but from Gods supreme and arbitrary will only; and
therefore great care ought to be taken to make a right distinction between
those Laws.

10. Sundry of Gods positive Laws have no relation at all to the moral Law of
nature, nor yet to the Covenant of grace, as it is evident by the first
Covenant of nature, and by other positive Laws and Covenants cited in Chap. 5.
and De civitate Dei, li. 16. c. 27^
so says Austin; there are many Testaments or Covenants besides the Old and
New: and he gives an instance in the first Covenant made with Adam; Whenever
thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death: but (says he) the Law was
afterward given, and that brought the more light to man's judgment in sin. In
these words he does plainly distinguish the first Covenant made with Adam, from
the decalogue, as being no part of it; therefore he could not hold the
decalogue to be the second edition of the Covenant made with Adam, as Mr.
Norton does.

11. I say notwithstanding, that sundry of Gods positive Laws were ordained to
be the typical part of the Covenant of grace and reconciliation; and in that
respect they d^ relate to the decalogue, as it was given for the Covenant of
grace.

12. It is also necessary to be noted, that sundry of Gods positive Laws did
relate to the national Church of the Jews only for a time, and not to other
nations.

13. It Is as necessary also to be noted, that sundry of Gods positive Laws and
Covenants did relate only to particular persons for some one transient act for
the trial of their obedience only, as I have showed in Chap. 5.

14. But I pray the Reader to take special notice, that the Covenant of nature
was not made with Christ, as the surety of the elect, to do that Law, and to
suffer that curse for man's redemption, as Mr. Norton does most dangerously
affirm in his first foundation proposition, in page 2. This is a great
foundation error, and therefore I do the more often reprove it, and pray the
Reader to take heed of it.

6. For the further clearing of the threatening of the Covenant of nature, it is
necessary to answer some objections.

1. Pigghius does make the corruption of our nature to be the natural effect of
Adams sin.

2. It is also affirmed by some learned Protestants, that the corruption of
nature, called Original sin, is conveyed to the body by the act of generation,
before the immortal soul is united to the body.

P. Martyr for this last assertion; and yet I find that he does in effect
affirm the contrary: for he affirms that the soul is not corrupted of the
body by any natural action: but the ground and reason thereof (says he) is
rather taken from the justice of God, whereby the grace of the Spirit, and the
Heavenly gifts wherewith man was endowed before his fall, were removed from him
when he sinned: and this withdrawing of grace (says he) came of the justice of
God; and then when God had once withdrawn his gifts, streightway vices and
corruptions followed of their own accord. In these words he does plainly
affirm, that the soul was not corrupted by the body, but by the justice of God:
and thence it follows, that Original sin is not conveyed to the body by the
act of generation, as an efficient cause, but only as it is, Causa sine qua non.

But says Pigghius, the loss of Original justice in children is no sin,
because it was not lost through their default.

Pigghius does reason more like a Nuturalist, or more like a Lawyer, then a
Divine: and to reason thus, says P. Martyr, is to call God to an account: but
(says he) God is not to be compelled to order, neither ought he to be ordered
by humane Laws, but according to his own arbitrary will and pleasure. See P.
Martyr in Romans 5. page 124. and in Com. pl. p. 122.


2. Mr. Calvin says in John 3. 6. Original sin comes not so much by
begetting, as by the ordinance of God: and by and by after (says he) every one
of us does not so much draw vice and corruption from our parents, as we are
altogether corrupted in Adam alone; because as soon as he was fallen away, God
did by and by take away that which he had given to man's nature.

3. The French Academy says, par. 2. p. 519. souls cannot be joined to their
bodies with any other condition, then that into which our first parents brought
all their children by Adams sin: wherefore we must not look for the cause of
our Original sin neither from creation, nor from the generaton of the body from
the seed: neither must we search for the corruption of souls from their
entrance and conjunction with their bodies, as if they received it from them:
but we must look for it, From that blo^ of ^^ unto which the whole race of
mankind was subject, through the fall and corruption of the first stock,
(namely, by deprivation) And in that decree of God, whereby he has condemned
mankind, by his most just judgment (in Genesis 2. 17.) without any further
inqulry after the means and manner how it came to pass: and to this very sense
does Bucanus speak in Com pl. p. 96.

2. It is affirmed by some learned Protestants, that Original sin is
communicated to posterity, by the natural act of generation, and they ground it
on Psalm. 51. 5. In sin has my mother conceived me. Psalm. 51. 5.


Ebrew word in Psalm. 51. 5. For first, the Ebrew word Cham does not properly
signify concei^ed, but warmed: I^ sin ha^h my mother warmed me!

2. This Ebrew word is of a large signification, and therefore the full sense
of it must be looked into, before it can be resolved how, or in what sense his
mother did warm him. First therefore consider that this word does signify any
kind of warming or heating, either of shorter or of longer continuance: and in
that respect it may signify not only the first act of warming or heating, that
is used in the first act of conception, but it may be applied to the continued
act of warming the conception in the womb until its birth: yea Mr. Ains. does
also affirm in Genesis 3. 16. that the Original word for conception is put for the
whole space of Original sin is not imputed to the conception in the womb, until
it is become a person by the insusio^ of the soul, as Adam was a person when he
was deprived of Gods ^o^create life of moral persectio^s.
time that the child is in the mothers body, until the birth; and in that
large sense is the word warmed to be taken in Psalm. 51. 5.

And for the want of this consideration, some Expositors do interpret this
warming of the first short warming act only, that is used in the first act of
conception, and they are led thereto by the restrained sense of the same Ebrew
word in Genesis 30. 38, 39, 41. and in Genesis 31. 10. For in these places the said
Ebrew word is used only for the first short heating act of conception: and from
thence they conclude that David's words (In sin has my mother warmed me, or
heated me) must be understood of the first short act of heating him in her
first conception: And 2. From thence they do also conclude, that Original sin
is conveyed to posterity by that natural act of generation. And to this sense
does Bithner in his Praris interpret Psalm. 51. 5. Fo vit and incal^^^ a me
matter mea, i.e. in fervore libidinis conceptus sum. 2. I find also that some
other learned Protestants (though they deny Original sin to be conveyed in the
first act of conception, yet) affirm that Original sin does belong to the
conception, as soon as the body is perfectly shaped; and yet, say they, before
the immo^tal soul is infused and united to the body: and to this sense does
Doctor Bilson expound Psalm. 51. 5. In his Survey of Christ's sufferings, p. 173,
174, 175.
with the concurrence of several Orthodox writers.

3. I shall decline from both the said expositions, and concur with them that
affirm that we are not warmed in our mothers womb in sin, until the continued
act of warming has made the mass to become a person by the union of the
immortal soul to the body; even as Adam was a person when he sinned against the
Covenant of nature, and when he received the punishment of a Spiritual death,
by being deprived of his concreated life after Gods image in moral perfections:
the loss of that concreated life is called death in G^^. 2. 17. and the
essential life of the soul is now infused without that concreated life: and for
the want of it the now blinded will does act irregularly; and this blinded will
is now called Original corruption.

Mr. Woodbridge says, that Adam represented all mankind, as being virtually In
his Method, p. 133. and Baxter in Confess. p. 252. and Warren on Justifi. p.
70. to 75. where he cites Wotton, and other Orthodox writers.
in the same obligation with himself: and therefore (says he) his offense was
the act of the whole humane nature, though it be not imputed to particular
persons until they begin to exist: and he refers the Reader for further light
to Paul Ferrium: and to this effect he speaks also in page 254.

4. It is further evident that the said Hebrew word Cham in Psalm. 51. 5. must
be taken for the continued act of heating the conception in the womb until its
birth, because that word is applied to the full hatching of the Ostrich eggs;
her care is to keep them warm continually in the warm dust, until they be
hatched, Job 39. 14. (and this kind of warming heat did bring life again into
the child that was thought to be dead, 2 Kings 4. 34.) David's meaning therefore
was, that as soon as he was become a person in his mothers womb, he was warmed
therein in Original sin until his birth.

5. David in his confession in Psalm. 51. 5. does express a personality in his
mothers womb. First he says, I [a person] was born in iniquity: but by born he
does not mean his birth into the light of the Sun; but his meaning was that I
[a person] was born or carried about in my mothers womb in iniquity: and
therefore 2. He does add (by way of explanation) And in sin has my mother
warmed me; namely, me a person in her womb. But in case any conceive that he
said thus, I was first born into the world in iniquity, and then after that,
Conceived or warmed in sin, they must conceive also that David set the Cart
before the Horse, by putting his birth into the world before his conception in
his mothers womb: therefore to make him speak in order, his words must be thus
understood; I (a person) was born about in my mothers womb in iniquity, and in
sin has my mother warmed me a person in her womb until my birth.

6. As the Covenant of nature was not made with Adams body alone, much less was
it broken by him, until his body was made a person capable of breaking it: just
so it is with his natural posterity; they are not capable of breaking that
Covenant in Adam, nor yet of suffering that double Spiritual death, until they
are become persons in the womb by the union of their soul to their body: but
then by virtue of Gods supreme arbitrary Law and Covenant they are made capable
subjects of that punishment.

7. The Ebrew word Cham of Cha^am signifies Light, in Es. 18. 4. and thence
the Sun has its name, in Es. 24. 23. Es. 30. 26. and so in Psalm. 19 6. It is
said, that nothing is hid from the heat thereof, and so consequently nothing is
hid from the light thereof; for its heat and light are united: and thence it
comes to pass, that all things are heated, and wormed, and cherished* both with
the heat and with the light thereof united. The like may be said of the
continued act of conception; as soon as there is a person in the womb, there is
both heat and light; namely, as soon as the rational soul is infused into the
body; then, and not till then, that person is made guilty of Adams sin, and of
Adams punishment of a double Spiritual death, because the soul as it has an
essential life is then infused; but not as it had a concreated life after Gods
image in Adams creation.

8. The said Ebrew word is so large, that it is not only applied to actions
that are heating and warming, but also to the heating of affections, as to the
heating of the affection of anger, love, joy, zeal or jealousy: therefore
seeing it is so largely used, the more heed must be taken to the context where
it is used, by the which the judicious Student shall be directed either to take
the word in a more large, or in a more restrained sense, either to a short act
of heating, or to a continued act of heating.

9. My said answers unto the two former Queries, and unto the Objections about
Original sin, may serve not only as a S^ord to cut, but also as a leading truth
to unloose many knots of carnal reason, touching the kind of death that was
threatened in the Covenant of nature in Genesis 2. 17.

10. Take notice that God did not first make this Covenant with Adams single
person as soon as he was created, but he deferred it until the woman was
created; yea, he deserred it until they were married together, and also until
they had received the command to become one flesh, for the procreation of their
like in nature, Genesis 1. 28. with Genesis 2. 24. and then after all these distances
of time God brought them into Paradise, and showed them the two Trees, and said
unto them, this is the Tree of the twofold life, eat of this tree and live for
ever the life of thy concreated perfections: but eat not of this other Tree,
for in the day thou eatest thereof in dying thou shall die; namely, thou shall
be deprived of thy perfections, and all thy natural posterity successively.

SECT. III.
DEclaring my second reason, why the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. must My
second reason.
be understood of a double Spiritual death only, is taken from the Antithesis;
namely, from that kind of life that was implicitly promised to Adam, in case
he did but first eat of the Tree of the twofold life.

Genesis 2. 17. did imply a promise of life, in case Adam had but first eaten of
the Tree of the twofold life, in obedience to the positive command of the
Covenant of nature.

2. It is also evident, that the kind of life that was promised, was no other
but the confirmation of his concreated life. The Ebrew words, Gnets Caijm, in
Genesis 2. 9.
Genesis 2. 9. is by some translated singularly, The Tr^e of life, and by others
it is translated plurally, The Tree of live^, but I think it ought rather to be
translated, The Tree of the twofold life, because Caijm is in the dual number.

3. This translation does most fitly answer to the foregoing phrase of N^sh^mah
Caijm, in verse. 7. The Spirit of the twofold life: the whole verse runs thus.
Genesis 2. 7.
The Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath (or the spirit) of the twofold life: others translate it
more plurally lives, because of the sundry faculties and operations, which they
conceive are in the immortal soul; though it is questioned by Mr. Baxter and
others, whether In Aphoris. page 252.
the immortal soul has such distinct faculties. 2. Bucanus and others do
translate it plurally upon another account; namely, in relation to the
vegetative, sensitive, and rational lives: but others do conceive, that God did
not inspire the It is left for a farther disqusition to the Reader, whether the
sensitive life be not in the body before the immortal soul is infused, though
it be not confirmed until the soul is infused. Lev. 17. 11, 14.
vegetative, and the sensitive lives with the same breath, when he inspired the
immortal soul, but that those two lives were created as the true parts of Adams
body of the dust, before his immortal soul was infused, and that ever since
they are generated with the body: for at first, when God did create Adams body,
he did not create it without veins, nor without blood in those veins: and
thence it does necessarily follow, that his sensitive or vital soul was also
created with his blood: for the Scriptures do tell us that the vital soul of
man, as well as the vital soul of the beast, is in the blood; namely, by
creation and generation, Lev. 17. 11, 14. Genesis 9. 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 30. 10. See
Aias. in the places cited.

But I perceive that the most of our latter writers do think otherwise; namely,
that there is no vegetative or sensitive life in the body, until the immortal
soul be first inspired to give being to the said lives: and so they make all
the three sorts of lives to be inspired into Adams body with the same breath;
which is done as they conceive upon the conception in the womb, about the space
of forty or forty five days after the first conception in the matrix. And Mr.
Weames I^ his observations moral and natural, page 7. and in his Portraiture,
pa. 52.
is so confident, that this is the only truth, that he does roundly reprove all
such as hold otherwise: he grants also that it is commonly holden, that we have
first the life of the plant by the vegetative faculty only, and then the
sensitive life before the rational soul is infused: and yet he does also affirm
in his Por^raiture, that the vegetative and sensitive faculties are virtually
in the seed in the conception. I freely leave all these assertions to the
Readers disquisition: my design is no other then this; namely, to make a clear
d^stinction between the passions of the vital and immortal soul, especially as
it concerns the sufferings of Christ: but yet I do apprehend as abovesaid, that
when God did first create Adams body, he did create it with veins full of
blood, and so consequently with a sensitive or vital soul in that blood, before
his immortal soul was inspired.

4. The French Academy says, The seed is a body that has in it self a
vegetative In par. 2. page 386, 500, 501. Some call the sensitive affections
the inferior part of the rat^onal soul. In his Survey, page 173. Carlisle in his
Descent, p. 146
soul, and that the animal spirits are only the instruments of the soul, and
not the soul it self: and 2. The French Academy says, That many great Divines
and Doctors do agree with Galen, Pla^o, and Aristo^le, that the vegerative and
sensitive soul is no other thing, then either the natural and vital spirits, or
else the temperament: and for this cause Occam says plainly, that there are
two distinct souls in man, the one reasonable, and the other sensual.

5. I find that Doctor Bilson does agree with their judgment, and so does
Carlisle. I think (says Carlisle) that ^ephes (the vital spirit) is no part of
the immortal soul, but it is proper only to the body, and to those parts of man
that r^se with the body, and die with the body; and that it consists in blood,
breath, life, vital spirit, senses, and in the whole natural substance of every
lively and corruptible creature. And says he a little before, Aristotle will
not have the immortal soul to be any part of the vegetative and sensitive soul,
which are corruptible and mortal, and die with the body; but (says he) the
immortal soul comes from God. And to this sense does Lupset speak in his
description Lupsetes description of a natural death, is remarkable.
of our natural death: In our death (says he) the body in a manner does leave
the soul, before the soul leaves the body; for it is the body by it self
forsaking life, that causes the soul to depart: this I believe is a sound
truth.

And from hence it follows:

1. That Gnets Caijm in Genesis 2. 9. cannot sitly be translated lives in relation
to the vegetative, sensitive and rational lives, as if they were all connexed
together in one so I: but I rather think (as I said before) that Gnets Caijm
should A true description of the twofold life and twofold death of Adams
rational soul. This assertion is explained by an apt similitude in Bucanus Com.
pl. p. 104.
be translated the Tree of the twofold life, in relation to N^sh^mah Caijm in
v. 7. which signifies the breath of the twofold life: for the immortal soul
which God inspired or blew into Adams nostrils, had a twofold life: the first
may be called the absolute, or the essential life of his soul; the second the
concreated life of his essential life, after the image and likeness of God in
moral perfections; and so this concreated life was but an accident to his
absolute life: and therefore it might be continued, or it might be removed from
his absolute life, without the loss of his absolute life. And 2. This
concreated life may also most fitly be called his relative life, because it:
related to the conditions that God made with Adam in the Covenant of nature;
namely, that in case he did first eat of the Tree of the twofold life, then his
said relative life should be confirmed and continued as an inseparable adjunct
to his essential life, and to all his natural posterity successively: but in
case he did first eat of the prohibited Tree, then he should be deprived of his
said concreated life: and this deprivation is properly called death in Genesis 2.
17. And from that deprivation the will of the essential soul, being of a very
active nature, could not act any otherwise then irregularly, running like a
blind Horse that is full of mettle, into danger and mischief continually; and
therefore it did necessarily act irregularly and confusedly, according to its
now blinded reason and will, and according to Satan's suggestions; so that the
thoughts and imaginations of the heart are evil, and only evil, and that
continually, against every branch of the moral Law; and this evil habit of
sinning is properly called death in sin: and in this sort the death threatened
in Genesis 2. 17. may most fitly be called a twofold death, as his life (if he had
stood in his created purity) had been a twofold life: and though Adam was
deprived of his concreated life for his transgression of the Covenant of
nature, yet his absolute or essential life was still continued even after his
said Spiritual death in sin, and shall also be continued to all eternity.

6. Take notice that there is a considerable difference among writers, in the
P. du Motilin i^ his Anatomy of Arminianism. Adams concrea^ed life was not
super^at^ral, but connatural only. See Weames in his Portraiture, page 251.
description of the true nature of Adams relative life.

1. Mr. Calvin does often call it a supernatural life, and so does P. du
Moulin: and the Papists do more especially affirm that man lost not his natural
condition, but his supernatural gifts: but I dissent from them.

2. I join with them that affirm that Adam had no other life to lose, but that
which was connatural only. Mr. Weames does strongly oppose the former tenent,
and does confidently affirm that Adam relative life was natural only, because
it had relation only to the Covenant of nature, and that it should have been
continued to all his posterity by propagation (namely, by propagation as it is
causa sine qua non) but efficiently by Gods relative justice to his said
Covenant; namely, that in case Adam had but performed the condition of that
Covenant on his part, by eating first of the Tree of the twofold life, then his
concreated life should have been his life relatively to that Covenant of nature
only: but in case he did first eat of the prohibited Tree, then in dying he
should die, (i.e.) he should be deprived of that concreated l^fe of his nature,
according to Gods relative justice in the threatening of that Covenant.

3. Mr. Walker does as stiffely oppose the former tenent, as Mr. Weames does,
and so In his Doctrine of the Sabbath, page 33, 34, 38, 39, 58. and in his
Treatise of the Covenants
does Bucanus in his Com. places p. 105, 106. And their reasons seem strongest
to me; of which see more in Sect. 4. But I intend not now to examine the
reasons of both sides, because both sides do grant that which I desire; namely,
that Adams rational soul was inspired into his body with a double life: and
thence I infer, that in case he had but first tasted of the tree of the twofold
life, his concreated relative life should never have been separated from the
absolute life of his essential soul, but it should have been confirmed to him
and to all his natural posterity for ever, in the sweet contents of an earthly
Paradise, according to Gods relative justice in his Covenant of nature made
with Adam.

Object. 1. N^shemah Caijm does not certainly signify the said twofold life of
Adams soul in Genesis 2. 17. because the same words are used, after that Adam had
lost his said concreated life. For after Moses had declared that all Beasts
died in the flood, he adds; and man also, in whose nostrils was the breath of
the Spirit of N^shemah Caijm, the twofold life, Genesis 7. 22, 23.

N^shemah Caijm after the fall must have another interpretation of man's twofold
life, then it had in the time of Adams innocence: and the rather, Genesis 2. 7.
with Genesis 7. 22, 23.
because that twofold life is here joined with Ruac [the Spirit.]

For first before Adam fell, God threatened only a twofold Spiritual death to
his soul, without the abolishing of his personal being here in this world: but
after the fall, and after he had threatened a bodily death for Original sin, and
after Jehovah saw that the wickedness of man was much in the earth, he
threatened the death of all men's bodies by a flood, G^^. 6. 5, 6. etc. except
eight persons; and then the immortal soul must necessarily depart from the body
to Hell: for all that died in the flood perished eternally, as both the Ebrew
Doctors and Christian writers hold.

2. Both Scripture and reason show, that absolute and indefinite threatenings
must sometimes be restrained to such a since as the context will bear; and in
that respect the death of the twofold life of man in the time of the flood,
must be restrained to such a bodily death, as was suitable to the drowning of
the body in the flood: and thence it follows, that the twofold life that was
taken from them by the flood, can be no other, but 1. That the sensitive life
of the body was killed by drowning: and 2. that then it caused the immortal
soul to depart from the body to an eternal death in Hell.

3. Though the dual number may be called plural, yet doubtless there is ever
some special reason why the dual number is so often used in Scripture as it is,
in a differing sort from the plural: of which dual number I have spoken more at
large in my Treatise of Holy time, in page 19, etc. upon the word Gaarbaijm
(the twofold Evening) and there I have showed that it does not signify a
confused mixture of any two or more things together, as when light and darkness
are confounded in the twilight, (as some do erroneously interpret it) but that
it does signify two several things connexed together, without confounding
their d^stinct species: and therefore when that dual word is put for the
natural Evening, it does signify the conjunction of the latter half of the
day, with the first half of the night, united together by the twilight. This
observation of the dual number does make the said sensitive life, and the
rational life of those that perished in the flood, to be two distinct species,
and yet connexed in their operations.

4. Hence observe, that when God did first inspire the absolute or essential
life of Adams soul into his body, it was to give the form to the matter: and 2.
That when he did with the same Breath inspire a concreated life after his own
image and likeness, (in moral perfections) he did conjoyn it as a distinct
species to his said essential life, as an accident to its subject, and
therefore it was no true part of his essential life; neither did it flow from
his nature essentially, as the faculties do from the soul: for then it could
not have ceased to be without the destruction of the subject that did support
it. 3. Therefore it was but an appendix which the God of nature had conjoined
to his essential soul, even as he conjoined an admirable beauty to Mose^ face
at his birth, Exodus 2. 2. which might have continued, or it might be lost, by
his eating of some prohited meat, which might have caused his beauty to consume
as a moth, without the anihilating of his essential life, or of his personal
dissolution.

5. Lest any one should stumble at this phrase, [The concreated life of Gods
The double life of Adams soul explained; of which see more before in Reply 7.
image] he may see it to be a necessary phrase, if he do but first consider the
Antithesis; namely, the kind of death that God did threaten in the Covenant of
nature, which was no other but the deprivation of Adams said concereated life,
which was conjoined only as an adjunct to his essential life: and thence it
follows by necessary consequence, that seeing the deprivation of his said
concreated life is called death, the joining of it as an adjunct to his
essential soul must needs be called his concreated life.

6. Lest any one should stumble at this phrase, [his relative life] he may also
see it to be a necessary phrase, because his said concreated life did relate to
the condition that God made with Adam in the Covenant of nature; namely, that
in case he did but perform the condition of that Covenant on his part, by
eating first of [Gnets Caijm] the Tree of the twofold life, then his said
concreated life should have been continued as a perpetual adjunct to his
essential life: and then 2. His essential life should have been confirmed in
moral perfections, and it should have been continued to his body eternally, in
the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise, without any separation by a bodily
death.

7. It is also further evident, that the life promised in the Covenant of
nature was the confirmation of his said twofold life, because God himself did
so expound it unto Adam presently after his fall in Genesis 3. 22, 24. For 1.
Presently after his fall God did drive him by force (in sign of his anger) out
of Parad se: and 2. He did then place at the East end of the Garden Cherubims,
and the flame of a Sword, which turned it self every way, (in a warlike posture
of anger) to keep the way of the Tree of the twofold life: and 3. Then God said
in the hearing of Adam, The man is become as one of us, to know good and evil.
Genesis 3. 22, 23.
And now lest he should think (in his deluded apprehensions) to put forth his
hand and take of the Tree of the twofold life, and eat and l^ve for ever, Genesis
3. 22. By this last ironical speech Jesus Christ did expound of what use the
said Tree should have been to Adam, in case he had but first eaten thereof in
the time of his innocence; namely, that he should thereby have lived for ever
in the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise; out of the which God did now in
anger drive him, in verse. 24.

8. From hence it does also follow, that the main end why Jesus Christ did now
set a warlike defense about the said Tree of the twofold life, was to make Adam
and all his natural posterity to know, that they were now for ever deprived of
the means, whereby the condition that was required in the Covenant of nature
Genesis 3. 22, 24. The first main end why Jesus Christ did set a warlike defense
about the Tree of the twofold life, was to make Adam and all his natural
posterity know, that the condition that was required to be performed in the
Covenant of nature, was now utterly void and null.
might be performed, and consequently that the said Covenant is now made
thereby utterly void: and that now they cannot be restored (to that N^shemah
Caijm) to that twofold life of the soul wherein Adam was created: and 2. To
make the said warlike defense of the Tree of the twofold life the more evident,
Jesus Christ caused an Angel visibly to appear in Adams sight, with a flaming
Sword in the air, for the greater terror unto Adam, that so he might not dare
to approach unto that Tree, which formerly had been ordained and constituted by
Gods arbitrary will and Covenant, to have been for the confirmation of his
concreated life, and so to be as a perpetual adjunct to his essential life: and
3. It was to assure us, that the condition of the said Covenant of nature is
for ever utterly abolished; and therefore it is not possible to be performed by
man himself, or by his surety, as the matter of his justification, as Mr.
Norton does most vainly argue: and 4. This warlike defense of that Tree, by an
Angel with a flaming Sword, was to assure Adam and all his natural posterity,
that God is for ever angry with them for the breach of that Covenant: and this
anger of his is exemplified to us, by the like posture of his anger in other
cases. 1. In the case of David: for out of the pride of his heart he numbered
the people, as trusting to the arm of flesh: but the Lord did manifest his
anger against him for this sin, by causing an Angel to appear in the air with a
drawn sword in his sight, 2 Samuel 24. 16. 1 Chronicles. 21. 16. 2. He did in the same
visible manner cause an Angel to appear with a drawn sword before the eyes of
Balaam, to deter him from his intended enchantments against his people Israel,
Numb. 22. 31.

9. From the premises it follows, that the Covenant of nature was ordained The
second main end why the Covenant of nature was to last no longer, then until
the trial of Adams obedience was made by his act of eating, was because else
God cannot be said to have perfectly finished the Heavens and the Earth, and
all their hosts in six days; for all their hosts could not be finished in six
days, unless Adam did fall, and were also created anew before the end of the
sixth day.
to last no longer then unt^l the trial of Adams obed^ence or d^sobedience was
manifested by one transient act of eating only.

2. That this trial could not be deferred, but it must be expressly made in the
very same sixth day in the which Adam was created, or else the whole creation
could not have been finished in the same sixth day: for Moses does tell us in
Genesis 2. 1, 2. that the Heavens and the earth, and all their hosts were
finished; that is to say, all the three Heavens and the Earth, and all their
hosts were brought to a full and perfect end in six days, as the Ebrew word
does signify; that is to say, some particulars of every several sort or kind
of host, which appertained either unto the Heavens above, or unto the Earth
beneath, were perfectly or completely finished before the end of the sixth day.

In my Book of the I^stitu^ion of the Sabbath, I have showed that the word
translated [in] in Genesis 2. 2. namely, in the seventh day, should be translated
[Before] the seventh day; namely, that God had finished his work, which he had
made before the seventh day. Now he deferred to make the woman unto the last of
his works; he made them perfect with natural perfection in the beginning of the
sixth day; but yet he made them to stand but in a mutable condition, because
they might fall through Satan's temptations, and that they might thereby lose
their natural perfections. And then 3. By Gods declaration of the new Covenant
of grace and reconciliation, in Genesis 3. 15. they were re-created and converted
before the end of the sixth day; and that they were by Gods supernatural grace
re-created: and this work of their re-creation was the perfecting or the
finishing act of Gods host of Saints here on Earth, before the end of the sixth
day.

3. Thence it does also follow, that the Covenant of nature must be
transgressed, that so it might thereby be utterly evacuated or extinguished,
and that so the new Covenant of grace and reconciliation might be declared to
our fallen Parents for their re-creation, by Gods supernatural grace before the
end of the sixth day; that so they might 1. be made the first fruits of Gods
Spiritual host of Saints here on Earth; and 2. That thereby they might be made
capable In all the natural Creation Christ must be considered but as the second
person in Trinity, but in the supernatural Creation of our first Parents, he
must be considered as Mediator before the end of the sixth day.
subjects of the heavenly host of triumphant Saints hereafter: for such
recreated souls are st^led the host or army of Heaven, Dan. 8. 10, 13. and they
are made to sit together in heavenly places, Ep. 2. 6. because they are by
their regeneration made capable subjects of Gods heavenly host; and they are of
a heavenly calling, Ebr. 3. 1. And 3. It is in relation to these re-created
souls that Christ is styled, The Prince of the host, Dan. 8. 11. namely, of his
Spiritual host here on Earth, and also of his heavenly host, as soon as their
warfare here is finished; and in this respect also Christ is called, The
Captain of the ^ords host, Jos. 5. 14, 15. Ebr. 2. 10. and in general he is
called, Jehovah of hosts, Psalm. 24. 10. because he is the Lord of every host
both in Heaven above, and in the Earth beneath before the end of the sixth day.

4. Take this for a remarkable consideration, that in all the natural creation
Christ must be considered but as the second person in trinity only (and not as
Mediator, during the time of the first five days, and in part of the sixth day;
namely, so long as Adam stood in his natural purity on the sixth day. But about
the middle of the sixth day Adam was deprived of his concreated life of moral
perfections, and became dead in sin by his transgression of the Covenant of
nature, and then the chiefest part of Gods natural creation was spoiled, had
not Jesus Christ then stepped in as Mediator; for then he was declared to be
the seed of the woman that should break this head-plot of Satan all to pieces;
and by that declaration Adam and Eve were re-created before the end of the
sixth day: and of this see more in Chap. 12. how Christ is called the Word, in
Genesis 3. 8. by the Chaldee paraphrase, at the beginning.

In this sort, and after this manner all the works of creation, both visible
and invisible, both earthly and spiritual were perfectly and completely
finished before the end of the sixth day, according to the true sense and
meaning of Genesis 2. 1, 2.

5. Then God rested on the seventh day, Genesis 2. 2, 3. from all the works which
he had made.

6. Then he blessed the seventh day with Spiritual ordinances, for the better
edification of Adam in that faith in the promised seed which he had now
received; and also for the conversion of his posterity.

Then God sanctisied the seventh day, and commanded Adam to set it apart from
worldly employments: and for the better exercising of himself in Spiritual
ordinances, as prayer, preaching, etc. as I have showed it more at large in my
Book of the institution of the Sabbath.

Reply 24.
Sund^y eminent Divines do hold as I do; namely, that the Covenant of nature
was utterly extinguished, as soon as Adam had transgressed it, and had received
the threatened punishment of a Spiritual death.

1. Mr. Baxter In his Aphoris. page 79. Mr. Baxter and many others do affirm,
that the Covenant of nature is become utterly null and void, ever since Adam
received the threatened punishment of a Spiritual death in sia. Perfect
obedience to the moral Law of nature was not the condition of that life that
was premised in the Covenant of nature, but Adams act in eating first of the
Tree of the twofold life, was the only condition.
says, many do believe that the Covenant of works (for so he calls the
Covenant of nature, though very improperly) is repealed to all the world: and
that the Covenant of grace is only in force: I am of their belief, and I
heartily wish that all Gods people would ponder the reasons of it, and then
doubtless they will be of the same belief.

2. I do also perceive that Mr. Baxter did at the first cite the said
assertion, on purpose to confute it; but since then I perceive that he has
found out such considerable reasons, as have confuted his former intended
confutation: for in his Confession, in page 21. he says thus: I approve of the
Confession of the assembly of Divines, if I may but be allowed to make five or
six exceptions (and says he at No 4.) in Chap. 19. and also in the larger
Catechism (which I forgot to mention before) It is expressed that the promise
of life upon fulfilling the Law in still in being. But (says he) I understand
it only of such a promise as is still on record in the Bible, as having been
once in force: but now (says he) I judge it to be no promise, but to be
ceased, cessante materia, the thing made its condition [perfect obedience]
being not only of moral, but of natural impossibility, as soon as mankind was
once sinful; so that now God is not, nor cannot be obliged by that promise: for
now it is no promise, though the preceptive part, and the poenal, or the
comminatory part does still remain: (but yet I add, that the preceptive part
of eating of the Tree of the twofold life does not remain.)

3. Mr. Baxter says further in page 100. at Conclus. 5. I believe that the Law
of works stands not now, as it did to Adam, as the sole Law in force, but that
the promisory part of it is void, God being as we may say disobliged upon man's
sin, and man being utterly uncapeable of being the subject to whom such a
promise can stand in force: and therefore (says he) it is fitter to say that
the Covenant of works is null and void, because it is from the promisory part
that the whole was so called a Covenant: and says he in this point, I retract
what I delivered in my Aphorisms.

4. Says he in page 106. this title, The Covenant of works, I used in my
Aphorisms, but upon better consideration I now think fit to forbear, and
disclaim it, because the name is given from the promise of life in that Law;
and that promise is now ceased: and therefore it is not fit to denominate the
Law, A Covenant, from that only part which is null: others (says he) stand
stiff for what in tea^ms I first asserted; viz. for the continuation of the
whole Covenant, promise and all: but it is clear (says he) that when man did
first break the Covenant, God was disobliged, and man was quite incapable of
having such a promise made unto him (after his fall) for when he was once a
finner, it was not only impossible that he should be no sinner (as it was
impossible for him to keep the Law for the future) but it was naturally
impossible, as being a mere contradiction. To feign a promise of God to be in
force, that will save men, on condition they have no sin, when they have all
sin already, is absurd: yet I say not that God abrogated his promise by making
a better; but that man nulled it by his Covenant breaking, so making the matter
impossible, and so it ceased cessante materia, vel subjecti capacitate. Thus
far from Mr. Baxter.

1. As touching the utter nulling of the Covenant of nature upon Adams
transgression in eating the forbidden fruit, I do fully agree with him.

2. But yet touching the thing made its condition I disagree: for he makes it
to be Adams obedience to the moral Law of his nature: but as yet I could never
see it proved by any Scripture that is rightly expounded. Mr. Norton does
labor to prove it by Lev. 18. 4, 5. Eze. 20. 11. Gal. 3. 10, etc. But I have
showed that the doing of the Law in all these Scriptures is not meant of Adams
natural doing it in the time of his innocence, as the condition of the promised
life: but the doing of the Law that is required in these Scriptures, is meant
of such If the Covenant of nature had been made in relation to the moral Law of
nature, then the same threatening must have been continued against the moral Law
of Christ's humane nature, which is dangerous to be affirmed.
a doing only, as is required in the Covenant of grace; namely, of doing it all
by faith in Christ, as I have showed it more at large elsewhere.

3. In case the Covenant of nature had been made in relation to the moral Law
of nature, then doubtless the threatening would have been continued even against
the humane nature of Christ. But says Mr. Rutherford on the Covenant, page 25.
you cannot show me in all the old Testament any poenal Law of active obebience,
as poenal imposed upon the man Christ: where is is written, If the man Christ
sin, he shall eternally dye: I tremble, says he, at such expressions. The like
must be affirmed of Adam, for he was created after the image and likeness of
God in moral perfections; so that he could not will to sin against any branch
of the moral Law of his nature, until he had first lost the rectitude of his
nature, by sinning against the arbitrary Law of the Covenant of nature, by his
transient act of eating of the forbidden fruit: then he was instantly deprived
of Gods concreated image of moral perfections, and then he could do nothing
else but sin against every branch of that moral Law; then the thoughts and
imaginations of his heart were evil and only evil all the day long, Genesis 6. 5.
But it is no less then horrible blasphemy to affirm that the humane nature of
Christ was obliged under the same Covenant of nature: I grant he was born under
the moral Law of nature, as much as Adam was, but he was not put under the same
Covenant of nature that Adam was, because he was none of his natural
generation, but was conceived by the Holy Ghost, that so he might be put under
the positive Law of Mediatorship, but yet without the addition of any
threatening.

2. Mr. Woodbridge says, if God by virtue of that Covenant made with In his
Method, page 251, 252.
Adam, does stand still engaged to give life, (supposing satisfaction to be
made for disobedience) then does that Covenant made with Adam stand still in
force, as the only way to life; and then men (at least the elect) are legally
in strict justice as innocent, as if they had never sinned: both which, says
he, are desperately false, and overthrow the very foundations of faith; and to
this effect also he speaks in page 252. This assertion of his does make null
the Covenant made with Adam, and it does point blank overthrow Mr. Nortons
first foundation proposition, and all the rest of his Book, because it is built
upon that false foundation.

3. Mr. Lawson does speak often to the same purpose. In his Body of Divinity,
page 1, etc.


1. Says he, when man transgressed the Law given in Creation, then the first
government was altered and modered anew: and thereupon the laws and judgments,
and the manner of administration were new, and different from the former: God
acquires a new power, requires a new obedience, and orders man to eternal
rewards another way.

2. Says he in page 16. This government is twofold; the first of justice, the
second of mercy; of justice in the first Adam, of mercy in the second.

3. Says he in page 53. Gods special government of man is twofold: 1. That
wherein God exercised his power ^cquired by Creation. 2. That wherein he
exercised his power acquired by redemption: and Mr. Baxter does give his assent
to this assertion, as a most clear truth, in his answer to Crandon, page 26.
God says he has three Kingdoms in specie over mankind, whereof the first two
are here on Earth, and the third in Heaven. The first, says he, was the
Kingdom of God over perfect man, and is never called the Kingdom of the Son, or
of the Mediator, or Redeemer: this endured but till the fall of man. The second
is the Kingdom of the Son, or of the Redeemer, which is distinguished from the
rest by the foundation right (general redemption) by its ends, laws, state of
the subjects, etc. The work and end of this Kingdom is to effect man's cure and
recovery. 3. Says he, when this is finished, the Son shall deliver up his
Kingdom to his Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25, 27. of the true sense of which
Scripture see more in him.

4. Says he in page 70. at No 2. In the sentence-passed upon the Devil, Genesis
3. 15.
Christ was promised, and by that promise the government of mankind was
altered, and God did new model his Kingdom; for thereupon followed a new
constitution, new laws, and new judgment did proceed afterward in a new
manner.

5. Says he, by this promise the Covenant of works was made void, and that
Law, as promising life only upon condition of perfect, personal, and perpetual
obedience, without any promise of pardon of any the least sin, was repealed;
and the positive Law of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil did cease.

6. Says he, though the Law of works was repealed, yet the sentence passed
upon man; for the sin he committed against the Law of works, stands still in
force, and shall in part continue to the resurrection.

7. Though the Law of works, as a condition and only condition of life be
repealed, yet the pure morals continue in force to bind man to obedience, or
punishment in general, but not to obedience perfect as the condition of life,
nor yet to punishment as no ways removeable. To argue, that because the matter
of the moral Laws continue in precepts and prohibitions, therefore the Law of
works continues, is vain, for it may continue in another manner, and to another
and, and both the end and manner far different.

8. Says he, to say that man is under the Law of works, as Adam was at first,
until he be in Christ, is very false: It is true he is under the execution of
that sentence, which passed upon man for his sin, against the Law both moral
and positive given to Adam: and he cannot pass from death to life, from the
state of damnation to the state of salvation, till he be in Christ by a true
and lively faith; and when we are in Christ, we are not wholly freed from the
sentence, because it continues partly in force until the resurrection.

9. Says he in page 82. when the first government did determine, the second
did begin: for after the fall of two of Gods most noble creatures, there
followed a great alteration in the world; and such, that if God had followed
strictly the rules of his former government, all mankind must needs have
perished: but Gods mercy could not suffer this; therefore his divine wisdom
continues a way how to recover fallen man, and began to govern him according
to such rules, as he might attain eternal salvation.

10. Says he in page 83. In this respect there must needs be a great
difference between the former and this latter g^^ernment: for in the former the
Governor was God, Creator by the [Word] not incarnate and made flesh: but in
this latter, he is not only Creator, but Redeemer, By the Word made Flesh. 2.
The subject of this latter; is not man holy, righteous, innocent, as he was
created; but sinful, guilty, and miserable in Adam fallen. 3. The Laws thereof
do not bind man as the former did, to perfect and perpetual obedience, as the
Here the Reader may see that Mr. Nortons first foundation proposition, upon
which his whole Book is builded, is opposed by Mr. Lawson; especially in the
point of doing the Law in a way of works.
condition of life, but to faith in the Redeemer.

This government is the act of divine providence, whereby he orders sinful
man, redeemed by faith in Christ Redeemer unto salvation, or upon his unbelief
unto eternal death unavoidable, John 3. 16, 18, 36, etc.

11. Says he in page 83. Whereas many tell us that the former government
continues, that the Laws are still the same, that God as Rector by substitution
transfered the punishment merited by transgression of the Law, upon Christ: and
for and in consideration of satisfaction made by him, remits sin; and that this
is nothing else but a relaxation, or interpretation of the former Law: they are
much mistaken, and reach not the truth in this particular. And he does make
this further evident in page 103. where propitiation is ascribed, not to the
active, but to the passive obedience of Christ.

12. Says he in page 72. Another penalty on Adam was, that he conceived and
found himself cast out of Gods favor: and this seems to be signified by Gods
casting him out of Paradise, denying him access to the Tree of life: for the
passage into that happy place was guarded by Angels with a fiery sword (Genesis 3.
24.) signifying, that s^eing man had sinned and polluted himself, there was no
possibility of life by the Law of works; and so says Mr. Ed. Holyoke in his
Doctrine of life, page 23. Gods purpose was not to bring fallen man to life, by
the ruins of any natural abilities: there was a bar put in Genesis 3. 24. that
we should not think of any hope in that.

13. Says he in page 146. To think that the promises, threats, and the
obligation of the Law of works do continue under the Gospel, or remain at any
time in the Kingdom of God Redeemer, is an error, and a great mistake.

It is one thing to bind unto perfect obedience, another thing to bind unto
perfect obedience, as the condition of life. This latter was essential to the
moral Law, as given at first (to Adam) and in that respect it is truly and
properly said, that the Law of works is abrogated.

Ibidem says he, in this respect it is not proper, nay it is not true to say,
that God in the moral Law binds man unto perfect and perpetual obedience; for
so it does not: he binds to perfect and perpetual obedience (which man neither
does, nor can perform) or to punishment by his Savior, and upon faith in him
removeable, and not to obedience and punishment too.

14. Says he in page 279. All the penalties on Cain, the old World, the
builders of Babel, and the rest were penalties as threatened by, so inflicted
for sin against God Redeemer: all this (says he) is evident from the Books of
Moses and the Prophets, which speak to men as sinful, promise Christ, forbid
impenitency, preach and urge repentance, and make all penalties removeable upon
that condition, which could not have been done, if sin and penalties had been
looked upon according to the Law of works.

It is in vain therefore to argue that, because as the Law of works commanded
love to God, love to our neighbor, did forbid idolatry, murder, theft, etc.
did threaten death and punishment for these sins: so the Gospel commands the
same duties, forbids the very same things, threatens the same penalties, and
promises life, that therefore the Law of works continues, especially the
moral Law; for the precepts, prohibitions, promises, and threats of the Law,
and of the Law of grace come under different notions: as for instance.

We may among many places single out this one; Let the wicked forsake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return to the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon, Esa.
55. 7. [but the Law of works does not say so] but it says, Be not wicked, sin
not at all: the Law of grace says, Though thou have sinned, and art wicked,
yet forsake thy wicked way, and return unto the Lord, against whom thou bast
sinned: the Law of works says, Thou have sinned, and must die; I have no
promise of life or pardon for thee: but the Law of grace says, Though thou
have by thy sia deserved to die, yet upon condition of repentance and return
thou shall be pardoned, and live.

I touch the more often upon this point (says he) and here stand the more
largely upon it, because some will take no notice of it; others, who are
sufficiently informed, are hardly persuaded of this difference, and of the
abrogation of the Law of works, which to a guilty person denies all possibility
of salvation.

15. Says he, no man ought to preach the Law of works unto sinful man, as now
in force; for that makes sin unpardonable, and it is the high way to cause
despair: he indeed that will only threaten death and punishment, according to
the Law of works, and silence the promise of the Gospel, is a legal Preacher
indeed, and can be no faithful servant of Christ in this world.

Thus far out of Mr. Lawsons Body of Divinity.

And as touching the utter nulling of the Covenant of nature, which he calls
the government of Gods creatures, I do fully agree with him: but yet I differ
from him in certain particulars, especially in the matter of the condition of
the Covenant of nature (which he does call the Law of works, though very much
amiss, because it is a misleading title) he makes the matter of the Covenant of
nature to relate to Adams obedience to the moral Law of his nature; but I make
it to be only in relation to his obedience to the arbitrary Law and Covenant,
by one single act of eating only, as I have before explained my meaning.

4. I have cited Mr. Wotton, and Mr. Clendon also in Chap. 4. who do fully
concur with me touching the arbitrary Law of the Covenant of nature; and they
deny as I do, that the Covenant was made in relation to Adams obedience or
disobedience to the moral Law of nature.

Conclusion.
From the premises in this Section it follows, that the kind of death that
God threatened in the Covenant of nature, in Genesis 2. 17. was no other but a
double Spiritual death; as I have opened it before.

2. That the life promised (in opposition to this kind of death) was no other
but the confirmation of his concreated life after Gods image in moral
perfections, in the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise, and not a life in
Heaven, as I have opened it more at large in the fourth Section.

3. That the conditional matter of Adams obedience to the Covenant of nature,
cannot be called the matter of a sinners justification, because Christ never
performed that condition by eating of the Tree of life, neither was he at any
time under that Covenant to perform it.

4. It is also a truth which Mr. Baxter did at the first deny; namely, that
seeing the first Covenant is totally repealed, we need not care for the
righteousness of that Covenant, in respect of any of our personal actions, but
only in respect of Adams first, (in eating of the forbidden fruit) and ours in
him. This clear truth he first cited in his Aphorisms, page 102. on purpose to
confute it; but since then he has in his Confession most happily altered his
judgment to the right; and his words I have cited a little before: and this
truth does irresistably overthrow Mr. Nortons first foundation proposition, in
page 2.

SECT. IV.
Showing that diverse Orthodox writers do affirm, that the life promised in the
Covenant of nature was no other but the confirmation of Adams concreated life,
after the image of God in moral perfections, in the sweet enjoyments of an
earthly Paradise. De Triplici Foedere Thesis 9. No. 5^. 1


1. Learned Camero says, that in the Covenant of nature an eternal and blessed
life is promised, but yet an animal life to be lived in, in Paradise, Genesis 2.
8. 9.

2. Says he in Thesis 19. and in Thesis 80. We do therefore define a heavenly
l^fe to be that, in which Christ now lives in the Heavens, which is therefore
called heavenly, because the first Author of it is the heavenly Man: and on the
other hand we call that an animal life, in which Adam lived before his fall in
Paradise, which was to be perpetuated according to the perpetuating of his
obedience, and so it would have redounded to all his posterity.

2. Gro^ius in his Appendix to sundry points controverted, says in page 104.
Taken out of De veritate Religionis Christianae.
The Apostle Paul opposing the earthly Adam to the Spiritual, considered Adam
as he was first created, (and not as fallen) whence it follows, that we have
another nature from Christ, then we should have had, if Adam had persisted in
his primitive condition, and begotten his like: but (says he) a caelestial
life was not promised him, but a terrestial only, as the Scripture plainly
speaks, (namely, 1 Cor. 15. 44. to 49.) and says he, Cameron taught thus in
France; Spirituality in 1 Cor. 15. 44. is opposed to animality: for a Spiritual
body that is glorified, is supported immediately without any corporal means;
but in Paradise Adams animal body was to be supported by corporal means.
and says he, I do not herein digress from the received sentence of the Church.

3. Mr. Boul^on in his Bounds of Christian freedom, says in page 173. That in
the Covenant of nature God required perfect obedience to all his Commandments,
with a promise of a blessed life in Paradise, if he obeyed. In this assertion
he does approve of Camerons judgment, and for that cause among others he has
printed Camerons Book with his own.

2. Take notice that he does call the Covenant made with Adam, The Coventnt of
nature, as Cameron did before; and as our large Annot. does in Jer. 31. 32. and
as many late writers do, as may be seen in some of the following Agthors.

4. Learned Mr. Wotton (so styled by sundry eminent late writers) says thus to
Hemingius; I deny the proposition, because it cannot be proved by Scripture
that there was any Covenant for eternal life (in Heaven) betwixt God and Adam,
in regard either of his habitual justice, which was bestowed on him in his
Creation, or of his actual obedience in keeping the Law. We find indeed (
Wotton de Recons. pec. par. 2. l. 1. c. 7.
says he) a threatening of death (and that eternal) in Genesis 2. 17. but we may
not from thence conclude, that if he had not eaten, he should have been
translated to Heaven: only this follows, that he should have enjoyed that
immortal life, which then he had: and that favor and familiarity with God, in
which he lived with all delight and comfort.

2. Says he, in John, page 410. Put case our first parents had continued in
obedience to God their Creator, according to their allegiance and duty; what
could they have looked for, but either a confirmation of that estate which then
they enjoyed, or at the most the reward of their service, the wages for their
work? they could never have attained to this dignity, to be the sons of God by
adoption: which we have only by Christ as our right to Heaven.

5. Mr. Rutherford on the Covenant, page 1. says, the Apostle in 1 Cor. 15.
47. does make the condition of the first Adam (before his fall) to be animal
and earthly; and that of the second Adam to be spiritual and heavenly: (and to
this sense does P. Martyr expound this verse, cited before at Reply 10.)

2. Says he in page 2. The flower and choicest of Adams Paradise estate is an
earthly condition; as it is evident, 1. By his eating, Genesis 2. 9, 16. 2. By his
sleeping, verse. 21. 3. By his being placed in a Garden to dress it, verse. 8,
16, 17. 4. By his marriage, verse. 23, 24. 5. By his Lordship over Birds,
Beasts, and Fishes, Genesis 1. 28. But (says he) In the second Adam we were
glorified with a life of more worth.

3. Says he in page 5. Adam was predestined to life through Jesus Christ;
but yet not as a public person representing all his sons; but as a single
person, as Abraham and Jacob, etc. therefore we are predestined to life
eternal, Not in him, but in Christ, Romans 8. 29, 30.

(And from hence I do also infer, that none are predestined or justified from
sin, or adopted to the heavenly Paradise, for their performance of the
condition of the first Covenant of nature, namely, not for their eating of the
Tree of life in Adam their public head, neither could Christ become our surety
to fulfill the condition of that Covenant for us, because he was none of Adams
natural generation, with whom only that Covenant was made.)

4. Mr. Rutherford does propound this Query, in Chap. 9. page 49. What life was
it that was promised in the Covenant of works? his answer is; not a life in
Christ, and the fruit of the merit of blood, as our life is in the new
Covenant, John 3. 16. But it is a Law life (happily a communion in glory) But
(says he) the life he lived; and the creatures for his service seems not to
belong to the life of glory: and says he in page 14. The conditional decree of
Adams life, if he should do the Law (of nature) was not predestination to
eternal glory.

5. Says he in page 20. It Is not written in the heart of man by nature, that
God should promise eternal life to man, upon condition of obedience: for it
were nothing against justice or bounty, or any attribute of God, not to reward
his creature which is obliged to serve him: nor can the promise as touching
such a Covenant be written in his heart, page 22. And unto this I add (that by
the like reason) neither can the threatening of death in Genesis 2. 17. be written
in Adams heart for his eating of the forbidden Tree.

6. Mr. George Walker in his Doctrine of the Sabbath, page 16. says, The
Covenant of life being sealed, by Adams eating of that Tree (which was the seal
of the Covenant, as it appears by Gods speech in Genesis 3. 22.) man had been
confirmed in that natural life and estate wherein God had created him, and the
Devil could have had no power, either to seduce him, or to prevail by his
temptations.

2. Says he in page 28. I confess and believe, that man by his perfect
obedience performed to God in his own person, according to the first Covenant
of works, might have continued in that earthly life, and natural happiness,
wherein he was created: but that he had any supernatural or spiritual power
given him before the promise of Christ, whereby he was fitted for heavenly
happiness; or that any such happiness was promised him in the first Covenant,
or any grace (of justification, etc.) tending thereunto, I cannot be persuaded;
and then he gives diverse reasons for the confirming of his said assertion.

3. Says he in page 34. If the observation of the weekly Sabbath were but a
dictate of nature written in man's heart in the Creation, then were the chief
end and aim of it no more but an earthly felicity, and the fruition of a
natural life in an earthly Paradise: and to this sense he does also reason in
page 10.

4. Says he in page 39. Though God did create man perfect after his own image,
yet I do not read that this image did comprehend any more in it, but natural
gifts and endowments only: and he speaks much more to this effect in page 32,
33, 37.

7. Mr. Weames in h^s Portraiture, page 251. does confidently affirm, that
Adams relative life to the promise was natural only, and not supernatural: his
words I have in part cited before, at Reply 22. ult. and Doctor Ames in Medul,
l. 1. c. 8. Sect 70. does make Gods image in Adam to be no more but natural
endowments; and so does Mr. Burg^s in Vindicae legis, page 19, 20. and many
others.

8. Mr. Woodbridge says in his Method, page 342. That Adams obedience to keep
the Law, was not of grace, but ut naturae debita, as due to his nature out of
the common goodness, which furnished every Creature in its kind, with those
principles and abilities which were necessary to them for the attaining of the
respective ends to which they were created: but (says he) to quicken us when
we are dead, and to restore lost abilities; yea, to vegitate and maintain them
against contrary principles, either of inclinations from within, or oppositions
from without, is such special grace as Adam in that estate received not.

2. Says he in page 36. If Adam had continued righteous, he might well have
propagated life to his children, but not salvation, because they had never been
in danger of death. This assertion does by necessary consequence prove that
Adam in his innocence should not have had any other life, then a perfect
natural life for ever in Paradise only.

9. The Book called, The manifold wisdom of God, (which some say was Mr. George
Walkers.) does often call the Covenant made with Adam, The Covenant of nature,
as in page 50, 93, etc.

2. The said Author says in page 51. That the sign and seal which God gave to
man for the confirmation of this Covenant, was the Tree of life, which was to
man a Sacrament: (and so Bernard does also call it a Sacramental Tree) and a
pledge of eternal life on Earth, and of all blessings needful to keep man in
life: and the receiving of this seal was the eating of the Tree of life: and
the end of this Covenant was the upholding of the Creation, and all Creatures
in their perpetual natural estate, for the benefit of man continually: this was
the first Covenant that God made with man.

3. Says he in page 89. The Seal of the first Covenant was the Tree of life,
which if Adam had received by eating thereof in the state of innocence, before
Adam in his innocence might not kill and eat the flesh of any Creatures: but
being fallen he has now liberty through Christ's sacrifice to kill for typical
sacrifices, and so cosequently to kill and to eat flesh at other times also.
his fall, he had certainly been established in that estate for ever, and could
not have been seduced and supplanted by Satan, (as some learned men do think)
and as Gods own words do seem to imply, in Genesis 3. 22.

4. Says he in page 93. The promises of God in the Covenant of nature, were
only natural life and earthly happiness, with all blessings necessary thereunto.

5. Says he in page 41. Others derive the word Berith of (...) which signifies
to eat and refresh ones self with meat: and says he, there is some reasons
thereof, because the old Covenant of God made with man in the Creation, was a
Covenant wherein the Condition or Law was about eating: and so also in the
solemn making and sealing of the Covenant of grace in Christ the blessed seed;
the public ceremony was the slaying and sacrificing of beasts, and eating some
part of them, after the fat and choice pieces were offered and burnt on the
Altar: for by virtue of that Covenant God gave man leave to eat the flesh of
beasts, which he might not do in the state of innocence, Genesis 1. 29, and so
also in the solemn Covenants that were made betwixt men, the parties were wont
to eat together, as it appears by Genesis 26. 30. and Genesis 31 54. And to this
sense does Mr. Walker speak in his Doctrine of the Sabbath, page 29. namely,
that Adam had power given him in the state of innocence, to rule over all
Cattle and all living Creatures, only to order them and command them for his
delight and pleasure: but (says he) in Christ he had power given him to kill,
and to sacrifice, and to eat them, and to use them for his profit.

10. Mr. Burroughes in his Gospel Conversation, page 43. says, we do not read
of Gods promising Adam to l^ve in Heaven, if he had obeyed; but he should have
continued in Paradise, and so have lived a natural l^fe, but yet continued
eternally, God would have upheld that natural life of his. This is all we read
that ever God promised unto Adam.

2. Says he the first Adam was natural, and the second Spiritual; the first of
the Earth earthly, the second the Lord from Heaven. The Apostle in 1 Cor. 15.
47. speaks of Adam in innocence, as the common head of all mankind, that he was
of Earth earthy: but says the Apostle in way of distinction, The 1 Cor. 15. 47.
second Adam was the Lord from Heaven, i.e. he brings all heavenly glory.

3. Says he, though Adam had stood, yet we never read of any heavenly glory
that ever he or his posterity should have had.

4. Says he in page 44. We have better promises then ever Adam had, we have
promises of heavenly glory that he had not.

11. Austin does expound 1 Cor. 15. 42. to 49. and in conclusion he says thus;
we may not think that our bodies at the resurrection shall be such as Adams I^
the City of God, l. 13. c. 23
was in his creation, for that was but a natural body. But at the resurrection
(our bodies) shall be Spiritual bodies: and so says he in Chap. 20. If we may
call the Spirit serving the flesh carnal, then we may in like sort call the
flesh serving the Spirit spiritual; not because it shall be turned into the
Spirit, as some think from 1 Cor. 15. 44. but therefore it is called a
Spiritual body, because it shall serve the Spirit in all wonderful and ready
obeisance, to the fulfilling of the most secure will of indissoluble
immortality.

12. Mr. Bale on the Covenant says in page 6. God provided and promised to
Adam in innocence an eternal happiness, In the present enjoyments.

2. Says he in page 10. Upon supposition of Adams persisting in the state of
obedience, to say that God would have translated him to the state of glory, is
more then any just ground will warrant, because in Scripture there is no such
promise. And if we must not presume above what is written, we may say that Adam
should have continued in that blessed estate of nature, in which he was
created: but as for his translation after some number of years spent on Earth,
we read not.

3. Says he in page 25. The creation of man, and the integrity of the humane
nature, is the foundation of the former Covenant; but the redemption of man by
Christ is the foundation of the Covenant of grace.

4. Says he, The Covenant of nature promised life, But not righteousness;
(namely, not justification) nor repentance, nor forgiveness of any the least
iniquity.

5. Says he in page 25. In the Covenant of nature, eternal life, and that most
blessed is promised; but yet only animal, and to be enjoyed in Paradise, or a
continuance in that good estate wherein he was set at first of the rich bounty
of God: but in the Covenant of grace, translation out of ignomy and death, to
an eternal happiness and glory in heaven, is promised.

6. Says he, ^n page 73. The first breaking forth of this gracious and free
promise and Covenant, was immediately upon the fall, Genesis 3. 15. Genesis 3. 15.


23. Mr. Barter says in his Aphorisms, page 15. the like promise was only the
cont^nuance of that estate that Adam was then in, in Paradise.

2. Says he, in page 136. Where does the Scripture talk of Adams meriting any
more then the continuance of that happiness which then he had: and says he ^n
his answer to Mr. Air, in page 34. Adam was not endowed with the image of God,
nor made Lord of the inferior Creatures, nor placed in a Paradise, nor had the
promise of immortality and felicity, if he sinned not upon the procurement of
the merits of Christ.

3. Says he, in page 31. Calvin and many more Interpreters think, that if Adam
had not fallen, he should after a season have been translated to Heaven without
death (and so says Bucanus in Com. pl. p. 111.) as Enoch and Elias: but says
he, I know no Scripture that tells us so much.

And therefore I pray the Reader to take special notice, that Mr. Watson in his
Christian Charter does prove by several pregnant Arguments in page 176, No
humane body is yet in Heaven, but the body of Christ only.
etc. that no other man's body is yet in Heaven, but the body of Christ only.
And 2. Take notice from his Arguments, that Mr. Nortons comparison, fetched
from the entering of Enoch and Elias body into Heaven, in page 32. is but a mere
fiction of his own brain.

14. Mr. Wilson in his Christian Dictionary does expound the Tree of life, in
G. n. 2. 9. of that happy life that Adam received by Gods Creation, wherein he
was to be confirmed by eating of the Tree of life, which was appointed to be a
Sacrament thereof.

15. Mr. Bro. says in Ecclesiastes p. 1. The holy Trinity consists for the
making of man in justice and plain holiness, and makes his body of the Earth,
that all things might serve his use; the Stars, the Elements, the Planets, and
all live things; and God does breath into him a soul immortal, and full of
life, which might have kept the body always alive, and shows unto Angels man's
wisdom, in that he names all Beasts with terms defining their natures; and
makes a woman out of his side, and gives them dominion over the Earth, and
gives his Angels charge over them to attend them, and to keep them; but one
part of them misliketh the charge, and by that rebellion extinguish their own
light, and lose their glory, and find misery irrecoverable, and seek leave to
try man, whether he can be deceived, to cast off the obedience of God, and
prevails; and brings them To death of the soul, and to the loss of that
(concreated) Light, that would have kept the body alive forever: in these last
words he does imitate the words of the Ebrew Doctors next cited.

16. The ancient Ebrew Doctors say; after the opinion of our Rabbis of blessed
memory; if Adam had not sinned he had never died, but the breath which he was
inspired with, of the most high blessed God, should have given him life for
ever, and the good will of God which he had in the time of his creation, had
cleaved unto him continually, and had kept him alive for ever: this is recorded
by Rab. Menachem, as the common opinion of the more ancient Rabbis: see Ains.
in Genesis 2. 17.

17. Doctor Gouge says in Ebr. 8. 8. Sect. 42. If Adam had eaten of the Free
of life, before he eat of the other Tree, he should for ever have been
established.

2. Says he in Sect. 45. The good promised in the Covenant of grace is a
greater degree of happiness, and a far more glorious estate, then that which
was promised by the first Covenant.

18. Mr. Hotchkis says in his Exercitation, page 83. Christ by his
satisfaction d^d procure for believers an eternal inheritance in Heaven, which
for degree is commonly thought to be a greater felicity, then Adam if he had
stood should have attained to.

19. Doctor All, B. B. of Exeter, says in his Poor man's Library, page 145.
The Tree of knowledge of good and evil is so called, as the Schoolmen and other
l^te writers say [Ab eventu] of that which followed the eating thereof; even as
the Tree of life is therefore called the Tree of life [Ab effectu] For as some
Divines write, the fruit of this Tree should (by virtue of Gods free Covenant)
have conserved the integrity of man's health, and the radical moisture, that he
should never be stricken with age, with wrinkles, with hoare hairs, nor with
any corruption, but should have remained in perpetual young age: And Auslin
says thus in the City of God, l. 14. c. 17. Their eyes were opened to see
between the good they had lost, and the evil they had incurred, Genesis 2. 7. and
thereupon the Tree was called, The Tree of knowledge of good and evil: for then
they knew they were made naked of that grace, which (at first) made their
bodily nakedness innocent.

20. Doctor Wills in Dan. 9. p. 24. says, we are in Christ restored to a more
excellent state, then we lost in Adam, which was but terrene and mutable; but
by Christ we receive a heavenly, everlasting, and immutable Kingdom.

2. Says he in Romans 5. Quest. 36. In Christ we are restored to a more
excellent estate, then we lost in Adam; for in Adam we are deprived of a
temporal Paradise, but in Christ we are restored to a heavenly: in Adam we are
excluded from eating of the material Tree of life, but in Christ we feed of the
bread of Heaven, which gives eternal life, etc.

21. Mr. Jo. Smith of Clavering says in his Exposition of the Creed, p. 243. A
Christians estate is better then Adams was in the time of his innocence; for he
had but an earthly Paradise, but a Christian shall have a heavenly Paradise.

2. Says he in page 450. We have a better estate by Christ, and greater honor
then ever we lost by Adam. For 1. We lost by Adam but an earthly Paradise, but
by Christ we get Heaven. 2. Adam was Lord only of the Earth, but we have Heaven
by Christ.

3. He had it but on his good behavior, but we have Heaven without condition.

4. He lived among Beasts and Birds, but we shall live among Angels.

5. He had the presence of God but by fits, but we shall enjoy it continually.

6. When he had all things, he had need of a (mutual) helper, but God shall be
all in all to us.

7. Says he in page 630. Our knowledge in Heaven shall be more perfect, then
ever Adams was in the time of his innocence. Adam knew his wise as soon as she
was brought to him, though he never saw her before, therefore shall we much
more know one another in Heaven; so that our knowledge shall then be more
perfect, then Adams was in the time of his innocence: and we shall rise with
the Tame bodies we lived in here. Peter knew Moses and Elias on the Mount,
although they were dead many thousand years before. If he knew them when he had
but a taste of glory, much more shall we when we shall have fullness of glory:
therefore our estate in Christ is better then that we lost in Adam.

22. Mr. Burges says in Vinditiae legis, p. 139. Adam was so immortal, as that
there was a possibility of mortality: but it is not so with those that are
glorified.

2. Says he, Adam was so immortal, that he had a natural body which did need
nourishment, but it is not so with those that are made happy (in Heaven.)

3. Says he, Adam in his first estate was naturally immortal; for if death had
been natural, God had been the author of death, and man would not have abhorred
it.

4. Says he in his former page, as we are in a Mediator, we are in a better
and surer condition, then the Angels or Adam was: and I will add this reason,
because Adam had but natural helps, but in a Mediator we have supernatural
helps to the attaining of the heavenly inheritance. Adams righteousness was but
natural, but the righteousness we have by Christ, is from Gods supernatural
grace, the pardon of sin to believing sinners, and the receiving them into the
adoption of sons to the heavenly inheritance: therefore our estate by Christ is
better then that we lost in Adam.

23. Doctor Sybes in his 19 Sermons on Phil. 3. 21. says in page 48. This is
certain we are renewed not to the image of the first Adam, but to the image of
the second Adam: we are conformed in soul to the image of Christ in holiness
and righteousness; so likewise we shall be conformable in body to Christ's body:
the glorious body of Christ is the pattern of this transmutation, and change at
the day of resurrection; and in page 59. the second life shall be better then
the first, our bodies shall be better then in the first Creation, they shall be
glorious bodies like Christ's.

24. Mr. Norton himself does in part agree with the said Authors: for thus he
says in page 261. Though man by reconciliation be restored into a better
estate, yet not into the same estate formally, wherein he was before the fall:
for then though he was A Son, Luke 3. 38. and in a state of favor with God,
yet he was not just, nor yet his condition immutable.

Adam was not just, until he was reconciled after his fall. I grant that he was
not made supernaturally just, so as to make him a capable subject of the
heavenly inheritance, until after his fall and conversion: but yet I say also,
that he was naturally just, because he was created after Gods image and
likeness in moral perfections; and therefore he was in that respect perfectly
just by nature, and made thereby a capable subject of an everlasting life in an
earthly Paradise; of which I have spoken more at large in Chap. 5. and Chap. 6.

2. I cannot but wonder why Mr. Norton does cite Luke 3. 38. to prove that Luke
3, 23. 38.
Adam is there called the Son of God, seeing the word Son* in all that long
genealogy is applied only to the humane nature of Christ, even from verse. 23.
which should (says Bro.) be thus translated; Jesus himself began to be about
thirty years of age, being the son of Joseph, [as ^t was supposed] the son of
Eli, the so^ of Matthat, etc. These words, As it was supposed, (says he)
should not be set before, but after Joseph: and thence it follows, that Luke
does not set down Joseph's genealogy; for Joseph was not the son of Eli, (as
most translations do carry the words) but he was the son of Jacob, as Matthew
does place him in his genealogy, Ma^th. 1. 16. therefore Luke does make Christ
to be the immediate son of Mary, of Eli, of Mattha^, and so all along up to
Adam: and thence it follows, that not Adam but Christ is called the Son of
God, in Luke. 3. 38. because his humane nature was conceived in the womb of the
Virgin Mary by the Holy Ghost: and in this manner does Sp^eds genealogy place
the word Son all along up to Adam; and so does Wo^ton in Joh. p. 401. and
Doctor Gouge in Ebr. 2. Sect. 162. By the threatening of the Covenant of nature,
Adams twofold Spiritual death should have been perpe^uat^d in this world only,
without any bodily death, in case Adams after sinning against the moral Law of
his nature had not provoked Gods justice to inflict a bodily death: in which
punishment the elect are distinguished from the reprobates by their says in
Christ. There are five main differences between the Covenant of nature and the
Covenant of grace.


3. Says Bro. in Re^. 20. 1. The Angels are called the Sons of God, but never
any one in particular; and so the faithful are called the Sons of God, but no
particular man: but the Son eternal, in whom they that trust are happy, Psalm.
2. 13. with Luke 3. 38. therefore Adam is not called in particular the Son of
God. But this reply is intended for no more, but only for a Parenthesis, for
the rectifying of h^s m^sinterpretation of Luke 3. 38.

Conclusion from the premises.

1. Hence it follows, that sundry Christian writers and Ebrew Doctors do
agree, that the kind of l^fe that was promised in the Covenant of nature, was
no other but the confirmation of Adams concreated life, after the image of God
in moral perfections; which concreated life he inspired as an adjunct to the
essential life of his immortal soul, for his sinless conversation in the sweet
contents of an earthly Paradise for ever.

2. Hence also it follows by necessary consequence, that the death that was
threatened in opposition thereto, can be no other but a double kind of
Spiritual death to be continued in this world only, without any bodily death,
for any thing that was revealed to the contrary in the Covenant of nature. God
reserved the punishment of a bodily death in his own secret mind for a time;
namely, until he had first declared the new Covenant of grace and
reconciliation, in Genesis 3. 15, but then he did presently after threaten a
bodily death; namely, in v. 19. not for Adams first sin in eating the forbidden
fruit, but as a new punishment for his after sinning quality; namely, for his
Original sin against every branch of the moral Law of nature.

3. From the premises it follows, that Mr. Norton is much mistaken, in
affi^ming that the Covenant of grace and reconciliation has its dependence on
the Covenant of nature: 1. In relation to Christ's satisfaction, and 2. In
relation to a sinners justification. Seeing I have proved that the Covenant of
nature was totally extinguished, before ever the Covenant of reconciliation was
declared; and consequently that it cannot have any likeness or agreement to the
Covenant of nature, neither in the Author of it, nor in the subjects, nor in
the conditions to be performed on man's part, nor yet in the promise or
threatening, nor yet in the continuance of them.

1. The Author of them is not the same: for the Author of the Covenant of
nature is God the Creators of all natural beings: but the Author of the
Covenant of grace and reconciliation is God Redeemers in a supernatural way.

2. There is no likeness or agreement between the subjects of these two
Covenants: for the subjects of the Covenant of nature was perfect natural
mankind; but the subjects of the Covenant of reconciliation is man fallen and
corrupted.

3. There is no likeness or agreement in the conditions that are to be
performed on man's part: for the condition that God required to be performed on
man's part in the Covenant of nature, was no more but one natural act of eating
of the Tree of life in the first place, for the confirmation of his moral or
natural perfections. But the condition that God has required to be performed
on man's part in the Covenant of reconciliation, is the supernatural act of
faith in Christ, not to be once done only, but to be daily renewed. 4. There is
no likeness or agreement in their promises and threatenings; for the promise of
the Covenant of nature did reach no further, but to the confirmation of his
concreated natural life for ever, in the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise,
in case Adam did first eat of the Tree of the twofold life: and the threatening
of that Covenant was no other but a double Spiritual death to be suffered in
this world only, in case Adam did but first eat of the forbidden fruit: but the
promise of the Covenant of reconciliation does reach far beyond this natural
life; namely, to a supernatural and heavenly life for ever, in the sweet
contents of the heavenly Paradise to all such as shall attain to the
supernatural grace of faith in Christ: and the threatening is an eternal death
in Hell to all s^^h as l^ve and die in the unbelief of their redemption, by the
promised seed of the woman. 5. There is no likeness or agreement in the
continuance of these Covenants: for the Covenant of nature was ordained to last
no longer in use, but until Adams obedience was tried by one single act of
eating; the which trial was also to be made in the very day of his Creation (as
I have showed it more at large elsewhere) as soon therefore as Adam had but
tasted of the forbidden fruit in the first place, that Covenant in Genesis 2. 17.
was totally extinguished, before ever the Covenant of reconciliation was
declared in Genesis 3. 15. and thence it follows by necessary consequence, that
the Covenant of reconciliation cannot have any dependence at all on the
Covenant of nature, neither in relation to Christ's satisfaction, nor yet in
relation to a sinners justification, nor yet in any other respect whatsoever,
as Mr. Nortons foundation proposition does affirm: but on the contrary God has
established the Covenant of reconciliation to be perpetuated to all Adams
fallen posterity to the end of the world, Psalm. 111. 9. Esa. 24. 5. Ebr. 13.
20. to try whether they will live and die believers or infidels: and in that
respect it was that Christ said unto Apostles, Go ye into all the wo^ld, and
preach the Gospel to every crea^ure; he that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16. 15.

4. Hence it does also follow, that when God did first appoint a bodily death
in Genesis 3. 19. he did at the same time appoint a particular judgment to follow
it to each departed soul, as the Apostle does tell us and assure us ^^ Ebr 9
27. namely, to all such as die in the faith of their redemption by the promised
seed of the woman, an eternal life in Heaven, but to all those that live and
die in the unbelief thereof an eternal death in Hell. At first God appointed a
Spiritual death in Genesis 2. 17. 2. a bodily death, and 3. an eternal death in
Hell, in Genesis 3. 19. These three distinct sorts of death have not any natural
dependence on each other; but they all proceed from the several threatenings of
Gods justice; first from the threatening of the Covenant of nature, and the two
other sorts from the Covenant of grace.

5. Therefore it is a great error to make these three distinct sorts of death
to be al threatened in the Covenant of nature, seeing the first sort only was
threatened in that Covenant, and the other two were only threatened under the
Covenant of grace.

But woe and alas! all these three several sorts of death are confounded by Mr.
Nortons unlimited exposition of the word Death in Genesis 2. 17. to the corrupting
of several fundamental truths, especially of the great point of Christ's
satisfaction, and also of the great point of a sinners justification; as his
first foundation proposition dath carry the matter: and 3. to the corrupting of
the true sense of abundance of the blessed Scriptures, as I have in some
measure showed in sundry places of this Treatise.

SECT. V.
Being a further description of the second part of our Spiritual death in sin,
by corruption of nature, as it is threatened in Genesis 2. 17.

1. IT is granted generally (as I think) that no other Scripture can be found
that does threaten a Spiritual death in sin to Adam, and to all h^^ natural
posterity, but Genesis 2. 17. and therefore this consideration should advise all
that love the truth in sincerity, to be more then ordinarily careful, that they
do not confound that kind of death which is only threatened in this Text, for
the transgression of the Covenant of nature, with the threatening of a bodily
death, and with the threatening of an eternal death in Hell, seeing these last
two sorts of death were not threatened, until after the Covenant of grace was
first declared in Genesis 3. 15. but then presently after Adam was threatened with
a bodily death for Original sin, in v. 19. and by Gods relative justice in the
Covenant, an eternal death in Hell does follow to all that live and die in the
unbelief of their redemption by the promised seed of the woman.

2. Consider that these three sorts of death were threatened from two distinct
and opposite Covenants; namely, the first sort from the Covenant of mere
nature: and 2. the other two sorts of death were threatened under the Covenant
of Gods free grace: these two Covenants must carefully be differenced and
distinguished, or else abundance of Scriptures will unavoidably be
misinterpreted, and several fundamental points of Divinity will be erroneously
expounded, especially that weighty point of Christ's satisfaction, and that
weighty point of a sinners justification: but woe and alas! such confounding of
the Covenants has already taken such deep root in the minds of many, that it
will be a two-handed labor to rectify their minds, and to free their
understandings from the said errors; especially such as through long custom
are naturalized to the said errors. More easy it is, says one of the ancient
Divines, to put off any other customs, how much soever he is affixed to them,
then to lay aside his accustomed opinion.

3. Take special notice that it was the godly care of the ancient Ebrew Doctors
of Ezra's age, or of the longest livers of that age, to keep in memory the
weighty point of our Spiritual death in sin, in a distinct sort from the other
The word Dead is often used in the Thalmudikes for dead in sin; and from their
making of that word common, our Savior and his Apostles did often use it in
the new Testament, as approving the care of their godly ancestors to make it
common.
two kinds of death, because it seems they foresaw and feared, that their
posterity wo^ld be very apt to confound the threatening of a Spiritual death in
sin, in Genesis 2. 17. with the threatening of a bodily death under the Covenant of
grace, in Genesis 3. 15, 19. therefore they out of a tender care to preserve the
memory of the second sort of our Spiritual death in Genesis 2. 17. distinct to
their posterity, did labor to make this phrase common, The dead (in sin) or
the dead in soul: and they could not ground this phrase so well upon any other
Text in the old Testament, as upon Genesis 2. 17.

1. Du Plessis in his Trueness of Religion, Chap. 27. says, that Rab. Moses
Ben Maymo^y understands by the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. a Spiritual
death; that is to say, the death of the soul wounded with sin, and so forsaken
of her life, which is God.

2. The ancient Ebrew Doctors that are related to by Rab. Menachem say; unto
this world there cleaves the secret filthiness of the Serpent which came upon
Eve; and because of that filthiness Death is come upon Adam and his seed, etc.
See Ains. in Genesis 3. 19. and says Ains. in Genesis 3. 15. the mystery of Original
sin, and thereby death over all, and deliverance by Christ. Rab. Menachem on
Lev. 5. notes from the profound Cabalists in these words; So long as the
Spirit of uncleanness is not taken away out of this world, the fouls that come
down into this world must needs die, to root out the power of uncleanness out
of the world, and to consume the same; and all this is, Because of the decree
which was decreed for the uncleanness and filthiness which the Serpent brought
upon Eve.

From these and such like testimonies from the ancient Ebrew Doctors, it is
evident they had a bodily death to be inflicted, not for Adams first sin in
eating the forbidden fruit, but for his Original corruption only.

3. It is observed by Mr. Bro. in Rev. p. 278. That Zeror Hamor an ancient
Rabbin, does very often use this phrase, The dead, for the dead in sin: and
says he in page 301. this is a Thalmudike phrase, The dead: for the profane
often in Zeror: and to that very phrase does the Rabbin speak, in 2 Esdras 2.
16. The Synagogue does there find fault with her own children; saying, Those
that be dead will I raise up from their places: and the Rabbin that wrote
Baruch faith, Hear the prayer of the dead Israelites, Chap. 3. 4. and says he
in v. 11. They are defiled with the dead, and are counted with them that go
down to the graves.

4. It is observed by Mr. Ains. in Erod. 16. 13. That Rab. Menacham speaks
thus of the dew that covered the Manna; that the holy blessed God will raise up
the dead to life therewith, in the time that is to come. His meaning can be no
other, but that God will raise up the dead in sin to the life of grace, by the
sweet dew of the preaching of the Gospel in the days of the Messiah to come.

By these and such like instances, which might be produced from their ancient
Ebrew Doctors, we may perceive their godly care to keep in memory the true
sense of the term Death in Genesis 2. 17. ^o their posterity: but in case they
had confounded that kind of death in Genesis 2. 17. with a bodily death, and with
an eternal death in Hell, as Mr. Norton does, then the very memory of that
Spiritual death in sin would have been raked up in oblivion, and then their
posterity would have been utterly ignorant of it before the days of Christ (as
many of that pestilent Sect of the Sadduces were) But blessed be God for the
car^ of their ancestors to preserve the name of it, for the memory of it, to
the days of Christ: for then both he and his Apostles did labor to make it more
known and more authentic in the new Testament.

1. Christ said thus to one that desired to be his Disciple, on condition that
he might have leave first to go and bury his father: but our Savior answered
him, Let the dead (namely, the dead in sin) bury the dead: (in body) follow
thou me, Matthew. 8. 22. Luke 9. 60.

2. Christ propounded the words that the Father of the prodigal Son said; 1. To
his servants in Luke 15. 24. and then to his elder brother: in v. 32. This thy
brother was dead, and is alive again; (that is to say, he was dead in a profane
course of sinning, but now being converted ^y the regeneration of his mind he
is made alive again) and in this respect regeneration is called, The first
resurrection from the death in sin to the life of grace, Rev. 20. 6. Romans 6.
13. And says Christ, The hour is coming, and now is, that the dead (in sin)
shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear it shall live, John
5. 25.

3. The Apostle Peter said, that he preached the Gospel of salvation to the
dead (in sin) that they might live according to God in the spirit, 1 Pet. 4. 6.
and so consequently our first parents were dead in sin, when the Gospel was
first preached to them in Genesis 3. 15.

4. The Apostle said thus to the Romans, Through the offense of one the many be
dead, Romans 5. 15. namely, the many elected ones (as well as the reprobates) are
dead in sin by nature; for through the offense of one (says he) Death, i.e.
Death in sin has reigned by one, v. 17. The word many in v. 15. does mean the
elect only; and Doctor Willet does approve of Haymo for that exposition.

5. Paul says, If one died for all, then were all dead (in sin) 2 Cor. 5. 14,
15.

6. Paul says (You elected Ephesians) has he quickened, who were dead in
corruption and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. and says he in v. 5. Even when we were dead in
sin has he quickened together in Christ: hence it follows, that there is no
life from this death in sin, but by the new Covenant of grace, and by the work
of regeneration, and by faith in Christ, John 3. 16. John 5. 40. John 6. 33,
35, 46, 51, 53, 63. John 10. 10. 1 John 5. 12. Rev. 2. 7. Romans 6. 13.

7. Paul says, By nature we are alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18.
Hence it follows, that seeing all Adams natural generation are alienated from
that concreated life of God, wherein Adam was created after Gods image in moral
perfections; they must needs be dead spiritually by nature.

8. Paul did thus persuade the unconverted Ephesians, To arise from the dead,
and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5. 14.

9. Paul said thus to the Colossians, You being dead in your sins, and in the
uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with him, forgiving you
all your trespasses, Col. 2. 13.

10. Paul affirms, That the young widow that lived in sinful pleasures was
dead, 1 Timothy 5. 6.

11. The Apostle John says, We know that we are passed from death to life,
(namely, from the death of sin to the life of grace) because we love the
brethren: he that loves not his brother abides in death; namely, in the death
of sin, 1 John 3. 14. in his natural and unregenerate estate.

12. Christ said thus to the Angel of the Church of Sardis, Thou have a name
that thou live, but thou art d^ad, Rev. 3. 1.

13. The Apostle does call the natural condition of all men, even of the elect
as they come from Adam, The body of sin, Romans 6. 6. because that Original sin
which they derive from Adam, does infect the whole man both soul and body: and
2. He calls it, the Law of sin, Romans 7. 23. because it was inflicted for Adams
transgression of the positive Law of the Covenant of nature: and 3. He does
also call it, The body of death, in v. 24. because Adam and his posterity were
deprived of the life of Gods concreated image: and thence followed that kind of
sin which is now called Original sin; and is here called by the Apostle, The
body of death (in sin.)

14. All the best works of man that proceed from him before he is regenerated,
are called, Dead works, Ebr. 6. 1. Ebr. 9. 14. because they proceed from such
as are dead in sin spiritually.

These and such like expressions are very rarely used in the old Testament: but
we see that the new Testament does abound with them in an honorable memorial
of the like Thalmudike words and phrases, received by tradition from their more
ancient Ebrew Doctors, that lived near unto Ezras age: and doubtless those
godly Doctors did borrow that phrase from the true sense and meaning of the
word Death, in Genesis 2. 17. for they could not borrow it so well from any other
place in all the old Testament: and doub^less they did foresee, that their
posterity would be in great danger to obliterate this precious sense of the
word Death, in Genesis 2. 17. by turning it to a bodily death: and therefore out
of a tender care to preserve the memory of it in a distinct sort from a bodily
death, and from an eternal death in Hell, they did in their writings frequently
use the term de^d, for the dead in sin, that their posterity might be touched
with the greater sense of their misery; 1. In being deprived of the l^fe of
Gods concreated image of moral perfections, and 2. That they might thereby the
better see how Original sin did abound, and that thereby they might be forced
to fly to the promised seed of the woman, for the Spirit of regeneration, and
for their justification to life by Gods atonement, procured by the most perfect
obedience of Christ to the death, even to the shameful and painful death of the
Cross.

But because regeneration is not wrought without the concurrence of true
repentance, therefore it is also called, Repentance from dead works, Ebr. 6. 1.
and repentance to life, Acts 11. 16. And in this respect Christ did not only
merit the Spirit, for the regenerating of poor humbled sinners from the death
of sin to the life of grace, 2 Cor. 3. 6. but the Father also in the respect of
his merit is said to take away the stone out of the heart of poor humbled
sinners, and to make them as soft as fle^h: and in both these respects it is
said, He that has the Son has life, but he that has not the Son has not
life, 1 John 5. 12. and in this sense also the calling of the Jews (yet to
come) is called, Life from the dead, Romans 11. 15. and in this sense also the
meritorious cause of this life is called, The justification of life, Romans 5.
18. as the context from v. 12. does make it evident.

CHAP. II.
Being a further demonstration, that the kind of death threatened in Genesis 2. 17.
ought not to be understood of a bodily death.

NO other death was threatened in the Covenant of nature, then such as was
Reason 1.
most strictly and formally executed in the very same day, or point of time, in
the which Adam should but taste of the forbidden fruit.

But it is most certain, that a bodily death was not then strictly and formally
executed.

Therefore a bodily death was not then threatened.

In my former Chapter I have given several demonstrative reasons, to prove that
the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. was a concluding or a definitive threatening:
and thence it follows, that that kind of death (whatsoever it was) was most
strictly and formally executed in the very same day or point of time, in the
which Adam did but taste the forbidden fruit.

2. The assumption is as clear as the Sun at noonday, by Genesis 5. 5. namely,
that a bodily death was not then strictly executed, because it is there said
that Adam lived in body 930 years after that day.

Thus both parts of the Argument stand firm and sound.

3. I have also showed in the former Chapter, that a bodily death was not
threatened, until after the Covenant of grace and reconciliation was first
declared in Genesis 3. 15. But then presently after Adams fall, (who fell in the
day of his creation) a bodily death was threatened in v. 19. as a new and
general punishment A bodily death was not threatened, until after the Covenant
of reconciliation was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. and then it was first
threatened in v. 19.
to him, and to all his natural posterity, for Adams new kind of sinning
nature: for I have showed in the former Chapter, that the kind of death that
was threatened, in case Adam did but taste of the forbidden fruit, in Genesis 2.
17. was a double kind of Spiritual death; 1. By depriving Adam of his
concreated life of moral perfections after Gods image: and this deprivation was
the act of Gods justice; and this deprivation is properly called death: and
thence it follows, that in case Adam could have made a stop here from any
further sinning against the moral Law of his concreated nature, he should have
had no further punishment: but 2. Because of his said deprivation, he could not
make a stop here, but did instantly sin against every branch of that Law of his
moral perfection; and this new sinning quality is now commonly called [Death in
sin] and it is also commonly called Original sin; and it is also called by Paul,
in Romans 7. 17, 20. In-dwelling sin: and it is in relation to this second part
of death in sin, that God (after he had first declared the Covenant of grace to
our fallen Parents, for their effectual conversion, in Genesis 3. 15.) did ordain
a bodily death in v. 19. as a general punishment to all the fallen Sons of
Adam, and two other general punishments, 1. Sore travail to women in
childbirth, and 2. Sore labor to men for the support of their bodily life:
and this Covenant of reconciliation, and these three general punishments are
orderly set down in Genesis 3. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. as I have also briefly noted it
in the former Chapter, and also in my former printed Reply, in page 30, 147,
334, 357. and also in my Book of the Institution of the Sabbath; and all being
compared together, will give the greater light to the diligent Reader.

4. Mr. Calvin says, the Apostle himself does expressly witness in Romans 5. 12.
that therefore death came upon all men, because all men are wrapped in Original
sin, and defiled with the spots thereof.

5. Mr. Trap does rightly call Genesis 3. 19. [The first Text of man's mortality]
and from thence it follows, that he ought not to make Genesis 2. 17. to be the
first Text of man's mortality: but seeing he does place a bodily death to Genesis
2. 17. he is not so firm to his right exposition of Genesis 3. 19. as he ought to
be. And in like sort Doctor Bilson says in his Survey, page 147. Before God
would inflict them, (namely, before God would inflict the aforesaid three
general punishments, 1. Of sore travail upon women in childbirth, and 2 Of
sore labor upon mankind, and 3. Of bodily death threatened in Genesis 3. 16, 17,
18, 19.) he made open promise of the woman's seed, that it should bruise the
Serpents head: therefore (says he) at the very first inflicting of them, if we
do but cast our eyes, either on our own deserts, or on the lot of the wicked,
we shall find the wonderful favor of God, not only in opening his purpose unto
us of everlasting salvation in Christ; but even in so tempering the smart of
the punishment, and feeling the weight of sin in some sort, that by his mercy
we should be eased and comforted under that burden in this life, and after be
received to everlasting bliss; so that the sorrow, pain, and death which the
godly feel, were even at the first laid on them, by the same mixture of Gods
justice and mercy, with the which they do now continue: neither did Christ die
for us, to free us presently from the sentence of a bodily death, which God had
irrevocably pronounced, and executed on Adam and his offspring, by returning
him and them to the earth for many thousand years before Christ came.

2. Says he in page 252. My resolution was and is, that Christ was first
promised by Gods own mouth to bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15 [Before
death was inflicted on Adam and his off-spring] and therefore the punishment of
man's sin following could extend no further in the elect, [Then to the death of
the body] Indeed (says he) the promise of Christ to the faithful brake the
sequence of eternal death, which in the wicked is coherent to the death of
their bodies.

3. Says he in page 254. God has not revoked the general judgment which he
gave upon all men for their (Original) sin; Dust thou art, and to dust thou
shall return, Genesis 3. 19. But he performed (or declared) his promise which he
made, before he inflicted this punishment (of a bodily death) that the seed of
Such as ^old a bod^ly death to be threatened in Genesis 2. 17. cannot convince the
Pelagians, that a bodily death was threatened for the punishment of Original sin
in infants.
the woman should bruise the Serpents head: and thus he qualified this sentence
at the first pronouncing of it to all his elect, even as it stands to this
day.

But yet (this remarkable truth, which he has three times over affirmed) if it
be but compared with what he says on the word Death, in Genesis 2. 17. then it
will appear by his words, in page 175. that he is not so firm to his said
exposition of Genesis 3. 19. as he ought to have been.

6. I may thus argue: such as hold a bodily death to be first threatened in Genesis
2. 17. for the punishment of Adams first sin in eating the forbidden fruit,
cannot as long as they hold that tenent, convince the P^lagians, that the
bodily death of infants was inflicted on them for Original sin: for the
Pelagians will straitway reply to such opposites after this manner; you say
that a bodily death was first threatened in Genesis 2. 17. for the punishment of
Adam, first sin in eating the forbidden fruit; then it was not first threatened
for his after new kind of sinning, which is now called Orig^nal sin, because
that kind of sin is but the second part of the punishment of Adams first sin:
for his first sin was nothing else but his transient bod^ly act of eating the
forbidden fruit, which act of eating was no so bidden by the moral Law of
nature, but by Gods arbitrary and transient law only: but Original sin is an
after sin, and an inward sin, causing the very thoughts and imaginations of the
heart to rebel continually against every branch of the moral Law of nature: and
therefore consequently such as hold a bodily death to be threatened in Genesis 2.
17. for Adam, first sin, cannot convince the P^lagia^^ that the bodily death of
infants is any proof of their Original sin.

7. It is generally acknowledged, that a bodily death was not threatened, until
Adam was under the actual dominion of a Spiritual death in sin; as I have also
showed it in my former printed Reply, page 30. to 34. But that kind of death
that was threatened in Genesis 2. 17. was threatened whiles Adam stood in his
innocence; and therefore it was not absolutely threatened, (as a bodily death
was) but conditionally only; In the day thou eatest, etc.

8. As soon as a bodily death was absolutely threatened in Genesis 3. 19. for the
punishment of Original sin, it did strike a dread and a terror into Adam, and
into all his natural posterity: for it is said in Ebr. 2. 15. that the fear of
death Ebr. 2. 15.
does make men all their life time subject unto bondage; or as Doctor Gouge
says, guilty of bondage; (...) is a relative, and it has reference to a
superior power that keeps one in awe: it is five times used in the new
Testament in a bad and base respect; first here, and in Romans 8. 15, 21. Gal. 4.
24. Gal. 5. 1. And the bondage here meant it spiritual under sin and Satan, it
compriseth under it a miserable anxiety of mind, upon a continual expectation
of death and The death that was threatened in Genesis 2. 17. did not breed a^y fear
in Adams incocent nature, because it was but conditionally threatened; but the
bodily death that was threatened after his fall, did breed a present fear in
him, because it was absolutely threatened as a punishment for ^^ Original sin
damnation; and in that respect also Job does call Death, The King of Terrors,
Job. 18. 14. and in Job 24. 17. he calls it, The terrors of the shadow of
death, but on the contrary, the death that was threatened in the Covenant of
nature, in Genesis 2. 17. did not strike any terror at all into Adams pure
nature, because it was not absolutely threatened, (as a bodily death was) but
conditionally only: and he had it in his own power, not to transgress the
Covenant of nature, as the deserving cause of that death; and therefore as long
as he stood in his innocence, no fear of any hurt could befall him: for seeing
he had a power not to fall, he could not fear neither sin nor death.

Austin says in his eleventh Book on Genesis; If Adam had foreknown his sin,
and the revengement of God, how could he be blessed in Paradise? yea, as I
conceive (says he) he had been miserable and wretched, in apprehending and
conceiving that he should fall, and so be banished from the pleasures of
Paradise.

2. Doctor All, B. B. of Exeter, in his Poor man's Library, does much approve
of this assertion of Austins, and therefore he does paraphrase upon it thus: if
(says he) Adam had known of his fall and of his misery to come, it had
extinguished his blessedness, or at least it had much obscured it: and (says
he) that Adam neither was, nor could be foreknowing of his fall: the Schoolmen
reason after this manner:

The ill that is foreknown and foreseen, either it pleases the will, or not:
If As long as Adam stood in his innocence there was no object of natural fear
set before his eyes, to provoke his passion of fear; of which see more in Chap.
4. Sect. 2.
it pleases the will, then there is fault in the will.

But (say they) ^t cannot be that any fault should go before the first fault of
Adam (in eating the forbidden fruit.)

If it do not please the will, then there is pain in it; which (say they) is
not to be granted: for pain does never go before the fault.

3. Austin does also show in the City of God, l. 14. c. 10. That Adam could not
be troubled with any natural fear, as long as he stood in his innocence.

4. Mr. Weames does confirm the same at large in his Portraiture, page 200.

And thence it follows, that the kind of death that was threatened in Genesis 2.
17. was no other but a conditional Spiritual death only (If thou eatest of the
forbidden fruit) and 2. Seeing it was in Adams power not to eat of it, it does
from thence follow, that it did not work the least fear in his innocent nature,
as a bodily death did, because a bodily death was absolutely threatened, for the
punishment of his Spiritual death in sin, or for his Original sin: and thence
it bred a terrible fear in his corrupted nature, and made him subject to that
bondage of a natural fear all his life long, because it was not in his power to
escape it.

9. I have given two other pregnant Arguments, to prove that neither a bodily
death, nor yet an eternal death in Hell, were threatened in the Covenant of
nature, in Chap. 3. at Sect. 2. to which place I refer the Reader.

10. The distinction that I have made between the Covenant of nature (in the
time of Adams innocence) and the Covenant of reconciliation, (after Adams fall)
and 2. The distinction which I have made between the several threatenings of the
several kinds of death, in the said two several and distinct Covenants, is the
more narrowly to be marked, because of the weightiness of those distinct
differences, and also because several ancient writers have given some
remarkable hints of the said distinctions, though they have not done it so
thoroughly as the weight of the matter does require.

1. I have cited three ancient writers, in Chapter 1. Sect. 2. that do expound the
kind of death that is threatened in Genesis 2. 17. of a Spiritual death only, and
not of a bodily death: and their reason why they deny a bodily death to be
there threatened, is, because Adam did not die that day a bodily death, as he
did a Spiritual death.

2. Though Austin does sometimes expound the word Death, in Genesis 2. 17. of
three sorts of death; namely, 1. Of the death of the soul in sin, 2. Of the
death of the body for sin, and 3. Of an eternal death in Hell: yet he does
sometimes distinguish them to the several threatenings of the two several
Covenants: 1. He does make the time of the threatening of a Spiritual death in
sin, In the City of God, l. 13. c. 19.
to have relation only to Genesis 2. 17. 2. He does make the time of the
threatening of a bodily death to have relation to Genesis 3. 19. his words run
thus: In that the soul felt a disobedient motion in the flesh, and thereupon
covered the bodies secret parts; in this was the first death felt, that is, the
departure of the soul from God.

2. Says he, when the soul forsakes the body; decayed with age, then is that
other death felt, whereof God said [In imposing man's future panishment] Earth
thou art, and to earth thou shall return, Genesis 3. 19.

These words of Austins have these two remarkable points; 1. That he expounds
the word Death, in Genesis 2. 17. of that kind of death, wherein the soul
departed from God, when he did first eat of the forbidden fruit; which act was
his transgression of the Covenant of nature.

2. In that he assigns bodily death to Genesis 3. 19. and not to Genesis 2. 17. 1.
Calling it by way of distinction [The other death] 2. In calling this bodily
death [Mans future punishment] as succeeding his first Spiritual death in sin.

3. He does once more in the close of that Chapter call bodily death [A due
punishment for sin] namely, a due punishment for his new sinning habit, which
now is commonly called Original sin: God (says he) in scourging this
(Original) sin, said unto man, of whom we are all descended, Earth thou art,
and to earth thou shall return.

Object. 1. It is objected by some eminent Divines, that a bodily death was
only threatened in Genesis 2. 17. because God could not be the Author of inflicting
a Spiritual death in sin: but say they, Adam pulled that upon himself, by his
wilful sin (in eating the forbidden fruit) as if God had said thus to Adam; If
thou killest thy self by thy wilful eating of the forbidden fruit, thou shall
be killed: but say they, the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. imports such a
death as was inflicted by the just hand of God, and that can be no other (say
they) but a bodily death.
I cannot as yet, says Mr. Baxter (in his Aphoris. page 15.) assent to their
Ans. 1.
judgment, that think it was only that death which consists in a mere
separation of soul and body, that was threatened in Genesis 2. 17. and see his
further answer in page 34.

2. I have showed in Chap. 4. that Adam did not wittingly pull a Spiritual
death upon himself, but that he was enticed to eat of the forbidden fruit by
the deceit of the good Angel (as Eve thought it was) and thereupon when she saw
that the Tree was good for meat, and that it was a Tree to be desired to make
one wise, she did eat through the persuasion of the good Angel; and thence it
follows, that her sin was not a wilful sin. Mr. Baxter says in Apho^is. page
34. many Divines say, that God did not take away his image, but that Adam
thrust it away; so says Capel on Temptations, page 8. though most (says he)
do judge otherwise, because the same power must annihilate that did create. And
I say that God did take away his image from him, for his transgression of the
Covenant of nature: for at first Adam and all mankind were in a state of favor
with God in the time of his innocence, according to the favor of the first
Covenant of nature: but in the same point of time that Adam transgressed the
Covenant, they were justly deprived of that favor; namely, of the concreated
image of God; contrary to Mr. Nortons assertion, in page 112. 113. And Doctor
Ames does use the word Privation in a like sense, in M. dull. c. 25. Sect. 35.
yea, Mr. Norton himself does make mankind to be once in a state of favor with
God, as they were in Adam before the fall, in page 261.

3. In case it should be granted (which cannot be granted, because it is not
true) that a bodily death was only threatened in Genesis 2. 17. then from thence
this absurdity will follow, that a Spiritual death (by deprivation) was not
threatened at all: for there is no other Scripture to be found, that does
threaten a Spiritual death, by the deprivation of the concreated life of Gods
image in moral perfections to all Adams natural posterity, if it be not
threatened in Genesis 2. 17. This objection therefore is to be observed as a
Pelagian tenent, though it be unadvisedly held by some good men.

Object. 2. Symachus Translation does make the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17.
to be no other but a lingering bodily death: for he does thus translate that
Text; In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall become mortal; namely, from
that day forwards thou shall become mortal, by a lingering kind of death, until
thy soul be separated from thy body.
This Translation of Symachus to this sense is very erroneous; and it is the
Answ. 1.
more hurtful, because it has gotten the favor to be approved of many eminent
Symachus translation of Genesis 2. 17. and of Genesis 3. 15. does much err from the
true sense, 1. Of the threatening of the Covenant of nature, in Genesis 2. 17. and
2. From the true person that must break the Devils head-plot in the Covenant of
reconciliation, in Genesis 3. 15.
writers, as if it were a remarkable truth.

1. Vines does show his approbation of it in his Annot. on Austins City of God,
l. 13. c. 23. 2. Jerome, and 3. Rivet do approve it in Genesis 2.

4. Trap does also approve it in Genesis 2.

5. Mr. Burges (and many others) do much approve of the said erroneous
Translation: others (says Mr. Burges, in Vindiciae legis, page 109.) read Genesis
2. 17. thus; In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die; as if God had
said, there is no day excepted from thy death when thou shall eat: but the
common answer (says he) is best, which takes to die to be in the state of
death: and therefore (says he) Symachus Translation is commended, which has,
Thou shall be mortal.

2. I say further, that the common answer is not best, neither is Symachus
Translation to be commended on this Text, but to be abhorred of all that love
the truth in sincerity. The Ebrew is thus in English, [In dying thou shall die]
that is to say, thou shall of a surety die in that very day, or in that point
of time, in the which thou do but taste of the forbidden fruit.

3. Symachus does commit the like abominable error in his Translation of Genesis
3. 15. She shall break thy head: this corrupt Translation of his did (as I
conceive) occasion the Popish party to corrupt Jeroms Translation, by putting
illa in Genesis 3. 15. instead of ille; (for I have seen some ancient printed
Copies Genesis 3. 15.
of Jeroms with ille) and by this corruption the Papists do give the honor of
our redemption to the Virgin. Mary instead of Christ. Gibbons in Genesis 3. 15.
does much reprove this corrupt Translation, and so do many others. And it is
well observed by Mr. Bro. and by our larger Annot. that the masculine gender is
three times over expressed in Genesis 3. 15. to preserve the Text from being
corrupted: and it is thus translated by Bro. [HV] HE [Jesh^phec^] HE-Shall
break thy head, and thou shall pierce HIM in the foot-sole.

These two foundation Scriptures, the first whereof does relate to the Covenant
of nature, and the second to the Covenant of reconciliation, are most miserably
spoiled by Symachus bad Translation (and also Esa 7. 14. as I have noted it in
Chap. 12. at this word he shall break) and in them both he has been an
occasion of much error in the Church of God, though in other respects his
translation is doubtless of special use.

But by his corrupt Translation of Genesis 2. 17. sundry eminent writers have been
misled from the right mark of that kind of death that was threatened only in
that Text, as I have noted it in part above, and unto them I may add others.

1. Beda does thus expound the threatening in Genesis 2. 17. Thou shall die the
death: this, says he, was as if he had said, thou shall be deprived (or
adjudged) to death; not that he should that very day die, but be mortal.

2. Ambrose says, after that day and hour (named in Genesis 2. 1. 7.) there was
no day or hour wherein our first parents were not (^or^i obnoxij) subject to
death: but Doctor Willet does thus answer him, in Romans 5. Quest. 21. the words
in the Text, In dying thou shall die, seem to imply an actual death, which they
should then die, and not a potential only. This answer of his is sound and
good; but yet I perceive also that he was not steadfast to his said sound
answer, because he does presently after confound that present actual death with
the future threatening of a bodily death.

Object. 3. Others do labor to confirm the said exposition of a lingering
bodily death, by the unlimited circumstance of time, which they th^nk is
expressed under the word Day: they say the word Day is a time certain put for
an uncertain; that is to say, for a time to come: and so they make a lingering
bodily death to be threatened in the day or time to come.
Though the word Day is sometimes used Synecdochically for a time to come, i^
Answ. 1.
Esa. 25. 9. Esa. 26. 1. Esa. 27. 1. and often, as it is showed also by Ains in
Deuteronomy. 27. 2. yet it must not be so taken in Genesis 2. 17. because then the sense
of the word Day (in relation to our Spiritual death in sin) should run thus, In
a time yet to come, after thy eating of the forbidden fruit, I^ dyi^g thou
shall die a Spiritual death. Any one that is but meanly acquainted with the
context of this place, will soon see that this sense of the word Day (in this
Text) is very absurd; they will soon see that the word Day is here connexed to
the very time of Adams actual eating.

2. In the former Chapter I have expounded the word Day in this Text, 1.
Generally of a true and proper artificial day, and 2. More strictly of that
very point of time in that day, in the which Adam did but first begin to eat of
the forbidden fruit: and to this sense does Mr. wilson expound it in his
Christian Dictionary; namely, of the very point of time in the which Adam
tasted of the forbidden fruit.

3. P. Mar^yr does answer the like objection touching this adverb of time: for
his Objector says, it is evident that Adam did not presently die, as soon as
he had transgressed.

P. Martyr does thus answer, (In Com. pl. par. 3. page 325.) that which these
men take for granted, we deny; that our first parents when they had
transgressed, did not forthwith perish, (or die) for death is accounted nothing
else, but a departing from life; neither have we life without God: so then
(says he) they dyed, because they departed from God; and though their soul was
not severed from their body, yet it was after a sort buried therein, so as if a
man will truly judge, we do not now live a life, (namely, not the concreated
life of our first creation) but a death; namely, a Spiritual death in sinful
and corrupt qualities.

4. All writers generally I think (except such as are of the Pelagian
judgment) do acknowledge that Adam was dead spiritually, in the very day or
time of his eating, and that all his natural posterity are successively dead in
sin, as soon as their immortal souls are joined to their body in the womb.

5. Any one that will but peruse Kirchers Ebrew and Greek Lexicon, may soon see
that the word Day is abundantly more often used in a proper sense, for the
present day or time, then for a time to come.

6. Whenever the Lord did limit his threatening of a bodily death to a certain
day or time, he did always execute it in the very day or time that he
expressed, unless the condition of repentance, or the like condition was
granted to the sinner, for the hindering of the execution of it.

Take these four instances to evidence the truth of my assertion.

1. Elisha was sent to tell the noble Lord, on whose ^and the King leaned, that
to morrow he should die for his unbelief: this threatening did not work in him
any repentance, (that he might believe, Matthew. 21. 32.) therefore the death
threatened was strictly executed in the very set time thereof, for on the morrow
he was trodden to death, 2 Kings 17. 20.

2. The Prophet Ahijah said to Jeroboams wife, when thy feet enter into the
City, (namely, into the door of thy house in the City) the child shall die: and
because this threatening did not work any repentance in her, it was strictly
executed in the set time thereof; for when the came to the threshold of the
door, the child died, 1 Kings 14. 12, 17.

3. God sent Elijah to tell the Messengers of Ahaziah; Thou shall not come down
from that bed on which thou art gone up, but in dying thou shall die: and this
threatening, because it did not work any repentance in him, was strictly
executed in the set time thereof; for he died whilst he lay upon that bed, and
before he came down from it, 2 King 1, 4, 6, 16, 17.

4. Korah and his Company were threatened with an unusual kind of bodily death,
and the time thereof was expressly limited to the morrow: but because this
threatening did work a sound repentance in the hearts of some of that Company,
therefore God was pleased to preserve their lives; but the rest that repented
not were strictly punished with the death that was threatened in the very set
time thereof, Numb. 16. 16, 29, 31, 33.

These and such like instances may assure us, that in case God had threatened
Adam with a bodily death, in the very day or time that he tasted of the
forbidden fruit, it should most assuredly have been strictly executed, seeing
he repented not; for the Lord had not ordained any repentance to life, as long
as the Covenant of nature stood in force. He ordained no repentance to life,
until he had ordained his new Covenant of grace and reconciliation, in Genesis 3.
15. in which Covenant he ordained a Mediator of reconciliation; namely, the
seed of the woman; who by his meritorious obedience should break the Devils
headplot: for as Mr. Ball says on the Covenant, page 25. The Covenant of
nature promised life, but not repentance, nor forgiveness of any the least
iniquity.

7. In case a bodily death had been threatened, as much as a Spiritual death
was, in Genesis 2. 17. it must have been executed at the same time that a
Spiritual death was, because the threatening was an absolute and a definitive
threatening: and then the persons of Adam and Eve had been extinguished, without
begetting any posterity; and then the wide world should have been filled with
no other inhabitants but wild beasts only: and then 2. It was altogether
needless for God to threaten a bodily death for the punishment of his
succeeding Original sin, in Genesis 3. 19.

8. In case a lingering bodily death had been threatened in Genesis 2. 17. as
Symachus Translation does carry it, then by Gods relative justice in the
Covenant of nature, it must have defiled all Adams natural posterity with
Original sin: for by the Covenant of nature, the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17.
was to defile all Adams natural posterity. But Moses Law does tell us, that a
lingering bodily death does not defile any man, as long as his soul is in his
body, as it is well observed by Ains. in Numb. 19. 13. and thence it follows,
1. That none of Adams posterity, which he begat while his soul was in his body,
were defiled by his lingering bodily death: and 2. thence it does also follow,
that none of his posterity could be defiled after his bodily death, because
after he was dead in body, he could not beget any children to be defiled
thereby: and therefore 3. I do from thence conclude, that the kind of death
that was threatened in the Covenant of nature, for the defiling of h^mself, and
of all his natural posterity, cannot possibly be meant of a bodily death, but
it must be meant of a Spiritual death only: 1. By deprivation, and 2. By
corruption of nature, because no other death was ordained to defile Adam and
all his natural posterity with Original sin, but that.

9. After that Adam and all his natural posterity were under the punishment of
a Spiritual death in sin, without any hope of recovery, by the conditions of
the Covenant of nature, yet then it was Gods good pleasure to declare his new
Covenant of grace and reconciliation to fallen Adam, in Genesis 3. 15. for his
redemption at last from the second part of his said Spiritual death in sin, but
not from the first part, namely, not from the deprivation of his moral
perfections of nature: for by Gods absolute definitive sentence, (In dying thou
shall die) that concreated perfection of his nature is totally lost to all the
elect, as long as they live in this world, though in the place of it God is
pleased to bestow his supernatural image upon them by regeneration: and
therefore this way which God has ordained in his new Covenant of grace, to
bring all the regenerate to an eternal life in Heaven, is called the new and
living way, Ebr. 10. 20. not in opposition to the Covenant of nature, as some
do unadvisedly expound it, but in opposition to the typical Covenant of works,
which God ordained at mount Sinai for these ends; 1. for the bodily
justification of the national Church from their ceremonial sins, and 2. To be a
Schoolmaster unto Christ; namely, to type out their true justification from all
their moral sins by the blood of Christ.

10. No Scripture says that ever God ordained any redemption from a bodily
death, to live again the life of grace in this world: for Aa^on the typical
Priest was not ordained to make any atonement for such as were dead in body, as
it is well observed by Ains. in Numb. 16. 46, 47. And for this he cites the
judgment of the Ebrew Doctors, in v. 48. affirming that there is no atonement
for the dead in body, quite contrary to the latter Apostate Doctors, who did
make an offering of reconciliation for the dead, 2 Mac. 12. 43, 45. But Job
says, according to the opinion of the more ancient Ebrew Doctors, If a man
die, shall he live again? This interrogation is a strong negation; as if Job
had said thus, The dead in body shall never be restored to live the life of
grace again in this world, nor yet to live the life of nature, to the begetting
of a natural posterity, Job 14. 14. But as touching 2 Mac. 12. 43, 45. Mr. Bro.
says in Revel. page 129. the Pope does much esteem 2 Mac. 12. 43, 45. for
sacrificing for the dead: but (says he) he little considers the vileness of
that Book: the Jews would tell him that it was but Hagada, A fable upon
phrases: and if any were ^d judged to death for sin by the Magistrates of
Israel, as in Exodus 22. 20. he might not vow any thing to God beofre his death;
or if any other did say, the price of this man be upon me, he was not bound to
give any thing: for this man, says Maymony, is as a dead man, and there is no
valuation or price of the dead: and of this it is said in Lev. 27. 29. None
devoted which shall be devoted of man (that is condemned to death for sin)
shall be redeemed: as if he should say, there is no redemption for him, but he
is as a dead man; see Ains. in ^ev. 27. 29. and from hence it does also follow,
that in case Christ had been put to death by God, as the greatest sinner in the
world, his death had been of no value in Gods sight for man's redemption. Let
this be ma^ked.

Conclusion from the premises.

1. That no other death was threatened in the Covenant of nature, in Genesis 2. 17.
but a Spiritual death only: and therefore it is not true which Mr. R^therford
(and others) do affirm, that the Covenant of grace made not death, but found it
in the world. (See him on the Covenant, page 47.) But I think I have
sufficiently showed, that the Covenant of grace found no other death in the
world, but a double Spiritual death only; 1. By deprivation, and 2. By
corruption of nature; and therefore that a bodily death was not ordained, until
the Covenant of grace was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. and then it was
presently after ordained in ^e^. 19. as the general punishment of Original sin,
as much upon the elect as upon the reprobate.

Obj^ct. 4. Though you have made it clear to my understanding, that a bodily
death was not threatened in Genesis 2. 1. 7. for the punishment of Adams first sin
in eating the forbidden fruit; yet I think it is held by all, that Adam was
liable to a bod^ly death, and to an eternal death in Hell, ipso facto, for his
second new degree of sinning against every branch of the moral Law of nature,
which fell upon him before the Covenant of grace and reconciliation was
declared in Genesis 3. 15. namely, in the entervale, or in the middle space of
time between the execution of his Spiritual death, and the declaration of the
Covenant of grace: for as soon as Adam was deprived of his concreated life of
moral perfections, he could not stand still from further sinning, but instantly
fell of his own accord into the new degree of Original sin: and the Scriptures
tell us, that God inflicted a bodily death, as soon as he was guilty of
Original sin; and therefore he was liable to a bodily death, before the
Covenant of grace was declared.
A. 1. What Adam was liable to, ipso facto, for h^s new degree of sinning
before the Covenant of grace was declared, was at the present hid in the secret
counsel and mind of God, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. and God was not pleased to reveal that
secret counsel of his, by his threatening of a bodily death, until he had first
declared the Covenant of reconciliation in Ge^. 3. 15.

2. I answer more particularly, that Adam was not liable to a bodily death for
Original: sin, ipso facto, In the entervale between Adams first begun Original
sin, and the declara^ion of the Covenant of grace, a bodily death was not due
by any natural necessity, until it was made due by the appointment of God;
after he had first declared his new Covenant of grace, in Genesis 3. 15. then it
was made due in v. 19.
in the entervale or middle space of time, between his first begun punishment
of Original sin, and the declaration of the Covenant of grace, by no natural
necessity of that punishment, until it was made necessary by the declared
constitution or appointment of God: and to this sense do many eminent Divines
s^eak.

1. Learned Mr. Wotton says thus; It will not stand well with the nature of
God, that his will should be determined by some object out of it self in the
creature; for then it should not be an act of Gods free choice, that his will
should be determined by some object out of it self: this (says he) is contrary
to the judgment of all sound Divines, and to the Scripture it self; which
affirms that God works all things after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians.
1. 11. He is much more large in the place cited, and it deserves perusal, de
Reco^si. pec. par. 2 l. 1. c. 6.

2. Mr. Ball on the Covenant says (in p. 275.) It is one thing for God to be
displeased with, or hate sin; another thing to punish it of absolute and
natural necessity: the hatred of sin and the punishment thereof are joined
together, (says he) as a free cause and effect; for God hates sin at all
times, but does not punish it ever, but in his time and season.

3. Mr. Ball says, in page 273. The demonstration of Gods revenging justice
springs not from the necessity of his nature, but from his voluntary
disposition.

4. Says he, in page 274. It Is not of absolute necessity that God should punish
sin, for then God should always punish it in one manner, and as much as he can,
as natural agents work: but (says he) we see by experience that God does
differently punish the sins of men in this life; the lesser offenders most, and
the greatest offenders least many times, and ever so as their punishments might
be increased.

From hence it follows: 1. That though it was Gods time and season to punish
Adams first sin in eating the forbidden fruit, ipso facto, with the deprivation
of his concreated life of moral perfections, because he, according to his
absolute arbitrary will, had threatened the first breach of that Covenant with a
present Spiritual death, in the very first point of time when he did but taste
of the forbidden fruit: yet it was not his will to declare the time and season
when he would inflict a bodily death, for his new kind of Original sinning;
but on the contrary it was his good will and pleasure to reserve the punishment
thereof in his secret mind, until he had first declared his new Covenant of
reconciliation, in Genesis 3. 15. but then it was his good pleasure to threaten a
bodily death in v. 19.

5. When Adam was under the punishment of a Spiritual death; 1. By being It was
not written in the heart of Adam, that God would punish his new sinning
quality, either with a bodily, or with an eternal death in Hell.
deprived of his concreated life of moral perfection, (which was bestowed on
him for the moral rectitude of his nature) he could not keep himself from
further sinning against every branch of the moral Law; and then his guilty
conscience told him, that he deserved further punishment, as it is evident by
his answer to the Lords first Quere, in Genesis 3. 10. I heard thy voice in the
Garden, and I was afraid; and because I was naked (of thy concreated life) I
bid my self, because my guilty conscience told me that I deserved a further
punishment for my new kind of sinning nature, besides my present punishment of
a Spiritual death: but what kind of further punishment it should be, he could
not tell, because God had not yet declared it.

6. Mr. Rutherford on the Covenant faith, in page 20. it was not written in the
heart of man by nature, that God should promise life eternal; upon condition of
obedience, either in the general, or so and so: and thence it follows by the
rule of opposites, that it was not written in the heart of Adam that God would
punish his new sinning quality, (against every branch of the moral Law) either
with a bodily death, or with an eternal death in Hell.

7. Mr. Baxter says in his Aphoris. page 13. There are some general obscure
threatenings annexed to the prohibitions of the Law of nature, that is (says
he) nature may discern that God will punish the breakers of his Law, but how or
with what degree of punishment, it cannot discern.

8. Mr. Rutherford on the Covenant says, in page 21. It is not a good
inference to say, that because there is disquietness in the conscience after
sin, and because it is natural to a sinner to apprehend a revenging power
pursuing sin committed, that therefore it is natural and essential to God to
pursue sin with punishment in general: and from hence I infer, that it was not
written in the heart of Adam by nature, that God would punish his first new
begun sinning quality with a bodily death; but it was the secret will of God to
defer his threatening of that death, until he had first published his new
Covenant of grace in Genesis 3. 15. and then it was in his free choice also to
have punished it otherwise.

9. It was the good pleasure of God, after the Covenant of nature was
extinguished by Adams transgression of it, and after the new Covenant of
reconciliation was declared in Genesis 3. 15. to constitute three several sorts of
general punishments to all Adams natural posterity for their Original sin.

1. He said thus to the woman, in v. 16. and consequently to all her sex, I God
ordained three general punishments in the Covenant of grace for Original sin.
will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy conception; in sorrow shall thou
bring forth children, and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule
over thee.

From hence it may be demanded why the woman is first threatened.

The Apostle does answer, because she was first in the transgression, 1 Timothy 2.
14.

2. Her punishment (says Ains.) was to be to her and to all her sex as a
chastisement. Here (says he) are annexed not curses, but chastisements, for
Eve and Adam, that their faith in the promised seed might be continually
stirred up, and their sinful nature subdued and mortified, Ebr. 12. 6. Psalm.
119. 71. and a little after he says, The reason of this chastisement is,
because sin is from Adam derived by propagation to all his posterity, Psalm. 51.
7. Romans 5. 12. Howbeit (says he) this chastisement bindreth not a woman's
salvation with God; for nevertheless they shall be saved in childbearing, if
they continue in says, and love, and holiness, with sobriety, 1 Timothy 2. 15.

I do from hence entreat the Reader to take special notice, that Ains. does not
make the threatening of this punishment to women-kind, to belong to the Covenant
of nature, but of grace; and that God delivers this threatening to Eve, (in the
hearing of Adam) as they were now converted to the faith by the declaration of
the Covenant of grace and reconciliation.

3. It is further evident, that the said threatening to women-kind does belong
only to the Covenant of grace, because God ordained sacrifices of atonement for
childbearing women; namely, 1. Typically for the expiation of their ceremonial
sins of uncleanness by childbirth, Lev. 12. 2, 3, 4. and 2. Typifying thereby
the expiation of all their Original sins against the moral Law, by the
sacrifice of Christ to all such sinners as do believe in Gods atonement through
his meritorious sacrifice.

4. There was yet another kind of punishment laid upon women-kind; namely, that
their desires must be to their husbands; that is to say, in subjection, (as the
Original word does signify, in Genesis 4. 7.) implying, that now they were put
into a greater subjection to their husbands, then they should have been, if Eve
had not been first in the transgression.

The second sort of general punishment for Original sin,

Was that the ground, which at first was created for Adams solace in his
innocence, without any hurtful thing in it, should now be cursed with
barrenness, and made subject to vanity, 2 Pet. 3. 7. waiting with earnest
expectation when the sons of God should be delivered from their Original sin,
that it also might then be delivered from its bondage of corruption, Romans 8.
19, 20, 21.

2. Mark how God does set forth the reason of this punishment to fallen Adam,
in Genesis 3. 17, 18. Because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy wise, and
have eaten of the Tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat
of it; cursed be the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shall thou cut of it all
the days of thy life. Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee,
and thou shall eat of the herbs of the field.

This reason is expressed in the conjunction of two things; 1. In that thou
have hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and 2. Have eaten of the Tree: Hence
it follows, that if Adam had but only hearkened to the voice of his wife with a
deaf ear, and had not obeyed it by his actual eating, he had not transgressed
the Covenant of nature, neither had Eve^ transgressed it, when she perceived
that the Tree was good for meat, and a desire to her eyes, in case she had gone
no further, but to give a hearing only to the voice of the Serpent, and had not
eaten; for nothing else was expressly forbidden, but the act of eating only. Our
Savior heard the Devils voice in persuading him to cast himself down from the
pinnacle of the Temple, and at another time to fall down and worship him; but
because he only heard his voice, and refused to obey the Devils persuasions, he
was not defiled with his temptations. In like sort if Adam had only hearkened to
her voice, and had not obeyed, but had refused to eat thereof, he had not
sinned. And 2. In case he had espied the danger of her temptation, and so had
refused to eat of it, then doubtless he would streightway have made choice to
eat of the Tree of life in the first place, because it was both commanded to be
eaten, and also commended unto him by its [name life] and then his concreated
life of moral perfections had been confirmed unto him for ever, and to all his
natural posterity successively, notwithstanding that Eve had first eaten of it,
and then the Covenant of nature should nor have been broken by her act of
eating, (until Adam did eat of it) because nor she, but Adam was ordained to be
the head in that Covenant.

3. This repeating of Adams transgression of the Covenant of nature, with the
temptation or occasion of it, now after he was re-created and converted, by the
declaration of the said new Covenant of reconciliation) was to make him and all
his fallen posterity take the greater notice of their corrupt and sinful
estate, as the only procuring cause of several great curses upon all the face
of the Earth, so that now all hope of a blessed and happy life here on Earth,
promised at first in the Covenant of nature, is utterly cut off: as if God had
said thus unto Adam; my definitive threatening of a Spiritual death, in case
thou did first eat of the prohibited Tree, has brought thee under a new
degree Such as look for a perfect sinless life under the fifth Monarchy, may
look their eyes out before they shall see it.
of sinning by Original sin: and for that new habit of thy sinning nature I
have cursed the Earth for thy sake all the days of thy life (and consequently
all the days of the life of thy natural posterity) to put thee and them out of
all hope of ever being restored again to thy first concreated life of moral
perfectons: and from thence such as dream of a sinless life here, under the
fifth Monarchy, may see from this definitive sentence, that their hope is but a
mere delusion, and that all the Scriptures they bring for it are but
misinterpreted, seeing there is no revocation of that definitive punishment of
a Spiritual death in sin in this world, until the resurrection of the body,
when it shall be changed into a spiritual nature, like unto the glorious body
of Christ.

The third sort of general punishment for Original sin, which is also called,
Inhabiting sin, Romans 7. 17, 20. is a bodily death, in Genesis 3. 19.

In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, until thou return unto the
ground; for out of it was thou taken: for dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return.

Now the Apostle does ass^re us in Ebr. 9. 27. that when God ordained a bodily
death for all the fallen posterity of Adam, he did at the same time ordain a
particular judgment to follow to each departed soul; namely, to all such as
died in the faith of their redemption by the promised seed of the woman, an
eternal life in Heaven, but to all the rest that died in the unbelief thereof,
an eternal death in Hell.

But no such promise of an eternal life in Heaven was made in the Covenant of
nature, neither was there any threatening made of an eternal death in Hell. 2.
This general punishment of Original sin by a bodily death, is by the Covenant
of reconciliation turned to be a blessing to such as shall die in the faith of
their redemption by the promised seed of the woman: for when they come to die,
the punishment of their Spiritual death in sin shall cease to their souls,
though not altogether to their bodies till the resurrection, and then they
shall enjoy an everlasting heavenly Paradise, instead of the earthly which Adam
lost by his sin.

And 3. By the new Covenant of grace and reconciliation all the elect have an
absolute promise of regeneration, to suppress the tyranny of their Original
corruptions, but yet not to subdue it wholly, until another Spiritual
regeneration be added to the body at the resurrection. Mr. Ains. speaking of
the several kinds of the Levitical cleansings, says in Lev. 11. 3. Every
earthen Vessel, wherein to any of the dead Creatures falls, whatsoever is
within it shall be unclean, and ye shall break it: He says upon this word
break it, (which is also used in Lev. 6. 28. and Lev. 15. 12. and Numb. 19.
15.) it is to be observed that it is not cleansed, but only by breaking it: and
(says he) this breaking of earthen vessels to cleanse them from uncleanness,
signified the abolishing of Original sin by death: we are compared, says he,
to earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 7. and the breaking of such is death, Jer. 19.
11. Jer. 48. 38.

2. The Covenant of nature promised no other life but a sinless life in the
sweet contents of an earthly Paradise; but the Covenant of reconciliation does
promise an eternal life in Heaven, in Genesis 3. 15. and then in v. 19. it
threatened a bodily death, which through Gods sanctisying grace should become as
an introduction to this eternal life in Heaven to all the elect: and so on the
contrary it threatened a bodily death, as an introduction to an eternal death in
Hell to all that die in the unbelief of their redemption by the promised seed
of the woman.

Flesh and blood, (says the Apostle) cannot inherit the Kingdom of God,
neither does corruption inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 50. to 54. Mr.
Woodbridge says in his Method, page 36. if Adam had continued righteous, he
might well have propagated life to his children, but not salvation (in Heaven.)

3. Hence it follows that a bodily death was not threatened, until after the
new Covenant of reconciliation was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. and then it
was threatened in v. 19. for the punishment of Original sin: and to this sense
have the ancient Ebrew Doctors spoken; unto this world, say they, there
cleaves the secret filthiness of the Serpent which came upon Eve: And because
of that filthiness death is come upon Adam and his seed, etc. But when that
filthiness is consumed, and the spirit of uncleanness taken out of the Earth,
Behold God will renew this world without any other filthiness, and will make up
by his power those that dwell in the dust. This is cited by Ains. in Genesis 3.
19. to evidence these twothings, 1. That the filthiness of our Spiritual death
in sin was the procuring cause of Gods justice in denouncing a bodily death. 2.
To distinguish those that die in the faith of the promised seed from them that
die in the unbelief thereof.

4. Hence it follows, that Mr. Nortons first foundation proposition, in page
2. is no better then a mere fiction, in affirming that Christ was our surety to
do the command of the Covenant of nature, (which was no other but to eat of the
Tree of life) and 2. to suffer the essential punishment of that threatened
death, (which was no other but a double Spiritual death) that so we might be
justified by the nullified righteousness of the nullified Covenant.

CHAP. III.
Showing that an eternal death in Hell was not threatened in the Covenant of
nature, in Genesis 2. 17.

IN my former Chapter I have given several considerable reasons, why a bodily
death was not threatened in Genesis 2. 17. and from thence I reason thus:

If a bodily death was not threatened in Gen, 2. 17. then an eternal death in
Hell was not there threatened: for none are condemned to an eternal death in
Argument 1.
Hell, until their bodily death do go before: and I hope that none will be so
inconsiderate, as to affirm that God did threaten Adam with a death of going
quick to Hell, (as Corah and his unbelieving Company did) without the ordinary
way of a bodily death, as soon as he had tasted of the forbidden fruit, for
then he could not have begotten a natural generation to fill the Earth, and
then this great Universe should have served for no other use, but for the
habitation of wild beasts.

But in my former Chapter I have made it evident,

1. That a bodily death was not threatened in the Covenant of nature.

2. That it was not threatened until after the Covenant of grace was first
declared in Genesis 3. 15. but then it was threatened in v. 19.

3. That when God did first threaten a bodily death, he did at the same time
appoint a particular judgment to follow to each departed soul, as the Apostle
does tell us in Ebr. 9. 27. namely, to such as died in the faith of their
redemption by the promised seed of the woman, a judgment to an eternal life in
Heaven, but to all the rest that died in the unbelief thereof, a judgment to
an eternal death in Hell.

4. That when God appointed a particular judgment to each departed soul, he
did at the same time also appoint a day of general judgment for all dead
bodies at the end of this world, that so the dead bodies of all believers might
be reunited to their glorified souls, and also that the dead bodies of all
unbelievers might be reunited to their condemned souls to the everlasting
torments of Hell.

5. Thence it follows, 1. Negatively, that no eternal death was threatened in
the Covenant of nature, in Genesis 2. 17. 2. Affirmatively, that an eternal death
in Hell was threatened only in the Covenant of grace, and to none else but to
such sinners as are unbelievers only (in Genesis 3. 19.)

6. Though no distinction is made between the elect and reprobates, in that
Spiritual death that is threatened in Genesis 2. 17. (as Mr. Norto^ would have it)
yet there is a wide difference made between them in the death threatened in the
Covenant of grace, as in Mar. 16. 16. He that will believe shall be saved, and
he that will not believe shall be damned: and to this sense does John speak,
John 3. 16, 17, 18, 19, 36. 1 John 5. 11, 12, 13. And our Savior does tell us,
that the sin of unbelief is the great condemning sin of the world, John 16. 9.
all other sins are no otherwise damnable, but as they are companions of this
sin of unbelief, which indeed is the only sin that does finally break the
conditions of the Covenant of grace.

7. It is acknowledged by sundry eminent writers, which I have cited in Chapter 1.
Sect. 4. that in case Adam had formed the condition required of him in the
Covenant of nature, by his obedient act of eating first of the Tree of life,
yet he should have had no other life by that Covenant, but a perfect natural
life in the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise: and thence it follows by
the rule of contraries, that God did not in that Covenant threaten any other
death, but a Spiritual death only, 1. By deprivation, and 2. By corruption of
nature that followed thereupon, to be inflicted eternally in this world only,
as the only proper punishment of his disobedient act of eating the forbidden
fruit: for no bodily death was as yet revealed, but it was reserved in the
secret mind of God, until he had declared his new Covenant. Peter du Moulin
says this last part of our Spiritual death; namely, corruption of nature, does
proceed from the former of deprivation; for (says he) holiness and
righteousness being lost, and the soul being instructed by the will, which
cannot be idle, must needs turn to the contrary part: and (says he) the loss
of supernatural gifts (for so he does (though amiss) call Adams concreated life
of moral perfections) does occasion corruption to those which are (essentially)
natural, as blindness to the mind, perverseness to the will, and perturbation
to the appetites. And says P. Martyr in Com. pl. par. 2. c. 1. Sect. 24.
Though the powers of the mind and the actons do remain, yet being (by
deptivation) made destitute of their right government, are therefore evil and
corrupted.

8. It is acknowledged generally, that an eternal death in Hell is threatened to
all unbelievers only; and thence it follows, that it was not threatened in the
Covenant of nature, in Genesis 2. 17. because Christ was not revealed to be the
Mediator of that Covenant, but of the after Covenant of grace only. This is a
strong and pregnant argument against Mr. Nortons three sorts of death to be
threatened in the Covenant of nature, in Genesis 2. 17.

And now I will cite some other Authors to the former.

1. Ambrose, though he does understand these words [And death by sin, in Romans
5. 12.] of a bodily death to be there meant, yet, says he, there is another
Sunday Aubors deny that an eternal death in Hell was threatened in the Covenant
of nature, in Genesis 2. 17.
death, called the second death in Hell, which we suffer not by reason of Adams
[first] sin; but by the occasion thereof, it is (says he) procured by our
personal sins.

2. Mr. Woodbridge in his Method, page 132. does agree with this of Ambrose, no
man (says he) now is, or ever was, since the first transgression, subject to
condemnation, by that Law in Genesis 2. 17. Quate^us, it was given to Adam as a
public person (for any personal sins of their own) but as it (^. c. as the
moral Law of nature) was obliging immediately upon each man in his own person;
and therefore (says he) the Law of Moses speaks more personally; Cursed is
every man that continues not in every thing that is written in the Book of the
Law, to do it, Gal. 3. 9, 10. and says he, by this (personal) Law every
transgressor is condemned; Not with a derivative condemnation, such I mean as
is derived, and as it were propagated from another, (according to the condition
that was made with Adam (the common head of all) in the Covenant of nature) Bu^
such, whereof every sinner in his own person is the first and immediate
subject. And unto this condemnation is our justification most frequently
opposed in Scripture.

This remarkable observation from Mr. Woodbridge is of such weighty
concernment, that for the better marking of it, it deserves to be written in
Letters of Gold: for 1. He does in these words (if I understand him) deny that
an eternal death in Hell was threatened in the Covenant of nature, in Genesis 2.
17. as a derivative death to all Adams natural generation, (as that death in
Genesis 2. 17. is) for his first common or general sin in eating of the forbidden
fruit. 2. In these words he does affirm, that an eternal death in Hell is
threatened for personal sins against the Law of Moses, (as it was given for a
Covenant of grace to the fallen posterity of Adam.) 3. His observation touching
the point of justification, as it is opposed to condemnation for personal sins
against the Law of grace, must of necessity be so understood; and not for
justification from the condemnation of Adams common head sin against the
Covenant of nature, by his act of eating the forbidden fruit; for the which he
and all his natural posterity were condemned to a Spiritual death by
deprivation, because that sin and punishment was not personal to Ada^, but it is
derived from Adam as the common sin and punishment of all his natural
posterity, even as a proper vindicative punishment, for the satisfaction of
Gods justice in the Covenant of nature; and therefore Adams purity of nature is
never to be restored again to any of his posterity for their justification,
neither in this world, nor in the world to come; and so consequently there is
no justification from Adams first sin, nor yet from that first punishment of
deprivation, as Mr. Norton does hold most erroneously.

3. Austin gives a fair hint of the said truth; for (in the City of God, lib.
13. c. 23) thus he says; whereas God did first signify the death of the soul
in leaving Adam, s^ying, is here art thou: and (2.) in saying, Earth thou art,
and to earth thou shall return, he signified the death of the body in leaving
the soul, Genesis 3. 19. But (3. Says he) we must not think that he spoke of the
second death; reserving that secret because of his new Testament, where it is
plainly discovered.

In these words Austin does plainly deny, that the second death in Hell did
belong to the first Covenant of nature, and 2. He does plainly affirm, that the
second death in Hell does belong only to the threatening of the new Testament;
namely, to all such as live and die in the unbelief of their redemption by the
promised seed of the woman: but yet I do also find, that Austin had not the
happiness to be uniform in his judgment in this precious truth, as well as in
some others.

4. Doctor Preston says (in his Treatise of love, page 19. 20.) There is a
Gospel Curse following the breach of the Gospel Law; and it is unrepealable and
more terrible then that of the Law, (namely, then that kind of death that was
threatened in the positive Law of the Covenant of nature, for so must his
meaning be by necessary consequence.)

5. Mr. Baxter says, As the first Covenant (made with Adam) gave not so great
a reward, so neither did it threaten so great a penalty, as the Covenant of
grace does.

2. (Says he) The penalty which the new Testament threatens, Christ never
underwent.

3. Says he in the margin; It is a wonder that learned Divines should deny
this: as if the new Law did threaten Hell to any, but the finally impenitent
Baxter in his Saints rest, c 4. Sect. 10. In his Aphor. p. 15. 51 162.
unbelievers; or that Christ had died for such final rebellion, (namely, for
such final Covenant breakers.)

4. Says he, the damnation that follows the breach of the new Covenant, it
could not be that Christ did bear.

5. Says he, in page 51. That life and glory (that is procured by Christ) is
not opposed to the death and penalty of the first Covenant, but of the second.

He does in these words plainly deny, that an eternal death in Hell was
threatened in the Covenant of nature, in Genesis 2. 17.

6. Says he, in page 162. It was not so grievous a death which was threatened
in the first Covenant, (in Genesis 2. 17.) as was threatened in the second: these
words of his do plainly show, that in his judgment Christ did not suffer the
torments of Hell for our redemption.

7. Says he in his Saints Rest, Chap. 4. Sect. 10. Christ suffered only for
the breaches of the Covenant of works, and not for the violation of the
Covenant of grace properly so called.

This assertion, that Christ suffered only for the breaches of the Covenant of
works, I reject as a most dangerous tenent; for then Christ should suffer a
double Spiritual death, 1. By deprivation, and 2. By the corruption of his
nature, just as all the fallen posterity of Adam do; which he dares not affirm:
and himself also does in his Book of the Confession of his says, deny this:
for there he does revoke what he formerly held, touching the continuance of the
first Covenant made with Adam, as I have cited his words in Chapter p. 1. Sect. 3.
Reply 24. So then, from his reformed judgment it follows, that Christ did not
suffer for the breaches of the Covenant of nature, by way of counterpassion,
neither could Christ suffer the torments of Hell by counterpassion, because
they are the proper vindicative pun^shments of the Covenant of grace, and none
else are guil^y of that punishment, but finally impenitent unbelievers only, as
he said before at N^ 3.

4. Therefore Christ's sufferings were only imposed upon him by his proclaimed
The s^fferings of Christ were no^ ^^fl^cted on him from the threat^ing of the
Covenant of nature, or yet from the threatening of the Covenant of grace, but
they were infl^cted on him from his combater Satan by Gods appointment, for his
perfect consecration to his Priestly sacrifice. We are all by nature the
children of wrath, because we are all ^orn in the sin of unbelief.
Combater, Satan and his Instruments, or else they were assumed by his own
inward passions, by occasion of Satan's ill usage; namely, they were propassions
in abho^ring such an ignominious usage. God gave Satan that l^berty of power
only for the trial of Christ's perfect obedience, by his constant patience under
all his sufferings, which were ordained also to be for his Priestly
consecration, before he could make his death to be accepted as a most perfect
and pleasing sacrifice, for the procuring of his Fathers reconciliation to the
elect, as I have showed it more at large in my Exposit on of Genesis 3. 15.

8. Mr. Baxter says in his Appendix, page 16. that the wrath in Ephesians. 2. 3.
of which they were children by nature, must be understood only of the wrath of
the first violated Covenant, and not of the wrath or curse of the second; for
no man (says he) is by nature a child of that.

1. It is of necessary concernment rightly to distinguish the wrath or curse of
the first Covenant of nature, from the wrath or curse of the second Covenant of
grace in Christ: and then it will appear, that the wrath and curse of the
Covenant of grace does not proceed from the wrath and curse of the Covenant of
nature, in Genesis 2. 17. as Mr. Norton does all along make it to do.

2. By Mr. Baxters late reformed judgment, touching the utter nulling of the
Covenant of nature made with Adam, he cannot now hold that we are the children
of wrath by the first nullified Covenant, but by the curse of the Covenant of
grace only, which curses all that live and die in their unregenerate
condition, or in the unbelief of their redemption by the promised seed of the
woman: for though Adam and all his posterity are deprived of the concreated
life of his moral perfections for his first sin: and 2. Though that deprivation
does necessarily bring them all under corruption of nature, to the
transgressing of every branch of the moral Law, yet the wrath and curse that
was denounced for their Original corruption, was not determined by the
threatening of the Covenant of nature, but it remained hid in the secret counsel
of God, until after the Covenant of grace was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. (as
I have opened the matter more at large in my Answer to Objection 4. in Chap.
2.) and then it was declared in v. 19. namely, that all should die a bodily
death, and after that a judgment should follow to each departed soul, Ebr. 9.
27. namely, to all such as die in the unbelief of their redemption by Christ,
and eternal death in Hell; and nothing is more certain, then that all the
natural posterity of Adam are born under that Original corruption of nature,
and so consequently they are by nature born in unbelief, and thereby are made
the children of wrath under the Covenant of grace, and so liable to judgment
and condemnation in Hell, Romans 5. 16. until it shall please God to regenerate
their nature by his Romans 5. 16.
^o^d and spirit, and so to work the grace of faith in the promised seed in
their (...).

SECT. II.
^rovi^g by two a^guments borrowed frrom Mr. Baxter, that neither a bodily
death, nor yet an eternal death in H^ll were threatened in Genesis 2. 17.

1. Because Christ is the Author of the resurrection. 2. Because Christ is also
the Author of the last judgment.
1 IT is well observed by Mr. Baxter, (in his Aphoris. 69. and in Appendix 30*)
that there is no intimation of a resurrection in Scripture, as any part of the
penalty of the Covenant of works, (so he calls the Covenant of nature, though
very unfitly) or as a preparative to it; that Adam should have risen again to
be condemned or executed, if Christ had not come, no Scripture speaks: but
rather on the contrary, resurrection (says he) is ascribed unto Christ alone,
1 Cor. 15. 12, 21, 22, 52. and says he in his Appendix, many Scriptures do
make Christ as Med^ator, to be the procurer of the resurrection: (and for this
see John 5. 28, 29. John 11. 25. 1 These. 4. 14, 15, 16, 17.)

2. Says he in his Saints rest, (par. 1 c 5. Sect. 2.) Athanasi^s does fully
prove, that there should have been no resurrection, had not Christ died: and 2.
That he died for all so far as to raise them.

From these sound assertions it follows, 1. That neither a bodily death, nor
yet an eternal death in Hell were threatened in the Covenant of nature, in Genesis
2. 17. seeing Christ as Mediator was not revealed in that Covenant. 2 From
thence it follows, that seeing Christ as Mediator is the only Author of the
resurrection of all dead bodies; none else must raise the dead bodies of
believers to be reunited to their glorified souls, nor none else must raise the
dead bodies of unbelievers to be reunited to their condemned souls in Hell fire
but he. And 3. Seeing Christ as Mediator was not revealed in the Covenant of
nature, he could not be the Author of a bodily death, nor of a bodily
resurrection in any relation to the threatening of that Covenant.

2. My second Argument is, that Christ as Mediator was ordained to be the only
Judge of all flesh, even as he is the son of man, John 5. 22, 27, 28.

But the Covenant of nature did not ordain him to be the Judge of all flesh, as
he is the Son of man; for that Covenant made no revelation of Christ as
Mediator; but the first time that he was declared to be the son of man, for the
breaking of the Devils head-plot for man's redemption, was by the Covenant of
reconciliation, which was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. and therefore he did
then first ordain a bodily death in v. 19. and then ^lso he ordained a
judgment to follow to each departed soul, Ebr. 9. 27. and so consequently a
general judgment for all dead bodies at the end of the world.

And to this very sense does Mr. Baxter speak in his Sermon of the Last
Judgment, Sect. 11. This sentence (says he) which will pass upon all sinners
at the last day, does much d^ffer from that which passed upon the first sin, or
which ^s due according to the Law of works alone: ^or 1. As to the penalty
called the pain of loss, the first judgment did depr^ve man of the favor of
his Creator, but the second will deprive him o^ the favor both of the Creator
and the Redeemer: the first judgment deprived him of the benefits of his
innocence, the second deprives him of the benefits of redemption, the loss of
his hopes, and possibility of pardon of the Spirit of justification and
adoption, and of the benefits which conditionally were promised and offered
him. These are the pun^shments of the last judgment, which the Law of works
did never threaten to the first man, (or to any) as it stood alone, etc.

2. Says he, as to the pain of sense, the last judgment by the Redeemer will
sentence them to a far sorer punishment, then would have befallen them* if no
Savior had been offered them, Ebr. 9. 29.

The conscience of Adam, if he had not been redeemed, would never have
tormented him for rejecting a Redeemer, nor for refusing or abusing his
gracious offers, nor for the forfeiting of a recovered happiness, nor for
refusing the easy terms of the Gospel, which would have given him Christ and
salvation for the accepting, nor for the neglecting of any means that tended to
recovery, no, nor for refusing repentance unto life, nor for disobeying a
Redeemer that bought him by his blood: As all these are the penalties of the
Redeemers Law and Judgment; so it is a sorer penalty then conscience would
have inflicted, merely for not being perfectly innocent; and they will be far
sorer gripings and gnawings of the never dying worm, for the abuse of these
talents, then if we had never been trusted with any, after our first
forfeiture: yea, and God himself will accordingly proportion his punishments,
so that to their loss and feeling the Redeemer will pass on them a heavier
doom, then the Creation did or would have done, according to the first Law to
perfect man.

3. Says he, another property of the Judgment of Christ is, that it will be
final, peremptory, and excluding all further hopes or possibilities of a
remedy, so was not the first Judgment of the Creator upon fallen man, though
the Law of pure nature knew no remedy, nor gave any hope of a Redeemer; yet it
did not exclude a remedy, nor put in a bar against one. But in the Law of grace
he has resolved that there shall be no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful
looking for of judgment and fire, which shall devour the adversary, Ebr. 10.
26. 27. and that the fire shall be everlasting, and that the worm shall not
die, and the fire shall not be quenched, Matthew. 25. ult. Mar. 13. 42, 50. John
5. 27. Matthew. 5. 26. Matthew. 3. 12. Mar. 9. 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, etc.

Conclusion.
These and such like speeches of his did occasion me to believe,

1. Negatively, that Christ was not declared to be the Son, of man in the
Covenant of nature, in Genesis 2. 17. and consequently that he was not ordained by
that Covenant, to be the Judge of all dead bodies at the end of the world.

2. Affirmatively, that he was first declared to be the son of man in the new
Covenant of reconciliation, in Gen 3. 15. and that then, and not till then, he
was declared to be the Judge of all flesh, even as he is the son of man; and
that then, and not till then, he ordained a bodily death in v. 17. 1. In order
to a particular judgment to each departed soul, Ebr. 9 27. and 2. In order to
a general judgment for all dead bodies at the end of the world. This necessary
consequence has in it a powerful force to confirm my proposition.

3. That my great design intended by my said exposition of the threatened death,
in Genesis 2. 17. is to make it a fundamental ground, for the full confutation of
Mr. Nor^o^s false interpretation of it.

4. For the full confutation of his first foundation proposition, in page 2.
whereby he does make Christ as Mediator to be the surety of the elect. 1. To do
the command of that Covenant, (which was no other act but to eat first of the
Tree of life) and 2. To suffer the essential punishment of that threatened
death, (which was no other but a double Spiritual death: 1. By deprivation, and
2. By necessary consequence the corruption of his nature) in a way of obedient
satisfaction unto divine justice, thereby exactly fulfilling the first
(extinguished) Covenant, for the justification of believers, (by that matter
which is nothing else but a non^ens) and thus you see that his first foundation
proposition, on the which his whole Book is builded, is extremely heterodoxal.

5. My said exposition is intended, for the full confutation of all the rest of
his eight propositions, especially his last, in page 4. For he does there
affirm, that the justice of God did require that Christ the surety of that
(nullified) Covenant, should die that death, in Genesis 2. 17. which (as I have
showed) is no other but a double Spiritual death: and thence it follows, that
Christ our surety was 1. deprived of the concreated life of his moral
perfections, and 2. That in the want thereof his nature was depraved with
sinful qualities. The like blasphemy he does often affirm by necessary
consequence, in page 2, 12, 14, 21, 23, 24, 25. and in page 27. he does
expressly include Christ, as the only person intended, in suffering the
punishment of eternal death for fin: his words are these; Certain it is, that
death for sin, as concerning the essential poenal part thereof, is solely
intended concerning Christ.

6. My said exposition is intended for the confutation of his several Answers
to the most of his Queries, especially of his third and fourth Quere, in p. 5,
6.

7. It is intended for the full confutation of all his eight Arguments, because
he does build them all upon his said false exposition of Genesis 2. 17. in p. 10,
11, 12.

8. I have intended this exposition for the fuller explanation of it in my
former printed Reply; and I have the rather done it, because I perceive that I
have there cited some Authors to my sense, which may have another sense then I
intended, (though they do also agree to my sense by necessary consequence) and
therefore to avoid mistakes I have left them out in this.

CHAP. IV.
Being a further discussion of the Covenant of nature made with Adam, and
proving that Adams natural understanding and will was made in perfect obedience
to the moral Law of nature by Creation only, and not by any super-added
Covenant.

1. MR. Clendon says, (in his Sermon of Justification, page 22, 23.) that Adam
was under the obedience of the moral Law, before God made any Covenant with
him, Genesis 1. 27. God created man in his own image, and this image of God did
stand in perfect knowledge, righteousness, and holiness, so that at the very
first instant of his Creation, he was under the obedience of the moral Law,
before ever God brought him into Paradise: but (says he) the Covenant was not
made with him, until after he came into Paradise.

2. (Says he) It may well be called the Law of nature, but not the Covenant of
nature, because no promise of any reward was made unto Adam for the keeping of
the moral Law; therefore perfect obedience unto the moral Law was not the
condition of the first Covenant, but it was a necessary condition of man's
perfection, and a necessary consequent of Gods perfection that man was so made:
and Mr. Gataker speaks to this sense at No 9.

3. Says Mr. Wotto^, It cannot be proved, that there was any Covenant of De
reconsi. pec. par. 2. l. 1. c. 7. Christ's obedience to the moral Law of nature
was no obedience to the Covenant of nature, because the Covenant of nature
required no other obedience, but one transient act of eating of the Tree of
life, and therefore Christ's moral obedience cannot be supposed to be the matter
of a believing sinners justification by Gods imputation.
eternal life betwixt God and Adam, in regard either of his habitual justice,
which was bestowed on him in his Creat^on, or of his actual obedience in
keeping the Law: and (says he) in his next Chapter, I deny the assumption; God
did not give the Law of the Decalogue, to be the only and perpetual rule of
that justice, which is the way whereby de facto, he brings to eternal life all
that shall be saved.

But Mr. Norton does affirm the contrary all along; namely, that Adams moral
and natural obedience was ordained to be the matter of justification in the
Covenant of works, (namely, in the Covenant of nature) for the attaining of an
eternal life in Heaven, to be performed by our selves, or by our surety: but
his Scriptures that he has cited to prove it, are all wrested from their true
sense as I have showed in Chap. 5. and elsewhere.

4. Mr. Rutherford on the Covenant, page 19 says, Man as a reasonable creature
owes himself to God, to obey so far as the Law written in his heart carries
him: but says he, there is not any promise of life, as a reward of the work of
obedience here. 2. Says he in page 20. It is not written in the heart of man
by nature, that God should promise eternal life upon condition of obedience,
either in the general, or so and so. 3. Says he, the Lord does plead his free
Covenant for his standing rule, Matthew. 20. 13, 15. This he speaks of the very
time of Adams innocence: but yet I grant also that he does afterward affirm,
that God made it just to reward Adams moral obedience with life: but yet take
special notice also, that he does not affirm it to be meant of a life in
Heaven, (as Mr. Norton does) for in page 49. he does propound this question:
What is meaned by the life promised in the Covenant of works? he answers thus;
1. Not a life in Christ, and the fruit of the merit of blood, as our life is in
the new Covenant, John 3. 16. but it is a Law life, happily a communion in glory:
but (yet says he) the life he lived, and the Creatures for his service seems
not to belong to that life: and 2. Take special notice, that Mr. Rutherford
does deny the obedience of Christ to the moral Law of nature, to be the matter
of a believing sinners justification, as I have showed in Chap. 5. and Reply 8.

5. Mr. Grayl says (on the Covenant of grace, page 12.) When we have done all
that we are commanded, we must say that we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.
10. unprofitable to our selves, (says Chamir) because we have done no Adams
and Christ's obedience to the moral Law of nature was a due debt, and therefore
that natural obedience cannot be called meritorious, of which see more in Chap.
13. Sect. 4.
more but what is our duty to do: Opposita sunt sol^ere debitum and mereri, To
pay or discharge a debt, and to merit or deserve, are opposite: This legal rule
of justice may as truly be applied to Adams concreated moral principles; for
when he had done all that was commanded him by his moral principles, he was but
an unprofitable servant to himself, (in respect of merit) because he had not
^^^ned or merited so much as thanks thereby, he did no more then what was his
duty to do: his paying of his debt of moral obedience cannot be called his
meriting of any thing at the hands of God, because no Covenant of any such
reward can be found for it, when the Scriptures are rightly expounded. 2. I
have showed in Chap. 1. and in this Chapter also, that the Covenant of nature
was not made with Adam, in relation to his obedience to the moral Law of
nature, but in relation to his positive obedience, touching one single act of
eating only.

6. In case we could perform obedience to the moral Law, as exactly as Adam did
in his innocence; yet it could not be accepted of God for the matter of our
just^fication: for as Luther says, If we were able to fulfill all the
commandments I^ his Sermon. of salvation by grace without works, p. 148.
of God, and were able in all things to satisfy his justice, yet
notwithstanding we had not deserved grace and salvation thereby, neither should
God for that cause owe it unto us; for that he may by the right of Creation
require as due service all those things of us his Creatures, created to live
unto him: and this (says he) did Christ declare in a parable, in Luke 17. The
master says to his servant, gird thy self, and serve me, till I have eaten and
drunken, and afterward thou shall eat and drink: does he thank that servant,
because he did that which was commanded unto him? I ^r^w not: so likewise when
ye have do^e all those things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants, we have done no more then that which was our duty to do.

2. Luther does not make our justification to lie in our conformity to the
moral Law of nature, as Mr. Norton does; but he does place it in Gods
forgiveness, for the sake of Christ received by faith, in several places on the
Galatians, and in his Argument to Paul's Epistle to the Galatians, which for the
Readers sake I will abridge.

1. Says he, there are diverse sorts of righteousness. 1. Political, which
Lawyers deal withal. 2. Ceremonial, which is taught by the traditions of men.
3. The righteousness of the Law, or of the ten Commandments: this we do also
teach after the Doctrine of faith. 4. There is yet another sort of
righteousness, which is above all these, to wit, the righteousness of faith, or
Christian righteousness, which we must diligently discern from the fore
rehearsed: for this most excellent righteousness of faith, which God through
Christ (without works) imputes unto us, is neither political nor ceremonial,
Nor the righteousness of Gods Law: nor consists it in works: but it is clean
contrary; that is to say, It is a mere passive righteousness, as the others
(above rehearsed) are active. In this passive righteousness (says he) we work
nothing, we render nothing unto God, but only receive, and suffer another to
work in us; that is to say, God: therefore it seems good to me to call this
righteousness passive righteousness, etc.
And says he, the afflicted conscience has no remedy against desperation and
eternal death, unless It take hold on the forgiveness of sins, by grace freely
offered in Christ Jesus; that is to say, this passive righteousness of faith,
or christian righteousness; which if the afflicted conscience can but
apprehend, it may be quiet, and may boldly say; I seek not this active and
working righteousness (of the Law) although I know I ought to have it, and to
fulfill it: but be it so that I had it, and did fulfill it indeed, yet I cannot
trust to it, nor dare I set it against the judgment of God: and thus I abandon
my self, and all active righteousness, Both of mine own and of Gods Law, and
embrace only See more of Luthers judgment in cha. 9. Sect. 6, and in Sect. 8.
that passive righteousness, which is the righteousness of grace, mercy, and
forgiveness of sins.

From hence it is evident, that Luther held no righteousness to sinners in Gods
fight, by the moral obedience of Christ, as Mr. Norton does: but he places it
in Gods forgiveness, for the sake of Christ's obedience in his death, and
received or applied to the soul by faith.

7. The obedience of Christ is distinguished by sundry eminent Divines; 1. They
call his active obedience to the moral Law, Justitia perso^^: and 2. They call
his obedience in his death and sufferings, Justitia meriti: and by this last
sort of his obedience they make a sinners justification to be merited, without
the former matter of it.

8. Mr. Baxter says in his Aphoris. page 53. Many learned and godly Divines of
singular esteem in the Church of God, are of this judgment; but in case they
had been of Mr. Nortons judgment, they could not have approved of the said
distinction.

9. Mr. Gataker does strongly oppose Mr. Nortons said matter of moral
righteousness, and places the merit of Christ's obedience in his death and
sufferings: for thus he says in his answer to Wigiline; It is not necessary
that Christ, In his answer to the 5 reason of his 13 Thesis.
in fulfilling the moral and natural Law, should deserve any thing for himself
or us, no more then the Angels, seeing every rational creature, in the very
name of its creation, owes all things on duty to its Creator, whatsoever the
Law (of nature) requires of any. Luther speaks just to this sense at No 6.

2. He does often speak to this sense in his Eleuchtick Animadversions upon
Gomarus, page 1. These. 1. p. 4. p. 15. These. 8. p. 17. These. 9. p. 19. These.
11. p. 24, 25. These. 15. p. 49. These. 32. and p. 50, 51.

3. In his Animadversions upon the disputes betwixt Piscator and Lucius, in the
meritorious cause of our justification, 1. par. Sect. 1. in page 2, 12. he
says, that the active righteousness of Christ is twofold, the one is contained
in these acts, which Christ as man owed, and performed to the common Law of
nature; the other in those things, he was bound to perform only to the Law of
mediation, after he had taken on him to perform them, which before was undue
for him to perform, as being bound thereto by no Law: and he speaks more to
this sense in Sect. 4. p. 18. and in Sect. 6. No 4. p. 19. and in Sect. 7. No
1. and in par. 2. p. 57. Sect. 2. No 16. and p. 70. Sect. ^. No 6. and there he
gives this reason; because Christ performed moral obedience for himself, and
not for us. Here Mr. Norton may see that Mr. Gataker is quite opposite to his
Answer to his 3 Quere, where he affirms in page 6. that the kind of Christ's
obedience was legal, the same in nature and measure, which we by the first
Covenant stood bound unto, and this unsound assertion he does also affirm in
his third Argument, in page 11. and after.

10. Pareus says, those that ascribe the merit of righteousness unto Christ's
active obedience, or to his native holiness, do thereby derogate from the death
of Christ, and do undoubtedly make it vain and superfl^ous. Pareus does often
use this Argument, and Mr. Gataker does as often approve it, not only in his
forecited Disputations, but also in his Answer to Mr. Walkers Vind. cation, in
page 13, 91, 107, 136.

11. I have cited another learned Divine in my former printed Reply, p. 132.
that says thus, It is true that Christ merited as well as satisfied for us;
but (says he) that by which he merited was not his never sinning or perfect
obedience, for that was due from the Law under which he was born: but his free
and voluntary giving up himself to death, without any obligation to that duty
lying upon him, as man so to do; according to that in Ebr. 10. 7. and Phil. 2.
6. Being found in fashion as a man he humbled himself, and became obedien^ unto
the death, even the death of the Cross, which obedience is there set as the
foundation of merit, for the which God has highly exalted him: But (says he)
all this is quite another matter from his active obedience, or fulfilling the
Law as being so imputed to us.

12. Doctor Bilson does also speak home to this very sense: his words I have
cited in Chap. 5. Sect. 5.

13. From hence it follows, that Mr. Nortons great design in making Adams
moral obedience to the Law of nature, to he the condition that was required of
him for the fulfilling of the Covenant of nature, for his eternal life in
Heaven, is utterly overthrown: from whence he infers, that Christ was the
surety of the elect to fulfill that obedience, that so it might be imputed to
believers for their perfect righteousness to an eternal life in Heaven.

14. Suppose the Covenant of nature had been made in relation to Adams
performance of perfect obedience to the moral Law of nature, (as it was not)
yet it could not have been performed by Christ, as the condition of the
Covenant of nature for a sinners justification to an eternal life in Heaven,
because that Covenant was extinguished, and made utterly null as soon as Adam
had transgressed it, and had received the threatened punishment of a Spirttual
death; and therefore that Covenant requires no obedience now, because it is no
Covenant, neither did that Covenant promise an eternal life in Heaven, but an
eternal natural life only in the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise, in case
Adam had performed the condition of it.

SECT. II.
Proving, that Adam was out under the obedience of a mere transient positive
Law, by the Covenant of nature only, and not by creation.

1. GOds positive Covenant with Adam was this; Eat first of this Tree which I
do name Gue^s Ca^jm, the Tree of the twofold life, and then thy concreated
moral perfections after my image and likeness shall be confirmed unto thee, and
to all thy natural posterity successively: but eat not of this other A brief
description of the Covenant of nature made with Adam.
Tree, which I have now showed thee in the midst of the Garden, For in the day
that thou eatest thereof, in dying thou shall die, a twofold death: 1. Thou
shall be deprived of thy concreated life of moral perfections after my image
and likeness: and then 2. Corruption of mind shall rush in upon thee of its own
accord, and by that means thou shall become dead in sin, and all thy posterity
successively.

2. This positive Covenant and the Law of it was not written in Adams heart and
mind by creation, as the moral Law of nature was, for then he should by his
creation have been made acquainted with Gods secret decrees and counsels,
touching the full reason of his said positive Law and Covenant, and then he
could not have willed to have eaten of the forbidden fruit, no more then he
could will to sin against the moral Law of his nature, and then also he could
not have been deceived by the Devils temptation; nay then he would have willed
irresistably to have eaten of the twofold Tree of life in the first place,
seeing in the time of Adams innocence sin did not depend on the will and
affections, as they were made by God, but as they are now corrupted: and from
thence it follows that Adam was not created after the image and likeness of
God in his knowledge and obedience to his arbitrary positive Laws, as he was in
the knowledge and obedience of every branch of the moral Law of his nature.

3. It is most evident by the threatening that was added to the Covenant of
nature, that the Law of that Covenant was not written in Adams heart and mind,
as the moral Law was, but that it was imposed upon him with a conditional
threatening: but the moral Law of his nature was not imposed upon him by any
threatening, but it was written in his heart and mind as the mere Law of his
perfect nature, to guide it in a perfect conformity to Gods will in all moral
duties, without any promise or threatening annexed thereunto, as it is noted
before from Mr. Rutherford at No 4.

4. It is further evident, that the said positive Law of the Covenant of nature
was not imposed on Adam, until a certain distance of time after his creation:
and 2. It was not imposed on him, until a certain distance of time after The
transient Covenant of nature was not made with Adam, until several distances of
time after his creation.
the woman's creation: and 3. It was not imposed on him, until after a certain
distance of time, after that God had married them together, and had commanded
them to be one flesh, for the procreation of their like in nature: and 4. It
was not imposed on them, until a certain distance of time after that God had
brought them into Paradise, and had showed them the two Trees; then, and not
till then God said unto them, I have planted this Tree of the twofold life in
the midst of the Garden, Genesis 2. 9. and this other Tree also in the midst of
the Garden, of the which thou shall not eat, For in the day thou eatest
thereof, in dying thou shall die.

5. It is further evident, that the woman's first eating of the forbidden fruit
Though Eve did first eat of the forbidden fruit, yet she was not put first
under the punishment of a Spiritual death in si^, God did suspend that
punishment, until Adam the head in the Covenant had eaten thereof.
was no transgression of any part of the moral Law of nature; for then her
single person should have been put under the actual punishment of that
threatened Spiritual death in the time of her eating, and before Adam had eaten
thereof: for the woman's single person was created under the obedience of every
branch of the moral Law of nature, as much as Adams was; But yet her single
person was not put under the actual punishment of the said Spiritual death for
her first act of eating, as much as Adam was for his first act of eating; for
if she had been punished with a Spiritual death in sin, in her first act of
eating, it would instantly have bewrayed it self by the evil effects of it, and
then Adam (being as yet in his moral perfections) could not otherwise choose
but he must have taken notice of it by its evil effects, and then in wisdom he
would have refrained from the eating of it: but it seems that God did not
inflict a Spiritual death in sin upon Eve, for her first act of eating, but
suspended the execution thereof until Adam the head in that Covenant had eaten
thereof; then, and not till then the eyes of them both were opened together at
one and the same point of time; then, and not till then her first act of eating
took its effect; then, and not till then Eve knew that they were both naked
together, i.e. deprived of their concreated life of moral perfections; then,
and not till then they sowed fig tree leaves together to make themselves
Aprons, Genesis 3. 7. because their corrupt affections Genesis 3* 7.
and passions did then, and not till then break forth to their shame: and th^s
was one of the evil effects of their Spiritual death in sin, as it is rightly
noted by Austin; in that their soul folt a disobedient motion in their flesh,
they did thereupon make themselves Aprons, to cover their bodies secret parts.

From hence I reason thus: If these evil effects had been first executed on
Eves single person, for her first act of eating the forbidden fruit, before
Adam had eaten, (as doubtless they would, in case her act of eating had been a
transgression of any branch of the moral Law of nature) then Adam, soul which
was made naturally holy and righteous, could not otherwise choose but have
taken special notice of it, and then he would certainly have shunned to have
eaten of the forbidden fruit from her hand, that so he might not come under the
same punishment with her.

But seeing Adam did not refrain from taking and eating of the said forbidden
fruit from her hand, it is an undeniable proof, that the said punishment of a
Spiritual death in sin was not as yet executed on her single person; and the
reason thereof is so plain, that he that runs may read it; namely, because the
positive Law of that Covenant was not made with Eves single person (as the
moral Law of nature was) but with Adam in the first place, as the head of the
Covenant of nature, and with the woman it was made conjunctim, and not divisim,
because God had conjoined her by marriage to be one flesh with Adam, for the
procreation of their like in nature.

2. Though she was first in the transgression, 1 Timothy 2. 14. yet it is not said
1. Tim. 2. 14. Romans 5. 12.
that we all sinned in Ev', but that we all sinned in Adam, because he was
constituted to be the head in the Covenant of nature: and accordingly it is
said, that his sin and punishment is derived from him to all his natural
posterity: and the order of the commination does run so; in the day that thou
(Adam the head of the Covenant of nature) do eat thereof, in dying thou
shall die; and yet the word Thou does in the second place reach in Eve, because
she was by marriage made one flesh with Adam, for the procreation of their like
in nature, and in that respect also they are both together called Adam, Genesis 5.
2. And the word Thou does also in the third place fetch in all their natural
posterity, seeing they were by marriage made one flesh, for the procreation of
their like in nature, Romans 5. 12. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. This Law of the Covenant of
nature was thus made by Gods supreme and arbitrary authority, for the discovery
of his eternal counsel for man's fall, and for his redemption by Christ, the
seed of the deceived captive woman. And to this sense does Ains. speak: this
Law (says he) was given both to the man and to the woman, being both together
called Adam, Genesis 5. 2. (and says he) the woman does confess as much in Genesis
3. 3. and the Greek version (says he) does manifest it, saying in Genesis 2. 17.
Ye shall not eat.

3. It is also observed by Mr. Bro. (in his Principal Positions, page 10.) that
those marriage Books have an oversight, that say the woman was formed in
Paradise; for the commandment, Thou shall not eat ther^of, Genesis 2. 17. went not
before the creation of the woman (nor yet before she was by marriage made to be
one flesh with Adam, for the procreation of their like in nature) but after:
she had the commandment as well as Adam, in the same term [Thou] as being but
one flesh by marriage: this remarkable observation I have also cited in my Book
of the Institution of the Sabbath, in page 9.

4. Doctor Ames says, that Adam was properly the beginning of mankind, not
Eve, unless as she was made for him, and with him, to make one and the same
beginning: and (says he) hence it is that we read of a second Adam, not of a
second Eve, in M^dul. c. 11. Sect. 30.

5. P. Martyr says, though Eve transgressed before the man, yet The original
of sinning is ascribed unto Adam, because the succession by propagation is
accounted in men and not in women, in Com. pl. page 242.

In these words he speaks home to what I have immediately asserted; and says
he, although our first parents sinned, yet Paul says, There was not one manner
of transgression in them both: for Adam did not say, the Serpent has deceived
me, but the woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and
I did eat, Genesis 3. 12. but the woman said in v. 13. The Serpent has beguiled
me, and I did eat.

From these speeches of P. Martyrs it follows, that Eves sin was not a wilful
sin against any branch of the moral Law of her nature, (as Mr. Norton does
affirm most erroneously) seeing she said she was beguiled, Genesis 3. 13. and
seeing the Apostle does also affirm, that she was beguiled through Satan's
subtilty, 2 Cor. 11. 3. But in case her act of eating Genesis 3. 13. 3 Cor. 11. 3.
Eves sin was not a wilful sin against her moral principles.
had been a sin against any part of the moral Law of nature, she could not be
said to be beguiled: but then it would have been a wilful sin, even against the
light of her own natural reason: but seeing she was made after the image and
likeness of God in moral perfections, it is no less then blasphemy to affirm,
that she sinned wilfully against the clear light of her concreated moral
principles.

6. Austin affirms, that the woman did think the Serpents words to be true, 1 Timothy 2. 14. and (says he) though Adam was not first deceived by the Serpent,
yet he was afterward deceived by his wife: for he said thus unto God, The
woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did As
long as Adam continued in his innocence, no object was set before his eyes that
might necessarily provoke his natural fear; See Chap. 2. Sect. 1. at No 8.
eat; namely, without the least fear or suspicion of any hurt that had befallen
her by her first act of eating, or without any fear or suspicion of any hurt to
my self, by eating of that fruit from her hand, that was given to be a mutual
helper to me: for as long as Adam stood in his innocence, no object of any fear
was set before his eyes; namely, no object that might stir up his natural fear
of any hurt that might befall him: and in this respect Austin does affirm, (in
the City of God, l. 14, c. 20.) that Adam could not have been reputed happy in
Paradise, if he had been troubled with any fear; and Mr. Wea^es does affirm the
same truth in his Portraiture, page 200. and of this see more in Chap. 2. No 4.

7. It is also worthy of special observation, that though Eve could not be
deceived in her obedience to the moral Law of her nature, because she was
created after the image and likeness of God in moral perfections, yet she might
easily be deceived in her transient positive obedience, to the transient
positive Law of the Covenant of nature; 1. Because it was not written in her
understanding and will, as the moral Law was. 2 Because she was persuaded to
eat of it for her best good, by a good Angel, as she thought (doubtless) it
was, that God had sent to reverse his former prohibition, and to persuade her
to eat of it for her best good: for she was as yet ignorant of the fall of any
part of the Angels, and therefore she did believe the Angels words to be true.
And so says Ambrose (in his first Book of offices, c. 31.) The only reason why
Eve committed her self to the Serpents trust, was, because she which had
received nothing but benevolence, could not think there were any such things as
malevolence and evil meaning. *

8. As Eve was deceived by the persuasion of the good Angel, so Adam was
overcome by the friendly persuasion of his wife. Austin says in Genesis, that
Adam was not overcome with any concupisence of her flesh, Which as yet he felt
not, not with the Law of his members, resisting the Law of his mind, But he
was overcome with a certain friendly benevolence and good will: But I judge and
suppose, (says he) that he could no manner of ways be deceived by the subtilty
of the Serpent, as the woman was; and (says he) the Apostle does call that
properly, A deceiving, by which the thing that was persuaded was thought to be
true, when it was false. The Devil had not been subtle, if he had first
persuaded Adam to eat of the forbidden fruit, for then he could not after that
have deceived the woman to eat of it.


From this supposition of Austins, that Adam could not have been deceived by
the Serpent, as the woman was; I infer that the Devil was more cunning then to
go about it: for in case the Devil had first deceived Adam, he could never
after that have deceived the woman: for in case Adam the head in that Covenant
had been first deceived to eat first of the forbidden fruit, he should at that
instant have been punished with a Spiritual death in sin, and then the evil
effects of it would at that instant also have showed it self to the woman, and
then her concreated moral perfections were such, that she could not after that
have been deceived to eat of that prohibited fruit, neither by Satan's
suggestions, nor by Adams persuasions: and this the Devil knew well enough
beforehand, and therefore he did first begin with the woman, and then he made
her his instrument to deceive Adam.

Conclusions from the premises.

1. From hence it follows, that the Law of the transient Covenant of nature
had no relation at all to any part of the moral Law of nature: for in case it
had depended on any part of the moral Law of nature, then Eves single person
had been first put under the threatened punishment of a Spiritual death in sin,
for her first act of eating before Adam had eaten, because her single person
was by creation put under the obedience of every branch of the moral Law of
nature, as much as Adams person was: but it is evident, that the threatened
punishment of a Spiritual death in sin was not executed upon her single person
at the first instant of her eating; for in case it had, then Adam could not
otherwise choose but have taken notice of it by the evil effects of it, and
then his wisdom was such, that he would ever after have refused (with utter
detestation) to have taken and eaten of that forbidden fruit from her hand,
that so he might not come under the same vindicative punishment.

2. From hence it does also follow, that though Eve was first in the
transgression, In case Adam had but forborne to have eaten of the forbidden
fruit from Eves hand, all his posterity should have been confirmed in his
concreated moral perfections.
yet the Covenant of nature was not fully broken by Eves first act of eating
the forbidden fruit, because her single person was not ordained to be the head
in the Covenant of nature, she was indeed under the Law of the Covenant of
nature in her married conjunction with Adam the head, but not divided. 2 From
hence it does also follow, that in case Adam the head in that Covenant had but
forborne the act of eating, his natural posterity should not have been punished
with a Spiritual death in sin for Eves transgression, notwithstanding his
natural and matrimonial union with her; for as I noted it before from P.
Martyr, at No 5, succession by propagation is accounted from men, and not from
women. 3. From hence it does also follow, that in case Adam had first seen the
evil effects of her Spiritual death in sin, he would on the contrary have
instantly eaten of the Tree of the twofold life, that so his concreated
perfections might have been confirmed to him, and to all his natural posterity
successively.

3. From hence also may be deduced another unconquerable reason, why the Law of
the Covenant of nature had no dependence at all upon any branch of the moral
Law of nature; namely, because Adam and Eves moral perfections were such, both
in their understanding, will, and affections, that they could not have willed
to eat of the forbidden fruit, in case it had been contrary thereunto: for by
their concreated moral principles they were as exactly conformable to every
branch of the moral Law of nature, as Christ's soul was, so that no temptation
to any sin against any branch of that moral Law, could possibly have prevailed,
as may be seen by the example of Christ: for as soon as the Devil began to
tempt him to a moral sin, (namely, to throw himself down from the top of the
Pinnacle of the Temple: and 2. To fall down and worship him) he said unto him,
Hence Satan, Matthew. 4. 10. The like answer doubtless would Eve have given, in
case the Serpent had but persuaded her to a moral sin, when he persuaded her to
eat of the forbidden fruit, and then the Devil should have lost his labor; for
Eves concreated moral perfections were such, that she would instantly have
perceived that some of the Angels were fallen, and that they were now become
tempters of her to sin against the light of her concreated moral perfections.

4. From hence also we may see the reason why Eve was first deceived by the
subtle Serpent, and why Adam was afterward deceived by Eve; namely, because
this arbitrary Law, and transient Covenant was not made with Eve, but with
Adam: and 2. Because it was not written in their heart and mind, as every part
of the moral Law of nature was; for had it been so written, then they could not
have been deceived by Satan's temptations: but seeing it pleased God to hide the
internal ground thereof in his secret decree, together with the internal ground
and reason of that other positive Law that was given to the Angels, (as I have
also noted it in my former printed Reply, in page 11, 159.) they might the more
easily be deceived by Satan's specious temptations.

For though Adam and Eve knew that God had commanded all his visible Creatures
to attend on them into Paradise, as upon their visible Lord, and that The sin
of the Angels was their disobedience to Gods positive command, to attend upon
Adam in Paradise; as it is noted by Bro. in his Sin sight, and in Revel. p.
303. 304. The image of God after which Adam was concreated, stood in a perfect
conformity to every circumstance of his moral Law, but not so to all the
circumstances of his arb^trary to positive Laws.
God had commanded his heavenly Angels to wait upon them for their best good,
(for the Scriptures do tell us, that God has commanded all his Angels to
attend upon such as shall be heirs of salvation, Ebr. 1. 14. Psalm. 91. 11.) yet
Adam and Eve were at the first ignorant, that some part of these heavenly
Angels did refuse to attend on them, and that God for that disobedience had
deprived them of their first concreated moral perfections: and 2. That they
were now punished with a double Spiritual death, and were become an envious
company against the good of man. 2. Adam and Eve were also ignorant, that these
fallen Angels had obtained leave of God to enter into the Serpent, and to
actuate the tongue of the Serpent, to speak with man's voice, and so to persuade
the woman that God had now reversed his former prohibition, and that now they
had a liberty of power to eat of the former prohibited Tree for their best good.

In these and such like circumstances, about the transient positive Law that
was given to the Angels, Adam and Eve might well be ignorant, because their
understanding and will was not created in the knowledge and obedience of every
branch and circumstance of Gods arbitrary positive Laws, as they were in the
knowledge and obedience of every branch and circumstance of the moral Law of
nature. It was Gods good pleasure to reserve the internal reasons of all his
posi^ive Laws in his own secret decrees, until he was pleased to reveal them by
his annexed promises or threatenings, or by their events. 3. Because the actings
of the Angels about Gods arbitrary commands, were not obvious to be discerned,
neither by the bodily senses of Adam and Eve, nor yet by their natural and
rational principles. From thence it follows, that seeing Adam and Eve were
ignorant, 1 Of the fall of some part of the Angels, 2. Of their cunning
head-plot to ask leave of God, that they might enter into the Serpent to tempt
the woman to eat of the forb^dden fruit, with such specious and artificial
persuasions as might prevail, as if they had acted the part of good Angels: ^t
is the less wonder therefore, that Eve was so easily and so quickly deceived.
4. On the contrary the most of the said circumstances of Gods positive Law
given to Adam, were, as it were, experimentally known to the fallen Angels; and
they knew also that Adam and Eve were as yet ignorant of the said
circumstances, and they knew also that their ignorance of them would be a ready
helping cause to them, to speed their temptations, as I have formerly noted it
in my Book of the Institution of the Sabbath.

5. P. Martyr says, that Adam at first could not by his reason know that the
Devil was fallen; or else (says he) his will had been governed by his mind. P.
Martyr does in these words affirm the same thing that I do; namely, that it
came to pass from Adams ignorance of the fall of one part of the Angels, that
the Serpent was too cunning for the woman: for doubtless at the present she
could not think it to be any other but a good Angel that God had sent to
reverse his former prohibition, and so to persuade her to eat of that fruit for
her best good; and in that respect she committed her self to the Angels trust:
for she that had received nothing but benevolence, could not as yet think there
were any such thing as malevolence and evil meaning: and after this sort did
the old Prophet deceive the young Prophet; for the young Prophet thought that
the old Prophet was sent by God (as he said he was) to reverse the former
prohibition, and to give him a liberty of power both to eat and to drink in
that place, contrary to Gods former prohibition, 2 Kings 13. but he lied unto
him as the Angel did to Eve.

6. It is worthy the noting also, which Philip of M^rnay says; that the wisest
The reason why Adam before his f^ll, and many others since have transgressed
Gods arbitrary positives, was because God did hide the internal reasons of
those Laws in his secret decrees.
men are often deceived by false spies, to make wrong deliberations, by
mistaking likelyhoods instead of truth; and such mistakings have often happened
to wise men, about some certain circumstances in Gods arbitrary and transient
positive Laws, as I instanced before in the case of the young Prophet, and in
the case of Ahab, and of diverse others, which I have cited in the next Chapter;
by the which you may see that God was often pleased to hide some circumstances
(in those kind of Laws) in his secret decrees: and thence it came to pass, that
several persons in several cases have made wrong deliberations, and for their
transgressions have fallen under the threatened penalties.

7. From hence also it is observable, that though there was no sinful ignorance
in Adam, touching his obedience to Gods said positive Law, yet there was a
negative ignorance in him (as there was also in the humane nature of Christ,
though in another case) touching some circumstances that concerned the said
positive Law and Covenant, and also touching Gods positive Law and Covenant
made with the Angels: and from thence it came to pass, (as Luther truly says,
in Psalm. 130. 5.) That the Serpent provoked Eve to dispute of a by-matter,
touching the secret counsel of God about the forbidden fruit, and so led her
away from the Word; (namely, from Gods positive command) But Luther could not
have called it a by-matter, touching the secret counsel of God, in case her act
of eating the forbidden fruit had been a transgression of any part of the moral
Law of nature; for no part or circumstance of that Law can be called a
by-matter, neither was any part of the Law of nature hid from Eve in the secret
counsel of God, as some circumstances about the transient Law of prohibition
was.

SECT. III.
But Mr. Norton does make the eating of the forbidden fruit to be a
transgression of the moral Law of nature: for thus he says, in page 189.

AS God at mount Sinai, after the Decalogue, gave the Judicial and Ceremonial
Laws, which were accessory commands, part of, and reducible thereunto, as
conclusions to their principles: so God at the Creation having given the Law to
Adam, by writing it in his heart, Genesis 1. 27. after that gave him this
accessory command concerning the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2.
17. part of, and reducible thereunto, as a conclusion to its principle.

And from this comparative argument he concludes thus, in page 190.

Adam in eating the forbidden fruit, was a branch of the same Law of works
which was given to Adam, and was afterward given by Moses; and so the
punishment of Original sin infl^cted upon man therefore, did fall upon him for
the breach of Moses Law, which was first given to Adam, and afterward given by
Moses.

The Law in the which Adam was created after the image and likeness of God, The
arbitrary Law of the Covenant of nature did no way depend on the moral Law of
nature, as the Judicial and Ceremonial Laws did on he Decalogue. 1. The moral
Law of nature. 2. The arbitrary Law of the Covenant of nature: and 3. The Law
of grace, are three differing sorts of Laws, and therefore are no where
contained under one and the same word Law: see more in Chapter 5. at Reply 3.
(says Mr. Clendon) may well be called the Law of nature, but not The Covenant
of nature: there is a wide difference between them: For 1. That Law in the
which Adam was created, was no more but a mere Law, without any promise or
threatening annexed thereunto: but 2. The other Law of the Covenant of nature
was not created or written in Adams heart or mind, as the moral Law of nature
was; but it was imposed upon him by God, as a mere arbitrary Law and transient
Covenant, for the trial of his obedience o^ disobedience, by one single or
transient act of eating; unto the which transient act God annexed both a
promise and a threatening, respecting either the confirming or the depriving him
of his concreated moral perfections: and 3. As touching that Law of the
Decalogue, that was given to fallen man at mount Sinai, it does differ
exceedingly in the kind of it, both from the said Law of nature, and also from
the said Covenant of nature, because it was given at mount Sinai to be the Law
of the Covenant of grace and reconciliation to fallen man, with a differing
promise, and with a differing threatening from those that were annexed to the
transient Covenant of nature; namely, with a promise of an eternal life in
Heaven to all believers, and with a threatening of an eternal death in Hell to
all unbelievers, which promise and threatening was not annexed to the Covenant
of nature. 4 They were founded upon differing grounds and reasons: for God gave
his transient positive Law to innocent Adam, for the trial of his obedience or
disobedience, by one transient act of eating, to the end he might either
confirm, or deprive him of his concreated moral perfections: but his positive
Laws which he annexed to the Decalogue at mount Sinai, were given to them that
were sinners, that they might be as a Schoolmaster unto Christ, that so they
might be justified from their sins through faith in him, Gal. 4. 24. and
consequently that they might be as rules to them for their sanctified walking,
in relation to the Covenant of grace only: and so consequently there is not the
like reason, why the said transient positive Law of the Covenant of nature
should be accounted as a part of, or as reducible to the moral Law of Adams
innocent nature, as there is why the Judicial and Ceremonial Laws should
belong to the Decalogue; and therefore this comparative argument is no better
then a mere falacy, as I have also showed in my former printed Reply, in page
6. and elsewhere.

5. The arbitrary Law of the Covenant of nature was not given as an accessory
Law to the concreated Law of Adams nature; namely, not as any part of it, or as
reducible to it, for then Adam should not have been created after the image and
likeness of God in moral perfections; but Adam was created after the image and
likeness of God in moral perfections, Genesis 1* 26, 27. therefore it must of
necessity be granted, that the arbitrary Law of the Covenant of nature was The
concreated Law of Adams nature was so perseci after the image of God in moral
perfections, that he needed no positive Law to be added thereto, to prompt him
to any moral duty, and therefore in his innocence he needed no Sabbath to
prompt him to serve God better in one day then in another, but it was Gods
arbitrary will to try his obedience to his arbitrary Law, by one transient act
of eating only.
not given to Adam, as an accessory Law to the perfect moral Law of his nature.
It is most certain, says Mr. ^alk^r, (^n his Dectrine of the Sabbath, p. 10.)
that man in that estate was perfect with natural perfection at all times,
equally d^s^osed to obey God, and serve him, and to remember his creation, and
to honor his creatures: he needed no observation of any day, to put him in
mind of any thing which he had before known, and which God had revealed to him:
his memory was perfect, and (his understanding was perfect) he knew whatsoever
was needful for him to know or do in that present state; and his will was ready
every moment to do whatsoever he knew to be right: he needed no sign to
admonish him of his duty, or to make him to do it in due season: he did not
labor or weary himself: every day was to him a day of delight and pleasure, of
rest and recreation; and in every creature which he did see or meddle with, he
did take notice of the wisdom and goodness of God: in a word, his whole life
was a constant obedience, and service of God, and there was no inequality or
less worship of God in one day then in another, for he fully served God at all
times: and (says he) whosoever denies this, must therein deny man's perfection,
and constant conformity to God in the state of innocence (therefore the Sabbath
was not then instituted) for where one day is kept better then another, there
is inequality and no constant uniformity in himself, nor conformity to Gods
will.

Conclusions from the premises.

1. From hence it follows, that God did not give his transient arbitrary Law
of the Covenant of nature to Adam, as an accessory Law to the concreated Law of
his nature; for then it would have argued that he had wanted some moral
perfection of nature in his creation: and thence it follows, that it is not
reducible thereto as a conclusion to its principle, as I have also showed in
Chap. 1.

2. From hence it follows, thut though the moral Law of nature is comprehended
in the Decalogue, as it is now ordained to be a part of the Covenant of grace,
yet it is no way fit to call the Decalogue the moral Law of nature, in such an
abstracted sense as it was written in Adams heart; for it was written therein
only as the mere Law of his nature, without any promise or threatening: but the
moral Law of nature, as it is now comprehended in the Decalogue, is thereby
made a part of the Covenant of grace: unto which there is annexed a promise of
an eternal life in Heaven to all believers, and a threatening of an eternal
death in Hell to all unbelievers; so that now the Law of nature is constituted
to be an essential part of the Covenant of grace, for sanctified walking, and
to show sin in not walking after that rule, that so sinners might fly to Christ
for pardon and forgiveness: therefore seeing God has after this sort, and to
this end joined the Law of nature to the Covenant of grace in the Decalogue,
let no man be so bold as to put them asunder, by separating the Law of nature
from the Covenant of grace in the Decalogue, in that abstracted sense as it was
given to Adam: nor yet let none be so bold as to conjoyn the Law of the
Covenant of grace in the Decalogue with the arbitrary Law of the Covenant of
nature, as Mr. Norton does all along, to the utter confounding of his own, and
of his Readers understanding, in the true sense of the said differing Laws and
Covenants. Our Savior does tell us, that Whatsoever God ha^h joined together,
let no man put asunder, Matthew. 19. 6. But Mr. Nor^on does break this rule of
caution; for first he does separate the Law of nature from the Covenant of
grace in the Decalogue, and then he does con join it to the arbitrary Law of
the Covenant of nature, where God has not conjoined it.

3. Though Mr. Baxter does hold the Covenant of nature to be dependant Mr.
Baxter does rightly make the Decalogue to differ from the moral Law of Adams
nature.
upon the moral Law of nature, as Mr. Norton does, yet he does exceedingly
disagree from Mr. Norton about the continuance of that Covenant, as I have
showed in Chap. 1. And 2. (Says he) it is evident, that the obligation of the
Law to believers (now) is exceeding different from the obligation of it to Adam
before the promise, or the obligation on unbelievers, or the obligation of the
Law of grace on the finally impenitent unbelievers: the Law (says he) obliged
Adam before the promise, without any remedy, existent, or revealed, etc. Ibidem
says he, the obligation of the moral Law on the believer for every new sin, is
such as has a perfect remedy at hand, even Christ and the promise, and he has
the Spirit within him to cause a renewed application: and (at best for ordinary
sins of infirmity) it seems that the habit of faith and repentance is ever in
him, as a condition which qualifieth him for present remission, and so the
guilt is but transient, and the justified estate is permanent: nor is it such a
guilt as makes an intercision in our adoption or union with Christ, or casts
us out of Gods favor, but only makes remission necessary.

These differences does Mr. Baxter make between the moral Law of nature, and
the Decalogue, of which differences II have also spoken more in Chap. 6.

4. I have given diverse instances in Chap. 5. at Reply 5. of diverse arbitrary
and transient positive Laws and Covenants, which God made with particular
persons, and sometimes with the national Church of the Jews; which said Laws
and Covenants have no dependence at all on the moral Law of nature: and by
those examples the Reader may see, that there is the like reason for the like
difference between the transient Law of the Covenant of nature, and the fixed
moral Law of Adams nature. And I believe that Mr. Norton may much sooner find a
knot in a bulrush, then find by any Scripture (that is rightly interpreted)
that the transient Law of the Covenant of nature was any way reducible to the
fixed moral Law of Adams nature, in such sort as the Judicial and Ceremonial
Laws are to the Decalogue.

5. From hence it does also follow, that Mr. Nortons said inference, in p. 190.
cannot be true; namely, that the transgression of Adam in eating the forbidden
fruit, was a breach of the same Law of works, which was first given to Adam and
afterward given by Mos^s, and that therefore the punishment of Original sin
did fall upon us for the breach of Moses Law, first given to Adam and
afterward given by Moses.

I have already showed in Chap. 1. That the punishment of Original sin does
Reply 2.
fall upon us for the breach of a mere arbitrary and transient positive Law,
and not for the breach of any part of the moral Law of Adams concreated nature;
and sundry eminent Divines do give their suffrage to this sense.

1. Mr. Wotton says (de Reco^si. pec. par. 2. l. 1. c. 7.) It cannot be proved
that there was any Covenant of eternal life (in heaven) betwixt God and Adam in
regard either of his habitual justice which was bestowed on him in his
creation, or of his actual obedience in keeping the Law; he does clearly affirm
in these words, that the Covenant of nature made with Adam, had no dependence
at all upon the moral Law of his nature.

2. He shows in John page 146. how we came to be infected with Original Adams
eating of the forbidden fruit was no sin against any part of the moral Law of
his nature, neither could he sin against it, until he had first sinned against
the transient Law of the covenant of nature, and had thereby lost his moral
perfections.
sin; and there he says thus, I am persuaded that the ten Commandments is the
only rule of our actions, teaching what we should or should not do, and not
the pattern of our nature, showing what we ought to be; by these words it is
clear, that in his judgment, the moral Law of nature did not forbid Adam to
eat of the tree of knowledge; no more then the ten Commandments, forbid the
young propher to eat bread or to drink water at Bethel, in case he stood in
need thereof to satisfy his hunger; But yet both the young Prophet and Adam
also were forbidden to eat by a mee^ arbitrary and transient positive Law.

3. P. du Moulin says (in his book against Armi^ianism) that Original sin is
condemned by the Law, but not forbidden: he does clearly affirm in these words,
that Adam was not forbidden to eat of the tree of knowledge, by the moral Law
of his nature, and therefore that he did not sin against that Law, when he did
eat of the forbidden fruit; But yet he does grant (as all good men do) that as
soon as Adam had sinned against the transient Law of the Covenant of nature, he
was deprived of Gods Image of moral perfections, and 2. That the corruption of
nature did follow thereupon, and this corruption which is now commonly called
Original sin is condemned by the Law, because it does continually draw mankind
to the transgression of every branch of the moral Law.

4. Mr. Clendon says (in his Ser. of Justifi. pig. 23.) obedience to the moral
Law could not be the condition of the first Covenant, because Adam could not
break the moral Law in the which he was created perfect, both in his
understanding, will, and affections, as all confess; his understanding did
perfectly apprehend the nature of God, And did perfectly know the will of God
in all things contained in the moral Law, and his will and affections did
perfectly follow the dictates of his understanding; Therefore he could not sin
directly against the moral Law; Adams holiness and righteousness was so
connatural to him, that it was more delightful and pleasing to his nature, to
observe every branch of the moral Law of his nature, then it is pleasing and
delightful to our corrupt nature, to sin against every branch of the said moral
Law; for sin is not a natural thing, as holy and righteous performances were to
Adam, and therefore Adam in his pure nature could not so much as will a moral
sin, until he was deprived of gods Image by his positive sin.

5. Mr. Warren says (on Justifi. page 153.) Sin entered into the world by that
positive Law forbidding Adam; and not by the moral Law existing in the mind of
God before it was declared; In these words he does clearly deny that Adams sin
in eating the forbidden fruit was a breach of the same Law that was given by
Moses.

But in case it be here objected that Mr. Warren has some other meaning then I
cite him for; I answer, though it should prove so, yet I say also, that which I
cite him for, does necessarily follow from his said assertion; and the like
consequences I have drawn from some other writers in my former printed Reply,
and I think it may be done conveniently, though the said writers may have not
only a differing but a contrary meaning also to what I infer from them, as it
is well asserted by Mr. Gataker in his Answer to Mr. Walkers vindication, page
18, 19.

But says Master Norton in p. 109.

The law entered that sin might abound, Romans 5. 20. i. c. That Adams sin might
abound. Therefore (says he) Adam, sin was committed against the Law of Moses:
and to this purpose (says he) Divines do show how Adams sin was a violation of
the most, yea of all the Commandments: and says he in p. 256. It was an
Universal sin, because in it was the violation of the whole Decalogue.

Romans 5. 20. to prove, That the Law (namely the Law of the Covenant of nature)
entered, that Adams sin in eating the forbidden Romans 5. 20.
fruit might abound; he misunderstands the true sense of the word sin, and also
the true sense of the word Law: for 1. The Apostle does not speak of Adams
first sin in eating the forbidden fruit, but of the after habit of his sinning
nature, which kind of sin is now commonly called original sin; and this
original sin was not the immediate punishment of Adams first sin: but
deprivation was the first immediate punishment; and 2. From thence consequently
followed corruption of nature, which is now called original sin.

2. He takes as little heed to the true sense of the word Law; for the Law that
entered to make sin abound, is not meant of the positive Law of the transient
covenant of nature, for that Law had its entrance before his first sin, and it
did forbid him to sin by his eating of the forbidden fruit: neither is it meant
of the fixed moral Law of his concreated nature; for that Law was also entered
into his heart and mind before his first sin: Therefore that Law that entered
tomake sin abound, was the new Law of the Covenant of grace as it is contained
in the ten Commandments: This is the only Law that does make sin abound to the
conversion of souls: namely, it makes Original sin to abound, for Adam was no
sooner deprived of Gods concreated image of moral perfections; But instantly
his active will and affections could not otherwise choose but act irregularly,
against every branch of the said moral Law; and from thence it came to pass (by
Gods grace) that the new Law of the Covenant of grace and Reconciliation, was
first declared in Genesis 3. 15. to make Original sin to abound, and this Covenant
of grace and Reconciliation was also renewed at mount Sinai, whereof the
Decalogue was the compendium; and in this Sense it is, that the Law entered that
Original sin might abound; But in the interval between Adam, first sin and
punishment, the Covenant of nature was extinguished, and no new punishment for
Original sin was threatened until after the new Covenant of grace, was first
declared in Genesis 3. 15. And therefore in that interval of time, no sin, nor no
new punishment was imputed to Adam, because there was no new Law declared, Romans
5. 13. But as soon as the new Law of grace in Genesis 3. 15. did enter (which was
so largely opened to Adam though we have but the brief heads of it) that it
made Original sin to abound against every one of the ten Commandments, for the
better humbling of Adam, and of all his fallen posterity, that so it might be
as a Schoolmaster to Christ: this Exposition of the word Law, and of the word
sin in Romans 5. 20. is sound and good, and Mr. Nortons Exposition exceeding
erroneous.

3. Though it be true that Divines do show how Adams sin was a violation of It
is no small error to affirm that Adams act in eating the forbidden fruit was a
sin against all the ten Commandments.
the most, yea of all the ten Commandments, when he did first eat of the
forbidden fruit; yet it is no commendation of Mr. Nortons judgment to follow
them in their error, seeing he might have found that many other learned Divines
do affirm the contrary, some of which I have cited before at No. 2. and
elsewhere; But in case Mr. Norton could produce a thousand Divines more on his
side, yet in contradicting the truth they ought to be counted no better then
misleading guides, that lead poor blind souls into the ditch of error with
themselves. I have seen an eminent minister cut an apple ass^nder cross the
core, and then he has showed to such as were present ten spots about the core,
and upon those ten spots, he has taken an occasion to tell how Adams sin in
eating the forbidden apple, did break all the ten Commandments: But though I
have often seen this, and heard his exposition of Adams sinning against all the
ten Commandments, yet I never thought his judgment to be sound in this; nor
yet his carriage and discourse to be grave enough for such serious matters.

4. To affirm that Adams sin in eating the forbidden fruit was a breach of all
the ten Commandments, is by consequence to affirm that Adams understanding
will, and affections, were not created after the likeness of God in moral
perfections.

5. It is no small grief to me to read Mr. Nortons assertions (and others also)
because they affirm that Adam had free will to evil as well as to good;
doubtless this is a very gross error: for from thence it does also follow, that
God did not create Adam after his own Image and Likeness, in moral perfections;
and see the next Reply at No. 5, 6, 7.

6. The Apostle does tell us that Adams sin was not a willing sin, much less
was it a wilful sin; Paul does tell us that it was no more but an unadvised
Fall, or stumble in Romans 5. 15, 17, 18. and those unadvised errors which David
prayed against in Psalm. 19. 12. are in the 70 rendered by Paul's Greek Romans 5.
15, 17, 18. Adams sin was not a wilful sin, it was but an unadvised stumble
through the deceit of Satan.
word, and Kir^herus does often render that greek word by (delictum) A small
offense in Ezekiel. 3. 20. Ezekiel. 14. 11. Ezekiel. 18. 26. Dan. 4. 24. Dan. 6. 22. and
I have already made it manifest in Sect. 2. That Adams sin in eating the
forbidden Fruit was brought to pass by the guile of the Devil, and thence it
follows, it was no more but an unadvised stumble, and not willful sin; and
therefore to hold so as Mr. Norton does will occasion sundry great errors in
Divinity.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 63.

We in Adam sinned in soul properly.

also in my former Printed Reply in p. 8. But I will repent some t^^ngs, and
add some other new considerations for the fuller confutat^on of it.

1. If we sinned in soul properly, in Eve, first desire to eat the (...) fruit;
then she sinned in soul before her act of eating, and then her ^ct of eating
was not her first sin, as usually it is esteemed and called; and indeed as the
plain letter of the prohibition does affirm; for the letter of the prohibition
says thus, in the day thou Eatest thereof (and not in the day thou Desire to
Ea^, etc.) and thence it follows that we did not sin in soul properly in Eves
desire to eat.

2. It is also evident that Eve had a liberty of power given her by the moral
Law of her nature to eat of that fruit, because she saw by her cl^er reason,
that it was by creation good for food, and yet it became unlawful to be eaten
by Gods arbitrary prohibition only; But as soon as she was persuaded by the
good Angel (as she thought it was) to eat of it for her best good, she did
without any scruple take and eat, and then she did also stretch out her hand
and gave thereof unto Adam, and he did eat; and then and not tell, then the sin
against the Covenant of nature was finished, and then and not till then, the
threatened Spiritual death was executed. 1. By deprivation of their concreated
life of Gods Image in moral perfections, and 2. Then came in corruption of
nature against every branch of t^eir concreated moral perfections; and after
th^s sort was the young prophet deceived by the old prophet; for the old
prophet persuaded the young prophet, that the former prohibition, (not to eat
any bread or drink any water at Bethel) was taken off, and thereupon he was
persuaded to eat. But it was to the loss of his natural life,) 1. K^^g. 13. 15,
etc. so in like sort was Eve deceived by the good Angel (as she tho^ght it was)
that God had sent to revers^ ^^s former prohibition, and to persuade her to eat
of it for her best good, namely to make her more wise in the knowledge of Gods
^ecret will; and th^s the Devil did suit his temptation to her natural desire:
for it is the property of nature to desire that which is best for it,
especially such things as have an operation by Gods appointment, to instruct
the understanding in Gods secret will; and 2. As God had created senses in her,
to perceive, and sensitive motions to desire such food as might be most
beneficial to nature, so her desire after such things was suitable to her
nature, and no sin; and to this effect does P. Martyr s^eak (in Com. pl. p.
217.) Man (says he) in himself had Originals, whereby he might desire things
pleasant and commodious, but not against Reason and the word of God; and says
he in his Ser: on Phil. 2. Christ might be delighted with sweet and delicate
meats, because they were agreeable to nature, without any self-love, for the
love of pleasure, seeking his own; and there was not any ill-affection therein,
as Adam. might have done in his first estate, but so cannot we do (says he)
because we are corrupted with ill-affections; and to this effect speaks Dr.
J^^^so^ in his 8. book on the Creed. p. 73, 74. And to this effect does Dr.
^^llet speak (in Romans p. 339.) man in paradise (says he) had natural
concupiscence, but without disorder or Rebellion against the mind.

I confess it does sometimes amaze me to read the said assertion of Mr. Nortons
in sundry eminent Divines: Dr. Ames says in Medul. l. 1. c. 11. The first
motion or degree of Adams disobedience did necessarily go before the outward
act of Eating, so that (says he) it may truly be said that Adam was a sinner
before he had finished the outward act of eating; whence it is (says he) that
the very desire which Eve was carried with toward the forbidden fruit, does
seem to be noted as some degree of her sin; and other Authors say, That Adams
soul was the Agent, and that his body was but the instrument, which the soul
uses, as in all sins; In case they had sa^d in all moral sins, they had hit
the na^l, but because they mean it of sins against an arbitrary Law, which
prohibits but the act, they have mist the nail; as I have opened the matter in
many positive Laws in Chapter 5. Reply 5.

3. The Fundamental ground of Mr. Nortons error, lies chiefly in not making a
right distinction, between the two sorts of Laws that were given to Adam: for
the Transient Law of the Covenant of nature, had no relation at all to the
fixed moral Law of his concreated nature; The transient Law of the Covenant of
nature was constituted only for the trial of his obedience, by one mere
outward bodily act only, of which kind of transient Laws and Covenants, See
Chap. 5. at Reply 5. But the fixed and concreated moral Law of his nature had
its seat in his heart and mind in the time of his creation, and therefore it
does A right distinction must be mad^ between the moral Law of nature, and the
transie it Law of the Covenant of nature, to preserve expositers from many
errors.
reach to the affections of the soul in the first place, as the agent, and then
to the body as it is the souls instrument; so that the very first desire of the
soul of any thing that is contrary to the Law of nature is a sin, though the
body act it not. This distinction between these two sorts of Laws is of
necessary use to preserve expositers from many great errors.

4. As the said distinction between the two sorts of Laws, that were given to
Adam is necessarily to be observed, so also it is as necessary to observe a
right distinction between the several sorts of transient positive Laws among
themselves, 1. Because many of them were typical, an^ ^ere ordained to have a
necessary dependence upon the Decalogue, as it was given for a Covenant of
grace and reconciliation at mount Sinai; and in that respect God did command
his national Church to observe them, by the obedience of faith in Christ; and
therefore all those that did observe those typical Laws, but with mere bodily
exercise without faith in Christ, were guilty of soul sin by omission, because
they wanted faith in their souls to observe them, according to the true intent
of Gods command; but on the other hand, God ordained some other transient
positive Laws but in relation to some one bodily act only; as I have instanced
in Chap. 5. Reply 5.

5. It is well observed by Mr. Clendon (in his Ser. on Justi. p. 23.) That the
liberty of Adams will did consist in this, That he should not will any moral
evil; and herein he was created after the Image of God (who is the most perfect
agent) and therefore does always necessarily will that, and only that which is
good; but about things indifferent in their own nature Adam had a liberty to
will or nill, to choose or refuse.

6. P. Martyr does also affirm (in Com. pl. p. 187.) that the will from the
time of its first creation in Adam was not evil; and says he, in page 191. our
motion of turning away from God is proper to our will as it is now corrupted,
and not as it was at the first instituted by God, and says he, in page 195.
Sin depends not on the will and affections as they were made by God, but as
they are now corrupted; and from hence it follows that the Law of the transient
covenant of nature was no part of the moral Law of nature, because Adam might
will to eat of the forbidden fruit, as it was food without sin, but he could
not so much as will any thing against the moral Law of his nature without sin;
2. From hence it does also follow that Eve did not sin in soul properly, when
she saw the tree was good for food and a desire to her eyes.

Object. 1. P. Martyr makes this objection in page 187. If man's will was not
evil by creation, but by deprivation; what shall we say as touching the sin of
the First man? for in him nature was good; grace and the help of God was not
wanting, and yet nevertheless he sinned.
P. Martyr does thus answer, here we must judge one thing as concerning the
first man, and another as touching our nature which is now corrupted. 2. He
does propound this Question again in page 570. But in neither of those Adams
first sin did not d^pend upon his will and affections as they were made by God,
but on his transient bodily act of once eating only.
two places do I find a satisfying answer, therefore I will endeavor to give a
satifying answer,

1. Then consider, That the moral Law of nature was so concreated in Adams
heart and mind, that he could not sin against any branch of it; But yet he
might sin against a mere Arbitrary and transient positive Law, that forbad
nothing else but his bodily act of eating of that fruit, that was good food by
creation; and of the which he had a liberty of power to eat by the Law of his
creation.

2. Consider that though Adam was created after the likeness of God in moral
perfections, yet he was not created after the likeness of God in the knowledge
and obedience of his transient positive Laws, they were not written in his
heart and mind in the time of his creation, as the moral Law was; but they and
the internal reason of them was kept secret in Gods eternal counsel and decree,
and in that respect Adam might easily be deceived, touching the ground and
reason of them, and so consequently touching the reason of his obedience to
them through the unseen subtilty of the good Angels persuasion, as Eve thought
it was.

3. Consider also that Adams ignorance of the secret reason of the said
transient Law, was no sinful ignorance, because it was not from any moral
deficiency in his rational soul; and to this effect does P. Martyr speak (in
Com. pl. p. 571.) every ignorance of Gods will, says he, is not a sin, since
even the Angels are ignorant of very many things, especially of the time when
the latter day shall be, etc. Adams first sin, therefore was not from any
deficiency in his moral principles, as all moral sins now are, ever since Adam
was deprived of Gods concreated image of moral perfections, neither was Adam
ignorant of Gods prohibition when he did eat, and yet this sin was not a wilful
sin: the woman thought it was a good Angel that was sent to take off the said
prohibition, and to persuade her to eat of it, for her best good, but this
Angel did beguile her, being a liar and a murderer from the beginning.

7. Mr. Perkins on the Creed says, freedom of will to that which is absolutely
evil, was not in Adam in his innocence: But (says he, at No. 4.) freedom of
will to things that are good in their own nature, and which may become evil
through prohibition; This freedom of will was in Adam before his fall, the tree
of knowledge, of good and evil, was good meat by creation, seeing all creatures
by creation were good, Genesis 1. 31. and there is nothing unclean of it self,
Romans 14. 14. therefore the moral Law of nature did not prohibit Adam to eat of
^t, but it was only forbidden by Gods positive institution, neither did the
moral Law of Adam, nature promise his confirmation for his actual eating of the
tree of life, but Gods positive Covenant only.

8. This Freedom of will (says another reverend Divine) was ordained by Gods
wise disposing providence, to be the true subject and root of contingency,
being left to such and such temptations; for in Gods predeterminating will,
even things contingent to us, come to pass necessarily: and from this freedom
of will it came to pass, that by the woman's arguing with the good angel (as she
thought it was) she was deceived.

9. Dr. All (in his Poor Man's library page 145. In answer to this Question,
whether Adam could be fo^eknowing of his sin and fall) says, The Schoolmen do
reason for the negative, after this manner.

The ill that is foreknown and foreseen, either it pleases the will or not; If
it pleases the will, then there is fault in the will: But (say they) it cannot
be that any fault should go before the first fault of Adam:

In this assert^on, the Schoolmen do affirm, that there could be no fault in
Adams will, before his first bodily act of eating the forbidden fruit;
Therefore in their judgment, we in Eves desire to eat did not sin in soul
properly.

10. It is worthy observation which old Chaucer has in page 64.

Whilst that Adam fasted, as I read, he was in paradise, and when he eat of
the fruit (forbidden) he was cast out: In these words Chaucer does affirm two
things, 1. That Adam did not sin whilst he fasted from the forbidden fruit,
and therefore he did not sin by his desire to eat. 2. That he had not been cast
out of paradise, in case he had but still fasted from the forbidden fruit,
notwithstand^ng he had desired to eat of it: therefore not the desire to eat,
but the act of eating was the only sin that was forbidden.

Object. 2. Some that I do much honor for their godliness have objected, That
Adam sinned in soul through unbelief of the threatening; and that Satan being a
lying Spirit did imbreathe unbelief into his soul.
Adam and Eves innocence, Satan could not have a liberty of power to enter into
Eves, or into Adam, soul to tempt them to the sin of unbelief, because in the
time of innocence he could not will to sin, because he The Devil could not
tempt Eve inwardly but outwardly only.
was made after the Image of God, as I have showed from the authors immediately
cited.

2. It is generally affirmed that neither the soul of Christ, nor yet the soul
of Adam could be corrupted, by any inward suggestions from Satan. 3. The
Apostle James does tell us in Chap. 1. 13. That God cannot tempt any man to
evil, (because he is absolutely good*) implying thereby that whosoever does
tempt any one to evil he must first be of an evil disposition himself as the
fallen Angels were before they could tempt Adam to eat the forbidden fruit.

4. The Apostle James does also affirm in verse. 14. That every man is tempted
to evil when he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed, and from thence it
does also follow, that Adams soul could not be drawn away to sin, until his
will was first corrupted by deprivation, and from thence followed corruption of
nature, which is now called Original sin, and then he was drawn away by his own
lust and enticed; and then the Devil had power to enter by his inward
suggestions.

5. From this acquired sinful habit of nature, it is that Ambrose says the
Devil does mingle himself with our thoughts, which he could not do (says he)
but through sin (first in the soul) 2. Thence it does also follow that until
Adam had sinned against the transient Law of the Covenant of nature, by his
bodily act of eating the forbidden fruit, the Devil could not enter into his
soul to imbreath any unbelief into it. 3. From thence it does also follow, that
seeing neither Adam before his fall, nor the humane nature of Christ had any
evil concupisence in their souls (as we have now since the fall) the Devil
could not enter into their souls to frame any unbelief therein.

6. Our Savior told his disciples in John 14. 30. That his soul was free from
Satan's power (even at that very instant time, when the Devil was in the acting
of his greatest combat with him) the Prince of this world comes (says
Christ) and he has nothing in me; a commission from God, he had in Genesis 3. 17.
and therefore he came, but says Christ, he has nothing in me, or within my
soul to work upon, no corrupt inclination, whereby he can work any discontented
affection in my soul, either at the shamefulness, or at the painfulness of my
approaching sufferings.

7. Our Savior said to his disciples in John 16. 33. Be of good cheer (or Joh.
14. 30. Joh. 16. 33.
be confident) I have overcome the world, namely, the foresaid Prince of the
world (and so the Devil is called in verse. 11.) that is to say, I have overcome
the Devils ignominious temptations, by his ignominious usage; and though his
potent seed, is now about to send a band of Soldiers to apprehend me, and to
use me with all reproaches and tortures, as if I were the worst of malefactors;
yet be of good cheer my disciples I have overcome this Prince of the world not
only by my pure moral principles, but also by my official graces of the holy
Spirit, wherewith God has anointed me for the execution of my Priestly and
Kingly office, to the utter soyling of Satan and all his potent seed in all
their temptations which are but outward; for they have no power over my sinless
soul, to work any temptation therein.

8. Sundry Christian writers do concur with me.

1. Mr. Tho. Goodwin cited in my former printed Reply in page 173. affirms,
I^ his Child of Light, p. 52. 53.
That the soul of Adam in his innocence, and the soul of Christ were privileged
from Satan's inward temptations to sin; because their understanding will, and
affections, were created after the likeness of God in moral perfections, and so
consequently they were free from the least tincture of corruption; without
which matter Satan cannot work any temptation to any moral sin. 2. Says he in
p. 52. Satan's power is from those principles of guilt and darkness that are in
us, or else he could not disquiet us; Satan comes, says Christ, but he has
nothing in me; A commission he had, and therefore he came, but he had nothing
of his Image; namely, of the guilt of sin in Christ's soul to work upon, and
therefore he could effect nothing at all upon his Spirit; and says he a little
after, The Devil in his tempting of Adam in his innocence, was not permitted in
his first assault to come within him to work indiscernably upon his phantacy
and affections; but only mediately and externally by an audible voice in the
body of a Serpent. And as touching the second Adam, we read not (says he) that
the Devil had any access to his inward senses and Spirit, but by an external
suggestion, by voice, and by visible representations, as when he showed him the
glory of the world in visible land-skips of his own making, which he
represented to the eye: and what else (says he) was the reason why he took the
advantage of a mountain?

9. All that temptation of Christ (by the Devil) was without, and not within
Christ, says Gregory in Evangel. Hom. 16.

10. All that temptation of the Devil was not inward, but outward, says Beda
in Matthew. 4.

11. Damasen speaking of the Devils tempting Christ in the wilderness, says,
The wicked Spirit then suggested from without, as he did unto Adam; not by
thoughts, for Adams temptation was not by thoughts, but by the Serpent, says
Damasen, Orthodoxae fid^i, l. 3. c. 20.

12. Theophilact says, in Matthew. 4. The Devil appeared to Christ by some
sensible shape; for thoughts (says he) the Lord would not admit.

13. Mr. Calvin says in his Harmony, in Matthew. 4. There is no absurdity in the
permission of God, and in the voluntary subjection of Christ, to be tempted of
Satan; so that we think not That he suffered any thing from within, that is, In
mind and soul.

14. G^alter says, in Luke 9. Homil. 38. No man ought to think that Christ
suffered these cogitations, no not a moment, because though nothing else be
added besides thoughts, yet of themselves they are within the compass of sin:
howbeit (says he) Satan did propose these things to Christ's senses.

15. The Devils may torment the body of man by touching, as they did Jobs; the
soul they cannot, but by possessing it: for they cannot work, but where they
are, and therefore they must possess the soul which they torment.

16. P. Martyr says (in Com. pl. p. 571.) truth it is we are compelled more
often, and more vehemently to sin then Adam was, we having many naughty
persuasions and provocations to sin, which Adam had not, until such time as he
had transgressed: and from thence it follows, that as soon as Adam had
transgressed the transient Covenant of nature, he was deprived of Gods
concreated image of moral perfections, and then the Devil had power to imbreath
unbelief into his soul, and not before: and now ever since Adams fall the Devil
has an exceeding great power to tempt the soul inwardly to moral sins, as well
as outwardly, as it is handled at large by Mr. Tho. Goodwin, in his Child of
Light.

17. The Devils themselves confessed, that they had nothing to do with Christ,
because they had no possession in his mind, Matthew. 8. 29. Luke 8. 28. Mark 1.
24. with Luke 4. 34. but on the contrary the Devils truly acknowledged, that
Christ's word and power tormented them, Matthew. 8. 29. Luke 8. 28. Mark 5. 7.

In my Dialogue I said thus, in page ^0.

1. That Satan by his instruments wounded and bruised Christ, according to Gods
foreappointment, in Genesis 3. 15.

2. That those wounds and bruises we^^ in^^icted by Satan upon Christ's body
only, and not upon his soul, because his soul was not capable of bearing those
wounds: and from thence I concluded, that Satan could not wound Christ's soul.

Mr. Norton does answer thus, in page 38.

Should the soul be supposed to be incapable of wounds and bruises properly,
yet experience shows it is capable of them metaphorically; Satan being a Spirit
may have access unto, and consequently both may and does afflict the Spirit, 1
Cor. 5. 5. Ephesians. 6. 12, 16. If Satan could not, God can: Christ suffered not
only in body, but in soul, Es. 53. 10. Matthew. 26. 38. Mark 14. 13, 33, 34. Luke
22. 44. Psalm. 16. 10.

Norton uses a cunning falacy to slide from the point, as it is laid down in
the Dialogue: for I do there affirm this truth; namely, that Satan had a
liberty of power given him, in Genesis 3. 15. to wound and bruise the body of
Christ, but not his soul: this is my assertion; and his answer is nothing else
but a mere evasion.

He does not, nor cannot prove that God gave Satan a liberty of power to wound
the immortal soul of Christ.

2. Says he, Satan being a Spirit, may have access unto, and consequently both
may, and does afflict the Spirit (of sinners) as his proofs do carry the sense;
but these Scriptures do no way prove that Satan might, and did wound the soul
of Christ: nay, I have showed, that Satan could not wound the Spirit of Christ
in my former Reply.

3. Says he, if Satan could not, God can. To this I answer, that God cannot do
it by any rule of justice that he has revealed to us in his word: for as I
have showed, he does not punish any one with proper vindicative punishments,
but for sin in the same subject: and I have also showed, that his five several
Scriptures do not prove any such thing, when they have their true exposition,
which I have given in my former printed Reply; 1. For Esa. 53. 10. see it in
page 211, 222, 223, 314, 348. 2. For Matthew. 26. 38. see it in page 173, 298,
314, 321, 327. 3. For Mar. 14. 33, 34 see page 223, 290, 338. 4. For Luke 22 44
see page 177, 331, 334, 336, 338. 5. For Psalm. 16. 10. see page 109. and much
more I could add to the exposition of these Scriptures from eminent authors,
if I thought it were needful.

I conclude therefore that these five Scriptures are cited to no better
purpose, but to take Gods name so many times in vain.

Object. 3. You affirm that Eve sinned not in soul, when she desired to eat of
the forbidden fruit; you say that nothing else was her sin, but her bodily act
of eating only: but it seems to me that it was a sin to touch it Genesis 3. 3.
with the hand; for Eve told the Serpent, in Genesis 3. 3. that God commanded, Ye
shall not eat, nor touch it, lest ye die: and to this sense does Austin
understand the prohibition in the City of God, l. 13. c. 20. And hence it
follows, that seeing it was against Gods command to touch it with the hand,
why should it not be a sin likewise to touch it with the desire of her soul?
[Nor touch it] was Eves addition to Gods commandment, even as, say they, it
was her diminution from Gods commandment to say, Lest ye die. This answer is
approved by our larger Ann^t. and by others. But

2. I do not like the said answer: for 1. I conceive that these words, Lest ye
die, was not any diminution of Gods command; for this manner of speech, says
A^^s* does not always show doubt, but it speaks of danger, to the end to
prevent evil, as in Psalm. 2. 12. Lest he be angry, and in Mar. 14. 2. Lest
there be an uproar, but it is in Matthew. 26. 5. That there be not an uproar, and
so in Acts 23. 10. Yea 2 Says Ains. it does sometimes rather affirm a thing;
As lest Ezekiah dece^ve you, Esa. 36. 18. is in 2 Ki^gs* 18. 32. For he
deceives you: So lest they faint in the way, Matthew. 15. 32. is in Mark 8. 3.
They will faint: and so the 70 translateth it affirmatively, That ye die no^,
and so in Exodus 20. 19. Lest we die, is in Deuteronomy. 5. 25. We shall die. If we
hear the voice of the Lord our God any more we shall d^e, (...) ^ev. 10. 6, 7,
9.

3. I have at large proved in this Chapter, that Adam and Eve in their
innocence could not sin against any branch of the moral Law, much less so
palpably as to falsify Gods command by any lying diminut^on.

4. Nor touch it, is no addition to Gods commandment; for it does not mean the
touching of it with the hand, but with the teeth and taste only, which is
nothing else but the very first act of eating.

5. I grant that the Ebrew word translated Touch, does signify any kind of
touch with any part of the body: but in this place the cont^xt does assure us,
that this general word Touch must be restrained to that particular kind of
touch that was to be made with their teeth, and taste only, which is nothing
else but the first act of eating.

6. It is worthy the noting, that the first declaration of a Law or Covenant
must be looked at as the standing rule, by the which all after repetitions,
(either by way of enlargement, or abridgement) must be expounded or regulated:
and from thence it follows, that seeing God was pleased in his first
declaration of this Law of the Covenant of nature, to forbid nothing else for
the breach of it, but the act of eating, in Genesis 2. 17. th^s additional word to
that prohibition [Nor touch it] must be of no other kind of touching, but with
the teeth or taste only; namely, as it is the first act of eating. 2. From
thence it does also follow, that in case Adam and Eve had done no more but
touched it with their hand; they had not transgressed the prohibit^on of the
Covenant of nature.

7. In case Eve only [and not Adam] had touched it with her teeth and taste, as
it is the first act of eating, yet the Covenant of nature had not been fully
broken thereby, because [not Eve, but) Adam was constituted to be the head of
all their natural posterity in that Covenant: but as soon as Adam (the head in
that Covenant) had touched it but with his teeth and taste only, as it is the
first act of eating, the Covenant of nature was fully broken, even before the
substance of the apple was swallowed down into his stomach; therefore this
additional word [Nor touch it] does explain the word [Eat] to signify that the
threatened punishment of a Spiritual death in sin, should be executed upon them
both together, even at that very point of time when Adam did but touch it with
his teeth and taste only.

8. The like speedy execution of Gods justice was inflicted on the murmuring
Israelites, who lusted to eat flesh; For even whiles the flesh of the Quails
was yet between their teeth, before the substance of the flesh was swallowed
down into their stomach, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, and
they were destroyed with a very great plague, Numb 11. 33. Psalm. 78. 30, 31.

9. My exposition of the additional word [Nor touch it] is illustrated by the
like restrained sense of the word in another case: the Apostle says, It is not
good for a man to touch a woman, 1 Cor. 7. 1. This word Touch must not be taken
at large for any kind of touch, for both the Scripture and reason does teach us
to restrain it to a particular kind of touch: Paul did not intend to forbid
them to touch a woman in any part of her body; for he does in other places of
Scripture command them to salute one another with a holy k^ss: and thence it
follows, that it was lawful to touch a woman by way of salutation, either by
kissing her lips, or by shaking her by the hand in token of christ an love,
Romans 16. 16. 1 Cor. 16. 20. therefore this prohibition, It is not good for a
man to touch 1 Cor. 7. 1. Genesis 20. 6. Prove. 6. 29.
a woman, must be restrained to that special kind of touching that is proper to
the marriage bed.

In those persecuting times the godly were often forced to fly for their safety
from place to place, being as it were killed all the day long, (that is to say,
continually) for the Gospels sake, Romans 8. 36. and in that respect Paul did
dehort such as were single from marriage, saying, It is good for a man not to
touch a woman in the marriage bed in these persecuting times, lest it prove a
more troublesome kind of life then to live single, by flying from place to
place to provide for the safety of wife and children, as well as of his own
life, which he might the more easily provide for being unmarried, then by being
married.

10. This restrained sense of the word touch, is so to be understood, both in
the Ebrew word, and also in the Greek word, in Genesis 20. 6. and in Prove. 6. 29.
namely, of that particular kind of touching that is used in the marriage bed,
and not generally of any other kind of touching, as of the lips or hand, by way
of salutation: so Nor touch it, is meant only of that particular kind of
touching the forbidden fruit with the teeth and taste only, as it is the first
act of eating.

11. I have also in the beginning of the first Chapter showed, that the death
in Genesis 2. 17. must not be taken in a general unlimited sense, for three
several sorts of death, but that it must be restrained to that kind of death
that belongs only to the Covenant of nature.

Conclusion.
From the premises it follows, that Satan could not imbreath any unbelief into
Eves soul in innocence: and 2. That we did not sin in soul properly in Eves
desire to eat of the forbidden fruit, because nothing else was forbidden but
the bodily act of eating only.

CHAP. V.
Proving 1. That the Law at mount Sinai was given for no other Covenant, but of
grace and reconciliation only; namely, in the Spiritual sense of it.

2. Though it was given for a Law of works to the national Church, yet it was
so done in a typical relation to the Covenant of grace only.

3. That the ten Commandments is called the Law of works, as it comprehends the
typical Laws, but not in any relation at all to the Covenant of nature that was
made with Adam.

MR. Norton does oppose my Dialogue in all these particulars.

1. I did in my Dialogue endeavor to prove, in page 103, 104, etc.

That the ten Commandments at mount Sinai, were given only for a Covenant of
grace and reconciliation; and there I gave these reasons to prove it.

1. Because our Savior affirmed to the Scribe, that there were but two great
Commandments in the Law, (namely, the first and second Tables) and that the
whole Law and the Prophets do hang upon these two Commandments, Mat. Matthew. 22.
40.
22. 40.

From thence I did infer, that seeing the whole Law and the Prophets do hang
upon the ten Commandments, as the general heads of all that is contained in the
Law and the Prophets, they must needs contain rules of faith in Christ.

2. Thence I did also infer, that therefore it is no way fit to call the
Dec^l^gue The term moral Law is often ill applied by Mr. Norton to the ten
Commandments; ^. In relation to the moral Law of nature, and 2. To the Covenant
of nature, seeing the ten Commandments relate only to the Covenant of grace.
the moral Law of nature, in an abstracted sense from the Covenant of grace;
which is the great point that Mr. Norton strives for, as the only matter of a
sinners justification.

3. Yet I granted in my Dialogue, that the ten Commandments may very fitly be
called the moral Law, though not in relation to Adams perfect nature, yet in
another respect; namely, in relation to the perpetual Covenant of grace,
because the said ten Commandments do command faith in Christ, as well as rules
of sanctified walking to all the subjects of that Covenant: and in this sense
only Mr. Holyoke in his Doctrine of life, page 83. does call it the moral Law,
because it is the holy Law of Christ that shall last for ever.

4. It is no less then a fundamental error in Mr. Norton, 1. To confound the
Law of nature with the Covenant of nature; and 2. To confound the Covenant of
nature with the Covenant of grace in the Decalogue, seeing the Decalogue and
the Covenant of nature were given for two apposite Covenants.

5. Mr. Norton affirms most dangerously, in p. 11. that we are to know that the
Covenant of grace it self does oblige us to fulfill the Covenant of works in our
surety.

Chap. 1. and Chap. 4. where I have showed, that the Covenant of nature was not
made with Adam in any relation at all to any branch of the moral Law of nature,
but in relation only to a mere arbitrary and transient positive Law, touching
one single bodily act of eating, either of the Tree of life for his
confirmation, or of the forbidden fruit for his deprivation of Gods concreated
image of moral perfections.

2. It is as suitable a Title to call all the Bible both the moral Law of
nature, and the Covenant of nature also, as it is to call the ten Commandments
so, seeing the ten Commandments is nothing else but the true substance of all
the Law and Prophets: and 2. Because all the heads of the moral Law of nature
may be e^tracted out of sundry places of the Bible, as well as out of the ten
Commandments: and 2. The Covenant of nature being extinguished, it is not
contained neither in the Decalogue, nor yet in any other part of the Bible, but
in Genesis 2. 17. only.

6. I did in my said Dialogue likewise prove from the preface of the ten
Commandments, that they were given only in the form of a Covenant of grace and
reconciliation: I am the Lord thy God, etc.

7. I did also show from the four first Commandments, that the Law at mount
Sinai was given by Christ, as the only Mediator of the Covenant of grace and
reconciliation, for the conversion and salvation of believing sinners: and from
thence I did infer, 1. That it is not fit to call the ten Commandments the
moral Law of nature; and 2. That it is not fit to call the ten Commandments the
Covenant of nature; and so consequently it cannot be the only matter of a
sinners righteousness, as Mr. Norton does all along make it to be.

8. I said also in page 103. That faith in Christ was not engraven in Adams
heart, as the moral Law of nature was, and that Adam in his innocence did not
know any thing of Christ, or of faith in Christ as his surety; and therefore
that the ten Commandments were not written in his heart, in the same sense as
they were given to fallen Adam at mount Sinai, after that Christ was published
to be the seed of the woman, that should break the Devils head-plot for the
redemption of believing sinners.

From these and the like considerations in my Dialogue I did conclude, that the
term moral Law was no way fit to be given to the ten Commandments, either in
relation to the moral Law of Adams nature, or to the Covenant of nature,
because the term moral Law in neither of these two senses, does express the
true scope of the ten Commandments, as every general title ought to do, but
they do rather pervert the true scope of the ten commandments to a wrong sense.

This is the true scope of my arguing in my Dialogue.

Mr. Norton does thus answer, in p. 178.

If the ten Commandments do require faith in Christ, as well as moral duties,
then the ten Commandments require moral duties, as well as faith in Christ: if
so, then they may aptly in that respect be called the moral Law.

Norton does often leave out the term, Moral Law of nature, and instead
thereof uses only the term, Moral Law, but I put in the word Nature; and in
that respect I say they cannot be fitly called the moral Law of nature, in the
which Adam was created, because they were not given at mount Sinai in that
abstracted sense from the Covenant of grace, as they were to Adam; for they
were given to him as the mere Law of his nature only, without any promise or
threatening annexed to them: but at mount Sinai they were given to fallen Adam,
not as a mere Law of perfect nature, but as a Covenant of grace and
reconciliation to man that was now of a corrupted nature: and 2. They were
given to man corrupted, with a promise of salvation in Heaven to all bel^evers,
and with a threatening of damnation in Hell to all unbelievers, Exodus 20. 5, 6,
7.

And from thence it follows, that the ten commandments cannot fitly be called
the moral Law (of nature) as it was given to Adam, which is the great point
that Mr. Norton contends for, as the only matter of a sinners justification.

3. Thence it does also follow, that the ten Commandments were given to fallen
Adam, for more excellent ends then they were given to Adam; namely, to show
sin, and to make sinners fly to God through Christ the only Mediator of their
reconciliation, and to be as a teaching Schoolmaster unto Christ, that we
might be justified by faith, Gal. 3. 24.

4. Hence it follows, that Mr. Norton is confounded in his right understanding
of the ten Commandments; for though he does sometimes call faith in Christ a
moral duty of the ten Commandments, in page 179. yet he cannot by the same
reason call it a moral duty of the moral Law of nature, though yet he does
endeavor to do it in the next place: For

Mr. Nor^on says thus in page, 179.

The Angels in their Creation received a principle, whereby they were able to
believe ^n Christ their head and confirmer (being commanded so to do) without
the inspiring of any new principle. Had Christ in like manner been propounded
unto Adam in his innocence, to have been believed in as his head and confi^mer,
which was no more repugnant unto that estate, then to the state of Angels, he
had (through proportionable concourse of the first cause) been able to have
yielded like obedience thereunto: why then (says he) was not that principle in
Adam able to have carried him out to believe in Christ as a head and Redeemer?
could not that command have consisted with Adams estate in innocence?

Adam able to have carried him out to have believed in Christ as a head and
redeemer? could not that command have consisted with Adams state in innocence?
these two interrogations are brought in for strong affirmations, to prove that
Adam by virtue of his concreated mo^al principles of nature, was able to have
believed in Christ; and therefore that the term Moral Law, as it related to
the moral Law of nature, is a suitable title for the Decalogue.

2. I w^ll by and by show that it could not consist with Adams state in
innocence, Adam in his innocence ^ould not believe in Christ, because
justifying faith was inconsistent with that estate
to believe in Christ as a head and redeemer, because believing in Christ does
not appertain to the Covenant of nature, under which Adam lived during the time
of his innocence.

3. Mr. Weames does most truly affirm (in his Portraiture page 91. 145, 220.)
That though Adam before his fall might believe in the Trinity; yet (says he)
he could not believe the incarnation of the second person: For then he should
have understood of his own fall (and so he should have lived in the continual
fear of it.) But (says he) the first Adam had not any natural fear, as the
second Adam had, because there was no hurtful object before his eyes, as there
was before the eyes of the second Adam; this speech of his I do but hint in
this place, because I have noted it more at large elsewhere.

4. Mr. B^rges says (in Vindiciae legis R. T. 129.) that Adam needed no
mediator nor comfort (in his innocence) because he could not be terr^fied with
any sin.

But says Mr. Norton.

Had Christ been propounded unto Adam in his innocence he had been able to have
believed in Christ as his head and confirmer.

5. In these words he seems to intend no other faith, which being called for
does reach no further then to believe in Christ as his head and confirmer;
which kind of believing had it been in Adam, had fallen a great deal short of
that kind of faith which is commanded in the Decalogue; therefore his answer is
no better then a mere evasion; for in my Dialogue I argued against Mr. Nortons
pretended matter of justification by the moral Law of nature, which I there say
is not contained in the ten Commandments, namely, not in that abstracted sense
from the Covenant of grace as it was given to Adam.

6. Mr. Norton does limit Adams ability to believe, through proportionable
concourse of the first cause; But I believe it may well puzzle his reader, (if
not himself) to explain what he means by proportionable concourse of the first
cause; whether he means that Adam had in himself a power already wrought by God
in his creation as the first cause (as his words seem to carry it) or whether
he should have been enabled to believe by fresh supplies, beyond that natural
reach which he had in his creation? If Adam had already a principle to believe
in Christ, then he needed not proportionable concourse of the first cause; on
the other hand, if he must yet have proportionable concourse of the first cause
to enable him to believe, by new influences of the spirit; then he had not
already a principle to believe in Christ, nor could he have it as long as he
lived under the Covenant of nature:

And from hence it follows that Mr. Norton had no just ground to infer from the
Covenant of grace in the D^calogue, that Adam had a principle while he lived
under the Covenant of nature to believe in Christ.

2. From hence it does also follow that though the ten Commandments do
comprehend the moral Law of nature, yet they do not comprehend it in the same
sense as it was given to Adam for a mere Law of nature, neither do they
comprehend the Covenant of works that was given to Adam; but the Law of nature
is now conjoined to the Decalogue in the new form of a Covenant of grace;
conjunctim and not devisim.

7. As for that Instance which he brings of the Angels believing in Christ as
their head and confirmer, it is but a doubtful instance at the best, and it is
no sound way of arguing to bring in one doubtful assertion to confirm another,
especially to bring in a mere phantacy to confirm a doubtful point: for I
believe it no better then a mere phantacy to affirm that the elect Angels were
confirmed by believing in Christ; seeing one part of them sell before Adam; and
so consequently when they fell, the rest that stood were confirmed before
Christ was revealed to be a Mediator, Head, or Confirmer.

8. Mr. Burges in page 134, 135. does fully confute the two reasons which The
cause of the fall of the one part of the Angels was for their refusing to
attend on such earthly creatures as Adam and Eve were* and the cause of
co^firming the other part was for their obedience in attending on Adam and Eve.
Mr. Calvin gives in Col. 1. 20. for the affirmative; namely, that the Angels
needed Christ's mediation for their confirmation. Mr. Jeanes in the Fullness of
Christ, p. 187. says, Christ is the head of Angels, Col. 2. 10. 1. In regard
of excellency or eminency; For all Angelical perfections fall short of the
hypostatical union vouchsafed to the humane nature of Christ, Ebr. 2. 16. Ebr.
1. 4. 2. In regard of authority over them, they are his servants made subject
to him, 1 Pet. 3. 22. But 3. says he, others go further, and affirm that he is
a mediator of good Angels, though not of redemption, yet of confirmation; But
against them, we may from the Schoolmen take these two arguments. 1. Christ
had not been a mediator, and had not been incarnated if Adam had not fallen,
therefore to affirm that Christ's mediation, was for the confirmation of Angels
is without Scripture. 2. Christ merited for those only for whom he was a
mediator: but he did not merit any thing for Angels, therefore he was not a
mediator for them: The minor is proved thus, Christ died for those for whom he
merited any thing, and his merits had not their consummation but at his death,
and 2. Mr. Shepherd does affirm, that in case Adam had kept the first Covenant,
yet he should not have been confirmed by Christ, but by his obedience to the
positive covenant; and the like must be said of the elect Angels that kept the
Covenant of nature that was made with them; but 3. See Mr. Shepherds words
cited at large in Reply 3. No. 10.

9. I do the rather believe that the elect Angels were confirmed (not by
believing in Christ, but that they were confirmed before Christ was declared to
be a mediator to be believed in) by their obedience to Gods arbitrary and
transient positive command, in their attending on such earthly creatures as
Adam and Eve were, when they were brought into paradise, as I have declared it
in Chap. 4. Sect. 2. and also in my book of the inst^tution of the Sabbath: for
Eve knew that the Serpent was not able to speak with an intell^gible voice
without the help of some good Angel, that did persuade her to eat of that tree
for the bettering of her knowledge; for as yet she did not know that any of the
Angels were The elect Angels did according to Gods positive Law and Covenant
attend upon Adam and Eve in paradise; but they did not attend on them from any
natural instinct, for there was no natural likeness between them, but in
obedience to Gods positive Command only.
fallen. 2. The only reason why these heavenly angels did attend on such
earthly creatures as Adam and Eve were, (was not from their own natural
instinct, for there was no natural likeness between them in the condition of
their nature to make them associate themselves with Adam and Eve; for they were
of a quite differing nature; seeing they were Spirits of a heavenly nature and
Adam and Eve were but flesh and blood, and of an earthly nature) was from Gods
Arbitrary command, and from his positive Covenant, which had a promise of
confirmation, and a threatening of deprivation annexed to it, (according to the
form of the Covenant of nature that was made with Adam,) namely, that in case
they did attend upon such earthly creatures, as Adam and Eve were, then they
should be confirmed in their concreated moral prefections after the Image of
God; But in case they refused to do it, then in dying they should die, namely,
a double spiritual death; 1. by being deprived of their concreated moral
perfections; and 2. that in the want thereof they (being of an active nature)
should rush into a violent course of sinning against every branch of the moral
Law of their created nature, and especially in hating the good estate of man;
and this new sinning quality of their nature, does also occasion a new
punishment to be inflicted on them at the end of the world, namely, an eternal
damnation in Hell.

This was the true ground (as I conceive) of the fall of the one part of the
Angels (and of the confirmation of the other part) and not their believing in
Christ as their head and confirmer; seeing Christ was not as yet declared as
long as Adam and Angels did continue under the Covenant of mere nature.

The internal cause of the confirmation of the one part of the Angels was Gods
Election; But the external cause was, as I said before, their obedience to Gods
positive Law and Covenant in attending on earthly Adam: by the moral Law of
their spiritual nature, they were exempted from so low a service as to attend
on earthly creatures: but it was Gods positive Law that did bind them to that
obedience, and that threatened them with a spiritual death in case they refused.

But Mr. Norton does give a further Answer in page 181.

If (says he) you intend no more then what you said before: (namely that the
ten Commandments require faith in Christ) we do not only acknowledge it, But
thence infer what you deny; namely, that Adam was obliged to believe in Christ:
in case God should call for it, because the Law, (now called the Decalogue) was
given to Adam as a rule of universal and absolute obedience, he stood obliged
thereby, not only unto what God did at present, but unto whatsoever God should
afterward require.

Adam in his innocence, whiles he lived under the moral Law of nature, and
under the transient Covenant of nature, was able by his natural principles to
believe in Christ, which is not a work of pure nature, but of supernatural
grace only.

2. Because it lays an imputation of preposterousness upon Gods government, as
if he might call for believing in Christ whiles Adam stood under the Covenant
of nature only, and before there was any necessary use of a Covenant of grace
and reconciliation, as I observed it before from Master Burges.

3. The Covenant made with Adam, says Mr. Burges; though it be truly called a
Covenant, yet no ways a Testament; because there did not intervene the death of
any to procure this good for Adam; yea, Mr. Norton himself does acknowledge in
page 183. That the Covenant at mount Sinai was confirmed with the blood of
Beasts, Erod. 24. 5, 8. compared with Ebr. 9. 19. And says he, Paul calls it
a Testament; Aphrase proper to the Covenant of Grace, presupposing the death of
the Testat^r, and says he, this term Testament, is never attributed to the
Covenant of works, Ebr. 9. 18, 19, 20. Namely, it is never Attributed to the
Covenant of nature made with Adam; but yet it is attributed ^^ the Covenant of
works that was made with the national Church of the Jews at mount Sinai; as I
have showed more at large else where.

4. Mr. Burges says (in Vindiciae legis, page 1^8.) there was in Adam a faith
of adherence, or of dependence on God in his promise and word; But this faith,
says he, did not imply any imperfection of the state of that subject, as
sinful, as justifying faith does; th^s is a true position, and from thence it
follows that justifying faith was inconsistent with Adams state, as long as he
stood in his innocence under the Covenant of nature, because it would have
argued that he had then been in a sinful condition, and that he needed Gods
reconciliation for his justification from sin.

5. Mr. Burges says, in page 130. The second person, though not as incarnate,
or to be incarnated, yet he with the Father did cause all righteousness in
Adam; and the holy Ghost (says he) was the worker of holiness in Adam, though
not as the holy Spirit of Christ purchased by his death for his Church; he does
in these words distinguish aright between Adams created natural holiness, and
his supernatural holiness, which he had after his fall and conversion, which we
also have from the holy Spirit of Christ in the Covenant of grace only; and
this necessary distinction is observed also by Mr. Walker on Ephesians. 4. 24. which
I have cited elsewhere.

6. Mr. Blake on the Covenant says thus in p. 14. The first Covenant was
immediate, no mediator intervening; All the blessings of the first Covenant
(says he) flowed from the Trinity, as the creation it self did, without
respect of Christ incarnate; there was no revelation of that high mystery to
man in innocence.

7. Mr. Woodbridge denies that Adam in his innocence could have faith in In his
Method. p. 197. and 132. and 341.
a Mediator; for says he, faith in a Mediator does Essentially suppose
imperfection; and says he, faith in a Mediator is at an end, when we shall be
perfected in glory. 1 Pet. 1. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 7. This I believe is a sound truth,
and therefore Irencus was in a great error in affirming that faith shall abide
in heaven, because there we shall more thoroughly pierce into Divine things then
we can in this life; But how then does Peter say, that faith has an end here,
1 Pet. 1. 9. and so Dr. All in his Poor Man's library, part. 2. fol. 92. for
the confutation of Ireneus.

8. Mr. Woodbridge says, in page 132. that neither faith nor repentance were
any part of that soul perfection in the which man at first was created; and
therefore it is a great absurd^ty to affirm that God did principle Adam with
any more in his innocence then he did require of him by the moral Law of his
nature, and by the transient Law of the Covenant of nature; more then this had
been needless and useless, and the most wise disposed of all things, would
ordain nothing for Adam, that was needless and useless for his present
condition; yea, Mr. Norton himself does acknowledge in page 180. that faith in
Christ was inconsistent with Adams state in innocence; he does in these words
in effect grant what the Dialogue has asserted, to the confusion of his said
inference, and from thence it follows that Adam in his innocence had no
principle by the moral Law of nature to believe in Christ: But he adds in case
God should call for it: But when is that? not as long as he lived under the
moral Law of his nature, and under the transient Covenant of nature; for in
case God should have called for it in that juncture of time, he should have
governed things in a prepostrous manner, by calling for the exercise of the
supernatural grace of faith whiles Adam lived under the Covenant of nature; But
t^s blasphemy to affirm that God did govern things so preposterously; and
therefore it does from thence follow; That Adam could not be obliged to believe
in Christ as his Head and Redeemer (which is an act of supernatural grace) as
long as he lived under the Covenant of mere nature.

9. Mr. Walker on the Sabbath, page 58. says, man in the state of innocence
could not have any thoughts or meditations of glory in heaven, or any studies
to fit and sanctify himself for the fruition thereof until Christ the only
way to eternal Rest, and glory was promised; and see more of his speeches to
this effect cited in Chap. 1. Sect. 4.

10. Mr. Shepherd says in Thesis on the Sab. p. 133. The first Covenant cannot
speak of Christ, of whom Adam stood in no need; no not so much as to confirm
him in that estate; for (says he) with leave I think, That look as Adam
breaking the first Covenant by sin, is become immutable, evil, and miserable in
himself, according to the rule of justice in that Covenant: so suppose him to
have kept that Covenant, then in like sort all his posterlty had been immutably
happy and holy, (not merely of grace, but) by the equity and justice of the
said first Covenant; and from hence, says he, it follows that he stood in no
need of Christ, or of any revelation of him, no not to confirm him in that
Covenant; and, says he, a few lines before, Christ is revealed only in the
Covenant of grace; and therefore could not be so revealed in the Covenant of
works, which is directly contrary thereunto; Adam (says he) was not capable of
any type then, to reveal Christ unto him, and so consequently he denies the
tree of life to be any type of Christ.

11. Benjamin Needler in his Expository notes on Genesis says, in p. 36. The
tree of life was a similitude, to the which the holy Ghost does allude in
making mention of Christ: But it was no type of Christ, and the reason is,
because the Covenant of works by which Adam was to live is directly contrary to
the Covenant of grace by says in Christ; Adam therefore was not capable of any
types then, to reveal Christ to him; of whom the first Covenant cannot speak,
and of whom Adam stood in no need; But (says he) it is objected that though
Adam stood in no need of Christ as a redeemer, yet he stood in need of Christ
as a confirmer; he answers by denying it just as Mr. Shepherd does above.

12. Mr. Burges says, in page 136. The tree of life was not a Sacrament of
Christ to Adam, I deny it, says he, upon the former grounds.

But Mr. Nortons last unsound assertion is this,

Decalogue was given to Adam as a rule of universal, and absolute obedience; he
stood obliged thereby (says he) not only unto what God did at present, but
unto whatsoever God should afterward require.

The very foundation of most of Mr. Nortons errors lies in this unsound
assertion: 1. The moral Law of nature. 2. The transient Law of the Covenant of
nature. 3. The Law of the Covenant of grace must be distinguished, as 3.
distinct sorts of Laws, and not co^sounded together under the same word Law, at
mount Sinai, as Mr. Norton does, and see more, in Chap. 4. Sect. 3. and here at
Reply 8.
for,

1. By this assertion he does confound the transient and arbitrary Covenant of
nature; (and sundry other arbitrary and transient Covenants) with the
concreated moral Law of Adams nature; whereas these two sorts of Laws ought
carefully to be distinguished and not confounded.

2. From this unsound assertion he infers that the moral Law of nature did
oblige Adam to yield obedience to the transient Law of the arbitrary Covenant
of nature (namely to eat of the tree of life in the first place; and 2. That it
did oblige him not to eat of the forbidden fruit) and by this means he does
confound Gods secret will (which he has reserved to himself in the ordering of
his transient positive Laws) to depend upon his revealed will in the moral Law
of nature: But I think I have sufficiently showed, that the moral Law of Adams
nature did not prohibit him to eat of the forb^dden fruit, seeing it was good
meat by creation, and therefore that p^ohibition was not dictated to him from
the revealed will of God in the moral Law of nature, but from Gods arbtrary and
secret will.

2. By his said assertion he does conclude, that all and every one of Gods
transient positive Laws as well after as before the fall are grounded in, and
derived from the moral Law of Adams nature, or from the moral Law of the ten
Commandments, as it is the second edition of the moral Law of nature: But this
is a most palpable untruth, because it deprives God of his arbitrary power to
make any transient positive Laws from the good pleasure of his secret will,
unless they be grounded in, and derived from his revealed moral Law of nature:
But I think I have sufficiently showed in Chap. 1. and in Sect. 1. and in Chap.
4. at Reply 1. and in this Chapter, at Reply 8. that both Scripture and reason
do teach us, sometimes to restrain universal words (as the word Law is) to the
present matter in hand; and according to this rule 1. The moral Law of nature,
and 2. The transient Law of the Covenant of nature, and 3. the Law of the
Covenant of grace in the Decalogue, must carefully be distinguished from each
other, and not confounded under the same word Law, at mount Sinai: or else
abundance of errors and heresies will be hatched at one time or other: the
Apostle says, even in things without life giving a sound, whether pipe or
harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds or tunes, how shall it be
known what is piped or harped, 1 Cor. 14. 7.

Conclusion

From the premises it follows, That as long as Adam lived under the obedience
of the moral Law of his concreated nature, and as long, as he l^ved under the
translent Law of the Covenant of nature, he was not obl^ged to believe in
Christ; neither could it stand with the order of Gods government in that
juncture of time, to call for believing in Christ, as his head and Redeemer,
because of the inconsistency, and incompatibleness of justifying faith with the
state of pure nature: and 2. from thence it does also follow, that Mr. Nortons
said inference is of dangerous consequence to the utter confounding of Gods
distinct order of government, under the two said distinct Covenants; and to the
introducing of many heterodox tenants into the Body of Divinity.

SECT. II.
Mr. Norton does object further, in page 180.

YOur argument taken from the engraving of faith in Adams heart; to prove, that
the term moral Law (of nature) is unfitly applied to the ten commandments, is
of no force, the Law of works (says he) was the same to Adam, before and after
the fall; Because the Covenant of works is always the same; the Law being the
same, the obligation is the same.



1. Take notice that my argument taken from the ten Commandments, which require
faith in Christ cannot be applied to Adam, because faith in Christ was not
engraven in Adams heart in the time of his innocence; does prove that faith in
Christ is no part of that moral obedience, that was engraven in his heart, in
the time of his creation, but yet it is the principal thing that is commanded
in the Law of the Decalogue, for without faith in Christ* there is no obedience
to that Law that will be accepted of God; and from thence I did infer in my
Dialogue, that it is no fit title to call the ten Commandments the moral Law of
nature, in the which Adam was created; but in relation only to the perpetual
Covenant of grace; and so consequently it is no small error to call obedience
to the moral Law of nature, the matter of a sinners justification, as Mr.
Norton does all along, as the chief mark of the ten commandments; though it is
indeed the chief mark of his erroneous judgment.

2. It is another great error to make the transient Law of nature to be still
in force in the Decalogu^, as the only matter of a sinners justification,
seeing that covenant was made utterly void and null, as soon as Adam had but
tasted the forbidden fruit* and nothing of it does now remain, but the
execution of the threatened punishment of a double spiritual death to all Adams
natural posterity successively.

3. It is another grand error to make the Covenant of works, both before and
after the fall to be the same; But I think I have sufficiently showed that the
Covenant made with Adam, is no where called a Covenant of works in all the
Bible; and it cannot be called a Covenant of works, in the plural, because it
required but one work, or act of eating. 2. I have also showed that the
Covenant of works after the fall, was ordained for no other end or use, but to
be as a Schoolmaster unto Christ, and thence it follows that the Law of works
both before and after the fall is not the same; and of this, see more in Sect.
5.

4. It is another grand error, to make the obligation of the Covenant of
nature, the same with the obligation of the ten Commandments, But I think I
have sufficiently showed in Chap. 1. and in Chap. 4. and elsewhere, that the
obligation of the Covenant of nature, in case Adam had but first eaten of the
tree of life, was no other, but the confirmation of his concreated life after
Gods Image in moral perfections, and 2. That the obligation of that Covenant in
case of his disobedience in eating first of the forbidden fruit, was no other
death, but a double Spiritual death in this wo^ld only: But on the contrary
the obligation of the Law of grace in the Decalogue, in case of faith in
Christ, was an eternal life in heaven, and in case of final unbelief eternal
death in hell; and thence it follows, that the obligation of these two
Covenants is not the same. Mr. Wotton says, in the beginning of Chap. 4. I
deny the assumption, God did not give the Law of the Decalogue, to be the only
and perpetual rule of that justice which is the way whereby de facto he brings
to eternal life, all that shall be saved.

Adam was created, and the transient Covenant That ki^d of Law that is called
posi^ive may thus be described, i^ is not an inbred, imprinted, or infused Law
into the heart of man, as the moral Law of nature was into Adams heart; neither
is it infused into the heart of man by the Law of grace; but it is imposed
only, by the external command of the Supreme Lawgiver; and so it has the name
positive, for the external imposition or consttution of the Lawgiver; and not
from the internal Law of nature. God made many positive Laws and Covena^ts for
the trial of obedience by* some particular bodily acts only.
of nature. I will now produce sundry sorts of Gods transient positive Laws and
Covenants, which he was pleased to make with sundry persons at several times
and after sundry means, for the trial of obedience, by some one outward work or
transient bodily act only; and 2. That as soon as the sa^d trial was made,
those transient Laws and Covenants became utterly void and null for ever after,
and therefore they were never after called the Law or Covenant of works; and 3.
That the most of those transient Laws and positive Covenants that I will now
cite, are no way reducible, either to the moral Law of nature, or to the
Covenant of nature, and 4. That many of these Positives are such as Command
things not only contrary to natural reason, but also contrary to the literal
sense of Gods moral Laws.

These following instances, or at the least some of them, will evidence the
truth of my said assertions.
1. God propounded this positive Law and Covenant to Gid^on: That he would
employ him to be his instrument, for the delivering of his people Israel, from
under the bondage of the Midianites; upon this condition, that he should not
take unto him any other Soldiers to effect it then he should appoint, Jud. 6.
12, 13, 14, 15, 16. and for his most sure knowledge of those particular
Soldiers, God appointed Gideon to bring his whole Army down to the water, that
so he might try them, by lapping water, which of them should be the particular
persons, that he should take unto him, for the effecting of the said
deliverance.

And therefore, in the second place, because Gideon was careful to observe the
said condition on his part, God was as careful also to perform the promised
deliverance on his part, Judge. 7. 6, 7.

3. It is worth the marking, that this Law and Covenant, was made only with
Gideons person, but yet it was for the bodily deliverance of all Israel.

4. Observe also that this transient positive Law and Covenant is no way
reducible to the moral Law of nature, but it is rather contrary to the wisdom
of it, for the moral Law of nature would rather have directed him to meet his
numberless enemies with an equal force; which is according to our Saviors
advice, in ^uke 14. 31. and accordingly Gideon did at the first labor to
furnish himself with a numerous company of Soldiers; until it pleased God to
direct him otherwise, and to promise him the victory, in case he took no more
but the said 300 Soldiers that lapped water; And that promise employed a
threatening also of some evil that should befall him, in case he did not observe
those d^rections.

2. The Lord made another positive Law and Covenant, with a young Prophet, that
he* should go to Jeroboam the King of Is^ael, and denounce a dreadful
threatening against him for his idolatry; and for his better encouragement, the
Lord was pleased to enter into a transient positive Covenant with him, to
protect him from the fury of Jeroboam, and from any other evil, upon this
condition, that he should neither eat bread, nor drink water in that place, nor
turn back again, by the same way that he came; but on the contrary this promise
employed a threatening, that in case this young Prophet did transgress these
prohibitions on his part, then God would also be at liberty from this Covenant
of protection: and 2. The said prohibition did also imply a threatening, that
some evil should befall him, in case he did transgress the said conditions on
his part: and so it fell out; for he was killed by a Lion, as it is recorded in
1 Kings 13. 9.

This positive Law and Covenant is as I conceive no way reducible, neither to
the moral Law of nature, nor yet to the Covenant of nature, nor yet to the
Covenant of grace, because neither of these three sorts of Laws did forbid him
to eat and drink in that place, (in case his hunger did invite him) nor yet to
return by the same way that he came: but these things became unlawful unto his
particular person by Gods arbitrary Law and Covenant only; and such a kind of
arbitrary Law was the Law of the Covenant of nature.

3. The Lord commanded another young Prophet to go unto Ahab king of Israel, to
tell him that he would deliver Benhadad into his hands, 1 King. 20. 28.
implying thereby, that it was his positive will and command, that he should put
Benhadad (his mortal enemy) to death, which was but good justice in Saul's
apprehensions, 1 Samuel 24. 18, 19. And the word, I will deliver him into thy
hands, does imply as much, as it appears by the same phrase Deliver, in Deuteronomy.
7. 23. But because Ahab did not observe this positive Law and command, but did
disobey it by sparing Benhadads life, therefore the Prophet told him that he
should lose his own life for it: and 2. Our larger Anno^. on 1 Kings 20. 42.
does parallel Saul's disobedience to Gods positive Law in sparing Agag, to this
disobedience of Ahab in sparing Benhadad.

4. It was Gods positive command to Elijah to go to Zarephath, and then it was
his positive Covenant, that he would provide a widow there that should sustain
him during the time of the famine, 1 Kings 17. 9. and because Elijah obeyed
this positive command, God was tied by his positive Covenant to provide that
Widow with sufficient food to make good his promise to Elijah: and it is
observable, that this positive command and Covenant was no way reducible,
neither to the moral Law of nature, nor yet to the Law of the Covenant of
grace; but it was a particular arbitrary Law and Covenant, made only for the
comfortable sustaining of Elijah's life during the time of that famine.

5. It was Gods positive command to Elijah at another time, to eat of the cake
that he had provided for him, and then it was his positive Covenant that he
should walk in the strength of that meat for the space of forty days and forty
nights together, 1 Kings 9. 8. This transient arbitrary Law and Covenant was
made only for his bodily preservation, during the time of that persecution: and
it is also observable, that this positive Law and Covenant is no way reducible
to the moral Law of nature made with Adam, neither is it reducible to the
arbitrary Law and Covenant of nature, no otherw^se, but as it does exemplify
that God used the like arbitrary power in both those positive Laws and
Covenants.

6. It was Gods positive command unto the two Kings of Judah and Israel, that
they should make Ditches in the Valley; and then it was his positive covenant
to fill those Ditches with water, for the comfortable relief of their whole
host, both man and beast, which were now ready to perish for the want of water,
2 Kings 3. 16. This positive command and Covenant is no way reducible to the
moral Law of nature, nor yet to the Covenant of nature, except to exemplify:
that both these Laws and Covenants are from the mere arbitrary will of God
alike: and thence also it follo^es* that neither the moral Law of nature, nor
yet the Covenant of nature were given to Adam as a rule of universal and
absolute obedience, whereby he stood obliged, not only unto what God d^d at
present, but also unto whatsoever God should afterward require, as Mr. Norton
does hold in Reply 3. before.

7. It was Gods positive command unto the Prophets Widow, that she should
borrow Vessels of her neighbors, as many as she could get; and then it was his
positive command to fill those Vessels with oil, that so the might thereby be
enabled to pay her debts, and might live of the rest, 2 Kings 4. 3.

8. It was Gods positive command to Naaman to wash his body seven times in
Jordan, and then it was his positive Covenant that he should be cured of his
leprosy, 2 Kings 5. 10. This positive command and Covenant, and the former at
No 7. are no way reducible to the moral Law of nature, nor yet to the Covenant
of nature, (seeing that Covenant is now utterly null) except it be to
exemplify that Gods arbitrary will was the only ground of them both: and we
see that Naaman by the light of his natural reason thought it to be so
publicly a means of his cure, that he thought to have disobeyed this positive
command, because he thought that the Rivers of his own Country were better
water then the water of Jordan. But his Servant persuaded him to follow the
Prophets direction, and so he did, and then he was cured. But in case he had
disobeyed. then this positive promise did imply a threatening of some evil that
should have befallen him for his disobedience, as was instanced before in the
case of the young Prophet at No 2. Yea, in case he had washed his body not only
seven times, but seventy times seven in a better River then Jo^da^, he should
not have been cleansed; and in case he had washed himself no more but six times
in Jordan, he should not have been cleansed neither, but some worser evil
should have befallen him then his leprosy for his disobedience.

The healing virtue therefore did not lie neither in the quality, nor yet in
the quantity of that water; but in case of his obedience it lay in Gods
positive Law and Covenant: and so in like sort it was from the virtue of Gods
positive Law and Covenant, that the Tree of the twofold life should have
confirmed Adam in his concreated perfections, ^f he had obeyed Gods will by his
act of eating it, as it was of death to him for his disobedience in eating
first of the forbidden fruit.

9. God made many positive Cove^ants for the bodily good of some particular
persons, upon condition of their performing the bodily act, either of seeing,
hearing, eating, etc.
It is also observable, that some of Gods positive Laws and Covenants were made
only to the obedient bodily act of seeing, hearing, eating, drinking, washing,
touching, etc.

As for example, The Lord by his Propher Elijah did make a positive Covenant
with El^sha, that in case he could but see Elijah with his bodily eye when he
was taken from him, he should have a double portion of the Spirit that was upon
Elijah; but in case he did not see him, then it should not be so: but because
El^sha did see Elijah with his bodily eye when he was taken from him, therefore
the Lord was tied by his said positive Covenant to bestow upon him the double
portion of the Spirit that was upon Elijah, 2 Kings 2. 10, 12.

10. God made a positive Covenant with David, that he would deliver the Army of
the Phil^stines into his hand, in case he did but hear a noise of going in tops
of the Mulbury trees, (with his bodily ears) and did but then bestir himself,
because then the Lord would according to his Covenant go before him to smite
the host of the Philistines: and because David was careful to observe the said
conditions on his part, the Lord was tied by the free promise of his positive
Covenant to perform the condition on his part; and accordingly he went before
David, and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazar, 2 Samuel 5.
24, 25.

11. God made a positive Covenant with Elijah, that in case he did but eat of
the cake that he had provided for him, he should walk in the strength of that
meat for forty days and forty nights together; of which I have spoken before at
No 5. and so in like sort, in case Adam had but first eaten of the Tree of the
twofold life, he should by the virtue of Gods free Covenant have been confirmed
in his concreated life of moral perfections, and all his posterity for ever, in
the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise.

12. It was Gods positive prohibition to the young Prophet, as I noted it
before at No 2. neither to eat nor drink in that place (in Bethel) implying
thereby that some evil should befall him, in case he did, and so it fell out,
though he did it not wilfully, but through the deceitful persuasion of the old
Prophet: and so it fell out with Adam and Eve, she did not sin wilfully, but
through the specious persuasion of the good Angel, as she thought it was: and
so Adams sin was not a wilful sin, but he sinned through the persuasion of his
beloved Wife; and yet they were both alike punished with a twofold Spiritual
death, because they transgres^ed the condition of that Covenant.

13. It was the good pleasure of Christ Jesus to command the man that was born
blind to wash his eyes in the Pool Syloam, and then it was his positive
Covenant that he should receive his sight: and because he did obey this
positive command, by performing the condition on his part, by washing his eyes
in the said Pool, therefore Christ Jesus was tied by his positive Covenant to
give him his sight, and accordingly he received his sight, John 9. 7.

14. The Lord made a positive Covenant with all Israel, that they should pass
s^fely through the overflowing River of Jordan, as soon as ever the soles of
the feet of them that bare the Ark of the Lord did but touch the waters: and
because those that bare the Ark of the Lord did perform the condition on their
part, the Lord was tied to perform the condition on his part: and thereupon he
caused the waters above to stand on a heap, until they were all passed over in
safety, Josh. 2. 13.

15. It was Gods positive Covenant with Lot, (including therein hi^ Wife and
children) that they should be preserved in safety, in case they did fly out of
Sodom to the Mountain, adding thereto this condition, that they should not look
behind them, Genesis 19. 17. but because Lot's Wife did not observe this
condition, but did turn back her head to look behind her, therefore the said
promise employed a threatening of some evil so: her disobedience, and so in v.
26. she became a pillar of Salt: yet I question not but that Lot might and did
look back in the sorrow of his mind for the loss of his Sons in law, without
any breach of the said condition, because it was but a transient condition to
be observed only in their way to Zoar.

These positive Laws and Covenants are no way reducible neither to the moral
Law of nature, nor yet to the Covenant of nature; and therefore these two sorts
of Laws were not given to Adam and his posterity as a rule of universal and
absolute obedience to whatsoever God should afterward require.

But yet there are other positive Laws and Covenants which do belong to the
Decalogue in a typical relation to the Covenant of grace; and yet they have no
relation at all neither to the moral Law of nature, nor yet to the Covenant of
nature.

15. It was Gods positive command and Covenant with his national Church in the
Wilderness, that in case any of them were bitten with fiery Serpents, they
should make a brazen Serpent, and set it aloft upon a Pole, that whosoever did
but look upon it with their bodily eye, they should instantly be healed. But
this healing virtue came not from any natural virtue that was in that brazen
Serpent, nor yet from the natural virtue of the eyesight, but it came from the
supreme power of Gods positive Covenant, during the time of their travels in
the Wilderness, and no longer; and therefore Hezekiah did afterward break it
in pieces as useless for the former purpose: and so in like sort the twofold
Spiritual death in Genesis 2. 17. came not from the natural operation of the
apple, but from the supreme power of Gods relative justice in that Covenant for
Adams disobedience.

This positive Covenant was ordained to be for a typical representation of Gods
Covenant of grace and reconciliation by the death of Christ, as our Savior
does expound it in John 3. 14, 15. and therefore it does belong to the
Decalogue, but not to the moral Law of nature, in the which Adam was created.

16. It was the good pleasure of Gods supreme will to make a positive Covenant
with Samson, (as it was declared to his parents before he was born) that he
should deliver Israel from under the dominion of the Philistines upon this
condition, that he should observe the Law of the Nazarites from his birth, by
letting his hair grow, etc. Numb. 6. compared with Judges 13.) but when he
suffered Dalilah to cut off his Nazari^es hair, he brake the condition of that
positive Covenant on his part, and then God was disobliged from performing the
condition of the Covenant on his part, and therefore he deprived Samsoa of his
victorious Spirit, and of his protection also; and then the Philistines got the
mastery over him, and used him with all reproach and shame as their capital
enemy: but as soon as Samson by his repentance and faith in Christ, had
obtained Gods reconciliation, and that his hair was grown again, it pleased the
Lord to repent him of the evil that he had done unto Samson, and to renew his
Covenant with him, and then he did restore unto him his former victorious
Spirit, and then he conquered the Philistines at his death, more then in time
of his life: but this new power and strength came not from the natural virtue
of his long hair, but from the operation of Gods positive Covenant, who
sanctifies outward types at his pleasure, as he did the act of washing in the
River Jordan to Naaman, for the cleansing of his leprosy: and as he would have
done the Tree of the twofold life to Adam, in case he had but observed the
conditions of the Covenant of nature on his part, by eating first of the said
Tree.

17. God did by his positive Law prohibit his national Church to sow their
fields with diverse kind of grains mixed together, Lev. 19. 19. Deu. 22. 9. and
from thence it did follow, that in case they did so do, then they should lose
all their crop; for all those sorts of grain were made thereby utterly unlawful
to be eaten, though otherwise they were good food by creation: and so in like
sort was the prohibited fruit, but yet it became unlawful to be eaten in the
first place, under the penalty of a double Spiritual death, by virtue of Gods
positive prohibition.

Conclusion.
From the premises it follows, that neither the Law of nature, nor yet the
Covenant of nature were given to Adam as a rule of universal and absolute
obedience unto whatsoever God should afterward require, as Mr. Norton holds.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 180.

The Law of God, (says Z^nchy) speaking of the Law of Moses given in the
interim, between the promise of redemption made first to Adam, and afterward
to Abraham, and the fulfilling thereof, is nothing else but a true and lively
expressed Picture of the image of God, according to which man was made.

Zanchy's words are very general, touching the Law of God, as it was given by
Moses: for he does presently add these words to the former, whereby we are
instructed what we were, and what we are, and what we ought to be; and indeed
(says he) what we shall be, if we trust in Christ.

In this close of his words he does plainly make the Law at mount Sinai to be a
Covenant of grace and reconciliation, by the which the fallen sons of Adam are
created anew after the image of God in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians.
4. 24. But unto this image of God Adam was not created, he was created only in
natural holiness and righteousness, and not in supernatural holiness, until he
was converted or re-created after his fall.

2. What though Zanchy does confound the Law of nature with the Law of grace,
and the Covenant of nature with the Covenant of grace in the Decalogue, yet
that is no sufficient plea to justify Mr. Nortons erroneous assertions against
the truth held forth in my Dialogue, seeing his answers are intended for more
then an ordinary confutation, because they are intended to justify the general
Courts ^ensure of it as heresy, and therefore they ought to have been tried
like gold.

3. Zanchy does not clearly concur with Mr. Nortons sense, because he has in
several particulars made a wide difference between the moral Law of nature and
the Decalogue, especially in the fourth Commandment, as I perceive by Mr.
Walkers testimony; for, says he, when learned men do call the Sabbath, and the
Law of it natural, we are not to conceive, that by natural they mean a thing
written in man's heart in the creation, which man was made to obey and perform
simply as a reasonable creature and natural man; for the Sabbath was made for
man (fallen) Mark 2. 27. But by natural they understand that, which the very
light of natural reason shows to be most convenient and necessary, for men that
are now corrupt, and which so soon as is commanded and revealed by Gods word,
appears to be so necessary in the very nature of it, both for men's souls and
bodies, that without it they cannot ordinarily have any well being on Earth,
and escape Hell, and come to Heaven after death. This exposition (says Mr.
Walker) learned. Zanchy gives of his own and other men's speeches, when they
call the Law of the Sabbath natural: and (says he) if it were so natural, as
things written in man's heart in the creation, then the Heathen Gentiles would
have felt themselves bound by it, and would have showed it in their practice in
some measure more or less.

4. Therefore Zanchy's words must not be understood in that strict sense that
Mr. Norton does cite them for.

5. It is the less wonder that Zanchy does make the Decalogue to be an express
Picture of the image of God, according to which man was created, seeing he held
that Adam was created in that true holiness which Paul speaks of in Ephesians. 4.
24. which is only supernatural holiness, merited for the elect by the
redemption of Christ; whereas the holiness wherein Adam was created, was but
natural holiness, or a sinless innocence, as I have formerly expounded it.

6. Mr. Walker does often declare, that the Law that commands us to keep holy
the Sabbath, or seventh day, was not written in man's heart in the creation; of
which see him on the Sabbath, in page 9, 10, 58, 59, 66, 80, 91, 133. and on
the contrary he affirms, that the Sabbath was only positively moral by Gods
institution after Adams fall, in page 17* 34, etc. And in my Book of the
Institution of the Sabbath I have affirmed the same truth; yea, Mr. Norton
himself does in some sort grant in page 178. that every one of the ten
Commandments were not engraven in Adams heart in the time of his creation, and
therefore he was not well advised to say as he does, that the Law at mount
Sinai is nothing else but a true and lively expressed Picture of the image of
God, according unto the which man was created.

SECT. III.
BUt says Mr. Norton in page 181.

Our Quere is not whether the ten Commandments, in the full latitude of them,
were given to Adam in innocence, but whether the obedience of Christ to the Law
(that is, as it was given to Adam in innocence) were for our justification?
whose affirmative, by the way, appears thus, That obedience unto the Law,
whereby Adam, in case of his personal performance thereof, had been justified
legally, is that by Christ's performance whereof received by faith, we are
justified evangelically.

But the performance of obedience unto the Law, as given to Adam in innocence,
is that performance of obedience unto the Law, by which Adam, in case of
performance personally, had been justified legally.

Therefore Christ's performance of the Law is given to Adam in innocence,
(whatsoever its extent be more or less, as given to him after the fall)
received by faith, is that whereby we are justified evangelically.
Adam in relation to his obedience to the concreated moral Law of his nature:
and 2. In affirming that the said Law of the Covenant of nature is yet in being
in the ten Commandments, as the only matter of a sinners justification.

But I believe I have sufficiently confuted both these assertions; namely,

1. That the moral Law, as it was written in Adams heart and mind, was not
given to be performed as the condition of the Covenant of nature, but that it
was given only as a mere Law, without any promise or threatening annexed
thereunto.

2. I have showed that the Covenant of nature was fully extinguished, and made
totally null, as soon as Adam had but tasted the forbidden fruit, and that
nothing of it does now remain, but the execution of that threatened punishment
of a double Spiritual death to Adam and to all his natural posterity to the
worlds end.

3. I have showed that the promise that was annexed to the Covenant of nature
was no other, but the confirmation of Adams concreated life after Gods image in
moral perfections, in the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise to all
eternity: but there is no such promise as this annexed to the ten Commandments,
therefore the ten Commandments do not comprehend that Covenant of nature that
was made with Adam: but on the contrary the promise that is annexed to the ten
Commandments, is nothing else but the promise of the Covenant of grace and
reconciliation; namely, it is the promise of an eternal life in Heaven to all
believers, and the threatening is an eternal death in Hell to all that live and
die in the unbelief of their redemption by the promised seed of the woman; and
no such threatening as this is annexed to the Covenant of nature.

4. I purpose to show ere long, that the moral Law of nature was not ordained
to be the matter of Adams justification to an eternal life in Heaven; but to be
the rule of his concreated life after the image and likeness of God in moral
perfections in this world only, and therefore that it ought not to be called
the matter of a sinners justification, in case the world Justification be
rightly understood for the justification of believing sinners, to the state of
an eternal life in Heaven.

5. Mr. Norton does exclude from the matter of a sinners just^fication
whatsoever the Dialogues extent is, more or less, then what was contained in
the Law of the Covenant of nature as given to Adam; and I have showed, that
that matter is nothing else but a non ens now, and that at first it was no more
but a transient act of positive obedience in eating first of the Tree of the
twofold life.

Conclusion from the premises.
1. From hence it follows, that Mr. Nortons said proposition and assumption
are builded only upon a twofold false foundation, and therefore are no better
then mere fallacies and fictions of his own brain.

2. From hence it does also follow, that the Dialogue argument, taken from the
not engraving of faith in Adams heart in the time of his creation, is of
sufficient force to prove that the term Moral Law, as it relates only to the
moral Law of Adams nature, is very unfitly applied to the ten Commandments, as
the general title of their true scope and aim, seeing the ten Commandments were
given to fallen Adam for no other Covenant, but that of grace and
reconciliation only, either in type, or in the thing typified; but the moral
Law of nature was given to Adam for no Covenant at all, but only for the moral
Law of his nature.

But says Mr. Norton in page 182.

The Law at mount Sinai admits of a threefold consideration.

1. As a Law of works obliging man unto a pure legal obedience, and accordly to
expect life or death.

2. As a rule of universal and absolute obedience, obliging man not only unto
what was commanded at present, but also unto whatsoever should afterward be
required.

3. As a Covenant of grace it self, though dispensed after a legal manner,
comprehending the Law as a perpetual rule of righteousness, freed from its pure
legal nature, of coaction, malediction, and justification by works.

And then in page 183. he does thus explain these three assertions.

By the Law in the first consideration faith is not required.

In the second, man stands obliged to faith in Christ conditionally, when God
shall call for it.

In the third, faith is not only required, but it is a part of our obedience.

Sinai is so far from clearing the true sense of it, that it does utterly
confound it.

1. Says he, the Law at mount Sinai does admit of a threefold consideration It
is a great error to make the Law at mount Sinai to comprehend three distinct
and differing kinds of Laws in a proper since. See also Reply 3.
; namely, it admits of three differing senses, according to three differing and
distinct kinds of Laws: But I have showed on the word Death, in Chap. 1. Sect.
1. that one and the same word, whether it be the word Death, or the word Law,
or an^ other word, in one and the same text of Scripture, can have but one
proper sense. This assertion is a received maxim of a sound exposition: and
from thence it follows, that the word Law at mount Sinai, in Exodus 24. 12.
(with Mal. 4. 4.) cannot be taken for three distinct sorts of Laws, in three
distinct proper senses, nor yet for two distinct sorts of Covenants, as Mr.
Norton does expound it.

This necessary rule of a right exposition does sufficiently confute Mr.
Nortons threefold consideration of the word Law at mount Sinai.
But yet for the fuller satisfaction of the reader; I will examine his
threefold consideration more particularly.

1. Says he, It must be considered as a Law of works, obliging man unto a pure
legal obedience, and accordingly to expect life or death.

I Reply, That the Law at mount Sinai, as it comprehends the ceremonial Law, is
called the Law of works, in a typical relation to the covenant of grace, but
not in any relation at all to the first transient Law of the Covenant of nature
that was made with Adam in his innocence; for I have before showed, in Sect. 2.
that the Law of the Covenant of nature, did not require works in the plural; it
required no more, but one transient act, or work of once eating of the tree of
life for the fulfilling of that Covenant.

2. I have also showed with the concurrence of good authors, in Chap. 1. Sect.
4. That the promise of life in the said Covenant of nature, was not made to
Adam, for any other life, but for the confirmation of his concreated natural
life only, in the sweet contents of an earthly paradise, and on the contrary
that the kind of death that was threatened for his disobedience, in eating but
once of the forbidden tree, was no other death but a double Spiritual death in
this world only. 1. By deprivation, and 2. By corruption of his nature, until
it pleased God to make an alteration, by his declaration of the New Covenant of
grace in Genesis 3. 15. then and not till then, he did first threaten a bodily
death, in verse. 19. and then also he did appoint a particular judgment to
follow to each departed soul; as the Apostle does tell us, in Ebr. 9. 27. and
then and not till then, he did first promise an eternal life in heaven, to all
such as died in the faith of their Redemption, by the promised seed of the
woman; and 2. then and not till then, he did first threaten an eternal death in
hell to all such as died in the unbelief of their Redemption, by the said
promised seed of the woman.

This promise and threatening was made only in the new Covenant of grace, and
not in the first Covenant of nature, as Mr. Norton does most inconsiderately
make it to be.

3. I have also showed that the first Covenant of nature that was made with
Adam, in his innocence was utterly extinguished, as soon as Adam had but tasted
of the forbidden fruit; and that nothing of it does now remain; but the
execution of the said twofold Spiritual death, to all Adams natural posterity.

4. Therefore the Decalogue at mount Sinai, does not comprehend the first Law
of the Covenant of nature, that was made with Adam in his innocence.

5. Though Mr. Rutherford does hold as Mr. Norton does, that the Covevenant
made with Adam, was made with him in relation to his perfect moral obedience,
yet he does differ from Mr. Norton in two main points in that Covenant.

1. He differs from him in the kind of life that was promised; he says Mr.
Rutherford denies the Decalogue to belong to the Law of works given to Adam.
See him on the Covenant, page 60, etc. The Law at mount Sinai was given for no
other Covenant; But of grace for man's salvation in heaven, and therefore it
does not comprehend the Law of the Covenant of nature that was made with Adam.
plainly, that it was not a life in Christ, nor the fruit of the merit of blood
as our life is in the new Covenant, Joh. 3. 16. But says he, it was a Law
life, happily a life in glory; But yet (says he) the life he lived, and the
creatures for his service seem not to belong to the life (of glory) I have
cited his sense more at large, in Chap. 1. Sect. 4.

2. Mr. Rutherford does peremptorily deny the Law of works made with Adam, to
be comprehended in the Law at mount Sinai; mark his title to Chap. 11. in page
57. and in page 60. he says, 1. The Law pressed upon Israel, was not a
Covenant of works (made with Adam) but a darker dispensation of grace; and 2.
says he, in page 60. The Law as pressed upon Israel, was not a Covenant of
works (made with Adam) because it was given to Israel as a Covenant of grace
only; for,

1. Says he, The Law, as the Law, or Covenant of works, was made only with
perfect men, who need no mercy: But this Covenant (at mount Sinai) is made with
sinners, with an express preface of mercy; I am the Lord thy God that brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, E^od. 20. 2. It is made with st^ff-necked
Israel, Deuteronomy. 29. Deuteronomy. 30. Deuteronomy 31. Deuteronomy. 32. And it is called a Covenant from
the end, and the Object, as motions are denominated from their end; For the end
of the Lords pressing the Law upon them, was to bring them under a blessed
necessity, to seek for salvation in their true City of Refuge Christ Jesus, who
redeemed them out of the spiritual bondage of sin.

2. Says he, It was the Covenant made with Abraham, which was a Covenant of
grace; And though (says he) it be called a Covenant besides that made at
H^reb, Deuteronomy. 29. 1. (yet that is to be understood) first, because it Deuteronomy. 29.
1.
was renewed again, after their breach. ^. Because ^t was repeated again a
little before the death of Moses, Deuteronomy. 31. 28, 29, 30. 3. Because there were
some additions of special blessings, cursings, and ceremonial commands, that
were not in the fo^mer proposed Covenant, in Exodus 20. yet the same it was In
Substance* To love the Lord with all the heart, Deuteronomy. ^. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
The fame with that of Abraham, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. That he may establish his Covenant
The Covenant made at Horeb was the same in substance that God made with
Abraham, and of this see more, in Chap. 6. Sect. 5. No. 8.
which he swear unto thy Fathers, As it is this day; And when God delivered
them out of Egypt, it is said, in Exodus 2. 24. That God heard their groaning
and remembered his Cov^nant with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; and so the Lord
did expound it in his appearing unto Moses, in Exodus 3. 6. and in Jer. 31. 32.
^ot according to the Covenant which I made with their ^a hers in the day that I
took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt.

Now that was the Covenant which God made with Abraham, of the which
circumclsion was a seal, Genesis 17. not of a temporary Canaan only, but also of
heart circumcision; for the Lord expressly tells them when he took them by the
hand (as his married wife) to bring them out of the land of Egypt and out of
the house of bondage, Exodus 20. That he meant no other Covenant then he made
with Abraham of believing, Genesis 15. 6. and of walking before him, and being
perfect, Genesis 17. 1, 2. which is somewhat more legal, as Moses and the Lord
himself expounds it, Exodus 2. 24. Exodus 3. 6. Exodus 20. 1, 2. and he tells them
in Lev. 26. That if in their enemies hand they repent, and shall come out and
meet the rod, and their uncircumcised hearts shall willingly accept the
punishment of their iniquity, then says the Lord, in verse. 24. I will remember
my Covenant with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant
with Abraham will I remember.

Besides (says he) There are not here (in the Decalogue) three Covenants; [But
One.]

And (says he) there is no word of the subservient Covenant with Israel in
Sinai, Except, that when he mentions the one, he excludes not the other.

For to walk before the Lord, required in Abraham, Covenant, Genesis 17. 1. Is to
walk in all the ways of the Lord, to fear him and to love him, Deuteronomy. 10. 12,
13. 1 Samuel 12. 22. Jos. 24. 22, 23, 24, 25. Luke 1. 55, 70, 72, 73. All these
places refer to the Covenant made with Abraham; And the Covenant at Horeb, the
Lord made with Abraham, to give Canaan to his seed, Deuteronomy. 6. 10. Deuteronomy. 7. 12.
If thou hearken to these judgments to do them, it shall come to pass that the
Lord thy God will keep unto the^ the Covenant of mercy, that he swear unto thy
Fathers, etc.

3. Says he, this Covenant has the promise of a circumcised heart, Deuteronomy. 30.
6. and of the word of faith, that is near in the mouth, and of the
righteousness of Faith; clearly differenced from the righteousness of the Law
by doing, and so Paul expounds Moses, in Romans 10. 5, 6, 7. with Deuteronomy. 30. 11,
12, 13, 14.

4. Says he, the Covenant of works (made with Adam) taught nothing of the way
of the Expiation of sin by blood (typifying the ransom of blood that Christ was
to pay for our sins) as this Covenant does, which all along had sacrifices, and
blood to confirm it, Exodus 24. 8. Moses took the blood and sprinkled it o^ the
people, and said, behold this is the blood of the Covenant which the Lord has
made with you concerning all these words; now the words were the But Mr. Ains.
says that these words were not only the ten Commandments, but especially the
book wherein the statutes and judgments were written, in Psalm. 25. 10.
ten Commandments. See Ebr. 9. 18, 19, to 25.

5. Says he, this Covenant is made with Israel only, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. Deuteronomy.
6. 5, 6, 7, 12. But says he, the Covenant of works is made with all mankind.

6. Says he, no people under the Law can be justified and saved thereby
(namely, not by the Law of the Covenant of nature made with Adam) nor have
their sins pardoned, Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 19, 20. Romans 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 9.
Romans 10. Psalm. 130. 3. Psalm. 143. 2. Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 13. But in
this Covenant, Abraham, Genesis 15. Psalm. 32. Romans 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and
the Jews by faith have remission of sins and salvation as also the Gentiles
have, Act. 10. 43. Act. 15. 11.

7. Says he, The Lord minds to lay aside the Law (of works made with Adam) as
inconsistent with the Covenant of grace, Gal. 3. 18. If the inheritance be by
the Law, then it is not by promise; but God gave it to Abraham by promise; for
to live by this Covenant is a life of promises; all being here promised; both
faith, the condition, and perseverance therein, and a new heart, pardon,
righteousness, and life, etc.

8. Says he, the passover and circumcision, Genesis 17. 7. all along were seals
of the Covenant, as baptism (being one with circumcision in substance, Col. 2.
11.) is the seal of the same Covenant, Act. 2. 29, 40, 41, etc. circumcision
did bind Abraham to keep the Law, as a ceremony and seal of the Covenant of
grace commanded by God: But the Law as a Covenant of works (made with Adam)
does command no ceremony, no sacrifice, no type of Christ Mediator at all.

From this last clause, no type of Christ, It follows that Mr. Rutherford could
not hold the tree of life to be a type of Christ (as Master Norton does) and
therein he does agree with Mr. Shephard and others before cited.
Having now briefly recited Mr. Rutherfords 8. Reasons, why the Law at ^ount
Sinai cannot be taken in Mr. Nortons first consideration; namely, not for the
Law of the Covenant of works, which he does also call the Covenant of nature
ma^e with Adam; I will add that special caution, which Austin gives, namely,
that Moses Law must be spiritually understood for fear of dangerous errors* in
City of God, lib. 20. cap. 28.

9. All the promises and all the threatenings also, from Genesis 3. 15. to the end
of the Revelation are made only from the said Covenant of grace, All the
promises and threatenings from Genesis 3. 15 to the end of the Bible do descend
from the Covenant of grace, and not from the Covenant of nature made with Adam.
and not from the Covenant of nature made with Adam; as I have formerly showed
in my exposition of the three general punishments, in Genesis 3. 16, 17, 18, 19.

10. Mr. Lawson says in his body of Divinity, p. 279. All the penalties on
Cain, the old world, the builders of Babel, and the rest, were penalties as
threatened by, so inflicted for sin against God Redeemer; and all this (says
he) is evident from the books of Moses and the Prophets, which speaks to men as
sinful, promise Christ, forbid impenitency, preach and urge repentance, and
make all penalties removeable upon that Condition, which (says he) could not
have been done, if sin and penalties had been looked upon according to the Law
of works (made with Adam.)

It is in vain therefore (says he) to Argue, that because as the Law of works
commands love to God, love to neighbor, did forbid idolatry, perjury, murder
theft, etc. Did threaten death and punishment for these sins, so the Gospel
commands, the same duties forbids the very same sins, threatens the very same
penalties, and promises life; Therefore the Law of works continues,
especially the moral Law; For the precepts, prohibitions, promises, and threats
of the Law of works, and of the Law of grace do come under distinct notions; as
for an instance we may among many places single out this one, let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return to
the Lord and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, and he will
abundantly pardon, Esa. 55. 7. Esa. 55. 7.


But the Law of works does not say so, but it says, be not wicked, sin not at
all. The Law of grace says, though thou art wicked and have sinned, yet
forsake thy wicked way, and return to the Lord against whom thou have sinned:
The Law of works, says thou have sinned, and thou must die, I have no promise
of life or pardon for thee, but the Law of grace, says, though thou by thy sin
have deserved to die, yet upon condition of repentance and return, thou shall
be pardoned and live:

And says Mr. Lawson, I touch the more often upon this point, and here I stand
the more largely upon it, because some will take no notice of it, others who
are sufficiently informed, are hardly persuaded of this difference; and of the
Abrogation of the Law of works, which to a guilty person (as every natural
child of Adam is) denies all possibility of salvation.

11. Mr. Holyoke says, we may understand by the process of the holy story,
that the sons of Adam never were, nor are plagued, for not doing a Covenant In
his Doctrine of Life, p. 313.
of works, but for despising Christ, his Gospel and kingdom; That unexpressable
plague (says he) of the confusion of tongues, 2000 years (after the creation)
came not, but for despising Christ and his kingdom; and says he, the Jews are
cast off for this, and to this day the Turks, (Heathens) and Papists are
destroyed, for the same cause, and the ungodly and unrighteous in reformed
Churches; and much more does he speak to this purpose, both in the place cited,
and elsewhere, for this very end; namely, to prove that the Law at mount Sinai,
was never given for any other Covenant of salvation, but for a Covenant of
grace only.

12. In case I had seen it needful, I could have added much more to prove that
all the penalties that are threatened, from Genesis 2. 16. to the end of the Bible
are threatened as penalties for sins against the Covenant of grace, either on
the elect as correctively penal, or on the reprobates as properly penal
punishments, to fulfill the quarrel of the Covenant (not of the Covenant of
nature made with Adam; for the quarrel of that Covenant was fully executed on
Adam, and on all his natural posterity, as soon as they have life in the womb)
but of grace, compare herewith, Lev. 26. 25. with verse. 15. and see more in my
exposition, in Jer. 11. 8. in Chap. 6. Sect. 5. and also, in Chap. 10.

13. Let the Reader take notice, that the three last cited authors do expressly
affirm, that the Law at mount Si^ai, was given only for a Covenant of grace
(represented also under the typical Law of works) and thence they infer that
therefore it cannot comprehend the Law of the Covenant of nature, made with
Adam, quite contrary to Mr. Nortons first consideration; and so consequently
the death threatened in the Covenant of nature, in Genesis 2. 17. must of
necessity, be of a differing kind, from that death that is threatened in the
Covenant of grace.

14. Mr. Baxter says, They that observe not, that it is not the Law made with
Adam, but Moses Law, which Paul most frequently mentions, and calls the Law
of works, will hardly understand the meaning of Paul's Epistles.

Conclusion.
From the premises it follows, That the Law at mount Sinai, was never given in
Mr. Nortons first consideration, namely, not for the Law of the Covenant of
nature made with Adam.

Mr. Norto^s second consideration of the Law at mount Sinai Examined.

He says, that the Law at mount Sinai, was in a second consideration given as
a Rule of universal and absolute obedience, obliging man not only unto what was
commanded at present, but also unto whatsoever should afterward be required.

Sinai; for first the Law at mount Sinai, does comprehend, not only the ten
Commandments, but the whole economy of Mos^s (for the most of it was given at
mount Sinai, Lev. 27. 34.) and thence it follows, that it was given for the Law
of the Covenant of grace, and not for the moral Law of nature, in an abstracted
sense from the Covenant of grace as it was to Adam.

2. I have at large showed in this Chapter, in Sect. 2. and elsewhere, that God
was pleased to make many Arbitrary Laws, and transient Covenants, sometimes
with the national Church, and sometimes with particular persons, for their
temporal salvation, only upon condition of performing some one transient act
of positive obedience, and that those Laws, and that kind of obedience had no
dependence at all on the moral Law of nature, in the which Adam was created;
and from thence it follows, that the moral Law was not given at mount Sinai for
a rule of universal and absolute obedience, obliging man unto whatsoever
positive obedience God should afterward require: and of this kind of Arbitrary
Laws, was the transient Law of the Covenant of nature that was made with Adam,
in Genesis 2. 17.

3. Mr. Norton does in the said assertion lay an imputation of folly on Gods
moral prefections, in affirming that Adam was obliged by the moral law of his
nature, to perform obedience to whatsoever God should afterward require of
him; But these words seem to imply, that Adam in the first instant of his
creation did want something of Gods concreated image, of perfect moral
obedience, which God might afterward require of him; But Mr. Walker affirms
the contrary, for he says in his Doctrine of the Sabbath, in page 10. that if
Adam in his innocence had been obliged to keep every seventh day more holy then
the other six days, it would have proved that he had not been created in
perfection of nature after Gods image; But it is most certain (says he) that man
in that estate was perfect with natural perfection at all times, equally
disposed to obey God, and serve him, he needed no observation of any day to put
him in mind of any thing which he had before known, and which God had revealed
to him, his memory was perfect, and he knew whatsoever was needful for him to
know or do, etc. In a word (says he) his whole life was a constant and
obedient service of God; and there was no inequality or less worship of God in
one day then in another, for he fully served God at all times; and says he,
whosoever denies this, must needs therein deny man's perfection, and constant
conformity to God, in the state of innocence, for where one day is kept better
then another there is inequality, and no constant uniformity in himself, nor
conformity to Gods will; this assertion of his, I believe is a clear truth, and
from thence I infer that Adam at the first instant of his creation, was so
perfectly framed in moral obedience, after Gods image and likeness, that no
more prefection could be required of him afterward; and therefore Mr. Nortons
said assertion, is very near a kin to that Socinian tenent which Mr. Burges
does confute; he says, there is a dangerous book called the Practical
Catechism, that venteth much Socinian poison, in this particular among other
things, that Christ added to the Law and perfected it, filled up some vacuities
in it; But certainly, says Mr. B^rges, the Law of God being perfect, and unto
which nothing must be added, cannot be said to have vacuities in it; and so
consequently it did not oblige to whatsoever God should afterward require by
his arbitrary will, and consequently the moral Law of Adams nature did not
oblige him to eat of the tree of life; for such transient, and arbitrary
commands as this, have their dependence on the secret will of God only, and not
on his Revealed moral Law of nature, in the which Adam was created perfect,
after the Image of God in moral perfections.

4. Though I doubt not to affirm, that Adam was created after the Image and
likeness of God in perfect moral obedience, yet it is as true also that he was
not created after Gods Image and likeness, in the like perfection of knowledge,
and obedience to Gods arbitrary Law of the Covenant of nature; no^ yet in the
knowledge and obedience of the rest of his transient positive Laws, for then he
must have been created in the knowledge and obedience of all Gods secret
decrees, and then he could not have sinned against the Law of the Covenant of
nature, and then he would have eaten of the tree of the twofold life in the
first place, and then he should have been so confirmed against the Devils
temptations, that the Devil could not afterward have deceived him, by any
temptations to do any thing contrary to Gods secret will; But it was the good
pleasure of God to reserve the knowledge of his secret will touching his
transient positive Laws to himself until he should think fit to declare them,
for the trial of obedience in this or that particular man, and case.

5. In this second consideration of the Law at mount Sinai, Mr. Norton does
hold forth another Heterodo^ assertion; namely, that by the moral Law of nature
in Adam, man does stand obliged to faith in Christ, conditionally; when God
shall call for it. But I have already showed in the former part of this
Chapter, at Reply 2, and 3. that it was not consistent, neither with the moral
Law of Adams nature, nor yet with the condition which God made with him in the
Covenant of nature to believe in Christ, neither was it consistent with the
order of Gods government under the Covenant of nature, to call for it as long
as Adam lived under that Covenant, because it is no act of pure nature to
believe in Christ as a Redeemer; But it is an act of supernatural grace only,
which belongs only to the order of Gods government, under the Covenant of
grace and reconciliation.

6. The Reader must take special notice that Mr. Norton, in this second
consideration does not speak of the Covenant of nature (for he spoke of that in
his first consideration) but here he speaks only of the moral Law of Adams
nature in the which he was created, and therefore, he does in this place most
inconsiderately confound the mere Law of nature, with the Covenant of grace in
the Decalogue ^t mount Sinai, for when God gave the Decalogue at mount Sinai,
he did at the same time call for faith in Christ; but he did not call for faith
in Christ, when he did first ingrave the moral Law in Adams heart: for he did
then engrave it in his heart, as a mere Law of nature, without any promise or
th^eatning; but when he was pleased to translate it into the Decalogue which
was given to man as a Covenant of grace after the fall, then it was given in
such a form of words as belongs only to the Covenant of grace and
reconciliation, with a promise of salvation in heaven to all believers, and
with a threatening of damnation in hell to all unbelievers, and therefore now
the moral Law of nature in the Decalogue, is to show sin, and to drive the soul
to Christ for salvation.

7. I have immediately showed from Mr. Rutherford, and others, in Reply 8. that
the Law at mount Sinai, ought not to be taken in any other consideration, but
for the Law of the Covenant of grace only; which is also further evident, by
Erod. 24. 3, 7, and 12. with verse. 16. for first, in verse. 7. The Law as it
comprehends the whole economy of Moses, is called The book of the Covenant,
and then, in verse. 8. all the words of it were confirmed with the blood of
those sacrifices, that were mentioned, in verse. 5. and then it was called, The
blood of the Testament; and thereupon all the precepts of the Law
(comprehending all the economy of Moses) are called the Testament, in Ebr. 9.
19, 20. both in the Typical, and also, in the Typified sense; and 2. in that
respect also, The Law and the Covenant are put for the same things, in 1 Chro^.
16. 17. with Psalm. 105. 10. and so also, the Law and the Prophets do speak the
very same things, touching faith in Christ, Luke 24. 44. Mat. 7. 12. Act. 24.
14. and 3. The Law at mount Sinai, does promise pardon of sin, to all repentant
sinners, which is the great blessing of the New Testament, in Exodus 20. 6. with
Exodus 34. 1, 6, 7. and there also this Law is called a Covenant, in verse. 27.
28, even the ten Commandments, as they do also comprehend the Levitical Laws
The typical Laws are a part of the Covenant of grace ^ha^ was made at mo^^t
Sinai.
for those Laws, are a part of that Covenant, that was made at mount Sinai,
Le^. 7. 38. Lev. 25. 1. Lev. 26. 46. Lev 27. 34. N^m. 25. 6. Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
Fourthly, This Covenant is also often called, The Law, Exodus 24 12. and because
it had a typified, and typical part, it ^s called, The Law of works, and the
Law of faith, in Romans 3. 27. But to observe the outward works of it, without
faith in Christ, is not to observe the Law in the right sense of it, at these
places do testify, Deuteronomy. 17. 11, 18, 19 Deuteronomy. 27. 3* 8, 26. Deu^. 29. 29.
Deuteronomy. 31. 9, 11, 12, 24, 26. with D^u^. 33. 4. Jos. 1. 8, 20. Jos. 22. 5. Jos.
8. 32, 34. 2 Chronicles. 33 8. Ezra 7. 6. Ezra 10. 29. N^^. 8. 2, 7, 9, 13* 14.
Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm. 19. 8. Psalm. 78. 1, 5, 10. Psalm. 81. 4. Psalm. 119. ^, etc.
Isa. 2. 3. Isa. 42. 4, 24. Isa. 51. 4, 7. Jer. 31. 32. Mal. 4. 4. Mat. 5. 17,
18. Mat. 22. 36, 40. Luke 16 16, 17. Joh. 1. 17, 45. Joh. 7. 19, 23. Joh. 11.
34. Joh. 12. 34. Joh. 15. 25. Act. 7. 38, 53. Act. 13. 15, 39. Act. 22. 3, 12.
Act. 28. 23. Ro^. 2. 25, 26. Romans 3. 20, 21. Romans 7. 12, 14, 22. Ro^. 8. 2.
Gal. 2. 19. In all these places the word Law does relate, to the true sense of
the word Law, as it was given at mount Si^ai, for a Covenant of grace and
reconciliation, as it is also expounded, in Jer. 7. 22, 23. Compared with Jer.
32. 23. and this very Law in the true substance of it, was given for a Covenant
of grace to Abraham, in Genesis 26. 5. 430 years before it was given to the
national Church at mount Sinai, Gal. 3. 17. and Eliphaz exhorted Job, long
before the Law, as given at mount Sinai, to receive this Law, from his mouth,
and to lay up the words of it in his heart, as a ready means to help him to
search out his sins, and as a ready means to provoke him to repentance, Job 22.
22, 23. and so in like sort, the Law for the keeping of the Sabbath day, was
given to the ancestors of the Jews, before it was given to them at mount Sinai,
Exodus 16. 4, 28.

Conclusion.
In case Mr. Nortons threefold consideration of the word Law be observed in all
these places, it will make as much confusion in the body of Divinity, as the
builders of Babel made in their building, when their languages were confounded.

Mr. Nortons third consideration examined.

The Law at mount Sinai (says he) must be considered as the Covenant of grace
it self, though dispensed after a legal manner.

Norton, but yet I say also, that he has put a dead fly into this most
precious box of saying truth, by adding these heterodox expressions [Freed from
its pure legal nature of co^ctio^, malediction, and justification by works] but
I have formerly showed, that the moral Law of nature, in the which Adam was
created, was not given for the matter of Adams obedience to the Covenant of
nature, but that it was given him as the mere Law of his nature, without any
promise or threatening thereunto annexed: and from thence it follows, that it
had no coaction or malediction belonging to it: But 2. In case Mr. Norton does
speak this of the Covenant of nature, unto the which a promise and a threatening
was annexed, then I have before showed, that God did not make the Covenant of
nature with him, in relation to his moral obedience or d^sobedience, but in
relation to his transient act of positive obedience in eating first of the Tree
of life: and 2. I have also showed, that the moral Law of nature is now
translated into the Covenant of grace, both in the Decalogue, and also in the
rest of the Bible, not in the abstracted sense, as it was written in Adams
heart for the rule of his natural obedience, but as a true part of the Covenant
of grace, to shun sin, and to drive to Christ; and theref^re now it has a
binding power annexed to it, (more then it had to Adam during the time of his
innocence) of coaction, and also of malediction to all impenitent unbelievers,
to force them either to believe in Christ as their Redeemer, or else to damn
them. But in this sense the moral Law was not imprinted in Adams heart in the
time of his creation, neither are any of the fallen sons of Adam freed from
this coaction and malediction, but believers only, who are also justified from
all sin formally by Gods forgiveness only: but in the time of Adams moral
perfections the moral Law of his nature had no coaction, malediction, or
justification by works.

Conclusion.
1. From the premises it follows, that one and the same word Law, in one and
the same Text, (many of which I have cited before at N^ 7.) cannot by the rules
of a sound exposition comprehend Mr. Norton^ said threefold consideration in it.

Or thus: One and the same word Law (as given at mount Sinai) cannot comprehend
in it his said three differing sorts of Laws.

2. Neither can the word Covenant at mount Sinai comprehend two distinct and
opposite sorts of Covenants, as the Covenant of nature and the Covenant of
grace are. 3. Therefore seeing Mr. Nor^on has so grossly transgressed this rule
of a sound exposition in his several answers to my Dialogue, he has most
miserably confounded the true sense of the word Law, and the true sense of the
word Covenant at mount Sinai: and 4. By that means he has most miserably
confounded the right understanding, 1. Of the great point of Christ's
satisfaction, and 2. Of the great point of a sinners justification.

SECT. IV.
BUt Mr. Norton proceeds, and says in page 184.

The observation of the Levitical worship cannot especially be called The Law
of works, because it is a part of the ceremonial Law; long before which was the
Law of works (given to Adam.)

(viz. 1. The affirmative, and 2. The negative part) are far from the true
sense of the blessed Scriptures; and therefore they may most fitly be called
two master errors, or two grand misleading errors in the body of Divinity.

1. I will examine the affirmative part, viz. that the Covenant made with The
Covenant made with Adam was not given to him as a Law of works in the plural.
Adam in the time of his innocence was a Law of works: this plural word Works
in that Covenant is no where to be found in all the Bible: but 2. On the
contrary I have showed a little before, at Reply 4. that the Covenant made with
Adam did require no more but one single work or act of eating of the Tree of
life, for the fulfilling of it: and thence it follows, that it is no fit title
to call it a Law of works in the plural. 3. I have also often showed, that the
said Covenant of nature had no continuance, no, not for one moment of time
after that Adam had but once transgressed it, by his single work or act of
eating of the forbidden fruit, and that nothing of it did remain from that
first act of his said eating, but the execution of that threatened punishment of
a double Spiritual death to him, and to all his natural posterity successively,
as soon as ever they have any life in the womb.

And from thence it follows.

1. That his affirmative part is no better then a mere fiction; and
consequently that his first foundation proposition, in page 2. (upon the which
his whole book is builded) ^s no better then a mere fiction also.

His said proposition is thus in brief.

The Lord Jesus Christ as God-man obeyed the Law (of the extinguished Covenant
of nature) as our surety, by doing the command in a way of works, (which
command was to do no other work but to eat first of the T^ee of the twofold
life) and suffering the essential punishment of the cross, (which was no other
but a double Spiritual death, 1. By deprivation of the concreated life of Gods
image: and 2. By corrupt^on of nature) in a way of obedient satisfaction unto
divine justice, thereby exactly fulfilling the first Covenant for our
justification: but he might more truly have said; thereby not fulfill^ng the
first Covenant, but the fictions of his own brain.

But the Reader that desires to avoid his errors must

1. Take special notice, that the first Covenant of nature that was made with
Adam in the time of his innocence only, has been utterly entinguished ever
since Adam received the threatened punishment of a double Spiritual death, in
the first moment of time when he did but first taste of the forbidden fruit.

2. That the Law at mount Sinai was given only for a Covenant of grace and
reconciliation, (though it was dispensed after a legal manner) and that 2. It
is in that respect called both a Covenant and a Testament, in Exodus 19 5. Exodus
24. 8. 12. and in that sense it must be understood in all those Scriptures
which I cited before at No 7.

Mr. Baxters caution is here again to be remembered; namely, that it is not the
Law made with Adam, but Moses Law that Paul does most frequently mention, and
call the Law of works: but such as are careless to observe this necessary rule
of caution, cannot understand the true sense and meaning of Paul's Epistles.

4. Had Mr. Norton been so happy as to have been well insighted into this rule
of caution, before he undertook to answer my Dialogue, he would not in wisdom
have builded the great point of Christ's satisfaction, and the great point of a
sinners justification, upon that extinguished Law and Covenant of nature, that
was given to Adam in the time of his innocence.

I come no^ to examine the negative part of Mr. Nortons said assertion; namely,
that the observation of the Levitical worship cannot especially be called the
law of works.



1. According to the extrinsecal sense of the Covenant of grace at mount Sinai.

2. According to the superstitious sense of the false Apostles.

1. The Lev^tical worship, according to the true intent of Moses Law at There
is no other Law of works (i^ the plural) in all the Bible, but the Levitical
works which God ordained at mount Sinai. for the typical pattern of the
Covenant of grace.
mount Sinai, is truly called a Law of works in the extrinsecal sense of the
Covenant of grace; and in that respect the said Law of works may well be called
the outward part of the Covenant of grace: and according to this sense it is,
that Paul calls the Law our Schoolmaster to Christ, that we might be
justified by faith, Gal. 3. 24.

2. This Law of works was like Tutors and Governors to the Jews; for the works
of the Law taught them to observe a twofold holiness; 1. Of sanctified walking
in abstaining from ceremonial pollutions: and 2. In case of ceremonial
pollutions the said works of the Law taught them how their bodies might be
sanctified or just^fied from their legal and ceremonial sins.

1. They were bound by the Law of works at mount Sinai, to be legally holy in
the whole course of their life and conversation, according to the commandments
and ordinances of the Levitical Law, that so their bodies (at least) might be
kept holy from legal pollutions, (though for the present they were not made
inwardly holy, by the renewing of the Holy Ghost) Ye shall be unto me men of
holiness, and ye shall not eat flesh ^or^ in the field, Exodus 22. 31. Deuteronomy. 14.
21. and it is also said in Lev. 11. 44, 45. Ye shall make your self holy, and
ye shall be holy, for I (Jehovah) am holy: and ye shall not make your selv^s
unclean by any creeping thing; that is to say, ye shall abstain from legal
pollutions, and ye shall show forth holiness by abstaining from positive
pollutions, though but imposed on them for a time, as shadows of better things:
and so also it is said in Lev. 19. 2. Be ye holy, for I am holy: and then in
Lev. 20. 7, 8, 25, 26, 27, he does Levit. 19. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15.
instance, that they must abstain from several ceremonial sins, as well as from
moral sins: and from thence the Apostle Peter does draw his exhortation, to be
truly holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15, 16. But no fallen
son of Adam can be so holy in nature, as God is, both by nature and essence;
but by the gift of Gods grace they may be holy as his peculiar or selected
people. The exhortation therefore is, Be holy from sia in all manner of
conversation, as God is. The people of God were compassed round about with
profane persons, from whom their corrupt nature was apt to be led into sin;
therefore God said, Be ye holy, as I am holy.

2. The Nazarites were commanded to be legally holy, by abstaining from sundry
polluted things in their diet, habit, and conversation, Numb. 6. 3, 4, 5, 8,
etc.

3. The fringe of blew, etc. was ordained to be worn on the skirts of their
clothes, that they might see it, and remember all the commandments of Jehovah,
and do them; (namely, and do them by faith in Christ, for without faith in
Christ the outward rite was vain.)

4. Another use of the fringe was, that they might be holy, Numb. 15. 38, 39,
40. This extrinsecal legal holiness was carefully observed by all the national
Church; but the inward part of it was not observed by any else, but such only
as were truly regenerated by the sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost: and in
both these senses Zachary and Elizabeth walked unreproveable in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord, Luke 1. 6. and so did Peter in Acts
10. 14. and Daniel in Chap. 1. 8. and Maymo^y concludes his Treatise of
unclean meats thus: The cleanness of the body brings one to the holiness of
the soul; (namely) from evil thoughts, and the holiness of the soul is a means
to make us like unto the majesty of God, as it is written in Lev. 11. 44. and
of this see more in Reply 13.

2. The second kind of holiness that was taught by the outward works of the
Law, was expiatory holiness; namely, it was the holiness of justification from
the guilt of their ceremonial sins, when their bodies were defiled by any
accident: for when their bodies were defiled with ceremonial sins, they might
not No^^ that were defiled with ceremonial sins might presume to ^ome into Gods
holy Temple, under the penalty of cutting off, until they were made holy again,
by being justified from those sins by the works of the Leviti^al Law. God
promised to forgive the guilt of ceremonial sins to all the national Church, if
they did but observe the outward works of the Levitical Law, Ex opere operato.
dare to appear before Gods holy presence in his holy temple, upon pain e^ther
of cutting off, or of death, until they were cleansed, or made holy again, i.e.
justified from those sins by the appointed works of the Law, Lev. 15. 31. N^mb.
9. 13. Numb. 17. 13. Numb. 18. 22. Numb. 19 13, 20. 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. 2 Chro^.
30. 18, 19. Exodus 12. 15, 19. Lev. 19. 7, 8. with Lev. 7. 18, 20, 21, 25, 27.
Le^. 12. 4. Lev. 20. 3, etc.

2. In case any came into the holy Temple, being ignorant of their guilt of
some ceremonial sin or other, then as soon as ^hey knew it, the Law provided a
remedy; namely, to bring a sin-offering, and to confess their sin to God: and
then in case they did so, they had a promise made over to them, that this work
of the Law should, Ex opere operato, procure Gods atonement for the formal
justification of their body from their sa^d ceremonial sin, and then the
threatened punishment of cutting off, or of death should be forgiven them, as
these Scriptures do testify, Lev. 4. 27, 31, 35. Lev. 5. 2, 10, 13, 16, 18.
Lev. 6 7. Lev. 19. 22. Lev. 15. 25, 26, 28. and see more of these legal
promises and threatenings in Chap 6. Sect. 3. and S^ct. 4.

3. For the avoiding of the said threatened punishments, the whole national
Church were exceeding careful to observe the said works of the Law, especially
at such times as they were to appear before God in his holy Temple, or when
they were to feast on the holy flesh in the holy City, as these Scriptures do
testify, Joh^ 11. 55. Lev. 11. 43, 44. Numb. 8. 6, 7, etc. 2 Chro^. 23. 19. 2
Chro^. 30. 18, 19.

4. The Jews were called a holy nation, in relation to their typical
church-holiness, as well as in relation to the true typified ^oliness which
believers only had among them.
Because the whole national Church were exactly careful to observe the said
works of the Law, (though there were but few of them that did observe them in
the true sense of the Covenant of grace, by faith in Christ) are called Gods
Saints, Psalm. 50 5. A holy nation, Exodus 1. 9 6. A holy people, Deuteronomy. 7. 6.
Esa. 63. 18. A righteous nation, Esa. 26. 2. i.e. a not on that are continually
justified from the guilt of their ceremonial sins by the works of the Law (and
as many as had faith in Christ were also justified or made righteous from the
guilt of their moral sins) and in that respect also they are called men of
holiness, Exodus 22. 31. Lev. 20. 7, 8, 25, 26. Lev. 11. 44. For the blood of
Bulls and Goat^, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, did
sanctify to the purifying of the flesh, i.e. to the justifying of their bodies
from the guilt of their ceremonial sins: and I conceive it is in relation to
these legal justifications, that God is said to see no sin in Israel, Numb. 23.
21. and that it was in relation to these Levitical justifications by the works
of the Law, that David said to Abimelech the Priest, that the vessels, i.e. the
bodies of the young men were holy, 1 Samuel 21. 5. they were negatively holy in a
double respect, 1. Because they had been but newly purified (or justified) from
their former ceremonial sins but three days before, for their more holy
observat^on of the new Moon feast, which began but three days before this
conference with David; and they must of necessity be purified then, or else
they might not have feasted on the holy flesh of their peace offerings on that
day, as I have showed more at large in my Treatise of holy time, page 25.

2. In another respect David said, that the vessels of the young men were holy,
because since the said holy feast they had not been defiled by women, seeing
they had continued in David's company from that time till now: his meaning was,
that in this space of time they had not been at home with their wives to be
defiled by them: for in case they had been at home to have done the act of
carnal copulation, they had been legally defiled; for by the Levitical Law that
act had a ceremonial sin cleaving to it, 1 Samuel 21. 5. but yet no moral sin did
cleave to it, Ebr. 13. 4. 1 Cor. 7 28.

In these two respects David said to the Priest, the vessels of the young men
are holy (viz. legally) and therefore in this time of necessity they might
lawfully eat of the holy bread.

In relation to this national Church-covenant-holiness it was, that all their
posterity are called a holy seed, Ezra 9. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 14. and a seed of God,
Mal. 2. 15. See Ains. in Genesis 17. 13. and in Lev. 12. 7. It was in relation to
the Law of works, that Jesus Christ ordained many lawful things at mount Sinai
to be ceremonially sinful, to the defiling of their bodies, (though not to the
defiling of their conscience) that so they might be justified therefrom by the
typical works of the Law.


6. It was the good pleasure of Jesus Christ from his arbitrary will, to
constitute many things at mount Sinai, that were no sin at all against the
moral Law, to be ceremonially sinful to the defiling of the Jews bodies only,
but not to the defiling of their conscience, that so they might be justified
therefrom by the typical works of the Law.

1. Christ ordained, that all such as remained uncircumcised, should, during
that space, be ceremonially unclean: and in that respect he made a Law, that no
uncircumcised person, (though he might otherwise be truly godly) should presume
to come into his holy Temple, or to feast upon any of the holy flesh in the
holy City, upon pain of cutting off, or of death, see Ains. in Lev. 12. 4, 8.
But by the moral Law an uncircumcised person was not unclean in Gods sight,
Acts 10. 28. Acts 11. 3, 18.

2. It was the good pleasure of Jesus Christ to ordain, that the transient work
or act of circumcising the child's foreskin on the eighth day, should purify,
i.e. justify the body of it from its said ceremonial sin of uncleanness: and
2. This outward act was also ordained to be for a teaching Schoolmaster unto
Christ, to teach them to circumcise the corrupt lusts and affections of their
hearts, by the knife of sound repentance, and by the exercise of their faith in
Christ's blood, as the only procuring cause of Gods reconciliation, pardon, and
forgiveness, to the justifying of their conscience from the guilt of all their
moral sins: and to this sense does Moses expound the use of circumcision* in
Deuteronomy. 10. 16. and in Deuteronomy. 30. 6. For even as the outward act of circumcising
the flesh did procure Gods atonement to the formal cleansing of the body from
its As God did command the national Church to do the outward works of the
Levitical Law, as the only condition on their part, for the justification of
their bodies from their ceremonial sins, so he has commanded such as sin
morally to believe in Christ, as the only condition to be performed on their
part, for their souls justification from their moral sins.
ceremonial sin of uncleanness, so the circumcising of the heart by sound
repentance, and by faith in Christ, did procure Gods atonement to the
justifying of the soul from its moral sins.

3. It was the good pleasure of Jesus Christ, to ordain at mount Sinai, that
the lawful and necessary act of copulation with a man's own wife, should defile
his body ceremonially; and in that respect that man might not dare (under the
penalty of cutting off) to come into Gods holy Temple, or to eat of the holy
flesh of their passover and peace offerings in the holy City, until his body
was purified, i.e. justified from his said ceremonial sin by the appointed
works of the Law; namely, by washing his body: see Ains. in Lev. 15. 18. Exodus
19. 14, 15. 1 Samuel 21. 5.

4. It was the good pleasure of Jesus Christ to ordain at mount Sinai* that the
natural and healthful purgings of married women (wherein there is no moral sin)
should be a ceremonial sin to the defiling of the body: (but yet the said
natural purgins in Virgins was not ordained to be any ceremonial sin to them:
see Ains. in Lev. 15. 19.) and therefore married women might not (under the
penalty aforesaid) come into Gods holy Sanctuary, or feast on the holy flesh,
until their bodies were first purified (or justified) from their said
ceremonial sin by the typical works of the Law.

5. It was the good pleasure of Jesus Christ to ordain at mount Sinai, that the
natural and healthful purgings of women in childbed, should be ceremonially
(but not morally) sinful, to the defiling of their bodies for many days
together, though after the first seven days of a male, and after the first
fourteen days of a female, if they were but washed they were clean for their
husbands society, but not for Gods Temple; no, though all their separated
natural purgings were ceased and dried up, Lev. 12. 4. until forty days were
expired of a male, and eighty of a female: yea, he did also ordain, that this
ceremonial sin of uncleanness should be so contagious, that whosoever did but
touch them in any part of the first seven days, might not presume to come into
the holy Temple, under the foresaid penalty, until their bodies were first
purified, i.e. justified from that sin by the appointed works of the Law, Lev.
12. 2, etc.

6. It was the good pleasure of Jesus Christ at mount Sinai, to prohibit the
national Church from the eating of sundry sorts both of flesh and fish (that
were otherwise good food by creation) (as the prohibited Tree also was, in Genesis
2. 17.) and which were also lawfully eaten by their forefathers, as it is also
well observed by Ains. in Genesis 9. 3.). And in case any did eat of the said
prohibited sorts of flesh or fish, their bodies should thereby be defiled with
sin ceremonially; in which respect they might not dare to come into Gods holy
Temple, under the foresaid penalty, until their bodies were cleansed, i.e.
justified from their said ceremonial sin by the appointed works of the Law,
Lev. 11. 25, 40. Lev. 17. 15, 16. Deuteronomy. 14. 2, etc.

7. Jesus Christ made it a sin at mount Sinai to touch a dead body; yea, though
it were done as a most necessary duty by the nearest relation to further its
burial, and such persons also might not presume to go into Gods holy Temple,
under the penalty aforesaid, until their bodies were cleansed, i.e. justified
from their said ceremonial sin by the appointed works of the Law, Numb. 19.

8. Christ Jesus did also ordain at mount Sinai, that whosoever did but touch
such as had issues or leprosies, though they were necessitated to touch them
out of a dutiful respect to the command of the moral Law to relieve them, yet
their bodies should thereby be defiled with sin ceremonially, and therefore
they might not presume to come into Gods holy Temple, under the penaly
aforesaid, until their bodies were justified from their said* ceremonial sin by
the appointed works of the Law: see Ains. in Lev. 14. and in Lev. 15.

9. Christ Jesus made it a sin at mount Sinai, for the Nazarites to cut their
hair, or to eat any grapes, or to drink any wine; and therefore in case they
did, they might not come into the holy Sanctuary, until their bodies were
justified from their said ceremonial sins, by the appointed works of the Law,
Numb. 6. and if it were needful, many such like instances might be added.

A further declaration of the Law of works, which Christ ordained to cleanse
the bodies of the national Church from their ceremonial sins.

The work of the Law for their bodily justification from ceremonial sins
described. The command to wash garments did always include a command to wash
the body, for the effecting of their bodily justification from certain
ceremonial sin^.
by washing or baptizing their whole body in water: see Ains. in Lev. 15. 11,
12.

2. But yet Jesus Christ ordained, that they should not be cleansed from some
sorts of ceremonial sins, except they did baptize their bodies in living or in
spring water only, Lev. 15. 13.

3. Jesus Christ ordained, that they should not be justified from some sorts of
ceremonial sins, unless they did wash their garments as well as their bodies,
because some sorts of ceremonial sins should be so contagious, that they should
defile their garments as well as their bodies: and in that respect he commanded
that they should wash their garments for the effecting of their bodily
justification, before they might presume to come with acceptance into Gods
holy Temple, Lev. 11. 25, 28, 40. Lev. 13. 6, 24. Lev. 14. 8, 9, 47. Lev. 15.
5, 6, 7, 8, etc. Numb. 8. 7, 10, 21. N^mb. 19. 7, 8, etc.

4. Jesus Christ also ordained, that they should not be fully justified from
four sorts of ceremonial sins, by the washing of their garments and of their
bodies, unless they did add to those works another work of the Law; namely, a
sin-offering.

1. The woman that has an issue. 2. The man that has an issue, Lev. 15. 3.
The woman in childbed. 4. The leper, Lev. 14.
Every one of these, say the Ebrew Doctors, although they be cleansed and
baptized, and their Sun be set, yet are they wanting, and their cleansing is
not fulfilled, so as they may eat of the holy things, until they have brought
their oblation: see Ains. in Lev. 12. 6. and when they brought their oblation
to the Temple, they might not go any further into the holy ground, then unto
the Courtyard of the Temple, where they must impose their hands upon the head
of their sacrifice, which none else might do but a clean person only: see Ains.
in Exodus 29. 10. for they were in part cleansed by washing though not fully,
till they had brought their sacrifice: but no uncleanness was done away without
washing; and in that respect Rab. Menachem said, uncleanness is not done away
but by water: see Ains. in Lev. 14. 3. And 2. To this effect does Dr. Ligh foot
speak in his Temple service, page 12. whosoever (says he) came within the holy
ground, being unclean, and knowing of it, and yet would presume to come in,
(namely, before he were washed) he incurred the guilt of cutting off, ipso
facto. 3. The Ebrew Doctors say, the man or the woman that has an issue, and
the menstruous, and the woman in childbed, are unclean for ever, and do defile
men, and vessels, and seat, and saddle, until they be baptized, although they
tarry many years, and have no appearance of any uncleanness; yet if they be not
baptized, (i.e. ceremonially washed) they are still in their uncleanness: see
Ains. in Lev. 15. 12. and Lev. 11. 32. because they were not fully justified
for the holy Temple, until they had brought their oblation.

5. I have before showed in Reply 12. that in case any came into the holy
Temple, being ignorant of their guilt of some ceremonial sin or other, then as
soon as they knew it, Jesus Christ ordained, that they should bring their
sin-offering, and confess their sin to God; and then this work of the Law had a
promise annexed to it, that it should (Ex opere operato) procure Gods atonement
for the formal justification of their body from their said ceremonial sin, and
then the threatened punishment of cutting off should be forgiven them, Lev. 4.
2, 13, 27, 31, 35. Lev. 5. 2, 10, 13, 16, 18. Lev. 6. 7. Lev. 19. 22. Lev. 15.
25, 26, 28.

6. Jesus Christ ordained at mount Sinai, that they should not be cleansed,
i.e. justified from some sins of uncleanness, but by the ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the unclean, to the purifying of the flesh, i.e. to the justifying
of the body Ebr. 9. 13. so that without water no sort of uncleanness was
cleansed.

7. The infant could not be justified from the uncleanness which it had in its
birth, but by circumcision, as I noted it before in Reply 12. at No 6.

8. I do not question but several other works of the Law might be produced for
the justification of the body from ceremonial sins, if it were needful.

9. These works of the Law were chiefly ordained, that they might be for a
teaching Schoolmaster to Christ, that so they might be justified morally only
by faith in Christ, Gal. 3. 24. and in that respect I call these works of the
Law, the outward typical part of the Covenant of grace, being ordained to serve
unto the example and shadow of heavenly things: for when Moses was about to
make the Tabernacle, God admonished him, saying, See thou make all things The
condition that was required to be performed by the Jews, for the justification
of their bodies from ceremonial sins, was by their doing of the typical works
of the Law, which were also ordained to be for an examplary pattern of the
souls justification from moral sins, on condition they did believe in Christ
the meritorious cause of Gods atonement and forgiveness, for their formal
justification.
according to the pattern showed thee in the mount, Ebr. 8. 5. and so consonant
thereto, when God ordained a ceremonial justification for the body, from the
guilt of ceremonial sins by their bodily doing of the works of the Law, he said
to Moses and Aaron, See that thou instruct the people, touching the point of
justification from their moral sins, according to the typical pattern that was
showed to thee in mount Sinai; for says the Apostle, It was necessary that the
pattern of things in the Heavens should be purified (i.e. justified from sin)
with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices then
these, Ebr. 9. 23. This inference from the typical purifying to the typified
justification from sin, does inform all that are w^lling to learn from this
Schoolmaster, wherein the right order and method of a sinners justification
from moral sins does consist.

And 2. The Apostle does tell all such as are willing to learn, that not only
the Lev^tical washings did pur^fie* the body from ceremonial sins; but also,
that the blood of bulls and goats did sanctify, (i.e. make the body holy from
ceremonial sins) to the purifying of the flesh (i.e. to the justifying of the
body from their said ceremonial sins,) Eb^. 9. 13. And so from this typical
justification, the Apostle does draw this heavenly inference, in verse. 14. How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who offered himself through the eternal
Spirit, without spot to God, purge, (i.e. just^fie) your conscience from dead
works, to serve the liv^ng God.

3. The same Apostle does tells us, in Romans 8. 3. that what the Law could not
do in that it was weak through the flesh (namely through its carnal or bodily
works, for those works tended but to the justification of their bodies from
ceremonial sins; and therefore those works are called carnal justifications, in
Ebr. 9. 10.) that did God do, by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
f^esh (namely in the likeness of a sinful malefactor, for Satan had a liberty
of power given him, in Genesis 3. 15. to pierce him in the footsoles on the cross
in the likeness of a notorious sinful malefactor; but Gods intent in giving
Satan that liberty of power, was but to manifest the perfection of Christ's
obedience in his death and sacrifice under those ignominious sufferings, Phil.
2. 8.) [And for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh,] namely, for his sacrifice
for sin, God first condemned the after use of all legal sin offerings, because
they were too weak to purify, or justify the conscience from moral sins; and
2. God did thereby condemn the guilt, or the condemning power of all moral sins
to all believers.

4. The same Apostle does also tell us; That by Christ, all that believe, are
Romans 8. 3. Act. 13. 39. Ebr. 9. 1, 10.
justified from all things, (namely, from all moral sins,) From which they
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13. 39. Implying thereby that
they might be justified from some sins, by doing the bodily works of Moses Law,
namely, they might be justified from their ceremonial sins, but not from their
moral sins; for Moses Law was never intended to be for justification from moral
sins; it is from men's superstitious conceits in all ages to think so.

5. Dr. Gouge says, (in Ebr. 9. page 300.) The word translated ordinances, in
Ebr. 9. 1, 10. Is by some rendered justifications, that is Expiations; which
being legally and externally taken, were effects of their rites and ceremonies;
for says he, by their many sacrifices and oblations, by their water of
purification, and such other rites, they were legally cleansed; and so
expiations (or justifications) were thereby made, Lev. 4. 20, 26, 31, 35. Number.
19. 19. And says he, in page 339. This Greek word translated ordinances, or
justifications, or expiations, is so done upon two grounds, 1. because the
performers of these legal rites, were thereby legally cleansed; and 2. because
they prefigured a true expiation: (or justification,) but (says he) because
they could not, in, and by themselves cleanse the conscience, the Apostle, in
verse. 10. styles them ordinances of the flesh, or carnal justifications; now
(says he) carnal is opposed to spiritual, 1 Cor. 3. 1. and that is counted
Spiritual, which is, 1. Inward Christ is the spirit of the letter, and also of
the types of Moses Law, to all such as have faith in him, as I have also
showed, in my Exposition of Romans 8. 2.
in the soul, 2. Heavenly and Divine, 3. Firm and stable, 4. Perpetual and
durable; and on the other side carnal things, are 1. Outward, 2. Earthy, 3.
Alterable, 4. Momentary; and thus the legal ordinances are called carnal
(justifications) And says he, in page 336. The Apostle does convince them of
the impotency of their legal rites, in Ebr. 9. 9. In that they could not make
perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, (namely, they could not justify the
conscience from sin) and that he does render the reason thereof, in verse. 10.
taken from the nature of those rites, namely, because they concerned the
external part of man only, and therefore could not give full satisfaction to
the conscience; And says he, these external things are fo^r in number, 1.
Meats, 2. Drinks, 3. Washings, 4. Ordinances of the flesh. 1. By meats, he
means meat offerings, and other meats, that were distinguished from such as
were legally unclean, 2. Drink Offerings, E^od. 29. 40. Lev. 23. 8. and such
other drinks, as were allowed, or forbidden to the priests and Nazarites, Jud.
13. 4. Lev. 11, 34. these defiled only, as concerning the flesh, Ebr. 9. 13.
3. Washings* for all that were made legally unclean, were to bathe themselves
in water, Lev. 15. 6. etc. Lev. 6. 27, 28. Number. 19. 13, etc. 4. Ordinances
called also justifications of the flesh, in verse. 10. and these ordinances are
applied to (positive) Commandments, which are st^led carnal commandments, in
Ebr. 7. 16. Consisting of outward, Earthly, alterable, and momentary matters
made with men's hands, called flesh, Gal. 3. 3. and the J^w are said to be in
bondage under these elements, Gal. 4. 3. and they are also called in verse. 9.
weak and beggarly elements, because they had nothing in them that could make
men thrive in grace, and be rich in God; and 4. they are styled shadows, Col.
2. 17.

Now the Law as it consisted of these external matters, separated from Christ
and from the spiritual truth, was but carnal; but yet in respect of the inward
typified part of it, it had a high account among the Saints, until all things
typified thereby were accomplished by Christ; and thus these typical
justifications were ordained, to be as a teaching schoolmaster unto Christ,
that we might be justified by faith in him.

6. This pattern of a sinners justification, from moral sins, was familiarly
known to the godly Jews of old, namely, to the Doctors next after Ezra, as it
is evident by some of their speeches, that are yet on record in some of the
Ancient Rabbis; 1. Rab. Menachem shows in Lev. 11. these things beneath are
answerable to things above, and that those above have their figures here
beneath; and 2. That by unclean beasts, the heathens of the world are meant
(just The Ancient Rab. did look into the spiritual sense of the letter of the
Law, and also into the spiritual sense of the types, which included the
Doctrine of Regeneration, and also of justification from moral sins.
according as it was showed to Peter in a vision, in Act. 10. 12, 28.) 3. That
the cleansing with water did signify the water that is above, which is the
water of mercy (meaning thereby, The water of Gods merciful atonement, and
forgiveness for the sake of Christ's sacrifice according to Za^h. 13. 1. and
Ez^k. 36. 25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be
clean, and from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse
you; and this water of mercy did David most fervently beg of God, for the full
purifying of his soul from sin, that so he might be made whiter then any snow
in Gods sight, see Ains. in Lev. 14. 3. and in Psalm. 51.) 4. The Ebrew Doctors
speaking of washing their garments, give this reason for it; namely, because it
is necessary to do away uncleaness (from moral sins) by the waters that are on
high, see Ains. in Lev. 6. 27. and in Psalm. 51. 1, 2, 3, 7. Zach. 13. 1. Isa.
4. 4. Rev. 1. 5. Rev. 22. 1. Ebr. 10. 22. John 7. 38, 39, etc.

5. Maymo^y, does thus conclude his treatise of unclean meats; The cleanness of
the body (says he) brings one unto the holiness of the soul from ev^l
thoughts: and the holiness of the soul, is a means to make us like unto the
majesty (of God) as it is written, and ye shall make your selves holy, for I
the Lord that make you holy, am holy (Exodus 22. 31.) see Anis* in Lev. 11. 44.

I entreat the Reader to take special notice how the Ancient Ebrew Doctors did
call their cleanness from sin by Gods merciful forgiveness, the holiness of
soul; and this negative holiness, by Gods forgiving of the evil thoughts of the
soul is consonant to the typical sense of the Apostle, in Ebr. 9. 13. He says,
that the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, does sanctify, or make
holy from ceremonial sins; and so it is in like sort said, that when the Temple
was ceremonially cleansed, it was justified as the Ebrew is in Dan. 8. 14. and
so, in Job. 4. 17. shall mortal man be more justified (from sin) then God? or
as it is in the 70, be more undefiled then God; and so God says to all Israel,
in Levit. 19. 2. Ye shall be holy for I Jehovah your God am holy; namely, ye
shall be negatively holy (as God is) from sin; by Gods atonement through your
faith in Christ; of which I have spoken also, in Reply 12.

7. The ancient Ebrew Doctors did also say, and believe, That all the typical
works of Moses Law, should be abolished in the days of Messiah, and that all
unclean meats should then become clean, see Anis. in Gene. 9. 3.

8. The ancient Ebrew Doctors have this remarkable observation from the
liberties of the year of Jubilee; That the Divine Majesty will be to Israel in a
Jubilee; Freedo^, Redemotion, and Finisher of Sabbaths; this is Recorded by H.
Bro. in his Sinai sight, and in his Require of Concent, page 13.

9. They understood that Circumcision was more then a carnal sign, as it
appears by the words of the book called Zohar; cited by Ains. in Genesis 17. 11.
ult. 14. 23. they understood it to be a sign and seal of justification^, from
sin, by faith, in the promised seed, Romans 4. 11. therefore they which deny the
baptising of infants, because as they say, circumcision was but a carnal sign,
of carnal promises to a carnal seed; they may see that the Jews own testimonies
do abundantly refute them. God said circumcise to me all your male children,
(this was a sign,) Genesis 17. 8. and he said also I will circumcise thy heart,
and the heart of thy seed, this is the signification of the sign, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

10. They rested not in the letter of the Law, but looked also into the
spiritual sense of the letter of the ten Commandments, as it is also showed, by
Ai^s. in Exodus 20. 6. and in Lev. 26. 10. and by Duplessis, in the Trueness of
Religion, page 547.

11. Duplessis says, in his Trueness of Religion, page 545. The cabal it self
gives us to understand, That Christ shall cure the venom of the Serpent, make
a new Covenant, and take away the necessity of Circumcision; and says he, in
page 546. some of the Rabbis say, that sacrifices shall cease, saving the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; And they say of the Sabbath, that he that
brings the Commandment from God (as Christ did) may also break it, (as Christ
also did, in Mark 2. 28.) And says Rab. Jonathan, in the Thalmud, in
whatsoever a Prophet bids thee transgress, obey him, saying in idolatry; for
all the rest are things that may be changed by a Prophet, according to occasion
and time.

Conclusion from the Premises.

1. That the Levitical worship, is especially and only called, The Law of
works, in the New Testament.

2. That the Law of works was ordained at mount Sinai, to be the typical part
of the Covenant of grace and reconciliation, and to be for a typical pattern of
the souls justification, from moral sins by the procuring cause of Christ's
blood, and by the formal cause of Gods atonement, upon condition of the sinners
faith in Christ.

3. That therefore it was a fundamental error in the false Apostles to teach
that the outward observation of the Levitical rites, did not only justify the
body from ceremonial sins, but the soul also from moral sins, and that the said
rites were given to be as a necessary appendix to faith in Christ.

But on the contrary the Apostle taught, that the said rites had no power given
them to justify the conscience from moral sins, Ebr. 9. 9. Ebr. 10. 4, 11. But
by Christ (says he) all that believe are justified from all things (namely
from all the matter of moral sins) from the which ye could not be justified by
the Law of Moses, namely, not by the works of Moses Law, Act. 13. 39. and in
this respect it is, that he disputes against justification, by the work of
circumcision, in Act. 15. 1, etc.

4. Paul told the Jews, in Gal. 3. 12. That the Law is not of faith; the works
of the Law may be done for the justification of the body from ceremonial sins
ex opere operato, without any faith in Christ at all. But the Apostle does not
mean that the Law in the spiritual sense of it, is not of faith, but in that
sense it is the same doctrine of faith, that is taught in the New Testament;
but of this, see more at Reply 16. No. 7. and in Chap. 7. Sect. 2.

SECT. V.
BUt still Mr. Norton does proceed, saying, in page 186.

God propounded the Law of works to man, before the fall with promise of
justification and life in case of legal obedience.

Chap. 1. Sect. 4. That the promise of life in the Covenant of nature was not
made to Adam, for a life in heaven, but only for the confirmation of his
concreated natural life, after Gods image, in moral perfections, to be
continued for ever, in the sweet contents of an earthly paradise.

2. I have showed, in Chap. 1. and also, in Chap. 4. that the Covenant made
with Adam, was not made with him on condition he did not sin against the moral
Law of his nature; for he could not possibly will to sin against that Law;
until he had first lost his moral perfections, by being deprived thereof, for
his sinning against Gods transient positive Law, by his act of eating first of
the forbidden fruit.

3. I have showed before in Reply 4. that it is a dangerous misleading title to
call the Covenant of nature, a covenant of works in the plural, seeing it
required no more but one work, or act of eating of the tree of life, for the
fulfilling of it, and it forbad no more, but once eating of the tree of
knowledge, for the utter breaking of that Covenant.

4. That as soon as Adam had but tasted of the forbidden fruit, he did in the
same moment of time receive the threatened punishment of a twofold spiritual
death; and thereupon that Covenant was for ever after extinguished.

Conclusion.
From hence it follows that Mr. Nortons misunderstanding of the true nature of
the Covenant of nature made with Adam, is the only cause of his
misunderstanding, 1. of many Scriptures, 2. of the great point of Christ's
satisfaction, and 3. of the great point of a sinners justification, as he has
expressed it in his first proposition, in page 2.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 187. The matter of justification is the same in
both Covenants, viz. Legal obedience.

Adam, was not made in relation to the moral Law of nature but in relation to a
positive Law. It is a great error to make the moral Law of nature, to be the
matter of a sinners justification.


2. Because the Covenant of nature was extinguished and made utterly null as
soon as Adam had lost the rectitude of his nature by eating of the forbidden
fruit. And thence it follows, that it can be no less then a mere fiction to
affirm, that the obedience of Christ to that transient, and now nullified
Covenant should be the matter of a sinners justification, under the Covenant of
reconciliation.

3. But in case it could be supposed, that the Covenant made with Adam, is
still in being (which cannot be granted, because it is not true,) Yet then it
will be no small absurdity to call that Covenant, and the Covenant of
reconciliation; [Both Covenants] as if both those differing Covenants, had the
same matter for a sinners justification.

4. Though it is granted that the Apostle does speak of two Covenants, in the
The Covenant at mount Sinai is called two Covenants, because the Covenant of
grace was typified) by the Covenant of works; But in case the Covenant made
with Adam, had been still in being for a sinners justification, then the
Apostle should have called them (not two but) three Covenants, or else he did
much forget himself in his account.
point of justification, in Gal. 4. 24. yet he does not make the Covenant of
nature made with Adam, to be any of those two Covenants; but the two Covenants
that the Apostle speaks of, in Gal. 4. 24. are 1. The typical Covenant of
reconciliation by the works of the Law, and 2. The typified Covenant of
reconciliation by faith in Christ only; and both these Covenants are but one
in a true spiritual sense, (of which see more, in Chap. 6. Sect. 5.) and both
these Covenants were ordained for the justification of sinners, as I have
showed before, at Reply 13. But yet they were not ordained for the same subject
matter of justification; for I have showed before, and often elsewhere; that
the first said typical Covenant, was ordained only for their bodily
justification from their ceremonial sins by the typical works of the Law ex
opere operato, and 2. It was ordained to be for a typical pattern of true
justification, from moral sins, to such persons only as do truly believe in
Christ, the procuring cause of Gods atonement; But the false Apostles did not
mark this distinction between the typical, and the typified justification, but
they did confound them: for they taught believing Gentiles, that their legal
justification, by the outward works of the Law was of necessity to be observed,
together, with their faith in Christ, for the justification of their souls from
moral sins, or else that they could not be saved, Act. 15. 1. Gal. 4. But the
Apostle Paul does tell them that this typical Covenant of works did engender to
bondage, and thereupon he did exhort the believing Gentiles to stand fast in
that liberty, wherewith Christ had made them free from that yoke of bondage
(the observation of Levitical works) and thence it follows, that justification
from moral sins belonged to such only as have faith in Christ; and in this
respect the Apostle called such as held justification from moral sins, by faith
in Christ only, the children of the freewoman.

5. In case the Covenant made with Adam, had been still in being as the matter
of a sinners justification, then the Apostle should have called them, three
Covenants; or else he did much forget himself, when he called them but two
Covenants, in the point of justification; but seeing he does call them, but two
Covenants, it does from thence follow, that the Covenant made with Adam is none
of those two, and therefore it is an undeniable proof that the Covenant made
with Adam, is extinguished, and not now in being.

6. I have also showed that the typical works of the Law were ordained to Ebr.
7. 11. Ebr. 8. 6. Exodus 24. 12. The Law was ordained to be for a teaching
Schoolmaster unto Christ, for justification by ^^ith in him.
be a teaching pattern, or a teaching Schoolmaster of true justification by
faith in Christ, Gal. 3. 24. and in that respect the Apostle does affirm, that
the people were taught the Law, Ebr. 7. 11. and 2. The Apostle says, in Ebr.
^. 6. That the Covenant at mount Sinai, was established [or Taught] upon better
promises, (so Ains. does translate this text, in Exodus 24. 12.) namely, better
then the legal promises, which are cited at Reply 12. because they are made
only to such as have true faith in Christ. 3. God said thus to Moses, in Exodus
24. 12. I will give thee tables of stone, and a Law, and Commandments which I
have written, [to teach them,] namely, to teach them to believe in Christ only
for their true justification from their moral sins, and God said, in Deuteronomy. 4.
1. Hearken unto the statutes, and unto the judgments which I teach you for to
do, that ye may live; but God did not teach them to do his statutes and
judgments, with bodily exercise only, for he declares his hatred against that
kind of worship, in Isa. 1. and from thence it follows, that when God ordained
the typical works of the Law, for the justification of their bodies from their
ceremonial sins, he did it not so much for the good of their bodies; but as a
Schoolmaster to Christ, for the good of their souls chiefly, that so it might
be for an external teaching pattern of the true way and method of their souls
justification, from moral sins, by faith in Christ; as it is also rightly
observed, by Mr. Woodbridge; Christians (says he) attain that In his Method,
page 10. 53.
righteousness by faith, which the Jews sought after by works, as the Apostle
does more largely express it, in Romans 9. 31, 32. Fourthly, God bade Moses bear
the people as a nursing father does the sucking child, Nam. 11. 12. The Chaldy
that goes in the name of Jo^athan, and Thargum Jerusalemy, calls this
nursing father Pedagoga, which name Paul uses, when he says, The Law was our
Pedagogue, or our (tutoring, or teaching) Schoolmaster unto Christ, Gal. 3.
24. And Moses made this answer unto God, by way of interrogation; have I
begotten these as if he had said, I am but the minister of the Law in the
letter, and in the outward type only, which begets no children to God, Romans 7.
4, 5, etc. Romans 8. 3. Gal. 4. 24. I conclude therefore with Paul, that the
typical works of the Law were ordained to no other end but to be as a teaching
Schoolmaster unto Christ, that so they might thereby be begotten unto true
faith, and that so they might by faith in Christ only be justified, Gal. 3. 24.

It is observable, that the said typical pattern was a teaching Schoolmaster
of true justification, in three particulars.
1. The national Church were commanded to do the works of the Law as the only
condition that was required on their part, for their bodily justification from
their ceremonial sins; and according to this pattern, the only condition that
is required of all the elect Israel of God, for their eternal justification
from moral sins, is faith only in the death of Christ, Gal. 3. 24.

2. As the blood of bulls, etc. was ordained by Gods free Covenant to be
typically meritorious, for the justifying of the bodies of the national Church
from their ceremonial sins, Ebr. 9. 10. 13. so in verse. 14. the blood of Christ
was ordained to be much more truly meritorious to procure Gods atonement, for
the purging, or for the justifying of the conscience from the dead works of
moral sins.

3. As the blood of bulls did procure Gods atonement for the formal
justification of their bodies, from the guilt of their ceremonial sins; so the
bloody death and sacrifice of Christ, which he performed in perfection of
obedience to his Fathers will, Ebr. 10. is much more meritorious to procure
Gods atonement and forgiveness, for the formal justification of all believers
from the guilt of all their moral sins, and so to the obtaining of the heavenly
inheritance.

In these three particulars, the works of the Law were ordained to be for a
teaching Schoolmaster unto Christ, touching the order of justification to the
souls of all believing sinners.

But I wonder where Mr. Norton can find the like teaching pattern of his
matter of justification, by the moral Law of nature: surely no where! except it
be in the proud Pharisee, Luke 18. 9. or in the fictions of his own brain; but
doubtless in case the obedience of the moral Law of nature had been ordained to
be the matter of a sinners justification, it would not have been omitted in the
typical works of Moses Law, seeing that Law was ordained to be for a teaching
Schoolmaster unto Christ for justification by faith, Gal. 3. 24.

7. From the premises it follows, that in case Christ did fulfill the Law of In
^is Method, page 251. Mr. Woodbridge denies that a sinners justification does
proceed from the matter of Adams obedience to the Covenant of nature, and
secondly he denies that Covenant to be now in force, point blank against Mister
Norton.
works for the justification of believing sinners as their surety, then it must
either be by those typical and outward works of the Law which were ordained at
mount Sinai, for the bodily justification of the national Church from their
ceremonial sins (for there was no other Law of works known to the Jews,) or
else it must be by Christ's fulfilling of the internal works of the said Law,
(the principal whereof is faith in Christ) and then faith in Christ must be the
matter of a sinners justification, which assertion is near a kin to the
Socinia^ tenent.

8. I Reply further in the words of Mr. Woodbridge; If God (says he) by virtue
of that Covenant made with Adam, does stand still engaged to give life
(supposing satisfaction to be made for disobedience) then does that covenant
made with Adam, stand still in force, as the only way to life; and then men
(at least the elect) are legally in strict justice, as innocent as if they had
never sinned; both which (says he) are desperately false and overthrow the
very foundations of faith; And says he, in page 252. Christ died not to repair
the old Covenant, nor by removing hindrances to make us capeable of the
influences of life and love, in that way in the which they should have been
derived to us, by the first Covenant; But therefore died he, that by means of
death, for the redemption of transgressions, he might become the new and living
way, through which we might come to God by faith, and partake of life and
remission of sins, Ebr. 9. 15. with Ebr. 10. 17, 20, 22.

But the said new and living way is not opposed to the first Covenant made with
Adam; But only to the old typical Covenant of works, that was made with the
national Church at mount Sinai; which is now abolished by the death of Christ;
and so consequently, there is no other Covenant, neither now nor heretofore in
force, for justification and salvation, but the new Covenant only, Jer. 31.
31, 32, 33. the Law of nature was never given as a Covenant of justification,
for an eternal life in heaven, as I have showed, in Chap. 1. Sect. 4.

9. In case it should be granted (which cannot be granted, because it is not
true) that Christ our surety had done the command of the Covenant of nature
^ade with Adam (as Mr. Norton affirms in his first foundation proposition,)
then he must have made a voyage into the earthly paradise of Eden to fulfill the
command of that Covenant by eating of the tree of life, to obtain thereby the
confirmation of Adams moral perfections, for the continuance of his natural
life, in the sweet contents of an earthly paradise; for no other life was
promised in that Covenant; and 2. In case he had been our surety to suffer the
curse of that Covenant for our redemption (as Mr. Norton affirms in his said
proposition,) then he must have been deprived of the concreated image of God,
and so consequently, he must have been punished with Adams spiritual death in
sinful and corrupt qualities, for this double kind of death was the only death
that was threatened in that Covenant; such hiddeous consequences do necessarily
flow from his material cause of a sinners justification.

10. Let it be considered, why God commanded sacrifices to be offered without
blemish and without spot; and it is evident, that the only reason was, not so
much to typifie the perfection of Christ^ humane nature, in his Conception and
birth, but especially to typifie the perfection of his Priestly obedience in
his death and sacrifice, and this perfection of his obedience was decalred, by
his perfect patience, in and through all his consecrating sufferings, according
to Genesis 3. 15. and then in the perfection of that obedience, he made his death
to be accepted as a most pleasing and acceptable sacrifice, for the procuring
of Gods reconciliation to all believing sinners, (Ebr. 7. 26. Ebr. 9. 14. 1
Pet. 1. 19.) for their formal justification from all sin, Romans 5. 19. But this
perfect righteousness of his, was not ordained to be imputed by God to
believing sinners, for their material, or formal righteousness, no more then
the unblemishedness, and the spotlesiness of the beast for sacrifice, was
ordained to be imputed to the sinner that presented it to the Priest, either
for his material, or for his formal legal righteousness; and yet
notwithstanding, though it was not in that sort made his righteousness, it was
in another sort made his righteousness; namely, because it was ordained to be
accepted of God for the typical meritorious cause of Gods atonement, by the
which the sinner was formally justified from his ceremonial sins; and so
consequently the thing that was imputed to the sinner for his justification,
was not the matter of the natural purity of the beast sacrificed; but it was
Gods atonement that was thereby procured, by the which his sins were forgiven,
and his person received into Gods favor; and just after this sort, sinners are
justified, not by the imputation of Christ's natural or actual purity, for
though he is truly called our righteousness, or our justification, 1 Cor. 1.
30. yet he is there so called, in respect of his righteous performance of his
death, and sacrifice, which God had ordained to be accepted, for the only
meritorious cause of his atonement to believing sinners, by the which atonement
so procured their sins are forgiven, and their persons thereby justified, and
received into Gods special favor to the fruition of the heavenly inheritance.

And this obedience of Christ is in special manner called his righteousness, in
John 16. 10. and it is called, The righteousness of one; namely, of Christ, in
Romans 5. 18. For the which God highly exalted him, or rewarded him, Phil. 2. ^,
etc. But to affirm that this special kind of righteousness is imputed to
sinners for the matter of their righteousness, is a^ much as to make them their
own priestly mediators by Gods imputation, which is more then a little absurd
to affirm.

11. Mr. Lawson propounds this question: Whether the propitiation of Christ, In
his Body of Divinity, c. 3. Sect. 8. p. 103.
which includes both satisfaction and merit, be to be ascribed to the active or
the passive obedience of Christ?

He answers thus at No 2. The Scriptures usually ascribe it to the blood,
death, and sacrifice of Christ, and never to the personal active obedience of
Christ to the moral Law.

3. That yet this active obedience is necessary, because without it he could
not have offered that great sacrifice of himself without spot unto God: and if
it had not been without spot, it could not have been propitiatory and effectual
for expiation.

4. That if Christ our surety had performed for us perfect and perpetual
obedience, so that we might have been judged to have perfectly and fully kept
the Law by him, then no sin could have been chargable upon us, and so the death
of Christ had been needless and superfluous.

5. Christ's propitiation frees the believer not only from the obligation of
punishment of sense, but of loss, and procured for him not only deliverance
from evil deserved, but the enjoyment of all good necessary to our full
happiness; therefore there is no ground of Scripture for that opinion, that the
death of Christ does free us from punishment, and that by his active obedience
imputed to us, we are made righteous and heirs of life.

6. If Christ did perform perfect and perpetual obedience for us, then we are
freed not only from sin, but from obedience to; and this obedience as distinct
and separate from obedience unto death may be pleaded for justification of
life, for the tenor of the Law was this, Do this and live; and therefore if a
man do this by himself or surety, and the Lawgiver and supreme Judge accept
it, the Lawgiver can require no more: it could not bind us to perfect
obedience and punishment to: there never was any such Law made by God or just
men.

All these assertions of his are point blank against so many of Mr. Nortons
assertions.

2. Hence the Reader may take notice, that Mr. Lawson denies the active
obedience of Christ to be the matter of our justification.

7. Mr. Lawson propounds this Quere, in page 311. whether there be two parts of
justification; namely, remission, and imputation of righteousness; and he
answers thus:

1. It may be remembered what I have said formerly against the imputation of
Christ's active righteousness, separated or abstracted for reward from the
passive.

2. Says he, if we examine the doctrine of the Apostle Paul, and other
Scriptures, we shall find, (if I very much mistake not) that remission and
imputation of righteousness are taken for the very same, Romans 4. 3, 4, 5. even
as David describes also the blessedness of the man to whom God imputes
righteousness without works, saying, Blessed is the man whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not sin. verse. 6, 7, 8. and therefore it was imputed to him [for
righteousness) etc.

8. Says he, this imputation of righteousness is the forgiveness of sin; for
to have faith counted, or imputed for righteousness, is explained by David to
have sin forgiven, covered, and not imputed.

9. Says he, the estate of the party justified, even in this life is blessed
and very happy: Blessed is he whose sin is forgiven, etc.

10. The party to whom righteousness is imputed, is he that believes on him
that raised up Christ from the dead, not he that believes that Christ
performed perfect obedience active to the Law in his person: for though he
perfectly obeyed the Law, as without which he could not have offered himself an
unspotted sacrifice for us, yet he did it not, that that active personal
righteousness should be imputed to us, though God in his absolute power might
have done so, yet his wisdom did not think good to do it, neither do we read
that he does it: the principal thing to be noted is, that this is the
principal, if not the only place, that speaks of imputation of righteousness,
and this imputation is remission of sins by the sentence of the supreme Judge.

11. Take notice, that he does in these words exclude the obedience of Christ
to the moral Law of nature, from being the matter of a sinners justification:
neither does he make his passive obedience to be the matter, but the
meritorious cause only of a sinners justification: for he does thus conclude;
remission, and* justification, and eternal life is ascribed to the sacrifice of
Christ's death, as the meritorious cause thereof, especially in Ebr. 9. and in
many other places*

12. I have also showed elsewhere, that Mr. Rutherford denies the said matter,
and ascribes all to the death of Christ: and says he on the Covenant, page
225. If we keep the Law, we are not obliged to suffer; for the Law does not
oblige man both to perfect doing and to perfect suffering copulatively: (as Mr.
Nor^on holds) and says he, in page 157. the righteousness, in the which is
David's blessedness, (before Christ) and Abraham's before the Law, and ours under
the Gospel, is, in forgiving of iniquity, covering sin, and not imputing sin,
Romans 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. But in all the Scriptures our sins are never said
to be pardoned, and not imputed to us by our own evangelike doing: For we are
justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
Romans 3. 24. and are washed from our sins in his blood, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14.
Matthew. 26. 28. Revel. 1. 5. and not by our evangelike doing. And says he a
little before, if any say by abusing that place, in Revel. 22. 14. we obtain
this (...), and right to the Tree of life, by keeping the Commandments
evangelically, he must say that we may first keep the Commandments
evangelically, before we have right to life to Christ, and so (consequently)
before we believe.

13. Mr. John Forbes on justification, concludes his 22. Chapter thus: It is
not only a vain opinion, but it is also impossible, that any flesh can be
justified by the works of the Law: for no Covenant, whereof Christ is not the
Mediator, and which he has never confirmed by his death, can ever possibly
serve to our justification: but of the Covenant of nature made with Adam, and
of the Covenant of works made with the Jews at mount Sinai, Christ was not the
Mediator of them, he has not shed his blood to confirm any of those two
Covenants, and therefore no flesh shall be justified, or have any access to God
by ^em. This is an invincible argument against Mr. Norton, and in page 103. Mr.
Forbes does heap up many arguments, to confute such as make Christ's obedience
to the moral Law of nature, to be the matter of a sinners righteousness.

14. I will now for further light recite the judgment of two learned and
eminent Bishops, touching the matter of a sinners justification.

1. Doctor All^, sometimes B. B. of Exeter, does distinguish a sinners
justification, In his Poor man's Library, fol. 35. 193.
from the matter of moral righteousness, properly so called; and therefore he
does first make a common place of moral righteousness by it self: and 2. Then
he makes another common place of justification, in another clear distinct and
different sort from the former.

1. Righteousness (says he, in fol. 35.) is nothing else but a general virtue
and an universal perfection, having in it no kind of iniquity or sin: it is
(says he) an absolute goodness, a perfect integrity and soundness, or a full
observance of Gods Laws. But

2. Says he, in fol. 193. To justify, or to be justified, is verbum forense,
in Scripture, and it properly signifies to be judged and assoyled, (i.e.
acquitted) as if I should say, the people of Rome have justified Scipio, being
accused of the Tribunes; that is to say, they have assoyled, (or acquitted him)
or pronounced him to be a just man: and so in Scripture it is said, The
righteous shall be justified in judgment, and the wicked shall be condemned,
Deuteronomy. 25. 1. and so in Matthew. 12. 37. By thy words thou shall be justified*
that is, thou shall be freed and delivered.

3. Says he, to be justified by faith in Christ, is to obtain remission, and
so to be accounted righteous; that is, accepted to God, not by our own powers,
but by the free grace of our Mediator.

4. Says he, justification properly is no other thing then a remission,
reconciliation, or acceptance of a person to eternal life; that is, (says he)
justification signifies remission of sins, and (thereby) a sure hope of eternal
life, given freely by the only mercy of God*

5. Says he, Paul calls those things Justifications, (in Ebr. 9. 10.) Which
declare justification after a sort, as are the sacrifices and purifications of
the Law: these rites and ceremonies are called, Justification^, not because
they do justify by themselves, but because they do sacramentally represent the
manner of justification by Christ.

6. In par. 2. p. 93. he says, the order of our justification lies thus:

1. It is God which does justify, by imparting unto us his mercy and promises;
(namely, of forgiveness to repenting and believing sinners, as he did express
it before.

2. It is Christ that has deserved this mercy of God, and promise of
salvation, by suffering those pains for us, which we our selves should have
suffered.

3. Then faith comes as an Organ or Instrument, by the which we perceive and
receive Christ, and with him the mercy and promises of God (his forgiveness) by
the which we are justified.

And says he a little before, when we say that we are justified by faith, it
is no more to say, but that justification is obtained and had by Christ, and
the promises of God which are received and apprehended by faith.

In these three points he speaks of the order of justification, just as Tindal
does, whose words I have cited in my former printed Reply; and in all this he
has not a word of Mr. Nortons matter of justification; and yet he says in his
Table, justification is thoroughly discussed; namely, in the words which I have
now cited.

15. The other eminent Bishop is Doctor Bilson, who says in his Sermons of
Redemption, page 45. By Christ's obedience I do not mean the holiness of his
life, or his performance of the Law, but the obedience of the person unto
death, even the death of the cross, which was voluntarily offered by him, and
not necessarily imposed on him, above and besides the Law, and no way required
in the Law. In these words he denies that matter of a sinners justification,
which Mr. Norton contends ^or, and also he denies the obedience of Christ in
his death, to be above and besides the Law, and therefore not to be any legal
obedience: quite opposite to Mr. Nortons assertion.

2. Says he, in page 104. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous, Romans 5. 19. This
obedience of Christ (says he) is his obedience unto death, even to the death
of the cross, Phil. 2. 8. and the righteousness of the faithful (says he) is
the forgiveness of their sins, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
Romans 3. 24, 25.

Mark this I pray, that he calls the righteousness of the faithful the
forgiveness of their sins.

3. Says he in his Survey, page 267. God does impute righteousness to us that
be sinners, by pardoning our offenses, and accepting us for Christ his sake,
when of our selves we are most unworthy.

4. Says he ibidem, the punishment of our sins Christ did willingly bear in
his body; the guilt of our sins he did not, and that made his offering the more
righteous (and meritorious) as being without desert of guilt.

5. Says he, in page 272. God made Christ sin for us, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. that is a sacrifice for sin, by
the which our sins are pardoned and purged, that so we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, by his remitting all our sins, and restoring us
into Gods favor. Mark I pray how he does expound both the parts of 2 Cor. 5.
21. just as I have done in my former printed Reply, page 207, etc. for he makes
Christ's sacrifice for sin to be the procuring cause of Gods atonement, by the
which our sins are pardoned and purged, that so we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

6. Says he a few lines after; Even in this life where we are continual
sinners, we have no righteousness, but what is joined with the real remission
of our sins pardoned for Christ his sake.

These eminent Divines, and diverse others which I have cited in the next
Section, do plainly deny the obedience of Christ in his life, to be the matter
of a sinners justification; and they do confirm the same way and order of
justification, that I have all along held forth, though they are censured for
heresy by Mr. Norton through my sides; but if any heresy be, it belongs to
the censurer: for oftentimes it falls out, that such as are most in error, do
most cry out against such as hold the contrary truth.

7. Neither does Doctor Bilson make the obedience of Christ in his death to be
the matter, but the meritor^ous cause only of a sinners justification; and so
do diverse other em^nent Divines, which I have cited in Chap. 4. at the
beg^nning.

15. I have cited five eminent Divines in my former printed Reply, in page 248.
that make no other matter to belong to a sinners justification, but believers
themselves; namely, the subject matter only, as I did at first express it in my
Di^logu^, in p. 133. and now I will add unto them some other Divines.

16. Mr. Gataker says thus in his Dispute with Gomarus, page 5. The satisfact
o^ of Christ in those doings and sufferings (whereunto he was not bound by the
common Law of nature) is the matter of the justice for which we are justified:
(i.e. it is the meritorious matter for the which we are justified) But of the
just^fication which is the action of God, it can scarce be prope^ly called the
matter. And says he in Thesis 7. how can any one pay that for another which
himself owes, etc.

17. Mr. Woodbridge a little before cited, does utterly reject that kind of
matter, (which Mr. Norton does so zealously contend for) namely, the obedience
of Christ in doing the command (and suffering the curse) of the Covenant made
with Adam: and in his Method, in page 65. and elsewhere he does call the matter
of a sinners justification, the meritorious cause, just as Mr. Ga^aker above
cited does.

18. Mr. Lawson says in his Body of Divinity, page 296. the subject of this
act, and the material immediate cause of this act (of justification) is man,
considered as a sinner, and as a believer.

19. Seeing justification is but a transient act of God, it cannot have any
matter properly so called, and therefore Mr. Nortons matter can be no better
then a no^ ens, because the doing of the Covenant made with Adam is now a no^
ens, seeing it has been utterly extinguished, ever since Adam brake it by
eating the forbidden fruit.

20. Mr. Norton does argue for his matter of a sinners justification, more like
a natural Philosopher, (that never read the Bible) then a sound Divine, because
he thinks that God cannot effect the formal cause of a sinners justification,
God can make the formal cause of a sinners justification, without any matter
that is properly so called, though men cannot by their natural reason form any
thing without matter. Arguments taken a simili, in transferring unto God the
same order of causes, that man's natural reason is led by in his order of
working, is of dangerous consequence to the hatching of many great errors in
Divinity*
without some matter that is properly so called: and just after this manner did
the Maniches and the Arians reason for the defense of their errors: 1. The
Maniches said, that God could not make the World without matter, because no man
can make any thing otherwise: but Chrysostom does thus answer in his Sermon on
Ephesians. 6. He that seeks the Doctrine of truth, should not fall down upon the
Earth; that is to say, he should not fall down to natural reasoning from
earthly similitudes: and there he gives the said instance of the Maniches. 2.
The like kind of natural reason did Arius give, why Gods begetting could not be
without passion; namely, because it is so among men. These and such like
Heretics did interpret the Scriptures according to the judgment of man's
natural reason. 3. Other Divines say, that Arguments taken a simili in such
like mysterious cases as these, does often prove very dangerous; and that they
have their eyes drowned in flesh, that transfer unto God the same order of
causes that are incident to sinful man in the course of their working: and of
this I have warned the Reader in my former printed Reply, in page 55, 82, 96.
and in page 102. I have cited Mr. T^ahe^o^s Caution, that we do not make God
subject to the order and row of causes, that man is subject to. 4. P. Martyr
says, that men may use similies of their own devising, so as they beware of
two things; 1. That they devise nothing that is repugnant to sound Doctrine: 2.
That they obtrude not those devices as the natural and proper sense of the
Scriptures. It is a dangerous thing to add our own blind and gross expositions
after the judgment and example of worldly reason unto the word of God, as Mr.
Norton does often in the matter of a sinners justification, and in the point of
Christ's suretiship, to do the command of the first Covenant, and to suffer the
curse of it. ^. Tindal in his Prologue to the five Books of Moses does at large
show the good use, and the dangerous use of allegories or similitudes, in page
14. and he concludes thus, in page 15. In allegories, says he, there is both
honey and gall; that is to say, both good and evil: For, says he, there is not
a more handsome or apt thing to beguile withal, then an allegory, nor a more
subtle and pestilent thing in the World to persuade a false matter, then an
allegory: and contrariwise says he, there is not a better vehementer or
mightier thing to make a man understand withal, then an allegory, etc.

21. The Ebrew Doctors say, the excellent knowledge (or reason) that is found
in the soul of man, is the form of man, and that it is not compounded of
Elements: and say they, when the matter of man's body, which is compounded of
Elements, is separated from the soul by death; yet then this essential form is
not destroyed, but continues to be a form without matter, until the
resurrection of the body. Their words are thus cited by Ains. in Genesis 2. 7. The
form of the soul (of man) is not compounded of the Elements, but it is of the
Lord from Heaven; therefore when the material body, which is compounded of the
Elements is separated, and the breath perishes, because it is not found but
with the body, and is needful for the body in all the actions thereof. This
essential form is not destroyed, etc. but continues for ever, even for ever
and ever; and so does the form of a sinners justification continue for ever,
yea, for ever and ever, though it have no matter that is properly so called.

22. I have formerly showed, that P. Martyr does make no other matter in a
sinners justification, but the subject matter of believing sinners only: and I
believe that a judicious and unbyased Reader will soon see, that it is from the
said earthly kind of reasoning that Mr. Norton does so often scoff at my
Dialogue, because I make the formal cause of justification to lie only in Gods
atonement, (or in his gracious forgiveness) procured by the merit of Christ's
obedience in his death and sacrifice, without his matter of moral obedience to
the nullified Covenant of nature.

23. But in so doing, I hope he does but at unawares scoff at the wisdom of
God, in giving such an external typical pattern, by the justification of the
bodies of the national Church from their ceremonial sins, by Levitical
washings, and by the blood of Bulls and Goats, etc. From this typical pattern
God would have all to learn, (as from a Schoolmaster) that a sinners
justification from his moral sins does consist only in negative holiness and
righteousness: and the Apostle does teach us to argue the case to this sense;
for in Ebr. 9. 13, 14. he tells us, That the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the
ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, does sanctify (or make sinners holy
ceremonially) to the purifying of the flesh; (namely, to the making of the body
negatively righteous from ceremonial sins) and from thence he makes this
heavenly inference, in verse. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
offered himself through the eternal Spirit without spo^ to God, purge your
conscience (i.e. purify, or justify your conscience) from dead work^; (that
is to say, from such works as proceed from our Spiritual death in sin) for ever
since God inflicted that punishment of a Spiritual death in sin upon Adam, and
upon all his natural posterity, for his transgression of the Covenant of nature
by eating of the forbidden fruit, in Genesis 2. 17. we can do nothing else but the
dead works of our Spiritual death in sin, which are called by the Apostle, Dead
works: but in case Mr. Norton will not learn this blessed truth from this
teaching Schoolmaster, (or typical pattern) let him go on to scoff, seeing he
delights in it; for he does often repeat his deriding term of a non en^, as in
page 212, 217, 225, 237, etc.

Conclusion.
It Is most evident by what I have noted touching the utter nulling of the
Covenant made with Adam, that Mr. Norton had no just ground to reproach my
formal cause as a non ens, for the want of that matter of the Covenant of
nature, (by eating of the Tree of life) which is not now in being: but the
unbyased Reader may see on the contrary side, that I have a true ground to
retort his term of a non ens upon his own head, because he affirms in his
first foundation proposition, and elsewhere, that Christ our surety did fulfill
the Covenant that was made with Adam, by doing that command in a way of works,
and by suffering the curse of that nullified Covenant: and thence it follows,
that his matter of a sinners justification is nothing else but a non ens.

But says Mr. Norton in page 189.

The Law of Moses being nothing else but an external pattern of the internal
Law of nature, printed in the heart of our first parents in their creation,
after the image of God, consisting in holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
The sum of the two Tables: It is called the Law of works, Romans 3. 27. because
it required personal obedience to life, Lev. 18. 5. The Law of Moses, Acts 13.
39, etc.



1. It is no small error to make the Law of Moses to be nothing else but an
external pattern of the internal Law of nature, seeing the Law of Moses was not
given to innocent but to fallen Adam: and 2. It was not given to fallen Adam in
that abstracted and separated sense from the Covenant of grace, as the internal
Law of nature was to innocent Adam; but in a conjunct sense with the Covenant
of grace, and as an inseparable part of it.

3. It appears by his confounding of things that differ, (1. by confounding of
the Law of nature, with the Covenant of nature, and 2. by confounding the
null^fied Covenant of nature, with the durable Covenant of grace, in the ten
Commandments,) That as long as he does thus confound these distinct Laws and
Covenants, he cannot possibly be a sound teacher of sundry fundamental points
in Divinity, especially he cannot be a sound teacher of the great point of
Christ's satisfaction, nor yet of that great point of a sinners justification.

4. It is another great error to make the Law of the Covenant of nature, made
with Adam, to promise a life in heaven, seeing that Covenant was no other but a
Covenant of nature, it promised no other life, but the confirmation of his
natural concreated l^fe of moral perfect^ons, after the image and likeness of
God, to be enjoyed for ever in this world only, in the sweet contents of an
earthly paradise; Mr. Walker says in his Doct. of the Sab. page 58. that man
in the estate of innocence could not have any thought or meditations of glory
in heaven, or studies to fit and sanct^fie himself for the fruition thereof
until Christ the only way to eternal rest and glory was promised; and of this
see more in Chap. 1. Sect. 4.

5. It is another great error to expound, Ephe. 4. 24. of Adams concreated Ephesians.
4. 24.
holiness and righteousness, in the which Adam was created after the image of
God, that was no other, but connatural holiness and righteousness, seeing it is
no other but Gods supernatural holiness and righteousness, wrought in the heart
by his regenerating Spirit. True holiness, says Mr. Walker, on the Sab. page
39. 40, 41. is a gift of supernatural grace, given only in Christ, and
proceeding from the holy Ghost, shed on man through Christ, and dwelling in
them as the immortal seed of God; And (says he) this holiness does not belong
to the natural image of God, wherein the first earthly Adam was created, but to
the spiritual and heavenly image of the second Adam Christ, who is a quickening
spirit, and the Lord from heaven, heavenly, whose image no man can bear, but in
the state of regeneration, as it appears, by 1 Cor. 15. 45, 49. and Ephesians. 4. 23,
24. but see him more at large in the place cited, and mark his concluding wish,
in page 41. If (says he) it would please God to open the hearts of our people
rightly to conceive this difference between the image of the first and second
Adam, and between the natural created uprightness of Adam, and the spiritual
uprightness, and infused holiness, wherein the second Adam was conceived and
framed by the holy Ghost; it would ravish their hearts and fill them with
admiration of the singular love of God to his elect in Christ, and of the
singular excellency of the grace of holiness, and of those high prerogatives
which the regenerate receive and enjoy through him, and which indeed do far
exceed all that belonged to man in the state of innocence.

6. It is another great error to affirm, that the two Tables is called the Law
of works, in Romans 3. 27. and that it required personal obedience Romans 3. 27.
to life; In this exposition of Romans 3. 27. he does again confound the Law of
nature, and the Covenant of nature together, in the Decalogue, which indeed had
no dependence on each other as I have formerly showed; 2. he does also confound
the life promised in the Covenant of nature with the life promised in the
Covenant of grace in the Decalogue; but I have showed that they differ as much
as a heavenly happiness, does differ from an earthly happiness. 3. The Law of
works, in Romans 3. 27. is meant only of the typical Law of works that was given
at mount Sinai, to be a teaching Schoolmaster unto Christ; And I have also
showed before at Reply 11. and 14. that the Covenant made with Adam, is no
where called the Law of works in all the Bible.

7. I have showed before at Reply 12. that the Levitical worship (under which
the whole economy of Moses is included) is called the Law of works, and that
it was ordained for their sanctified walking, and for the just^fication of
their bodies from their ceremonial sins; But the false Apostles (from the
example of their ancient carnal forefathers) made an addition thereto, out of
their own superstitious conceits; namely, that the said works of the Law were
ordained not only for the justification of their bodies from their ceremonial
sins, but also for the justificat^on of their souls from their moral sins, and
in that respect it was, that they did most vehemently urge the believing
Gentiles to observe the said works of the Law, as a necessary condition to be
joined to their faith in Christ, for the obtaining of their souls justification
from all kind of sin; but the Apostle Paul did constantly oppose this last use
of the works of the Law; and did as constantly affirm, that God required no
other condition to be performed on the sinners part, for the obtaining of his
moral justification, but faith only, in the meritorious death and sacrifice of
Christ, as the only procuring cause of Gods atonement, and forgiveness for
their formal justification; But secondly Mr. Norton does again repeat his said
Exposition, in page 177. The Law (says he) as it was written in the heart of
Adam (and the ten Commandments) is called the Law of works, in Romans 3. 27.
because it required personal and perfect obedience thereunto as the condition
of our justification, but it cannot be proved that ever God ordained this way
of justification, either in the time of Adams innocence, or since the fall. But
in my former Reply, I have sufficiently confuted this assertion, it being but
the same in substance with the former, save only that he makes the ten
Commandments to be the Law of the Covenant of nature which I have also
confuted, in Chap. 1. and elsewhere.

8. It is another great error to cite the Law of Moses, in Act. 13. 39. for the
Law of the Covenant of nature made with Adam, which he does falsely style the
Covenant of works for a sinners justification; But in case he had made the Law
of Moses to comprehend the Law of works at mount Sinai, for the Jews bodily
justification, and for a typical pattern, or for a teaching Schoolmaster unto
Christ, that we might be justified by faith; I should most gladly have
concurred with that sense, for I do freely grant, that the two Tables (as they
comprehend all the economy of Moses) is by the figure Synecdoche called the
Law of works, but not in any relation at all to Master Nortons sense of the
Covenant made with Adam, for the holy Ghost knew well enough that that
transient Covenant was utterly extinguished as soon as ever Adam had broken it
by his once eating of the forbidden fruit.

2. Master Calvin (and others) expound Act. 13. 39. of the ceremonial Act. 13.
38, 39.
Law chiefly, and to that sense does the context most clearly carry it; for in
verse. 38. the Apostle speaks thus; Through this man is preached to you the
forgiveness of sins, and this forgiveness, in verse. 39. is said to justify all
that believe, from all things (namely, from all those moral sins) from which
they could not be justified by the Law of Moses; implying that they might be
justified from some things by the Law of Moses, namely, from their ceremonial
sins by the typical works of Moses Law, but implying also, that they could not
be justified from their moral sins by the said works of Moses Law, as the false
Apostles taught they might; But says the Apostle, in verse. 30. By him all that
believe are justified from all those moral sins, from which ye could not be
justified, by the typical works of Moses Law: and thus he does assign their
justification, only to the condition of their believing in Christ who was the
only procuring cause of his Fathers forgiveness to believing sinners, for
their formal justification, as in verse. 38. In these verses the Apostle does
teach such are willing to learn the true nature of justification.

But I suppose it will be also expected, that I should show in what sense the
two Tables may be called the Law of works.

First, I will briefly answer in the words of Mr. Sh^pard, that the Apostle 2
Cor. 3. 6, 7. In his Thesis on the Sab. p. 77 The two tables do in some sense
belong to the typical Law of works.
speaks, in 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 11, 13. of a Law engraven in stone, which is now
abolished by Christ in the Gospel (not as it is a rule of life,) but says he
the meaning of this place is (as the former, in Gal. 3. 25.) that the Apostle
speaking of the moral Law does by a Synecdoche comprehend the ceremonial also,
hoth which the false teachers in those times urged* as necessary to salvation,
and justification, at least together with Christ against whom the Apostle does
here dispute; the moral Law therefore (says he) is abolished, first, as thus
accompanied with a yoke of ceremonies, this Reason does in part hit the nail;
for the second Commandment, and the fourth, does command the observation of all
the ceremonial Law; but secondly, I also add that the two Tables do in some
other respects also appertain to the typical Covenant, or Law of works, for God
ordained that certain sins against the moral Law, should defile the bodies of
the national Church ceremonially; and in that respect God did also ordain a
ceremonial cleansing of their bodies, from the ceremonial defilements of their,
moral sins, of which I have spoken more at large, in Chap. 6. Sect. 6. and
something also before at R^ply 13. ult.

But still Master Norton does misinterpert, the word Law, in page 191.

The particle by, says he, in Gal. 2. 21. notes the manner, not the matter;
obedience (says he) unto the Law, neither cease nor can cease to be the
matter of our justification.

[By the Law] are most palpably misinterpreted; for the argument which I drew
from this text, in my Dialogue, in page 108. was to Gal. 2. 21.
this sense, if righteousness come by the Law, that is to say, by Christ's moral
obedience imputed, Then Christ made his oblation in vain.

Mr. Norton does thus Answer, The particle [by] notes the manner, not the
matter. I Reply, 1: that it does not, nor cannot note Mr. Nortons kind of
matter, for there is no such matter in being for Christ to fulfill (as the first
Covenant made with Adam,) But in the second place I Reply, that these words by
the Law, does note the matter of that condition, which the Law required to be
performed by the national Church, for their bodily justification from their
ceremonial sins, for by the word Law here is meant the matter of the typical
works of the Law, which the Jews were commanded (at mount Sinai) to perform for
their bodily just^fication; and so Luther does expound these words* If
righteousness come by the Law; that is (says he) by the works In his Choice
Sermons on Joh. 6. p. 227.
of the Law.

The false Apostles taught the believing Gentiles, that it was of necessity for
them to observe the works of the Law, as well as to believe in Christ, for the
obtaining of their justification from moral sins, as well as from ceremonial
sins;

But the Apostle affirms the contrary, in verse. 20. namely, that the only
condition, that was required to be performed on the sinners part, for his moral
justification, was no other, but his faith in Christ, the only mediator or
procurer of Gods atonement and forgiveness.

2. The Dialogue argument is sound and good; and it is much approved by men of
sounder principles.

1. It is much approved, by Pareus, and 2. by Mr. Gataker in his Answer Pareus
de justitia Christi activae and passivae.
to Mr. Walkers Vindication, in page 13. 91, 107, 110, 136. and also in his
Answer to Gomarus, page 8. 19, 20, 37, 38, 39. and by Pareus again, in his
Epistle to Count Whitgeustenius, and by sundry other Orthodox writers which I
could easily cite if it were needful, as Mr. Lawson, and Mr. Rutherford already
cited, in Reply 15.

3. These words by the Law, do comprehend the whole Law; for neither Paul, nor
yet the false Apostles did exclude any part of the economy of Moses, out of
this word Law; The Covenant of grace at mount Sinai, was dispensed after such a
legal manner, that it taught them to observe an outward sanctification in the
whole course of their lives; and 2. In case of ceremonial sin, it taught them
to observe the works of the Law, for their bodily justification, from their
said ceremonial sins, and according to this last sense of the word Law, the
Apostle does argue, in Gal. 2. 21. If righteousness (or justification from
moral sins,) come by the works of the Law, then Christ died in vain; and
according to this last sense of the word Law, the false Apostles insisted most,
namely, on the Law of rites; but yet not excluding any other part of the Law:

4. The Apostle does argue to this very sense, in Gal. 3. 21. if there Gal. 3.
21.
had been a Law given, which could have given life, namely, justification to
life, surely, (or verily*) righteousness, (i.e. justification from all sin)
should have been by the Law, namely, by the works of the Law only, and by no
other means, namely, not by faith in Christ; for where any one single means is
ordained to attain* the end infallibly, there it is altogether needless and
useless to ordain any other means; The force of the Apostles Reason in verse.
21. lies thus; Is the Law then against the promises? God forbid, for if there
had been a Law given which could have given life ex opere operato by doing the
outward works of it; verily justification (to life from moral sins as well as
from ceremonial sins) should have been by the said works of the Law, and then
the Law should have been against the promises (of justification and salvation
by faith in Christ death only) for it is the proper office of Christ promised
to die, and to give that life that brings the soul to heaven; and then the Law
had been against the promises, and had taken its work out of Christ's hand; but
yet I have often showed that the Law, namely, that the typical works of the Law
were ordained only for the bodily justification of the national Church from
their ceremonial sins, and so consequently their bodily life was thereby
preserved which else would have been cut off, in case they went into the holy
temple in their unjustified condition, namely, in their ceremonial sins.

In this last sense, the Law is not opposite to the promise, but it is added to
the promise, as the type is added to the truth, as a teaching Schoolmaster unto
Christ, that so we might be just^fied from our moral sins by (performing the
condition of) faith in Christ, and not by performing the works of the Law.

5. The Apostle does also argee to this very sense, in Gal. 5. 4. Christ Gal.
5. 4.
is then become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you, are justified by the
Law, ye are fallen from grace; from hence it follows, that in case it were
possible for any fallen son of Adam, to keep the moral Law of nature as
perfectly as Adam did in the time of his innocence, yet it could not justify
him, from the guilt of Adams first sin in eating the forbidden fruit, for that
sin was no sin against the moral Law of nature, and therefore the perfection of
the moral Law of nature, wherein Adam was created did not keep him from sinning
against the transient positive Law of the Covenant of nature; which does
plainly prove that that transient positive Law, was no part of the moral Law of
his nature, for in case it had, then Adam could not by any temptation have been
persuaded to break it, because he was made after the image and likeness of God
in moral perfections, and 2. because the whole Law at mount Sinai, was given
for another end, namely, to be a Schoolmaster to Christ; this reason will hold
if the truth of the Scriptures will hold.

6. Luther denies the righteousness of the moral Law to be the matter Gal. 2.
21. Luther denies the moral obidience of Christ to be the matter of a sinners
justification he makes the passive obedience of Christ to be the only procuring
cause of a sinners justification.
of a sinners justification; for thus he does argue, If Christ suffered not in
vain, Gal. 2. 21. thence it follows of necessity, that righteousness comes
not by the Law; 2. says he, Paul speaks not of the ceremonial Law only, as
the Papists do continually dream, but of the moral Law also, or of the Law of
the ten Commandments, wherein is contained the most perfect Religion, and the
highest service of God.

3. Says he, in the close of that Section, without grace, and without Christ I
find no righteousness, either in my self, or in the Law, (i.e. in no part of
the Law, no not in the moral Law,)

4. Says he, in the next Section, we do constantly affirm with Paul, that
either Christ died in vain, Gal. 2. 21. or else the Law justifies not, for if
the Law could have justified us, then Christ had done unwisely, in that he gave
himself for our sins, that we might thereby be justified; we conclude therefore
(says he) that we are not justified by our own works; [nor yet by the Law;]
Iuther in these words and in many other places does affirm, that sinners are
justified by the passive obedience of Christ, not by his active moral
righteousness: he denies that to be the matter of a sinners justification.

5. Says he, in the next Section, how can I buy that for a farthing which cost
many Talents of gold; the Law (says he) and all the works, and righteousness
thereof, is but as a farthing, if you compare it unto Christ's (death) who by
his death has vanquished my death, and has [thereby] parchased righteousness
and everlasting life; should I then reject this incomparable price, and by the
Law and the works thereof, seek that righteousness which Christ freely, and of
mere love has given to me already; and which cost him so great a price that he
was constrained to give himself, even his own heart blood for me.

6. Says he, this righteousness, neither man's Law, nor Gods Law is able to
perform, mark I pray how he does still place the righteousness of sinners, not
in the righteousness of the moral Law, but wholly in the meritorious cause of
Christ's death.

7. Luther does by way of Prosopopeia, speak thus to the believing Gentiles, in
Gal. 2. 23. well, though thou be never so barren and forsaken, not having the
righteousness of the Law; yet notwithstanding Christ is thy righteousness; he
was made a curse for thee, to deliver thee from the curse of the Law; if thou
believe in him the Law is dead to thee; and look how much Christ (in his said
cursed death) is greater then the Law; so much have thou a more excellent
righteousness, then the righteousness of the Law; and says Luther, in Gal. 3.
19. page 155. when we reason as touching righteousness, life, and everlasting
salvation, the Law must be utterly removed out of our sight, as if it had never
been, or never should be; but as though it were nothing at all; for in the
matter of justification, no man can remove the Law far enough out of his sight;
or behold the only promise of God sufficiently, as he should do, and says he,
in verse. 27. as many ^are justified therefore, are justified not by the
observation of man's Law, (...) of Gods Law; but by Christ alone, who has
abolished all Laws; hi^ ^one does the Gospel set forth unto us, as a pacifier
of Gods wrath, by the ^^edding of his own blood, and says he, in verse. 18.
ult. hypocrites think (...) the office of the Law, is to justify; this is the
general opinion of man's (...) among the Sophisters through the whole world,
that righteousness is (...) through the works of the Law, because they
understand not the righ^^^^sness of faith, and see much more cited from Luther,
in Chap. 4. No. 6.

8. Says he, in Sect. 3. Paul speaks here, (in (...). ^. 27.) especially of
the abolishment of the moral Law, which is (...) be considered; for says he,
he speaks against the righteousness (...), that he might establish the
righteousness of faith; and then he co^cludes it thus; if only grace and faith
in Christ does justify, then is the whole Law abolished, without any
exception, and in page 223. he explaineth his meaning thus, we say, that the
moral Law of the ten Commandments has no power to accuse and terrify the
conscience, in which Jesus Christ does reign by his grace, he has abol shed
the power thereof.

9. Luther in that Commentary on the Galatians does never apply a believing
sinners justification to any moral righteousness; it seems that matter of a
sinners righteousness was not at all known to him; But still he makes the death
of Christ to be the procuring cause of Gods forgiveness, and faith in Christ to
be the condition that must be performed on the sinners part, for his
justification from sin; this I find to be Luthers constant judgment.

10. Luther says, in Gal. 4. 4. Sect. 11. whereas Christ in the Gospel gives
Commandments, and teaches the Law, or rather expounds it, in Mat. 5. 17, 18.
This pertains not to the Doctrine of justification, Mat. 5. 17, 18.
but of good works.

From this text of Matt. 5. 17, 18. Luther denies the Doctrine of justification
to lie in the active righteousness of the Law; But Mr. Norton on the contrary
does expound this text, and that in Gal. 4. 4. of Christ's fulfilling the moral
Law of nature, for our justification, in page 192. 197, 213, 240, 267. and
moreover (says Luther) it is not the proper office of Christ (for which he
came principally into the world) to teach the Law, but an accidental or by
office, like as it was to heal the weak, and to raise up the dead, etc. these
indeed are excellent and Divine works, but yet not the very proper and
principal works of Christ; and says he, a few lines after, To teach the Law,
and to work miracles are particular benefits of Christ, for the which he came
not principally into the world (but to suffer death for man's redemption.)

11. Says he, in verse. 27. fol. 175. and 275. Christ is no Law, no Lawgiver,
no work, but a Divine, and inestimable gift, whom God has given to us, that he
might be our justifier, our Savior and Redeemer; wherefore to be apparalled
with Christ, according to the Gospel, is not to be Luther says, that the
garment of righteousness according to the Gospel, is not to be apparalled with
the Law, or with works: But with remission of sins which for Christ his sake is
given to believing sinners, for their perfect righteousness.
apparalled with the Law, or with works but with an inestimable gift; That is
to say, with remission of sins, righteousness, peace, consolation, joy of the
spirit, salvation, life, and Christ himself.

12. It is also observed by Mr. Wotton that the imputation of righteousness
often mentioned by Luther in his Commentary on the Gal. is merely remission of
sins, and Gods accepting us thereby, as if we were righteous, etc. de Recons.
pec. part. 1. cap. 2. cap. 5. Luther does peremptorily deny justification to be
effected in a sinner, by the righteousness of the Law; and assirmeth it to
consist in Gods gracious forgiveness: which he does also call the imputation of
righteousness as many others do.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 225.

Abraham was made partakers of the righteousness of the moral Law, or of the
Law of works by faith without works, 1. because no man can attain eternal life,
without fulfilling the Law, either in himself, or in his surety; without the
righteousness of the Law there is no life, Lev. 18. 5. Deu. 27. 26. Eze. 20.
11. Gal. 3. 10.

Adam) is a mere non ens, because that covenant, and consequently the positive
Law of it was utterly extinguished as soon as ever Adam had but tasted of the
forbidden fruit, and received the threatened punishment of a twofold spiritual
death; and therefore it is no better then a mere fiction to affirm that Abraham
was made partakers of this nullified matter of righteousness by his faith; 2.
It is another fiction, to affirm that Christ was Abraham's surety, to do that
extinguished Law of works, and to suffer the Essential punishment of that
threatened double spiritual death, for the fulfilling of that nullified Law. 3.
It is another fiction, to affirm that without the righteousness of this
extinguished Law, there is no life. 4. This word life must be distinguished,
and not confounded as the same in both Covenants.

5. From thence it does also follow, that his former Scriptures which he has
cited, to prove his said fictions, are cited for no other end, but to take Gods
name so often in vain; for first, I have given the true sense of Lev. 18. 5. In
my former Printed Reply, and in this book also. 2. I have also expounded the
rest of his Scriptures in this Treatise of such a kind of doing as belongs only
to the Covenant of grace, by faith in Christ only, and not of that bodily
doing, by eating of the tree of life, that was required of Adam in the Covenant
of nature.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 225.

The matter of righteousness consists in conformity to the Law; and you may
(says he) as well say that a man may be learned without learning, or that be
may be a man without a reasonable soul, as say there is a created righteousness
without conformity to the Law.

Adams obedience to the Covenant of nature, but that his transient act only,
of once eating of the twofold tree of life, should have been the means of his
confirmation. 2. That it is a misleading error to call the Covenant of nature
the Law of works. 3. That it is another misleading error, to hold the Covenant
of nature to be still in being, and so consequently, it must of necessity be as
great an error to hold the righteousness of it to be still in being for a
sinners justification. 4. I say also, that as none can be a man without a
reasonable soul, so none can be perfectly righteous in nature and life, as Adam
was in his creation, without those concreated moral perfections (wherein Adam
was created) be restored, which never was, nor never shall be in this World,
because Gods definitive sentence of death, in Genesis 2. 17. cannot be reversed:
but in case it could be supposed, that the said sentence might be reversed, and
that those concreated moral perfections might be restored, yet those concreated
perfections of nature should not benefit any man, so far as to give them a
right to Heaven, it should but give them a perfect natural life in this World,
in the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise; and therefore Mr. Nortons created
righteousness, which he does contend for as the matter of a sinners
justification, is but a mere fiction, seeing God in the Covenant of grace and
reconciliation has ordained no other righteousness for the justification of
sinners, but a supernatural negative righteousness only, by Gods atonement and
forgiveness procured for believing sinners by the death of Christ; and this
atonement so procured is that righteousness, that the typical works of the Law
do continually teach us to look at as our Schoolmaster to Christ.

But says Mr. Norton in page 225.

The reason is, because the Scripture says, The righteousness of the Law, that
is (that righteousness) which the Law requires, is fulfilled in us that
believe, Romans 10. 4. And says he a few lines after, The righteousness of the
Law is fulfilled in us, because we by faith apprehend the obedience of Christ,
who fulfilled the Law for us.

Norton, all along to interpret the moral Law in the Decalogue, to be the
matter of Adams obedience to the first Covenant of nature.

I have abundantly showed with the concurrence of good Authors, that the moral
Law of nature was not the matter of the first Covenant of nature: and 2. That
that Covenant is not now in being: and from thence it follows, that the
righteousness of it is not in being.

2. That righteousness which the Law requires for the justification of
believing sinners, is Gods reconciled forgiveness only, as I have showed in
Chap. 15. Chap. 16. And

3. Says he, most vain is the shift of the Dialogue, endeavoring to avoid the
strength of this place, in Romans 10. 4. by interpreting it against text,
context, and Scripture [The righteousness of the Law] only of the righteousness
that was typified by the ceremonial Law; that indeed is no righteousness, but a
non ens, as having no essential matter.

To this I reply, by retorting his words more truly against himself: Most vain
is the shift of Mr. Norton, endeavoring to avoid the strength of this text, in
Romans 10. 4. by interpreting it against text, context, and Romans 10. 4.
Scripture, of the righteousness of that nullified Covenant that was made with
Adam: for indeed that is no righteousness, but a non ens, having now no
essential matter; seeing that Covenant has been utterly extinguished, ever
since Adam did but taste of the forbidden fruit; and nothing of it does now
remain, but the threatened punishment of a twofold Spiritual death to all the
natural posterity of Adam to the end of the world.

4. I have expounded the righteousness of the Law, in Romans 10. 4. of the whole
economy of Moses in my former printed Reply, in page 242, 243. though yet I do
make the Law of rites to be chiefly meant by the figure Synecdoche; and I
believe I have put the matter out of doubt, by proving that the Jews legal
justifications, by the blood of Bulls and Goats, etc. were ordained to typifie
the death and sacrifice of Christ, as the perfecting end of all Moses Law, for
the procuring of Gods atonement and forgiveness, for the formal justification
of all believers from all their moral sins, from the which they could not be
justified by the said typical works of Moses Law, Acts 13. 39. and to this
sense also I have expounded Dan. 9. 24.

5. It is yet further evident by Tit. 2. 14. that Christ gave himself for Tit.
2. 14.
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculiar people. In these words, Redemption from iniquity, and purifyi^g from
sin, is all one with Justifying us from sin; and this justification from sin
was procured or brought to pass by Christ's passive obedience in his death, and
not by his active moral obedience in the course of his life, by his passive
obedience in his death he procured Gods atonement and forgiveness, Romans 5. 10,
11. which atonement and forgiveness is the only formal cause of redemption from
all iniquity, and of purifying or justifying all believers from all their moral
sins: and in this sense only Christ is called, The end of the Law for
justification to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. and to this sense I did
first open this Scripture in my Dialogue.

6. Doctor All in his Poor man's Library, fol. 94. says, that Jacobus de
Valentia held, that the old Law was nothing else but a certain way, directing
and leading unto Christ, Tanquam infinem immedlatum, as to the very end of the
Law, (Romans 10. 4.) therefore, says he, the Law never asks the kingdom of
Heaven, but always desires (or asks after) Christ, which teaches the way to
the Kingdom of Heaven, For Christ is the door, John 10. the way and the truth,
John 14. 6.

7. Mr. Jeanes says, in the Fullness of Christ, page 9. that Christ was full of
truth, John 1. 14. because he made good the prefigurations of the ceremonial
Law; For in them there was an emptiness, because they were but shadows or
figures, Col. 2. 17. but in him they were fulfilled, perfected, and
accomplished; and thereupon (says he) he is termed, The end of the Law, in
Romans 10. 4.

This exposition given in my Book Mr. Norton calls a non ens; but I have showed
a little before, that he halts of his own sore.

8. Luther says in his Argument to Gal. fol. 6. The Law has its bounds unto
Christ, as Paul says afterward, The Law continues unto Christ, Romans 10. 4.
who being come, Moses cease with his Law, circumcision, sacrifices, sabbaths,
yea, and all the Prophets. Luther in these words does expound Romans 10. 4. of
Christ's being the end of the ceremonial Law, and also of the Prophets, in his
fulfilling of their predictions: yet he does not exclude, but does include the
whole Law of Moses, as a rule of sanctified walking in the Covenant of grace.

9. Mr. Gataker in his Animadversions on Gomarus, p. 52. does reject Mr.
Nortons interpretation of the word Law, in Romans 10. 4. he calls that exposition
of the moral Law, a forced interpretation.

Mr. Norto^ has as much erred also in his exposition of the word Law, in Gal.
4. 4.

He expounds it of the moral Law of nature, as it was given to Adam,

1. For a Covenant of works, and 2. For an eternal life in Heaven, in page 103,
192, 196, 200, 240.

Adam, was not made with him in relation to his obedience to the moral Law of
his nature, but in relation to his transient act of obedience, in eating but
once only of the Tree of the twofold life; and I have also showed, that that
Covenant has been utterly extinguished, ever since Adam received the threatened
punishment of a double Spiritual death.

2. The word Law in Gal. 4. 4. must be understood of the whole Law, and yet of
the La^ of rites chiefly by the figure Synecdoche, as I have also noted it in
my former printed Reply, p. 47. 120.

3. That the life promised in the Covenant of nature was not an eternal life in
Heaven.

4. Mr. Norton has as much erred in his exposition of the word Law, in sundry
other places in his Book, as in page 140, 149, 191, 199, 212, 225, etc. but I
have vindicated the true sense of all those places, in my exposition of Gal. 3.
10. where the Reader may be satisfied.

Conclusion.
1. It is no better then a mere fiction, to make the Law at mount Sinai, to be
the second edition of the Law of the Covenant of works made with Adam, seeing
that Covenant is no where called the Law of works in all the Bible.

2. It is another fiction, to affirm that the Covenant of nature did promise an
eternal life in Heaven, seeing none but bodies spiritualized must come thither,
1 Cor. 15. 44, etc.

3. It is another fiction, to make the Covenant of nature to be still in being
for the matter of a sinners justification, seeing that Covenant was utterly
extinguished, as soon as Adam had but tasted the forbidden fruit, and received
the threatened punishment of a double Spiritual death.

4. It is another fiction, to make Christ to be our surety to fulfill that
nullified Covenant, for the justification of believing sinners, seeing that Law
required no other work, but to eat of the Tree of the twofold life: and 2. By
suffering for them the essential punishment of that double Spiritual death, for
the redemption and justification of believing sinners. These and many such like
fictions held forth by Mr. Norton, are no better then the building of a strong
conceited fabric in the air, that falls to the ground of it self.

But says Mr. Norton in page 212.

Being sinless acquits from obnoxiousness unto Hell, but being just gives a
right to Heaven.

There is (says he) an observable difference between being unjust, not unjust,
not just just: the sinner not yet a believer is unjust, the unreasonable
creature is not unjust, Adam in his innocence was more then not unjust, yet was
not just: the believer is just.

Decalogue; and out of that confusion he has hatched his first corrupt
foundation proposition, in page 2. namely, that Christ was the surety of the
elect in the Covenant of nature made with Adam, 1. To do the command in a way
of works, (which was no other work, but to eat of the Tree of life once for
all) and 2. To suffer the essential punishment of that cursed Spiritual death
that was threatened in Genesis 2. 17. in a way of obedient satisfaction to the
justice of that Covenant: and from this foundation error he has hatched many
heterodox distinctions, 1. In the point of Christ's satisfaction; and 2. In the
point of a sinners justification, to the utter confounding of the truth. But I
hope I have taken a right course to clear the truth, by making a right
distinction between the said two Covenants, and by proving also that the
Covenant of nature made with Adam was utterly extinguished, as soon as Adam had
but tasted of the forbidden fruit: and from thence it follows, 1. That the
great point of Christ's satisfaction, and 2. That the great point of a sinners
justification have no dependence at all upon that nullified Covenant of nature.

But I will now reply to the particulars.

1. Our being made sinless by Gods gracious forgiveness, does acquit He that is
acquitted from all sin by Gods forgiveness, is thereby made perfectly righteous
to eternal life.
us not only from obnoxiousness to Hell, but it does also make a sinner just in
the sight of God, with that negative justice only, which God in the Covenant of
grace and reconciliation has ordained to justify them, and to bring them into
the favor of Gods adopted children, and so consequently to give them a right
to Heaven: but the concreated moral righteousness, wherein Adam was created,
had no promise of Heaven made over to it, because the state of man at first was
only natural, and it was before the Covenant of grace was ordained to bring
fallen Adam to Heaven.

2. Mr. Calvin says, in Instit. b. 3. c. 11. Sect. 22. that Zachary the father
of John Baptist sings thus: The knowledge of salvation consists in the
forgiveness of sins, etc. and thence it follows, that it does not consist in
perfect moral righteousness.

3. Mr. Woodbridge does prove from John 6. 53, 54. that remission of In his
Method, page 175, 176.
sins is that life, which the flesh and blood of Christ gives to the World.

4. Mr. Bradshaw on Justification, c. 13. Sect. 26, 27, 28. says, no sinner
can be freed from all sin in manner aforesaid, (that is to say, by Christ's
satisfaction in his death) but he must therein of necessity be esteemed As (a)
perfectly righteous. The (b) least defect of righteousness being a degree of
sin.

(a) Romans 4, 5, 6, 8. and 5. 19. Phil. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 21. (b) 1 John 5. 17.
and 1 John 3. 4. (But take notice, that this kind of righteousness is
supernatural, and not natural righteousness) It is therefore (says he) all one
To be free from all sin, and to be perfectly righteous: they therefore that
affirm that by Christ's sufferings we are freed from all sins, and that by his
active obedience we are made righteous, (as though these were two diverse
effects of those two diverse acts) seem to have no warrant from Scripture, and
are regugnant to reason, it being not possible to devise a medium between him
that is no sinner, and a righteous person, no more then between the air free
from all degrees of darkness, and fully light, or a man in no measure blind,
and perfectly seeing.

And says he a little after, he that is free from all sin, is thereby freed
from all degrees of eternal death; and whatsoever (says he) does effectually
and meritoriously free a man from all degrees of death, does thereby also
entitle him to everlasting life. Christ's sufferings therefore, and his
righteousness must either jointly do both, or one of them must be utterly
excluded from both; for that which effects the one, effects the other also
of necessity.

And says he, though it be said that Christ dyed for our sins, and rose Romans
4. 25.
again for our justification, yet it does not thence follow, that by his death
and sufferings only our sins are expiated; and that by his fulfilling the Law
we are moreover made righteous, and thereby entitled to everlasting life: for
by his resurrection in that place we cannot understand his fulfilling of the
Law, it being no part thereof: and his dying for sin was for our justification
also, so that the meaning of the Apostle seems to be this only, that Christ
dyed and rose again to this end, that thereby we might be justified; implying
also, that though Christ dyed for our sins, yet if he had not risen again we
should not have been justified.

This little Book of Mr. Bradshaws is to be highly prized: For

(1. It has been often Printed both in English and also in Latin.

2. I conceive that a judicious Reader will find more solid things, touching a
sinners justification in it, then in many great Volumes.

3. Mr. Gataker does give a large testimony, both of the Book, and also of the
Author, in his answer to Mr. Walkers Vindication, from page 71. to page 80. and
he does also record a large testimony that was given to it, by that great
Lawyer Sir Edward Cook, then Lord chief Justice; and the like testimony was
given to it by Lodowick Capellus, one of the Divinity Professors of the
University of Salmure in France, and also by some of both the Universities of
England.)

5. Mr. Gataker does answer the like assertion to Mr. Nortons, in his
Animadversions on the sixteenth Thesis of Gomarus, whose assertion is this, To
him that is perfectly just is required not only purgation from the guilt of
sin, but also from all the stain of it; as it is understood by Ebr. 10. 9, 10.
because the purged of whom it is spoken do yet retain the remaining stains of
original sin.

Mr. Gataker does thus answer in page 25. How is he not perfectly just? who
plainly in that same place (of Ebr. 10. 9, 10.) is of due right accounted as if
he had never sinned*

2. (Says he) purgation from stains, seeing it appertains to sanctification
properly so called, (here being ill confounded with the business of
justification) is not the work of justification, or indeed of it self a
necessary consequent.

3. (Says he) those stains after Christ's satisfaction, imputed by God, and
apprehended by faith, are no more imputed unto guilt, truly no more then if
they had not been in them at all. And (says he at No 5,) how shall not that
man obtain right unto eternal life, who is fully purged from sin? neither can
that man but live eternally, who can never die: this exception therefore (says
he) is most vain, it being such as abounds with almost as many faults as words.

6. Mr. Baxter does thus answer to Mr. Nortons said assertion, in his Aphor.
page 50. at No 11. It makes the like vain distinction (says he) between
delivering from death, and giving title to life, or freeing us from the
penalty, and giving us the reward: for when all sin of omission and commission
is absent, there is no unrighteousness; so when all penalty is taken away, both
that of pain, and that of los^, the party is restored to his former h^ppiness.
Indeed there is a greater superadded degree of life and glory procured by
Christ, more then we lost in Adam; but as that life is not opposed to the death
or penalty of the first Covenant, but to that of the second; so it is the
effect of Christ's passive as well as of his active righteousness.

7. Mr. John Goodwin does dispute against Mr. Nortons said assertion, in a
large Chapter, in Imputatio fides, par. 2. p. 3, etc. He shows that there is
no med^um between a perfect absolution, and a complete righteousness; his
dispute is large and worthy of a serious perusal.

8. Mr. Lawson (before cited) makes Gods forgiveness to give a sinner a right
to Heaven: and if it were needful I could cite sundry eminent writers, that do
make Gods forgiveness for the sake of Christ's obedience in his death and
sacrifice, to be a believers full and perfect justification to the attaining of
an eternal life in Heaven.

But says Mr. Nor^on in the place aforesaid.

Adam in his innocence was more then not unjust, yet was not just; the believer
is just.

Adam in his innocence was not just, with that kind of justice that a believer
is: for I have showed before at Reply 2. and 3. that the justice which
believers have by Christ, is not a natural, but a supernatural justice; and
that that kind of supernatural justice was not compatible to Adams perfect
natural estate. Mr. Norton does indeed affirm in that place, that Adam by his
creation had a principle in nature to believe in Christ his head and Redeemer,
in case God should have called for it; but I have showed there, that he had not
such a principle by nature: and his supposition, in case God should call for
it, seeing it is but a bare surmise of a thing that cannot be, it is no better
then a mere falacy in arguing.

2. Though Adams ability to keep the Law was given him of God, yet it does not
thence follow, that he had an ability to believe in Christ: for his ability to
keep the Law, says Mr. Woodbridge in his Method, page 342. was given him of
God, but not of grace, but Ut naturae debita, (as we maintain against the
Papists) as due to his nature, out of that common goodness which furnished
every creature in its kind, with those principles and abilities which were
necessary to them, for the attaining of the respective ends unto which they
were created.

2. The eight Divines immediately cited, and sundry others do affirm, that Adam
was made and remained perfectly just, as long as he enjoyed his concreated
moral perfections: and of this I shall speak more from Mr. Gataker in my next
Reply.

3. Mr. Burges says truly on Justific. page 8. that there can be no
justification properly, but where there is an accusation or a charge; and so
says Mr. Ains. in Psalm. 1. 5. to make just, or to justify (says he) is to
acquit or to absolve in judgment, Psalm. 82. 3. Matthew. 12. 41. and so said
Doctor All before cited in Sect. 5. Reply 15.

4. Mr. Bradshaw does also affirm, in Chap. 2. No 4. that if Adam had not
sinned, and if there had been no Devils to charge him with sin, or any ground
or color to suspect him of sin, he might in this case have been declared just
and innocent: but yet (says he) he could not then properly be said to be
justified. Mark his distinction between being just naturally, (as Adam was in
his innocence) and justified supernaturally, as sinners are that believe in
Christ. His distinction is of special importance, and it agrees with Doctor
All before cited.

5. Mr. Woodbridge (and generally all) says, that justification does make a
change in a persons state from unjust to just: and from thence it follows,
that as long as Adam stood without any change in his innocent state of nature,
he could not be said to be properly justified.

But yet notwithstanding I do also grant, that in case he had resisted the
Devils temptation, and had thereupon refused to eat of the forbidden fruit, he
should have been justified in that particular case, as no transgresser of the
Covenant of nature; yet he should not by that refusal have been confirmed in
his moral perfections, until he had first eaten of the Tree of the twofold
life; for nothing else was ordained to benefit his posterity, but his doing of
that Covenant-act of obedience: and had he but done that act of obedience, then
his posterity should not have stood in need of any personal justification, as
all believing sinners now do under the Covenant of grace.

But says Mr. Norton in page 244.

As the matter of Adams justification in innocence had not consisted of one act
of obedience, but of a whole course of obedience, the finishing of which was
requisite to have made him just; so it is with the obedience of Christ.

Adams condemnation to a double Spiritual death, did not consist in one act of
disobedience, (by his once eating of the forbidden fruit) as say, that the
matter of his confirmation (for he needed no justification, as long as he stood
unchanged Adam in his innocent esta^e needed a confirmation, but no
justification properly so called.
in his created perfections) did not consist in one act of obedience, by his
once eating of the Tree of the twofold life.

2. He says, that the matter of Adams justification stood in a whole course of
obedience, the finishing of which was requisite to have made him just. Behold
(I pray) the fallacy of his arguing; for he does not tell the punctual time
when his obedience (which he calls the matter of his justification) should be
finished, whether at the end of ten thousand, or at the end of a hundred
thousand years, for the perfecting of his justification: but on the contrary,
in case Adam had but once eaten of the Tree of the twofold life in the first
place, he should have been so confirmed in his concreated moral perfections,
that he should never have dyed, but have lived for ever in the sweet contents
of an earthly Paradise, and all his children, by the virtue of Gods supreme
positive Covenant should have been born in his natural perfections, and so
consequently they should never have been properly justified, (because they
should never have finished their course of moral obedience) unless God had set
a limited time when the course of their obedience should have been finished,
which had been to make his image in Adam changeable before he fell.

Gomarus agrees with Mr. Nortons said assertion.

For thus he says, in Thesis 17. Moreover, neither does the absence of all sin
suffer that any one should (thereby) be endued with perfect justice, who has
right to life, but thereto is also required the perfect obedience of the Law;
that is, that all the Commandments be altogether, and at all times kept; by
which reason Adam before the fall, albeit he were not unjust and a sinner, yet
was he not perfectly just with such a justice as was required to the right of
life, because the duration of his begun justice succeeded not unto the end.

Mr. Gataker does thus answer: Scarce a more vain thought then the Answer.
other (in These. 16.) could even be devised: For.

1. As if the absence of sin, and the keeping of the Law, which are utterly
indivisive, were two distinct things severed from each other, or two members of
justice, unto the which (justice) it should stand as whole, whereas in very
deed these two are coincident: for all kind of absence of sin must necessarily
include in it self the keeping of the Law; and the absolute keeping of the Law
must necessarily include in it self the absence of all sin.

2. Says he, whose denies that Adam was perfectly just, with such a justice as
was required unto the right of life, because the duration of his justice
succeeded not unto the end, the same must deny Christ to have been perfectly
just immediately from his birth, or from his begun public ministry, because
the duration of his justice had not yet succeeded unto the end, or that Adam
also now placed in Heaven is perfectly just, because the duration of his
justice is not yet also expired. Adam was from the very beginning perfectly
just, because he was made of God in perfect justice, he also remained perfectly
just, because endowed with perfect justice, so long as he stood in that estate
wherein he was made: and so long as he stood in that estate, he had both right
unto life, and rejoiced even in the possession of the same. His fall cut off
the right unto life, not by condemning his former justice of imperfection,
which whilst he retained, he had both right unto life, and the fruit of that
right: but neither had he, by cutting off the continuation of it, (which being
continued had not been more perfect, but more prolonged) gotten a new right
unto life, but had continued that before conferred.

3. Says he, the opposition and comparison is not made unto the same thing; to
wit, the temporary absence of sin is compared with perpetual justice which is
perfect, when as even the perpetual absence of sin ought to have been compared
with justice alike continued: for who can bear one thus arguing? expurgation of
sin brings not in justice, because absence of sin for a time brings not in
perpetual justice. Yea the expurgation of all sin in general does not bring in
perfect justice, (for so ought it to be said, unless we would deny some sin to
be purged away by the blood of Christ, against the Apostle, 1 John 1. 7.)
because doubtless the temporary absence of sin does not necessarily bring in
perfect justice.

4. Says he, from the Authors very grounds here proposed (it follows that)
Adam, if he had never sinned, had appeared perfectly just, whereas nothing
hindered whereby he should appear less such, but that he sometimes sinned: and
therefore all the faithful, seeing all their faults which they have committed
from birth until death, are purged away by the blood of Christ, what hinders
why in the sight of God they be ere a whit less holden for perfectly just.

And then he concludes thus,

Those things are not only Sophisms, but mere prodigious Phantasms.

5. Touching the duration of time wherein Adam is said to obey for the
justification of his posterity.

Mr. Gataker does thus Answer, to his seventh Thesis, That which is said of
Adam, is most false and foolish; for did Adam ever so keep the Law instead of
his posterity, as that they, though they had never kept it, should yet have
lived, for the merit of their fathers keeping it; imputed unto them? whence
came that Divinity to us? he that pleads Gods justification, ought to show
where that may be found; the Scripture surely holds not forth any thing of that
kind; moreover he ought to have given, a determin^^ space of that time, wherein
he ought to stand and obey for others. But (says he) these are phantasms of
infernal dreams.

I have thus far cited Mr. Gatakers Answers.

But I do not in all things assent to him.

1. Because I have showed that the Covenant of nature was not made with Adam,
on condition of his perfect moral obedience, but on condition of h^s transient
act of positive obedience in eating first of the tree of the twofold life.

2. Because that promise of life, was not a promise of a life of glory in
heaven, but only of a perfect natural life in the sweet contents of an earthly
paradise.

3. Because his perfect moral obedience cannot properly be called his
just^fication, there is an exceeding wide difference between Adams natural
righteousness, and the justification of believing sinners, as I have showed, in
R^ply, 17. and shall do more at large in my several Chapters touching
forgiveness of sin; I con^lude therefore, that in case Adam had but first eaten
of the tree of the twofold life; he and his posterity had been confirmed
thereby in their concreated natural perfections, to all eternity, and that
natural perfection should have been their eternal righteousness, but not their
eternal justification, because there can be no justification properly, but
where there is an accusation of sin going before; as I showed, in Reply 23.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 254.

Upon supposition of Adams continuance in obedience, all the acts of his
obedience, even to the finishing of perfect righteousness, had been imputed to
his seed according to the nature of the Covenant of works, unto their attaining
of justification by the Law.

Adams obedience to the moral Law of nature should have been imputed to all his
seed for their justification.

2. The Reader may also please to take notice, that he does contradict this way
of justification; for he does affirm, in page 245. That it is not the formal
doing of the command, but the meritorious efficacy of Christ's obedience, that
is imputed to believers for their justification.

3. This way of justification by the meritorious efficacy of Christ's obedience,
I did affirm in my Dialogue, in page 140. to be the only way: But Mr. Norton
(being blinded with error and prejudice) does fall into an extreme passion
against it, and calls it heresy, because I do not agree with him, to make
Christ our surety to the first Covenant made with Adam, to do the command in a
way of works, etc.

4. The Reader may also take notice, that in his denial of the acts of Christ's
moral obedience, to be imputed to the justification of believing sinners, in
page 245. he does contradict a former sort of Divines, that frequently have
asserted the very acts of Christ's moral obedience, to be imputed to believers,
for their justification, against whom M^. Wotton, Mr. Goodwin, and others have
largely disputed in several printed books.

5. Take notice that in his two last assertions he does affirm. 1. That Adams
justification did not consist in one act of obedience, but in a whole course of
obedience. 2. That all the acts of his obedience even to the finishing of
perfect righteousness had been imputed to his seed for their justification; and
from thence it does necessarily follow, that in case Adam had continued in his
moral obedience a hundred thousand years, yet he might have fail^d at last; and
then neither himself nor his poster^ty should have been justified by the works
of the Law; and 3. It does from thence also follow that that part of his
children, which he begat in that hundred thousand years space, should have
been begotten in his own created likeness, after the image of God; and the rest
that were begotten after that time should have been begotten after the image of
Satan.

I conclude therefore that his said assertions, are no better then infernal
dreams.

6. Mr. Norton does often cite Dr. Willet, as if he were wholly of his
judgment in the point of Christ's legal obedience; for Mr. Nor^o^ does make all
Christ's obedience to be legal; both in his incarnation and death; But Dr.
Willet does differ much from him, for that he says, in Dan. 9. 24. page 291.
The justice of Christ is meritorious of eternal life for us, because by it he
overcame death, and subdued the devil, none of all which Adams righteousness
could do; and says he a few lines before, Doctor Willet denies the ob^dience
of Christ in his sufferings, in his death, in his conception, in his
incarnation, and in his miracles, to be any part of moral obedience, and
affirms it to be but positive obedience only.
his descention, conception, incarnation and miracles, are not imputed to us,
because they were no part of fulfilling the Law, that is to say, they were not
performed in obedience to any part of the moral Law of nature, quite contrary
to Mr. Norton, for he makes all Christ's obedience to be done in a perfect
conformity to the moral Law of nature.

2. From the said assertion of Dr. Willets, it follows that the moral
righteousness of Christ as well as of Adam, was not sufficient to conquer
Satan, and to break his head-plot, without the addition of his positive
obedience, for in case Adam had performed positive obedience by eating first of
the tree of the twofold life, he had conquered Satan's temptation, so Christ by
his performance of positive obedience to the peculiar Law of Mediatorship in
his combat of sufferings; conquered Satan's head-plot for man's Redemption, for
these positive Laws were derived from the decrees of Gods counsel (which he
first declared, in Genesis 3. 15.) and not from the revealed moral Law of nature.

3. Thence also it follows that seeing Adams moral righteousness was not
sufficient to secure him from being beguiled in his obedience to Gods positive
law and covenant, that Christ's moral obedience was not in like sort sufficient
to conquer the Devils head-plot unless his obedience to Gods positive Law and
Covenant for man's Redemption were added thereunto; and 4. God did in special
manner qualify the humane nature of Christ, for the execution of his office of
Mediatorship, with more grace then he did give to Adam; for first his humane
nature was not only conceived by the holy Ghost. But 2. when he entered into
his public office of Mediatorship at his baptism, God added another
qualification to him, by anointing him with the fullness of the holy Ghost, even
with the fullness of all supernatural graces which were suitable, for the
ineffable performance of his said positive obedience, both in his combat of
sufferings, and in his death and sacrifice for man's Redemption; But I have
spoken more at large of his anointing, on the word anoint, in Dan. 9. 24. to
which I refer the Reader.

Conclusion,
1. From the premises it follows, that the Law of the Covenant of nature was no
moral Law, it was no other, but a transient positive Law only, about the act
of once eating.

2. Seeing the Covenant of nature was totally extinguished in the first moment
that Adam tasted of the forbidden fruit; it is a mere fiction to affirm that
Christ was the surety of the elect to fulfill that extinguished Covenant, by
doing the Command in a way of works, etc. and therefore Mr. Norton labors in
vain to build the great point of Christ's satisfaction, and the great point of a
sinners justification on this nullified Covenant.

CHAPTER VI.
Giving some Directions that tend to the Right understanding of the word Law in
the Apostles Disputation with the False Apostles.

1. OBserve this: That the word Law at mount Sinai, does usually import The
word Law is most commonly to be taken in a large sense for all the economy of
Moses, but yet sometimes for a part of it by the figure Synecdoche. Romans 7. 1,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
the whole economy of Moses, as it was given for a Covenant of grace, whereof
the Ten Commandments is the Epitome: though sometimes the word Law is put only
for the Law of rites by the figure Synecdoche, or for any other part thereof,
and from thence it comes to pass that the word Law is interchangeably used.
Sometimes for the Law of the Ten Commandments, and sometimes for the Law of
rites: and these senses are often interchangeably used even in the same
Chapter, where the Apostle disputes with the false Apostles. As for example:
The word Law in Romans 7. 1. does comprehend the whole economy of Moses. 2. Yet
in v. 4. it referres to the Law of rites: for says the Apostle, ye are become
dead to the Law (namely the Typical rites of the Law) by the body of Christ:
for when the body is come in place the shadow cease, Col. 2. 17. The service
of the Law is needful for the Church (says Ains. in Genesis 16. 16.) until
Christ be come and formed in us, and we by him do bring forth fruit unto God,
Romans 7. 4. and says he in Cant. 1. 2. Before Christ came in our humanity, the
Church (according to the oeconomicall dispensatation of God) was a child in her
nonage, under Tutors and Governors until the time appointed of the Father,
Gal. 4. 1, 2. kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith which which should
afterward be Revealed, which Law was a Schoolmaster unto Christ, Gal. 23. 24.
in this estate she continued till Faith came, and then she being dead to the
Law by the body of Christ was to be married to another, even to him who is
raised from the dead, that she might bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7. 1, 4.
in these two cited places Mr. Ainsworth (and others) does make the 4th verse. to
speak of the Law of Typical rites. 3. The word Law in verse. 5. does most
especially refer unto the Ten Commandments, the motions of sin which were by
the Law, namely which were made known to be sin, by the spiritual sense and
meaning of the ten Commandments. 4. The Apostle does again speak in verse. 6.
of the Law of rites especially. And 5th, then he does again relate to the Law
of the Ten Commandments in verse. 7, 8. Saying, I had not known sin but by the
Law, for I had not known lust, except the Law had said thou shall not covet. 6.
Then he does also refer to the Spiritual sense and meaning of the Ten
Commandments in verse. 9, etc. This interchangeable use of the word Law, by the
figure Synecdoche is often used: and seeing it is a controversy among Writers,
in what sense to take the word Law in many places, this observation may help
to clear their doubt.

2. The word Law in the Apostles inference in Romans 8. 2. is by some Writers
referred to the Ten Commandments, because the Apostle did relate to the Ten
Commandments in Chap 7. 5, 7, 8, 9. but others do refer it to the Law of
rites, in relation to their typified sense from chapter 7. 6. and this last sense I
believe is most agreeable to the Apostles meaning, as I shall explain it when I
have occasion to open Romans 8. 2, 3, 4.

3. This interchangeable use of the word Law, is very frequent also in other
places; as in Gal. 3. 17. there the word Law does comprehend the Gal. 3. 17,
19, 21, 24.
whole economy of Moses (at Mount Sinai) The Law was four hundred and thirty
years after the Promise (made to Abraham in Genesis 12. 3.) thence the Apostle
does propound this interrogation in verse. 19. wherefore then serves the Law?
It was added (says he) to the Promise, namely as that Type is added to the
truth for the explanation of it, and to this sense the Apostle does expound it
in verse. 21. Is the Law against the Promises? God forbid: and from thence he
does conclude his interpretation in verse. 24. Saying, the Law (at Mount Sinai
as it comprehends the whole economy of Moses) was given for a Teaching
Schoolmaster unto Christ, and then he calls this Schoolmaster of the Law
Tutors, and Governors, in Gal. 4. 2. and according to this sense of the word
Law, I have showed in the former chapter at Reply 9. at n. 7. that the whole
economy of Moses is called both a Covenant and a Testiment as well in the
Typical as in the Typified sense of it.

4. We are not to doubt says Mr. Calvin (in Heb. 8. 8.) but that the Prophet
in Jer. 31. does comprehend the whole Ministry of Moses, when he says, I have
made a Covenant with you: and it is always the usual custom of the Apostles
(says he) when they contend about ceremonies, to dispute generally of the
whole Law. This observation of his touching the true sense and meaning of the
word Law, in the Apostles disputations with the false Apostles, is worthy to be
written in letters of gold for the better marking of it.

5. Though the word Law at Mount Sinai is to be taken most usually for all the
Ministry of Moses, yet it is also put by the figure Synecdoche for the Law of
rites, as it is well observed also by Mr. Calvin. The false Apostles held, that
the works of the Law did not only justify the body from ceremonial sins, but
the conscence also from moral sins, and therefore that the believing Gentiles
must of necessity observe the said riets, together The word Law is often put by
the figure Synecdoche, for the Typical rites, namely for the works of the Law.
with their Faith in Christ, as they hoped to be saved, Act. 15. But the
Apostle Paul does most earnestly dispute against this latter tenent, and does
all along call those Typical works [The Law] by the figure Synecdoche, and so
do the other Apostles also. So Luke 2. 22, 27. Joh. 1. 17. Joh. 7. 19.
(compared with Ex. 24. 3.) Joh. 7. 23. Act. 6. 13. Act. 7. 53. Act. 13. 39.
Act. 15. 5, 24. Act. 18. 13, 15. Act. 21. 20, 24, 28. Act. 22. 3, 12. Act. 23.
29. Act. 24. 6, 14. Act. 25. 8. Act. 28. 3. Romans 2. 13, 17, 18, 20, 23, 25, 26.
Romans 3. 19, 20, 21, 27, 28, 31. Romans 4. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Romans 5. 13, 20.
Romans 6. 14, 15. Romans 7. 1, 4, 6. Romans 8 3, 4. Romans 9. 4. 31, 32. Romans 10. 4, 5.
1 Cor. 9. 20, 21. Gal. 2. 16, 19, 21. Gal. 3. 2. ^, 10, 11, 12, 17, 18, 19, 21,
23, 29. Gal. 4. 4, 5, 21. Gal. 5. 3, 4. Gal. 6. 13. Ephesians. 2. 15. Phi. 3. 4, 6,
9. Heb. 7. 5, 11, 12, 16, 19, 28. Heb. 8. 4. Heb. 9. 19, 22. Heb. 10. 1, 8. In
all these places the word Law, at large is put by the figure Synecdoche, for
the Typical rites of the Law; and sometimes it is put for the Spiritual
signification of those Typical works of the Law, namely, either for sanctified
walking, or for true justification.

6. They that observe not, says Mr. Baxter (in his Confession p. 107.) That it
is not the Law made with Adam, but Moses Law, which Paul most frequently
mentions and calls the Law of works, will hardly understand the meaning of
Paul's Epistles.

7. As the word Law, so sometimes the word [Works] is named alone instead of
the word Law; because those Typical works of the Law were ordained to be as
Tutors and Governors to the Jews in their nonage, and to be as a Schoolmaster
unto Christ, being ordained to be the Typical part of the Covenant of Grace,
as in Romans 4. 2, 5, 6. Rom, 9. 11. Romans 11. 6. Ephesians. 2. 9. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 3.
5, etc.

8. Observe this for a sound truth, That the word Law is never used for a
Covenant of works (made with Adam) as it is also observed by Mr. Baxter at n. 5.

9. The word Law, is very seldom used (if ever) for the moral Law of nature,
in the which Adam was created (namely not in that abstracted sense from the
Covenant of Grace as it was given to Adam) though some defaced stamps of it
does yet remain in the conscences of Heathens, Romans 2. 14, 15.

Conclusion.
The Reader that would know when the word Law is to be taken at large for the
whole economy of Moses, or when it is to be taken by the figure Synecdoche,
either for the ten Commandments, or for the Law of rites, must be careful to
observe the circumstances of each place where it is used, and that will direct
him to the right sense of it.

Sect. 2.
Showing, That the Typical works of the Law had never been given for a
Covenant of works; but for the sake of the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation only.

1. COnsider, That the bodily works of the Law are reputed vile The Typical
works of the Law, were not ordained for their own sakes good, but to be as a
Teaching Schoolmaster unto the Covenant of Grace.
and abominable in Gods sight, until Faith in Christ be joined thereto, Isa.
1. etc. And from thence it follows, that they had never been given for the
bobies sake; namely not barely for the sanctification, and justification of the
body from ceremonial sins, if it had not been to make them a Teaching
Schoolmaster unto Christ, that they might be justified by Faith only, Gal. 3.
24. and it is in that respect that the said works of the Law are called Tutors
and Governors, Gal. 4. 2. and shadows of good things to come (by Christ) Col
2. 17. Heb. 8. 5. Heb. 9. 9, 23. Heb. 10. 1. And it is in this sense only that
Christ is called the end of the Law for justification to every one that
believes, Romans 10. 4. The Law (namely the Law of Typical works) made nothing
perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope (did) Heb. 7. 19. These Typical
works of the Law were ordained to be for a prospect unto Christ: but Christ
being come they are now to be esteemed only for a respect unto Christ. Peter
Martyr says, that the ceremonies and rights of the Jews, were not instituted
of God, of set purpose and council, namely they were not instituted for their
own sakes good, but for the sake of Christ, they were added to the promise as
the Type is to the truth.

2. This is also the more evident, because God asked the Jews in disdein (when
they grew superstitious in the outward observation of the commanded bodily
works of the Law) who required these things at your hands, Isa. 1. 12.
Affirming most strongly thereby, that when he made a Covenant with them at
Mount Sinai, he did not take them for his people on that The National Church
Covenanted to do the whole Law, not only with their bodies, but with their
inward man, by Faith in Christ, according to the true intent of the Covenant of
Grace. Ex. 19. 8. Deuteronomy. 5. 27, 28, 33.
condition, to perform no more but bodily works of the Law; but says he, I
Covenanted with you, to take you for my peculiar people, upon this condition,
that you should observe and do my Law; namely in the Spiritual sense of it,
with all your heart and soul, that is to say, inwardly by faith in Christ: and
you did all with one mouth promise and covenant, all that Jehovah has spoken
we will do, Exo. 19. 8. namely we will do it not only in the outward man, but
also in the inward man, by faith in Christ, in our heart and soul.

3. After this you did again confirm the said Covenant, when you said unto
Moses in Deuteronomy. 5. 27. Do thou speak unto us, and all that Jehovah our God
shall say unto thee we will hear and do it. Namely we will do it according to
the true intent of the Law, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation by Faith in Christ; for that is the only true condition of the
intrinsecall part of the Covenant of grace, though the outward doing of the
Typical works of it is also required, to the attaining of bodily
justification, as a Schoolmaster to true justification by Christ.

4. God did so much approve of this their Promise and Covenant, that he said in
verse. 28. I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have
spoken unto thee: they have well said, all that they have spoken. This
approbation of their Promise does imply, that they promised not only to do the
outward works of the Law, for their bodily justification from ceremonial sins,
but also to do it by Faith in Christ, for the justification of their souls from
all their moral sins: doubtless they promised to do the whole Law, as well in
their inward man, as in their outward man, namely to do it by Faith in Christ,
the true end of the whole Law, or else God would not have approved of their
promise as he did; and this is the more evident, because upon the condition of
their performance of their promise, Christ Jesus was pleased to annex a promise
of eternal life in Heaven in verse. 33. And this promise is often renewed to
all their Godly posterity, as in Prove. 4. 4. Prove. 7. 2. Prove. 19. 10. Eccles.
12. 13. Dan. 9. 4.

5. The Church did again (after this) renew the said Covenant in the plains of
Moab, Deuteronomy. 29. 13, etc. And it seems they knew well enough that they might
keep all Gods Commandments in case they did but take a right course to get
Faith in Christ. And so Ahijah the Prophet told Jerahoam, that he might have
Faith in Christ, in case he did take a right course to get it, saying in 1 Kin.
11. 38. If thou will hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in my
ways, and do that is right in my sight, to keep my statutes and my
Commandments as David my servant did, that I will be with thee, etc. In these
words Ahijah said that Jerohoam might, and that David did keep all Gods
statutes and Commanements, compared with 1 King. 3. 14. and 1 King. 14. 8. 1
King. 15. 5. And David declared, that it was Gods Promise to his Son Solomon,
to establish his Kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do my Commandments,
and my Judgments, 1 Chr. 28. 7. and in ^h. 29. 19. David does thus pray unto
God; Give unto Solomon my Son a perfect heart to keep thy Commandments, thy
Testimonies, and thy Statutes, and to do all. And so Asa commanded Judah to
seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law, and the Commandment, 2
Chr 14. 4. So Hezekiah clave to the Lord and departed not from following after
him, but kept his Commandments which the Lord commanded Moses, 2 King. 18. 6.
2 Chr. 31. 21. And so Jasiah stood by a Pillar and made a Covenant before the
Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments, and his
Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all their heart and soul, to perform the
words of this Covenant: and all the people stood to the Covenant, 2 King. 23.
3. 2 Chr. 34. 31. But without constant hope in God, namely without Faith in
Christ none can keep Gods Commandments Psalm. 78. 7. Psalm. 112. 1. Psalm. 119.
35, 47, 47, 66, 127, 143, 166. and therefore in case it could be supposed, that
any man could be as perfect in nature as Adam was in his inocency, yet he could
not keep the Law of the Covenant of Grace, by his natural principles, as it
was given at Mount Sinai: none else can keep it truly but such as have Faith
in Christ.

From these and many such like Scriptures cited in the former Chapter. it
follows, the Lord Christ would never have given the Typical works of the Law
to be performed for bodily justification in an abstracted sense from the
Covenant of Grace, had it not been for the sake of the Covenant of Grace, that
they might be for a Teaching Schoolmaster unto Christ, that so they might be
justified by Faith in him.

Sect. 3.
Showing, That the legal promises made to the Typical works of the Law, were
ordained to be as a Teaching Schoolmaster to the Promise of Grace in Christ,
Gal. 3. 22.

GOd did first Covenant, that his National Church, should be his peculiar
people, upon condition that they likewise did Covenant to take him for their
God; and to observe and do the whole Law, as it was given for a Covenant of
Grace and Reconciliation; namely to do it in their heart by Faith in Christ,
as well as in their bodies by doing the Typical works of the Law, but without
Faith in Christ they could not do it in their hearts, therefore they Covenanted
to do the whole Law by Faith in Christ, as it was given for a Covenant of
Grace, Lev. 11. 43, 44, 45. Lev. 20. 24, 25, 26. Deuteronomy. 14. 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 26. 16,
17, 18, 19.

2. Because the Typical works of the Law were ordained to be as a Schoolmaster
unto Christ, thence it came to pass, that Jesus Christ made many legal
Promises of bodily justification to the Jews, upon condition of their exact
performance of the Typical works of the Law, and therefore Legal promises
made for the bodies justification by the Typical works of the Law, were
Typical Promises of the souls justification from moral sins, by the
procuring of Christ's blood.
in Lev. 12. 7. there is a Promise made to the woman after childbirth, for the
purifying, or for the justifying of her body from the ceremonial sin of her
uncleanness for her bodily doing of the Typical works of the Law. 1. By the
washing of her body, and then by her offerings; the Priest shall make an
atonment for her, and then the promise annexed is, she shall be clean.

3. The like Promises of bodily justification did God make to the bodily works
of the Law for the cleansing of the lepers, in Lev. 14. 9, 18, 19, 20, 49, 53.

4. The like legal Promises are made to the bodily works of the Law for the
justification of such as were defiled by the dead, Numb. 19. 12, 19.

5. The like legal promises are made to the bodily works of the Law, for the
justification of the bodies of such as were defiled by issues in their flesh,
Lev. 15. 13, 15, 28, 38. Numb. 15. 22. with verse 25, 26, 28.

6. The like legal Promises are made to the bodily works of the Law for the
justification of their bodies from several sorts of ceremonial sins, in Lev.
4. 20, 26, 31, 35. Lev. 5. 2, 3. compared with verse. 6. 10, 13, 16, 17, 18.
Lev. 6. 7. Number. 15. 26, 27, 28. Lev. 13. 18. Lev. 14. 9, 20. Lev. 15. 28, 29,
30. Number. 22. 31. 1 Samuel 21. 5. Lev. 19. 2, 22. with verse. 23, 24. Numb. 6. 5.
Deuteronomy. 23. 14 Deuteronomy. 26. 16, with verse. 19.

These and such like legal Promises were made to the whole National Church
(but not to other nations) for their bodily justifications from their
ceremonial sins, by their bodily doing of the outward works of the Law, and
none of them might dare to appear before Gods holy presence in his holy
Temple, upon pain of cutting off, or of death, by the hand of God, until they
were first justified from their said ceremonial sins, by the said bodily works
of the Law: and the order and method of working out their bodily justification,
was ordained to be for a Typical pattern of the manner and method of true
justification, to the soul from its moral sins: but I have spoken more
touching these legal Promises in chapter 5. at Reply 12.

Sect. 4.
Showing, That the legal threatenings of cutting off, and of death, was for
presuming to come into the holy Temple, before their bodies were legally
justified by the Typical works of the Law.

1. THe legal threatenings are set down in Lev. 15. 31. Lev. 17. 10, 16. Lev.
22. 8, 9, 10. compared with verse. 16. Number. 4. 15. Number. 1^. 13, 20. and see more
before in chap. 5. Reply 12. and in Ainsworth in Lev. 15. 2.

These legell threatenings, and sundry the like, were also Typical to the
eternal death of the Soul in hell, to all such as did not perform the
condition of the Covenant of Grace by Faith in Christ, as it is also ^hewed by
Mr. Ainsworth on the word cut off, in Number. 9. 13. Genesis 17, 14. Number. 15. 31.

But though some might but cut off with temporal judgments for their
presuming to approach into Gods holy Temple before they were legally justified
by the outward works of the Law; as it was done in the case of Elies Sons, 1 Samuel 3. 14. yet the Typified threatenings of an eternal death in hell, is never
executed on any sinner that does Repent and believe 1 Samuel 3. 14. Genesis 17. 14.
in Christ, as it is also well observed by our larger Annotations on 1 Samuel 2.
25, 31.

2. There is a severe threatening of cutting off, denounced against the
unwitting infant in case it was not circumcised on the eight day, Genesis 17. 14.
The Elected infant that dies before it has gotten Faith by hearing, has it
wrought by the holy spirit, as the condition of its justification.
This threatening according to humane reason, should rather have been denounced
against the negligent parent, than against the unwitting infant. But I have
often warned that such like supreme arbitrary Laws as this is, are not derived
from Gods revealed moral Laws, but from the good pleasure of Gods secret will
(such as the choosing of Jacob, and the refusing of Esau was) as I have showed
more at large in chap. 1. and in chap. 4.

3. A woman in childbed after the first seven days of a male, and after the
first fourteen days of a female, was accounted clean by Gods positive Law from
her monthly customs, in case she were but washed, A Godly woman in childbed
was morally justified by her Faith in Christ, and yet she was unjustified
legally until she had done the bodily works of the Law, for her purifying.
and thereby she was made lawful for her husbands society, and also for the
Synagogues assembly. But yet by another part of Gods positive Law, she was
unjustified still in relation to her bodily appearing in the holy Temple;
namely for three and thirty days more for a male, and for sixty six days more
for a female; yea though she were truly Godly, and so consequently truly
justified from her moral sins, yet she was still unjustified legally, in
relation to her bodily appearing in Gods holy Temple, until she was justified
the second time legally, by the bobily works of the Law, from the ceremonial
sin of her childbed, which lasted forty days of a male, and eighty days of a
female, see Levit. 12. 4, 6.

4. The only reason why such as were guilty of ceremonial sins, might not come
into Gods presence in his holy Temple, until their bodies were first justified
from their ceremonial sins by the works of the Law, was because the
Tabernacle and Temple, were Types of the humane nature of Christ; and also of
Heaven it self, into which none that are unclean in any thing may enter, until
they be justified from all their moral sins, by Faith in Christ's blood.

5. The Reader that pleases, may see what I have said more touching the
Typical works of the Law, in my former printed Reply, in page, 49, 110, 119,
120, 211, 233, 234, 236, 238, 245, 401.

Sect. 5.
Showing the Reason why the Covenant of Grace at Mount Sinai, being but one, is
notwithstanding called two Covenants, and sometime it is more plurally called
Covenants.

1. PAul does call the Covenant of Grace at Mount Sinai, two Covenants, Gal. 4.
24. and the Reason of it is, because it had an outward typical The Covenant at
Mount Sinai is called two Covenants, because it had an outward typical part,
and an inward typified part. If the Covenant made with Adam, had been
comprehended under the Decalogue, then the Apostle should have called them not
two, but three Covenants.
part, as well as an inward typified part: and from thence it came to pass,
that either of these parts may by the Figure Synecdoche, be called the
Covenant: of which see more in Chap. 5. Sect. 5.

But take special notice, that the first Covenant of nature that was made with
Adam, had no relation at all to either of these two parts of the Covenant of
Grace, as I have showed it in Chap. 5. at Reply 15.

But in case the Covenant made with Adam had been in Being, for a sinners
Justification; when the Apostle did speak of the two Covenants, then he should
have called them the three Covenants, and not the two Covenants.

But the Apostle speaking of the Law at Mount Sinai, does call it two
Covenants, and not three Covenants, as Mr Norton's Divinity will have it to be:
for he makes the Covenant made with Adam, to be comprehended in the Decalogue
at Mount Sinai; and then of necessity the Decalogue must comprehend three
Covenants.

But the Apostle calls the Law at Mount Sinai but two Covenants only: namely,
the typical Covenant of Works, and the typified Covenant of Grace: and just so
Mr Ainsworth does distinguish the Law of Moses into two Covenants, in Psalm. 25.
10. and in Deuteronomy. 5. 3. of which see n. 10.

2. From these two parts of the Covenant of Grace, it comes to pass, that the
outward typical part is called the first Covenant or Testament, in Heb. 8. 7,
13. Heb. 9. 1, 15, 18, 19 Heb. 10 9. and the Reason why that part is first, is,
because the literal and typical part, must in order of nature Heb. 8. 7, 13.
go before the inward spiritual and typified part.

3. Hence it comes also to pass, that the inward part of the Covenant of Grace,
must needs be called the second Covenant or Testament, as it is in Heb. 8. 7.
and Heb. 10. 9.

4. Hence also it comes to pass, that the first typical part, must necessarily
be called the Old Covenant or Testament, as it is in 2 Cor. 3. 14. Heb. 8. 13.

5. Hence also it comes to pass, that the typical Covenant must needs be
antiquated, as soon as the New Covenant or Testament was confirmed by the death
of Christ, Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. Dan. 9. 27. Mat. 26. 28. and from thenceforth to
the worlds end: and therefore the New Covenant must be called the New
Testament, Jer. 31. 31. or the new and living way, Heb. 10 20

6. Hence also it comes to pass, that this New Testament ought to be called the
better Testament, as it is in Heb. 7. 22. Heb. 8. 6. namely, as much better as
the souls eternal Justification from moral sins, is to be preferred before
the transient Justification of the body from ceremonial The New Testament is
called the better Testament, because it does justify the soul from moral sins
2 Cor. 3. 6, 14.
sins; and as much better as the Spirit of the Law is above the letter, 2 Cor.
3. 6. For the letter of Moses Law does kill all such as have no faith in
Christ. In these very respects it was, that the Apostle told the carnal Jews,
that their very inward mind was blinded, with a superstitious esteem of the
literal and typical sense of the Law of Moses: For until this day (says he)
the vail remains untaken away, in the reading of the Old Testament, which
vail is done away in Christ: namely, as soon as the eyes of the mind are
opened, to see Christ by says, to be the true end of the Law for Justification
to every one that believes.

7. The said two parts of the Covenant of Grace, is exemplified to us by a
double marriage-Covenant: for in Jer. 2. 2. Christ is said to take the
National Church of the Jews by the hand, in way of marriage typically: and to
this sense does Jer. 31. 32. speak, being compared with Ezekiel. 16. 8. But after
a while, this National Church did break this typical marriage-Covenant, by
mixing the works of Idolatry, with the typical works of the Law, quite
contrary to their Covenant at Mount Sinai, where they covenanted to take the
Lord for their only God, and to serve him with all their heart and soul, by
coupling faith in Christ, to the outward works of the Law; as I also noted it
before in Sect. 2. and therefore Christ Jesus, after he had waited a certain
time for their repentance, did cast them off, because they did not return to
him by repentance, according to their Covenant.

2. But yet the said marriage-Covenant, was confirmed for an everlasting
Covenant, to as many of them as did couple faith in Christ to the typical
works of the Law, Ezekiel. 16. 60, etc.

3. Such was the riches of Gods mercy in Christ, that after he had divorced his
National wife, he offered (upon her unsaigned repentance) to take her again,
contrary to his own Judicial Law, for he had made this Judicial Law with his
National Church, that whosoever did put away his wife for adultery, he might
not after that take her again to wife, Deuteronomy. 24. 4. But Jesus Christ being the
supreme Lawgiver, did not hold Deuteronomy. 24. 4.
himself bound by that Law; and therefore it was his supreme positive will,
that in case his National wife did but truly repent, he would take her again
to wife, by an everlasting Covenant, Jer. 3 1. with Ezekiel. 16. 60. This is also
noted by Ainsworth in Deuteronomy. 24. 4. Neh. 1. 9. Neh. 9. 29. 2 King. 17. 13. 2 Chronicles. 30. 11, 12.

8. When Jesus Christ took his National Church by the hand, to be his
covenanted wife, he required that they should enter into Covenant with him,
that they would do all that God required of them with all their heart and soul,
namely, to do all by faith in Christ; and thereupon they did all promise and
covenant with one mouth, so to do; as I noted it before in Sect. 3. and it was
upon that condition, that Christ took them by the hand, to be his married wife
in the Covenant of Grace, Hos. 2. 2, 19, 20. Hos. 3. 1, 5. Deuteronomy. 25. 6. Isa. 54
2.

9. The Apostle does apply this double marriage-Covenant, unto the twofold
state of the Church, in Gal. 4. 24. But his covenanted wife (his National
Church) brought forth no children to God, because they continued only under the
typical part of the Covenant, by their bodily exercise to the Law of works
only, Romans 7. 4, 5. Romans 8 3.

2. But though his National wife in general was barren, yet there was a
certain number of them, that did in wardly cleave to him as his true wife by
says: and such actings of grace did flow from them to others, that many
children were begotten to God by their means; for none else are to be accounted
the children of God, but such only as are converted and have true says in
Christ, Gal. 3. 26.

10. The Prophet Jeremy does also distinguish the marriage-Covenant at Mount
Sinai, into two Covenants, saying in Jer. 31. 32. Behold the Jer. 31. 32.
days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the house of
Israel, and with the house of Judah, (i.e. with the Elected Israel of God) not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, when I took them by
the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which my Covenant they brake,
(because they did not couple faith in Christ, to the typical part of that
marriage Covenant; and because they did not couple faith to it, they manifested
their breach of it, by falling to Idolatry,) although I was a husband to them,
says the Lord, (by providing sufficient means of grace, for the begetting of
them to the faith, if they had but improved the means, as they ought to have
done.) But this shall be my Covenant, that I will make with the house of (my
Elected) Israel: after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law into
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people.

There are two principal Covenants or Testaments, says Ainsworth, in Psalm.
25. 10. First, that which God made with our Fathers, when he brought them out
of Egypt, the sum whereof was contained in the ten Commandments, written by
the finger of God, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. Exodus 24. 7, 8. 1 King. 8. 21. together with
all the other Laws written by Moses, in a Book called the Book of the Covenant,
2 King. 23. 2, 21. Exodus 24. 4, 7. 2 Chronicles. 24. 30. The second Covenant (says
he) is the New Testamentall Band, which God has made with us in Christ,
established upon better promises, and confirmed by the blood and death of
Christ the Testator, as the first was by the blood and death of Beasts, Luke
22. 20. Heb. 8. 6, 8. Heb. 9. 16, 17, 18, etc. Lo here is a full description of
the twofold marriage-Covenant: in which description observe, that the outward
part of it, was made for their bodily purity or sanctity, in two particulars:
1. In requiring them to abstain from all ceremonial sins, that might defile
their bodies. And 2. in case they were by any accident defiled ceremonially,
then they were commanded to observe the typical works of the Law, for the
justifying of their bodies therefrom, before they might come into Gods holy
Temple. But this fulfilling of the outward part of the marriage-Covenant, was
not the fulfilling of the whole Covenant, until they joined faith in Christ
unto the said typical works of the Law. 2. Therefore none else did attain to
be the true Spouse of Christ, by a complete marriage-Covenant, but such only as
did couple says in Christ, to the letter of the Law of the ten Commandments,
and also to the typical works of the Law. Faith is the only condition that is
required to be performed, as the only hand-fastning Band of this marriage-Union
with Christ: and therefore none else are accounted for the body of his Spouse,
but believers, as it is also most fully declared in the Allegories of Solomon's
Song.

11. The Covenant at Mount Sinai is also more plurally called Covenants, Every
particular Law, both of the typical, and also of the typified part of the
Covenant made at Mount Sinai, may be truly called the Covenant by the Figure
Synechdoche.
because every particular Law, and branch of that Law, both of the outward part
of it, and also of the inward part of it, is a Covenant, truly so called by the
Figure Synechdoche: and therefore,

1. The Salt that was used for the salting of every Sacrifice, is called the
Salt of the Covenant, Lev. 2. 13.

2. The blood of all their legal Sacrifices, is called the blood of the
Covenant, Exodus 24. 7, 8. and the Apostle says, that the first Covenant was
not dedicated without blood, Heb. 9. 18, 23. And the Saints did make a Covenant
with God by Sacrifices, Psalm. 50. 5. The Chaldee does open it thus; which have
stricken the Covenant, and confirmed the Law. See Ainsworth in Psalm. 25. 10.

3. The shewbread that was set in order every Sabbath upon the pure Table, is
called the everlasting Covenant, Lev. 24. 8.

4. The cutting off of the foreskin of the flesh of the male-Infant on the
eighth day, is called the Covenant, Gen 17. 10. Act. 7. 8.

5. On the contrary, he whose foreskin was not circumcised on the eighth day,
is said to break the Covenant, Genesis 17. 4.

6. Those Jews which refused to let their servants go free at the end of six
years, are also said to transgress the Covenant, Jer. 34. 18. namely, the
typical Covenant.

7. When Antiochus did withdraw the Jews from the observation of their
ceremonial Laws, he is said to have indignation against the holy Covenant,
Dan. 11. 28, 30, 32.

By these Instances it is evident, that every particular part of the Covenant,
may be called the Covenant, by the Figure Synechdoche: and in this very respect
it is, that the Covenant at Mount Sinai is called Covenants in the plural,
Romans 9. 4. Ephesians. 2. 12.

12. Every particular Law both of the typical and typified parts of the
Covenant of Grace, at Mount Sinai, may be called the Covenant: For

1. Moses wrote upon the Tables the words of the Covenant, the ten
Commandments, Exodus 34. 28. Now seeing the ten Commandments are here called
the Covenant; it does from thence follow, that all the Law and the Prophets,
must in like sort be called the Covenant, because the whole Law and the
Prophets do hang on the ten Commandments, as the general heads of all, Mat.
22. 40. and this is also noted by Ainsworth in Exodus 34. 28.

2. All the judicial and ceremonial Laws were written in a Book, and that
Book is called the Book of the Covenant, 2 King. 23. 2, 21. Exodus 24. 4, 7. 2 Chronicles. 24. 30.

3. Christ says thus in Lev. 26. 15. He that despises my statutes, and
loatheth my judgments, and does not keep all my Commandments, does break my
Covenant. From hence it does also follow, that every one of Gods statutes,
judgments, and Commandments, are called his Covenant: and all these are
broken, when they are done by the body only, without says in Christ, which is
the only condition of keeping the Covenant on man's part: and in Psalm. 50. 16.
Gods statutes and his Covenant is but the same thing: What have thou to do,
says God to the wicked, to declare my statutes, or to take my Covenant into
thy mouth.

4. Christ said thus to his National Church in Jer. 11. I earnestly protested
unto your Fathers, saying, obey my voice, and they obeyed not, nor inclined
their ear, but walked every one in the imagination of their evil heart,
therefore I will bring upon them all the words (i.e. all the threatenings) of
this Covenant, which I commanded them to do, but they did them not: and cursed
be the man (said he in Verse. 3.) that obeys not the words of this Covenant.

5. When the Lord plagued the children of Israel with liars, for their mixing
of Idolatry in Gods Worship, he told them, it was because they brake his
Covenant: they manifested by their Idolatry, that they had no says in Christ,
and therefore they are said to break his Covenant. For God had charged them,
saying, Ye shall not fear other Gods, nor bow your selves to them, nor serve
them, nor sacrifice to them: but the Lord that brought you out of the Land of
Egypt, him shall ye fear, and him shall ye worship, and to him shall ye do
sacrifice, and the Statutes, and the Ordinances, and the Law, and the
Commandment, which he wrote for you, ye shall observe to do for evermore, and
the Covenant that I have made with you, ye shall not forget, neither shall ye
fear other Gods, 2 King. 17. 35, 36, 37, 38. Mark I pray you how he does
enumerate the several terms of the Law: he does twice call it a Covenant in
these Verses, and Statutes, and Ordinances, and Commandments, which he wrote
for you (at Mount Sinai) See also 1 Chronicles. 16. 17. with Psalm. 105. 10.

6. The Lord said thus to the degenerated ten Tribes in Hos. 8. 1. The King of
Assure shall come as an Eagle against the house of the Lord, because they have
transgressed my Covenant, and trespassed against my Laws. Hence I observe, that
all Gods Laws are called his Covenant, they are Synonimous terms.

13. The ancient Hebrew Doctors do indifferently and interchangeably use these
terms, the Law, the Covenant, and the Testament, for the same thing at Mount
Sinai. See 1 Mac. 1. 51, 59, 60, 66. 1 Mac. 2. 26, 27. Heb. 9. 19, 20. Exodus
34. 27, 28. Lev. 25. 46.

14. Jesus Christ did beforehand call all those Laws, that he intended to give
at Mount Sinai, his Covenant, Exodus 19. 5. compared with Deuteronomy. 4. 13, 23. And
the Laws of this Covenant were renewed again, about thirty eight, or forty
years after in the plains of Moah, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 13, etc. Mr Ainsworth calls it
the same Covenant for substance, in Deuteronomy. 29. 1. and Deuteronomy. 29. 1.
so does our Annotations there: and also in Jer. 31, 32. and Mr Calvin says in
Heb. 8. 8. we are not to doubt but that the Prophet (in Jer. 31.) does
comprehend the whole Ministry of Moses, when he says, I have made a Covenant
with you: and Mr Rutherford does make it the same with the Covenant at Mount
Sinai; his words I have noted in Chap. 5. at Reply 8. and Mr Holioke makes it
the same Covenant in his Doctrine of Life, page 293. where he does also cite
Tremelius to the same judgment.

But it is objected by some of the most eminent Ministers of England, That the
first Covenant at Mount Sinai, was only a Covenant of works, and that this
Covenant in Deuteronomy. 29. was given only for a Covenant of Grace.

To this I Reply, that in case this error had kept it self within the bounds of
New England, where it was first hatched, I should have taken the less notice
of it; but seeing it has crept from thence hither, I think it needful to put
some check upon it to cause the better marking. They in New England do build
their said exposition upon the word [Besides] in Deuteronomy. 29. 1. But if it be well
marked, this word besides has relation only to the adverb of time: namely that
this Covenant, now made in the plains of Moah, was made at this ^ime [besides
that time] when it was first made at Horeb called also Mount Sinai.

Mr woodbridge in his method of grace does most unhappily follow this New
England error in p. 309.

15. The Covenant at Mount Sinai, must be considered in the extrinsecall part
of it two ways. 1. As it related to their Synagogue-worship. And 2. As it
related to to their Temple-worship.

1. As it related to their Synagogue-worship: there was not the like
prohibition Persons that were guilty of ceremonial sins, might appear before
God in his Synagogue-worship every Sabbath day, but not in the holy Temple,
upon pain of cutting off, or of death by the hand of God.
of the unclean to come thither, as there was to the Temple-worship, for any
persons that were ceremonially unclean, might lawfully resort to the
Synogogue-worship every Sabbath, as freely as those that were clean, yea even
Heathens might resort to the Synogogues as freely as the Jews, as I have also
observed it in my book of the Jews Synogouge discipline, p. 19, 57, 58.

2. But no unclean person might dare to resort to the holy Temple under the
penalty of cutting off, or of death, until they were first legally justified
from their ceremonial sins, by the appointed works of the Law.

3. The true reason of this difference is, because the Temple was a Type of the
most holy humane nature of Christ, and also of the most holy place of Heaven it
self; and therefore none that were unclean in any thing might appear therein;
as I noted it before at the end of Sect. 4.

But the Synagogue being not ordained for such a holy Type, thence it came to
pass, that the unclean as well as the clean might resort thither every Sabbath
day; we deny not says Cameron (de Triplici Foedere These. 76.) that even the
Sacraments of the New Testament may have a carnal use by the institution and
custom of man, but not any such prescribed to them by any word of God (as the
Typical rites of the Jews had) namely in relation to the holy Temple.

Sect. 6.
Showing that the ten Cmmandements do in some respects belong unto the Typical
Covenant of works at Mount Sinai.

I have showed before in chapter 5. at Reply 16. that the two Tables wherein the
ten Commandments were engraven, is now abolished by Christ, as the Apostle
says in 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 11, 13. and therefore those ten Commandments may in
some sense be called the Typical Law of works. And this is also evident.

1. Because the Apostle says in 2 Cor. 3. 7. that the glorious ministration
The decalogue does in some respects appertain to the Law of rites, by 2 Cor.
3. 7.
of the Law that was written and engraven in stone, was to be done away, and
the reason is (as I conceive) because the decalogue does in some sort belong to
the Typical Law of works, for according to the ministration of Moses Law, sins
against the decalogue (did not only defile the conscience morally, but also)
did defile the body ceremonially, and in that respect the Law of Moses, did
ordain a ceremonial cleansing, from the ceremonial defilements of their
moral sins.

2. It is also evident, that all the Typical Laws which Christ Jesus ordained
for the purifying (that is to say for the justifying) of the bodies of the
national Church from their ceremonial sins, do belong to the second, third
and fourth Commandments; and from thence it followst, hat the said legal
justifications are commanded in these Commandments.

3. It was the good pleasure of Christ Jesus, to ordain by his positive Some
moral sins did by Gods positive Law defile the body and the holy place
ceremonially as well as the conscience morally. Lev. 16. 16, 21, 22, 30.
Law, in Lev. 16. 16. That the High Priest should make an atonement for the
holy place, because of the uncleanness of the sons of Israel and because of
their trespasses, and because of all their sins; this last clause, and because
of all their sins, does imply that their moral sins, did defile the holy place
ceremonially.

4. From this verse. Mr Ainsworth does observe, that though the people never
went into the holy place to defile it personally; yet (by Gods positive
ordinance) such was the power of their iniquities, that the holy Altar, Arc,
and Sanctuary it self were defiled. But this defiling power of their moral
iniquities, came not from the moral Law it self, but from the constitution of
Gods Arbitrary will in his said positive Law: and in that respect it was, that
he did also ordain, that the holy Altar, Arc, and holy place should be
purified (that is to say, ceremonially justified) from the ceremonial
defilements of their moral sins, namely once a year by the blood of the
sin-offering.

5. It was the good pleasure of Jesus Christ, by his positive Law, to ordain in
Lev. 16. 21. that the High Priest should make an atonement for the purifying
i.e. for the justifying of the bodies of the whole national Church from the
ceremonial defilements of their moral sins once a year, by imposing both his
hands (with all his might) upon the head of the live Goat buck, and by
confessing over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
trespasses, and all their sins.

5. It was the good pleasure of Jesus Christ in Lev. 16. 22. to annex a legal
promise to the said bodily works of the Law, namely that the said Goat buck
should bear upon him all their iniquities to a Land of separation; implying
thereby, that the ceremonial defilements of all their moral sins, should be
brone away from them by Gods atonement and forgiveness, and that then they
might come into Gods holy presence with acceptance.

6. It was the good pleasure of Jesus Christ to enlarge his said legal
promise, saying in verse. 30. For in this day the Priest shall make an
atonement for you, to cleanse you, and from all your sins before Jehovah ye
shall be cleansed, i.e. By Gods atonement procured, ye shall be justified from
the legal defilements of all your moral sins.

From these three verses in Lev. 16. it follows, 1. That as the High Priest did
by the works of the Law on the day of expiation, cleanse all the national
Church from the legal defilements of their moral sins; so much more shall our
High Priest Christ Jesus, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, to purge the conscience (of all believing sinners) from
dead works, that is to say, from the guilt of all their moral sins, which
proceed from their spiritual death in sin; and therefore all such of the
National Church as had true Faith in their true sinoffering Christ, were
justified not only ceremonially from their legal defilements of their moral
sins, but also in soul from the moral defilements of their moral sins.

2. From hence it does also follow, that the said legal cleansing did justify
Dan. 8. 14. The Seventy for Tzedec justified in Dan. 8. 14. and in Job 4. 17.
do put (...), cleansed or purified, and thence it follows that such as are
cleansed from sin by Gods atonement, are thereby formally justified.
their bodies from their legal defilements, by an instance in Dan. 8. 14. for
the Temple is there said in the Hebrew Text to be justified, namely to be
purified from the pollutions of Antiochus Epiphanes, who had polluted the holy
Temple by setting up in it the Idol of Jupiter Olympus. But the seventy and our
Traslators do render the said Hebrew word [be cleansed] so then, to be
justified and to be cleansed from sin are Synonimus terms. But how else was
the Temple cleansed or justified from its ceremonial defilements, but by the
Typical works of the Law. 1. By carrying out the Idol. 2. By carrying out the
dirt, as was also done in another like case, 2 Chr. 29. 5, 15, 16, 17, 34. And
3. By the blood of the sin-offering, in procuring Gods atonement thereby, Lev.
16. 16. Exodus 45. 18, 19. and as the Temple was cleansed or justified by these
works of the Law, so also was the Altar purified, that is to say, justified
from the legal uncleanness, which it received from the moral sins of the
children of Israel, See Ains* in Ex. 29. 36, 32.

3. The Ancient Hebrew Doctors have this common saying among them, That the
Escape Goat made atonement for all the transgressions of the Law, both the
lighter and the more heavy transgressions, whether done presumptuously or
ignorantly, whether they were known unto a man or unknown; all are expiated by
the Escape Goat, if so be the party do repent* see Ainsworth, in Levit. 16. 22.
verbal repentance did obtain legal justification, but nothing but true
repentance, which cannot be done without Faith in Christ, could obtain true
justification to the conscience from the guilt of moral sins.

7. It may be also gathered from Jacobs example, that moral sins did defile
the body ceremonially, in relation to the holy place of Gods Altar; and
therefore Jacob durst not adventure to go with his family, into the place of
Gods sanctuary, to offer his Sacrifice, on that consecrated Altar at Bethel,
until he had first taken order for the purifying, or the justifying of the
bodies of his family from the legal defilements of their moral sin of
idolatry, by washing their garments (or else by changing their garments) after
their bodies were first washed Genesis 35. 2,

8. The taking of Gods holy Name in vain is a moral sin, against the express
letter of the third Commandment.

9. To refuse to bear witness to a matter, when it is lawfully required, is a
moral sin against the ninth Commandment.

These two sins did not only defile the conscience* but by Gods positive Law
they did also defile the body ceremonially; and therefore such persons might
not presume to come into Gods holy Sanctuary, under the penalty of cutting off,
or of death, until their bodies were ceremonially justified from those sins,
by the appointed works of the Law; see Ains. in Lev. 5. 1, 4, 6, 7, etc.

10. In case any native Jew had committed fornication with a bondwomen that was
betrothed to another man (not yet made free) he was to do no more by Gods
positive Law, but to bring his trespass offering to the Priest; and then unto
this work of the Law, there is a legal promise annexed, that it should
procure Gods legal atonement to his body, for the justification of his body
from this sin, Lev. 19, 20, 21, 22 and until he had preformed this sacrifice,
he might not present his body before God in his holy Temple, but yet that sin
could not any other ways be forgiven to the justifying of his conscience, than
by Faith in Christ's death and sacrifice, as the only procuring cause of Gods
atonement and forgiveness.

11. Such as sinned presumptuously are threatened to be cut off, in the case of
thirty six sins, many of which are moral sins against the Ten Commandments.
But yet in case any one did fall into any one of those thirty six sins
ignorantly, they might be legally justified therefrom by the blood of the sin
offering, ex opere operato, and then they might freely come into Gods holy
Temple; but this bodily justification by the works of the Law might be done
without any Faith in Christ. And according to sense it is, that Paul says the
Law is not of Faith, Gal. 3. 12. namely the Gal. 3. 12.
Law of works for their bodily justification may be done without Faith in
Christ. Mr Ainsworth does number up the said thirty six sins: 1 He that lies
with his mother. 2. that lies with his fathers wife, 3. or with his daughter
in Law, 4. with mankind, 5 with a beast, 6. the woman that lies down to a
beast, 7. he that lies with a woman and her daughter, 8. with another man's
wife, 9. with his sister, 10. with his fathers sister, 11. with his mothers
sister, 12. with his wives sister, 13. with the wife of his fathers brother,
14. with the wife of his mothers brother, 15. with a woman that has her
sickness, 16. the blasphemer, 17. the idol server, 18. he that gives of his
seed to Moloch, 19. he that follows him that has a familiar spirit, 20. he
that prophaneth the Sabbath, 21. the unclean person that eats of the holy
things, 22. the unclean person that comes into the Sanctuary, 23. he that
eats fat, 24. he that eats blood, 25. he that eats that which remains
of the sacrifice when it is a polluted thing, 26. he that eats unclean meats,
27. he that slays sacrifices without the Sanctuary, 28. he that offers them
without, 29. he that eats leaven at the passover, 30. he that eats any
thing on atonement day, 31. he that works on that day, 32. he that makes
any oil like the oil of the Sanctuary, 33. he that makes any incense like
the holy incense, 34. he that annoints man's flesh with the holy oil of the
Sanctuary, 35. he that observes not he passover, 36. he that observes not
the Law of circumcision.

For these they are guilty of cutting off, if they transgress presumptuonsly,
if ignorantly they must bring a sin offering, and if they presumed to come into
the holy Sanctuary before they had legally cleansed their bodies by a sin
offering, they are said to defile Gods Sanctuary, and to profane the name of
his holiness; and were therefore guilty of cutting off, or of death by the
hand of God. But yet by the general sin offering on the day of atonement, all
the transgressions of the Law, both the lighter and the more heavy
transgressions, whether done presumptuously or ignorantly, all are expiated by
the escape goat, if the party do repent, as I noted it before, at n. 6.

12. From the premises in this 6th Sect. the Reader may perceive, how the ten
Commandments which were written and engraven in stone, do appertain in some
respects to the Law of works at Mount Sinai, and in what respects the said ten
Commandments are to be done away by the death of Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 7.

But for the beter understanding how the Apostle does make the ten
Commandments to be abolished with the other rites of Moses in 2 Cor. 3. 7.

Observe the dependence of this 7th verse. from verse. 5, 6. to the end of The
sense of 2 Cor. 3. 7. according to its dependence with the rest of the chapter.
the Chapter.

1. The Apostle says in verse. 5, 6. Our sufficiency is of God, who has made
us able Ministers of the New Testement. not of the letter, but of the Spirit,
for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life (i.e. the letter of the ten
Commandments, and of all the rest of Moses Law, though it be never so exactly
observed according to the letter, does but kill; or it is the ministration of
death as in verse. 7. or it is the minictration of condemnation, as in verse. 9.)
But the Spirit (of the Law) which is Christ, gives life; and therefore he
says in verse. 19. The Lord (Christ) is that Spirit, none but Christ and Faith
in Christ, is here called the Spirit of the letter, both of the ten
Commandments and of all the rest of Moses Laws; and to this sense does the
Apostle expound the word Siprit in verse. 8, 14, 17. and thus our larger
Annotations, and the Genevah does expound the word Spirit in verse. 17.

2. It Is in this sense also that the Law of Moses is called the Law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 2. Christ is the Spirit and life of the
Law, to such only as are in Christ Jesus by Faith: and of this I have Romans 8. 2.
spoken more at large in chapter 25.

3. In this sense it is that Christ said unto the carnal Jews, It is the
Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto
you they are spirit, and they are life, Joh. 6. 63. as if Christ had said thus:
I ^ould you before in verse. 51. that I am the the living bread which came down
from Heaven (typified by the corporal Manna) if any man eat of this bread he
shall live for ever, and the bread that I will give (in my combat of
sufferings even to the death of the Cross) is my flesh for the life of the
world. The carnal Jews mistook our Saviors meaning, they thought that he had
spoken of eating the corporal substance of his flesh with their teeth, in
verse. 58. but said Christ, the words, I speak unto you, they are Spirt, and
they are life, it is me and my flesh that I will give to the death for you, to
be eaten with the teeth of Faith, it is I that am the true Spirit of the letter
of Moses Law; and then said he in verse. 58. This is that bread which came down
from Heaven, not as your fathers did eat Manna and are dead; but he that eats
of this bread shall live for ever. In these words Christ calls himself this
bread, because he is the Spirit of that bread to such as have the teeth of
Faith to seed on his death and Sacrifice.

From these instances it is evident,

1. That Christ is the Spirit of the letter, and the very spirit of all the
Types of Moses Law.

2. Observe, that the Apostle in 2 Cor. 3. 6. from this phrase [the letter
killeth] does infer, that even the ten Commandments as well as the legal
rites do kill, though they be never so exactly observed according to the
letter; the letter without Faith in Christ is called the ministration of death
and condemnation, in verse. 7, 9. there is no justification from sin and
condemnation without Faith in Christ, who is the only true Spirit and true end
of all the Law of Moses, Romans 10. 4.

3. The Apostle in verse. 7. does allude to Exodus 34. 29, 30, 33, 35. where
Moses when he came down from the Mount, knew not that his face shone, or that
it was glorious as Paul does express it (after the Seventy) signifying
thereby, that the glory of the Types of Moses Law (which did also in some
respects appertain to the ten Commandments) should be done away, and therefore
the holy Sabbath that was written in stone as it was a Typical sign, it was
done away. And from thence the Apostle does infer in verse. 8, 9.

V. 8. How shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious?
(namely, how shall not the ministration of Christ in his office of
mediatorship) who is the true Spirit of the Law be glorious? seeing he is the
only meritorious author of all spiritual blessings Ephesians. 1. 3.

V. 9. For if the ministration of condemnation be glory (which makes sin to
abound, Romans 5. 20. and causes wrath, Romans 4. 15. to the condemnation of all
unbelievers) being delivered with so great glory that it made Moses face to
shine; much more says the Apostle does the ministration of justification (from
all sin which we have) by Christ, exceed in glory; even as much as the souls
justification from moral sins, does exceed the justification of the body from
ceremonial sins, by their doing of the Typical works of the Law.

V. 10. For even as that which was made glorious, had no glory by reason of the
glory that excels, that is to say by reason of the glory of the Spirit of
the Law (which is Christ) does excel the letter and the Types of the Law: In
this respect the letter and the Types of the Law have no glory, because the
glory of Christ in the Covenant of Grace for the souls justification excels.

V. 11, 12. For if that which is done away was glorious, how much more (Christ
the end of the Law) which remains is glorious. Seeing then we have such hope
we use plainness.

V. 13. Of speech verse. 13. And not as Moses which put on a veil over his
glorious face, to signify to the children of Israel, that they could not look
steadfastly to the end of that which is abolished; that is to say, the children
of Israel could not by the eye of natural reason look steadfastly to the
victorious death of Christ the true end of those Types that are now abolished.

V. 14. But their minds were blinded, for until this day remains the same
veil untaken away in the reading of the Old Testement, namely in following
after the righteousness of justification of the old Covenant of works given at
Mount Sinai.

But in these last two verses the Apostle does speak of a double veil, one
outward in the Types of the Law under the which Christ was veiled; the other
inward in the heart through unbelief, and indeed this inward veil of their
unbelief was the only cause of their utter ruin.

V. 15, 16. But even to this day when Moses is read the vail is upon their
hearts, namely the veil of ignorance and unbelief, verse. 16. nevertheless
when it shall turn to the Lord; namely when the blinded heart shall turn to
the Lord Christ by Faith and repentance, then shall the other veil of Types be
taken away.

V. 17. Now the Lord (Christ) is that Spirit (both of the letter and of the
Types of Moses Law) and where the Spirit of the Lord (Christ is received by
Faith) there is liberty, 1. From the bondage of Moses ceremonies, in the which
liberty believers must stand fast, Gal. 5. 1. And 2. Liberty from the
condemning power of sin, Romans 8. 1.

V. 18. But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord; in these words he compares Moses Law to a glass, in the which we may be
Faith behold the glory of Christ mediator, as it were in a glass namely in the
glass of Moses Law; and from thence it follows, that we cannot, as long as we
live here, behold the glory of the Lord Christ so perfectly as we shall do in
Heaven, when we are changed into the same image (1 Cor. 15. 49. with Ephesians. 4.
24.) from glory to glory even as by the Lord [Christ] who is the only Spirit of
the letter, and of the Types of all Moses Law.

Conclusion.
From the permises it follows that the ten Commandments do in some respects
belong to the first Typical Covenant of works, under the which the new
Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation is veiled, and therefore it is absurd to
call the decalogue the second Edition of the Law of works made with Adam, as Mr
Norton does all along. See him in p. 180, 182, 184, 186, 187, 189, etc.

CHAPTER VII.
Wherein Mr. Nortons exposition of Gal. 3. 10. of doing the whole Law by
perfect nature as in Adam, is briefly confuted.

Sect. 1.
1. MR Norton cites Gal. 3. 10. in p. 2. to prove that Christ was our surety,
to do the command of the works made with Adam in a way of works; and 2. to
suffer the essential punishment of that cursed death for our redemption.

And says he in page 14. "Christ obeyed the Law of works as God-man
judicially, bare sin, suffered the punishment due for sin, in a way of
satisfaction to divine justice, and all this as the surety of the Elect;
without which doing and suffering, the mediatorly obedience of Christ is
insufficient, and ineffectuall; for we cannot bear sin nor suffer the
punishment of sin, so as to satisfy the justice of God, nor can we perform
legal obedience: yet all this must be suffered, Genesis 2. 17. and overcome 1 Cor
15. 17. and done, Lev. 18. 5. otherwise no salvation, Galat. 3. 10.

chapter 5. My intent now is to speak briefly to the confutation of his corrupt
sense of Gal. 3. 10.

2. Therefore it is a great error to make Gal. 3. 10. to speak of Christ doing
the Law of the Covenant of nature, as our surety with Adam, or else that we can
have no salvation. But I have often showed before in chapter 5. and elsewhere. 1.
That the Covenant made with Adam, cannot be called the Covenant of works in the
plural. And 2. That it was utterly extinguished as soon as Adam had broken
it, by eating but once of the forbiden fruit. And 3. That Christ cannot be our
surety in that Covenant, because that Covenant was made with no other persons
but with the natural generation of Adam only, of which kind of generation.
Christ was none, and thence it follows that Gal. 3. 10. does not threaten that
cursed death that is mentioned in Genesis 2. 17. to Christ for our non-continuance
in the doing of that now nullified Covenant of nature.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 140. " Obedience unto the command, i.e. to the Law
of works Lev. 18. 5. Gal. 3. 10. and suffering the punishment due to sin Genesis
2. 17. is that which God according to the Law demands, and the debtor, namely
the sinner owes.

Therefore obedience unto the Law of works is that which the surety ought to
pay.



chapter 1. that the Covenant made with Adam is not now in being, but that it has
been utterly extinguished ever since Adam did but taste of the forbidden fruit,
and had received the punishment of that threatened death; therefore not any
obedience is now due unto that nullified Covenant: and therefore Gal. 3. 10.
Lev. 18. 5. and Genesis 2. 17. are cited to no better end, than to prove that he
does not understand the true nature of that Covenant that was made with Adam;
nor 2. the true nature of Christ's suretiship, nor 3. the true nature of Christ's
satisfaction, nor 4. the true nature of a sinners justification, nor 5. the
true sense and meaning of his three cited Scriptures.

But says Mr. Norton in p 149. "The immutable truth of God, Genesis 2. 17. and
his inviolable justice Romans 8. 32. requires obedience in the Mediator; the Law
requires obedience, both active, Lev. 18. 5. and passive, Gal. 3. 10. or else
there can be no life.

Gal. 3. 10. to prove the passive obedience of the mediator to the eternal
curse of the Law of Grace; I wonder at his oversight seeing this Text speaks
not at all of the curse of the Covenant of nature, but of the curse of the
Covenant of Grace only, as it is due to unbelievers only, as J shall make it
manifest in my after exposition of it.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 191. "The Law in case of innocence required only
doing, Lev. 18. 5. but in case of sin it cannot be satisfied without suffering,
Genesis 2. 17. and doing, Gal. 3. 10.

Gal. 3. 10. to prove that Christ was the surety of the Elect, to do the Law of
the Covanant of nature made with Adam. But I have sufficiently proved, that the
Law of that Covenant is utterly dead and void, and therefore a dead Law cannot
act as to the point of doing, neither can it threaten any new punishment; but
yet the difinitive and inviolable justice of God, does continually execute that
first threatened punishment of a double spiritual death upon all Adams natural
posterity successively, by depriving them of Gods concreated image, for the
breach of the Covenant of nature to the worlds end, as I have showed it in
chap. 1.

But says Mr Norton in page 199. "The Law is fulfilled as concerning them that
are saved, Gal. 3. 10. either by the obedience of Christ, God-man Mediator, or
by the personal obedience of the believer; but not by the personal obedience
of the believer, Romans 3. 3. Gal. 3. 10. therefore by the personal obedience of
Christ, God-man Mediator.

Adam's natural generation: therefore he was not bound to fulfill that Law in
Genesis 2. 17.

2. That the Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation in Genesis 3. 15. is fulfilled,
as concerning them that are saved, even by the personal obedience of the
believers faith: for faith in Christ is the only condition that is required on
the sinners part, for the fulfilling of the Law of Grace: and this is the great
fulfilling that is required of all them that shall be saved, by Gal. 3. 10. and
by Romans 5. 1, 2. and by Romans 8. as I shall show ere long.

But I deny that the Law of the Covenant of nature is fulfilled, as concerning
them that are saved: because that Law is now become no Law, seeing it has been
utterly extinguished, ever since Adam did but taste of the forbidden fruit. God
never ordained any other way to eternal life in Heaven, but by faith in Christ
only on the sinners part: and I say also, that he never made any Covenant for
eternal life in Heaven, by any Covenant of works.

But says Mr Norton in page 212. "Not only he that does whatever the Law
forbids, shall die, Genesis 2. 17. but he that continues not in all things
that are written in the Book of the Law, to do them, Gal. 3. 10. shall die.

Cor. 3. 6. to observe a right distinction between the word Law, as it belongs
to the Covenant of nature, and the word Law, as it belongs to the Covenant of
Grace: and on the contrary, it is the ready way to make heterodox Ministers to
confound the word Law; but in both those Covenants, surely it is the ready way
to make men leaders of the blind into the ditch of Error.

2. By observing the said distinction aright, it will be found that the word
Law in Gal. 3. 10. does not at all relate to the Law of the Covenant of nature,
in Genesis 2. 17.

3. Therefore the doing of the Law of Grace, (as it is required of all that
shall be saved) in Gal. 3. 10. is not to be understood, of the doing it by
perfect natural obedience, as in Adam's Creation; but of the doing it,
according to the condition of the Covenant of Grace, which is done no
otherwise, but by faith in Christ only: this is the great fulfilling of the Law
which God requires, of all that shall be saved in the Covenant of Grace.

But says Mr Norton in page 240. "The Law required not only death in case of
sin, Genesis 2. 17. but also the doing of legal obedience unto the command, Deuteronomy.
27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. otherwise there is no life.

Deuteronomy. 27. 26. and in Gal. 3. 10. did require obedience unto the first
arbitrary Law of the Covenant of nature, made with Adam: for that Law required
no other obedience, but to eat once only of the Tree of the twofold life, for
the fulfilling of it, as I have showed in Chap. 1. But the doing required in
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. and in Gal. 3. 10. is meant of such a doing only, as is required
in the Law of the Covenant of Grace: which is done by says in Christ only, as
I shall more fully clear it, in my following Exposition of Gal. 3. 10.

But says Mr Norton in page 244. "Perfect obedience to the Law, is the matter
of our Justification, Gal 3. 10.

Chap. 5. and elsewhere, That perfect moral obedience was not ordained by the
Covenant of nature, to be the matter of Adam's Justification, because God in
that Covenant required no more of him, but to do one only transient act of
obedience, in eating but once only of the Tree of the twofold life, for the
confirmation of him, and of all his natural posterity, in his concreated
moral perfections for ever, in the sweet contents of an earthly Paradise, as I
have showed in Chap. 1. Sect. 4. And 2. That that Covenant is now totally
extinguished, and therefore that now it cannot be the matter of a sinners
Justification. And 3. that nothing else is required of sinners for their
Justification, by the Law of Grace, but the supernatural obedience of faith in
Christ: and therefore the Apostle does make Christ only, to be the true end,
scope, and aim, of all Moses Law, for Justification to every one that believes.

Thus much in brief, for the confutation of Mr Nortons Heterodoxall Exposition,
of Gal. 3. 10.

Sect. 2.
The true Exposition of Gal. 3. 10. does now follow.

AS many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse; for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written
in the Book of the Law, to do them. Gal. 3. 10.


Four phrases must be explained, for the better understanding of the force of
Paul's Argument.

1. What is meant by as many as are of the works of the Law. 2. What by this,
that continues not in things that are written in the Book of the Law. 3. What
by this, to do them. 4. What by this, are under the curse.
1. By as many as are of the works of the Law, I understand, as many as held
their Justification to be attained from their moral sins, (as well as from
their ceremonial sins) by their bodily performance of the works of the Law:
and for this end, it was the constant endeavor of the false Apostles, to
persuade the believing Gentiles, that faith in Christ was not the only
condition to be performed on their parts, for the obtaining of their full
Justification from all ki^d of sins, except they did also perform The false
Apostles taught the believing Gentiles, that their faith in Christ was not
sufficient for their Justification from all sin, without they joined the works
of the Law thereto. Of which see before in Chap. 5. at Rep. 13. ult.
the outward works of the Law, as a necessary condition to be conjoined to
their faith in Christ: and in that respect they did vehemently press the
believing Gentiles, to be exactly careful in the observation of all the Laws
of Moses, or else that they could not be saved, Act. 15. 1, etc.

2. The Brethren at Jerusalem said unto Paul, Thou see brother how many ten
thousand Jews there are which do believe, and yet they are all zealous of the
Law, Act. 21. 20. and now (says he in Verse. 21.) they are informed of thee,
that thou teach the Jews, which are (in dispersion) among the Gentiles, to
forsake Moses, and that they ought not to circumcise their Sons, neither to
live after the customs. And by the example of Ananias we may see, that many
Jews which were eminent for their faith in Christ, were also for a time
exceeding zealous in the observation of Moses Laws; for Ananias was a godly man
as pertaining to the Law, Act. 22. 12. And there were diverse other Jews which
did believe in Christ, and yet were zealous also not only for the practice of
circumcision, but also for all the other customs of Moses, Act 15. 5. And such
as were converted by the preaching of Paul, and others in the Jews Synagogues,
were by the malignant Jews of that Synagogue, often persecuted to strange
Cities, and then they did separate themselves from the Synagogues, and joined
themselves into Christian Churches, and yet they did still continue zealous for
the observation of Moses Law, even after they had separated themselves into
Christian Churches, Act 21. 20. Act. 15 5, 24. Jam. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1 1. and many
of them did sometimes resort to Jerusalem, to observe the Festival Sabbaths,
Act. 2. 5.

But as soon as the Apostles did perceive, that the said believing Jews grew
stiff and sturdy, for the observation of Moses Ceremonies in Christian
Churches, as a necessary condition to be performed on their part, for their
eternal Justification, then Paul and the other Apostles grew resolute, to
oppose this practice of theirs in Christian Churches, Gal. 2. 5. as it is most
evident by Paul's downright reproofs of them, in the Churches of Galatia, Gal.
2. 3, etc. Gal. 3. 1, etc. Gal. 4. 9, etc. Gal. 5. 1, 2. But especially mark
the manner of his reproof, in Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11. for he does there call all the
customs of Moses, but weak and poor Rudiments, whereunto as from the
beginning, (when you were first converted, and whilst ye lived in the Jewish
Synagogues) ye will be in bondage again.

3. The Apostle in Heb. 13. 9. exhorted the Jews (in dispersion) that were now
joined into Christian Church Assemblies, not to be carried about with diverse
and strange Doctrines, (namely touching the observation of Moses customs, for
their eternal Justification) for (says he) it is a good thing that the heart
be established with grace, and not with meats, which have not profited them
that have been exercised therein. And he calls the observation of meats and
drinks, and diverse washings, carnal Justifications, in Heb. 9. 10. which were
imposed on them (as teaching types only) until the time of bettering, by the
Mediators fulfilling of the better Covenant.

4. The Apostle says thus to the Colossians, Let no man judge you in meat or
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbaths
which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ, Col. 2. 16, 17.
And says he in Verse. 18. Let no man beguil you of your prize; that is to say,
of that precious liberty from the bondage of Moses Rites, which Christ has
merited for you by his death: and then he passes his sentence against the
authors of this evil, saying in Verse. 19. that they are but self-willed in
humbleness: and then he concludes in Verse. 20. If ye be dead with Christ from
the rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world, are ye subject
to Ordinances? that is to say, why do you still live in the observation of
Moses Rites, seeing they are but external and worldly things?

5. The Apostle does again call them the elements of the world, in Gal. 4. 3.
and he does also call the holy Sanctuary, but a worldly Sanctuary, in Heb. 9.
1. Therefore why do you subject your spiritual consciences to these worldly
things, seeing Christ has through his death in the flesh abrogated this Law of
Commandments, contained in Decrees (or Ordinances,) Ephesians. 2. 15. But of these
things see more in Chap. 5. Sect. 4, 5. and in my Book of the Institution of
the Sabbath, in page 116, etc.

6. Paul says in Phil. 3. 5, 6. As concerning the Law I was a Pharisee,
concerning zeal I persecuted the Church, and as concerning the Justification
which is of the Law, I was unrebukeable: and from thence the Apostle infers,
that if any man had cause to glory in the Justifications of Moses Law, he had
more cause to glory in it than any other. But says he in Verse. 7. What things
were gain to me, I now count loss for Christ: and in Verse. 8, 9. I count them
but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having my own
Justification which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the Justification which is of God by faith.

7. The Apostle Peter does write to the same sense to the Jews, (in 1 Pet. 1.
18.
dispersion) saying in 1 Pet. 1. 18. Ye know that ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver or gold, from your vain conversation, or as the
Syriack has it, from your vain (or empty) works (of the Law) received by
tradition from your Fathers.

Dr All says in his poor man's Library, part. 2. fol. 105. "That by vain
traditions from their Fathers, may be meant conversation of life, according to
Moses Law, which was vain and weak, to the attaining of eternal life: for
(says he) these works of the Law did not justify of themselves, they were but
shaddows and figures, and could not remit (moral) sins: from these Lawish
works the Jews were delivered, being now no more bound to Moses Law, seeing
Christ our Savior has fulfilled it. And to this sense Paul says, that he was
zealous of the Traditions of the Fathers before his conversion, Gal. 1. 13, 14.
not meaning it of humane Traditions, and pharisaicall Traditions, but of the
Traditions of Moses Law, which the Fathers left as an inheritance to their
children, for their bodily justifications from their ceremonial sins; though
those Traditions were corrupted by their children, to serve not only for their
bodily justifications, but also for their moral and eternal justification. Dr
Hammond does paraphrase this Verse of Peter thus; "This redemption from their
vain conversation, means, That Christ by his death has taken away the legal
Rites of mere external obedience, wherein the sages of the Jews placed all
their Religion.

8. The chief ground of this their superstitious Error, both of the apostate
and also of the converted Jews, did arise from their blind carnal reason, in
taking Moses Types too much in a literal sense: for it is observed The Hebrew
Doctors expound the statutes in Lev. 18. 5. not a^ Mr Norton does of the Law of
the Covenant of nature made with Adam, but of the bodily doing of Moses
statutes, as the condition of eternal life: and 2. they did as grossly err
in making these statutes to continue as the condition of life to the end of the
world.
by Mr Ainsworth in Lev. 5. 15. that the Hebrew Doctors say, "Behold It is said
in the Law, ye shall keep my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them; our
wise men have said, that the keeping and doing must be applied unto the
statutes, as well as unto the judgments; now the judgments are Commandments,
the reason (or meaning) whereof is manifest, and the good that comes by the
doing of them is known in this world, as the forbidding to rob, and to shed
blood, and the Commandment, to honor Father and Mother: but the statutes (or
Ordinances) are Commandments, the reason whereof is not known, etc. and all
the Sacrifices every one of them generally are statutes, (or Ordinances.) And
our wise men have said, that for the services of the Sacrifices, the world does
continue; for by the doing of the statutes and judgments, righteous men are
made worthy of life in the world to come: and the Law sets the Commandment
of the statute first, saying, Ye shall keep my statutes and my judgments,
which if a man do, he shall live in them, Lev. 185.

2. Maymony says, "That the Law, the statutes, and the Rites of it, do stand
for ever, yea for ever and ever, and that nothing may be added, nor nothing
taken away; this is noted by Mr Bro. more at large in Eccl. page 33. And says
he in Melchisedeck H. 1. This Tenent of theirs was and is among the Jews the
ground of all their Errors. This superstitious opinion of theirs was also
signified by Moses, when he put a vail upon his shining face, signifying
thereby, that the children of Israel (after the flesh) could not sted fastly
look unto the end of that which is now abolished, but their minds were blinded,
for until this day remains the same vail untaken away, in the reading of the
old Testament, (namely in the reading of the typical Rites of the first old
typical Covenant, of Testament, which Rites were ordained for their bodily
justification from their ceremonial sins. And 3. That they might be as a
teaching Schoolmaster unto Christ, that so they might be justified from all
their moral sins through faith in him. And this old typical Covenant is also
called a Testament in Exodus 24. 8. compared with Heb. 9. 20. which (typical)
vail is now done away by Christ; but even to this day when Moses is read, the
vail (of ignorance and unbelief) is upon their heart, 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15. And
indeed this literal understanding of the typical Rites of Moses Law, was so
rooted in all the Nation in general, that it was not easily taken away even
from the believing Jews, in the first preaching of the Gospel.

9. Cameron says in Triplici Foedere, These. 75. "That the Sacrifices,
Sacraments, and Ceremonies of the Ancients, had their carnal use, over and
besides their spiritual signification. And says he in These. 76. we deny not
but even the Sacraments of the New Testament, may have a carnal use by the
institution and custom of man, but not any such prescribed by them, by any
word of God, (as the Ceremonies of the Jews had) for God had appointed their
ceremonial works of the Law to be done, for the justification of the bodies of
all the National Church, from their ceremonial sins, before they might
presume to appear before God in his holy Temple, as I have showed it more at
large in Chap. 5, 6.

From hence we may see, that the false Apostles took these ceremonial
justifications of their body, in a larger sense than God intended it, namely
for the justification of their souls from their moral sins, as well as for the
justification of their bodies from their ceremonial sins.

But the Apostle Paul denies this Tenent, and does labor to confute it by
three sorts of Arguments. The Apostle does confute the Doctrine of
justification by the works of the Law, by three sorts of Arguments.


1. From the appointed time of ending all the Rites of Moses Law: namely from
the fullness of the time (appointed of the Father) was come, God sent forth his
Son, to redeem them that were under the Law, (from that bondage of Moses Rites)
that we might receive the adoption of Sons, (by faith in Christ) which is the
full fruit of such as are come to ripe age, from being children under the
rudiments of the world. But of this full time see my Exposition of Dan. 9. 24.

2. The second sort of Arguments which he uses is, because the said typical
works of the Law, were never ordained for any other kind of justification, but
of the body only from ceremonial sins, as I have showed it more at large in my
Exposition of Heb. 9. 10. and in that respect the Apostle does peremptorily
deny, that the said works were ordained to justify the conscience from dead
works, (namely from moral sins) Heb. 9. 9, 13, 14, 15. Heb. 10 4, 11. Act. 13.
39.

3. The third sort of Arguments which he uses is taken from Faith in Christ,
which God has ordained to be the only condition to be performed by the sinner
for his full justification from all his moral sins; as it is well observed by
Mr. Wotton (and by many others) the Apostles disputation against the false
Apostles (says he) was not so much by what we are formally justified, as by
what God requires to be preformed on the sinners part for his justification,
whether works, or Faith in Christ, Gal. 2. 16. Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. neither was their
disputation whether their own fulfilling of the Law, or whether our Savior
Christ's fulfilling it for them, was imputed to them for their formal
justification; but what it is that God requires on man's part to his
justification, whether Faith alone, or Faith joined together with the works of
the Law.

Mr. Woodbridge says in his Method p. 53. "That Christians attain that
Righteousness by Faith, which the Jews sought after by works, Romans 9. 31, 32.
Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness, have not attained to the
Law of Righteousness, wherefore? Because they sought it not by Faith, but as
it were by the works of the Law. Ergo, says he when justification is ascribed
unto Faith, it must be taken in the same sense, as when it is denied unto
works: but says he the Jews sought to be justified by works, as the matter (of
that condition) for which they should be justified; and therefore the Apostle
does directly oppose it in these words: By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh
be justified, namely in the sight of God; as it is expressed by the Psalmist in
Psalm. 143. 2. and by the Apostle also in Romans 3. 20. and Gal. 3. 11.

Conclusion.
From the consideration, of what is alleged in the said nine particulars, it
follows; that by as many as are of the works of the Law; is meant, as many as
sought for their eternal justification ex opere operato by their bodily doing
of the works of the Law.

CHAPTER. VIII.
Which is meant, by every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the Book of the Law.

BY every one than continues not, is meant the same thing that is meant in
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. by this phrase, he that confirms not, so the Hebrew is, but the
Seventy render it, he that continues not but I will first speak of the Hebrew
phrase, he that confirms not all things that are written in the Book of the
Law, namely he that confirms not the Spiritual Typified sense of it by Faith
in Christ, as well as the outward part of it by bodily exercise, for this Book
of the Law was given as a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation in both these
senses, namely 1. To the bodies of the National Church in relation to their
ceremonial sins: God Covenanted that upon their boily performance of the
Typical works of the Law, they shoud he cleansed, or justified from their
ceremonial sins; this was the Typical part of the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation. 2. In the Typified sense it was given to their souls in
relation to their moral sins; namely that upon their preformance of the
condition of that Covenant on their part, which was by believing in Christ the
only procuring cause of Gods Reconciliation, their moral sins should be
forgiven them, and so their souls should be justified from their moral sins;
and from thence it follows, that none else can confirm all things that are
written in the Book of the Law, according to the true sense of it, but such
only as have true Faith in Christ, being rooted and built up in him, being
stablished (or confirmed) in him as ye have been taught, Col 2. 7.

The coherence of this Exposition lies thus.

1. Christ was the giver of the Law at Mount Sinai, Act. 7. 30. and therefore
it was Christ that commanded Moses to tell his National Church in Deuteronomy. 27.
That it was his will and pleasure that they should in a most solomne manner
confirm the Covenant which he had made with them at Mount Sinai, as soon as
they were entered into the possession of the Land of Canaan; and for the greater
solemnity of their coufirmation, he commanded them to set up certain great
stones, and to plaster them with plaster; and to writ thereon all the words
of the said Law very plainly. and 2. For the higher solemnity, he commanded
that six of their Tribes (when they heard the blessings of the Law pronounced
toward Mount Gerezim) should confirm all the words) namely all the blessings)
of the Law, by saying Amen at the end of every blessing, Deuteronomy. 27. 26 Jos. 8.
30. 34, 35. And that the other six Tribes when they heard the curses of the
Law, toward mount Ebal, should likewise confirm all the words of the Law
(namely all the curses of the Law as it was given for the Covenant of Grace) by
saying Amen at the end of every curse, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. with Deuteronomy. 11. 29. By this
word Amen, all the twelve Tribes did Covenant to confirm all the words of the
Law, namely both the blessings, and the curses, the promises and the
threatenings, which appertained to the keepers, or to the breakers, of the Law
of the Covenant of Grace.

2. As soon therefore as Joshua had conquered A^, and had thereby gotten some
possession in the Land of Canaan, he did without any delay yield obedience to
the a foresaid command.

3. For the greater solemnity of their confirmation of the said Law and
Covenant, he did first build an Altar to the Lord in Mount Ebal (where the
curses were pronounced) as Moses had commanded, Jos. 8. 30. with De^t. 11 29.
and then, 2. Joshua offered thereon both burnt offerings and peace offerings
(as the most lively ties and representations of the sacrifice of Christ for the
procuring of their peace with God Heb. 10. 10.) these things did Joshua
perform just as the Lord had commanded it by Moses, Deuteronomy. 27. 2, 6, 7.
compared with Jos. 8. 31.

4. Then did all the Tribes resort thither to keep the feast of the Lord: for
there they did eat and rejoyee before the Lord their God.

5. By this Typical Covenant feast they were taught, that all the curses of
the Law were now expiated to all that did believe, and that God was attoned to
them by the true burnt offering, and peace offering of Christ's death, and
sacrifice; as it is also expressed, in Romans 5. 1, 11. and in other places

6. For the further solemnity of confirming all the words of the Law, as it was
given for a Covenant of Grace, not only Moses, but the Priests did also speak
unto all Israel before they came into Canaan, saying, in Deuteronomy. 27. 9. 10. Take
heed and hear O Israel: this day thou art become the people of Jehovah thy God,
to do his commands and his statutes which he commanded thee this day.

7. This very charge did Joshua renew unto them at Mount Ebal at their
solemn-Covenant feast, For there was a word (i.e. not a command) of all that
Moses commanded which Joshua read not before all the congregation of Israel,
with the women and little ones and strangers which were conversant among them,
Jos. 8. 35. But I entreat the Reader to take special notice, that all these
degrees and sexes of the people, are here owned and acknowledged to be the true
visible subjects of the said Covenant of Grace; and for this see further in
A^nsworth in Deuteronomy. 7. 11, 12.

From the premises we may see the true manner how they confirmed the Covenant
of Grace on their part.

1. They made profession of their subjection to all the Laws of Moses, the
general heads of all being contained in the ten Commandments, The National
Church confirmed the whole Law to do it by faith in Christ, or else to suffer
the curse of it as Covenantbreakers, by saying Amen at the end of every curse
pronounced, Exodus 24. 5
which also were ordained to be the rules of their faith, and of their holy
life and conversation.

2. They made profession of their faith in Christ's death and sacrifice, by
offering burnt-offerings and peace offerings, and by their Religious feasting
on the holy flesh of their peace offerings, with expressions of joy in Gods
atonement, which was by the sacrifice of Christ procured, for their
justification from all sin: they rejoiced, just as they did rejoice at the
first solemnization of this Covenant of Grace at Mount Sinai, Exodus 24. 5.

From these Considerations it follows; 1. That none else can truly confirm all
the words of the Law, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation, but such only as have true says in Christ: none but such can
truly say Amen to all the words of the Law.

Mr Ainsworth says in Numb. 5. 22. and in Deuteronomy. 27. 15. "When Amen is added at
the end of prayers or curses, it is an approbation and a confirmation, with a
desire that the thing may be so. And says he in Psalm. 41. 14. Amen implies
both a wishing of the thing to be so, and a persuasion in faith that so it
shall be, namely when it is added at the end of blessings or imprecations.

2. A more full view of the several times wherein the National Church did
confirm all the words of the Law, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace.

1. At Mount Sinai: for though the word confirm is not there expressed, as it
is in Deuteronomy. 27. 26. yet in true substance it is there expressed; for at Mount
Sinai all the people said with one mouth, All that Jehovah (Christ) has spoken
we will do, or we will say Amen to it, not only with bodily Exodus 19. 7, 8.
exercise, but we will also do it inwardly by faith in Christ, who is the true
end of the whole Law, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation to believing sinners: but without faith in Christ none can do
the Law, so as it was given at Mount Sinai, for the Law is spiritual, Romans 7.
14. "And what else is the meaning of the first Commandment, In Vindiciae
legis. page 235.
(says Mr Burges) but to have one God in Christ, our God by faith; for (says
he) if says had not been on such terms commanded, it had been impossible for
them to love God, or to pray unto God, for how can this be done without faith
through Christ. And it is true (says he) there is no mention made of Christ,
or of faith in Christ, in the first Commandment: but that is nothing (says
he) for love also is not there mentioned, and yet our Savior discovers it to
Seeing the Law was given as a Covenant of Grace at Mount Sinai, it follows that
the National Church did covenant to do it as a Covenant of Grace by faith in
Christ, when they said, All that Jehovah has said we will do. Exodus 24. 4, 5,
6, 7, 8.
be there, and so must faith and Christ be supposed to be there also by
necessary consequence: and he does further prove by diverse undeniable Reasons,
that the Decalogue does require faith and repentance in page 149, 166, 181,
182, 234. and thence it follows by necessary consequence, that the National
Church did covenant to do all the Law by faith in Christ, when they said, All
that Jehovah has said we will do, Exodus 19. 8.

2. It is further evident that the National Church did (at Mount Sinai)
confirm all the words of the Law, to do it by faith in Christ, because Moses
when he did repeat the Law to the people in Exodus 24. they all answered with
one voice and said, All the words (i. e* all the commands) which Jehovah
(Christ) has spoken we will do, Exodus 24. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And then 2. For the
fuller and stronger confirmation, they doubled their promise, saying in Verse.
7. We will do and be obedient. And then in the third place, They did for the
stronger confirmation of their Covenant on their part, offer sacrifices for the
procuring of Gods Reconciliation. And then 4. For the joy thereof, they feasted
on the holy flesh of their peace offerings before the Lord, Exodus 24. 4, 5.
compared with Psalm. 50. 5. And 5. For the fuller confirmation of this Covenant
at Mount Sinai, Moses took half the blood, and put it in Basins, and the other
half of the blood he sprinkled on the Altar, and then he took the Book of the
Covenant, (in the which was written the statutes and judgments, Exodus 24. 7. 2
King. 23. 2, 21. 2 Chronicles. 34. 30.) and read in the audience of the people, and
then they all said, All that the Lord has said we will do, and be obedient,
Verse. 7. And then in Verse. 8. Moses took the other half of the blood which he
had put in Basins, and sprinkled it on the people, saying, Behold the blood of
the Covenant, which the Lord has made with you concerning all these words: and
from thence the Apostle draws this Conclusion, that the first Covenant was not
dedicated without blood, Heb. 9. 19. Now the first Covenant was ordained, to be
for a typical pattern only of the Covenant of Grace, and in that respect it
was, that the blood of Beasts offered in sacrifice, and sprinkled on the Book,
and on the peoples representatives, was to typifie the blood of Christ, by the
which he confirmed the better Covenant, (namely the Covenant of Grace) which is
also called the second Testament, Heb. 8. 6, 7. and the New Testament, in Dan.
9. 27. with Mat. 26. 28. by the which he has dedicated for us a new and living
way into the holy Heavens, Heb. 10. 20. different from the bodily works of the
typical Testament.

3. The National Church did by their promise confirm the whole Law, as it was
given for a Covenant of Grace at Mount Sinai, saying thus unto Moses in Exodus
20. 19. Speak thou with us and we will hear, but let not God Exodus 20. 19.
speak with us lest we die: and God did so well approve of this their promise
and request, that he did thereupon promise Christ to speak unto them; for it is
from thence that Moses told them in Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 16. rhat God would raise up a
Prophet like unto him, and unto him thou shall hearken, according unto all that
thou askedst of Jehovah thy God in Horeb, saying, let me not hear again the
voice of the Lord my God, and then the Lord said unto me in Verse. 17. they have
well spoken which they have spoken, I will raise them up a Prophet from among
their breth^en like unto them, and I will put my words into his mouth, and he
shall speak unto them all that I shall command them: then in Verse. 19. it shall
come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken to my words, which he shall speak
in my name, I will require it of him, (or as the Seventy translate it, I will
take vengeance on him) and to that sense does the Apostle expound it in Act. 3.
23. Every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among
the people; and this threatening was fignally fulfilled on them, when for their
refusing to believe in Christ, he destroyed their City and Sanctuary, Dan 9 26.
Then wrath came on them to the utmost, 1 These 2. 16. On the contrary, so many
of them as did confirm the Law by faith in Christ, were made partakers of the
righteousness of the Law, Romans 8 4. namely of that justification from sin, that
was typified by the bodily justifications of the Law.

4. The National Church did at another time confirm all the words of the Law,
as it was given for a Covenant of Grace: for in Exodus 34. as soon Exodus 34. 4,
5, 6, 7. The Law at Mount Sinai did promise forgiveness to repenting and
believing sinners, therefore it was not given for the Law of Adam 's nature in
a separated sense, but in a conjunct sense only to the Covenant of grace
Vindiciae legis. page 234.
as Moses had hewed two Tables of stone like unto the first, he went up into
the Mountain as Jehovah had commanded him, and then Jehovah passed before him,
and proclaimed, saying, Jehovah, Jehovah, God pitiful and gracious,
long-suffering, and much in mercy and truth, keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniqu^ty, trespass and sin: and then the Lord said unto Moses in
Verse. 27. Write thou these words, for after the tenor of these words, (both
moral and positive, and of pardon promised to repenting sinners) I have made a
Covenant with thee, and with Israel. And it is manifest by Exodus 19. 7, 8. that
all Israel stood to this Covenant on their part.

Mr Ainsworth says, "That the abovesaid seven Attributes, do show Gods
affection to repenting and believing sinners. The Lord (says he) came down in
a Cloud, proclaimed his Name, renewed the Covenant, and repeated the principal
Laws of the Covenant. 2. Mr Burges says, In the second Commandment God is
described to be one showing mercy unto thousands, and by showing mercy (says
he) is meant pardon, as it appears by the contrary, visiting iniquity; and
therefore until sinners do turn unto God by true repentance, they cannot
receive Gods pardoning mercy; but as soon as they do receive Gods pardoning
mercy, they are thereby made sinlesse, and so consequently perfect doers of the
whole Law, 2 King. 17. 13. compared with Neh. 1. 9. and with Neh. 9. 29. and
Ezekiel. 18. 19, 21, 22. 2. None else can keep or do Gods Commandments, as they
were given for a Covenant of Grace, but such only as have a fixed hope (or
trust) in Gods atonement, through faith in Christ the Mediator of it, Psalm.
78. 7. and see more in Chap. 9. Sect. 4. n. 2.

3. This blessed proclamation of Gods merciful forgiveness to all repenting,
and beliveing sinners, does infer and advise all that love the truth in
sincerity, that this Covenant at Mount Sinai, is no other but the Covenant of
Grace and Reconciliation, and that there ore it must not be taken for the b^re
moral Law of nature in the which Adam was created; much less must it be taken
for that transient Covenant of nature teat was made with Adam, which Mr Norton
does usually mistake the Covenant of works made with Adam. But I have often
showed, that the Covenant made with Adam required but one work or act of eating
of the tree of life, for the fulfilling of it, and 2. that it was utterly
extinguished as soon as Adam, had but once tasted of the forbidden fruit.

5. The National Church did again confirm all the words of the Law to do
them, as they were given for the Covenant of Grace, in Deuteronomy. 5. 1, 2, 3. which
was about forty years after it was given at Mount Sinai, Deuteronomy. 1. 3.

Moses does repeat the Law to the National Church (forty years after they
came out of Egypt, Number. 33. 38.) saying, Jehovah made (or stru^k) a Covenant
with us in Horeb, Deuteronomy. 5. 2, etc. And then all the people in Verse. Deuteronomy. 5. 2.
27. said unto Moses, (by their representatives) All that Jehovah our God shall
speak unto thee, we will hear and do it. Then Jehovah (Christ) said unto Moses
in Verse. 28. I have heard the words of this people that they have spoken unto
thee, they have well said all that they have spoken; and thereupon the Lord
Christ did presently break out into this patheticall wish in Verse. 29. Who
shall give that their heart may be such in them, to fear me, and keep my
Commandments always. From this patheticall wish of Christ, it follows, that
they covenanted to do the whole Law, by the true fear of God in their hearts,
that is to say, to do it by faith in Christ, or else Christ would not have
given such an approbation of their promise, as he did in Verse. 28. and as he
did, by conjoyning thereto a promise of an eternal life in Heaven in Verse. 33.
which doubtless he would not have done, if they had not promised to do the
whole Law by faith in Christ, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace, under a
legal administration: and therefore it does from hence also follow in the
second place, that Christ Jesus did not accept of their bare verbal
confirmation, nor yet of their bare doing it by bodily exercise only, but of
such a doing of it, as proceeded from the true fear of God in their hearts; and
indeed none else can truly fear God in their heart, but such only as have a
true faith in Christ.

As for example;

1. It is said of Cornelius, that he was a devout man, and one that feared God,
Act. 10. 2. "But how could this be (says Dr Barns the Martyr) A description of
the true fear of God.
without God had taught him inwardly by faith? how could he know God and pray
devoutly to him, but by faith? Ergo (says he) he was justified before God by
his faith.

2. To fear God aright, is to be devoted to his feat, Psalm. 119. 38. or it is
to serve God with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12. 28.

3. God does absolutely promise to all his elected Israel, I will give them one
heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever, and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, and will not turn away from them to do them
good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from
me* Jer. 32. 39, 40. "And it is a truth beyond contradiction, (says Mr
Woodbridge in his Method 329.) That the giving of the first grace (i.e. of
faith in Christ) is promised, not as a part of the Covenant, but as a means and
qualification on man's part, for his entrance into Covenant.

4. This fear of God which Christ wished might be in their hearts, is so
described in Moses Law, that none else can have it but such only as have true
faith in Christ, as these Scriptures do testify; Deuteronomy. 4. 2, 40. Deuteronomy. 5. 29,
31, 32, 33. Deuteronomy. 6. 2, 13. Deuteronomy. 10. 12, 20. Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 27.
10. compared with Deuteronomy* 30. 11, 12. Deuteronomy. 29. 12. Deuteronomy. 31. 12. Jos. 1. 7, 8.
Jos. 22. 5. with 2 King. 17. 35, 36, 37, 38. Psalm. 19. 7. Psalm. 25. 10. Psalm.
103. 18. Psalm. 111. 10. Psalm. 132. 12. Prove. 7. 2. Eccles. 12. 13. Deuteronomy. 7. 9,
10, 11. Deuteronomy. 11. 1, 13, 27, 28. Deuteronomy. 13. 4, 18. Deuteronomy. 15. 5. Deuteronomy. 28. 9, 13.
1 King. 11. 38. 1 King. 8. 59.

6. After the captivity, the National Church did again confirm all the words
of the Law, to do them by faith in Christ, as they were given for the Covenant
of Grace.

And that they might the better express their serious resolution, to confirm
all the words of the Law, they said, We will make a sure Covenant, and we will
write it, and our Princes, and Priests and Levites shall seal it, Neh. 8. 38.
And then 2. For the stronger confirmation of their Covenant, Neh. 8. 38.
they recorded the very names of them that did seal it, Neh. 10. 1. And then 3.
For the further confirmation of their Covenant, they entered into a Curse, and
into an Oath, to walk in Gods Law given by Moses the servant of God, to observe
and do all the Commandments of the Lord our God, and his judgments and his
statutes, Neh. 10. 39.

And 2. They did thus solemnly enter into this Covenant, and into this Oath,
from the example of their Forefathers in Deuteronomy. 29. 10, etc. for all Israel took
themselves to be bound up in that Covenant: and David did acknowledge that his
consent was included in his Forefathers Covenant, and therefore he said in
Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn and I will ratify it, to observe the judgments
of thy justice; and this he performed in part by his sanctified walking, but
more fully by his faith in Christ, as the procuring cause of Gods atonement
and forgiveness, for by that faith he had daily recourse to Gods Throne of
Grace in Christ, where he obtained Gods Reconciliation and forgiveness for his
daily failings. This was the true way whereby he did confirm Gods Covenant, to
the perfect keeping of the whole Law, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace;
and thence it follows, 1. That he that will be justified from sin, and saved
eternally by the justice of the Law of God, must be saved by faith in Christ
only, for faith in Christ is that justice or conformity to the Law, that God
does most especially require and command in the Law of Moses, 1 John 3. 23.
Joh. 5. 46, 47. Romans 5. 1, 2. And 2. Thence it follows, that in case any son of
Adam could keep the Law by the strength of nature, as perfectly as Adam did in
his innocence, (it might make him live a sinless life here on earth) but it
could not bring him to Heaven, because there is no other condition made for an
eternal life in Heaven, by the Covenant of Grace, but by faith in Christ only,

Conclusion.

No man on earth can confirm all the words of the Law to do them, neither by
the strength of his own natural principles, nor yet by the natural principles
of Christ, (or of any other) for them, seeing the Law at Mount Sinai was not
given for the Covenant of nature, but for the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation to repenting and believing sinners only: therefore none else can
truly confirm all the words of the Law to do them, but such only as have
attained to the supernatural Grace of true faith in Christ, the only true end
of all the Law of Moses, for justification to every one that believes, Romans
10. 4. The natural performance of the condition of the Covenant of nature, is
no performance of the supernatural condition of the Covenant of Reconciliation.

Sect. 2.
This phrase, He that continues not, is borrowed from the Seventy in Deuteronomy. 27.
26. and means no other thing than is meant by the former word, confirm.

1. MR. Ainsworth says in Lev. 26. 15. "To break the Covenant, is expounded
Nothing but faith in Christ does make men to continue to do the whole Law, as
it was given for a Covenant of Reconciliation, therefore such at trusted to
their doing of it by bodily exercise only, did not continue to do the Law, but
did break it. And see c. 9.. 5 Romans 11. 20.
by the Apostle, of not continuing in it, Heb. 8. 9. from Jer. 31. 32. on the
contrary (says he) to confirm, is to continue in doing all things commanded,
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. with Gal 3. 10. And from thence it follows, that such as have
covenanted to do the whole Law by faith in Christ, (who is the only true end of
the Law) as the National Church did, and yet do neglect to get true faith into
their hearts, by the constant use of all possible means, they do not continue
to do the Law according to their Covenant. And 2. Though such as have gotten
faith in Christ into their hearts, do daily sin some or other sin against the
Law of their sanctified walking, yet for all that they do not break the
Covenant of Grace, because that Covenant was given not only for a rule of
sanctified walking, but also for the way of Reconciliation to believing
sinners, that they might be daily justified from the guilt of all their sins.
And thence it follows in the third place, that nothing else can be said to
break that Covenant, but the want of faith in Christ, which all professors of
Christ have covenanted to get, for the keeping of the Law. And to this sense
does the Apostle reason in Romans 11. 20. Because of unbelief they were broken
off, but thou stand (i.e. continuest in that Covenant) by faith; and thence
he infers this exclamation in Verse. 22. Behold the goodness and the severity of
God, on them which fell (from the Covenant of Grace through unbelief) severity,
but toward thee goodness, if thou continuest in his goodness, (i.e. if thou
continuest in his good Covenant of Grace, by faith in Christ) otherwise thou
also shall be cut off. The Apostle does tell us No sin does utterly break the
Covenant of Grace, but the want of faith in Christ.
in these words, that there is no other way to continue in his goodness,
(manifested in his Covenant of Grace) but by faith in Christ only; and of this
see more in Ainsworth, in Numb. 15. 31. And 2. on the contrary, no other sin
does utterly break the Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, but want of faith
in Christ, in not laying hold upon Gods pardoning mercy, Heb. 8. 9. Heb. 10.
38, 39. Jude v. 5. Lev. 26. 14, 15. Numb. 14. 34. Deuteronomy. 31. 16, 17. Zach. 10.
11.

2. The Apostle does expound the word continue [of faith in Christ only] in 2 Timothy 3 14, 15, 16. Continue in all things thou have learned, and have been
assared of, for thou have known the holy Scriptures (of Moses and the Prophets)
from a child, which are able to make thee wise to salvation, through faith in
Jesus Christ. And from hence it follows, that if it could be supposed, that any
son of Adam could keep the whole Law, as exactly as Adam did in his innocence,
yet it could not make him wise to salvation, because nothing else can make a
man wise to salvation in Heaven, but faith in Christ Jesus. The Apostle John
speaking of temporary professors, says, If they had been of us, no doubt but
they would have continued with us; namely, if they had been such as had had the
true grace of faith in their hearts, (which is a lasting grace) they would have
continued with us in the same faith, Joh. 2. 19. And then says he in Verse. 24.
If that (faith) which ye have heard from the beginning, shall remain in you, ye
shall also continue in the Son and in the Father. And our Savior said thus to
his Disciples, If ye continue in my Word (which is done by faith only) then are
you my Disciples, Joh. 8. 31. And Paul and Barnabas persuaded the Religious
Jews and Proselites that followed them, to continue in the Grace of God, Act.
13. 43. namely to continue in the Covenant of Grace, by stirring up their faith
in Christ; and when Paul and Barnabas returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium,
and to Antio^h, they confirmed the souls of the Disciples, and exhorted them to
continue in the faith, Act. 14. 22. And Paul said thus to the Colossians, You
that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works, now
has he recenciled in the body of his flesh through death, to Col. 1. 21, 22,
23. Gods Reconciliation procured by the mediation of Christ to believing
sinners, does make them perfectly holy, and without blemish, and spotless in
his fight, that is to say, it does perfectly justify them.
present you holy and without blemish, and spotless in his sight, (so Bro.
reads it) if ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, Col. 1. 21, 22, 23.
and from thence it follows, that none else can have Gods Reconciliation, to
make them perfectly holy from all sin, and perfectly without blemish, and
spotless in Gods sight, but such only as have true says in Christ, the only
Mediator and procurer of Gods Reconciliation; and to this very sense does the
Apostle speak in Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things that are written in the Book of the Law, (namely as it was given for the
Gospel of Reconciliation through faith in Christ.) And thus Samuel told the
people, saying, If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and obey his voice,
and not rebel against the Commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye and
also the King that reigns over you, continue following the Lord your God.
This is the true sense of the word continue in Gal. 3. 10.

3. It was for the want of faith in Christ, that God found fault with them, Heb
8. 8. namely with the National Church, (and not with it, as some translate it)
namely not with the typical Covenant of works, for God ordained that to belong
to the Covenant of Grace no otherwise, but as the type belongs to the truth:
God never gave the typical Covenant of works, for a Covenant of salvation by
it self alone, but he gave it for the sake of the thing typified, conjunctim,
and not divisim, until Christ had fulfilled the said typical Covenant. But
contrary to Gods appointment, the carnal Jews did trust to their outward doing
of the works of the Law, for life and salvation; but Paul does often rebuke
them for their gross mistake of the works of the Law, and tells them, that
those typical works were ordained to be but as a teaching Schoolmaster unto
Christ: it is absurd therefore to say, that God found fault [with it] namely
with the typical pattern of the Covenant of Grace; but he found fault [with
them] as it is expressed in Verse. 9. because they continued not in my Covenant.
They covenanted to couple faith in Christ to the litterall sense of the
command, and to the typical pattern of the Law of works, and in case they had
done so, he had not found any fault with them, but on the contrary, would have
esteemed them as the true doers of the Law, for their justification from all
sin: but because they did not couple faith in Christ to the letter, and to the
typical works of the Law, therefore he found fault with them as
Covenant-breakers in Verse. 9. for nothing else but the want of faith does fully
break that Covenant; and thence it follows, that God did not find fault with
the typical Covenant of works, seeing he ordained it to be a Schoolmaster unto
Christ, but he found fault with them, because they continued not to do his
Covenant, by believing in Christ, as they promised to do at Mount Sinai, and at
sundry times afterward.

4. From hence the Reader may see, that Mr Weames does make a very bad
Exposition of the typical works of the Law: "for (says he) Ezekiel says in
Chap. 20. 25. That the works of the Law were not good; this Exposition I did
once follow in my former Reply in page 120. but I perceive since then, by some
Animadversions that I received from a godly Friend, that Mr Weames's Exposition
is very bad; for Ezekiel must thus be understood, that the Lord in wrath did
give over his National Church to statutes not good, namely to Heathen
statutes, when they were carried captive into Heathen Countries. But in case
the National Church had but regarded the statutes of Moses, as the typical
part of the Covenant of Grace, for which end they were given, they would have
been as good to them, as our Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper are to
us.

5. From the premises it follows, that faith in Christ does denominate a
believing sinner to be one, that does continue in all things that are written
in the Book of the Law, as it is also most fully evident by the like equivalent
term in Deuteronomy. 11. 22. Ye shall diligently keep all these Commandments which I
command you, to do them, to love the Lord your God, to walk in his ways, and
to cleave unto him; that is to say, to continue fast united unto him, and to
his Laws, as Ainsworth does expound it in Deuteronomy. 10. 20. namely to cleave unto
him with purpose of heart, Act. 11. 23. and with the soul, Psalm. 63. 9. and
with a continued resolution, Ruth 1. 14, 16. And says he in Deuteronomy. 11. 10.
Moses exhortation is to a continual and constant obedience, saying, Thou shall
love Jehovah thy God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and his
judgments, and his Commandments all thy days, that is to say, constantly and
continually, Deuteronomy 12. 1. or for evermore, 2 King 17. 37. 1 Chronicles. 28 7. Col. 1.
22, 23. But without faith in Christ it is not possible to please God, Heb. 11.
6. And therefore the Law as it was given for a Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation, does command all finners to believe in Gods Reconciliation,
through the mediation of Christ, who was ordained to be the only propitiation
for their sins, that so through him they might be justified from all their
moral sins, from the which they could not be justified by the typical works
of Moses Law, Act. 13. 38, 39.

6. The Law of Moses required the National Church to do the Law; 1. By their
sanctified walking, and in that respect they must abstain from every thing that
defiles their bodies from ceremonial sin; for none that were guilty of
ceremonial sins might come into Gods holy Temple until they were legally
purified. 2. Therefore when they were defiled with ceremonial sins, the Law
of Moses required them to do the appointed works of the Law, for the purifying
(i.e.) for the justifying of their bodies from the said ceremonial sins,
before they might appear before God in his holy Temple. The most usual
defilements were expiated only by the washing of their bodies, but they could
not be justified from some sorts of ceremonial defilements, but by the blood of
Bulls and Goats, etc. and in those cases the owner must impose both his hands
on the head of his offering, and confess his sin, and then as soon as he had
performed these works of the Law, his sin was forgiven him. But the children
of Israel 2 Cor. 3. 13. Faith in the true nature of it is a steady or: a firm
persuasion in the promises.
(in the general) could not look steadfastly to the end of that which is
abolished, 2 Cor. 3. 13. implying by this word steadfastly, that the National
Church had but a temporary faith in the works of the Law, and that for the want
of true faith they could not look steadfastly unto Christ the true end of the
Law for justification to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. It is said in
Exodus 17. 12. That Moses hands were faith, that is to say steady; and says
Ainsw. this does show, that the force of the Hebrew word Emunah, which
signifies faith, is a steady or firm persuasion in Gods promises; and the
Hebrew word Amen, is of the same force, and therefore it is used as a word of
confirming our prayers by faith. 3. The Hebrew word for Abraham's says, does
signify in Genesis 15. 6. that he trusted to, or depended upon the promise of
God, as sure, certain, stable and constant: he trusted to the promise of Gods
Reconciliation through the obedience of Christ in his combat and sacrifice,
Gen, 3. 15. but now declared unto Abraham in other words. 4. This act of faith
was lively typified Imposition of hands upon the head of their Sacrifices was
ordained to typifie their faith of dependence upon the true Sacrifice, as the
only procuring cause of Gods atonement for their justification.
by the act of the sinner, in imposing both his hands with all his might upon
the head of the sin-offering; for when the sinner brought his sin or
trespass offering to the Priest, he was commanded to impose his hands with all
his might upon the head of his sacrifice, to signify thereby his steady says
of dependence on the true sin-offering Christ, as the only procuring cause of
Godss atonement; and then as soon as he had confessed his sins, the legal
promise annexed was, that he should have Gods atonement for his justification
from his said sins. Mr Ainsw. says, that the Apostle makes this inference in
Heb. 10. 21. Having a High Priest over the house of God, let us draw near to
him with a true heart in full assurance of says.

7. The Hebrew Doctors do explain this act of imposing hands to the said sense;
they say when the High Priest imposed his hands on the live Scapegoat, he
prayed thus; "O Lord make atonement now for the sins, and for the
iniquities, and for the trespasses of thy people Israel. They say also, "That
neither Reconciliation-day, nor the sin-offering, nor the trespasse-offering,
do make atonement for any, but for them that repent and believe in their
atonement.

2. They do usually call their sacrifices their atonement, because they were
The Hebrew Doctors did usually call their Sacrifices their atonement.
ordained to procure Gods atonement to such as did believe in their
atonement. See Ainsw in Lev. 4. 4. and in Lev. 4. 4. and in Lev. 5 5, 6. and
Numb. 5. 7.

3. I have observed in my former printed Reply, in p. 197, 198, and 203. that
the word hand in Lev. 3. 2, 8. is put for both the hands, as it is also
evident. by conferring it with Lev. 16. 21. and with Exodus 17. 12. and with
Numb. 8. 12. Lev. 24. 14. Deuteronomy. 17. 7. Mar. 5. 23. Mar. 16. 18. and to this
sense also Ainsw. does expound hand for hands, in Lev. 1. 4. and Lev. 9. 22.

4. Mr Warren says, "That by laying the hand upon the head of the sacrifice,
is signified the apprehending of Christ by faith. On Justif. p. 249 in his
Method. p. 242.


5. Mr Woodbridge says, "As under the Law there was no propitiation by
sacrifice typical, but it supposed on the offenders part the concurrence of
some act; as confession, Lev. 5. 5. humiliation, Lev. 23, 29, 30. laying his
hand on the head of the sacrifice, Lev. 1. 4. signifying thereby that says by
the which sinners shall be justified, when Christ the true sacrifice should be
offered up But says Maymony, there is no imposing hands on offerings but by
Israelites, by man only and not by women: See Ainsw. in Lev 22. 25. and so in
like sort circumcision did belong to men only and not to women; and yet the
spiritual application of all these types did belong to women as much as unto
men, in resting upon Christ by faith, as the only procurer of Gods atonement
and forgiveness for their justification.

Conclusion.
Such only are said to continue in all things that are written in the book of
the Law, as have attained to faith in Christ, for by faith in Christ a sinner
does make his obedience perfect to the whole Law, as it was given for a
Covenant of grace, because such sinners do go unto God through faith in Christ
for his daily atonement and forgiveness, by the means whereof they are
justified daily from all sin, and are thereby made as perfectly holy and
righteous as the Law of God (as it was given for a Covenant of grace) does
require them to be: and in case any do not thus continue to do the Law, they
are under the curse.

Sect. 3.
What is meant by All things in Gal. 3. 10.

ANswer. The word things, does in the Hebrew mean 1. Every word or command. 2.
Every word of promise. 3. Every word of threatening that is comprehended in
Moses Law, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation. But none
can continue in all these things without faith in Christ; for all the promises
of God are in Christ Yea, and are in him Amen: 2. Seeing Christ is the end of
the whole Law; none else can continue to do all things therein contained, but
such as have says in Christ. And 3. Without faith in Christ there can be no
true obedience performed to any one command: and thence it follows, that faith
in Christ is the principal of those all things that is commanded in the Law of
Moses, Faith in Christ is the most principal part of those all things, that is
commanded to be done for life in the Law of Moses.
as it was given for a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation; with
restipulations often renewed on both sides. Mr Calvin says in Instit. p. 370.
"Whatsoever a man thinks, purposes or does, before he be reconciled to God
by faith in Christ, is accursed, and not only of no value to righteousness, but
of certain deserving to damnation. And says Luther in Gal. p. 23. "Whosoever
goes about to please God with works going before faith, goes about to please
God with sin: and that (says he) is nothing else but to heap sin upon
sin, and to mock God, and to provoke him to wrath. "And nothing in man (says
Mr Woodbridge in his Method. 209.) is lovely in Gods eyes without faith: and
thence it follows, that when by faith we are said to please God, or to be
pleasing to him, Hebr. 11. 6. or that it is impossible to please him without
faith; it must be understood of the pleasingness of the person as well as of
the Heb. 11. 6.
action, as I have also showed it in the example of Cain and Abels sacrifice in
Genesis 4. 7. And the reason is, because all the commands, promises and
threatenings of the Law at Mount Sinai, do appertain to the Covenant of grace,
Deuteronomy. 30. 19, 20. Deuteronomy 27. 26. and not to the Covenant of nature, as Mr Norton
does corrupt the sense of the word Law at Mount Sinai.

2. Observe these differences between Paul and Moses.

1. Paul calls that All things in Gal. 3. 10. which Moses calls All the
words of the Law in Deuteronomy. 27. 26. (i.e. all the commands or charges of the
Law.) See Ainsw. in Genesis 15. 1. in Exodus 34. 28. in Lev. 18. 4. Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
Deuteronomy. 12. 32. and in Psalm. 7. 1.

2. Moses said, Cursed be he. But Paul says, Cursed is every one.

3. Moses says, That confirms not. But Paul says, that continues not.

These dfferences were first made by the LXX, whom Paul follows: and by that
we may see, that Paul does much approve of the various phrases of the LXX
Translators: and so consequently he approves of the like differing expressions
in translations, provided the true sense be kept: and indeed various
expressions when they are conserred together, do greatly help to explain the
sense.

CHAPTER IX.
Showing what is meant by this Phrase To do them.

1. THis phrase [to do them] does mean, such a doing of the Law, as is
opposite to that doing that was taught by the false Apostles, for a sinners
justification.

The false Apostles taught, that the doing of the works of the Law by bodily
exercise, was of necessary use for their justification in Gods sight; This
phrase, to do them, is meant chiefly of the inward doing of the Law, as it was
given for a Covenant of Grace, by says in Christ only the: true end of the Law.
but in opposition thereto the Apostle Paul does affirm, that every one is
cursed that continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the
Law to do them, in that manner that was required in the Covenant of Grace; and
that was to do them, not only outwardly with the flesh or body, but also
inwardly by faith in Christ: and in this very sense the Apostle does cite this
word [to do] in Rom 2. 25, 26. Circumcision verily profits, if [thou do] the
Law, namely if thou do it so, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace to be
done, and that was by faith in Christ, the true end of the Law for
justification to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. And says the Apostle in
Verse. 26. If the circumcision do the righteousness of the Law, that is to say,
do it inwardly by faith in Christ, (for in that their flesh was circumcised,
they did it outwardly) and from hence it follows, that faith is here called the
righteousness of the Law on the sinners part, for his justification from sin.

2. God promises to his elected Israel in Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and do them; implying hereby,
that none can walk in Gods statutes, and do them, until God do put his Spirit
into their hearts, to cause them to believe in Christ, the only true end of the
Law for their justification: and from thence it follows, that none else can do
Gods statutes, as they were given for a Covenant of Romans 2. 25, 26. Ezekiel. 36.
27. Psalm. 103. 17, 18. Romans 4. 11, 13. Gal. 3. 12. Romans 9. 31, 32.
Grace and Reconciliation, until God by his Spirit does work in them the grace
of faith in Christ; by that means only God does effectually cause them to do
his statutes in the typified sense.

3. David says in Psalm. 103. 17, 18. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting
to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness [or his
justification from sin] unto childrens children, to such as keep his Govenant,
and to those that remember his Commandments [to do them.] In these words David
does make a full description of a sinners justification. 1. He does make the
everlasting mercy of the Lord, in pardoning sin to them that fear him, and his
justification, to them that keep his Covenant, to be one and the same thing;
but none else can fear him, nor keep his Covenant, but such persons only as
have a true faith in Christ; neither can any else remember his Commandments,
to do them so as they were given for a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation,
but such only as have a true faith in Christ, as the only Mediator of Gods
reconciled forgiveness. These kinds of persons are the only subjects that are
constantly justified, even to childrens children to the worlds end.

4. Paul says in Romans 4. 13. The promise was not made to Abraham or to his
seed through the Law, i.e. through his bodily doing of the work of
circumcision, and of washings, etc. but through the righteousness (or the
justification) of faith; and therefore the work of circumcision in Verse 11. is
called the seal of the righteousness of that faith, which he had being yet
uncircumcised; for the Apostle does tell us, that the (outward works of the)
Law is not of faith, but (says he) the man that does them, (so as they were
given for a Covenant of Grace) shall live in them, Gal. 3. 12. or that does
them so, as Abraham did the Law of circumcision, by that faith in Christ which
he had, being yet uncircumcised.

5. The Apostle tells us in Romans 9. 31, 32. That Israel which followed after
the Law of righteousness, (or of justification from ceremonial sins, by the
bodily doing of the typical works of the Law) has not attained to the Law of
righteousness, (or of justification from moral sins) wherefore? because they
sought it not by faith, but as it were by the (bodily) works of the Law. The
Apostle does here speak of a double Law of righteousness, (or of a double Law
of justification from sin) the one outward, the other inward; the one of the
letter, the other of the Spirit; the one by the bodily works of the Law, the
other by faith in Christ the true end of the Law; the one for the justification
of the body from ceremonial sins, the other for the justification of the soul
from moral sins: and in this double sense it is, that Mr Woodbridge says,
that the Law of righteousness in Verse. 31. is called the righteousness which is
of faith in Verse. 30. and so it is also called in Heb. 11. 7. and in Romans 10.
6. compared with Verse. 10. and see what more I have also cited from in the end
of Chap. 7.

6. Cornelius is said to work the righteousness of the Law, and to be accepted
Cornelius is said to work the righteousness of the Law no otherwise, but by his
faith in Christ only. Of which see more in. Sect. 5. at n. 3.
of God, Act. 10. 35. but without faith it is not possible to please God, Heb.
11. 6. therefore Cornelius did work the righteousness of the Law by his faith,
even then when he lived in a Heathen Country, remote from the Jews National
Church, where the typical works of the Law were done, for as yet he was an
uncircumcised Gentile, Act. 10. 35. and many other Gentiles did the like, as I
have expounded. P. Martyr says in Romans 9. 30 31. "The Israelites did not
uprightly seek the righteousness of the Law, for in case they had sought it
according to the true meaning of the Law, they had believed in Christ that was
the true end of the Law, and then they should thereby have been justified (from
the guilt of all their moral sins.) But says he a few lines after, being void
of says and of the Spirit of Christ, they could not keep the Law; for (says
he) faith is the seal and life of all those things which are commanded in the
Law.

7. When the National Church covenanted to be obedient in Ex. 24 7. they did
thereby covenant to perform the whole Law, by the obedience of faith in Christ,
as it is called in Romans 1. 5. which is not done, until every thought is
brought unto the obedience of Christ by says, 2 Cor. 10. 5. and it is also
said, that by the preaching of the Word a great company of the Priests became
obedient unto the faith, Act. 6. 7. and on the contrary it is said, that such
as refuse to be obedient, shall perish in their sins, Isa. 1. 16, 17.

But for the cl^erer understanding of this word Do, I will open it from the
Context from ver. 9, to 12.

1. In v. 9. the Apostle does make this inference from the premises: So then
they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham, (and not Gal. 3. 9,
10, 11, 12. explained from the Context.
with working Abraham) the blessing promised to him in his seed Christ, was
given to him before he had done the typical work of circumcision; yea it was
given to him 430. years before the whole body of the typical Law of works, was
given to the National Church at Mount Sinai: and from thence it follows, that
as Abraham was justified by faith in Christ to come without any help from the
works of the Law; so by the same faith in Christ already come, we are still
justified without any help from the works of the Law: for now Christ by his
death has fulfilled these types, and so consequently the use of them for ever
after is abolished.

2. From thence the Apostle infers in v. 10. That as many as are of the
works of the Law (for their eternal justification thereby) are under the
curse; for it is written, cursed is every one that continues not in all things
that are written in the book of the Law to do them: namely, as many as are of
that judgment, that faith in Christ. is not a sufficient condition to be
performed by a sinner for his eternal justification, except he join thereto
the bodily works of the Law. They are under the curse of the Covenant of grace,
because they do apostatize from the condition of that Covenant that was made
with the consent of the whole National Church at Mount Sinai; for then they
covenanted to do the whole Law by faith in Christ, as it was given for a
Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation: But you that are for justification from
all sin by the bodily doing of the works of the Law, do not continue in that
Covenant, but do apostatize from it; therefore you are under the curse; for it
is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the book of the Law to do them; namely, to do all by faith in
Christ, according to the first promise at Mount Sinai: the which promise you
have often renewed.

3. From thence the Apostle does further confute them with another argument in
v. 10. saying, But that no man is justified by the Law (i.e. by the bodily
works of the Law, as he does explain himself in v. 2, 5, 10. in the sight of
God, is evident; for it is written, The just by faith shall live, Hab. 2. 4.
and not such as think to make themselves just by works: for in these words Paul
does utterly exclude all the external works of the Law, as no way coincident or
coordinate with the grace of faith; for says he, None else are justified from
sin in Gods sight, but such as are first made just by performing the
condition of the Covenant by faith only, such persons only shall live
eternally.

4. From thence the Apostle does proceed to a 4th Argument in v. 12. saying,
The Law is not of faith, (i.e. the said works of the Law may be done by the
whole National Church, for the justification of the body from ceremonial
sins, without any faith at all; for those works of washing the body with water,
and with the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, had virtue by Gods
Ordinance, ex opere operato, to purify or justify the body from ceremonial
sins, without any faith at all, as the Apostle does also explain himself in
Gal. 3. 19, 21, 23, 24. and in Heb. 9. 13.) But the man that does those works
of the Law, (by looking unto Christ by says, as the only true end of the Law)
shall live in them, that is to say, shall live by looking to the true end of
them, which is Christ by says.

5. This is the true sense of this phrase to do them (in Gal. 3. 10.) from the
Context; and from thence it follows, that it is no small error in Mr Norton,
to expound this doing of the Law, to be meant of the perfect doing of the
Covenant of nature, which he does also make to be the moral Law of nature,
(though much amiss) strength of pure nature, as in the time of Adam's
innocence, seeing the Law of that Covenant of nature that was made with Adam,
was no other but a transient positive Law. And 2. Seeing it required no other
work to be done for the fulfilling of it, or for the final breaking of it, but
one single act of eating only.

6. The Apostles disputation is quite another thing from the Covenant of nature
that was made with Adam: his disputation is altogether against the false
Apostles, that held there was no justification from all sin, without their
bodily doing the works of the Law. The Apostle does not deny, but that the
bodies of the National Church were justified from their ceremonial sins, by
their bodily doing of the typical works of the Law; for in case he should have
denied this, he should by the same reason have denied the Law of works to be a
Schoolmaster unto Christ, but he might not deny this: and therefore that which
he denied was, that the works of the Law were not ordained to be a coordinate
means with faith, for the souls justification from moral sins. And to this
sense do the rest of the Apostles argue the matter in Act. 15. 1, etc.

7. It is further evident, that the true doing of the Law, as it was at the
first given for a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, is meant of doing it by
faith in Christ, as the only procurer of Gods Reconciliation, for their perfect
justification from all their moral sins; as it is explained by these
particulars.

1. The Law says, Do the Passover; so the Hebrew Text speaks in Ex. 12. 48.
Numb. 9. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Deuteronomy. 16. 1. and so speaks the Greek Text in Mat.
26. 18. But the carnal Jews mistook the true nature of this doing; they made
account that in case they did but do the Passover by their bodily exercise
only, they had done as much as the Law required. But Moses Law commanded a more
spiritual doing, namely, to do the Passover by faith in Christ the true
Passover; and in that respect it is said, that Moses kept the Passover by
faith, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the firstborn of
Egypt, should also destroy them, Heb. 11. 28. He saw by faith that Christ was
the true Passover, that by his obedience unto death, did appease Gods wrath,
and procure his atonement, for his full justification from all sin, 1 Cor. 5.
7, 8.

2. The Law said, Do the Feast of Boothes; so speaks the Hebrew Text in Deuteronomy.
16. 13. But the carnal Jews made account that if they did but do that Feast,
by their bodily exercise only, they had done as much as the Law required. But
Moses Law commanded them to do that Feast, with a more spiritual doing, Lev.
23. 34, etc. namely, to do it by faith in the true Tabernacle, which was to
come into the world by his birth at this time of the year, to dwell in the
Tabernacle of our flesh, J^h. 1. 14. which the Lord pight and not man, Heb. 8.
2. who is also called the greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with
hands, that is to say, not of this building, who entered by his own blood once
(for all) into the holy place, having found eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.
11, 12.

3. The Law says, Do thy Sacrifice; so speaks the Hebrew Text in Ex. 10 25. 1
King. 12. 27. Jer. 33. 18. Psalm. 66. 18. (See Ainsworth there) and see how this
word do is used in Job 7. 20. cited in Chap. 20. at n. 8. But the carnal Jews
understood this doing, but of their outward doing of those works that
appertained to their Sacrifice, as a sufficient doing for the procuring of Gods
Reconciliation, for their eternal justification from all sin. But the Prophets
did most sharply reprove them, for their gross mistake of the true doing; and
in that respect Isay does call the Nation in general, the people of Gomorrah,
saying thus in Isa. 1. 10. Give ear unto the Law of our God, ye people of
Gomorrah. To what purpose is the multitude of Isa. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13, 16.
your sacrifices? I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of
he-Goats. And says he in Verse. 12. Who required this at your hands? did I ever
require the outward act of the body, without the inward act of says in Christ?
And then says he in Verse. 13. Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an
abomination to me, and your new Moons, and your solemn Feasts, my soul hates,
because ye do them by your bodily exercise only with says. And then in Verse.
16, 17. he does exhort them, saying, Put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes: he calls the bare outward doing of their sacrifices, the
evil of their doings, because they did not do it by says in Christ the true
sacrifice; and thence he enforces another exhortation, saying, Cease to do
evil, learn to do well, (i.e. cease to do your sacrifices without faith, and
learn to do them by faith in Christ the true sacrifice: learn it by the
diligent use of the means of grace, and cease not to use the means, until you
have attained to faith in Christ.

4. Much after this sort does the Psalmist reprove them, for not offering their
sacrifices by faith in Christ, Psalm. 50. 5, 6, 7. and Jeremy did reprove them
for the like want of faith in Christ the true sacrifice, Jer. 7. 22, 23. and
Jer. 32. 23.

5. God reproved Cain for this very sin, saying to him in Genesis 4. 7. If thou do
well shall thou not be accepted? that is to say, if thou do thine offerings in
faith, shall thou not be accepted? surely thou shall be as much accepted as
Abel is. Mr Ainsworth does observe from this phrase, if thou do well, that God
does thereby teach us, that well-doing consists not in the outward offerings
which Cain brought, but in says which he wanted, Heb. 11. 4. Joh. 6. 29. and
from thence the Apostle concludes, that Cain's good works were evil, only for
the lack of faith in Christ, 1 John 3. 12. there was no difference to the eye
of man in their bodily doings, for Cain brought of the best of the fruits of
the earth, just as it was afterward commanded to be done in the Law; but his
sin was, in that he wanted faith in Christ the true oblation: he did not strive
for that grace with that unwearied industry in the use of the means, as he
ought to have done.

4. The Hebrew Text says, Do thy sin (i.e. do thy sin offerings) Lev. 9. 7,
22. Lev. 16. 9. Exodus 29. 36. 39, 41, 42. Numb. 6. 11, 16. The carnal Jews made
account, that in case they were exact in the bodily doing of their
sin offerings, that it was as much as was required to be done on their part for
their eternal justification from all sin: but the Apostle Paul does tell us,
that the Law required a more spiritual doing, namely of doing them by faith in
Christ the true sin-offering, Heb. 10. 5. and he does again tell us in ^ Cor. 5
21. That God made Christ to be our true sin-offering (for this end) that we
might be made the righteousness of God (or the justification of God) in him,
that is to say, by faith in him. The Prophet Daniel likewise foretold, that at
the end of seventy sevens of years, the Messiah should by his death do these
four things; 1. That he should end the Leviticall use of all sin offerings. 2.
That he should make Reconciliation, (i. e procure Gods atonement) for
iniquity. 3. That by that means he should bring in an eternal justification
from moral sins, instead of the ceremonial justifications of the body. And
4. It does from thence follow, That Moses commanded the National Church to do
all their sin offerings by faith in Christ, the only true sin-offering.

5. The Hebrew Text says, Do the Sabbath. Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Ex 31. 16. compared
with ver. 13, 14. But the carnal Jews and the false Apostles understood this
command, to do the Sabbath, but of their exact bodily doing of the duties of
the Sabbath: But the Apostle Paul does tell us, that the true doing of the
Sabbath is by faith in Christ, Heb. 4. 3. 9, 10. and I have showed more at
large in my Book of the Institution of the Sabbath, that Christ is the true
Sabbath (i.e.) the true rest to the souls of all true wearied and believing
sinners.

Yea the typical Covenant at Mount Sinai, did not only command the National
Church to do the Sabbath with the outward rest of the body, but it did also
command them to do the Sabbath by resting on Christ by faith, as the only
procuring cause of Gods atonement, for all believing sinners to rest upon. 2.
From hence I infer, that as the breaking of the outward rest of the Sabbath, is
called the breaking of Gods typical Covenant, Neh 9. 14. Ezekiel. 20 12, 13, 16,
20. so it does also imply, that in case they did not rest their souls on Christ
by faith, as the only procuring cause of Gods atonement, they should much more
break the inward and spiritual part of that Covenant; for no other sin does
totally break the Covenant, but the want of faith in resting on Christ the true
Sabbath of rest, because he was the only procuring cause of Gods atonement.

Sect. 2.
6. CHrist Jesus said thus to his National Church in Lev. 18 4, 5. My
judgments Lev. 18. 4, 5. The doing of Gods statutes in Lev. 18. 5. is not meant
of that doing that was required of Adam in the Covenant of nature; but of that
doing that was
shall ye do, and my statutes shall ye keep, to walk in them, I am Jehovah your
God. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, which if a man do
he shall live in them.

1. I wonder that Mr Norton should so unadvisedly involve his Divinitystudies,
under such an inextricable Conclusion, as to make this Scripture to speak of
the obedience of the Covenant of nature, that was made with Adam in his
innocence. Me thinks these very titles, I am Jehovah your God, and this, ye
shall keep my statutes and judgments, should have kept him from expounding
these words, of any other Covenant than that of Grace only.

2. It is out of Question, that the Doing of these statutes and judgments
required in the typified part of the Covenant of Grace, by faith in Christ only.
does not belong neither to the Law of Nature, nor yet to the Covenant of
Nature: but to Moses Law as it was given at Mount Sinai, for the typical part
of the Covenant of Grace.

Mr Bolton says (in his true bounds, page 154.) "That Do this and live, has
not reference to the moral Law only, but to the ceremonial also, which was
their Gospel, as it carries a typical Relation to Christ; for every Lamb slain
did point out Christ, and say, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins
of the world.

2. (Says he) "This was spoken of the Law, not abstractly and separately
confidered, but of the Law and Promise jointly considered, as having the
promise involved in it, and therefore Paul says in Gal. 2. 21. Is the Law then
against the promises of God? God forbid. Therefore (says he) we must so
interpret these words, Do this, and Live, that we must not make it against the
promises. But on the contrary Mr Norton does interpret this doing of the Law,
of the doing it according to the Covenant of Nature, and so consequently he
does interpret it against the promise of Christ, quite contrary to the Apostles
way of arguing.

3. Says Mr Boulton, We must have life before we can do any acceptable "work:
Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing, John 15. 4, 5. Dead men cannot
work until they be made alive by faith in Christ.

4. (Says he) in page 125. "The Law, as some Divines say, was given with
Evangelical purposes, that is, with purposes subservient to the Gospel: And
(says he) I say it must be obeyed with Evangelical principles (namely with
faith in Christ.)

5. I shall hereafter show in my Exposition of Romans 10. 4, 5, etc. that the
Apostle Paul did preach the word of faith from the statutes of Moses Law,
mentioned in Lev. 18. 5.

6. The promise of a life in Heaven for the Doing of the Law in Levit. 18. 5.
is meant of such a doing as is done by faith in Christ. But on the contrary the
promise of life that was made to Adam for his doing of the Covenant of Nature
by eating of the tree of the twofold life, is not meant of a life in Heaven (as
it is in Levit. 18. 5.) but it is meant of the confirmation of his concreated
life of Nature only in the small contents of an earthly Paradise, as I have
showed it in Chapter 1. Sect. 4.

7. Christ Jesus said thus to his National Church, Ye shall keep my statutes,
and do them, I am Jehovah that sanctifies you, Levit. 20. 8. and in ver. 22.
Lev. 20. 8, 22.
Ye shall keep all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them; and
thereupon he does make this gracious promise, Ye shall dwell in the Land in
confident safety: namely in the spiritual Canaan, or in the spiritual Church
militant of Christ: made of regenerate hearts that are all justified from sin
by faith in Christ, and such regenerate hearts are called the good ground, Mat.
13. 8, 23. In this spiritual Land of Canaan (though it be also militant here on
earth) Ye shall be kept in confident safety through faith, 1 Pet. 1. 5. until
ye shall at last pass from hence to the heavenly Canaan of triumphant and
glorified souls, Heb. 11. 9, 10, 14, 16. with Ezekiel. 47. 22. Gal. 3. 16, 26, 28,
29. and Heb. 4. and the like spiritual promises are made under other earthly
types, as in Lev. 26. 3. If ye shall keep my statutes, and keep my
Commandments, and do them, then will I give you rains in their season, etc.
Lev. 26. 3.
Mr Ainsworth observes that the condition here required, is by faith
fulfilled, as Enoch walked with God, Genesis 4. 24. when he pleased him by faith,
Heb. 11. 5, 6. This then (says he) according to the letter is legal, but yet
it does spiritually lead unto Christ, who is the end of the Law for justice to
every one that believes, Gal. 3. 24. Romans 10. 4.

2. It is also further evident, that under earthly promises, spiritual
promises are chiefly meant: as in Hos. 10. 12. Amos 9. 13, 14, 15. Eze. 34. 27.
Zach. 8. 12. Zach. 9. 17. Isa. 29. 6. Isa 45 8. Jer. 31. 12. Hag. 1. 6, 7. Joh.
3. 12. But howsoever God persuades his people by promises of outward How and
in what sense the end of the Commandment is love, 1 Timothy 1. 5. and how faith
works by love, Gal. 5. 6
blessings to keep his Law, yet (says Ainsw. in Lev. 26. 10.) the end of the
Commandment is love out of a pure heart and of a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. and true love cannot be without faith, and therefore
the ancient Hebrew Doctors say; "All love that depends on a thing, when the
thing cease, the love cease. He that serves the blessed God, to the end
that his riches may be multiplied, or his life preserved, his service is not
perfect; as Satan said, Does Job fear God for naught? he that serves God
because of bodily things on which his service depends, it shall not be
confirmed unto light, in the light of the living, for when those things cease
for which he serves, his love will cease, and there is no eating and drinking
in the state of death whither thou go. But he that serves God out of entire
love, his love shall be in life everlasting, and shall not depart for ever, and
his reward that loves God shall be eternal: See Ainsw. in Exodus 20. 6. and
the Apostle says, that love shall abide after this life, 1 Cor. 13. 1. and to
this sense see more in Sect. 6. at no 2.

3. As God persuaded his people to keep his Law by outward promises, so he does
threaten to punish the breakers of his Law by depriving them of outward
blessings in Lev. 26. 14, 15. If ye shall despise my statutes, and your soul
loath my judgments, so that ye do not all my Commandments, that ye break my
Covenant, etc. But here it may be questioned, How do men break Gods Covenant?
The answer is not by every sin that is committed against Gods statutes and
Commandments, nor yet by any other sin, but by final unbelief only, as I
have showed it before in Ch 8. Sect. 2. and in this Chapter also; for as it
pleased God to ordain, that nothing else should be the condition to be
performed on man's part for the keeping of his Law or Covenant, but faith in
Christ only who is the very end of the Law or Covenant, and where says in
Christ is there will be sanctified obedience: so on the other hand he has
ordained, that no other sin shall be the condition of breaking the Law or
Covenant of grace finally, but unbelief only, Deuteronomy 29. 18. compared with Heb.
10. 38. All sins are forgiven daily to a believer through Gods multiplied
pardons, for though the body of sin does abound in all believers, yet the
free In his Method. P. 4, 51, 58, 65, 71, 73, 101, 127 171.
grace of Gods forgiveness does super abound them all.

Mr Woodbridge says, "that almost all our Protestants do frequently call
faith the condition of our justification; and says he, Mr Wotton does
purposely dispute it de Reconcil. pec. part. 1. l. 2. chapter 18. and (says he) Mr
Wetton has saved me the labor of transcribing the testimonies of many famous
Protestants who say the same: and yet Mr Woodbridge does also add many more
famous Writers unto these which are cited by Mr Wotton. And Mr Jessop says in
his Preface touching the nature of the Covenant of grace p. 3. "That if no
duties were commanded to man by the Lord, nor no promise made by man to be
performed on his part, he could not justly be said either to keep or to break
Covenant; which the Scripture does often affirm: See him more at large in page 3,
36, 37, 44, etc. See Mr Graile in the same Book, page 37, 43, etc.

Sect. 3.
8. CHrist Jesus said this to his National Church in Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 5. Now Deuteronomy.
4. 1, 5.
Israel hearken unto the statutes and unto the judgments which I teach you to
do.

Doubtless it is a mavelous blindness to affirm, that Christ Jesus did now
teach his National Church, to do all his typical statutes and judgments, by
their own natural strength; or else that Christ must be their surety to do all
the statutes, etc. for their justification, and so consequently that Christ
must believe in Christ for them all; seeing the doing that Christ does here
teach them to do, is called their wisdom in ver. 6. namely, that wisdom that
makes men wise to salvation, through the faith which is in Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy
3. 15. But how Christ did teach them to do his statutes inwardly by faith, I
have showed more at large in Chap. 5. Sect. 5. at n. 6.

9. Christ Jesus said thus to his National Church in Deuteronomy. 5. 1. Hear O Israel
the statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears, ye shall learn them, and
keep and do them. And again in ver. 32. Ye shall observe to do as Jehovah has
commanded you. This word as Jehovah has commanded you, must be understood of
the inward doing of the Law, by faith in Christ; for God did never command the
outward bodily doing, without the inward doing, as he does explain his meaning
in Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, etc. and in Ier. 7. 22, 23.

10. Christ Jesus said thus to his National Church in Deuteronomy. 6. 18. Thou shall
do that which is right (or pleasing) and good in the eyes of Jehovah. It is no
less than gross ignorance to say, that this right doing is meant of a mere
bodily doing; seeing the Apostle shows that this right doing in Romans 12. 2.
is to Be ye transformed by the renewing (or regenerating) of your minds, that
ye may prove what is that good, that well-pleasing and perfect will of God.
From hence it follows, that no work does please God, until the mind be
regenerated, and until faith be wrought. And Moses does thus explain the
matter in ver. 24, 25. Jehovah does command us to do all these statutes, to
fear Jehovah our God for good unto us all our days, to preserve us alive, as
it is this day, and justice shall it be unto us, when we observe to do all
these Commandments, before Jehovah our God, as he has commanded us.

In the Exposition of these last two verses Mr Ainsw. does follow some
erroneous Leader (just as Mr Norton has done all along.) "This justice (says
he) means, That, whereby men, if they could do the Law, might be justified
before God, and differs from the justice of faith. But, 1. I reply, That no
Law of God was ever given to merit Heaven, by any man's natural performance of
it. 2. I reply, That this doing does not differ one hairs breadth from the
justice of faith: For if the command in verse. 24. be well marked, it does
command us to do all the statutes, or all the justifications by says in
Christ. For to fear Jehovah for good, is to worship him in faith, for that
eminent good that we receive from him in the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation. The typical Covenant taught them to do the The LXX render the
word statutes in Deu. 6. 1, 2, 17, 20, 24 by Dicaomita, justifications.
statutes, and all the other works of the Law for a double end: 1. For the
Sanctification of their bodies, by avoiding ceremonial pollutions, as well as
moral pollutions by sins. 2. For the Justification of their bodies from their
ceremonial sins, when they were defiled: And thence it follows, that the
typified part of this Law did teach them sanctified walking both in body and
mind. And, 2 It taught them justification, not only from ceremonial sins, but
also from their moral sins by says in the blood of their atonement: And so in
Deuteronomy. 28. 45. The curses of the Law are denounced against all such as do not
hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his Commandments, and [his
Dicaiomita] his statutes, or his justifications which were thereby typified.

2. Consider that the condition which God required to be performed on their
part for the justification of their bodies from their ceremonial sins, was but
bodily exercise only in doing the extrinsecal works of the Law, but the
condition which God required to be performed on their part for the
justification of their souls from their moral sins, was by their faith in
Christ only; and from thence it follows, that none else could keep the Law for
good unto them, but such only as had true faith in Christ the only procuring
cause of Gods atonement and forgiveness, who by their souls were justified
from their moral sins: for thus stands the similitude: First, The bodies of
their National Church were cleansed or justified from their ceremonial sins
upon condition of doing the works of the Law by washing their bodies, etc. Lev.
4. 13, etc. verse. 22, etc. verse. 27, etc. Number. 15. 22, etc. with verse. 27, 28.
And then, 2. Their souls were justified, in the typified sense, upon condition
of their says in Gods atonement, God in the Covenant of Grace has ordained
no other justification for believing sinners, but negative holiness and
righteousness by his atonement, procured by Christ. Psalm. 51. 7.
which was procured by Christ: and thus the soul was made perfectly just from
all its moral sins, and so says 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any man sin we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins: And therefore as soon as God for Christ his sake
has forgiven us our sins, we are thereby made sinlesse: And so the Hebrew word
does signify in Numb. 8. 21. Numb. 19. 12, 13, 19, 20. and it was in that
respect that repenting and believing David prayed to God to make him sinlesse,
or to purge him with hysop: but the Hebrew is, Make me sinlesse with hysop, and
I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow, Psalm. 51, 7. even
as perfectly white as the Law of God (as it was given for a Covenant of Grace
and Reconciliation) does require sinners to be, and in this sense it may be
truly said, that all believing sinners do perfectly keep the whole Law of God
for their eternal justification; for the Law of God was never ordained for the
justification of sinners any other way, but as it is thus performed and done by
faith in Christ, the true end of the Law for justification to every one that
believes.

Tindal says, "When I say that faith justifies the understanding, is, that
faith receives the justifying: God promises to forgive our sins, and so to
impute us for full righteous, and God does justify us actively, that is to
say, forgiveth us for full righteous: and Christ's blood deserves it, and faith
in the promise receives it, and certifieth the conscience thereof, fol. 225.
And (says he) where Paul says, that says justifies, understand thereby,
that faith causes that we be counted just, reputed righteous, and that our
sins are not imputed to us, but forgiven us for Christ his sake. Tindal is full
and clear for justification by pardon of sin, in sundry places of his works.

11. Christ Jesus said thus to his National Church in Deuteronomy. 7. 11, 12. it shall
be because ye shall hearken unto these judgments, and shall keep and do them.
That Jehovah thy God will keep unto thee the Covenant that he has sworn to thy
Fathers. Hence observe, that the condition required to be performed on the
peoples part for their keeping of the Covenant, is to hearken, and to do the
judgments: now so to hearken as to do them according to the Covenant of Grace
given to the Fathers, is to hearken to them with an obedient ear, until says
be wrought in the heart, and then to do them, by faith in Christ, as these
Scriptures do explain it, Genesis 3* 15. Genesis 12. 3. Levit. 26. 44, 45. compared
with verse. 3, 12, 41, 42. 2. Then The Covenant of Grace was made not only to
believing parents, but also to their children upon the condition of their
believing.
God on his part will keep the Covenant as he swear unto the Fathers. Mr
Ainsworth observes, That the Oath and Promise made to the Fathers pertains
to the faithful children, which are all implied in the same Covenant, Psalm.
105. 8, 11. Luke 1. 55, 72, 73, 74. Acts 3. 25, 26. Gal 3. 29. On the contrary,
the punishments (of the said Covenant) remains for the wicked from the
parents to the children, for God recompenseth the iniquities of the fathers
into the bosom of their children after them, Jer. 32. 18 and see my Note also
in Chap. 8. at N. 5. and see more here in Sect. 5. N. 4.

2. From hence it is also evident, that the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation was declared unto the National Church at Mount Sinai, under a
typical Covenant of bodily works: but yet it is no other Covenant, but the very
same in the spiritual sense of it, that was made with the Fathers; namely with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: For thus Christ said in Exodus 3. 15. I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, this is my memorial to all
generations (that are begotten of their says, as it is also expounded in Gal.
3. 7, 8.) and on the contrary what ever generations are begotten of their
bodies, and not of their faith, they are none of that spiritual seed that do
belong intrinsecally to the Covenant of Grace, and therefore they are put under
the eternal curse of that Covenant in Gal. 3. 10.

12. Jesus Christ said thus to his National Church in Deuteronomy. 11. 32. and in
Deuteronomy. 12. 1. These are the statutes and judgments which you shall observe to
do in the place which Jehovah shall choose, and there shall thou offer thy
burntofferings, and there thou shall do all that I command thee, v. 14. namely,
in thy in ward man by faith in Christ, that was typified in the Land of Canaan,
both by the Sanctuary, and by the Altar, and by Sacrifices. For as I have
showed before, God never required his typical worship to be performed alone by
it self, but together with faith in Christ: and then said Christ in v. 28.
Observe and hear all these words that I command thee, that it may be well with
thee, and with thy sons after thee for ever, when thou shall do that which is
good and right in the eyes of Jehovah. This exhortation backed with a promise,
That it should be well with them, and with their sons after them for ever, was
made to them upon this condition, that they should observe and hear all the
words of command, and do that, which was good and right in the eyes of Jehovah.
But without faith in Christ, the true end of the whole Law for Justification
they could not perform the condition, and thereupon Christ said thus to them
in verse 32. Thou shall not add unto it, neither shall thou diminish from it;
that is to say, thou shall not add any will worship to my typical worship,
neither shall thou take any thing from it, and therefore consequently they
might not take away faith in Christ from it; for in case they did so, they made
all their worship to be abominable in the sight of God, as I showed before from
Psalm 50. Esaias 1. and Jer. 7.

13. Christ Jesus commanded him that offered the basket of first fruits to make
this profession of his Faith in Deuteronomy. 26. 14. I have hearkened to the voice of
Jehovah my God, and have done according to all thou have commanded me. But they
could not make this profession in truth without faith in Christ; for God
commanded faith in Christ, as the main End of the whole Law; and therefore
Christ said thus in verse. 16. This day has Jehovah commanded thee to do all
these statutes and judgments, and thou shall keep and do them with all thine
heart, and with all thy soul. But they could not do all these statutes and
judgments with all their heart, and with all their soul without faith in
Christ; and therefore Christ said thus unto them in ver. 17. Thou have avouched
Jehovah this day to be unto thee for a God, and to walk in his ways, and to
keep his statutes, and his Commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto
his voice. Christ Jesus does tell them in these words, that they had covenanted
to do the whole Law by faith in Christ, and that God should be their God, no
otherwise but by faith in Christ.

14. Christ Jesus commanded this National Church in Deuteronomy. 27. 10, 26* and in
Deuteronomy. 28. 1, 13, 15, 58. and in Deuteronomy. 29. 9. and in Deuteronomy. 30. 8, 12, 13, 14.
and in Deuteronomy. 31. 12, 29. and in Deuteronomy. 32. 46. To observe and do all that Moses
commanded them; and thereupon he annexed a promise of an eternal life in Heaven
to such as observed the said condition: and so in Josh. 1. 8. he annexed a
promise of good success unto them: from whence we may observe, That Jesus
Christ did not command them to do that which was impossible for them to do, in
case they did but set upon the work of Repentance and of believing in Christ in
the use of the means in good earnest. And the like exhortation Joshua made to
the people, That they should cleave unto the Lord with all their heart and
soul, according as they had promised and covenanted, Joshua 22. 5. Josh. 23. 6.
8, and so in like sort Nehemiah did speak unto the captived Israelites, even
after their repentance and conversion, that now they should do the Law as they
had covenanted to do it, namely to do it by faith in Christ, Nehem. 1. 7, 8, 9.
and in Chap. 9 29. he does first confess their disobedience against the Laws
of Moses, and then he does exhort Nehem. 1. 7, 9. Nehem. 9. 29.
them to do the Law by faith in Christ, which if a man do he shall live in
them. For this is a certain truth, that the whole Law was given for a Covenant
of Grace and Reconciliation, to such as should believe only, and therefore such
doers of the Law shall live. And for the better Reformation of their unbelief,
they entered into a curse, and into an Oath, to walk in Gods Law (in the
constant use of all those means) which was given by Moses the servant of God,
and to observe and do all the Commandments of the Lord, and his judgments, and
his statutes. But I hope no man is so grossly ignorant, as to think that they
entered into this curse and oath, to do all that Moses commanded by the mere
strength of their own natural obedience, (or else by Christ their Surety) for
they knew that the greatest part of Moses Law had relation to purifications by
washing, and to Sacrifices which were ordained to be used for the procuring of
Gods atonement for their daily sins, and without faith in Christ they could
not observe the condition that was required on their part: Therefore when they
entered into this curse, and into this oath, their intent was to fly daily to
the throne of grace for Gods merciful pardon and forgiveness, for their daily
failings by faith in the death and sacrifice of Christ: And in doing so, they
might well enter into a curse, and into an oath, to do all that Moses
commanded, seeing it was to do no more than they had formerly covenanted to do
at Mount Sinai, which Covenant they did sundry times afterward renew, and now
after their captivity they did but renew the same Covenant in Nehem. 9. 29.

Sect. 4.
The Prophet Ezekiel does also expound the true Doing of all Moses Law to be by
Faith in Christ.

1. EZekiel does repeat Gods absolute Covenant and Promise made only to Ezekiel
does expound the true doing of all Moses Law to be by faith in Christ. Ezekiel.
11. 19, 20. Ezekiel. 18. 19, 21. Ezekiel. 30. 15, 16, 19. Ezekiel. 33. 15.
the elect Israel of God in Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. saying, I will give them one
heart, and I will put a new Spirit within you, and I will take the stony heart
out of their flesh that they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine Ordinances,
and do them. From hence it follows, that none else can walk in Gods statutes,
and keep his Ordinances to do them, so as they we^e given for a Covenant of
Grace and Reconciliation at Mount Sinai, until God do effectually take away
the stone out of their heart, and put a new Spirit into them, then, and not
till then, they shall keep the Law of Moses, as it was given for a Covenant of
Grace and Reconciliation, as I have also expounded these words in Chapter 11. Sect.
1. Reply 3.

2. None but such as truly repent can truly keep Gods statutes, as I showed
before in Chap. 8. N. 5. and in that respect it is that God made this gracious
promise to converting and repenting sinners in Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22, 27, 28. None
can truly keep Gods statutes but such as do truly repent of their sins.
If the wicked turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, and
shall not die: (this promise is just like unto that in Levit. 18. 4, 5.) All
his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto
him: verse. 22. (because they shall be expiated by Gods atonement, through the
procuring cause of Christ's sacrifice) in his Righteousness that he has done
(by flying to Christ by says) he shall live: (for a sinner can do no other act
of righteousness, but by his flying to Christ by faith, as to the procuring
cause of Gods atonement and forgiveness.) But I pray mark it: That Gods
Forgiveness through faith in Christ, is here called [A sinners Righteousnesse]
Gods forgiveness through faith in Christ is called a sinners righteousness.
Ezekiel. 18. 22.
and in verse. 19. (by his faith in Christ) he has kept all my statutes, and
has done them: (and therefore) he shall surely live, namely an eternal life in
Heaven. And it is in that respect that Gods statutes are called statutes of
life in Ezekiel. 30. 15, 16, 19. and in Ezekiel. 33 15. But the statute of the
Covenant of Nature that was made with Adam, did not promise an eternal life in
Heaven, it promised no more but a perfect natural life in the sweet contents of
an earthly paradise, as ^ have showed it in Chapter 1 Sect. 4. Therefore the
statutes that are here mentioned cannot belong to any other Covenant but that
of Grace only.

3. Ezekiel does thus expound the true doing of Moses Law in Ezekiel. 18. Ezekiel.
18. 31.
Cast away all your transgressions, whereby you have transgressed: and make you
a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will you die, O you house of Israel. You
may cast away your transgressions, if you will use your utmost endeavor, by
laboring for such an earnest and zealous Repentance, as may breed in your soul
an utter indignation against sin, and you may make you a new heart, and a new
spirit by the industrious use of the means of Grace; or else if you do not take
his course you will die in your sins: But I say, do not die in your sins, but
use all possible endeavors to repent and to believe in Gods atonement and
forgiveness, through the procuring cause of Christ's sacrifice. This do, for
this is lawful, namely it is according to the true intent of the Law; and this
is right, verse. 21. namely this is the only right way which I have appointed in
my Law, whereby believing sinners may be justified from all their sins, and
live an eternal life in Heaven after this life is ended.

4. The Lord Jesus does first exhort his people to true Repentance Ezekiel. 20.
11, 19, 20, 21.
in Ezekiel 20. 7. and then he says in ver. 11. I gave them my statutes, and
showed them my judgments, which if a man do he shall even live in them.

This Law and promise is cited by Mr Norton in page 259. to prove, that the
Covenant of Nature made with Adam for life, was made upon condition of his
exact obedience to the works of the moral Law of Nature: and that now Christ
our Surety has fulfilled that Law for our perfect Righteousness, and that God
the Father does impute his fulfilling of it to believers for their
justification.

I confess I cannot but wonder at the strangeness of this collection, and at
the darkness of his understanding, as to interpret the word statutes in this
Text of the moral Law of Nature, seeing it is so evident by his exhortation to
Repentance in verse. 7. and by his inference in verse. 19, 20, 21. that the
promise annexed does belong only to the Law of Moses, as it was given for a
Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation to repenting sinners through faith in
Christ: yea it is most easy to be discerned, that this whole Chapter does
reprove the National Church for the breach of Moses Law, as it was given for a
Covenant of Grace, through their Apostasy to Idolatry, and so consequently it
lays them under the damning sin of final unbelief, from verse. 13, to 33

5. The Lord does thus swear in Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord God,
Ezekiel. 33. 11, 19.
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his way and live. And then in ver. 19. he makes this gracious promise to
repenting sinners: If the wicked turn from his wicked way, and does that which
is lawful and right, he shall live thereby.

1. He does promise, that repenting sinners shall not die in their sins,
because their sins shall be pardoned upon their true Repentance.

2. He does promise that in case they do that which is lawful and right,
namely in case they do that which I have appointed them to do in my Law, as
it was given for a Covenant of Grace, by getting a repenting heart in the
constant use of the means, and by getting the grace of faith in Christ, who is
the procuting cause of my atonement and forgiveness, They shall live thereby.

3. Inasmuch as God does confirm this gracious promise by his oath: It is for
the stronger Surety sake to all those that should believe his said promise,
that their faith might be the more confirmed in the certainty of his promise,
as I have opened it in Heb. 7. 22. For Gods oath is as an unchangeable a thing
as his immutable counsel is; and therefore the Apostle does join them
together, as things of the same infallible crtainty, in Hebrews 6. 17, 18.

6. Christ Jesus says thus to his elect Israel that lived promiscuously among
the outward members of the National Church in Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Ezekiel.
36. 27.
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments, and do them.

This promise is an absolute and an imperative promise, and it is grounded on
that absolute promise that God made to Christ: and therefore it has the force
of causing; implying thereby, that they could not possibly walk in Gods
statutes, neither by their natural principles which are now corrupted, nor yet
by the principles of Adams pure nature, in case he had stood, because Moses Law
does require such a walking in Gods statutes, and such a keeping of his
judgments, and such a doing of them as does appertain to repenting sinners in
the Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, that must be assisted therein by the
supernatural aid of Gods Spirit converting the soul, and working the grace of
faith in it, to enable it to fly to the throne of grace for Gods atonement
and forgiveness through the procuring cause of Christ's sacrifice: which Grace
Adam had not in the time of his pure Nature, neither could he have it as long
as he stood in his pure Nature, because this supernatural Grace of true
Repentance and faith in Christ, was not consstent with his pure Nature. And the
like promise does God make in Ezekiel. 37. 24. That Judah and Israel shall dwell
together in the Land of Canaan for ever, and that they shall be cleansed from
their sins, and walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes to do them;
namely, by faith in Christ.

By these, and the like places, Ezekiel does tell us, but that we are dull of
hearing, that the Doing required in Moses Law is not to be understood of a bare
bodily doing, but of the inward doing of it by faith in Christ, as the only
procuring cause of Gods atonement and forgiveness for their perfect
justification in his sight.

Sect. 5.
Showing, That the speeches of the godly in their prayers, and meditations, and
in their exhortations under Moses Law, do witness that they understood the
doing of Gods statutes, to extend to the inward doing of them by faith in
Christ.

1. DAvid knew that such as are truly Regenerate might keep the whole Law of
Moses perfectly: and therefore he says thus in his prayer, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. O
Lord God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel our Fathers, keep this for ever in
the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their
hearts unto thee, and give unto Solomon my son aperfect heart to keep thy
commandments, thy testimonies, and thy statutes, and to do all. In this prayer
David does pray for these particulars: 1. That God would keep the very thoughts
and imaginations of the heart of the people for ever to do Gods will. And, 2.
That God would prepare their hearts thereto. And, 3. That Solomon might have a
perfect heart to keep all Gods Commandments, his testimonies, and his statutes,
and to do all. But David knew that Solomon could not have this perfect heart
to do all this, but by repentance, and by faith in Christ only. But in case
the Law of Moses had required no other perfect doing, but by their bodily
exercise only, then David needed not to have prayed for a perfect heart to do
it. For the Apostle does tell us, That the Law is not of faith, Gal. 3. 12.
that is to say, the outward duties of the Law may be done by bodily exercise
only for their bodily justification from their ceremonial sins without a
perfect heart, namely, without any faith at all, for the effecting of it. But
David knew that the Law of Moses was given for a Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation, for the justification of their souls from their moral sins; and
therefore he prayed to the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, to whom God
renewed the Covenant of Grace, which was first made to Adam in Genesis 3. 15. that
he would prepare the hearts of the people by his supernatural Grace (above
their natural principles) and that he would give unto Solomon a perfect heart
to do all the works of the Law by faith in Christ's Sacrifice, as the only
procuring cause of Gods atonement and forgiveness for the eternal
justification of his soul from his moral sins. And see more to this sense in 1
King. 2. 3. and 1 King. 9. 4, 6. 2 Chronicles. 7. 17. 2 Chronicles. 28. 7. 1 Chronicles. 28.
7, 8.

3. Sundry others are said to keep the whole Law: and God does in particular
testify, that David kept all his statures and Commandments, Such as have faith
in Christ, that is the only procuring cause of Gods atonement and
forgiveness, do keep the whole Law perfectly, as it was given for a Covenant
of Reconciliation.
1 King. 11. 38. and 1 King. 15. 5. 2 Chronicles. 7. 17. 1 King. 14. 8. and Asa kept
all, 2 Chronicles. 14. 4. and Hezekiah kept all, 2 King. 18. 6. 2 Chronicles. 31. 21. 2
King. 23. 3. and so Jos. 22. 2, 5. And God does tell them, that they may keep
all his statutes and Commandments, if they will but turn from their evil way
(by the which means they may get the spirit of Regeneration, and the grace of
faith in Christ) 2 King. 17. 13, 37. Nehem. 1. 9. and see Deu. 11. 1, 13, 27,
28. Deuteronomy. 13. 4, 18. Deuteronomy. 15. 5. Deuteronomy. 7. 9, 11. Deuteronomy. 30. 11. And of this see
more in Chapter 8. Sect. 2.

2. David does pray thus in Psalm. 119. 68. Thou art good, and do good, teach
me thy statutes. And again in verse. 124. Teach me thy statutes. And in verse.
135. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and teach me thy statutes. And in
verse. 112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always. And in
verse. 54, 55, 56. Thy statutes have been ^y songs in the house of my
pilgrimage, and I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, and kept thy Law; and this I
had, because I kept thy precepts. And in verse. 166. O Lord, I have hoped for
thy salvation, and have done thy Commandments. In all these expressions, David
does show, that he looked at Christ by faith, as the only procuring cause of
Gods atonement and forgiveness for his perfect justification, or for his
perfect righteousness, from the condemning power of all his moral sins. For he
that is no sinner by Gods atonement, is a perfect keeper of the whole Law.

Dr Gouge has observed in Psalm. 119. that the Law of Moses is set out by ten
several Hebrew words, in Heb. 7. Sect. 38. But none of those ten words are to
be understood of the Covenant of Nature, nor yet of the Law of Nature in an
abstracted sense from the Covenant of Grace, as it was given to Adam.

3. David has this meditation in Psalm. 103. 17, 18. The mercy of the Lord
David makes a true description of a sinners justification, in Psa. 103. 17, 18
is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his
justification to childrens children to such as keep his Covenants, and to them
that remember his Commandments to do them.

In the beginning of this ninth Chapter I have showed, That the mercy of the
Lord in pardoning sin, and his justification from sin, are equivolent
terms. 2. That the persons to which this merciful justification does belong,
are to such as fear God; and, 2. such as keep his Covenant: But none can truly
fear him, nor keep his Covenant without faith in Christ. And, 3. They are such
as remember his Commandments to do them, namely, to do them so, as they were
given for a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, and that is to do them in the
inward, as well as in the outward man, by faith in Christ, as the procuring
cause of Gods Atonement for their eternal justification from all sin. And,
4. After this sort these kind of persons are constantly justified even to
childrens children, because they are begotten by their faith, by the which they
perform the condition that is required on their part: And this kind of
condition performed Act. 10. 35. Romans 2. 26. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.
by them, is called the work of Righteousness (or the work of justification)
on man's part in Act. 10. 35. He that fears God and works Righteousness (or
that does work out his justification by faith in Christ) is accepted with him.
Cornelius was not made Righteous by doing the outward works of the Law, for he
was as yet uncircumcised in flesh, but yet he did perform the inward work of
the Law, because he was circumcised in his heart by faith in Christ, and in
that sense he performed the condition of the Covenant of Grace on his part, or
he did work the righteousness, Faith is a supernatural work which a sinner
must labor to get by the use of means, before he can be justified from the
condemning power of his sins.
or the justification of the Law on his part (Of which see more in in the
beginning of this ninth Chapter) and in this sense it is, that believing in
Christ is called the Righteousness (or the justification) of the Law, Romans 2.
26. Romans 8. 4. And in that sense it is also called the Law of faith, Romans 3.
27. and the Righteousness of faith, in Romans 4. 13. And so in Psalm. 15. 2. He
that shall dwell with God for ever, is he that works righteousness, not only
by his sanctified walking, but more especially by his believing in Christ, for
the procuring of Gods atonement for his justification from sin: And in this
sense it is, that the godly forefathers wrought Righteousness, namely, by
their faith in Christ, Heb. 11. 33. 6. And all the godly are exhorted to
Remember Gods Commandments to do them (by faith in Christ) Psalm. 103. 18.
Exodus 20. 8. Deuteronomy. 8. 11. Mal. 4. 4. And in their prayers they did often desire
the Lord to remember his Covenant. And on the contrary such as wanted faith in
Christ, are said not to continue in his Covenant, Heb. 8. 9. But to break his
Covenant, Lev. 26. 15. Deuteronomy. 31. 16, 20.

4. Christ Jesus said thus to his National Church, in Psalm. 78. 1, 5. Give Psalm
78. 1, 5.
ear my people to my Law, how he established a Testimony in Jacob, and put a
Law in Israel, which he commanded to our Fathers, to make them known to their
sons: that so (in verse. 7.) they might put their constant hope in God, and
might keep his Commandments.

Mr Ainsworth says, "That it is Christ in ver. 1. that speaks this Psalm to
his people, as (says he) the next verse shows: And (says he) it is Christ
also that says in Esaias 51. 4. A Law shall proceed from me; and that says, A
Law shall go out of Zion, Esaias 2. 2, 4. namely, the Law of the Gospel, which
is nothing else but the Law of Moses in its spiritual sense; and it began to be
spread abroad upon the death of Stephen, Act. 8. 1, etc.

2. This Law which God gave to the Fathers for a Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation: He commanded them to make it known to their sons: and from
thence it follows, That the children of believing Parents are the true subjects
of the Covenant of Grace, extrinsecally at least: of which see before in Sect.
4. N. 11.

3. This Law was also given to them for this End (in verse. 7.) that they might
put their constant hope in God: namely, in Gods atonement, by faith in Christ,
who is the only procuring cause of Gods atonement; and so the holy Ghost does
expound the word wait or hope, Esa. 42. 4. of Trust: which is the nature of
says, Mat. 12 21. And

4. Might keep his Commandments, but none else can keep Gods Commandments, as
they were given for a Covenant of Reconciliation without this constant hope or
trust in Gods atonement.

5. It was Solomon's prayer for the people at the Dedication of the Temple, That
God would incline their hearts unto him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep
all his Commandments, his statutes, and his judgments which he commanded to
our Fathers, 1 King. 8. 58. 1 King. 8. 58.


It appears by this petition, that Solomon knew well enough, that they could
not keep Gods Law by their own natural abilities, and therefore he prays, That
God would incline their hearts by his Spirit to keep his Law, he knew they
could not walk in Gods ways, nor keep his Commandments, statutes and judgments,
as they were given for a Covenant of Reconciliation without says in Christ.
And therefore he does exhort them in v. 61. saying, Let your heart therefore be
perfect with the Lord our God to walk in his statutes, and to keep his
Commandments. In these words Solomon does place the true and perfect being of
the Law in the supernatural work of faith in Christ, For without me (says
Christ) ye can do nothing, John 15. 5. But (says Paul) I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. The true doing therefore of
Moses Law is by faith in Christ, as all these places do also testify, Genesis 17.
9, 10. 2 King. 23. 3, 24. Eccles. 12. 13. 1 Chro. 22. 12, 13. 2 Chronicles. 34. 31.
Psalm. 119. 2, 5, 24, 33, 34, 35, 69, 70, 77, 88, 100, 106, 112, 129, 134, 143,
146, 147. Ezekiel. 37. 24. Romans 2. 25, 26. Romans 7. 22. Gal. 6. 9. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 13.
1 Pet. 4. 19. 1 John 3. 22. 1 John 5. 2, 3. 1 Timothy 6. 14. John 15. 10. Genesis 18.
19. Judge. 2. 22, Exodus 15. 26. Nehem. 1. 4, 5. Dan 9. 4.

6. Take notice, That the Covenant-promise does run thus, in Levit. 26. 3, 12.
If you walk in my statutes, and keep my Commandments and do Lev. 26. 3, 12. 2
Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18.
them; then in verse. 12. I will walk among you, and will be your God, and you
shall be my people. But neither the Jews, nor yet Adam in his innocence were
able to keep these statutes and Commandments, as they were given at Mount Sinai
for a Covenant of Grace without faith in Christ: and the Apostle does tell us
plainly in 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. that this Covenant-promise in Levit. 26. 12
does appertain to none else but to believers only: and from thence he does
infer in 2 Cor. 7. 4. That having these three promises, we must cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in
the fear of God.

The first of the said three promises he does cite from Levit. 26. 12. which
does answer to the Apostles words in verse. 16. The second promise he does cite
from Esa. 52. 11. which does answer to the Apostles words in verse. 17. The
third promise he does cite from Jer. 31. 1, etc. which does likewise answer to
the Apostles words in verse. 17. and thus by this comparing of things you may
see how the Law in its promises does answer to the Gospel-promises made over to
believers only.

7. It is said in Psalm. 111. 10. Good prudence have all they that do them;
namely, that do the precepts which are so called, in verse. 7. But the LXX read
it, That do it, meaning, that do his Covenant for ever: as it is also called in
verse. 9.

But indeed there is no difference between them. For the precepts of the Law
and Gods Covenant is but the same thing: and the true doing of all is by faith
in Christ only: or else if they be done by bodily exercise only, they are not
done as God commanded.

Obj. P. Martyr says, It is objected by some, "That the ancient people of the
Jews did never expressly call upon Christ, nor pray for the forgiveness of their
sins, for the Messiah sake.

Answ. He does thus answer, "They performed this abundantly, when they said,
Lord remember the Covenant that thou have made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and also with David, (Ex. 2. 24. Ex. 6. 5. Ex. 32 13. Lev 26. 42, 45. Ps. 20.
3. Ps. 27. 7. Ps. 105. 8, 42. Ps. 106. 45. Luke 1. 72. and in many such like
places, which I have immediately cited.) Wherefore (says he) so often as the
old Fathers called these things to remembrance, they did no less include Christ
in their prayers, than we do now at this day.

8. David does signify, That the great mysteries of salvation by Christ, were
veiled under the types, and under the letter of Moses Law; and therefore he
does thus pray unto God in Psalm. 119 18. O Lord open mine eyes, (or unvail mine
eyes) that I may see the wonderful things of thy Law: and he speaks thus in
his meditations on the blessings that are comprehended in Moses Law; The Law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, making wise the simple, rejoicing the
heart, enlightening the eyes, enduring for ever: true and righteous altogether,
and more to be desired than gold, yea than much fine gold, sweeter also than
honey and the honeycomb, and in the keeping of them there is great reward,
Psalm. 19. 7. etc. These spiritual and heavenly blessings the Law does afford
to all such, as are the true intrinsecall subjects of the Covenant of Grace,
which no man can be, till he has gotten faith in Christ, as the procuring
cause of Gods atonement and forgiveness for his eternal justification: and
from thence it follows, that as soon as a sinner is thus justified from all
sin, he is thereby made as perfectly holy and righteous, as the Law of God (as
it was given for a Covenant of Grace) does require sinners to be. Adam in his
innocent nature was not so supernaturally righteous, as they are by the said
conditions of the Law of Grace; and therefore their supernatural righteousness
shall have a far greater reward, than his natural righteousness should have
had, in case he had continued in his innocence. But on the contrary, such as
lived under the outward practice of the Law of Moses, without faith in Christ,
had no more benefit by the Law of Moses, than a bare shadow of good things to
come; the Law was no better to them than a carnal Commandment, and a dead
letter.

9. The shining of Moses face, did typifie the glorious Ministry of Moses Law
to the National Church; and the vail that he put upon his shining face, did
typifie the hiding of the true end of the Law from the unbelieving Israelites,
2 Cor. 3. 7, 13, 16. compared with Ex. 34. 30, 33. And so in like sort his Rod
turned into a Serpent, was for a sign to such as otherwise 2 Cor. 3. 7, 16.
would not believe him, Ex. 4. 5, 8, 9. signifying thereby, that his Ministry
should become deadly to all such, as did not by says see the end of the same,
to be the redemption of Abraham's seed by Christ, Luke 1. 68, 74. Romans 10. 4.
This is observed by Ainsworth in Ex. 4. 3.

10. Paul says thus in Romans 2. 17. Behold thou art called a Jew, and restest
in the Law. And in ver. 20. Have a form of knowledge of the truth in the Law.
But yet says he in ver. 28, 29. He is not a Jew which is one outwardly,
neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew
which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit and
not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.

But on the contrary, the false Apostles taught the believing Gentiles, that
says was not a sufficient condition to be performed on their part, for their
full justification from sin, without the bodily act of circumcising the
foreskin of their flesh, and doing the other works of the Law, Act. 15. 1, etc.
But yet Moses Law taught them, that the true circumcision was of the heart, by
cutting off the corrupt lusts of it by sound repentance, and by faith in
Christ, as the procuring cause of Gods atonement, for their eternal
justification, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Deuteronomy 30 6. Jer. 4. 4. And 2. In opposition to the
false Apostles, Paul affirmed, that the outward act of circumcision, did avail
them nothing to their eternal justification from sin in Gods sight, but faith
working by love, Gal. 5. 16. and a new creature, Gal. 6. 11. and that it
availed nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God by says in Christ
did, 1 Cor. 7. 19. and that circumcision availed nothing to the purifying of
their heart from sin, but faith in Christ did, Act. 15. 9. And says Paul in
Phil. 3. 3. We are the circumcision which worship God in the Spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, (namely, not in
the bodily use of the Rites of Moses Law, for justification in Gods sight.) The
circumcision of the flesh, was ordained to justify the body from its
ceremonial sins of uncleanness in its birth, and yet it is not called the seal
of their bodily justification, but it is called the seal of their eternal
justification from their moral sins, by says in Christ, Romans 4. 11. Romans 2.
29. Romans 3. 30.

When God did first institute the Sacrament of circumcision, he changed Abram
into Abraham, and Sarai into Sarah, Genesis 17. 5. 15. to signify In the City of
God. l. 16. c. 26.
says Austin, that newness which is shaddowed in the types of the old
Testament, (as circumcision, etc.) in the which the new one lies prefigured:
for why else is it called the old Testament, but for that it shaddoweth the
new? and what is the new Testament, but the opening of the old?

11. Christ Jesus said thus unto Isaac in Gen 26. 3. I will perform the Oath
Genesis 26. 3, 5.
unto thee, which I swear unto Abraham thy Father, because that (in ver. 5.)
Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my Commandments, my statutes, and
my Laws; namely by faith in Christ: for the Apostle does tell us, that
circumcision was given to him, as a seal of the righteousness which he had (by
faith) before he was circumcised in his flesh, Romans 4. 11.

12. God gave the like testimony of David's faith under the Law, That he kept
his Commandments and his statutes, 1 King. 11. 34, 38. 1 King. 14. 8. and
David knew that the Law might be perfectly kept and done, by believing sinners;
and therefore he did thereupon exhort Solomon to keep all Gods Laws, and all
his statutes with a perfect heart; but no man has a perfect heart by nature,
until his heart be made perfectly conformable to the Law of God, as it was
given for a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, which is done by faith in
Christ, and no other way, as in 1 King. 2. 3, 4. 1 King. 6. 12. 1 King. 3. 14.
1 King. 15. 5. 1 King. 9. 4, 6. 1 Chr. 22. 13. 1 Chr. 28. 7, 8, 9. 1 Chr. 29.
17, 18, 19.

From these and the like exhortations it is evident, That the godly under Moses
Law did know, that believing sinners might perfectly keep the Faith in Christ
does make sinners as perfectly righteous, as the Law of Moses does require them
to be. p. 159.
whole Law, namely as perfectly as it was given for a Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation at Mount Sinai. The Law ordained a typical Priest and
sacrifice, for the expiation not only of their known sins and trespasses, but
also for their doubtful trespasses, and also for their unknown sins; yea even
for the sins of their holy things. And 2. It required nothing else to be
performed on the sinners part, as the condition of their eternal justification
from all sin in Gods sight, but faith in the true Priest and sacrifice Christ
Jesus, as the only procuring cause of Gods atonement and forgiveness; by which
means they were made as perfectly holy, and righteous in Gods sight, as the Law
of Moses did require them to be.

And it was in this sense that God said unto Cain in Genesis 4. 7. If thou do
well, (that is to say, if thou do present thy oblations to me by faith in
Christ, as the procuring cause of my atonement) is there not bearing? that is
to say, is there not a bearing away of thy sins by my atonement so procured?
and consequently shall thou not he accepted into my favor, as Abel is? for
Abels sacrifice is no more acceptable to me, in respect of the outward matter
of it, than thy oblation is; but he has obtained witness, (by the fire that I
sent from Heaven to burn his sacrifice) that he was made righteous by his faith
in Christ, as the procuring cause of my atonement, Heb. 11. 4. but because thy
offerings are not offered with the like faith, therefore in dislike thereof, I
have not sent any fire from Heaven to burn thy offerings.

Conclusions from the premises.

1. That no son of Adam under the Law of Moses, was ever accounted to be a true
doer of Moses Law, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace, but such only as
had true faith in Christ.

2. That Adam in his innocence could not keep Moses Law, because it was not
given in his innocence for the Covenant of Nature, but it was given after his
fall for a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation.

3. Hence it does also follow, that it is a great error in Mr Norton, to
separate the moral Law of nature from the ten Commandments, as the only matter
of a sinners justification, seeing the moral Law of nature was conjoined to
the ten Commandments, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace. He may as well
say, that the Covenant of Grace was given to Adam in his innocence, as say,
that the Decalogue at Mount Sinai was given to Adam in his innocence. The one
is as true, (or rather as false) as the other.

4. Hence it follows, that all the works of Moses Law, though observed never so
exactly by bodily exercise, are vile in Gods sight, without faith in Christ,
Isa. 1. Gal. 4 9. Col. 2. 8. and in that respect all the works of Moses Law,
that are done without faith in Christ, is called the Ministry of condemnation,
2 Cor. 3. 9. and Christ is of none effect to such bodily doers of the Law; they
are fallen from Grace, Gal. 5. 4. and the Lord was wroth with such as were
circumcised, but in their flesh only, and not in their heart by faith in
Christ, Jer. 9. 25, 26. and they that want faith are said to break Gods
Covenant, as I noted it before at N. 3. ult. and they that want says want true
repentance also: and such as want true repentance, are also said to break Gods
Covenant, 2 King. 17. 13. Ezekiel. 18.

Sect. 6.
The New Testament does also expound the true doing of all Moses Law to be by
Faith in Christ only.

1. A Certain rich man said thus unto Christ: Good Master, what good thing The
New Testament teaches, that the keeping of Moses Law by faith in Christ, is
the perfect keeping of it to everlasting life. Mat. 19. 16, 17, 21.
shall I do that I may have eternal life? Christ answered: If thou will enter
into life, keep (or do) the Commandments, Matthew. 19. 16, 17. compared with Mark
10. and Luke 18. as if Christ in more words had said thus: Do thou ask me
what good thing thou shall do, as the condition to be performed on thy part
for the obtaining of eternal life; my answer is, keep the Commandments in that
sense as they were given for a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, namely by
Repentance, by the supernatural Grace of faith in Christ: for none that are
descended from the natural generation of Adam, can do or keep the Commandments
by their natural Obedience; therefore if thou will perform the condition that
is required to be done on thy part, then labor earnestly in the constant use
of means: Get faith in Christ, for he is the only procuring cause of Gods
atonement and forgiveness, and then all thy sins shall thereby be expiated,
and done away, and when they are in that manner done away, then thou shall be
made as perfectly righteous in Gods sight thereby, as the Covenant of Grace
does require sinners to be to their attainment of eternal life.

But the rich man mistook our Saviors meaning in this word Keep or Do the
Commandments, he thought our Savior did teach him to do no more for the
attaining of eternal life, but to keep the Commandments by his exact bodily
obedience: as soon therefore as our Savior did perceive the error of his
understanding, he replied thus to him in verse. 21. If thou will be perfect
(namely, if thou will be a perfect doer of the Commandments) then go and sell
all that thou have, and give it to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
Heaven, and come and follow me: for I am the true End of Moses Law. But thou
can not follow me, or prefer me before all thy worldly riches (as converted
Zacheus did, Luke 19. 8. and as believing Peter did, Luke 18. 28, 29. with
Matthew. 19. 27.) until thou have gotten faith in Christ: When the young man
heard that saying, he went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions, verse.
22. Then said Jesus to his Disciples (in verse. 23.) verily, I say unto you,
that a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. In this Reply,
our Savior did also declare, that the true doing of the Law is by faith in
Christ: for if he had gotten true faith in Christ, he would not have departed
from Christ for the loss of all his substance When Paul was converted to be a
believer in Christ, he counted all his former righteousness of the Law to be
but loss for Christ, Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. And so did Zatheus, when he said,
Behold Lord the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken away
any thing from any man, I will restore him fourfold, Luke 19. 8. or else our
Saviors advice to the rich man had been in vain, when he said, If thou will
enter into life, keep (or do) the Commandments, if those Commandments had not
required him to prefer Christ (before all his worldly riches) as the chief End
of the Law, and as the only procuring cause of Gods atonement and
forgiveness, for his justification, seeing there is no other name (or means)
given under Heaven whereby sinners can be saved, Act. 4. 12.

The life and blessing which Gods Law set before the National Church, was by
faith in Christ, Gal. 2. 16 Gal. 3. 19. And the death and curse was by refusing
to believe in Christ, and by seeking to be justified by the works of the Law,
for as many as are of the works of the Law are under the curse, Gal. 3. 10.
This is observed by Ains. in Deu. 30. 19. and Deu. 6. 1. and Deu. 7. 12. And
says Bullenger in Dec. 3. Ser. 6. "He does fulfill the Law that has no
confidence in his own works, but does seek all Righteousness in the faith of
Christ, whereupon it is evident, that these two sentences of Christ, are of one
sense and meaning, 1. Whosoever believes in me, has everlasting life, John 3.
16. And 2. If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, Mat. 19. 17. As
Paul also says in Act. 13. By him all that believe are justified from all
things, etc

2. A certain Lawyer tempted Christ, saying, Master, what shall I do to
inherit eternal life, Luke 10. 25. compared with Mat. 22. 35. and Mark 12. 28,
etc. Luke 10. 25, 28.
Christ said unto him, What is written in the Law, how read thou? The Lawyer
answered, saying, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy
neighbor as thy self. To this answer Christ replied in verse. 28. Thou have
answered right, this do, and thou shall live. But thou can not in this sort
Love, and faith that works by love makes a sinner to keep Gods Commandments
perfectly.
love the Lord thy God (in the Covenant of Grace) with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy strength without faith in Christ the only
Mediator of that Covenant: and so says the Apostle in 1 Timothy 1. 5. The end of
the Commandment is love out of a pure heart and a good conscience, and faith
unfeigned. Love is first named here (and so it is in Exodus 20. 6. Doing mercy
unto thousaands of them that love me, and of them that keep my Commandments.)
"Love (says Ains.) is first named, as that grace from which the keeping of the
Commandments proceeds, John 14. 15. and toward such as love him and keep his
Commandments, God keeps Covenant and mercy, Dan. 9. 4. and Faith works by
love, Gal. 5. 6. and love walks after his Commandments, 2 John 6. And of this
Love, see more in Sect. 2. N. 7. But since the fall of Adam none can so love
God, nor have a pure heart by any natural inherent sanctity, but only by the
supernatural Grace of faith in Christ. For it is Christ (by his Death and
Sacrifice that has procured Gods atonement and forgiveness to such sinners
only, as have faith in Christ. And from thence it comes to pass, that the
heart is fully purified, Act. 15. 9. that is to say justified from all sin,
and by that means they came to recieve an inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith in Christ, Act. 26. 18. And to him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his Name whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins, Act. 10. 43. 1 John 2. 12. Act. 13. 38, 39.

2. Observe that Christ sent him back to the Scriptures, saying, What is
written in the Law? how read thou? do that only that thou find written,
and thou shall live. From hence it follows, that our Saviors Reply: This do,
and thou shall live, does imply, That he must do the Law in the same manner, as
it was written or commanded to be done on his part, and that was by faith in
Christ, the only procuring cause of Gods atonement, and then he should live:
But not by his bodily doing of the Law, though he were as exact in his
performance of it, as Adam was in his innocence. And to this sense does Luther
interpret the Doing of the Law for eternal In his choice Ser. on this Text, and
also in Gal. fol. 128. 129.
life. "To love God (says he) with all the heart, is to love God above all
creatures, though they be never so amiable; and to love God with all the soul,
is to bestow our whole life and body at his pleasure; and to love God with all
the strength, is for Gods cause to renounce all the members and limbs of the
body, rather than to sin against God; and to love God with all the mind, is
to enterprise nothing but that which may please God. This is to love God
wholly, and in every part of thee; not thy hands, not thy mouth, not thy knees
alone, etc. Christ answered Do this, which indeed is as much as to say, thou
art altogether a naughty fellow, thou have never in all thy life fulfilled so
much as one letter thereof, For without faith it is not possible to please God,
etc. Thus far Luther.

3. This Lawyer bewrayed his hypocrisy, because he was willing to justify
himself, and therefore he said unto Christ, Who is my neighbor, verse. 29.

4. Christ does also expound his meaning to the same sense, in John 14. 21. He
that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, John 14.
21.
and shall be beloved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my
self unto him. Our Savior does in these words affirm, that none else can keep
the Commandments of Moses Law (which he calls his Commandments, because he was
the Angel of the Covenant that gave them at Mount Sinai) but those that love
him with that united love of faith in Christ. And so says the Apostle, The end
of the Commandment is love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and of
faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. And he that loves me (says Christ) shall be
beloved of my Father. For it is for the sake of my meritorious obedience in my
Death and Sacrifice, that the Father does love me, and all such sinners as are
united to me by faith.

5. The place of Scripture to which the Lawyers answer does refer, is, Deuteronomy. 6.
4, 5, 6. which place does include Christ as the main thing in the Law Deuteronomy. 6.
4, 5, 6.
that is so highly to be beloved with all the heart, mind, soul and strength:
as it is also well expounded there by Ains.

3. The carnal Jews said unto Christ: What shall we do, that we may do Joh. 6.
27, 29.
the works of God, John 6. 27. It seems they thought that everlasting life did
depend upon the condition of their bodily doing the works of the Law, as I have
cited their meaning more at large in Chap. 7. But Christ did thus answer them
in verse. 29. This is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent.
The Geneva Note says, That Christ did call them back from the bodily doing of
the Law to faith: And in the foregoing words, Christ said in verse. 26, 27. Ye
seek me not because you saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves,
and were filled. Labor not (or work not) for the meat that perishes, but for
the meat that endures to everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give
unto you (which in verse. 51. is said to be his flesh to the death for you) for
him has God the Father sealed, i.e. authorized. And now your Question is, what
external works of Moses Law you must do, that you may work the works of God for
an eternal life in Heaven? I answer, That you must believe on him, whom God
has now sent unto you. And this believing is called the work of faith and
power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. and in Sect. 5. at N. 3. I have showed, That faith is
wrought in sinners by the supernatural aid of Gods grace: And that it is such a
work that none without it can do the commanded works of Moses Law in a right
sort: for Christ said thus to the Jews, This is the work of God (namely, that
work that God expects from you) that ye believe on him, whom the Father has
sent, John 6. 29. And says John, This is his Commandment, that we should
believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3. 23. Here the word
Commandment in the singular, is put for all the Commandments of Moses Law,
because they do all generally teach us to believe in Christ.

4. Our Savior said thus to his hearers in the Mount: Think not that I am come
to destroy the Law and the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill,
Matthew. 5. 17. namely to fill up their true interpretation which the Scribes
have destroyed with their corrupt glosses: For (in verse. 18.) Till Heaven Mat.
5. 17, 19, 20.
and Earth pass, one jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law,
till all be fullfilled; namely, until all their true sense be filled up. But
(in verse. 19.) whosoever shall do and teach (them to be done by faith in
Christ, the true End of the whole Law) the same shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven. And then our Savior told his Auditory in verse. 20. Except
your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: for their
righteousness stood in outward sanctification, and, 2. in case of defilement
in the outward justification of their bodies from their ceremonial sins by
the works of the Law: But our Savior told them, that they must go beyond
their bodily sanctification, and beyond their bodily justification by says in
Christ, or else that they could not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And
after this sort the Apostle James does teach them to couple faith in Christ to
their hearing, or else they were but vain hearers and doers of the Law,
deceiving themselves, James 1. 22, 23, 24, 25.

5. Paul told the Jews in Romans 2. 13. That not the hearers of the Law are Romans
2. 13. Romans 4. 14.
just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified: But without
says in Christ none can be a true doer of the Law, as it was given for a
Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation: And to this sense the context does carry
it, as I have expounded it more at large in my former printed Reply in page 18.
And unto that I will add the testimony of Dr Wilson in his Book against Usury,
fol. 182. "The doers of the Law shall be justified, that is, (says he) they
shall be pronounced just and righteous: as if Paul had said thus: It is not
enough for thee, O Jew, to hear the Law only: But if thou will be justified
and made righteous in the sight of God by the Law, thou must have another way
to become righteous, and that is by faith, that fastly believes sins to be
forgiven freely by Christ, and not by our works and deservings; and (says he)
to this purpose does Ambrose expound this Text, saying, Not they are righteous
which have the Law, but which believe in Christ, whom the Law promised;
affirming plainly, that to believe in Christ is to do the Law. And see Luthers
Exposition in Sect. 8.

And says Dr Barnes the Martyr, " Paul means in Romans 2. 13. by the hearers
of the Law, all them that do the outward works of the Law for fear, or for
reward; or else by them to be justified. But (says he) the Doers of the Law be
they that ^^e the works of the Law after the in^ent of the Law, and so as the
Law commands them, that is in the true says of Christ Jesus, which is the
very End of the Law, and the fulfilling of the Law to all them that believe,
Romans 10. 4. wherefore all men be but hearers of the Law only, until the time
they have the faith of Jesus Christ.

6. Paul does thus argue against the false Apostles that held justification in
Gods sight by their bodily doing the works of the Law. If (says he in Romans 4.
14.) they which are of the (works of the) Law be heirs, then faith is made
void, and the promise (to Abraham, as believing) is made of none effect. The
Apostle James says, Chapter 2 21. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works,
when he offered Isaac his son upon the Altar? But his works (in offering his
only son the type of Christ's Sacrifice) could not justify him without says
in Christ, as verse. 22. shows: He believed that God was able to raise him up
from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure: namely in the
figure of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, Heb. 11. 19. For he knew that
Christ must die, and rise again for our justification, Romans 4. 25. And then the
Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it was counted
unto him for righ^e^usnesse, Jam. 2. 23. Romans 4. 3. Genesis 15. 6. And Cornelius
is said, to work the righteousness of the Law by his faith. Therefore this is
a sound truth, that the Law was not at all given at Mount Sinai for a Law of
works to an eternal life in Heaven, by any bodily doing of it in an abstracted
sense from faith in Christ: And therefore in case it could be supposed that any
man could keep the Law by his natural principles, as perfectly as Adam did in
his innocence, yet it could not bring his soul to Heaven, because there is no
other Name (or means) under Heaven whereby we can be saved, but by faith in
Christ only.

7. The Apostle does thus conclude his disputation against justification Romans
3. 31.
by the works of the Law, in Romans 3 31. Do we then make void the Law through
faith? God forbid; yea, we establish the Law, i.e. we do not only establish
the Decalogue; but all the rest of the Law also, in the true spiritual sense of
it, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, and the reason
is, because Christ believed in is the procuring cause of Gods atonement and
forgiveness. But the works of the Law performed by bodily exercise only, were
ordained for no other end but to purify and justify the body from ceremonial
sins, Heb. 9. 13. They were not ordained to purify the heart from moral
sins, Heb. 10. 4, 11. That purifying or justifying power was given only to
the blood of Christ, as the only true end of the whole Law for justification
to every one that believes, Heb. 9. 14. Romans 10. 4. and so the heart is
purified or justified from moral sins: only by faith in Gods atonement
through the procuring cause of Christ's blood, Act. 15 9. and by that means they
are made as perfectly holy and righteous in Gods sight, as the Law of God (as
it was given for a Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation) does require them to
be. This kind of negative holiness and righteousness is it which the whole
economy of Moses does drive at: and says Bibliander on Jude, "They are
blessed and sanctified of God that have says, and do believe that their sins
are taken away by Christ, and by his bloodshed: These are they that be truly
hallowed and sanctified in God the Father: and these be holy and blessed
whether men do either bless them or curse them: and in all Moses there is no
other way of justification from sin but this. Though Mr Norton does out of
his heterodox principles call this heresy; but I believe it is approved to be
orthodox Divinity, by others of sounder judgment. This may be referred to my
former printed Reply in page 125. for a further explanation of Romans 3. 31.

8. The Apostle John says in Apoc. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments Rev. 22. 14.
that they may have right to the tree of life: namely, that do his
Commandments by says in Christ, that so they may have right to an eternal life
in the spiritual, so also in the heavenly Paradise.

9. When Christ ordained his last Supper, He took Bread and brake it, and gave
it to his Disciples: saying, This is my body which is given for you, This do in
remembrance of me, Luke 22. 19. After the same manner also he took the Cup,
and when he had supped, he said, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood,
This Do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 21. 25. Can any
man be so grossly ignorant, as to think that our Savior did command them to do
these actions but with their bodily mouth only: doubtless he commanded them
to Do it all by faith in the Death and Sacrifice of Christ, as the procuring
cause of Gods atonement and forgiveness for the justification of every
believing Communicant from their sins.

2. I have showed in the beginning of this ninth Chapter, That when Christ
said, Do the Passover, Do your sinne-offerings, Do all your Sacrifices,
etc. he commanded them to do all these Ordinances by faith in the Remembrance
of his promised Death and Sacrifice; and therefore it was Christ that commanded
them to do all the Law of Moses by faith in his expiatory sacrifice.

Sect. 7.
Moses in Romans 10. 5. describes the Righteousness which is of the Law: that
the man which does these things shall live in them: His proof is taken from
Levit. 18. 5. But in my former printed Reply in Chap. 2. I have expounded the
Doing of Gods statutes and judgments there spoken of, of such a doing of the
Law, as is done by faith in Christ only.

2. His proof also is taken from Ezekiel. 20. 11. which I have also expounded
before in Sect. 3. of such a doing of Moses Law, as is done by faith in Christ.

3. His proof is also cited by Paul in Gal. 3. 12. which place I have also
expounded in the beginning of this ninth Chapter of such a doing of the Law, as
is done by faith in Christ.

4. The said proof is also cited by the Apostle he^e in Romans 10. 5. as a reason
of that justification which he taught: For (says he) Moses describes the
justification which is of the Law: that the man that does these things shall
live in them: namely, that man that does them by faith in Christ, shall live in
them, because Christ is the procuring cause of Gods atonement and forg^venesse
for the justification of believing sinners.

5. This is the true sense according to the Context. For (says the Apostle in
Romans 10. 3. They (i e. the carnal Jews) being ignorant of Gods Romans 10. 3. 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Righteousness (i.e. of that typified way whereby God does make believing
sinners righteous by his atonement and forgiveness) and going about to
establish their own Righteousness, namely their own carnal way of
justification from sin, by trusting to their own bodily doing of the letter
of the Law, and of the typical purifying which did indeed justify their bodies
from their ceremonial sins: But they did not submit themselves to the
Righteousness of God; namely, they did not submit themselves to that way of
making sinners righteous or sinlesse by Gods atonement and forgiveness
procured by Christ upon the only condition of faith in Christ on their part,
they did not submit themselves to this kind of justification which God
ordained in the Covenant of Grace, to make believing sinners righteous in his
sight.

Then in verse. 4. the Apostle does give another Reason of this sense of
justification; For Christ is the End of the Law for justification (from all
sin) to every one that believes. The causative particle [For] does show that
this verse is added as a Reason of that which went before: and then in v. 5. he
does again amplify the said Reason: Saying, For Moses describes the
Righteousness (i.e. the justification) which is of the Law: that the man which
does these things shall live in them (i.e. that does them by faith in Christ
who is the true end and scope of the whole Law) shall live in them (that is by
faith in Christ who is related to, in them, according to v. 4.

6. Then the apostle does still amplify his former Reason in verse. 6, 7.
saying, Moreover, The justification which is by faith speaks on this wise,
Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven (that is to bring Christ
down from above to be incarnated) or who shall descend into the deep (that is,
to bring Christ up again from the dead.) And then in verse. 8. the Apostle does
answer to the said unbelieving interrogation: But what says it (i.e. what
says the Law of Moses, as it was given for a Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation to believing sinners) The Word (i.e. the Law asore-spoken of) it
is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart: This is the word of Faith which
we preach: that is to say, this Law of Moses is no other, but the very same
Word of faith which we the Apostles of Christ do preach from Deuteronomy. 30. 14.

So then, this word (or this command) of Moses Law, Do this and live, is the
same word of Faith which I Paul and the other Apostles do preach: It is no
other but that Law that was prophesied of, to go out of Zion, Isa. 2. 4.

Therefore Moses Law cannot in any respect be called, The Covenant made with
Adam, as Mr Norton does most inconsiderately make it to be: But it is the
Covenant of Grace typified under a legal Covenant; and so says the Apostle in
Act. 26. 22, 23. We preach no other thing then what the Prophets, and Moses
said should come (to wit) that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the
first that should rise from the dead, and should show light to the people, and
to the Gentiles.

Then the Apostle does in verse. 9. enlarge his Answer to the former unbelieving
interrogation: for there he does oppose their unbelief to true believing in the
heart, saying in verse. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and shall believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. For (says he in verse. 10) with the heart man believes unto
justification, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation. Even as when
the twelve Tribes did renew the Covenant of Grace upon their first conquest of
Ai in Canaan: They said Amen to all the Blessings, and Amen to all the curses
that were annexed to Moses Law: By which word Amen, they covenanted with their
mouth to do the whole Law by faith in Christ, in their hearts, as I have showed
it more at large in Chapter 8.

Conclusion:

The Apostle does declare from all the said verses, and from the subsequent
verses, that himself and the other Apostles, did preach the word of faith from
Moses Law, and in particular from Levit. 18. 5. and from Deuteronomy. 30. 6, 11, 12,
14, etc.

Object. Mr Norton does holdly and constantly affirm, " That do this and live,
does relate to the command of the Covenant of works made with Adam.
Answ. 1. The Covenant made with Adam, had no relation at all to the moral Law
of Nature, in the which Adam was created; because the Law of the Covenant
required no more but one single transient act of eating of the tree of the
twofold li^e for the fulfilling of it. And, 2. It forbad but one transient act
of eating of the forbidden fruit for the final breaking of it. And therefore,
3. As soon as that act of eating the forbidden fruit was but once done, that
Covenant was for ever after extinguished: and nothing thereof does now remain
but the vindicative punishment of a double spiritual death to all Adams natural
posterity successively to the worlds end, Gen 2. 17. And then God declared his
Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation to fallen Adam, and to all his posterity
successively, that in case they did believe in the seed of the woman, that he
should break the Devils head, but for their Redemption, they should be
justified from sin, and so eternally saved, and that such as did not believe
should be damned. Therefore this command, Do this and live, being given at
Mount Sinai two thousand five hundred and thirteen years after the Covenant of
Nature was extinguished, can relate to no other Covenant, but the Covenant of
Grace and Reconciliation: There is no other Covenant for salvation to the
world, but that Covenant only.

2. The true sense and meaning of these words, Do this and live in Lev. 18. 5.
must be fetched from the context in verse. 4. Ye shall do my judgments, and do
mine ordinances to walk therein, I am the Lord your God in the Covenant of
Grace, (and not of Nature, for that Covenant is not in being) ye shall
therefore keep my statutes and my judgments (by says in Christ according to
their typified sense) which if a man do, he shall live in them. And I have
showed from Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. in Sect. 4. that none else can walk in Gods
statutes, and keep his ordinances, and do them, but such as he does enable to
do them by his Spirit.

Object. 2. But Mr Norton does oppose this interpretation of the word Law, in
Romans 10. 4. and does affirm in page 199, 214, 225, etc. "that Christ is the
perfecting End of the Law by fulfilling the duties that are required in the
moral Law for our justification.
Answ. 1. Tindals Annotations on the said 4th verse, does thus answer him:
"Christ (says he) fulfilled the Law not so much in observing all the
Ceremonies and Precepts thereof, as in performing that which was meant by the
whole course of the Law, which was, that he being pure and without spot of
sin, should purge our filthy nature, by the shedding of his most precious
blood, for so many as should believe in his Name. And this Exposition I gave at
first in true substance in my Dialogue.

2. Mr Bro. says, T "hat Faith in the Son is the very End of the Law. In
Melchis. p. 50. in Com. pl. p. 580.


3. P. Martyr says on this 4th verse: "Christ is said to be the End of the
Law, because he brings the perfection, and the absolution thereof.

2. Says he, "We must note the property of the word (...): for it signifies
two things: 1. The extreme or uttermost part or limit of things: Or 2. The
perfection and absolution of a thing which is brought to the uttermost of its
motion, and bringing forth (i.e. its perfect accomplishment.)


1. Says he, "As touching the first signification, although Christ by his
coming made an end of the Law, for he took away the Ceremonies and the curse
thereof: yet says he, Paul in this 4th verse. means not that Christ was in
such manner the end of the Law: Death is the final end of all flesh, Genesis 6.
13. and in that respect the LXX translate death by this word end, in Genesis 27.
2. Deuteronomy. 31. 29. Deuteronomy. 33. 1. Josh. 1. 1. Judge. 1. 1, etc.

But, 2. Says he, " Paul has respect to the other signification of this word:
namely, unto perfection and absolution, Forasmuch as Christ finished and
perfected that which the Law could not perform. Howbeit, that which it can do
it does, namely, it urges us, and accuses us, that we might think upon our
deliverer, and by that means, be converted unto Christ; by whom we may be
absolved from sins, and also by his Spirit and Grace, may be able (as much as
the condition of this life will give leave,) to obey his Law given unto us;
which two things Christ most liberally gives unto them that believe in him.
And thus Christ is called the end, that is to say, the consummation and
perfection of the Law.

3. Says he, "Let us learn therefore hereby to consider two things in every
precept of the Law, namely our sins, and Christ our Redeemer, whom all the
Commandments do set forth, for otherwise says he, we shall unprofitably
consider of the Law: and the Jews (says he) inasmuch as they excluded Christ,
boasted of the Law in vain, as they which had not the Law, but a shadow of the
same.

4. Says he, "In Part 3. p. 119. Chrysostom expounding these words, The end
of the Law is Christ: says, if the end of the Law be Christ, thence it
follows, that he which has not Christ, though he may seem to have the
righteousness of the Law, yet he has it not in very deed. And a little after
he says, whosoever has faith, the same also has the end of the Law, and
whosoever is without faith, is far from either of them.

5. Says he, "In p. 39. If any man doubt whether the Old Testament has spoken
of Christ as the New Testament does, let him hear what Paul says, in Romans 10.
4. Christ is the end of the Law, for justification to every one that believes.

From these several Considerations taken from Peter Martyr, the Reader may see,
that Mr Nortons Exposition of Romans 10. 4. in making Christ the perfecting end
of the Law by his life, by fulfilling the Precepts of the Law, as it was given
to Adam in his innocence for our justification, comes not at all within the
compass of Peter Martyrs twofold division; nor yet within the compass of
Tindals Exposition. Neither does he agree with the Exposition of sundry
Lexicons, which make Christ in Romans 10. 4. to be called the end of the Law, as
he is the scope and final cause of Moses Law. See Pasor, Sympson, Cockins, etc.
And the same Greek word has the same sense in 2 Cor. 3. 13. The children of
Israel could not look to the end of that which is abolished, that is to say,
the carnal Jews could not look to Christ who is the true scope and the
perfecting end of the typical Law, which is now abolished.

6. For further light into the true sense of this word end, in Romans 10. 4.
peruse Mr Wottons Exposition de Reconsi. pec. p 151, 152, 153, etc.

7. See what I have also cited in chapter 5. at Reply 20.

Rom 10. 6. by moreover, (as you have done in this 7. Sect. at n. 6.) for a
further amplification of the Apostles former reason; seeing Translators do
generally render it [But] as a discrepant particle: to manifest, that this 6.
verse. speaks of a disagreeing matter, from that which was expressed in the 5.
verse.

But, as a note of a disagreeing matter from that which went before: yet it is
not always so translated, but sometimes it is translated [And,] as a
Conjunction Copulative: and sometimes moreover, or, furthermore, as a
Conjunction Copulative to that which went before, and so it must be translated
in this 6. verse.

1. Dr Gouge does expound it And, in Heb. 1. 6. Sect. 66. "In the Greek (says
he) the particle of opposition [But] is used, which is here well turned into a
Copulative And; for (says he) all the testimonies tend to the same scope.

2. Beza does render (...) in James 1. 9. by porro, moreover, or, furthermore;
and so do the Geneva and King James Translators, in Romans 5. 20. and in Romans 8.
30.

3. Dr Gouge in Heb. 9. 5. Sect. 109. does make (...) a Conjunction with the
word And, and also the Adverb [likewise,] "all which (says he) our English
does comprize under this word moreover.

4. Says he in Heb. 7. 5. Sect. 37. "This adversative Conjugation translated
[But,] is sometimes a note of a strong affirmation: and so it is used in Heb.
3. 5. Sect. 50. and in Heb. 6. 16. Sect. 115. And says he, if it be taken as a
note of asseveration, then it implies, that the point there spoken of, is the
more thoroughly to be weighed, as a matter that is most certainly true. And I
apprehend that the particle (...) in the said 6. verse. is to be taken both as a
Conjunction Copulative, and as an asseveration also of that truth which went
before in verse. 5.

5. The Hebrew particle which is usually translated but, is sometimes also put
for a reason of the foregoing assertion, as it is observed by our Annotat. on
Job 9. 18. And consonant thereto, must the particle (...) be rendered, in Romans
6. 10. namely, as a Conjunction Copulative, and as a further explication and
asseveration of that which went before in verse. 4, and 5. for all those
testimonies there cited, do tend to the same scope, namely, to prove that faith
in Christ is the only condition required on the sinners part for his
justification from sin.

Sect. 8.
Do, in Gal. 3. 10. is a new ^pstart Exposition, differing from the sense of
all Expositors; and therefore it may well be suspected to be no better than a
fiction of your own brain.

Do in Gal. 3. 10. as Mr Norton does, namely, of such a perfect doing of the
Moral Law, as God required of innocent Adam, for they take it for granted,
(which is not true) that the Covenant made with Adam was, that in case he
continued to do the Moral Law of nature, he should be thereby justified to an
eternal life in Heaven, according to Mr Nortons first Proposition, in p. 2. But
I have formerly replied. 1. That the Covenant of nature had no relation at all
to the Moral Law of nature. 2. That the Covenant of nature was to last no
longer, but for the trial of Adams obedience by one single act of eating. And
therefore, 3. As soon as Adam had but once tasted of the forbidden fruit, and
had received the threatened punishment of a double spiritual death, then that
Covenant was totally extinguished for ever after. And, 4. That the promise of
life made for his obedient eating was not an eternal life in Heaven; but it was
only for the confirmation of his concreated life of nature, in the enjoyment
of an earthly Paradise for ever. And, 5. That the Law at Mount Sinai was given
for no other Covenant, but only of Grace and Reconciliation, to believing
sinners, for an eternal life in Heaven, veiled under a typical Covenant of
works.

6. I shall now show that I am not alone in my said Exposition of the word Do
in Gal. 3. 10. but that I have Luther on my side, though I did not know he was
on my side until after I had finished my said Exposition.

A necessary Digression to show Luthers judgment about the word Do, in Gal. 3.
10. That it means the doing of Moses Law by Faith in Christ.
1. Luther in those blind days wherein he lived did most truly explain those
words, To do them, in Gal. 3. 10. of Doing the whole Law by faith in Christ.
But now, though we say we see the truth more fully, we are become blind in the
Exposition of those words.

" Paul, says Luther, (in Gal. 3. 10.) proves this affirmative sentence
[Whosoever are of the works of the Law, are under the curse,] by this negative
sentence, [Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the Book of the Law To Do them.]

"These two sentences of Moses and Paul, (says Luther,) seem contrary Luther
does interpret these words, To Do Them, in Gal. 3. 10. of such a doing as is by
faith in Christ, or else to be under the curse of the Law. And see more of
Luthers judgment in chapter 4. at N. 6.
to each other: for Paul says, whosoever shall do the works of the Law is
cursed: and Moses says, whosoever shall not do the works of the Law is
cursed: How shall these two sayings be reconciled together: or which is more,
how shall the one be proved to be true by the other.

And a few lines after he does thus answer:

The Article of Justification teaches, that whatsoever is done without the
true faith of Abraham is accursed. "Wherefo^^ says he (a few lines after) the
whole effect of the matter consists in this word, to do: now to do the Law
(says he) is not only to do it outwardly, but to do it truly and perfectly.

"There be then (says he) two sorts of the doers of the Law: "1. They which be
outward doers of the works of the Law, against whom Paul inveigheth through all
his Epistles.

"2. The other sort of does are of Faith.

And says he a few lines after: "He that considers this shall easily
understand, that to observe the Law is not to do that which is commanded in
the Law, in outward show only (as hypocrites imagine) but in spirit, that is to
say truly and perfectly: for to be of the works of the Law, and to be of says,
are two contrary things, wherefore these Justiciaries and Law-workers, Luther
held that says in Christ was taught in the 1, 2, and 3. Commandments, and also
in the whole Law of Moses.
when they do the Law, even in so doing they deny the righteousness of faith,
and sin against the first, second, and third Commandments, even against the
whole Law: for God commands that we should worship him in faith, and in the
fear of his name.

And says he in the next Page: " To Do is first of all to believe, and so
through says to perform the Law: we must (says he) first receive the holy
Ghost, wherewith being enlightened and made new creatures, we begin to Do the
Law, that is to say, to love God and our Neighbors.

2. But the holy Ghost (says he) is not received through the Law, (that is to
say, not through the doing of the outward works of the Law, ex opere operato,
Gal. 3. 2, 12.) but by the hearing of faith, that is to say, through the
promise (of Christ Preached, as in verse. 8.) we must be blessed only in
Abraham, namely, in the promise made unto him and in his faith in that promised
seed. Therefore before all things, we must hear and receive the promise which
sets out Christ, and offers him to all believers, and when they have taken
hold of him by faith, the holy Ghost is given to them for his sake. Then do
they love God and their Neighbor, then do they good works, then do they carry
the Cross patiently. This is to do the Law indeed, otherwise the Law remains
always undone.



Wherefore if thou will define truly and plainly what it is to do the Law, it
is nothing else but to believe in Jesus Christ: and when the holy Ghost is
received through faith, to work those things which are commanded in the Law,
and otherwise (than thus) we are not able to perform the Law.

3. Says he a few lines after, "These words, To do the Law, must comprehend
faith also which makes the tree, and when the tree is made then follows the
fruit, for the Apples make not the tree, but the tree the Apples: So the faith
first makes the person, and afterward the person brings forth good fruit.
Therefore To Do the Law without faith, is to make the Apples of wood and earth
without the tree, which is not to make Apples, but mere fantasies. The Moral
righteousness of Adams nature performed by Christ, cannot be the matter of a
sinners justification. Romans 2. 13. rightly expounded.


Contrariwise, if the tree be first made, that is to say, the person (or doer)
which is made through faith in Christ, then works will follo^ ^or Christians
are not made righteous in doing righteous things, but (...) now made righteous
by faith in Christ they do righteous things.

In politic matters it comes to pass, that the doer or workers is made of
the thing that is wrought, as a man in playing the Carpenter is become a
Carpenter. But in divine matters, the doers or workers are not made of the
works going before; but the persons that are first made and framed by faith in
Christ, are now become doers and workers: of such Paul speaks of when he
says, The doers of the Law shall be justified, Romans 2. 13. that is, they shall
be counted righteous.

4. Says he in the next Page, "When Paul proves, that whosoever are of the
works of the Law, are under the curse, by this sentence of Moses, Cursed is
every one that abides not in all things that are written in the book of the
Law. He proves not one contrary by another, (as at the first sight it does
appear) but rightly and in due order, for Moses means and teaches the
self-same thing that Paul does.

Ibidem says he, "There are two sorts of men that are doers of the Law, that
is to say, true doers and hypocrites. The true doers of the Law are they, which
through says, are the good tree before the fruit: that is to say, doers and
workers before the work, and except they be such, they are under the curse.

5. Says he in fol. 126. "The doers of the Law therefore are not the
hyppocrites, by observing the Law outwardly; but the true believers who
receiving the holy Ghost, do accomplish the Law, that is to say, do love God
and their Neighbor, etc. So then, the true doer of the Law, is not to be
understood in respect of the works that he works; but in respect of the
person now regenerated by faith. For according to the Gospel, they that are
first made righteous, do righteous things: but according to Philosophy it is
not so; but they that do righteous things, are made just and righteous thereby.
"Wherefore (says he) in fol. 127. Moses together with Paul does necessarily
drive us to Christ, through whom we are made doers of the Law, and are not
accounted guilty of any transgression: How so?

"1. By forgiveness of sins, and imputation of Mr Wotton says, As for the
imputation of righteousness, often mentioned by Luther in Galatians. It is
merely remission of sins, and Gods accepting us thereby, as if we were
righteous, De Reconsi. pec. par. 1. lib. 2. cap. 5. And says he a little
after, Other imputation than this, there is none to be found in that Commentary
of Luther. 2. I find also that Luther does call Imputation Acceptance, in fol.
65, 66. 3. He makes Christ to be our right^^usnesse, in the meritorious cause
only: namely, by his passive obedience in his death only, in (...) 43, 257,
258, 263. and not by the holiness of his life, as Mr Norton does. 4. He mak^^
the garment of righteousness to be forgiveness of sin for Christ's sake.
fol. 112. 257.
righteousness, because of our faith in Christ. And see more of this in chap.
22. n. 7, 8, 9.

"2. By the gift of the holy Ghost, which brings forth a new life and new
motions in us, so that we may do the Law effectually. Now that which is not
done is pardoned for Christ his sake; and moreover, whatsoever sin is left in
us, is not imputed. "And so Moses agrees with Paul, and means the self-same
thing that Paul does: for says Moses, They do not the Law, (why?) because they
would justify themselves by their works; and therefore he concludes with
Paul, that they are under the curse.

" Moses requires true doers of the Law which are of faith, even as Paul
condemns those which are not true doers of the Law, that is to say, which are
not of faith: herein is no repugnancy that Paul speaks negatively, and Moses
affirmatively, so that you define rightly what is meant by this word To do.

So then both sentences are true.

"1. That all are accursed that abide not in all things that are written in the
Book of the Law.

"2. That all are accursed which are of the works of the Law.



6. Says he in fol. 128. "Doing is one thing in nature, (for in nature the
tree must be first, and then the fruit,) Another thing in Philosophy, which
requires a good intent, and a sound judgment of Reason (to do or work well)
going before. But Divines say, that moral Philosophy takes not God for the
object and final cause. For Aristotle calls that right reason and a good
intent, when we seek the public commodity of the Commonwealth, and the
quietness and honesty thereof. A Philosopher and a Lawyer ascends no higher.

"But (says he) in Divinity we must ascend higher with this doing, than by
Philosophy in natural things: so that in Divinity Doing must have a new
signification; it must be joined with a right judgment of reason and a good
will; not morally but divinely, which is, that I know and believe, by the word
of the Gospel, that God has sent his Son into the world, to redeem us from
sin and death. Here Doing is a new thing, unknown to Reason, to Philosophy, to
Law, Workers, and unto all men, for it is a wisdom hid in a mystery. Therefore
in Divinity, the work does necessarily require faith going before: wherefore
Doing in Divinity, must always be understood of faithful doing: so that this
faithful doing, is altogether as it were a new Kingdom, separated from the
natural and moral doing.

"Therefore when we that are Divines, do speak of doing, we must needs speak of
faithful doing; for in Divinity we have no other judgment of right reason, no
good will or intent besides says.



7. Says he in fol. 129. "The Lord had respect to Abel and his offering, the
Text says plainly, that the Lord had respect first to the person of Abel,
which pleased the Lord, because of his faith, and afterward to his offering.
Therefore in Divinity we speak of faithful works, sacrifices, oblations and
gifts; that is to say, which are offered up and done in faith: as the Epistle
to the Hebrews declares, saying, Through faith Abel offered a better
sacrifice, Heb. 11 4. Through faith Enoch was taken away, Heb. 11. 5. Through
faith Abraham obeyed God, Heb. 11. 8, etc.

From hence it does manifestly appear, that in Divinity and divine matters, the
work is nothing worth without faith: But thou must needs have faith before thou
begin to work, for without faith it is impossible to please God, and he that
will come to God must believe, Heb. 11. 6.

8. (Says he) "When the Scripture speaks of rewards and works, it speaks
of the compound and incarnate faith: we will rehearse some examples of this
faith.

1. Faith works by love, Gal. 5. 6. 2. Do this and thou shall live, Luke 10.
28. 3. If thou will enter into life keep the Commandments, Matthew. 19. 17. 4.
He that does these things shall live in them, Lev. 18. 5. is by Luther
expounded of the inward doing of the Law by faith in Christ; and his Exposition
is much approved by M. Wilson in his Theological Rules, for the right
understanding of the Scriptures.
Lev. 18. 5. Romans 10. 5. 5. Decline from evil and do good, Psalm. 37. 27. 6.
The doers of the Law shall be justified, Romans 2. 13. This I have taken from his
former fol.
"In these and such like places (says he) where mention is made of doing; the
Scripture does always speak of faithful doing: as when it says, Do this and
thou shall live in Luke 10. 28. it means, see thou be faithful, and that
thou have a right judgment of reason, and a good will, that is to say, faith in
Christ, and when thou have this faith work on a Gods blessing. Thus far out of
Luther in Gal. 3. 10.

1. From hence I infer, that in case Luther had held as Mr Norton does, that
Christ had been our surety to do the command of the moral Law of nature in a
way of works for the justification of believing sinners, and that Luther had
proved that tenent as Mr Norton does by Lev. 18. 4, 5. and by Gal. 3. 10. and
by Deuteronomy. 27. 26. then he could not have made such an exposition of the wore
do, as he has done in all the said places, by expounding them of doing all
the Law of Moses by says in Christ.

2. From hence I infer, that Mr Nortons first foundation-proposition in p. 2.
was not received for an orthodox tenent by Luther.

3. If Mr Norton were as sound in the faith as he ought to be, then 1. he would
not disapprove of this exposition of Luther, where he is most sound: Neither
would he in the 2. place approve of his judgment where he is most unsound. For
Luther does call Christ the greatest sinner in the world, the greatest thief,
blasphemer, etc. in Gal. fol. 137. This speech M. Norton does approve Luther
for making Christ the greatest sinner in the world, but M. Gataker does condemn
him for it.
of Luthers, I did except against in my Dialogue, p. 92, 93. But Mr Norton does
answer my Dialogue with high approbation of Luthers words; And yet he
understands not Luther, for Luther does not hold Christ to be the greatest
sinner in the world, upon Mr Nortons grounds of suretiship, but upon other
differing grounds: for Luther held Christ the greatest sinner in the world,
from the point of union, as if Christ sustained the person of all believers, as
in Gal. fol. 83, 139, 141, 142. and in Gal. 2. 20, etc.

4. It was also upon this false foundation, that Austin the Archbishop of
Nazaret did go, in making Christ the greatest sinner, namely, from the said
point of personal union.

But Mr Norton does make Christ the greatest sinner in the world, upon another
false foundation, namely, in making Christ to be the legal surety of the Elect,
in the Covenant of nature made with Adam, to suffer the curse of that Covenant,
(which I have showed, is no other but a double spiritual death.) This tenent is
much worse than a fantastical fiction, for it is blasphemy at least, in the
highest degree, if it be not rank heresy. But I will suspend my judgment for
the present, though I could cite good Authors for the affirmative.

Mr Gataker in his Answer to Mr Walkers Vindication, faith in page 41. "That
Luther in his Commentary on the Galatians, makes Christ the greatest sinner in
the world: and (says he) we read of one Austin of Rome, Archbishop of
Nazaret, who maintained some assertions not unlike to that of Luther: to wit,
that Christ sins daily, and ever so did. The speeches of them both, says Mr
Gataker are over-harsh; and says he, the Archbishop was taxed for this in the
Council of Basil, Sess. 22.

1. From hence the Reader may see, that Mr Gataker does condemn Luthers
speches, and so by consequence he does condemn Mr Norton for justifying the
said speech of Luther.

2. Hence the Reader may see, that Mr Nortons kind of imputing sin to Christ,
was first hatched by a popish Bishop, and 2. that his assertion, That Christ
did suffer the Essential Torments of Hell, was first broached by Causanus a
Romish Cardinal before Calvin's days, as it is observed by Dr Jackson in his
Book on the Creed, p. 135. and he calls it heresy.

4. Bishop Davenant does call it a thing Repugnant to the Salvation of De
Justi. habiti. c. 24. p. 33.
men and blasphemous, once to imagine that Christ should be made wicked (i.e.)
a sinner) by the imputation of our sins to him. But says he in p. 333. "Christ
was willing so far to take our sins upon him, nor thereby to be made a sinner,
but a sacrifice for sin.

CHAPTER X.
By the curse of the Law in Gal. 3. 10. is meant the eternal curse of the
Covenant of grace, and not the curse of the Covenant of nature, as Mr Norton
does confound it.

1. I Have abundantly proved, that the Law at mount Sinai was not at all given
for the Law of the Covenant of nature, but for the Law of the Covenant of grace
and reconciliation only, to the comfort of all those sinners that do believe in
Christ to be the procuring cause of his Fathers atonement and forgiveness to
their souls; and to the terror of all unbeleevers.

2. From thence it follows, that all the curses of Moses Law do belong to the
said Covenant of grace, either as temporary chastisements for sin, to bring
them to repentance; or for the trial of the graces of the godly; or else as
proper vindicative punishments begun here and perfected hereafter in the flames
of Hell upon all unbeleevers.

3. I have showed in Chapter 5. Sect. 3. and Reply 8. from Mr Lawson, That all the
penalties on Cain, the old world, and the builders of Babel, and the rest; were
penalties as threatened by, so inflicted upon sin by God Redeemers; and so
consequently not for sin against the Covenant of nature.

4. I have showed in that cited place, that Mr Ed. Holyoke does affirm the same
thing: he says we may understand by the process of the holy story, that the
soul of Adam never were, nor are plagued for not doing a Covenant of works, but
for despising Christ, his Gospel and Kingdom.

5. I have also showed in Chapter 8. at no 6. that after the captivity, when the
National Church did renew the Covenant of grace that was made with their
Fathers, they did then enter into a curse and into an oath, to walk in Gods Law
that was given by Moses the servant of God, to observe and do all the
Commandments of the Lord, and his judgments, and his statutes, Neh 10. 29.
compared with Neh. 8. 38. But it were too gross ignorance in any to affirm,
that they entered into this solemn curse and oath, to do all the Law of Moses
by their bodily exercise only; doubtless they did by this curse and oath, bind
themselves and their posterity to do all the Law of Moses, as it was given to
them for a Covenant of grace and reconciliation, namely to do it by faith in
Christ, as the only procuring cause of Gods reconciliation: and from thence it
follows, that whosoever among them did dye before they had gotten faith in
Christ, did dye in their sins, and also under the eternal curse of that
Covenant: and to this sense does Ainsw, expound it in Deuteronomy. 30. 19. "The death
and curse there threatened (says he) was for refusing Christ, and seeking to be
justified by the works of the Law.

6. It is further evident, that the whole National Church of such as were alive
at that present, and of such as should be born of them in future generations,
are all put under the curse of the Covenant of grace, in case they did not
perform the condition that was required to be performed on their part by
Believing in Christ who was the only procuring cause of Gods atonement: for
thus Moses said to them in Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 12. Ye stand this Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 12,
18, 19, 20.
day all of you before Jehovah your God, that thou should pass into the
Covenant of Jehovah thy God, and into his Oath which Jehovah thy God strike^h
with thee this day, that he may establish thee this day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, us he has spoken unto thee, and
as he has sworn to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaak, and to Jacob.

Hence observe:

1. That this Oath does oblige both sides to keep the conditions of the
Covenant that did appertain to each party.

2. That Moses does compare this Covenant which was now renewed in the plains
of Moab, with that which was first made at Horeb, (called also mount Sinai,)
and 2. also with that Covenant of grace which he had formerly made with
Abraham, with Isaak, and with Jacob.

3. Says Moses in ver. 18. Least there be among you man or woman, etc. whose
heart turns away this day from Jehovah our God; namely through unbelief: and
to that sense does Paul expound it; saying, Take beed brethren least there be
in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing (or turning away) from
the living God, Heb. 3. 12.

4. Moses says in ver. 19. When he hears the words of this Oath (called also
the curse in ver. 12.) and he bless bimself in his heart saying, I shall have
peace though I walk in the imagination of mine own heart: (Then in ver. 20.)
Jehovah will not spare him, but then the anger of Jehovah and his jealousy
shall smoke against that man, and every curse that is written in this book
shall lie upon him. And in ver. 21. Jehovah will separate him unto evil out of
all the Tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the Covenant that are
written in this Law.

Now the curses that are written in this Law, are first temporal curses, many
of which are expressed in Lev. 26. and in Deuteronomy. 28. and 2. the Eternal curse of
Hell torments is threatened to all such as dye without faith in the Expiatory
Sacrifice of Christ, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Galat. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Heb. 10. 38, 39.

5. After they were come into the Land of Canaan, they said Amen to all the
curses of the Law, in case they did not observe it as it was given for a
Covenant of Grace by faith in Christ, the true end of the whole Law, Joshua 8.
30, 34, 35. which I have handled more at large in Chap. 8.

6. The curse that is denounced by the Prophet Jeremy in Jer. 11. 3, 4, 8, 10.
is no other but the curse of the Covenant of Grace: saying, Cursed be the man
that obeys not the words of this Covenant: But they could not Jer. 11. 3, 4,
8.
obey it without faith in Christ: and in that respect it is that faith is
called, The obedience of faith in Romans 1. 5. Therefore where there is no faith
in Christ, there is no obedience that is accepted of God: and hence it follows,
that in case it could be supposed that any son of Adam could by their natural
principles keep the whole Law as perfectly as Adam did in his innocence, yet
that obedience could not free them from the eternal curse of the Law, because
that obedience is not the obedience that is required in the Covenant of Grace,
no other obedience but faith in Christ, who is the only procuring cause of
Gods atonement, was ordained to be the condition to be performed on man's part
for the fulfilling of the Covenant of Grace: therefore no other obedience to
the Law but what is joined with faith in Christ, has the promise of life
annexed unto it. And therefore in the second place, the Lord said by Jeremy in
verse. 4. I commanded your Fathers in the day that I brought them out of the
Land of Egypt, saying, Obey the words of this Covenant, and do them according
to all which I commanded you, so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God:
Yet (in ver. 8.) they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, but walked every one
in the imagination of their evil heart: Therefore I will bring upon them all
the words of this Covenant, that is to say, all the curses of it (as in verse.
3. and in Deuter. 29. 21.)

7 All the punishments that are threatened in Levit. 26. are no other but the
punishments of the Covenant of Grace; because they are said to be inflicted to
fulfill the quarrel of the Covenant, Levit. 26. 25. compared with verse. 15.

8. The Apostle says, That Christ Jesus shall come at the end of the world in
flaming fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1. 8. All are bound by the
Covenant of Grace to believe in Christ, and therefore all such as live in sin
in the Church without repentance, and all Apostatized Idolaters, shall feel the
flaming fire of Gods vengeance, because they obey not the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus.

9. I have in Chapter third given two Arguments, to prove, That Christ as
Mediator, is the Author both of the Resurrection, and also of the final
sentence at the last judgment in relation to the breach of the Covenant of
Grace by unbelief: and that the whole world shall in that respect be judged
according to the condition required of them in the Covenant of Grace, John 3.
18, 36. John 5. 24. therefore seeing faith in Christ is the principal condition
that is required of sinners for the keeping of the Law, and seeing faith in
Christ is the chief sin that breaks the Covenant of Grace finally: thence it
follows, that it must needs be a great error to hold, that any son of Adam
shall be judged to an eternal death in hell for the breach of the Covenant of
Nature that was made with Adam.

10. The Lord is said to be wroth with the Jews, because they were not
circumcised in their hearts by faith in Christ, Jer. 9. 25, 26. And it was for
the want of faith in Christ, that the National Church was broken off, Romans 11.
17. And it was for the want of faith that he sound fault with them, as I have
formerly expounded Heb. 8. 8, 9. And for that cause it is that he has cast
them out, Gal. 4. 30. And it was for the want of faith in Christ, that they
could not steadfastly look to the End of those types which are now abolished, 2
Cor. 3. 6, 13. All the curses of the Covenant of Grace, are now fallen upon
that Apostate Church, because they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear to
believe in Christ, the true End and Scope of all Moses Laws for their
justification from all sins to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4.

Conclusion.
1. I conclude my Exposition of Gal. 3. 10. as Luther began it in fol. 121.
"Here (says he) you see, That the curse is as it were a flood swallowing
whatsoever is without Abraham, that is to say without faith, and the promise of
the blessing of Abraham. And he that will avoid the curse, must lay hold upon
the promise of Blessing, or upon the faith of Abraham, or else he shall remain
under the curse.

2. Says Luther in fol. 122. "This sentence, As many as are of the works of
the Law, are under the curse; might have been said by a general proposition,
Whatsoever is Done without Faith is under the curse And, says he, that it may
be understood plainly what it is to be under the curse, Paul declares by this
testimony of Scripture, saying, For it is written, (in Deuteronomy. 27. 26.) Cursed is
every man that continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the
Law to Do them.

3. Says he in fol. 123. "The whole effect of the matter consists in this
word [to doe] now to do the Law, is not only to do it outwardly, but to do it
truly and perfectly. And says he in fol. 124. wherefore to Do is first of all
to believe, and so through faith to perform the Law, etc. or else to do it
but outwardly without faith is to be under the curse: For, as Paul says, The
letter kills, 2 Cor. 3. 6. and in verse. 7. It is the ministration of death:
and in verse. 9. It is the ministration of condemnation.

CHAPTER XI.
Showing, That Christ is called a Surety of the Better Testament in Heb. 7. 22.
In Relation to his Eternal Intercession in Heaven, and not in Relation to the
Covenant made with Adam.

Mr Norton says thus in page 140, "That Obedience which the Creditor according
to Law demands, the debtor owes, and the Surety is to pay. "But Obedience unto
the command, i.e. to the Law of works, Lev. 18. 5. Gal. 3. 10. and suffering
the punishment due to sin, Genesis 2. 17. is that which God according to Law
demands, and the Debtor, namely the sinner owes. "Therefore Obedience unto the
Law of works is that which the Surety ought to pay.

Reply 1. There are many notable errors both in his Assumption and Conclusion.

1. It is a notable error to call the Covenant of Nature made with Adam, the
Law of works in the plural, seeing it required no more but one work or act of
eating of the Tree of the twofold life for the fulfilling of it.

2. It is another notable error, to make Christ as Mediator to be Adams Surety
in the Covenant of Nature, seeing that Covenant was made with no other person
but with Adam and his natural posterity only. And, 2. For no other act of
obedience, but for his once eating only of the tree of the twofold life. And,
3. The said Covenant was totally extinguished as soon as Adam had but tasted of
the forbidden fruit, and had but received the threatened punishment of a
twofold spiritual death. His Assumption and Conclusion is therefore fallen to
the ground, seeing they are built but upon mere fictions.

3. I reply further for the sake of such as do hold as Mr Norton does, namely,
that the Covenant of Nature is yet in being, and that it was made in Relation
to Adams obedience to the moral Law of his nature: But in that sense, I say
also that Mr Nortons Assumption is exceeding erroneous: because he puts no
difference between a surety for debt of goods, and a surety that does undertake
both to perform obedience, and to suffer the punishment that belongs to a
capital delinquent, though no such surety is allowed either by the Law of God
or man. For it is a received maxim among judicious Lawyers, "That no just Law
does admit any one to be a Surety for a delinquent either to perform his
personal obedience, or to suffer his personal punishment in the very idem or
kind, of payment, as is done In his Confession p. 273, 289.
in the case of debt. Mr Baxter and others say, "That in payment of debts to a
creditor, which is not our case (in the point of Christ's Suretiship) Christ
could not by the justice of Gods Law be made the Surety of the Elect, to do the
command and to suffer the curse of the Covenant of nature made with Adam.
the Law admits palment by a delegate, and takes the person as the same,
looking only at the debt (for in that case what a man's instrument does,
himself does) yet in the case of obedience and punishment, the Law determines
of the person as well as of the thing due, and allows not a delegation of
doing or suffering by an instrument, or in the natural person of another: And
therefore Dum alius solvit, simul aliud solvitar. And says he in page 289. The
idem is perfect obedience, or the full punishment of man himself: and in case
of personal disobedience, it is a personal punishment that the Law requires. It
is Supplicium ipsius delinquentis: The Law never threatens a Surety, nor
grants any liberty of substitution. If therefore the thing due, were paid, it
was we our selves morally or legally that suffered; and it could not be our
selves legally, because it was not our selves naturally: But if it had been our
selves legally, then the strictest justice could not have denied us a perfect
and present deliverance ipso facto: seeing no justice can demand more than the
Idem quod debitur, the whole debt of obedience or punishment. Thus far he.

But I have showed in Chap. 1. that the thing due was paid, namely that the
threatened death of the deprivation of Gods Image was inflicted on Adams person,
and also upon the person of all his natural posterity, as a satisfaction to the
justice of God in that Covenant.

4. Mr Woodbridge says, "It was not Christ's death but ours that was in the
obligation (in Genesis 2. 17.) for the Law requires, that he that sins die, and no
man else: But if he that sins not die, (then says he) that death cannot be
the same that was in the obligation: (and I add, that seeing Christ sinned
not, no death was due to him by the threatening of any Law, but by the Law of a
voluntary Covenant only for the meriting of man's redemption.

And 2, (says he from Vlpian) "In corporal punishments (which metaphorically
may be called payment of debts to the Law) the samenesse of the person is
essential to the samenesse of the payment; so that Si alius solvat, aliud
solvitur, if another person pay, it is another thing that is paid.

3. (Says he) "If Christ paid the Idem, then no man's sins are pardoned: for,
says he, the Law it self would admit of satisfaction from the sinner, if he
were able to make it.

4. Says he, "Our obligation was ex delicto, Christ's ex contractu voluntario;
In his method, p. 232. at N. 3.
It was not any breach of the Law that subjected him to death, but his own
voluntary act, John 10. 17, 18.

5. Says he a little after, "Christ was not obliged to suffer by the same Law
that we were, but by a Law peculiar to himself, as a voluntary Surety for them:
In which respect it is that we say, his payment was not Ejusdem, but Tantidem.
Vide Cameron. Disp. de satisfact. p. 363. ad object. 1.

6. Says he in page 246. "That Christ translated our very obligation upon
himself, and so paid as in our names, and as Representing us in making payment,
I deny it as dangerously false: The Reason is ready, because See N. 10.
what is done as in our name and person, is not so much his act that does it,
as ours, whom he represents in the doing of it, etc. See him more at large
there.

5. Mr Ball says, "In the rigor of the Law the delinquent himself is in person
to suffer the penalty denounced: Every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6.
5. And in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death, Genesis 2. 17.
And says he, the Law in the rigor of it, does not admit of any commutation or
substitution, of one for another; and then he concludes, that satisfaction was
made by another free Covenant. But of this you may see more in my former
printed Reply in page 112.

6. Mr Woodbridge said above at N. 3. "That if Christ paid the Idem, then no
man's sins are pardoned. And in my former printed Reply, in page 77. I have
cited several good Authors for it: and this truth is also most clearly proved
by Mr Baxter in his Consession, in page 272, 273, 275, 276, 289, 290.

7. P. Martyr in his Answer to those Arguments that are alleged for Popish
satisfactions, says, "After thou have once paid the price, there is nothing
can be forgiven thee; but then has Remission place when the price is not paid
in Romans p. 383.

8. Bullinger says in Decad. 4. and Ser. 1. "Forgiveness of sin is the gift
of Gods mere Grace and liberality: for the creditor cannot forgive the thing
that is already paid unto him: for when he gives back the thing that he has
received, in so doing he does not forgive, but give; and that deed in Scripture
is called Donum a gift, and not Remissio a forgiving. And says another good
Author, If thou pay thy debt by thy Surety, then God shows thee no mercy, but
if God shows thee mercy by his forgiveness, then thou can not be said to
make full payment in kind by thy Surety.

If Mr Norton had been so happy as to have been better insighted into the said
maxim of Law before he answered my Dialogue, he might have seen, that no Law
of God, nor of any well ruled Commonwealth does allow of any Sureties either to
perform obedience for, or to suffer punishment for the personal faults of
capital delinquents, except it be by Vtopian sureties, and by the Laws of the
Commonwealth of Vtopia, or by the Laws of tyrannical conquerors.

9. Paraeus does dispute against Mr Nortons foundation-proposition, which
affirms in page 2. "That Christ was our Surety both to do the command of the
first Covenant made with Adam, and to suffer the curse of it for our
Redemption. Paraeus does thus answer: "It was never heard (says he) that the
Law did oblige both to obedience and punishment at the same time, but
disjunctively, and not copulatively: either to obedience or punishment: His
words I have cited more at large in my former printed Reply in page 16. And Mr
Lawson and Mr Rutherford and many others do use this Argument against the legal
obedience by Christ as our Surety.

10. Mr Baxter says, "The misunderstanding of the nature and use of Christ's
death and obedience, and thinking that Christ obeyed or satisfied by suffering,
or both: As in our persons, so that the Law takes it to all ends and uses, as
done by us our selves, as when a man pays a debt by a delegate. This opinion
(says he) if I understand it, blots out both Law and Gospel at one dash. And I
have cited more from him to this purpose in my former printed Reply, p. 86, 250.

11. Mr Baxter says, "That Christ was no sinner, nor so esteemed, nor could he
possibly take upon him the same numerical guilt which lay on us, (the accident
if removed from the subject perishes) nor yet a guilt of the same sort, as
having not the same sort of foundation, or efficient: ours arising from the
merit of our sin, and the commination of the Law, and his being rather
occasioned than merited by our sin, and occasioned by the Laws threatening of
us, both which are, (as we may call them, pro-causes as to him,) having neither
sin of his own, nor merit of wrath from such sin, nor did the Law oblige him
to suffer for our sins: but he obliged himself to suffer for our sins,
[Though not as in our persons strictly,] yet in our stead in the person of a
Mediator. In his Epist. to his Confess. p 4.

From hence it follows, that God did not according to Law, in Genesis 2. 17.
demand of Christ as the surety of the Elect, the payment of that obedience,
which that Law required, nor the suffering of that twofold spiritual death,
which that Law threatened.

2. From hence it follows, that Mr Nortons comparative Argument, (falsely taken
from legal justice) is no better than a mere fiction of his own brain, even in
the judgment of such as hold as he does, namely, that the Covenant of nature
was made with Adam, in relation to his obedience to the Moral Law of nature.

Baxter for me, that yet he does hold in his Saints Rest, That Christ suffered
the wrath of God.

Austin does thus define the wrath of God, "It is nothing else (says he) but
his judgment, whereby punishment is inflicted for sin. 2. Says he in The
City of God, l. 15. c. 25. "Gods anger is no disturbance of mind, The wrath of
God defined by Austin.
but his judgment assigning sin, is deserved punishment. And says he in l.
9. c. 5. "God is said to be angry, yet far off is he from feeling such an
effect. The effect of his revenge did procure this phrase, not the turbulency
of his passion. Peter Martyr, in confutation of Pighius, (that held the naughty
desires in Children, to be the works of nature and not to be sin,) does first
cite this place in Ephesians. 2. 3. We are by nature the children of wrath, because
sin is in every one of us by nature. But Pighius answers, "To be the
children of wrath by nature, is no other thing, than to be the children of
wrath, by a certain condition of our birth, because we are so brought forth
into the world. But Peter Martyr replyeth, in Com. pl. p. 218. "The wrath of
God is not stirred up but upon just cause: so, as it behooves, that in our
nature there be something amiss, whereby Gods wrath is provoked to revenge. In
these words he shows that Gods wrath is not provoked against any until there
be sin in the subject. And says Mr Baxter in his Confession, p. 276. "He that
is guilty of no fault, (as Christ was not, as he also affirms above at N.
11.) cannot be justly punished with the smallest penalty, (as Dr Twisse truly
says:) It may be affliction or torment, but it is no punishment unless it be
for sin. And Mr Baxter as well as Grotius, does also add this clause thereto:
unless it be for personal sin, (whereof Christ was free:) This considered, I
cannot see how Mr Baxter can maintain that Christ did suffer the wrath of God:
But I leave it freely to him to reconcile these things if he please; but to me
they seem to be unreconcileable.

But says Mr Norton in p. 11, 85. 86, etc. "He that was the surety of the
Elect, was bound to pay their debt, and consequently to satisfy the Law for
them: But Christ was the surety of the Elect, Heb. 7. 22. neither is the
Argument at all infringed, by saying he is our surety, in regard of the
Covenant of Grace, called a better Covenant, in Heb. 7. 22 but not in respect
of the Covenant of Works, etc.

Nortons sense, namely, not to pay their debt of obedience, nor yet to pay
their debt of punishment to the Law of the Covenant of nature (which he calls,
though very unfitly, the Law of works,) made with Adam: For in that Covenant
Christ must be considered as God-Creator, and not as God-Man Redeemer; and
therefore he could not then, as God-Man Christ mediator could not be the surety
of the Elect, in the Covenant of nature, to do the command, and to suffer the
curse of it for them.
Redeemer be surety, to do or to suffer any thing for the Elect in that
Covenant. But in that Covenant he left them to themselves, to obey by eating
first of the tree of the twofold life, or in case of disobedience, by eating
first of the forbidden fruit, then to suffer that threatened punishment of a
double spiritual death in their own persons: and therefore every mothers son
does bear that death, as a satisfaction to the justice of that Covenant. And,
2. It cannot agree to the holiness of the person, and office of the Mediator,
to bear that punishment in his humane nature.

1. Because that kind of death, is the deprivation of the concreated image of
God, and then in the second place, it is death in sin, which is now called
original sin. This double spiritual death was the essential punishment that
was threatened to Adam, and to all his natural posterity in that Covenant: and
therefore it can be no less than blasphemy in the highest degree, to say, that
Chrtst was the surety of the Elect, in that Covenant to bear that punishment
for them. And, 3. That Covenant was made only with Adam, and his natural
posterity. But Christ was none of his natural posterity, and therefore he was
not included in that threatening.

2. It is an extreme harsh speech to say, that Christ was bound to pay their
debt. "If any man think (says De Reconc. l. 1. par. 2 c. 13.
Mr Wotton) that the Gospel has made such a Covenant, by translating, and as
it were putting over the fulfilling of the Law to a deputy or surety. I desire
to see the writings whereby the A defeasance is an undoing of what was formerly
done: or it is a writing, testifying that a former Covenant shall be of no
force.
defeasance is made, which I could never yet find in the Records of the
Apostles or Evangelists. But it is no less than blasphemy to affirm that
Christ was such a surety, as to make such a defeasance that should overthrow
the definitive sentence of the Covenant of nature. For I have showed in Chapter 1.
that the sentence of that Covenant was not comminatory only; but that it was a
definitive sentence, or a declaration of the irreversable Decree of God;
namely, that Adam and all his natural generation, should bear it themselves as
a satisfaction to the justice of that Covenant, being all deprived of the
concreated image of God: and then 2. They were no sooner deprived of Gods
image, but presently they fell under the positive curse of a spiritual death in
sin.

3. Mr Woodbridge says in p. 246. "I deny that Christ translated our very
obligation upon himself, and so paid as in our names, and as representing us in
making payment, as dangerously false: The reason says he is ready, because
what is done in our name and person, is not so much his act that does it, as
ours whom he represents in the doing of it, etc.

4. Mr Baxter says in Confess. 288. "That the sinner did not in Law, what the
Priest did on his behalf, and for his good: this short observation is worthy a
long meditation.

5. I have often said, that Mr Norton having extremely missed of the true
matter of the Covenant of nature, does run further and further into many great
errors. And therefore, both He, and I, and all others that love the truth in
sincerity, had need to pray to God earnestly as David did in Psalm 119. 10. Let
me not wander (or let me not err) from thy Commandments, least we fall under
that curse of the Covenant of Grace, in Deuteronomy 27. 18. Cursed be he that makes
the blind to err out of the way, especially in such fundamental points of
Religion as Christ's satisfaction is, and as the justification of a sinner is.

6. Mr Norton does not come any thing near to the true sense of the word
Surety, in Heb. 7. 22. For, 1. He errs in the word [Our] in p. 11, 85, 86 as if
Christ were called our surety, in Heb. 7. 22. seeing the word [Our] is not Heb.
7. 22.
to be found there. 2. The Context in verse. 21. does tell us, that it must be
read [A Surety,] The Lord swear and will not repent, Thou art [A Priest] for
ever, not our Priest. The Hebrew Text says thus, in Psalm. 110. 4. Jehovah
swear (that is to say, God the Father swear unto the Lord Christ) thou art a
Priest (or a Surety) for ever. Now Gods Oath is such an unalterable thing, that
neither the repentance of Moses, nor yet the repentance of all the godly in the
world, can ever alter any thing that God does swear to: and from thence the
Apostle does infer in verse. 22. By so much (namely, by so much, as God the
Fathers Oath is more sure than his word or promise, (which is sometimes
alterable upon man's unbelief, as in Numb. 14. 31. For God makes his promises
upon the condition of faith on our parts, Genesis 4. 7. Esaias 1. 19, 20. so then it
is our unbelief that is the cause of the nonperformance of his promises,)
therefore he gave his Oath to David for the stronger confirmation of his
promise, in Psalm. 110. 4.) was Jesus made a surety, (that is to say, a most
sure, certain, and unchangeable Priest) of a better Testament, namely, that the
typical Testament of Moses Law of works, which was given at Mount Sinai. For
this word Better is not opposed to the Covenant of nature made with Adam, as Mr
Norton does most grossly interpret it; for that Covenant was no Testament, but
it is opposed only to the typical Covenant of Moses Law, which is also called
a Testament, because it was confirmed by the blood of beasts, Exodus 24. 7, 8.
and the works of that Testament were ordained for the procuring of Gods
Reconciliation, to the bodies of the national Church, from their ceremonial
sins only, before they might dare to appear before God in his holy Temple.
And therefore this typical Testament served only unto the example and shadow
of heavenly things, Heb. 8. 5. And those Priests were many, says the Apostle
in verse. 23. because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death. But
this man (says he) in verse. 24. (i.e. this sure and certain Priest) continues
for ever, because he has an unchangeable Priesthood. For says the Apostle, in
verse. 24. The Law makes men Highpriests which have infirmities: But the word
of the Oath to David (in Psalm. 110. 4.) which was since the Law (of those
typical works given at Mount Sinai) makes the Son who is consecrated or made
(perfect through sufferings, according to Heb. 2. 10.) for evermore.

2. From hence it follows, that Gods Oath did make Christ to be a surety, that
is to say, to be Gods surety or certainty to us: that he should continue to be
an unchangeable Priest, by his continual intercession for us in the Heavens;
Wherefore (in verse. 25.) he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that
came unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

3. From hence it follows, That whatsoever God swears to, it is to assure us
that he had so decreed it in his eternal counsel, to stand without any
alteration.

4. Therefore when God made a promise to Abraham, that Christ should come out
of his loins, it pleased him for the stronger assurance thereof to his faith,
and to the says of all the godly, to confirm that promise by his Oath, saying
in Genesis 22. 16. By my self have I sworn, assuredly (or sworn for the more
surety-sake of my former promise to thee.) And to this sense it is also said in
Heb. 6. 17, 18. That God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two
immutable things, (1. By his immutable counsel. And, 2. By his unchangeable
Oath,) (by the which, his eternal secret counsel was now revealed,) it is
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation. And see Ezekiel. 33.
11, 19. cited in chapter 9. sect. 4.

5. Mr Roberts says, "The Levitical Priests were made without an Oath; But
says he, Christ's Melchi-zedeck* like Priesthood with an Oath, that it might be
unalterable, in which respect says he, Christ is the surety of a better
Testament, Heb. 7. 20, 21, 22. He does rightly make Gods Oath, to make Christ's
Priesthood unalterable. But yet he misseth in the word [The,] for I have
showed, it ought to be read, a Surety, namely, Gods assurance to us, of the
continuance of Christ's Priestly intercession for us in Heaven.

6. Dr Gouge says thus on verse. 22. "In this Verse, says he, the main point
is concluded, namely, that Christ's Priesthood is more excellent than the
Levitical: it is (says he) comparatively laid down thus, By so much, (having
reference to verse. 20.) that which is established with an Oath, is better than
that which is established without an Oath: so much more excellent is Christ's
Priesthood than the Levitical. And He, (says he) whom he there styled Priest,
is here called Surety. But yet he also misseth of the right sense of the word
surety in this place.

7. The Greek word (...) translated surety, is but once used in all the New
Testament.

8. But yet this word surety has various senses in other Authors, and
therefore the greater heed must be taken to the Context, where it is used, that
it be not taken in any other sense than the Context will afford it.

1. It is put for a bounden surety, as in the case of debts. 2. It is put for a
voluntary surety, as in a dangerous combat for the deliverance of friends. 3.
It is put for Gods protecting of his people in a good cause. 4. It is put for
certainty, to the faith of Gods people.
1. It is put for a bounden surety, as in the case of debt, and in this sense
the Septuagint put the foresaid Greek word twice over in Prove. 22. 26. for two
several Hebrew words. 1. For Cappaijm, which signifies the connection of two
men's hands together, in sign of a sure contract. 2. It is put for Gnereb, which
also signifies a conjunction of two together in a contract of debt, and
therefore the said Verse may be thus translated, Be not one of them that
conjoyn hands, (in way of suretiship for debt) or of them that are conjoined
with another for debt.

2. In this respect it is, that the said Hebrew word Gnereb is often translated
surety, by the figure Metynomia, because the act of joining hands was used for
the sign of suretiship: and so it is translated surety by the said Greek word
in Prove. 11. 15. and Prove. 17. 18. and Prove. 20. 16. 3. It is put for
suretiship by promise, or by word of mouth only, as in Genesis 43. 9. and Genesis
44. 32. There Judah did engage himself by promise, to be a surety to his
Father, for the safe return of Benjamin; or else to become a guilty sinner to
his Father, in case he did not bring Benjamin back in safety. But we must not
so understand his promise, that he engaged his life to be taken away by his
Father, in case he did not bring Benjamin back in safety. As it is evident by
the like offer of Ruben, for Ruben offered to engage the life of his two Sons
to his Father, to slay them if he did not bring Benjamin back. But his Father
refused to admit of this condition of suretiship, because it was unnatural and
sinful: as it is also well observed by Ainsw. in Genesis 42. 37. But yet it is
very ill allowed, for a good example by Mr Rutherford on the Covenant, p. 248.

2. The said Greek word (...) is used in Ecclesiasticus, in Chapter 29. 15, 18. for
a voluntary surety, that ventures his life for the safety of his friend. The
words are thus: Forget not the friendship of thy surety, for he has laid
(down) his life for thee: and in verse. 17. He that is of an unthankful mind
forsakes him (his surety) that delivered him. And in this sense also Christ
took on him to be the Surety of the Elect: and therefore he says in John 10.
11, 15. I lay down my life for my sheep. That so through death, he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. And
says John, Hereby we perceived his love, that he has laid down his life for
us, therefore we ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren, 1 John 3.
16. Romans 5. 7, 8. but this sense of the word surety, does not agree to Christ's
everlasting suretiship in Heb. 7. 22.

3. There is yet another sense of the Hebrew word surety (much like to the
former,) in Psalm. 119. 122. Be surety for thy servant for good, that is to say,
conjoyn thy self to me, to assist me and defend me, against my malignant
adversaries in any just cause. And such a like expression did the Jews use by
the said Greek word in 2 Maccab. 10. 28. they (after they had prayed) had The
Lord for their pledge or surety, of their success and victory. But this sense
of the word surety does not agree to Heb. 7. 22.

4. The said Greek word is used for certainty, in Heb. 7. 22. The Lord The word
Surety Heb. 7. 22. is put for Gods certainty to our faith, that he has
ordained Christ to make continual intercession for us, according to his promise
in the better Testament.
swear, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedec. By so much was Jesus made a surety, (or a certainty) of the better
Testament. From hence it follows, that Gods Oath did make Christ to be a more
sure and certain Priest to us of the better Testament, than the legal Priests
were of the typical Testament, for they died, and thereupon were often changed.
But Gods Oath made Christ to be a most sure and unchangeable High Priest, by
his continual intercession for the Elect in Heaven; for the word surety in Heb.
7. 22. is there applied to Christ's continual intercession in Heaven for the
Elect.

The Priestly office of Christ is most fitly divided into two parts: 1. Into
his oblation here upon earth, which he finished in a short space of time. And,
2. To his eternal and unalterable intercession for all the Elect in Heaven:
and it is in this last respect that Christ is called a Surety, in Heb. 7. 22.

2. I find that Gods oath is generally used for a surety or for a certainty
sake: as to Abraham in Genesis 22. 16, 17, 18. By my self have I sworn assuredly
says Jehovah, that for because thou have done this thing, and have not
withheld thy son, thine only son, of a Surety (or of a certainty) blessing
I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee, and in thy seed shall
the nations of the earth bless themselves. This promise of bleffednesse, God
for the greater certainty sake of it did confirm it by his unalterable oath,
expressed by this word assuredly; for the Apostle does expound this word
assuredly, by doubling the word for the greater Emphasis in Heb. 6. 14. as it
is well observed by Dr Gouge in Sect. 101. "This word surely (says he) is used
in Greek for the form of an oath: He says, that the first particle [(...)]
here used with a circumflex, is a note of a strong asseveration of it self
alone, and that it signifies surely or truly. 2. Says he, the other particle
[(...)] joined thereto, adds emphasis, as if he should say truly in truth:
and says he, the LXX have used this (doubled) word in Genesis 22. 17. to show
that that which follows was the oath which God did swear: and other Greek
Authors (says he) do use it as a note of an oath.

4. As Gods oath is used for the confirmation of his promise, and is set out
unto us by the said doubled word [truly in truth] so his said promise is also
confirmed by two other doubled expressions: In blessing I will bless thee, and
in multiplying I will multiply thee. This threefold doubling of words in Heb 6.
14. was used by God for the greater certainty, or for the greater suretyship
sake of Abraham's faith, and of the faith of all the godly: for this threefold
doubling of words sounds thus much in English, Of a surety, of a surety, I will
surely bless thee, and I will surely multiply thee, and in thy seed shall all
nations bless themselves. The like doubling of words for suretiship sake does
God use in his promise to all the godly in Heb. 13. 6. I will not, not, leave
thee, neither not, not, forsake thee. In all, there are five negatives: of
which see Dr Gouge there.

5. The Apostle says in Heb. 6. 17. Wherein (or in which promise confirmed by
Gods oath) God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the
immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath. Mark how he sets out the
certainty of Gods promise: 1. By the immutability of his internal counsel: 2.
By the immutability of his explicit oath to Abraham.

6. Take notice, that this oath was expressed unto Abraham by an Angel, namely
by the Angel of the Covenant Christ Jesus: as it is also well observed by
Ainsw. in Genesis 22. 11.

7. Dr Gouge says in Heb. 6. 17. Sect. 138. "That Gods oath was given to
Abraham as a kind of suretiship: Mark this, he does expound Gods oath to
Abraham to be for his suretiship: just as I do in Heb. 7. 22. namely for the
surer certainty of his promise.

8. (Says he) "The Verb confirmed is derived from an Adjective that signifies
middle, Mat. 18. 2, 20. thence a Substantive that signifies a Mediator; one
that stands as it were in the midst betwixt two at variance: and this word
says he is often attributed to Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb. 8. 6. Heb. 9. 15.
Heb. 12. 24. Hence the word here used is derived.

9. "This word confirmed (says he) is interpreted by the vulgar Latin, He
interposed: By Beza, he undertook as a Sutety; and by our English, he bound
himself: But Dr Jackson says in his seventh part on the Creed, p. 288. That
the Original does verbatim sound thus, Deus intermediavit Juramento: God did
intermediate by oath: The object of this oath was God, ver. 13. but the Chaldee
does instruct us, that the object of this oath was The Word, (...), noting him
thereby to be (...) The Mediator between God and man: and the tenor or contents
of the oath was, that this (...) should become the seed of Abraham, and make
mediation by such a sacrifice as God tho Father (for trial only) did require
of Abraham: And 2. From hence also it follows, that when God does add his oath
to his promise or to his predictions, it is for the greater suretiship sake to
the faith of Gods Elect: ( "and says Dr Jackson in p. 287. Genesis 22. 16. is
thus translated by the Chaldee, By my word have I sworn (says the Lord) that
blessing I will bless thee, because thou have obeyed my Word, This
translation) says he) of the Chaldee, affords more light for the right and
punctual explanation of Heb. 6. 17. than most Commentaries on that place have
done.)

10. In this recited sense is the word surely to be taken in Heb. 7. 22.
namely, that God the Father did by his oath make Christ a surety of the better
Testament, that is to say, a most sure and certain Priest, to make continual
intercession in Heaven for all the heirs of the Promise.

11. Mr Wilson says in his Christian Dictionary, "That the word Surety is
sometimes put for certainty; as in Genesis 15. 13. But the word Surety is not
there in the Hebrew; though yet it is there by necessary consequence, namely by
the doubling of the Hebrew word; for there God said thus to Abraham; knowing,
kown: that is to say, know of a surety: this doubling of words in the Hebrew
text, is always a note of Gods suretiship to us, not only in his promises, but
also in his threatenings: as I have showed it more at large upon those doubled
words, In dying thou shall die, Genesis 2. 17.

This last exposition of the word Surety, does best suit to Heb. 7. 22. and to
that sense I have expounded it in Chapter 1. Sect. 2. and also in my former printed
Reply.

But says Mr Norton in p. 52. "Christ on earth suffered the wrath of God; that
is, the Extention of Divine Justice, because he then stood as a Surety to
satisfy the curse due to sin, Isa. 53 10. But having satisfied it, Joh. 19.
13. Col. 2. 14. the same Justice that before punished him now acquits him, Romans
8. 34. If the debtor be discharged and the Bill cancelled, doubtless the Surety
is free.

Surety cited often from Heb. 7 22. being rightly expounded as above, does
utterly consound his said assertion; for there it is said in ver. 24. that this
man (that is to say this Surety) because he continues for ever, he has an
unchangeable Priesthood. But on the contrary Mr Norton does make him but a
temporary surety; contrary to Hebr. 7. 24 for he affirms, that his suretiship
was finished at his death: but the Apostle says, that it does and shall
continue as long as his office of intercession does continue in Heaven, for the
daily procuring of Gods Reconciliation to the elect, as long as they live under
sin in this world, according to the conditions of the better Covenant.

2. Dr Reynolds says, "It was the same continued action whereby the Priest did
first offer without the holy place; And 2. that did once a year bring the blood
into the holiest of all, Heb. 13. 11, 12. And the reason why it was so shed
(says he) was to present it to the mercy seat, and to show it to the Lord
there: Therefore Christ's entering into Heaven with the merit of the blood, was
to assure all believers that he did continually present unto God the merit of
his sacrifice, for the procuring of his continual reconciliation to all
believing sinners: And in this sense it is that our High Priest does
continually bear our sins (from us) now in the Heavens, Isa. 53. 12. and this
truth is also confirmed by Heb. 12. 24.

3. Mr Nortons several Scriptures now cited to prove his erroneous assertion,
are all consuted in my former printed Reply in p. 205.

But says Mr Norton in page 53. "If the debtor be discharged, doubtless the
surety is free.

Baxter truly says, "When the debtor has paid all by his surety, he owes
nothing, and therefore cannot justly be continued in prison, nor be justly
punished with the smallest penalty. But says Mr Norton in his In Confess. p.
276.
foundation proposition, page 2. "Christ has made full payment by paying the
Idem both of obedience and punishment: But I rather believe that he knows not
what he affirms: for the debt of obedience to the Covenant of Nature, was no
other but for Adam himself, to eat first of the tree of the twofold life, and
the debt of punishment, for his eating first of the forbidden fruit, was no
other but a double spiritual death: and therefore it is no less than blasphemy
to affirm, that Christ was our Surety to make this full payment, seeing all the
Elect themselves do pay the debt of that double spiritual death, being all
deprived of the concreated Image of God. And, 2. Being all dead in corrupt and
sinful qualities: and though they are in part renewed here through grace, yet
they are not so perfectly renewed, but that the said double spiritual death
does still remain upon them, as the proper punishment which God has appointed
for the satisfaction of his justice, for the breach of the said Covenant of
Nature, even as long as they live in this world: and from thence it follows,
that Christ was not the Surety of the Elect to satisfy the justice of God for
the Redemption of the Elect, from that definitive punishment: For, 1. None of
the Elect are discharged from the deptivation of Gods concreated Image: Nor 2.
From their original sin in full, until the Resurrection of their bodies:
this punishment of a spiritual death in sin, does lie upon all the godly both
in their life, in their death, and in their putrefaction in their graves,
until their Resurrection: and therefore they stand in continual need of such a
Highpriest, as is made a Surety by Gods oath of the better Covenant, to make
continual intercession to God for his daily reconciliation and forgiveness to
them. Mr Bridge in his Saints comfort, says thus in page 26. "If you duly
consider the Epistle to the Hebrews, you will find, that this work of Christ's
Intercession, is the Essential work of his Priestly Office: It seems rather to
go beyond the former, than to fall short of it, etc.

Sect. 2.
But says Mr Norton in page 142, 143, 147, 154. "The nature of Redemption by
Christ, according to the constitution of the only blessed, wise and just God,
is by way of Suretiship, and not by way of mere price, which last is a
fundamental error in the Author of the Dialogue throughout.

"That the nature of Christ's Redemption is by way of Suretiship to the Covenant
of Nature in doing the command, and suffering the curse of that Covenant, as he
has explained his meaning in his first Proposition in page 2. But I think I
have sufficiently showed, that Christ as Mediator was not revealed, during the
time of that Covenant, and that none else are under the obligation of that
Covenant, but Adam and his natural generation only. And, 2. That as soon as
Adam transgressed that Covenant by eating of the forbidden fruit, and had
received the threatened punishment of a double spiritual death, that Covenant
was wholly extinguished for ever after. And, 3. Thence it follows, that Christ
could not be Adams Surety, to suffer that kind of spiritual death by the
constitution of the only wise and just God: therefore all those Scriptures
which Mr Norton has cited in several pages to prove his heterodoxal Assertion,
are exceeding grossly abused.

2. I do as much wonder at his negative assertion, in denying, that we are not
redeemed by way of mere price, seeing the blessed Scriptures do so plainly
assert it. First, Paul says, Ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Cor.
7. 23. And Peter describes the price, 1. Negatively, Not silver and gold. 2.
Affirmatively, But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. 1. 19, 20. And, 2. I have showed in my
Dialogue in page 85, 86. that he was without blemish or spot, not only in
nature, but also in the performance of his combat of suffering, and also in
the formality of his death and Sacrifice. And the reason why this performance
is called a price, is, because it was paid or performed according to the
Covenant that was agreed on between the Trinity, as it was first declared in
Genesis 3. 15. and as I shall further explain it in Chap. 13.

But says Mr Norton in page 144.

"Christ was our Surety to satisfy vindicative justice in our place, which
else we must have suffered. And says he, in page 146. Redemption is not by way
of mere price, but by way of Suretiship, where that which does Redeem, is put
in the place of the Redeemed.

2. I have also showed in my former printed Reply in page 216. that the As the
Law of Nations, so also the Law of God does forbid to admit sureties to suffer
the same corporal punishments that are due to capital offenders.
Roman Laws did not admit sureties to suffer the punishments of capital
offenders for their Redemption. Vide Panormitan Rubri de fide jussoribus: and
vide Digest. lib. 2. Tit. 11. Si quis cautionibus lege quotiens.

3. And more particularly, the Roman Laws did not admit of any surety for an
Adultresse, as I find it recorded by P. Martyr in his Common-pl. p. 485, 480.

4. The Digestes in matrimonio solute, say, That the bargain is of no force,
wherein a man does bind himself to prison, if he pay not the debt in a certain
time.

5. "Neither does Gods Law, says P. Martyr, make any mention of imprisonment
for debts, but of a certain bondage for six years, or to the year of Jubilee in
case it came before the expiration of the sixth year, in Com. pl. p. 316.

6. The Statute Laws of England made in the Reigns of several Kings, do
prohibit the Judges to accept of any bail or mainprize, that is to say, of any
surety for such persons as stand accused either of Treason or Murder, or of the
like capital crimes: many of which crimes are expressed in Mr Daltons Justice
of Peace.

7. The Law of God does also teach the same Rule of justice; especially in two
cases, 1. In the case of murder: And, 2. In the case of manslaughter in Numb.
35. 1. Maymony says in the case of murder, "That the Judges are warned to
take no Ransom of the murderer, although he could give all the wealth in the
world: and though the avenger of blood should be willing to free him: for the
soul of him that is killed is not the possession of the avenger of blood, but
the possession of the holy blessed God. See Ainsw. in Numb. 35. 31. and thither
also I do refer his Annor. on Exodus 21. 25. Levit. 24. 19. Psa. 49. 7, 8.
Prove. 28. 17. From hence it follows, that seeing God forbad the Judges of the
Sanhedrim to accept of any satisfaction for the murthereds life, they were also
prohibited to admit of any surety for the Redemption of the murderers life:
and that nothing else but the murderers own death could satisfy the justice
of that Law, in Numb. 35. 31. Yea God commanded a murderer to be taken from
the Altar, and to be put to death, Exodus 21. 14. and yet the Altar was ordained
to be a place of Suretiship to the manslayer, but not to the murderer. Thargum
Jerusalemi expounds it thus, "Though he be the Highpriest who stands and
ministers before me; from thence ye shall take him and kill him: And even Joab
the General was by the sentence of Solomon killed there, 1 Kings 2. 31.

8. The Law of God did prohibit the Judges to accept of any satisfaction (and
so consequently of any surety) for the manslayer, Numb. 35. 32. Ye shall take
no satisfaction for him that is fled to the City of his Refuge, that he should
come again to dwell in the Land, until the death of the Highpriest: But I pray
take notice, that this Law was not given from the moral Law of nature, nor yet
from the judicial Laws of other Nations, but it was given as a positive Law
only: and the reason thereof is, because it was ordained to be a typical Law
to the National Church only, whiles they lived in the Land of Canaan, for that
Land, and people, and many of their Laws were typical, until Christ had
finished Trespasse-offerings, and ended Sin Offerings, and all other types by
his death; and until his death they were ordained to be a teaching
Schoolmaster unto Christ: and then that National Church was no longer to be
accounted for the peculiar people of God: neither was the Land of Canaan to be
any longer accounted for Gods holy Land, neither were the typical Laws to be
any longer continued as a teaching Schoolmaster unto Christ.

2. This positive Law concerning the manslayer is the more remarkable, because
he was commanded to continue in exile, until the death of the Highpriest: and
it was in that respect that the Judges were forbidden to accept of any kind of
Surety for his restitution.

3. This Law was so strictly to be observed, that in case the manslayer did
presume to go never so little from the border of his City of Refuge, the
avenger of blood might kill him, if he met him, and no blood should be imputed
to him for it: or as the LXX render it, the avenger of blood should not be
guilty of bloodshed; no, though the manslayer had been acquitted of wilful
murder by the sentence of the Judges, Deuteronomy. 19. 10.

4. The justice of this positive Law is the more remarkable, because it is so
exceedingly different from the justice of the Laws of all other Nations: for in
other Nations when a mankiller is proved to be no more, but an unwitting
manslayer, he is acquitted from murder, and from death, and from imprisonment
also at the very first sessions of justice: and this difference does make this
kind of positive Law to be the more evident type of our Redemption from sin and
death, by the bodily death of our Highpriest Christ Jesus.

5. Hence it does also sollow, that seeing this positive Law did prohibit the
Judges to accept of any kind of surety for the redemption of the manslayer from
his exile: That the way of Gods justice for our redemption from sin, is not
framed to the ordinary way of legal Court-justice that is used in any Nation;
much less is it framed to the course of justice, that is used against sureties
for debts of goods: neither can any exemplification be made of it from the
course of justice that is used in any well governed Nation in the world, but by
the Jews positive Laws while they lived in a National Church in Canaan.
Therefore the manner of Mr Nortons reasoning is very dangerous, in that he does
parallel the way of Gods justice (though he does not make a right parallel) in
the point of man's redemption, to the ordinary course of justice that is used in
other Nations, to the utter confounding of his Reader in this blessed truth, as
I have noted it more at large in Chapter 5. Reply 15. N. 12. and in Chapter 1. Reply 16.

But says Mr Norton in p. 131. "It seems to be no injustice, for the
Magistrate in the case of Sure^iship Grotius does confute Grotius in the point
of suretiship.
to put Peter to death for Thomas his crime: and at last he concludes his long
discourse about the point of suretiship (in page 133.) with this testimony of
Grotius, "I dare almost say (says Grotius, a man excelling in this kind of
learning) that where there is consent, there is not any of those whom we call
Pagans, who would not esteem it unjust, that one should be punished with the
delinquency of another. De satisfact. chap. 6.

Norton is more apt to follow Grotius his errors in the point of Christ's
satisfaction, than to follow him where he reformes those errors: For he might
have found, if he had but read Grotius's Book of War and Peace, that upon
second thoughts (which usually are best) he did alter his judgment in the
point of suretiship, quite contrary to what he had delivered before, De
satisfactione Christi.

For thus he says in his War and Peace, par. 2. c. 112. p. 398. "Some evil is
sometimes imposed upon one, or some good is taken away by occasion indeed of
some fault: yet not so, that the fault is the immediate cause of that action,
as to the right of doing. So he, who by occasion of another debt has engaged
himself, suffers evil; Sponde n^x a prasto est.
but the immediate cause of his obligation is his promise. As he who is become
surety for a buyer, is not properly bound by the bargain, but by his promise:
so he also who is bound for a Sometimes sureties are admitted for delinquents:
not to suffer their bodily pains, much less to suffer death for them: but only
to pay a certain sum of money, in case they appear not to answer to the
justice of the Law.
delinquent, is not held by the delinquency, but by his engagement. And hence
it is, that the evil that is to be borne by him, receives it measure, not from
the fault of the other, but from the power which himself had in promising.
Consequent whereunto is this, (According to the opinion which we believe to be
the truer,) That no man can by his becoming surety lose his life: Because we
determine, that no man has such right over his own life, that he can take it
from himself, or engage it to be taken away by another; though the ancient
Greeks and Romans were of another mind in this matter. And there he cites five
Authors to that ancient opinion: But one of those five is the speech of Ruben
to Jacob, in Genesis 42. 37. Slay my two sons, if I bring not Benjamin again.
But says Ainsw. "This proffered condition (of suretyship) being unnatural and
sinful, Jacob would not admit of it. And the like answer must be made to all
other instances of suretiship for life.

2. Grotius says in p. 399. "What we have said of life, ought to be understood
of members too; for a man has not right over them, but for the preservation of
the body. And hereunto I will add by way of Parenthesis, the words of Dr
Bilson. "I hope (says he,) that humane Laws have no power nor practice, to
take away men's lives for suretiship: yea, (says he) they allow no sureties for
any corporal pains, because no man is master of his own body, to engage the
whole, or any part thereof, to be mangled or maimed, unless he will be a
homicide to himself, which Gods Law does not permit, nor man's Law accept, p.
293. And says he in p. 288. "Neither in capital crimes, nor in corporal
pains, does man's Law allow of any sureties: and no surety stands bound for a
servant, much less for a condemned and dead person; since then we were not
only the servants of sin, but for heinous offenses condemned, and already
dead in soul by sin, no course of Law allows us sureties. 2. I have cited
another Reverend Divine in my former Printed Reply, in p. 121. that says thus:
"It is not required by the rules of equity, whether Divine or Humane, that
satisfaction for wrongs, should be always made in kind, or by way of
Counterpassion. His words more at large I have cited there. "3. It is a
childish assertion to affirm, that none can ransom a Prisoner condemned to
death, unless he will suffer the same death in his place and stead. 4. It was
no good justice in Zalencus, when he caused one of his eyes to be put out, that
one of his wicked sons eyes might be spared, who according to the true intent
of the Law, ought to have lost both. Some think this act of Zalencus did
satisfy justice, but Dr Reynolds condemns it as contrary to justice, in Psalm.
110. p. 448.

Conclusion.
1. That Grotius saw good cause by his further reading and meditation, to alter
his judgment from what he first held, touching Christ's suretiship, to make
satisfaction to Gods justice for man's Redemption, by way of Counterpassion.

2. That thereupon Grotius does distinguish his judgment from the ancient
Greeks and Romans, that were of another mind: implying also thereby, that the
latter Romans saw the inconveniences of their own former customs, and also of
their Ancestors customs, in putting sureties to death; and thereupon they made
other Laws in opposition to their former customs. Vide Codic. l. 9. Tit. 47.
de poenis lege sancimus. And P. Martyr does also point at this, in Com. Pl. p.
367. and in Jude 2.

Sect. 3.
3. I Observe also that Grotius does rightly distinguish between the word
punishment, that is properly so called, from that which is improperly so called
in p. 309.

1. He speaks of punishments improperly so called. "Certain works Punishments
improperly so called, must carefully be distinguished from punishments that are
properly so called.
(says he) are sometimes to be imposed upon some, by way of punishment: yet
those works, (says he) are only to be considered as troublesome, and
therefore are to be referred unto passions. As in the Hebrew Law, to be kept
from Assemblies or Functions, are not properly punishments, although for a
certain similitude, and abusively they are so called.

2. Pet. Martyr gives another instance. "It sometimes happens (says he) that
such as are converted, are vexed with godly sorrow, but that, says he, is not
properly punishment, but it must be referred unto passions.

3. Says Grotius in p. 399. "If exile, if loss of money were in the promise,
(i.e. of a surety) and by the others fault, the forfeiture was made, the surety
shall bear the loss, which yet in him, to speak exactly, will not be a
punishment: and thereunto he does add two other examples of punishment
improperly so called.

4. I will thereunto add the example of a voluntary Combater, he in the trial
of masteries, may receive many wounds in his body, from the malignity of his
opposite Combater; which wounds may improperly be called punishments, but not
properly, because they were not inflicted by the judges of the Combat, for the
demerit of his misdemeanour. And in this sense only must all the sufferings of
Christ be called punishments improperly, for his malignant Combater Satan, and
his instruments did labor to provoke his passions, to some sinful distemper
or other: and indeed his natural passions of fear and sadness, were thereby
provoked, but yet not to any disorder from the rules of pure nature. Those
sufferings therefore were no proper punishments in Gods account, but were by
him ordained to be for the trial of his perfect obedience in his death and
sacrifice, that so it might procure Gods Reconciliation to all the Elect for
their eternal Redemption. As I have more fully opened the matter in my former
Printed Reply. "5. Not to suffer any thing wrongfully, (says Austin) but to do
any thing unjustly, is sin (that deserves punishment properly so called.) De
Arbit. lib. 3. cap. 16. And says Dionysius, "It is no evil (in it self) to be
punished, but to deserve punishment.

Of Punishment properly so called.
6. Grotius says thus in p. 310. "Among things which nature it self dictates
to be lawful and not unjust, this is one, That he who does evil, should
suffer evil: This (says he) the Philosophers call, A most Ancient and
Radamanthean Law. And, says he, pertinent is that saying of Plutarch, Justice
accompanies God to punish them that transgress the Law Divine, etc.

And (says he) Plato said, "That neither God nor man will say that an offender
ought not to be punished.

And (says he) " Hierax by this (as the noblest part) defined justice to be an
exacting of punishment from offenders.

"And (says he) punishments properly so named, must be rendered to some
offense, as it is also noted by Austin. All punishment (says he) if it be
just, is the punishment of sin: which says Grotius, is to be understood of
those punishments also that God inflicteth: though in them sometimes (as the
same Father speaks) the sin is secret, where the punishment is not secret.
[And Elihu said the same to Job, God (says he) will not lay upon man more than
right, least he should go unto judgment with God, Job 34. 23.] And see more in
Dr Ames in Medul. par. 1. c. 12. N. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

6. Grotius shows in page 400. "That none is justly punished (in propriety A
surety cannot in propriety of speech be justly punished for the fault of
another. If merit of punishment be personal, then the sufferings of Christ
cannot in propriety be called punishments unless he were personally guilty of
sin.
of speech) for another fault; none (says he) that is free from fault, can be
punished for the fault of another, because (says he a little after) the
obligation to punishment arises from merit, [and merit (says he) is
personal,] having its original from the will, than which nothing is more ours,
whence it is called (...). And it is also often affirmed by Peter Martyr, "That
this is properly the merit of punishment, in Com. Pl. p. 163, 165.

And says Grotius, Jerome says, "Neither are the virtues, nor the vices of
Parents imputed to their children, Epist. 3. in morte nepot.

And Austin says, "That God himself should be unjust, if he should condemn any
one guiltless, Epist. 105. But Mr Norton does make God to condemn Christ, to
the suffering of the essential torments of Hell, being altogether guiltless;
namely, in not any having any personal guilt from his own will.

Dion Chrysostom says, "That Gods Law is not like the Athenian sanction, that
is added to Solons Laws, in punishing the posterity of transgressors. Gods Law,
(namely, his moral Law of nature) does not punish the children and posterity of
offenders, but every one is the Author of his own cal^mity. Pertinent is the
Proverb, Noxa caput sequitur: and that saying of the Emperors punishment, must
remain there where the Lege Sancimus ^. de poenis.
fault is; and let sins, (i.e. the punishment of sins) light only upon
their Authors, and the fear go no further than the offense. But Dr Bilson does
thus recite the Laws of the said Christian Emperors, (Arcadius and Honorius,)
"We appoint that punishment shall be where the fault is: let offenses bind
their committers, and let no fear of punishment extend further than to such as
are guilty of crime. Vide Codic. l. 9. Tit. 47. de poenis.

And says Plato, "It is just that the punishment should rest where the sins
do, reprehending the customs of some Nations, that put to death the innocent
children of Tyrants or Traitors. which custom Dionysius Halicarnassensis
reprehendeth also, and shows the iniquity of the pretended reason, viz. "That
children will be like their Parents. And says Seneca, Nothing is more unjust
than that one should inherit his Fathers hatred.

7. Says Grotius in p. 402. "Though by an immature and violent death, It is no
good justice to punish innocent children for their Fathers sin.
God did cut off the children of Achan, of Saul, of Jeroboam and Ahab: he did
it as using the right of Dominion, and not of punishment, and yet in the same
act he punished the Parents in a more grievous manner. But I have before
showed, that the sin of Achan was a national sin, by virtue of Gods supreme and
arbitrary Law.

But says Grotius in p. 403. "Men may not imit^te that vengeance of God, nor
is the reason alike, because as we have said, God without any regard of the
fault, has right over the lives, men have not, but upon great crime, and such
as is the persons own.

Wherefore that Divine Law, as is forbids Parents to be put to death for their
children; so it forbids children to be put to death for the deeds of their
Parents: which Law pious Kings have followed, even in the case of Treason, 2
King. 14. 5, 6.

And (says he) Plato has a saying which Callistratus the Lawyer expresses to
this sense: "The crime or punishment of the Father can inflict no blot upon the
son, (he adds the cause,) namely, because every one bears that lot, which his
own doings have drawn upon him: nor is he made successor of another crime.

And says Cicero, "Would any Commonwealth endure that Lawgiver, by whose
Ordinance the Son or Grandchild is condemned, if the Father or Grandfather be
a Delinquent. And he speaks much more to this purpose in the place cited, to
the which I refer the Reader.

8. Says Grotius in p. 406. "The cause why an heir being liable to others
debts, is not liable to the punishment of the deceased, is, for that the heir
bears the person of the deceased, [not in respect of merits which are merely
personal,] but of goods which are engaged. And for this he cites three Authors;
and in the beginning of this Chapter, I have cited the words of Mr Baxter to
the same purpose. Surcties or Hostages of War (if personally innocent, ought
not to be put to death for the treachery of the delinquency of others.


9. Grotius does soundly convince both the Laws and the practice of some
Nations, of great injustice, because they hold it lawful to take away the life
of Hostages, (though innocent in their own persons.) And therefore it seemed an
atrocity or cruelty to Narses a good General, to take punishment of innoxious
Hostages: And Scipio said, "That he would not show his displeasure upon
harmless Hostages, but upon those that had revolted, in page 602, 603. And
says he in page 542. A just Talion, and properly so called, is to be exercised
upon the same person that offends: (and not upon an innocent surety) as
(says he) may be understood by what we have said above of Communication of
punishment, in page 400.

Conclusion.
From the said assertions of Grotius and others, it follows,

1. That the truer opinion is, that no man can become a surety, by engaging his
life to be taken away for the fault of capital delinquents, because no man has
right over his own life; and therefore those examples which Mr Norton has
alleged, for taking away of the life of innocent sureties, for the personal
faults of others, in page 131, 132, 133. though they past for good justice in
his erroneous judgments: and that God by the like justice did punish Christ as
the Surety of the Elect, (by imputing their sins to him,) with the
vindicative punishments of the Covenant of nature, (which was a twofold
spiritual death,) and also with the vindieative punishments of the Covenant of
grace, by inflicting on him the essential torments of Hell, which are due to no
others by Gods Law, but to unbelievers only: yet it will not pass for good
justice by the Rules aforesaid.

2. Though he has cited Grotius for the confirmation of his said assertion,
yet now he may see, that I have cited Grotius (in his after-considerations) to
be point blank against him.

3. Seeing Mr Norton does acknowledge that Grotius is a man that does excel in
this kind of learning, he ought to take the more notice of his reformed
judgment.

4. That God (according to Grotius judgment) cannot by the Rules of his
justice, punish Christ as a sinner, with any proper punishments, unless he can
make it appear, that Christ was a true personal sinner: for Grotius does
affirm, "that the merit of true punishment is personal.

5. From hence we may see a true rule of direction, how to understand all those
Scriptures that speak of the sufferings of Christ, from Genesis 3. 15. to the end
of the Revelation: namely, not of true punishments, but of punishments
improperly so called; because God in Genesis 3. 15. gave the Devil a liberty of
power to pierse him in the foot-soales, as a sinful malefactor on the tree,
with all possible reproach and torture, to provoke his passions to some
sinful distemper if he could. But in Gods intent it was to make full proof
of the obedience of Christ, before he could make his death to be accepted as a
most pleasing sacrifice, for the procuring of his Fathers Reconciliation, for
the Redemption of the Elect from Satan's headplot.

But says Mr Norton in p. 132. Dr Willet says, "That in some cases, by the
Law of God, the surety gave life for life: for the Prophet told Ahab, That his
life should go for Benhadads life, 1 King. 20.

Norton does count all fish that comes to his net, but if he had but examined
the circumstances of the Text, as he ought to have done before he let his Pen
to write after Dr Willet, he might have found that this instance does not prove
his said assertion; for the Prophet told Ahab in verse. 28. That God would
deliver his potent enemy Benhadad into his hand: intimating thereby, that it
was his positive will and command, that he should not spare Benhadad's life,
but that he should execute the Law of War upon him by putting him to death. (If
a man find his (mortal) enemy, will he let him go well away, 1 Samuel 24. 17, 18,
19.)

But because Ahab did not observe this positive command of Gods supreme will,
thence it came to pass that the Prophet told Ahab, That for his said personal
disobedience, his life should go for Benhadads life. And to this very sense
does our larger Annotat. expound it in verse. 42. where it does parallel Saul's
disobedience in sparing Agag, to this disobedience of Ahab in sparing Benhadad.

Therefore this instance is no proof at all that God did appoint Ahab to be
Benhadads surety, no more than Saul was appointed to be Agags surety. But on
the contrary, they were both appointed by God to be their sure executioners.

2. From hence it follows, that in case Mr Norton will say that Ahab was
Benhadads surety, to keep him sure until he put him to death: yet even in this
case, Ahab was not bound to be Benbadads surety, according to the ordinary way
of justice, to put Benhadad to death for blasphemy, as Mr Norton does affirm in
his Epistle Dedicatory, page 2. from 1 King. 20. 42. But by Gods supreme
positive command only, wherein he used the right of his dominion, and not the
right of his common Laws.

3. The Reader may please to take notice, That the said positive Law Josh. 2.
2. Josh. 8. 2. with v. 29.
and Covenant made with Ahab, and the like positive Law and Covenant made with
Joshua 6. 2. were not given in the nature of standing positive Laws, for the
Rule of justice to be observed at other times, and in other cases. But they
were given as transient positive Laws, for the trial of their obedience in that
particular time and case. And in chapter 5. I have given sundry instances of the
like transient positive Laws and Covenants, which are quite contrary to Mr
Nortons assertion of suretiship in p. 131.

4. It is evident from Grotius distinction of punishment, that neither the
death, nor any of the sufferings of Christ, can be called true punishments,
because no sufferings can be called true punishments, until they be inflicted
for personal moral sins; of which kind of sins Christ was free, and
therefore he was free also from true punishments. And Mr Baxter does fully
concur to the said assertion of Grotius, "He (says he) that is guilty of no
fault, cannot be justly punished with the smallest penalty, as Dr Twisse truly
says, It may be affliction or torment, but it is no punishment unless it be
inflicted for (personal) sin. In his Confessi. 276. And says he in p. 290.
"The Law never threatens a surety, nor grants any liberty of substitution.

5. There are two assertions of Austins formerly cited by Grotius, that deserve
serious Considerations.

1. "That all punishment if it be just, is the punishment (of personal sin.)
And says Grotius, This is to be understood of those punishments also that God
inflicteth.

2. Says Austin, "God himself should be unjust, if he should condemn any one
guil^lesse.

6. Mr Norton does seem also to approve of these assertions, but his foundation
It is a dangerous assertion to say, that God imputed the sins of the Elect to
Christ, as the obligation to vindicative punishments. Of which see more in chapter
13. in Sect. 4.
error lies, in making Christ to be a true sinner by Gods imputing to him the
sins of all the Elect. For thus he says in p. 130, 131. "Neither by the said
Rule, nor by any other rule of justice, can either the torments of Hell, or of
any other, no not the least punishment be inflicted upon a person being simply
innocent: But says he, though Christ was innocent in himself, yet he was not
innocent as our surety, until the guilt imputed to him was satisfied for. But
to this I have replied in the words of Grotius, immediately cited, "That Christ
could not by any Law of God that is given to man, become a surety for the
personal guilt and punishment of others. And therefore it is no better than a
fiction in Mr Norton to affirm it.

7. Mr Norton says in p. 96. "Christ is expressly said to be a curse in Gal. 3.
13. and thence (says he) it will unavoidably follow, that sin was some way
judicially upon Christ, for we read of no curse inflicted, according to the
determinate and revealed way of proceeding, with the reasonable creature, but
presupposes sin. Wherefore (says he from Luther,) "Christ could neither have
been made a curse, nor dye, since the only cause of the curse, and of death is
sin, from the which he was free, but because he had taken upon him our sins.

Gal. 3. 13. namely, in the outward manner of his death, because God had given
the Devil a liberty of power, to pierce him in the foot-soales upon the Cross,
for the trial of his obedience, Phil. 2. 8. And now I will only add a short
passage thereto from Cyptian, De Passione Christi. "Christ, says he, was
called sin and a curse, pro similitudine poenae non culpae, for the likeness
of the punishment, not of the fault. But Christ was not called sin and a
curse, in respect of any guilt or fault that was derived to him from us by Gods
imputation. But he was called sin and a curse, 1. Because of the likeness of
the punishments which he suffered, like unto such malefactors as were
deservedly put to death upon the Cross, according to the prediction in Genesis 3.
15. 2. He was called sin, because he was the true sinne-offering in his death
and sacrifice, for in the Law, the sin offering is above a hundred times over
called, sin with an addition of the word offering. 3. Mr Nortons Conclusion
from Luther is unsound, and therefore it will not help him. 4. Mr Norton does
not agree with Luther in the ground of Gods imputing our sins to Christ: for
Luther makes Christ to be a sinner, not as he was the legal surety of the
Elect, as Mr Norton does: but by virtue of his spiritual uninion with the
Elect, for Luther does make the spiritual union of the Elect with Christ, to be
a kind of personal unity, and by virtue of that unity, he makes Christ to
partake with them in their sins: for in Gal. 2. 20. and fol. 83. he says
thus, "Thou art so entirely and nearly joined unto Christ, that he and thou art
made as it were one person; so that thou may boldly say, I am now one with
Christ, that is to say, Christ's righteousness, victory and life are mine: and
again Christ may say, I am that sinner, that is to say, his sins and his
death are mine, because he is united and joined unto me, and I unto him, etc.
And 2. Because of this union By Christ's righteousness Luther does not mean his
moral righteousness, but his righteousness in his sufferings and death.
he does again say in sol. 113. "Christ's Righteousness is thy Righteousness,
and thy sin is his sin. And 3. Says he in fol. 139. "Christ being made a
curse for us, did put upon him our person, and laid our sins upon his own
shoulders, saying, I have committed the sins which all men have committed. And
a little after he says; Having made a happy change with us, he took upon him
our sinful person, and gave unto us his innocent and victorious person,
wherewith we being now clothed, are freed from the curse of the Law. And 4.
Says he in fol. 141. "He putting off his innocence and holiness, and taking
thy sinful person upon The Doctrine of our spiritual unity with Christ does
not make us the same person with him in his obedience, both in his doings and
sufferings.
him, might bear thy sin, thy death and thy curse, and might be made a
sacrifice and a curse for thee, that by this means he might deliver thee from
the curse of the Law. And 5. Says he in fol. 142. "Being united unto us which
were accursed, he was made a curse for us, and hid his blessing in our sin,
etc. 6. Luther has many such like speeches, in Gal 3. 13. and in Gal. 4. and
in other places. These and such like speeches of our unity with Christ have
been much used by the Antinomians, and have been condemned in N. England, as an
unsound exposition of our union with Christ, and therefore I suppose that Mr
Norton will not defend it. And 2. Therefore if he would avoid this dangerous
Doctrine, then he must not approve of Luthers way, in making Christ the
greatest sinner in the world.

2. I find also, that some of our own eminent Divines do make a kind of
personal unity between the Elect and Christ: not properly personal; but after
a fort personal, because they call it unity; 1. as the only ground of Gods
imputing the righteousness of Christ to believers: and 2. As the only true
ground of Gods imputing the sins of the Elect to Christ: and this kind of
unity they exemplify several ways: and among others they exemplify it
between a man and his surety, who (say they) are in conspectu fori, but as one
person. But I have showed in the beginning of this 11th Chapter, that though
the debtor and his surety is but one person in conspectu fori, in respect of
money or goods; yet that in conspectu fori they are not as one person in the
case of obedience and punishment, because in these cases the Law determines of
the person, as well as of the thing due, and allows not a delegation of doing
or suffering by an instrument, or in the natural person of another.

3. This kind of unity as it is made the only ground of Gods imputing our sins
to Christ, and of imputing his righteousness to us; has been, and is, the
ground of much error in the great point of Christ's Satisfaction, and in the
great point of a sinners justification.

4. Mr Gataker says in his Answer to Mr Walkers Vindication in p. 41. "That as
Luther made Christ the greatest sinner in the world: So, says he, we read of
one Austin of Rome Archbishop of Nazaret, who maintained some assertions not
unlike to that of Luther; to wit, that Christ sins daily and ever so did:
The speeches, says he, are both over-harsh: and says he, the Archbishop was
for this taxed in the Council of Basil, ses 22. and the ground of his error was
from his misunderstanding of the true nature of the union of believers with
Christ; for, says Mr Gataker, he spoke of the body of the faithful, who being
in Christ, Romans 8. 1. and 16. 7. are one with Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 17. and for
this he cites Austin five times over in five several places; and Bid in Joh.
17. and Bern. Epist. 190. and Gregory, etc. who have some such like speeches of
unity with Christ that need examining.

5. I confess the doctrine of our spiritual union with Christ by says is a
most comfotable doctrine to all true believers, provided that the right meaning
of it be not corrupted as it is too to much by the common doctrine of
imputation, and as Mr Forbes does in particular; for in his Doct. of
Justificat. p. 47. he calls our spiritual union our unity with Christ; and in
p. 53. he says, "That we are made the sons of God by being one in unity with
the Son of God, by which unity alone (says he) we are made the sons of
God. And says he In p. 163. God by imputing of Christ's obedience unto us
(namely his passive obedience) does not only account it to be our
righteousness, but also does account it as performed and done by us: that is to
say, God imputes Christ's Righteousness as truly to be ours, and as effectually
to justify us, as if we had in our own persons actually performed it. If we
consider that Jesus Christ did bear all our persons in his death, so that what
he did bearing our persons even in the sight of God and dying for us, that
which he did for us and in our name, may not impertinently be said to be
imputed by God unto us, as done by us. This assertion is opposed by Mr
Woodbridge, cited before in the beginning of this Chapter at N 6. and by Mr
Baxter at N. 10, and 11. and in his Answer to Molineus, p. 183.

This kind of unity I do not like: and therefore I said to him in my Dialogue p
146. It passes my understanding to conceive how God can impute the act of
Christ's obedience in his Mediatoriall sacrifice to believers as their act,
seeing Christ did actuate his death as it was made a sacrifice, by the
cooperation and joint consent of both his natures, (unless he do first make us
to be one person with Christ in the personal unity of both his natures,) seeing
Christ did actuate his sacrifice by his Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. 14. and how
that action can be imputed to us as our act, I see not; neither can I see how
any of the actions of Christ can be imputed to believers as their actions.

You may as well say, that the Actions of the head ought to be imputed to the
hand or to the foot as their proper actions, as say the mediatoriall acts of
obedience which were done by Christ our head, are imputed to each member of his
mystical body: and yet I do freely acknowledge, that the actions which are done
by the head, are done for the good and benefit of each several member of the
body, by reason of their natural union with the head, as fully and as
effectually as if every member had done the same actions of the head.

And so in like sort our blessed Mediator (as he is the mystical head of But
for the further confutation
all believers in the Covenant of Grace) took care to do all and every act of
mediatoriall obedience, that might procure his Fathers atonement of his
dangerous error of personal unity, see Vindiciae Fidei, p. 113, to p. 117. and
in part 2. p. 11.
for the good and benefit of every member of his mystical body, as fully and
effectually as if every member had performed those acts of mediatoriall
obedience themselves: and in this sense God does impute the efficacy of all
Christ's mediatoriall obedience to all believers, as the only meritorious price
for the procuring of his Fathers atonement to them; which atonement of the
Fathers does comprehend under it our full redemption and freedom from sin,
which is a sinners full and perfect justification: and it does also comprehend
under it Gods favorable accepting of believing sinners unto the adoption of
sons. This truth as it is expressed in my Dialogue p. 146. Mr Norton does
first acknowledge in his Answer, p. 258. and then because it spoils all his
Answer, he falls into reviling speeches against me: but the curse that is
causless, shall in Gods justice fall on the giver.

6. I suppose that Mr Norton himself will not approve of this kind of union of
Luther and others (that yet are famous lights in the Church of Christ) and yet
their opinion is more like to be true, than his fictitious making of Christ to
be the surety of the Elect in the Covenant of mere nature, to suffer the curse
of that Covenant for the redemption of sinners, not from the curse of the
Covenant of nature, but from the curse of the Covenant of Grace: But indeed
neither of the said ways are grounded on Scripture rightly expounded, but on
Scriptures that are corrupted and abused, and therefore both assertions must
go for no better than mere fictions.

But says Mr Norton in the place aforecited: "Seeing sin was the cause of
death in man, it must in like sort be the cause of death in Christ.

Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, and at that very instant he gave up
the ghost, by the actual power and by the joint concurrence of both his
natures, and this last and short act of his, did give the formality to his
death and sacrifice: and from thence it follows, that his death was not
inflicted upon him, as our death is for the punishment of original sin:
because himself did actuate his own death in the formality of it, as the Priest
and sacrifice of his own death in a supernatural way by the joint concurrence
of both his natures. 2. Therefore how can the guilt of an actual death be due
to his soul, seeing his bodily death was not due to him by the demeritorious
cause of the guilt of original sin, as it is in all the fallen sons of
Adam. And of this see more in my former printed Reply, in p. 419, 421, 426.

3. I will add the words of Dr Usher (to those Authors I have formerly cited)
he says in his 18 Sermons of Redemption, p. 387. "That it was not with Christ
in his death as it is with other men, in whom the extremity of their pains does
dissolve their sense, and blunts their pains, because they have not a perfect
apprehension: But (says he) Christ was in his perfect sense, all the while:
all that the Jews could do could not take away his life from him, until he
would himself: and therefore the Holy Ghost says, that immedia^ly before he
gave up the ghost, he cried with a loud voice, whereas others are wont at the
same time to be so weak that they can scarce be heard to groan; but never was
Christ stronger than when he gave up the ghost, Mar. 15 37.

2. P. Martyr says (on the Article, he was Dead,) "The fourth and last
punishment which Christ took upon him, was the separation of his soul from his
precious body, the which (as he had the same fully in his own power) as soon as
he saw all things to be fulfilled that were foretold of him by the Prophets, he
of his own accord making a loud voice, yielded up the spirit. P. Martyr calls
this active death of Christ a punishment, and it may be improperly so called,
because it was the dissolution of his humane nature for the present, and so his
fear and sorrow in the garden which are inflicted on other men as true
punishments for original sin, yet they were not inflicted on him, but they
were only assumed by him according to the declared will of God in Genesis 3. 15.
namely, that the humane nature of Christ should encounter with Satan, as it
was accompanied with our infirmities of fear, sorrow, etc. but yet not with our
personal infirmities as they are inflicted on us for original sin, but with
such infirmities as Adams pure nature might have had, in case any objects of
fear and sorrow had been presented before his eyes, as there was before the
eyes of Christ. And of this see more in my former Book, p. 300. and in this
Book also.

3. Therefore unless Mr Norton can prove that Christ was personally guilty of
moral sins, he can never prove that his punishments were inflicted on him as
true punishments from Gods wrath, though yet for a certain similitude they may
be called punishments, and so they are called by the Ancient Divines, and by
some later Divines also; and in that respect it is that Mr Wotton does many
times affirm, that Christ was punished for our sins, and that we are
pardoned, and yet he denies that Christ suffered the Torments of Hell for our
Redemption: his meaning therefore can be no other, but that the sufferings of
Christ were punishments improperly so called. And see more of Mr Wottons
judgment in my former printed Reply p. 219. at Reply 6. and in other places.

The wounds received in the trial of masteries, or in warlike combats from a
man's opposite combator, may improperly be called punishments, and such were all
the sufferings which Christ suffered from his proclaimed combator Satan and
his seed, who had a liberty of power given them by Gods declaration of the
combat in Genesis 3. 15. to try if they could by any means provoke his passions
to some sinful distemper or other, by ignominious reproaches, or else by sharp
tortures on the Cross; for this kind of usage does ordinarily provoke all the
children of Adam to one sinful distemper or another. And indeed in ths case
the Devil could he have prevailed, he had spoiled the perfection of Christ's
obedience, and then his death could not have been accepted as a most perfect
and pleasing sacrifice, for the procuring of Gods Reconciliation for the
formal Redemption of all the Elect. But on the other side, because he did
perform his death in perfection of obedience, therefore it procured Gods
Reconciliation, whereby the Devils head plot was broken as to the Elect number.

7. From the former assertions of Grotius and others it follows, that there is
an exceeding wide difference between a surety for such as are There is a wide
difference between a Surety for money matters, and a Surety that suffers the
punishments of capital offenders, in case any Sureties were allowed by Law. In
some cases men may as voluntary Sureties lay down their lives for others, but
not as bounden sureties for delinquents.
guilty of capital crimes. But Mr Norton does confound these sureties, and
therefore he does borrow an instance from Paul's engaging to Philemon on the
behalf of Onesimus, for goods purloyned: but I think any indifferent Reader
will soon see, that this instance is no way suitable, to exemplify that Christ
did become our legal surety in the Covenant of nature, to suffer the curse of
that Covenant. But I shall say the less here, because I have replied to this
more at large in my former printed Reply, in Chapter 6. at Reply 4.

8. Though men have not power over their own lives, to engage them as sureties
for capital delinquents; yet God does give them power to engage them in sundry
good causes. 1. For the witnessing of the truth. 2. For the preservation of the
Church of Christ. 3. For the preservation of the chief Ruler. 4. For the safety
of Parents. 5. For the good of ones Country, etc. Compare Josh. 2. 14, 15, 18,
19, 21. with Josh. 6. 1^, 22, 23.

Ambrose says, "That friendship proceeding from the fountain of benevolence,
fears not to undergo the greatest dangers that may befall this life for a
true and trusty friend. And the French Academy entreating of magnanimity, says
in p. 247. "That no man that fears God and is willing to obey him, ought to
forget himself so much as to hasten forwards the end of his days for any
occasion whatsoever. This did Socrates know well when he said, We must not
suffer our soul to depart from her sentinel wherein she is placed in the body,
without the leave of her Captain; and that so weighty a matter as death ought
not to be in a man's power: But yet if it be offered to us by the will of God,
then with a magnanimious heart void of all starting aside in any thing against
duty, we must set free this passage.

9. In this sense Christ may be called the voluntary surety of all the Elect,
in taking on him the office of a warlike combator: and he conquered our arch
enemy Satan by righteousness, that is to say, by his most perfect patience and
constant obedience under all his most shameful and painful sufferings: he
ventured his life in the great combat with Satan and his potent seed: but
Christ did so order the combat, that his patience was made perfect by his
trials; for his trials did but prove the perfection of his patience, and then
his perfect patience was a sure proof of his fortitude, Romans 5. 3, 4. And
therefore says Austin, in Civit. Dei, l. 1. c. 34. "Worthily is that spirit
entitled great, that can rather endure calamities than avoid them.And says
Austin, "Man's mind can never know it self so well, as by putting forth it self
upon trials and experimental hazards. And says Cassiedorus on the Psalms,
"Patience is that which overcomes all adversity, not in wresting against it,
but in susteining and suffering it, not by murmuring but by thanksgiving And
indeed the perfect pattern of patience is most lively set forth in all Christ's
sufferings, Isa. 53. 7. Mar. 14. 61. 1 Pet. 2. 22. Heb. 12. 28. The Devil and
all his potent and numerous seed, did what they could to provoke his passions,
but because they could not provoke them to any sinful distemper, he made his
death to be accepted of God as a most perfect and pleasing sacrifice, for the
procuring of his Reconciliation to all the Elect: and thereby he also spoiled
Principalities Col. 2. 15.
and powers (which the Devil exercised by Herod and Pilate, and by the chief
Priests) and made a victorious show of them openly, by his victorious and
supernatural death, Col. 2. 15. for even the Centurion observed the Triumph of
the Conqueror, in that he did openly testify that he was the Son of God in
his miraculous death: and therefore it is added, triumphing over them in it,
namely in the miraculous manner of his death; for he made it evident by his
loud crying out, that he was in his full strength of nature, when he said,
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, and at that instant gave up the
ghost, Luke 23. 46. from which words Peter Martyr makes this inference; "They
which be in the hands of God, undoubtedly are not tormented with the pains of
Hell: in Com. Pl. part 3. p. 344.

Conclusion.
From the premises it follows, that Christ was not the Legal Surety of the
Elect, to do the command, and to suffer the curse of the Covenant of nature,
for their justification, and for their redemption from Hell, as Mr Norton from
his heterodoxall principles does affirm.

CHAPTER XII.
Expounding Genesis 3. 15.

1. I will put Enmity between thee and the woman, 2. And between thy seed and
her seed, 3. HE shall break thy head, 4. And thou shall bruise Him in the heel,
(or rather in the footsole.)
1. THis verse is the first Declaration of Gods Eternal Counsel, or of his
Eternal Covenant and decree, touching the way of Fallen man's Redemption from
the head-plot of Satan.

2. The Hebrew word which we translate the Decree, in Psalm. 2. 7. is by the
Chaldee rendered The Covenant of God: namely the internal and Eternal Covenant
of the blessed Trinity, touching the way and means of man's Redemption in their
order of working it.

3. In this Declaration God does proclaim a double warlike combat of enmity:
1. Between the Devil and the believing woman, as the mother of all her
believing seed. And 2. Between the Devils seed, and one single seed of this
poor deceived woman.

4. This Declaration in Genesis 3. 15. must be considered as the
foundation-Scripture, unto the which all the other Scriptures that speak of
man's Redemption (by Christ the seed of the woman) must be referred as unto
their prime and principal standard, for the trial of their true sense and
meaning, for this declaration of the second combat, is a perfect declaration
of the true way and means of man's Redemption: and therefore no new way or
matter must be added thereunto in the exposition of any other Scripture that
does speak of the sufferings and death of Christ, (as Mr Norton presumes to
do) neither must any thing be detracted therefrom (as Socinus presumes to
do,) But all Christ's sufferings in all the other Scriptures, must be expounded
to proceed from Satan's warlike enmity as it is here first declared; Therefore
all the other Scriptures that speak of the sufferings of Christ, must have
their dependence upon this first Declaration for their genuine sense and
meaning, and so consequently this Scripture of Genesis 3 15. must be regarded and
marked as the definitive declaration of Gods will, touching the true nature of
Christ's sufferings for man's Redemption.

But first I will speak a little of Gods declaration of the first warlike
combat; [I will put Enmity between thee and the woman.] This declaration of
the first warlike combat, was directed against the Devil which was as yet
abiding in the Serpent, and in that respect it was denounced against him with
terror: But yet because it was delivered in the hearing of our first parents,
it did in that respect imply a most comfortable promise to Gods declaration of
the first warlike combat, was delivered with terror to the Devil, but yet us
it was delivered in the hearing of our fallen parents, it implied a promise of
grace and Reconciliation to them.
them, that they should be converted from their amity with Satan, to be now at
enmity with him, and that they should be the supplies of Gods special grace,
get the victory over their potent and warlike enemy Satan.

2. This threatening implies as if God had in more words said thus: Thou Satan
have by thy specious Temptations deceived this woman to eat of the forbidden
fruit, and by her means thou have also deceived Adam to eat thereof; and by
that act of eating they are now fallen under the death of the Covenant of
nature: 1. By being deprived of my concreated image of their moral
perfections: And 2. In the want thereof they are now fallen under another
spiritual death of a new sinning quality, even against every branch of the
eternal moral Law of nature, and in that respect thou have made them thy
conquered captives to do thy will at thy pleasure: But yet nevertheless I do
now by this declaration of mine, denounce a warlike enmity on the woman's part
against thee, for I will now by the powerful operation of my holy Spirit, put
such a new principle of warlike enmity into this poor deceived woman, that
thereby she shall be able to conquer thee in all thy future temptations; and
being thus Re-created by my Spirit, she shall be redeemed from thy power, and
as many others as shall be begotten by her faith to believe in the seed of the
woman.

But for the better understanding of the true sense and meaning of this blessed
Declaration, and of the new Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, I will 1.
observe the parts of this Text, and then 2. I will expound the words.

The parts are four:

1. Gods causing of a warlike enmity in the deceived woman's heart, against the
Devils first begun enmity; in these words, [And I will put enmity between thee
and the woman.]

2. Gods causing of a warlike enmity in one single Seed of the woman, against
the warlike enmity of the Eevils potent and numerous seed; in these words, [and
between thy seed, and her Seed.]

3. The victorious issue and event of this last combat of enmity, by the said
single Seed of the deceived woman; [He shall break thy head.]

4. The liberty of power which God gave unton Satan, and to his potent and
numerous seed, to hinder this Seed of the woman from the breaking of his
head-plot; and so consequently from getting the victory; in these words, [and
thou shall pieree him in the foot-soal.]

2. I will now expound the words as they lie in order in the Text.

I. And:] This word is by some rendered Moreover or Furthermore; for indeed they
are all alike copulative words, and do all alike conjoyn the threatening
against the Devil in this 15 verse, to the threatening of the Serpent in the 14
verse; for as none else but the Devils instrument, the Serpent was threatened in
the 14 verse, so none else are threatened in this 15 verse, but 1. The Devil
himself, and 2. His numerous and potent seed; the Scribes and Pharisees, etc.

II. And I:] This word I, does relate to Jehovah Elohim as he is called in ver.
8, 9, 14. And both these titles are given to all the Trinity jointly; and yet
sometimes to each person severally: And in this place I conceive it must be
understood chiefly of the second Person, who did now in this juncture of time
appear in a humane shape: exemplifying thereby unto our The second person as
Mediator does appear in a humane shape, to threaten the breaking of the Devils
headplot, to our fallen parents by a double warlike combat.
first parents, that he would one day become man of the seed of the deceived
woman, and in that nature perform his victorious conquest against his now
threatened combator the Devil and his potent seed for their Redemption; and
that in the mean time he would procure the holy Spirit of his Father, to create
anew the persons of Adam and Eve, that were now deprived of their first
concreated principles after Gods image; and were now fallen under the threatened
punishment of a double spiritual death.

2. Mr Estwick against Bidle says in p. 334, 363. "That Theophilus, Justin
Martyr, and others of the Fathers held, that God the Father is called the
invisible God, because he never appeared visible to man in any form: and that
it was the Son of God that came to Adam in Paradise, and that afterward
manifested himself to Abraham, Genesis 19. and that wrestled with Jacob, Genesis 32.
and that appeared unto Moses in the Bush that burned and was not consumed,
Exodus 3. And says he, Christ did appear unto Adam, both in his own and in his
Fathers Name.

3. Says P. Martyr in Com. pl. page 26. "As often as we read The Word of the
Lord came unto this or unto that man; so often in my judgment (says he) it is
to be attributed to Christ our Lord, the Son of God, namely, that God did by
him speak unto the Patriarchs and to the Peophets: and for the proof of it he
cites Joh 1. 18. Joh. 12. 39, 40. and to this opinion which indeed (says he)
is agreeable to the Scriptures, do Chrysostom, Jerome, Cyril and Austin consent.

4. Dr Jackson in his 7th part on the Creed, page 285. says, " They heard the
voice of Jehovah God walking in the garden, Genesis 3 8. That is, as Onkelos Genesis
3. 8.
does render that place, They heard the voice of the word of the Lord; or the
voice of the Lord God [the Word.] And says Dr Jackson presently after, It is
no harsh construction to read this place, They heard the voice of the Word, The
Lord, per Appositionem: not the voice of the word of the Lord. So (...), The
word (which in the beginning was with God and was God,) did convent our first
parents, as having peculiar reason to examine and convict them of their
transgression, because he in person (not the Father or holy Ghost,) was to
undertake for their restoration, was to combat with the Serpent for their
redemption, and to denounce this sentence upon them both, Genesis 3. 14, 15, 16.
This assertion of Dr Jacksons is of special observation.

5. From hence it follows, that though Christ as God-Creator (and not as
God-Redeemer,) did create all the natural creation in the first five days, and
in part of the sixth day: yet before the end of the sixth day he appeared as
God-Redeemer to our fallen Parents for their re-Creation and Redemption; as I
have formerly also noted it in Chap. 1. Sect. 3. at N. 9.

III. [Will put.] The Hebrew word Ashith is of the greater force, because it is
an Imperative word, and because it is a Verb in the Conjugation Hiphil, the
first person, the future tence, and the singular number: I say it is of the
greater force, because it is an imperative word, and because it is delivered in
the Conjugation Hiphil; for thereby it has the force of a powerful causing,
and it sounds thus much in our language: I will now, by this my declaration of
a double warlike combat, powerfully cause to be put or set into the heart and
mind of this poor deceived woman, such a principle of warlike grace, that it
shall enable her to countermine thy first begun warlike enmity O Satan. Or it
sound thus, I will effectually cause to be put or set into the heart and mind,
of this poor deceived captive woman, such a principle of grace by my holy
Spirit, as shall regenerate her sinful nature, and work in her the grace of
sound repentance, whereby she shall truly loath the sinful frame of her
nature; and I will also effectually put into her the grace of faith, to believe
in me as the only Mediator of Gods Reconciliation, for her formal Redemption.
This is the only way and means, whereby I will powerfully and effectually
cause to be put into her heart and mind, a warlike enmity against thee O Satan;
and by this means she shall be able to war the good warfare of this blessed
Gospel, or declaration of my grace against all thy temptations O Satan: and
this kind of warlike enmity, I will also cause to be effectually put into the
heart and mind of all her elected posterity successively.

2. Pet. Martyr also does give a special caution, to mark the efficacy of those
Verb^ they call Hiphil: of which necessary caution, I have also given notice in
my former printed Reply, upon the word Pagah in p. 186. and also in my
Exposition of Dan. 9. 27.

3. Mr Ainsworth does also give a special caution touching the said Hebrew word
Ashith in Psalm. 45. 17. for in this Verse God does thus speak unto Christ
(concerning the Elect number,) whom thou shall put (or set) for Princes (or for
principal persons) in all the earth: that is (says he,) whom thou shall place,
constitute, or appoint for Princes, etc. or for principal combating Champions
against Satan's warlike enmity in all Lands: for by the grace of faith in their
fervent Prayers, they have power to prevail with God, for the assistance of
his grace, to withstand the warlike enmity of Satan and of all his potent seed,
as Jacob had against Esau, Gen 32.

4. Take notice that when God does by his imperative word of promise, cause to
be put or set a new principle of grace, into the heart and mind of his Elect
servants, he does always bring it powerfully to pass at one time or other: as
in Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my spirit within you, and in Ezekiel 11. 19, 20. I
will cause you to walk in my statutes, and then you shall Ezekiel. 36. 27. Ezekiel.
11. 19, 20.
keep my judgments and do them. So then from hence it follows, that until God
does powerfully cause his Spirit to be put into the heart and mind of his
Elect, they cannot possibly walk in Gods Statutes, nor keep his judgments, and
do them in that manner as they were given, for a Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation: and the reason thereof is, because that cannot be done on man's
part, until faith in Christ be first caused to be put into them by Gods
Spirit. A Camel may more easily go through a needles eye, than a fallen son
of Adam can walk in Gods statutes or keep his Ordinances, in that manner as
they were given for a Covenant of grace, (no, not if they were as perfect as
Adam,) until God does supernaturally cause them to do it, by putting his holy
Spirit into their hearts and minds.

5. This warlike threatening of Christ against Satan, did imply a gracious
promise to the woman, to assure her that she should be instantly furnished with
the supernatural warlike grace of faith in her seed Christ, which doubtless
did cause her heart to joy in believing that he should now be furnished with
such a warlike principle as should enable her to get the victory over her
first-begun warlike combater Satan: for doubtless this word of promise was
mighty, in the operation in her heart and mind, to the casting down of the
strong holds of Satan, 2 Cor. 10. 4. And this word of promise to her, was after
wards confirmed to Abraham by Gods Oath, Genesis 22. 16. to assure us, that it was
so decreed from eternity, Luke 1. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74. So then, Christ's
threatening of the Devil, did imply a very strong promise of grace and
reconciliation to the woman, and to all her believing posterity, and so it may
in that sense be called a Covenant of grace or mercy, 2 Chronicles. 6. 14. Nehem. 1.
5. Nehem. 9. 32. Dan. 9. 4. Acts 3. 25. Gal. 3. 17. and a Covenant of peace or
reconciliation, Isai. 54. 10. Ezekiel. 34. 25. Ezekiel. 37. 26. Ephesians. 2. 15, 16. and
so it may be called the holy Covenant, Luke 1. 72. Dan. 11. 28, 30. and as it
is the Antitipe of the Covenant of works at Mount Sinai: so it is called the
new Covenant, Jer. 31. 31. Heb. 8. 8, 13. Heb. 12. 24. and a better Covenant,
Heb. 8. 6.

6. As the threatening of a warlike combat against the Devil, did imply the
strong promise of grace and Reconciliation to our first parents: so it is
called a Covenant of grace in Act. 3. 25. Gal. 3. 17. Heb. 8. 6, etc.

IV. [Enmity.] The Hebrew word Ebah is a Noun, and it is derived from the Verb
Aiab, he was an enemy. This enmity must be understood of a holy warlike enmity,
which was not in the woman's nature now after her fall, until it was
effectually caused to be put into her by Jesus Christ: namely, by his
undertaking the work of a new Creation and Redemption And in that respect it
was, that he did cause the holy Spirit to be put into her heart and mind, to
enable her to war the warfare of the Gospel, against the Devils first-began
warlike enmity. Christ did not cause any warlike enmity to be put into the
Devil at all, for then he should have been the author of sin, and should have
done against the peace of his own Kingdom, for a Kingdom divided cannot
stand. But the Devil had his enmity from the justice of Gods deprivation.
Therefore when Christ declared to the Devil, I will put enmity between thee and
the woman, he did not thereby promise to assist the Devil, but thereby he did
threaten the Devil, that he would powerfully cause to be put such a warlike
principle of grace into the woman, as should assist her, and make her able to
conquer his warlike enmity.

2. The Devils warlike enmity was not put into him, but it came into him from
the deficient cause; for as soon as that part of the Angels which refused to
attend upon our first parents in Paradise, (which they were not obliged to do,
by the moral Law of their nature, because it was transcendently different from
Adams earthly nature,) but they were obliged thereunto by Gods transient
positive Law only, for the trial of their obedience in that single act. Their
refusal was their sin, and for that sin God (according to his relative
justice, in his Covenant of nature with them) deprived them of his concreated
image of moral perfections: and from that deficient cause, all manner of
corrupt qualities did necessarily and instantly fall upon their nature: and
from thence began their warlike emnity against the good of man.

3. I have made it evident in chap. 1. and in chap. 4. That God did not only
command his visible creatures to attend upon our first parents, as on their
visible Lord, but also that he commanded his Heavenly Host of Angels to attend
upon them for their best good; for in Gods secret counsel, Adam and Eve were
hairs of salvation: and thence the Apostle says, Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes which shall be heirs of
salvation, Heb. 1. 14. and for the good of such, he shall give his Angels
charge to keep them, that are his, in all their ways, Psalm. 91. 11. and we see
that God gave his Angels charge to keep Jacob in his way, Genesis 32. 1, 2. and he
caused his Angels to fill the mountains full of Horses and fiery Chariots round
about Elisha, 2 King. 6. 17. But many legions of this heavenly Host not knowing
Gods election, look only on Adams earthly condition; and then perceiving their
own nature to be far more excellent, and also seeing there was no natural
likeness in conditions of their nature to make them associate together, they
in that respect were not tied thereunto by the moral Law of their nature; and
therefore seeing there was no reason in nature to make them to associate
themselves with such earthly creatures, as Adam and Eve were; they refused to
be ministering spirits, to such inferior earthly creatures, of so differing a
nature from them, and that refusal was their sin, and that sin was the
cause of the punishment of their deprivation of Gods concreated Image: and then
in the want of that image, they did instantly act irregularly, and hated man,
and at the same instant, they did also all combine together in one head-plot,
to bring man into the same kind of spiritual death with themselves. And
thereupon they asked leave of God, (as the Devils did of Christ, before they
could enter into the heard of swine, Mark 5. 13, 14.) that they might enter
into the serpent, to try whether Adam and ^ve would be more perfect in their
obedience to Gods transient positive Law, than they had been: and having
obtained leave, they did at the same instant, enter into the serpent, and did
actuate the tongue of the serpent to speak so amicably and so perswadingly,
that Eve could not think it to be any other, than some good Angel that God had
sent, to reverse his former prohibition, and to give them liberty to eat of the
forbidden fruit for their best good: for she which had received nothing but
benevolence, could not think there were any such things as malevolence, and
evil meaning, as Ambrose says. And thus after this hidden and fraudulent
manner, the Devil did actuate his first warlike enmity against the good of man,
he covered over his enmity with the greatest pretense of amity to the woman
that could be demised.

4. The Devil had no sooner deceived the woman with this cunning warlike
stratagem, but he did at the same time so prevail with her, as to make her his
instrument to deceive Adam. 1. By reaching out some of the forbidden fruit to
him with her hand. And, 2. By using words of persuasion to provoke him to eat
thereof, Genesis 3. 17, 6.

And much after this manner did God give a liberty of power to the Devil to
enter into Peter's tongue, as his instrument to dissuade Christ from undergoing
his ignominious and painful sufferings from the Devils instruments at
Jerusalem. But it was not possible for the Devil to prevail with Christ by
Peter's tongue, because Christ knew the blessed Scriptures, wherein God had
revealed his decree for his said sufferings, and therefore he knew also that.
Peter's tongue was actuated by the Devil: and in that respect he said unto
Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me, thou savourest not
the things that are of Gods appointment, but those things that be of men.

5. Seeing Adam did not as yet know that any of the Angels were become Devils,
he could not as yet suspect any hurt from her persuasions, that was given to
him to be his mutual helper, and therefore he did take of the forbidden fruit
from her hand, and did eat thereof: and then as soon as he, which was made the
head in that Covenant had eaten, the trangression was finished: and at the same
instant it brought forth the execution of that threatened punishment of a double
spiritual death, upon them both together, and now also was the said Covenant of
nature fully broken and exstinguished.

6. From this subtle art of the Devils enmity, all the legions of the fallen
Angels are collectively called the Devil, and the enemy, Matthew. 13. 39. and the
wicked one, Matthew. 13. 19. and the adversary, 1 Timothy 5. 14. and the accuser of
the brethren, Rev. 12. 10. by which titles we may see, that the Devil is become
an irreconcilable enemy to the good of man.

7. In this juncture of time, it pleased Jesus Christ to appear in a humane
shape, to exemplify unto Adam, that he would one day become true man of the
seed of this poor deceived captive woman for their Redemption; and therefore he
does beforehand denounce a double warlike enmity against Satan. 1. He said thus
to the Devil, I will now effectually cause to be put into this poor deceived
woman's heart and mind, such a powerful principle of grace, that she shall be
enabled thereby to countermine thy first guilefull warlike enmity: and this
principle of grace was now wrought in her, by the Preaching of the blessed
Gospel; for doubtless Christ did now declare unto them, the manner how the
seed of the woman should break the Devils head-plot: and in this respect, her
conversion does comprehend in it the whole Doctrine of Repentance, and of
Reconciliation, and of Justification, and Adoption by says in the said seed of
the woman. And this work of her conversion was from Gods powerful causing of
it, and therefore the Gospel Preached to the conversion of souls, is called the
power of God to salvation, to every one that believes, Romans 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1.
18, 24. 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. 2 Timothy 1. 8, 9. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Luke 4. 32. Luke 5. 24.
Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. Ephesians. 3. 7, 20. Col. 1. 13. 1 These. 1. 5. 2 These.
1. 11.

8. And though this declaration was delivered as a dreadful threatening to the
Devil, yet it employed the stronger promise of Redemption to our fallen Parents;
and therefore it did work in them a ground of hope in their redemption from
Satan's head-plot: and the ground of things hoped for is faith, Heb. 11. 1. and
there faith was no sooner wrought, but it embraced and accepted of the blessing
promised, and therefore it was a laying hold upon the blessing promised: and
this performance of these acts of faith on their part, was the fulfilling of
the condition that was required of them for the application of their
Redemption, Justification, and Adoption.

9. The Devils warlike enmity was disguised under a fair pretense of amity: and
this stratagem the Devil does often use to the ruin of Gods people. The Devil
taught Balaam how to ruinate the Israelites, by teaching the Midianites how
they might under a fair pretense of amity, entice the Israelites to come to
their idolatrous feasts, and so to entice them to commit fornication, whereby
God might be provoked to anger, not only against the Israelites, but also
against the Midianites: and it was in relation to their guilefull amity, that
God commanded Moses to vex the Midianites and to smite them, Numb. 35. 17. or
as the LXX render it, to use hostile enmity against them. But this warlike
enmity of the Israelites was but a bodily warlike enmity, but the warlike
enmity which Christ did cause to be put into the heart of the woman, to
countermine the Devils warlike enmity, was a spiritual enmity only. The Hebrew
Doctors say from Deuteronomy. 25. 19. that we are commanded to destroy the remembrance
of Amalek, and are commanded to remember continually his evil deeds, and his
treachery, to the end, to stir up enmity against him, etc. and say they, it is
unlawful to forget his enmity and his hatred. See Ainsw. in Deuteronomy. 17. 14. Much
more say I, are we commanded to remember continually this evil deed of the
Devil, in seducing our first Parents, and to stir up a holy warlike enmity
against him: and it is unlawful to forget his enmity and his hatred, and
therefore we must daily stir up a holy spiritual hatred against him.

And so in the like sort, David's enmity against the profane enemies of God, was
a spiritual enmity, when he said, Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee: I
hate them with a perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies? Psalm. 139. 21. And
so in like sort Christ did warn his Apostles to be ready armed to suffer
affliction, for preaching the Gospel of peace to the world, Matthew. 10. 16, etc.
and then said he in verse. 34. Think not that I came to send peace on the earth,
but a sword; and says he in verse. 35. I am come to set a man at variance
against his father, etc. and says he in Luke 12. 49. I am come to send fire on
the earth, and what will I, Oh that it were already kindled, (so Ainsw. does
read it in Genesis 24. 42.) And the Apostle does call the Word of God, the sword
of the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. and he tells them that it is sharper than a
two-edged sword, Heb. 4. 12. and that it is not a carnal, but a spiritual
sword, and that it is mighty through God to the pulling down of the strong
holds of Satan, 2 Cor. 10. 4. And this sword is said to go out of the mouth of
Christ, because all godly Preachers are but his mouth, Rev. 1. 16. Rev. 2. 12,
16. Rev. 19. 15, 21. And Christ did warn his Disciples to sell their Coat to
buy a Sword, Luke 22. 36. that is to say, to Luke 22. 36.
spare no cost, but to use all possible endeavors to get the sword of the
Spirit to defend them against persecutions, and to offend such as are enemies
to grace and goodness.

This is that warlike enmity that Jesus Christ did powerfully cause to be put
into the heart of Eve, and into the heart of all her elected generation.

V. [Between thee and the woman.] This warlike threatening against the Devil,
did imply a strong promise to the woman, that she should be delivered from the
power of the Devil, and that she should have such a warlike principle of enmity
put into her heart and mind, that it should make her sufficiently able to get
the victory over all Satan's after temptations, for though the Devil should
often draw her to sin, yet she should by Gods Atonement, procured by the
seed of the woman, be justified from the condemning power of all her sins.

2. As this threatening did make the Devil to tremble, so on the contrary it
made the hearts of our first parents to leap and dance for joy: for now they
sound by experience, that faith came by hearing, (namely, by the hearing of the
Covenant of reconciliation preached unto them,) Romans 10. 17. For now they hear
it opened at large to them, (though now we have but the heads of it,) how
Christ should become the seed of the poor deceived woman, and how he should, by
his perfect obedience through all his sufferings, make his death to be accepted
of God, as a most perfect and pleasing sacrifice, for the procuring of his
reconciliation to all believers, and that by this means, the Devils head-plot
should be broken, as to the Elect number, because they should be redeemed from
his power.

This declaration was the savor of death to the Devil, and so it is to all his
seed; But on the contrary, it was the sweet savor of life to the souls of our
first parents, and so it is still to all new converts to the end of the world.
And by this means, the now converted woman, and all her converted seed, are
made able to stand fast in the faith, 1 Cor. 16. 13. 2 Cor. 1. 24. and to be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; and to put on the whole
armor of God, whereby they may be made able to stand against the wiles of the
Devil, Ephesians. 6. 10, 11, etc. and To fight the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy 6. 12.
As good soldiers of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2 3, 4, 5.

3. Eve had now also found by experience, that she was not made able to
withstand the guilefull temptations of the Devil, by her first concreated moral
perfections of nature, and nothing else was ordained to make her withstand
those guilefull temptations of the Devil, but her transient act of obedience,
to the positive Covenant of nature, in eating first of the tree of the twofold
life, for in case she had but first eaten of that tree, she had been confirmed
in her moral perfections. But because she did not as yet know that any of the
Angels were fallen, she could not imagine, that it was any other but a good
Angel that God had sent to reverse his former prohibition, and to persuade her
to eat first of the forbidden tree, for her best food, and so she was deceived.
But yet after she was thus deceived, and brought under the power of Satan's
will; it was the good pleasure of Jesus Christ, not only to declare the said
double warlike enmity against the Devil; but also together with his said
declaration, to put a new powerful principle of grace into her heart and mind,
whereby she was made able to withstand the Devil, even now after she was
deprived of her concreated moral principles of nature; for now he did by the
new principle of grace, fight the good fight of faith, against the Devils past
and future temptations, until she had gotten the Crown of life, as a full and
perfect Conqueror.

Seeing Adam was the woman's head, 1. By Creation. And, 2. By the contract
Object. 1.
of Marriage. And, 3. In being ordained to be the head of all his natural
posterity in the Covenant of nature; Why is not his warlike enmity against the
Devil first recorded, as the signal mark of his conversion, before the woman's
conversion?

The main reason why the woman's conversion is recorded before Adams Answ. 1.
is, in respect of the eminency-sake of that single seed Christ, that was to be
conceived and born of the seed of the woman alone without the help of man.

2. Though the woman had the pre-eminence to have her conversion first
recorded, in relation to Christ that should come from her seed alone, yet she
is presently after abased, and Adam is exalted: for she was first doomed to
several chastisements for her original sin. As, 1. To bring forth children in
multiplied sorrows, Genesis 3. 16. And, 2. To be under a greater subjection to her
Husband now, than she was in the time of her innocence, because she was first
in the transgression, Genesis 3. 16.

But yet it is carefully to be marked, that these general punishments now
threatened to her after her conversion, and to all of her sex successively, were
not threatened as absolute vindictive punishments, as the first general
punishment of a double spiritual death, was for the breach of the Covenant of
nature, where no repentance nor mercy was ordained for their help; for the said
punishments to womankind, were now threatened under the new Covenant of Grace
and Reconciliation, even after our first Parents were converted to believe in
Christ: and therefore they were threatened but as moderated punishments or
chastisements for Eves humiliation, and also for the humiliation and conversion
of others of her sex: and in that respect it is, that the Apostle does tell us,
that the punishment of childbirth does not hinder the salvation of such women
as do believe in Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 15. and from thence it follows, that the
said punishments were but correctively poenal, to bring them to repentance and
to faith in Christ, or in such as are converted, to bring them on to the
exercise of their faith and repentance.

3. As Christ did honor his first mother by recording her conversion before
Adams, because he was to be conceived and born of the woman's seed alone,
without the help of man: and in that respect also he did honor all his
succeeding mothers, after the flesh, with the like conversion at one time or
other before they died, from the Virgin Eve to the Virgin Mary: which indeed
was the highest degree of honor that he could bestow upon them, because he did
thereby make them partakers of the Covenant of grace here, and heirs of the
Kingdom of glory hereafter. And so in like sort he did also honor all his
Fathers after the flesh, for he took flesh from Adam, from whom all mankind do
come, but yet his flesh was still Christ did not take flesh from any
unbelieving Parent: and thence it follows, that when Judah committed Incest
with Thamar, (which was known to Thamar to be that sin, though not to Judah,)
they were believers, and repented, and were pardoned, and never after committed
that sin, Genesis 38. 26.
derived from such Parents as were converted at one time or other before they
dyed. Mr Ainsw. says in Genesis 38. 7. "That God would not have any wicked man to
be Christ's progenitor. And Mr Warren on Justification says in p. 242. "That
all Christ's true kindred are sanctified ones, Heb. 2. 11.

4. Christ's example in doing the highest degree of honor to his Parents,
should teach us thus far at least to imitate him, as to do the best honor we
can to the Parents of our body, even for their spiritual good, as well as for
their temporal good.

5. Though Adam was ordained to be the head of all mankind in the Covenant of
nature; yet not he, but Christ was ordained to be the head of all believers in
the Covenant of grace, as it is well observed by Mr Warren and by Mr Wodbridge
and others.

"The fall of man, says Mr Warren (in p. 126.) was the occasion of Christ was
ordained to be the head of all believers in the Covenant of grace.
this Covenant. God permitted man to fall, that he might show the abundant
riches of his mercy in our redemption: for mercy might have freed us from
misery, by preventing our fall But the exceeding abundance of Gods rich mercy,
is more seen by recovering us out of that misery into which we were fallen.

2. Says he, "The grace of God was much seen in the time of giving this
Covenant even at the very fall, before judgment was given upon the delinquents,
that they might not be swallowed up with wrath, and before Satan had made too
great a waste upon the Creation, and especially upon man drawn by his
temptation into condemnation with himself.

3. Says he, "This Covenant was made with Christ, and in him with all that
believe: for since God and man were separated by sin, there was no Covenant
could pass between them, but in and through a Mediator reconciling both
parties.

4. Says he, "There is no reconciliation to God but by Christ, therefore this
Covenant was made in Christ, and for the sake of Christ with us: And so there
are three parties contracting. 1. God the party offended. 2. Man the party
offending. 3. Christ the Mediator between both. The Scripture says, The
Promise (or Covenant) was made to Abraham, and his seed: he says not to seeds,
as of many, but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ. And to this sense
speaks Lyranus at Reply 4. N. 6.

"5. He shows also how Christ is called the head of his Church in page 94, 158,
224. to which I refer the Reader for satisfaction.

6. Mr Woodbridge does also say, (in his Method. 304.) "That faith is not given
to us by virtue of the Covenant made with us, but by virtue of the Covenant
made with Christ. God has promised to Christ that sinners shall believe in
him, Esaias 53. 10. Esaias 55. 4, 5. Psalm. 2. 8. Psalm. 110. 3. Matthew. 12. 21. Psalm.
89. 25, 26, etc. And says he a little after, The promise to Christ, that many
Nations shall come unto him, and become his children in a spiritual sense, is
no promise to them, nor have they thereby any right given them to be made
believers, but unto him, and in gratiam sui, for his own honor and glory: and
to this very sense also does P. Martyr speak.

7. Though Eves warlike enmity against the Devil is first named, as the Adams
conversion is recorded by his giving of the new name Evah to his wife after
their fall.
signal mark of her sound conversion: yet it is most expedient also, that Adam
was at the same time converted by the same powerful Preaching of the said
double warlike combat of enmity against the Devil. And this is also evident.
1. Because Adam did testify his own faith as well as his wifes, by giving her
the new name Evah, upon their hearing of this good tidings preached: for when
Eve was first created, Adam did not then call her Evah life, but Isha woman,
because she was taken out of man, Genesis 2. 23. But now as soon as Jesus Christ
had Preached the ruin of Satan's headplot, by the said double warlike combat
of enmity, Adam was thereby effectually converted as well as the woman: and for
the joy thereof, he called his wife Evah, life, Genesis 3. 20. But it is a
senseless thing to say, that after he had heard that Evangelical Sermon, he
should then name her life in relation to her first natural life: for it had
been more fit that he should have called her so at the time of her first
creation. But then he did not call her Evah, but Isha woman, of Ish man, that
is to say, woman, or mannesse of man. 2. Neither can any one find any other new
occasion that might induce Adam to give her this new name Evah, (after he had
received the threatened punishment of a double spiritual death. And, 3. After he
had heard this blessed declaration,) but only in relation to her new life from
the death of sin, to the life of grace.

8. In as much as Adam could now discern the new life of his wife from death in
sin to the life of grace, it is a most sure and certain proof that he was now
effectually converted as well as the woman, by the said Evangelical
declaration, of the said double combat of enmity. And of this see more in my
Book of the institution of the Sabbath.

9. The whole Church of believers here on earth, is called, A woman that does
make war with the old Serpent and his seed, Rev. 12. 1, 17. By way of
allusion to the first warlike combat of enmity, between the Devil and the
woman; for by the continual Preaching and Expounding of the first declared
combat of enmity, all believers do stand upon their Guard, namely, in battle
array, holding forth the same flag of faith that Eve did, and warring the same
warfare of the Gospel that she did, 1 Timothy 1. 18. As good soldiers of Jesus
Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. Having put on the whole armor of God, that they might
be able to withstand the wiles of the Devil, Ephesians. 6. 11, etc. 2. The whole
National-Church of Israel, (which was a type of the true Israel of God, Gal. 6.
16.) were numbered for the war from twenty years old and upward, Numb. 1. 3.
and they were mustred or numbered by their Armies. "And this showed (says
Ainsw.) where-ununto God had called them, even to fight the good fight of
faith, 1 Timothy 6. 12. By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor
of righteousness, on the right hand and on the left, 2 Cor. 6. 7. "And, says
he, the males, or men of strength only, were mustered to teach us, that We
ought to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: Putting on the
whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the wiles of the
Devil, Ephesians. 6. 10, 11, 12, 13. And to this point of a Christians warfare, he
speaks also in Numb. 4. 3.

10. The Exposition of the word woman in Genesis 3. 15. as comprehending all the
saithfull that are begotten from the seed of her faith, is of special
consideration, for she may be called, The mother of all the faithful, as well
as Sarah was, 1 Pet. 3. 6. And so in like sort, Adam may as truly be called
The father of all them that do believe, as Abraham was in Romans 4. 11. For the
faith of our first Parents in the seed of the woman, was handed from them, (by
the Preaching of the double combat of enmity) until it came to Abraham and to
Sarah for their conversion. Therefore this woman Eve may well comprehend all
the saithfull that are begotten of the feed of her faith. This Exposition is
also approved by Pet. Martyr, for in his brief Notes upon Genesis 3. he says,
"That enmity which God put between the Devil and the woman, belongs unto all
godly men: and therefore also it belonged unto Eve, as she was now become godly.

But Mr Norton runs in a contrary course, for instead of comprehending all the
godly under this woman, he does comprehend them all under these words [her
Seed,] which is a notable error, as I shall show by and by.

11. This proclaimed warlike combat of enmity, was not barely personal between
the Devil and Eve, but to be continued between the Devil and her faithful seed
to the end of the world, there is no set time for the ending of it. Therefore
it may advise all such as do expect the glorious reign of Christ here upon
earth, to set them free from this warlike combat of the Devils enmity, not to
think of any such freedom, as long as they live in this world; for this
warlike enmity was not only proclaimed in the hearing of our first parents,
but our Savior spoke of it also to his Disciples, saying thus to them, Suppose
ye that I am come to give peace on the earth? I tell you nay, but rather
division, Luke 12. 51. and says Christ in Mat. 10. 34. I came not to send
peace, but a sword: and from thence he proceeded to make a long discourse of
their sufferings, from the warlike enmity of Satan and his instruments from
verse. 16, to 40.

Sect. 2.
VI. ANd between thy seed and her seed.

1. This copulative word [And] does necessarily bring in the two The second
warlike combat between the Devils potent seed, and one single seed of the poor
deceived woman described.
former words that were prefixed to the first warlike combat of enmity; and in
that respect this sentence may be read thus, I will put enmity between thy seed
and her seed, that is to say, I will effectually cause to be put by my Spirit,
a most powerful principle of a most righteous warlike enmity, into one of this
poor deceived woman's seed, that shall by his righteous performance of his
combat of sufferings, conquer the warlike enmity of the numerous and potent
seed of the Devil, the Scribes and Pharisees, together with Pilate and Herod,
and all the people of the Jews.

2. This second proclaimed combat of warlike enmity, is expressed in the
future tense, because it was to be acted in a time yet to come, but in what
year or day to come it should be acted, it was not declared at this present
unto Adam. Neither was the time thereof revealed unto Abraham, and yet Christ
said, He rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad, John 8. 56. but
the particular time was not revealed unto Abraham, no more than it was to Adam,
neither yet was the time of it revealed unto David: and yet it was revealed
unto David, that Christ should be his son, and that the Throne of his
spiritual Kingdom should be everlasting, 2 Samuel 7. But the exact time when this
seed of the woman should accomplish his warlike combat of enmity, for the
breaking of the Devils head-plot by his obedience in all his sufferings,) was
first revealed unto gracious Daniel, at the just end of the seaventy years
captivity in Babylon. Then Daniel was at prayer for their return at the time of
the evening oblation. And then the Angel Gabriel said unto him, O Daniel, I am
come to give thee skill and understanding, therefore understand the matter, and
consider the vision. Seventy sevens of years are exactly accounted to finish
trespass offerings, and to end sinofferings, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in an everlasting justification, (instead of the
Ceremonial,) Dan 9. 22, 23, 24.

Three things are remarkable in this message of the Angel.

1. The exact time when the seed of the woman should fulfill his warlike
combat of enmity, and thereby procure Gods reconciliation for the breaking of
the Devils head-plot.

2. The manner of his death, and that is expressed in these words, in verse. 26.
He shall be cut off, (as a malefactor on the tree,) as it was first declared in
Genesis 3. 15. Thou (Satan) shall (have a liberty of power to) pierce him in the
foot-soales, namely, to cut him off as a wicked malefactor on the tree.

3. The efficacy of his death: and that is twofold. 1. He shall finish
trespass and sinne-offerings, (and so by a consequent all the other rites of
Moses Law.) 2. And make reconciliation for unrighteousness, and so procure an
everlasting righteousness, (or justification from sin,) to all believers
instead of the ceremonial, verse. 24, 27.

These three points I have explained more at large in my Exposition of Daniel 9.

2. [Between thy seed.] (O Satan,) namely, between thy wicked generation of
Scribes and Pharisees, who are also called by J^hn at his Baptism, A
generation of serpents, Matthew. 3. 7. and our Savior called them serpents, and
a generation of vipers, Matthew. 23. 33. and in that Chapter denounced eight woes
against them for their spiritual blindness; and our Savior told the Jews, that
though they boasted of their Father Abraham, yet they were of their Father the
Devil, and that his lusts they would do, John 8. 44. And Isaiah says in Chapter
53. 8. Who shall declare his generation in which he lived? it was so wicked, as
I have showed in my former Book, page 353. By these Scriptures we are taught,
who they are that are called thy seed, (in speech to the Devil that was yet in
the serpent.)

3. The reason why this warlike combat of enmity, openly proclaimed in the
Devils hearing was, that the Devil might not say in aftertimes, I could have
made my party good, against this seed of the woman, if I had but had an open
and a fair warning, as indeed there ought to be in the first beginning of a
righteous warlike combat of enmity: and therefore to prevent this complaint,
God gave the Devil an open and fair warning.

3. [And her seed.] By her seed Mr Norton and many others do understand Christ
with all the godly in a collective sense. But this Exposition is a grand
error, because they do by necessary consequence, make all the godly to be
copartners with Christ, in the actual breaking of the Devils head-plot for
man's Redemption. Therefore for the avoiding of this grand errors, this word
[her seed,] must be expounded in a restrained sense of one single seed of the
woman, namely, of the humane nature of Christ only: for no other seed of the
woman was able to conquer the Devils said warlike combat of enmity by
perfection of obedience, and to make their soul a sacrifice in that perfection
for the procuring of Gods reconciliation to the elect; but this single seed of
the woman only.

Therefore the word [her seed] must be understood of that singular seed of the
woman, that must be conceived and born of the woman alone, without the help of
man: for if Christ had been born of a woman in the ordinary way of generation,
then he had been born under the cursed spiritual death of the Covenant of
nature; and then he should have been born in original sin; and then he could
not have been a Lamb without spot and blemish for sacrifice; and then he could
not have been a Priest holy and harmless; and then his death could not have
been accepted of God as a perfect sacrifice; and then we had been still left in
our sins. But blessed be God, that promised such a seed from the woman alone,
as should be conceived in her womb, by the power of the holy Ghost, in a
miraculous manner above the power of nature, Luke 1. 31, to 35. and such a seed
of the woman, as should be able to live and dye without the least spot of
sin, notwithstanding the Devils subtle temptations to ensnare him therein:
But no other seed of this poor deceived sinful woman, could be such a sinless
seed in conception, life and death, but the hu^a^e nature of Christ only.

But says Mr Norton in page 19. and page 218. "The meaning of these words,
Thou shall bruise him in the heel, in Genesis 3. 15. is, that chiefly Christ, and
with him believers that live Godly, (both which are the sed of Eve) shall
suffer affliction and persecution by Satan.

page 3. The Lord told Adam, that not only the promised seed should break the
Devils head-plot, but also that the Devil should crucify him, and pierce him
in the foot-soales, Genesis 3. 15. The Devil did it by his instruments, the
Scribes and Pharisees are the Roman Soldiers. These are my words in my
Dialogue, which Mr Norton does labor to confute with hi^ corrupt exposition.

"That the godly are the seed of Eve as well as Christ: yet it is not a truth
from the said words in Genesis 3. 15. 2. I believe also, that the wicked are the
seed of Eve as well as the godly: but yet I say also, that these three sorts of
seed, are the seed of Eve in three several differing senses. 1. Christ is the
seed of Eves womb, only by the power of the holy Ghost. 2. All the godly, (as
they are godly,) are the seed of Eves says only. 3. The wicked are the seed of
Eve by natural generation only. But none else is called her seed from the seed
of her womb alone, but the humane nature of Christ only.

Seed, and the word HE are thus expounded by our large Annotations. The former
word Zeta, Seed, and the following word HV HE, and Jeshuphecha shall break, are
all of the Masculine Gender: thence I infer, that seeing they are all of the
Masculine Gender, then godly women which are of the Feminine Gender, must not
be reckoned into this word seed, nor into this Masculine word HE, but they must
be excluded from being comprehended under this Masculine Seed; as Mr Nortons
corrupt exposition does collectively speak.

2. Hence the Papists are to be reproved, because they have corrupted Jeroms
translation in his latter Editions: for in his first Editions he translated HV
[by HE] shall break; but in the latter Editions they put in Ipsa she, instead
of Ipse he, and by that means they give the honor of our Redemption to the
Virgin Mary. But the said three Masculine terms, do fully exclude the Virgin
Mary, and do strongly confirm it to be meant of that humane nature of Christ
only.

3. Though our larger Annotations gave a right sense of the words at first, yet
it does conjoyne the said erroneous collective Exposition to the word Seed at
last, to the utter confusion of its first orthodox Exposition.

4. The like great error does our Annotations fall into, in its Exposition of
the word Seed in Gal. 3. 16. for there it does expound it in a collective sense
also.

5. Mr Calvin is in like sort the more to be blamed, because he does vehemently
contend against such Interpreters as make [Her Seed] to relate only to the
humane nature of Christ; and doubtless he has led many latter Expositors into
the same error with himself, seeing he is counted for a leading Expositor. "6.
The word Seed, says Mr Ainsw. in Genesis 22. 18. is there meant in special of
one, that is Christ, Gal. 3. 16, 8. and yet in Genesis 3. 15. he does likewise
fall in the foresaid great error, for first he does expound the word Seed of
Christ only; but in the second place he does expound it in a collective sense
of Christ and all the godly: which two senses is contrary to that Rule of a
sound Exposition which I have given of the word death, in chap. 1.

But on the contrary, diverse other Expositors do most soundly Expounded, [Her
Seed,] to relate only to the humane nature of Christ.

Luther, for he seems not to be led by Calvin in any thing: Luther does make
her seed in Gal. 3. 16. to relate only to the humane nature of Christ, in
opposition to the malignant Jews, that expound the word Seed of seeds in the
plural. "The Jews says Luther, will not receive this interpretation of Paul.
They say the singular is put for the plural, one for many. But (says he) we do
gladly receive this meaning and interpretation of Paul, who oftentimes
repeateth this word Seed, and expounds it to be Christ: and this (says he)
he does with an apostolical spirit.

2. Luther says thus in Gal. 3. 7. "All the promises are to be referred to the
first promise, and to be expounded concerning Christ the Seed of the woman,
that shall break the Serpents head, and so did all the Prophets understand it
and teach it.

3. Bullenger in his 4th Decad and Sermon. 1. does interpret the word Seed in
Genesis 3. 15. of one single seed of the woman, "The first and most evident
promise of all, (says he) was made by the very mouth of God unto our first
Parents Adam and Eve, being oppressed with death, which promise is as it were
the pillar and base of all Christi^n Religion, whereupon the Preaching of the
Gospel is altogether founded, and out of which all the other promises are in a
manner derived, Genesis 3. 15. In this Verse (says he) God promises seed: The
seed I say, not of man, but of woman: to wit, of the most holy Virgin Mary; for
she conceived not by any man, but by the holy Ghost, and was delivered of
Christ our Lord: who by dying and rising again, did tread and crush the head of
Satan, etc. And in the mean while, (says he) Satan troad on Christ's heel by
his members, when Caiphas, Pilate, Jews and Gentiles did with exquisite
torments of death vex and kill the flesh of Christ, etc.

2. Says Bullenger in his 3d Decad Sermon. 6. "God did not first begin the
league with Abraham, but renewed unto him that Covenant which he had first made
with Adam immediately upon his transgression, when he received him again into
favor, and promised his only begotten Son, in whom he would be reconciled to
the world, etc. And, says he, this ancient league he renewed afterward unto
Noah, and after that again to the blessed Patriarch Abraham: And again, after
four hundred years, he Bullenger makes the Decalogue and the Ceremonies at
Mount Sinai to be given for the new Covenant of grace.
renewed it under Moses at Mount Sinai, where the conditions of the league were
at large written in Tables, and many Ceremonies were added thereunto. But most
excellent, clearly, and evidently did our Lord himself show forth that league,
who wiping away all ceremonies, types, and figures, brought in, in the stead of
them the very truth: and this is now called the new League or Testament, etc.
And then he concludes thus, This promise of God to Abraham, is all one with
that which he made to Adam in Genesis 3. 15.

4. Tyndal in his Translation and Annotation of Genesis 3. 15. does make [Her
seed] to be the humane nature of Christ only.

5. That blessed Martyr Jo. Frith says in p. 109. "The word of promise was
this, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and
her seed; that seed shall tread thee on the head, and thou shall tread it on
the heel. In this promise (says he) they, (namely, the Fathers that lived
before Christ's Incarnation,) had knowledge that Christ should become the seed,
or Son of a woman, and that he should destroy the Devil with all his power,
and deliver his faithful from their sins. And whereas it is said (says he)
that the Devil shall tread it on the heel, they understood right-well, that the
Devil should find the means by his wiles and wicked ministers, to put Christ to
death, etc. This promise (says he) was given to Adam, and it saved as many as
did believe, and it was afterward established to our father Abraham, saying,
In thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.

6. Mr Rutherford on the Covenant page 312. does largely Dispute on this word
[Her Seed,] in Gal. 3. 16. in opposition to Mr Nortons collective sense. "Our
Divines (says he) as Beza, Piscator, Deodati, and our English Divines in their
Annotations, expound the word Seed in Gal. 3. 16. of Christ mystical, as the
Church the body is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. But (says he) judicious
Pareus says, that the Apostle expounds this word seed, not collectively of
many, but individually of one, [Christ.] And (says he) among Papists Lyranus
says, the promises are made to the seed, that is, to Christ, in whom the
promises are fulfilled, and in no other, and therefore it is said to the seed
in the singular number.

2. Says he a little after, "There is no reason to expound the word seed, of
mystical Christ and of his seed. 1. Because the seed is he, in whom the Nations
are blessed, both Jews and Gentiles, Gal. 3. 14. 2. Because the seed is he that
is made a curse, verse. 13. which is Christ only, and not mystical Christ, head
and members. 3. Says he, The promise is made to the seed coming in the flesh,
and assuming our nature in personal union, verse. 19. 4. It runs most connatural
to the Text, and most comfortable to us, if neither Christ Gal. 3. 16. be
understood as a private man, the Son of Mary, nor yet as Christ mystical, as 1
Cor. 12. 12. but as Christ a public person, head, and Lord-Mediator. This
Orthodox Exposition of his, I first hinted in my former printed Reply, in p.
341. But I think it fit to relate it here more fully.

7. Mr Warren says in p. 127. "The Promise or Covenant was made to Abraham and
his seed, he says not to seeds as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed,
which is Christ, Gal. 3. 16. This Christ (says he) was not Christ mystical,
as Beza, Piscator and many others expound it (as Mr Rutherford (says he) has
well observed) but Christ personal. But with their leave, says Mr Rutherford
in his Trial and Triumph of Faith, Ser. 7. p. 51. The promise is not made to
Christ's person singly considered, nor to Christ mystical: For 1. The Promise
is ma^e to Christ in whom the Covenant was confirmed, Gal. 3. 17. 2. In whom
the Nations are blessed, verse. 14. 3. In whom we receive the promise of the
Spirit through faith, verse. 15. and who was made a curse for us, verse. 13. Now
(says he) not any of these can agree to Christ mystical: Christ mystical did
not confirm the Covenant, nor give the Spirit, nor was made a curse; but Christ
mediator is he to whom the promises are made, and in Him, to all his heirs and
kindred, not simply in his person, but as a public person and mediator: and
upon believing we are truly in him, and so Abraham's seed, and so heirs
according to the promise, etc. Thus I have presented the Reader with Mr
Rutherfords double Exposition of [her Seed] to be meant of Christ only, and
that his exposition is also approved by Mr Warren.

Thus have I confuted Mr Nortons Confutation by a Jury of orthodox Writers.

8. Mr Ainsw. says, "The word Seed, is used either for a multitude as in Genesis
15. 5. or for one particular person, as in Genesis 4. 25. Genesis 21. 13. But says
he in Genesis 3. 15. it means one special Seed, Christ, Gal. 3. 16. And this
did the ancient Hebrew Doctors acknowledge: for in Thargum Jerusalemy (says
he) the fulfilling of this promise is expressly referred to the last days, to
the days of King Messiah. Thus Mr Ainsworth has concluded his Exposition in a
right sense as he began it; but he has put into the middle the corrupt
exposition of a collective Seed, like a dead fly into a Box of precious truth.

VII. He shall Breakthy Head.

This first word HV, HE; is in the masculine gender: But in case the former
word Seed had been meant collectively of the woman's godly seed as well as of
Christ; then this word HV, should have been translated They, and not HE: They
together shall break the Devils head for man's Redemption.

2. It is observed by Mr Broughton in Rev. 24. 6. and in Melchisedeck D. 2.
that the very Zohar upon Genesis 3. says, that HV HE is the holy Blessed the
Eternal: In these words the ancient Hebrews did confess, that none else could
become true man of the woman's seed alone, but the second Person in the Godhead.

3. The same Zohar does also say on Genesis 3. 15. That by the Serpent Christ
should be killed: from both these speeches put together, we may see that the
ancient Hebrew Doctors held, That the holy Blessed, the Eternal, the second
person in Trinity should assume true humane nature from the poor captive woman's
seed alone without the help of man: And 2. That the seed of the Devil in the
Serpent, should have a liberty of power given them to kill his humane nature,
by piercing him in the foot-soals as a sinful malefactor on the Cross. But
the later Hebrew Doctors are extreme enemies to the death of Christ, and
extreme Apostates from the says of their Ancestors.

4. Hence observe, that this word HV HE in the masculine Gender, does note out
unto us three properties in the Messiah person and office.

1. The Humane nature of the Messiah; because he must be made true The word HE
in Genesis 3. 15. does comprehend both the natures of Christ in personal union.
man of the seed of the woman alone, Gal. 4. 4. Luke 1. 42.

2. It notes out unto us the Divine nature of the Messiah, because none else
can take man's true nature and passions from the seed of the woman alone without
the help of man, but the second person in Trinity.

3. HU HE, is a Noun singular, and in that respect it does note out unto us,
that the said two natures of the Messiah should be truly united in personal
union; namely that his Divine nature should assume his humane nature as an
appendix to his divine person: and that he should in that respect be called
Emanuel, Mat. 1. 23. and one Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and
that he should in his humane alone, combat with the warlike enmity of the
Devil for the victory, by his perfect obedience, through all his ignominious
tortures, until he had gotten the victory, and had in that perfection of his
obedience, made his death a most perfect and acceptable sacrifice, for the
procuring of his Fathers Reconciliation to all the Elect: and thus, as by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one (in his
combat of sufferings, and in his death and sacrifice) many are made righteous,
i.e. justified from their sins, Romans 5. 19.

4. Dr All expounds, he shall break of Christ only, and reproves the Popish
writers for reading it ipsa, part 2. fol. 62.

5. Mr Bro. says in Rev. 9. p. 93. Appoluon fights against all for Hebrew in
Genesis 3. 15. He shall breakthy head; All the millions of Hebrews says he to
each man say HE: And John expounds all of Christ, that HE should destroy the
works of the Devil: And Onkelos says, HE shall, etc. and so the Arabique
Sadazias: and so the LXX: yet the Popes Translation has She, against thrice
the masculine gender in Hebrew, and all Hebrew kind that ever were, to bring
Mary into Christ's honor, to destroy the Bible and the world: and to this sense
does Gibbons speak in Genesis 3. 15. Question 10. where he shows, that Aquilae,
Symachus and Theodotion do corrupt the Hebrew, by translating it She: It is
recorded that Aquila and Theodotion were notable Apostates from the faith of
Christ, and joined themselves to the unbelieving Jews, and by sinistrous
translations perverted such places of Scripture, as gave a clear testimony of
Christ, as Genesis 3. 15. they translate She instead of H ^: and in Isa. 7. 14.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive, they corruptly translate it, Behold a young
woman shall conceive: This bad translation of apostate Christians to the
apostate Jews, ought to be abhorred of Christians; so Chap. 2. Austin says,
"That the Jews prefer Aquila before all, (in the City of God, lib. 15. cap.
23.) it is the greater sign, that to please the Jews, he corrupted the said
Scriptures. But Jerome did approve of Theodotion before that of Aquila and
Symachus, as Vines says in l. 16. c. 32.

[Shall break.] So the LXX translate it: others render it, Shall pierce,
bruise, or crush. This Hebrew word is used only in Genesis 3. 15. and in Job 9.
17. but the true sense from the context is the thing that is chiefly to be
regarded; namely, how this seed of the woman should bruise break or the Devils
head, or rather his head-plot; for the Son of God was manifested to destroy the
works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. namely through death he destroyed him that had
the power of death, the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. And the kind of his death is
expressed to be as ignominious and cruel, as the Devil could devise; by this
expression, Thou shall pierce him in the foot-soales; and also by this
expression, He shall be cut off, or executed (as a notorious malefactor) Esaias
53. 8. Dan. 9. 26. But it was not possible that Christ could destroy, break,
bruise, pierce or crush the head-plot of Satan, by such an ignominious death,
unless he had performed his death in all exact obedience to the Articles of the
Covenant, in countermining Satan's warlike enmity, by his said perfect obedience
in his death; but being so performed, it did procure his Fathers reconciliation
to all his Elect seed: and after this sort the Elect are redeemed from the
Devils power, and after this sort the Devils head-plot is broken, bruised,
pierced, and crushed all to pieces, as concerning the Elect number, though the
wicked do still remain under his power as his conquered captives.

[Thy head.] It is a known thing that the Devil is a spirit, and therefore that
he has no corporal head: and hence it follows, that by the Devils head must be
understood his head-plot, namely, the head-plot of those The Devil is said to
have a head, because of the head-plot of all the Angels that fell, to deceive
Adam and Eve.
many legions of Angels that fell, by refusing to be ministering spirits to Adam
and Eve, according to the Law of Gods positive Covenant made with them: and for
that sin of theirs, God deprived them of their concreated moral perfections:
and then they could not stop from further sinning, but instantly became an
envious company against the good of man: and without any delay they combined
together in one head-plot, to ask leave of God to enter into the Serpent, and
to try whether Adam and Eve would be more perfect in their obedience to Gods
positive Law and Covenant of nature, then they had been: and having obtained
leave, they did enter into the head of the serpent, and did so cunningly
actuate the tongue of the serpent to speak, as if it had been no other but an
Angel from Heaven, that god had sent to reverse his former prohibition, and to
give them liberty to eat of the forbidden fruit for their best good, and that
the eating of it, would increase their knowledge in all Gods secret will. And
by this means, the Devil brought them under the same punishment of a double
spiritual death with themselves: and as soon as they had effected this
head-plot, these fallen Angels are ever since called collectively, The Devil
and Satan, and the accuser of the brethren, The adversary, etc. And the word
head or head-plot, is very suitable to them, because the word head is used for
a head-plot, for in Psalm. 140. 9. David prays against the head of those that
compass me about. Mr Ainsw. says, "That head sometimes signifies a company of
chief men, 1 Chronicles. 4. 42. and for this also see Ains. in Psalm. 141. 5.

2. But yet presently after that our first Parents had broken the Covenant of
nature, by eating of the forbidden fruit, and had received the threatened
punishment of a double spiritual death. It pleased the Lord to show forth the
riches of his mercy to them, by declaring unto them the decree of the eternal
Covenant of the Trinity for their Redemption, namely, that the second Person in
Trinity, should become true man, of the seed of the poor captive woman: and
that he should be conceived in the womb of a Virgin that never knew man, by the
power of the holy Ghost; and that in the fullness of the time appointed of the
Father, he should in that nature perform the warlike combat of enmity, with
his malignant Champion, Satan and his seed, in such perfection of obedience,
even to the death of the Cross, that he should in that perfection of his
obedience, make his death to be accepted as a most perfect and acceptable
sacrifice, for the procuring of his Fathers reconciliation, for the full
redemption of all the Elect. And after this sort it is, that the seed of the
woman has broken the Devils head-plot, gotten the victory, and divided the
spoil, namely, he has divided the Elect number from the rest of the spoil,
that are yet in the hands of the strong enemy Satan, Isa. 53. 12.

VIII. [And thou shall pierce him in the foot-soales.]

[Thou] Namely, thou Satan that art yet in the Serpent: Thou, as well as thy
seed formerly named, shall have a liberty of power, without any restraint to
hinder this seed of the woman from breaking thy head-plot. God gave the Devil a
liberty of power to pierce the humane nature of Christ, in the foot-soales, as
a sinful malefactor on the Cross.
But thou cansts not devise any likelyer means to hinder him, than by provoking
his passions to some sinful distemper or other: and thou can not devise any
likelyer means to provoke his passions, than by accusing him to be no better
than a sinful malefactor, and by using him with all ignominious, reproachful,
and painful tortures, by tormenting his body with the most exquisite and
long-lingring torments, in piercing his hands and his feet with iron spikes
upon the Cross. This unlimited power of malignity, do I give thee over the body
of Christ, more than I gave thee over the body of Job: as I have showed in my
former Book, page 312. And accordingly the Devil began to exercise his
unlimited power over the body of Christ, immediately after he was extrinsecally
installed into the Mediators office. At his Baptism he tempted him forty days
together, and at the end of those forty days, the Devil did take his blessed
and sinless body, and did carry it up into the air, and set it upon the top of
the pinnacle of the Temple, and then tempted him to cast himself down: and
Christ had no sooner resisted that temptation, but the Devil having still the
same liberty of power, did take his body from thence, and carried it to the top
of a high Mountain, and there he had such a liberty of power given him, as to
represent to his bodily senses, the glory of the whole world; and then the
Devil said unto him, All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me: and when Christ had resisted this temptation, the Devil seeing no
hopes to prevail at this present, left him for a little season; but it was but
for a little season, for not long after, he used a new liberty of power, to
stir up the Scribes and Pharisees to be his arch instruments to provoke his
patience, by many slanderous reports, and false accusations; and at last to
apprehend him, and impeach him as a grand malefactor, and to get Pilate to
condemn him to the most ignominious and tormenting death of the Cross between
two thieves. For the Devil knew right-well, that in case he could not provoke
his patience by any of these means, that then his death should be accepted of
God as a death of righteousness, namely, Performed in all exact obedience,
according to the declared will of God, in his Covenant of reconciliation, in
Genesis 3. 15. And then that it should be accepted as a most obedient sacrifice,
for the procuring of his Fathers reconciliation, for the full redemption of all
the Elect, and that then his head-plot should be broken as to the Elect number.
And yet for all this, the Devils warlike enmity was such, that he would not
give over his warlike stratagems; and therefore when Christ was dead and laid
in his grave; he caused the Scribes and Pharisees to seal his Tomb, and to
set a watch about it, least his Disciples should steal him away. And when it
was noised that he was risen to the great amazement of the Soldiers, by a
terrible earthquake, then the Devil prevailed so with the Scribes and
Pharisees, as to give the Soldiers a large quantity of money, to say that his
Disciples stole him away while they slept. But blessed be God, this righteous
seed of the woman, did in all things conquer the Devil and all his potent seed
by righteousness.

And, 2. After his Resurrection, Peter said thus to the Jews, Him, being
delivered, (namely, to Satan and to his potent seed, according to the
declaration of the warlike combat of enmity in Genesis 3. 15.) by the determinate
counsel, and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain, whom God has raised up, having loosed (or healed) the
soars of death, because it was not possible he should be holden of it, namely,
not of death, (because he had it in his power,) Act. 2. 23, 24. Col. 2. 15.
Romans 6. 9.

[Shall pierce] Thou Satan shall have a full liberty of power to pierce, to
bruise, or break this seed of the woman, as a sinful malefactor in the
foot-soales on the Cross, Mr Bro. does render the Hebrew word in all these
terms in his Descent. page 17, etc. And

2. The word Plerce is used for his crucifying, in Zach. 12. 10. Joh. 19. 34,
37. Rev. 1. 7.

[His heel] The Hebrew word and the Greek word also, does signify not only the
heel, but the whole foot, or the foot-soal. As Ains. does often render it, as
in Psalm. 89. 52, etc.

2. This word Foot, is put for both the feet, as it is also in other places:
How or in what sense Austin calls the death of Christ, not a death of
condition, but of crime.
as in Lev. 13. 12. Deuteronomy. 8. 4. Josh. 1. 3. Matthew. 22. 13. and consequently by
an argument of the like sorce, it is put for both the hands also. And so David
does explain the manner of the Devils crucifying of this seed of the woman, in
Psalm. 22. 17. The assembly of evildoers have enclosed me, they have Lion-like
pierced my hands and my feet. There is in this Verse a double reading in the
Hebrew, and Mr Ainsw. does translate them both by lion-like: "And this was
fulfilled (says he) in nailing our Lord to the Cross by his hands and feet,
Matthew. 27. 35. John 20. 25. And this kind of death is that which Austin
calls, A death, not of condition, but of crime, But Mr Norton does interpret
Austins sense to be meant of the death of Christ's soul, under the wrath of God,
through the imputation of our sins to Christ, in page 130. But I find that Mr
Nortons sense is no more like Austins, than an Apple is like an Oyster: as I
have also noted it in my former Reply in p. 96.

Austin does often use the word crime for scandalous sins, (as Vines does
expound his meaning in The City of God, lib. 14. cap. 9.) " Austin (says he)
declares the difference between crime and sin, in Tract. Super Joan 41. A
crime, says he, is an act worthy of accusation and condemnation: for (says
he) the Apostle giving order for the Election of Priests and Deacons, and other
Churchmen in 1 Timothy 3. 2. says, not if any of you be without sin, (for so he
should exclude all mankind from being elected,) but if any be without crime, as
manslaughter, whoredom, adultery, theft, fraud, sacrilege, and the like. And
for suchlike scandalous crimes was Christ accused and condemned to death, from
the accusations of the Highpriests, and from the sentence of Pilate. And in
this respect it is that Austin calls his death, not a death of condition, but of
crime: and therefore the Devil did labor to make his death as odious in the
eyes of the world as it was possible, that so none at all, or but very few,
might be affected to believe in his death, for the salvation of their souls:
but yet because he performed his death in perfection of obedience, it was
accepted of God, as the meritorious price of man's Redemption.

Conclusion.
After this manner it is that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, when he was made a curse for us, (for in the outward manner of his death,
he died as a cursed malefactor,) for it is written, cursed is every one that
hangs on a tree, Deuteronomy. 21. 23. That so the blessing that was promised to our
first Father Adam, (which was renewed afterward unto Abraham,) might come upon
all believers, even upon the believing Gentiles, as well as upon the believing
Jews.

Sect. 3.
Comparing the promise of Reconciliation made first to Adam, with the promise
of Reconciliation made afterward to Abraham.

GOd said thus to Abraham, in Genesis 12. 3. And in thee shall all the families of
The promise made to Abraham in Genesis 12. 3, etc. depends upon Gen 3. 14. for its
true exposition.
the earth be blessed.

1. This word thee, in the literal sense of it, may seem to be meant of
Abraham's single person: but because it cannot be that all the families of the
earth should be blessed in his single person, therefore it must of necessity be
taken for that seed of the woman in Genesis 3. 15. that should also come out of
his loins, to break the Devils head-plot for man's Redemption, by his obedient
performance of his combat of sufferings, and of his death and sacrifice, by
the which he should procure his Fathers Reconciliation for to make all
believers in all the families of the earth to be eternally justified from the
guilt of their sins.

2. The word [in thee] is also expounded in thy seed, in Genesis 2. 18. and it is
also expounded to be one seed [Christ,] Gal. 3. 16.

3. The Apostle says in Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would
Justify the heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham:
saying, in thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. 1. Mark this,
that the promise which God made to Abraham, is called the preaching of the
Gospel. 2. But yet it is a point of wise consideration, how to parallel the
threatening of the Devil in Genesis 3. 15. with this preaching of the Gospel to
Adam and to Abraham.

I answer, That I have formerly showed, how the threatening of the Devil was
denounced in the hearing of fallen Adam and Eve; and in that respect it employed
a strong and a gracious promise to them: for from thence it must follow by
necessary consequence, that if the seed of the woman should break the Devils
head-plot, then they, and as many others as were elected, should be redeemed
from his power: and in this sense it is, that the threatening which was
denounced for the ruin of Sarans head-plot by the obedience of the seed of the
woman in his ignominious death, was the preaching of the glad tidings of
salvation to Adam and Eve.

4. But yet here it may be demanded, how, and after what manner all nations
should be blessed in the seed of Abraham: and how, and after what manner in the
seed of the woman.

The answer is after one and the same manner, in them both alike, namely, by
the warlike combat and victory of the seed of the woman: in opposition to the
warlike enmity of the Devil and of all his porent seed, namely, by his
consonant obedience, even at the same time, when the Devil had a liberty of
power to pierce him in the foot-soales, as a sinful malefactor on the Cross:
by which perfect obedience, he merited his Fathers reconciliation, for the
formal redemption of all believing sinners from Satan's head-plot, even then
when Christ was made a curse for us, in the outward manner of his death: And
after this manner the believing sinners of all Nations are blessed, first in
the seed of the woman, and then also in the seed of Abraham: there is not one
hairs breadth difference in the manner of performing these promises of
blessedness.

5. From hence we may find out the true sense of the Apostles reasoning in Gal.
3. 13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when Gal. 3. 13,
14.
he was made a curse for us: for it is written, (in Genesis 3. 15. Thou Satan
shall have a liberty of power to pierce him in the foote-soales, as a sinful
malefactor on the tree: and just so it is also written, in Deuteronomy. 21. 23.)
Cursed is every one that hangs upon a tree. And from thence the Apostle does
make this blessed inference in verse. 14. That the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, (that promised seed of the woman,
and also of Abraham,) for by his righteous performance of the said combat in
all his sufferings, he got the victory: that so we might receive the promise of
the spirit through faith, that is to say, through the preaching of this faith,
and not by the bodily exercise of the works of the Law, as in verse. 2, 5. This
Gospel preached, is the only way and means that God has ordained to make good
his promise of the spirit to the Elect of all Nations. And after this manner it
is that Christ was sent of God to bless us, that he might send the preaching of
his Gospel into all Nations, accompanied with the effectual operation of his
spirit to turn us every one from our iniquities, Acts 3. 25, 26. To give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5. 31. and so to work the
grace of faith in this promised seed, that so we might be blessed with
faithful Abraham, Gal 3. 9.

And therefore, 2. It was by the preaching of this blessed Gospel to our first
parents, that God brought them to repentance, and to faith also: and so they
had their sins forgiven them, and were justified by performing the condition of
the Covenant of grace on their part, by believing in the righteous performance
of the combat, by the said promised seed of the woman: and they were blessed
through the forgiveness of their sins, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. and so they were
received into Gods special favor, as his children by adoption, Joh. 1. 12.
Gal. 3. 26.

6. I conclude therefore, that the blessing promised to Abraham in his seed
Christ, in Genesis 12. 3. and in Genesis 22. 18. must be expounded according to the
first declaration, of the Covenant of grace and reconciliation made to Adam in
Genesis 3. 15. for that is the very first foundation promise of blessedness, and
it is no other but the same that was renewed unto Abraham in Genesis 12. 3. and
though it is now recorded unto us, but in very few words; yet it is evident,
that it was opened unto Abraham more at large, because it is called the
preaching of the Gospel unto Abraham in Gal. 3. 8. and it is the self-same
Gospel that was first preached to our first parents at large, though now we
have but the brief heads of it in Genesis 3. 15.

7. It is the same promise of the Covenant of grace that was made also unto
Isaak in Genesis 26. 4. and also to Jacob in Genesis 28. 14. These promises are
recorded to us but in few words. But doubtless they were opened unto them
abundantly more fully by the preaching of the Gospel.

Sect. 4.
But I suppose, the greatest difficulty is, how to bring that promise that was
made unto Judah, to the right sense of the said standard, in Genesis 3. 15.

Genesis 49. 10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
Genesis 49. 10. depends on Genesis 3. 15. for its true sense and meaning.
between his feet, until Shiloh come: and to him shall the gatherings of the
people be.

1. By scepter I do not understand the whole Tribe of Judah as many do, (though
much amiss,) because the Hebrew word Shebet is often put for a Tribe, or for a
Principality to be ruled; and so they put it here for the whole Tribe of Judah,
that it shall not fail till Shiloh come. But I take this word for a scepter,
as it is put for a sign of regal Authority. The words then of this 10th verse,
must be thus understood, namely, That a right heir to sway the scepter, shall
not depart from the lineal descent of Judah, until it come to Christ the right
heir of Judah to sway the scepter.

2. Nor a Lawgiver, [from between his feet.] This phrase from between his
feet, cannot be meant of the whole Tribe of Judah, therefore it is not fit to
translate it a Tribe, but it must be taken for one that has a legal right to
give Laws, namely, for Christ the true Lawgiver, whose right descent is from
the loins, or from between the feet of Judah, that is to say, from the place
of begetting, and also from the place of birth: for the original signifies not
only feet, but the whole leg and thigh. And in this respect the words must be
expounded thus, [nor a Lawgiver,] i.e. nor a right heir to give Laws, shall
depart from between the feet of Judah, until it come to Christ the last right
heir of Judah.

3. [Vntill Shiloh come:] That is, until Christ the Son of Judah be born of
the Virgin Mary. And for the full confirmation of this Exposition, the holy
Ghost has recorded the Genealogy of Christ from Judah. 1. By his Father
Joseph, (as it was supposed,) Mat. 1. And, 2. By his Mother Mary in Luke 3. And
from this double proof, we may see of what great use the said Genealogies are,
to prove the truth of this Prophecy, namely, that Christ was the right heir to
Judah: both to sway the scepter, and to give Laws, if Tirants had not kept his
right from him: and indeed it was his good pleasure to permit Tirants to keep
his earthly Kingdom from him, that so his spiritual and mediatorial Kingdom
here on earth, might be the better marked and regarded.

Jacob in his last will, did give the right of the firstborn to Judah, and
said, that his brethren should confess him, meaning, that they should
acknowledge the dignity of the firstborn, in respect of the government to be
given to him, and that Christ the King should come of him, 1 Chronicles. 5. 2. Heb.
7. 14. Psalm. 45. 7. And the other Tribes did acknowledge the dignity of this
Tribe above the rest, for this Tribe was the foremost of all in their marching
through the wilderness, Numb. 10. 14. and the Prince of this Tribe was the
first that offered at the Dedication of the Altar, Numb. 7. 11, 12. And after
Josiahs death, Judah was the first that went up to fight for Israel against the
Canaanites, and got the victory, Judge. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8. And the foremost in
battle against their rebellious brethren, Judge. 20. 18. And the first Judge
that saved Israel was of this house, Judge. 9. 3, 9. And God chose this Tribe
and David out of it, to settle the Kingdom of Israel in his stock for ever,
Psalm. 78. 68, 70, 71. Psalm. 89. 20, 21, 28, 30, 36, 37. And to our Lord Jesus,
who came of Judah, does the right of the scepter, and the right of making Laws
belong, as Jacob declared it in his last will and testament.

4. It is also evident, that such as have a true legal right to a temporal
Kingdom, may be called Kings though they never come to Reign actually: as for
example, the three heirs that Antiochus defeated of their actual right to
Reign, are notwithstanding called Kings by the holy Ghost, because they had a
true legal right to sway the scepter, and to give Laws, Daniel 7. 8, 20, 24.
But as I said before, Jesus Christ saw it necessary to suffer Tirants to take
away his right to his temporal Kingdom, that so his spiritual and mediatorial
Kingdom might be the better regarded.

5. Now there is no other right heir of the right line of Judah, to sway the
scepter and to give Laws, but the humane nature of Jesus Christ: and this is
also confirmed by Ezekiel. 21. 26, 27. for at the death of Zedekiah, the Kingdom
of Solomon, of Judah, was utterly perverted, until be come (of Nathan the
son of David of Judah,) whose right it is, and I will give it him. By this
place of Scripture it is evident, that Christ had a true right to the temporal
Kingdom, though he refused it, to the end his spiritual Kingdom might be the
better taken notice of: and in that respect it was that Christ said, My
kingdom (emphatically so called) is not of this world: if my kingdom were of
this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the
Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence, Joh. 18. 36.

6. Christ is called Shilch, that is says Beroald [his Son,] to wit, the
son of Judah: and the Rabbis confess that this Verse is thus to be
interpreted, The truth compelling them: for they say that Shiloh signifies
Beno, that is, [his Son,] which is Messiah. This is cited by Mr Broughton in
his Short View of the Persian Monarchy, page 41. And says Mr Bro. in Rev. page
107. "The Zohar says that Jah is Shiloh, and says he, most Rabbis expound
Shiloh of Christ. And Ainsw. does cite both the Chaldee interpreters and sundry
others to that sense in Genesis 49. 10. And so does Du Plessis in his Trueness of
Religion, p. 468, 494.

7. Mr Jeremiah Buroughs says, (in Moses Self-denial, page 39.) "That the
name of Christ in Psalm. 72. 17. shall continue from generation to generation:
the words are, Filiabitur nomen ejus, it shall be child-ded, or it shall be
begotten from one to another by a lineal descent, (till it come to Christ. But
Mr Ainsw. does read it thus, "His name shall be continued, to wit, as a Son
continues his Fathers name, (from one generation to another. From hence I
gather, that the name of Christ in Psalm. 72. 17. is very comprehensive, and
therefore it may very well fetch in his natural name of right, to sway the
scepter of his temporal Kingdom, and to make Laws for that King: for by his
lineal descent from Judah, (and from David of Judah,) he had a true legal
right, and it was promised to be continued until it should be settled on his
humane nature, which is still alive, though it be gone into a far Country;
and his said lineal right is soundly proved by his Genealogy in Mar. 1. and in
Luke 3. But yet it was most necessary that he should refuse the claim of his
temporal right, that so his right to the scepter of his spiritual and
mediatorial Kingdom might be the better known and marked.

8. Take notice that this Shiloh is no other but the very same seed of the
woman, that was promised to break the Devils head-plot, by his perfect
obedience under his ignominious death of the Cross in Genesis 3. 15. and therefore
because he was obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross, God has
highly exalted him as a conquering Combater, and given him a name above every
name, That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10.

9. [And unto him shall the gatherings of the people be.]

This gathering of the peoples (of several Nations) unto Shiloh, must be
understood of their resorting to him by faith through the preaching of the
blessed Gospel: that so they might fight the good fight of faith, under his
banner, who is the only Conqueror of Satan's head-plot, by his perfect
obedience in his combat of sufferings, from his envious Combater Satan and his
potent seed. And this victory Christ does hold forth like an eminent Ensign in
the preaching of the Gospel, which is lifted up to the elect of all Nations,
Esaias 11. 10. where it is prophesied, That a root from Jesse shall stand up for
an ensign to the peoples, and to it shall the Gentiles seek, (or resort,) or
be gathered together, and his rest shall be glorious. And then in verse. 12. He
shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of
Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah, from the four corners of
the earth. This ensign is nothing else but Christ crucified, and lifted up by
preaching of the Gospel, as in John 3. 14, 15. John 12. 32. and so in Gal. 3.
1. Christ is said to have been evidently set forth, and crucified among the
Galatians: and this is no other ensign, but the same flag of defiance against
Satan, that was first held forth to our first Parents, by the preaching of the
Gospel in Genesis 3. 15. and then it was held forth to Abraham, in Genesis 3. 12. and
then to Isaac and Jacob, and then to Judah in Genesis 49. 10. And Christ himself
did set out this ensign in the preaching of the Gospel, when he said, If I be
lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me, John 12. 32. namely, the
elect of all Nations shall be gathered to me as to their ensign, and to the
Captain of their salvation, to behold the perfection of my obedience, in all my
combat of sufferings, from the warlike enmity of my combater Satan and his
potent seed, and how I conquer him by my perfect obedience in my death and
sacrifice, which is so acceptable to God, that it is the procuring cause of his
reconciliation to all the elect: and by the means of that reconciliation so
procured, they have the holy Spirit given them for their regeneration: and they
have the pardon of all their sins, for their full redemption from Satan's power:
and in this sort it is, that the seed of the woman has broken the Devils
head-plot, as to the elect number.

Conclusion.

The aforesaid promises made to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Judah, must be
referred to Genesis 3. 15. as to their standard, for the trial of their true sense
and meaning. And, 2. That the like must be said for the trial of the true sense
and meaning of all other promises and declarations, concerning our redemption
by the death and sufferings of Christ.

CHAPTER XIII.
The Meritorius price of Man's Redemption Described, and distingnished from the
supposed Demeritorious cause of Christ's Sufferings and Death, by Gods imputing
of our sins to him.

1. A Price in general, is any kind of thing that is given by one party and
taken of another party by a mutual contract, for the purchasing of A price in
general described.
any desirable thing: and therefore that nothing in the world, though never so
precious in it self, can be truly called a price, for the purchasing of any
thing, until it be made a price by a mutual contract: so then, the essence of
a price is a mutual contract.

2. That which is made a price by a mutual contract, may be ranked, either into
such things which are seperable from the buyers person, as money or moveable
goods are, or into such things as cannot be separated from the person of the
buyer: as for example, when the taker will accept of nothing else, but of the
personal service of the purchaser.

3. This price of personal service is also of a double consideration: 1. It is
either such as may stand well with the safety of the purchasers life, or else
it is such a personal service, as does necessarily put the purchasers life in
danger.

In the first sense Jacob said unto Laban, I will serve thee seven years for
Rachel thy younger daughter. And Laban consented thereunto, and said, It is
better that I give her unto thee, than that I should give her unto another man:
abide with me. And Jacob served for Rachel seven years, and they were in his
eyes but a few days, because he loved her. And (at the end of seven * The
meritorious price which is sometimes given for some eminent thing, is the
performance of some dangerous warlike, personal service.
years) Jacob said unto Laban, give me my wife (for my days are fulfilled,)
that I may go in to her, Genesis 29. 18, 19, 20, 21. But Jacob not having any
dowry to give out of his substance, (as other men had, Genesis 34. 12. Exodus 22.
7.) does out of his poverty give seven years service to his Unkell, that so it
might be accepted as the meritorious price for Rachel to be his wife, Genesis 32.
20. and thus, Israel served for a wife, and for a wife kept sheep, Hos. 12. 12.

In the second sense, such a personal service is sometimes required for he
meritorious price of some eminent reward, as does necessarily put the life of
the purchaser into danger. And in this sense it was that Caleb said, He that
smites Kiriah-Sepher and takes it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to
wife: And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb took it: and be gave
him Achsah his daughter to wife, Josh. 15. 16, 17. with Judge. 1. 12, 13. From
this instance you may see, that this personal service which Othniel performed,
was the meritorious price which he gave or performed for Calebs younger
daughter to be his wife, and that it was such a personal service as did
necessarily put his life in danger.

2. When David heard that Goliath did challenge any single person of Israel to
combat with him for the victory: He said to those that stood by, what shall be
done to the man that kills this Philistim, and takes away the reproach from
Israel? 1 Samuel 17. 26. The people answered him three times over in verse. 25,
27, 30. The man that kills him, the King will enrich him with great riches,
and will give him his daughter, and make his Fathers house free in Israel. And
David accepted of this offer, and undertook to perform the said personal
service by a dangerous warlike combat. And then in verse. 49. He put his hand
in his bag, and took thence a stone and slang it, and smote the Philistim in
his forehead, that the stone sunk into his forehead, and then Goliath fell upon
his face to the earth. And thus David prevailed over the Philistim with a sling
and a stone, and slew him. But Saul did not perform his Covenant to David, but
gave his elder daughter Merab to another to wife: and not long after this,
Jonathan pleaded with Saul for David's life, saying, in 1 Samuel 19. 5. He put his
life in his hand, and slew the Philistim: and our Annotations says, he exposed
his life to much danger, in undertaking a single combat with such a mighty
Giant, from whom all others did fly at the first sight of his approaching:
this dangerous personal service David performed as the meritorious price that
Saul's daughter might be his wife.

3. At another time Saul offered to give his daughter Michal unto David for a
hundred foreskins of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 18. 25. David accepted of this
offer, and performed the condition of that contract on his part: for in verse.
27. He brought unto David two hundred foreskins, instead of a hundred, that he
might be the Kings son in Law: and then Saul gave him his daughter Michal to
wife. This dangerous personal service which David performed, was the
meritorious price which he performed or paid, for the obtaining of Saul's
daughter Michal to wife: and therefore when Michal was kept from David, He sent
messengers to Mephibosheth, saying, deliver me my wife Michal, which I
purchased to me for a hundred foreskins of the Philistims, 2 Samuel 3. 14. David
does not plead that he purchased her for two hundred foreskins, though he paid
two hundred, because the contract was made but for a hundred, the other hundred
was not purchased money, but a voluntary gift.

4. Such a like dangerous warlike combat did Gideon perform with no more but
three hundred men, against the numberless host of the Midianites; as Jotham did
plead his case with the Sichemites, saying, in Jud. 9. 17. My father fought for
you, and adventured his life far, and delivered you out of the hand of
Midian, that is to say, he undertook a long pursuit after the flying enemy for
the public good. This dangerous warlike service he performed as the
meritorious price for his obtaining the place of Captain General, which was
also conferred on him by the after-contract of the people. And as soon as Peter
Martry had expounded this victory of Gideon in Jud. 7. he does conclude it thus
in fol. 141. "Now (says he) we must Peter Martyr describes the meritorious
price of man's redemption, by Christ's performing of a warlike combat.
in few words touch the allegory which is drawn out of the fountain of the holy
Scripture, namely, from Esaias 9. 4. for Esaias does there enter at of our
redemption by Christ, saying, Thou have broken the yoke of his burden, and the
staff of his shoulder, and the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian.
In these words, [as in the day of Midian,] he shows that this victory of
Gideon is to be referred unto that deliverance from sin, which we have
obtained by Christ, namely, by his obedient personal service in his great
combat of suffering, from his old proclaimed enemy, Satan and his potent seed,
in Genesis 3. 15. And says Mr Gataker in his Annotations on Esaias 9. 4. "These
words, Thou have broken the yoke of his burden, wherewith Senacherib begirt
Jerusalem, (Esaias 36. and Esaias 37.) looks further, namely, to the redemption
that is wrought by Christ, as it is manifest (says he) by verse. 6. And Peter
Martyr says in fol. 2. These private deliveries which happened under the
Judges, forasmuch as they are comprehended under the principal redemption that
is given unto mankind by Christ, it must needs be that they should express the
same unto us, being certain assured parts, and figurative shadows of our
redemption by Christ. These words of Peter Martyr are remarkable, and therefore
seeing the warlike personal service of Gideon, was made the meritorious price
of his preferment. And, 2. Seeing it is also cited by Esaias 9. 4. as an allegory
of the warlike personal service of Christ, in breaking the Devils head-plot,
(according to the declaration of the warlike combat in Genesis 3 15.) it must
needs be accepted of God as the meritorious price of man's redemption.

5. David offered, that whosoever did smite the Jebusites first, should be
Chief and Captain, thereupon Joab the son of Serviah went up first, and was
Chief, 1 Chronicles. 9. 6. this personal service which Joab performed by a dangerous
warlike combat, was accepted of David as the meritorious price of preferring
him to be his Captain General: and this is another lively similitude of the
meritorious price of man's redemption, which Christ performed in perfection of
obedience to Gods will, in his combat of sufferings from Satan and his potent
seed, according to Gods declaration of the combat in Genesis 3. 15.

6. The people and the princes of Gilead, said one to another, what man is he,
that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon, he shall be head over
all the inhabitants of Gilead, Judge. 10. 18. Then Jephtah said unto the elders
of Gilead in Judge. 11. 9. If ye bring me home again to fight against the
children of Ammon, and the Lord deliver them before me, shall I be your head?
Then the elders said unto him, in verse. 10. The Lord be witness between us, if
we do not so according to thy word. And, 2. After this Jephtah pleaded thus
with the offended Ephramites, When I called you, you did not deliver me out of
the hands of the Ammonites: and when I saw that you did not deliver me, I put
my life in my hands to fight with them, and the Lord delivered them into my
hands, Judge. 12. 3.

This personal service of Jephtah which he performed by a most dangerous
warlike combat, was accepted of the Elders of Gilead, as the covenanted
meritorious price for being made their Captain General. Peter Martyr in Com.
Pl. p. 523. speaking of the several degrees of benefiting others, says, "They
are to be accounted in the chiefest place, beneficial, that with their own
grief, hurt and loss, do benefit others: and after this sort (says he) Christ
dealt to redeem us, (he redeemed mankind with the loss of his own life, whom
Jephtah after a sort resembles,) who delivered the Israelites to liberty, and
that by his own great danger: which he declared by this form of speaking, I put
my life in my hands, Judge. 12. 3.

7. The like dangerous personal service did three of David's thirty Captains
perform, in breaking through the host of the Philistims, to draw water out of
the well of Bethlem, to satisfy David's desire, and so consequently to merit
his favor. But yet upon second thoughts, David would not drink it, but poured
it out before the Lord, saying, shall I drink the blood of these men that have
put their lives in jeopardy, 1 Chr. 11. 17, 18, 19.

8. The like dangerous personal service did Jonathan and his armor-bearer
perform by a warlike combat, to the destruction of the numerous host of the
Philistims for the redemption of oppressed Israel, 1 Samuel 14. 1, 6, 7, etc.

9. The like voluntary personal service did Zebulun and Napthaly perform
against Jabin and Sisera. Deborah said in her Song, That they jeoparded their
lives to the death, in the high places of the field: or as the Hebrew does also
signify, They exposed their lives to reproach, in the high places of the
field, Judge. 5. 18. For in case the enemy had prevailed, they would have made
all those that they took captive to be a reproach, or a mocking-stock, as the
Philistims, when they called for Sampson, that he might make them sport,
(passively,) by being made the subject of their sport, by giving us a fit
occasion of scorn and laughter, Judge. 16. 25. And our Annotations says, that
in this Sampson was a type of our Savior Christ, whom his enemies made the
subject of their scorn and malice, Matthew. 26. 67, 68. and Matthew. 27. 20. But
when Sampson was thus mocked, he did by prayer so stir up his faith, that he
did with the loss of his own life, conquer the enemies of Gods Church more by
his death, than he did by his life: and therefore this last act of his is
brought in as the pattern of his says in Heb. 11. 39. and thus through death
he destroyed them that had the power of death over his body, as Christ also did
in Heb. 2. 14.

These instances do in some sort exemplify the true nature of the meritorious
price, which Christ performed or paid according to the will of God for man's
redemption from Satan's head-plot: for the declared will of God, in Genesis 3. 15.
was, that the second person should assume our true humane nature from the seed
of the poor deceived captive woman; and that he should in that nature venture
his life in a warlike combat with his proclaimed enemy Satan, who had a
liberty of power given him to provoke his passions to some sinful distemper or
other, (if he could) by using him as the very worst of all sinful malefactors:
and yet God declared also, that this seed of the woman should break the Devils
head-plot, by his righteous performance of the whole combat of his sufferings,
and his constant obedience was made manifest by his perfect patience under all
his ignominious sufferings; and therefore his perfect obedience in his
sufferings, and in his death and sacrifice, was accepted of God as the only
meritorious price and procuring cause of his reconciliation for man's redemption
from Satan's head-plot; for as soon as God is by this means reconciled to
sinners, he does at the same time pardon their sins, and receives their persons
into his special favor, and thus after this sort, they are perfectly redeemed
from Satan's head-plot.

In my former printed Reply, and also in my former Chapter of this Book, I have
described the meritorious price of man's redemption, and have showed that this
price has a double consideration; 1. In Christ's sufferings. And, 2. In his
death and sacrifice. 1. In his sufferings, in that he did according to his
eternal contract with his father, venture his life in a warlike combat with
his proclaimed enemy Satan and his potent seed, according to the declaration of
the combat in Genesis 3. 15. which was of necessity to be done for his
consecration, or for the perfecting of his obedience, before he could make his
death to be accepted as a perfect sacrifice. And, 2. Then he did in that
perfection of his obedience make his death a most pleasing sacrifice, by
separating his immortal soul from his body by his own Priestly power, namely,
by the actual power and joint concurrence of both his natures. And this double
performance is the full meritorious price for the procuring of Gods
reconciliation for the redemption of believing sinners: and no other combater
in Heaven or in earth, was able to perform this meritorious price but himself
alone; as I have showed it in my former printed Reply in page 92, 145, 309,
315, 415, 436. Mr Lawson says in his Body of Divinity, page 95, 102. "That the
immediate effects of Christ's sacrifice were two; 1. Satisfaction. 2. Merit, and
both these in respect of man are called propitiation; but in respect of Christ
(says he) the immediate effect, is called merit, Romans 3. 25. 1 John 2. 1, 2. 1
John 4. 10. And Mr Warren on Justification, page 64. says, The death of Christ
does procure Gods reconciliation by way of merit: and say I, merit properly so
called, must be understood as I have expounded it in this Section, and in the
rest that follows.

Sect. 2.
HAving made a true description of the meritorious price of man's redemption, by
the personal service of Christ in his combat of sufferings, as it was first
declared in Genesis 3. 15. I will now add thereunto Mr Wottons description of
merit, "The meritorious cause of reconciliation (says he in page 10.) is a
kind of efficient, and there needs no other proof, than that it binds, as it
were, the principal efficient to perform that, which upon the merit is due. As
if a man in running a race or the like, Mr Wotton describes the meritorious
cause of reconciliation, and of man's redemption thereby, to the meritorious
running of a race or the like.
so runs, as the order of the game requires, by so doing he meriteth the
prize or the reward: and thereby also he binds the master of the game to pay
him that which he has deserved.

This is a true description of merit, according to the order of justice, and
this description does most fitly exemplify the true nature of Christ's merit,
in his combat of sufferings, according to the order of justice, in the
voluntary cause and covenant, as it was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. much
better and more agreeable to the true sense of the blessed Scriptures than Mr
Nortons is: for he does not at all set out the true meritorious price of
Christ's combat of sufferings, nor of his death and sacrifice. But instead
thereof, he does only set out the demeritorious cause of his sufferings and of
his death, from Gods imputing our sins to Christ; and so he makes his
sufferings and his death, to be inflicted on him as a sinner, or as the surety
of the elect, according to the order of vindicative justice. And yet I have
also showed, that it is quite contray to the order of vindicative justice, to
admit of any sureties for capital delinquents, either to perform their omission
of personal obedience, or to suffer their personal punishments, and therefore
the Scripture is wholly silent in that way, and very clear for that way of
merit which I have described.

From this descrip^ion of merit these inferences do follow:

1. That the wounds, bruises, and bloodshed of such as do win the prize The
imputation of any sin to voluntary combaters by the masters of the game, does
cause such combaters to lose the prize.
from their opposite Champion, cannot be said to be inflicted on them from the
vindicative wrath of the masters of the game, through their imputation of sin
to them against their Laws; for none that is guilty of any such transgression
can win the prize: and so likewise, the joy of the prize that was set before
Christ, made him to endure the Cross, and to despise the shame of it, and to
endure the contradiction of sinners against himself, and to run with patience
the race that was set before him, that is to say, to continue obedient to the
death, notwithstanding his ignominious wounds and tortures on the Cross, Heb.
12. 1, 2, 3, 4. which words do allude unto the strivings and conflicts of the
Olympic, or of the Roman games, which seldom were determined without
bloodshed, they counted it a shame to yield before any blood was drawn.

2. Hence it follows, that the wounds, bruises, and bloodshed which combaters
did undergo from their opposite Champions, ought not to be accounted as
vindicative punishments from the masters of the game, but as trials The
punishments which Christ suffered for the proclaimed combater Satan and his
seed, were suffered without any imputation of sin from Gods vindictive justice.
of their patience, and of their manhood, and of their ready obedience to the
Laws of the combat.

3. Hence it follows, that the wounds, bruises, and stripes which Christ
suffered from his combater Satan, according to the true sense of Esaias 53. 5.
were no other but the very same which God had declared, that he should suffer
from his envious combater Satan and his seed in Genesis 3. 15. and because Christ
did perform that combat of his sufferings in perfection of obedience to the
Laws of the combat, God did accept of his performance thereof, and of his
death and sacrifice, as of the only meritorious price and procuring cause of
his reconciliation to all the elect. And in this sense it is, that all the
chastisements of Christ are for our peace, or for the procuring of Gods
reconciliation, and so consequently they are for the healing of the guilt of
our sinful souls, for the said reconciliation of God, does include, not only
the forgiveness of our sins, but also his receiving of believing sinners into
his special favor, even to the adoption of the heavenly inheritance. And after
this sort it is, that the seed of the woman has broken the Devils head-plot,
namely, by his meriting of Gods reconciliation for the redemption of all
believing sinners. And the ancient Divines do bear witness unto this truth, in
that they do often say, that Christ conquered Satan by righteousness, namely,
by his righteous performance of the great combat of his sufferings, and in
this respect it is that God does style him, his righteous servant, Esaias 53. 11.

Sect. 3.
Showing from diverse Scriptures, that Christ's sufferings has relation to his
warlike combat, as it was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. and therefore that
declaration must needs be counted as the basis or foundation, upon which all
the other Scriptures that speak of the sufferings of Christ, must be referred
as to their first principle for their true sense and meaning.

As for example.

1. CHrist said thus in John 10. 11. I am the good shepherd: the good
shepherd gives his life for his sheep, implying thereby, that he would
Abundance of Scriptures that speak of the sufferings of Christ, cannot be so
well understood, as by referring them to Genesis 3. 15. for their true sense and
meaning.
venture his life in a warlike combat with Satan and his seed, for the
redemption of his elected sheep, according to the first declaration of the
combat in Genesis 3. 15. and for the sake of his righteous performance of that
combat, God has covenanted to accept it as the meritorious price, or as the
procuring cause of his reconciliation, whereby his elected sheep are redeemed
from Satan's head-plot, according to Genesis 3. 15. But Mr Nortons sense is quite
contrary, he says, "That Christ gave himself to be made a sinner, by Gods
imputing the sins of the elect unto him, that so he might suffer the
essential torments of Hell, to satisfy Gods vindicative justice for the elect.
And thus he puts the sufferings of Christ into the demeritorious cause of sin
imputed, and so he makes him to satisfy Gods justice for the elect by
counterpassion, or as a vice-sufferer in the place and stead of all the elect,
in page 144. But I have showed, that all the sufferings of Christ were properly
meritorious of Gods reconciliation, and not demeritorious of any vindicative
wrath at all.

2. Christ said thus in John 10. 15. I lay down my life for my sheep, namely,
by performing the great warlike combat of enmity against Satan and his potent
seed, according to the first declaration of the combat in Genesis 3. 15. that so
by my righteous performance of it, I may please my father, and so procure his
reconciliation thereby, for the redemption of my sheep from Satan's head-plot.
Peter Martyr says in his Sermon. on Phil. 2. "That a King ought to dye for his
people, and that a Shepherd puts his life in danger for his sheep, and that
the sacrifice is given for sin: and where a sacrifice is, there God is
reconciled, and sin is destroyed: briefly (says he) therein consisted [our
justification] (i.e.) our redemption from the condemning power of sin.

3. Christ is called, The great Shepherd of the sheep, Heb. 13. 20. because he
did for their sakes, undertake that great warlike combat with Satan and his
potent seed, as it was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. Satan and his seed had a
liberty of power given them by Gods said declaration, to use this seed of the
woman as a sinful malefactor, bruising him in the heel, or as it is better
rendered, by piercing him in the foot-soales on the Cross, out of a design, to
provoke his passions to some sinful discontent or other; but because this seed
of the woman performed all his combat of sufferings in perfection of patience
and obedience, he conquered his envious combater by his righteous performance
of the combat, for he became obedient to the death, even to the most painful
and shameful death of the Cross. And God was so well pleased with his
righteous performance of that combat, that he accepted it for the full
meritorious price of his reconciliation, for the redemption of all the elect
from Satan's head-plot: and in this respect it is, that his bloody sufferings is
called, The blood of the everlasting Testament, or Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. And
therefore in the second place, the humane nature of Christ which performed this
great combat of his sufferings, in perfection of obedience to the Laws of the
combat, may well and truly be called [Agoniceta,] the conquering combater.
And 3. The blessed Trinity that made this eternal Covenant, may be as truly
called [Agonotheta,] the righteous Judges, In giving the sentence of victory
and reward on the side of the righteous performer: namely, on the side of the
humane nature of Christ. As it is also well observed by our Annotations, and
often by Dr Hammand, that the Scriptures do very often allude to these
Agonistical customs, as in Romans 9. 30. Romans 15. 30. with Genesis 30. 8. 1 Cor. 9.
24, 25, 27. Phil. 3. 12, 14. Col. 3. 15. 2 Timothy 2. 6. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Heb. 12.
1, 2, 3, 4. But in the fourth place, I pray take special notice, that the blood
of Christ is called The blood of the everlasting Covenant in a double respect.
1. As it relates to his conseerating sufferings. And, 2. As it relates to the
formality of his death and sacrifice; for Christ did by both these, perform the
meritorious price, for the procuring of Gods everlasting reconciliation, Dan.
9. 24. for the everlasting redemption of all the elect from Satan's head-plot,
Heb. 9. 12.

4. God said thus in Esaias 53. 12. I will divide him a portion with the great,
and he shall divide the spoil with the strong: here God the Father does promise
to divide him a portion with the great enemy of mankind, namely, to divide all
believing sinners from Satan's spoil: and so consequently, God gives them to
Christ, as to the only meritorious procurer of their redemption. And therefore
in the second place, God does promise that he shall divide the spoil with the
strong, intimating thereby, that Christ shall be such a conquering combater,
that he shall divide the spoil with the strong enemy Satan, that is to say, he
shall divide the elect from the reprobate number, whom he will still leave
under the power of the strong enemy Satan. But all the elect God does promise
to give unto Christ (to be his faithful seed) as the reward of his meritorious
obedience. And in this respect God is said to give him a name above every name,
that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, Phil. 2. 9, 10. of them in
Heaven, [the Angels,] and of them in earth, [men living in the faith on earth,]
and of them under the earth, namely, of them whose dead bodies are under the
earth, but their souls are in Heaven, and do glorify Christ for the
meritorious price of their redemption, (as I have opened this phrase in Dan. 9.
24.) And Peter Martyr on this Text says, "Bowing in the name of Jesus is not
meant of the bodily bowing of the knee at the naming of Jesus, in his Com. Pl.
par. 3. page 243.

5. The reason of Christ's dividing the spoil with his strong enemy Satan is,
because he poured out his soul to death, (i.e.) because he did freely and
readily venture his life in that great combat of his sufferings, with his
strong enemy Satan and with his potent seed, according to Gods declaration of
the combat in Genesis 3. 15. But the LXX render this last phrase passively, he
was delivered to death (for our sins,) and their translation is also used by
the Apostle in Romans 4. 25. So then, Christ was both delivered to death by God,
and he did also deliver himself (actively) into the hands of sinners, Mark 14.
41. and after this sort it was, that he was delivered to death passively, and
that he did also pour out his soul to death actively, by delivering himself
into the hands of his envious combater Satan and to his potent seed, who had a
liberty of power given them in Genesis 3. 15. to do whatsoever the hand and
counsel of God had determined, Acts 4. 28. that is to say, they had a liberty
of power given them to do what ever they could do, to provoke his passions to
some sinful distemper or other, that so his death might not be made an
acceptable sacrifice to God: and to this end, they did pierce him in the
foot-soales, as a most wicked malefacter on the Cross, in the midst of two
other real malefacters. And, 4. In that respect it is that Esaias in the next
words says, He was numbered with transgressors, or as the Hebrew word does also
signify, he was imputed (to be a transgressor) among transgressors: but yet
because they could not by all this ill usage spoil the perfection of his
obedience to the Laws of the combat, God accepted of his sufferings as of his
consecration and of his death, as of a most perfect and acceptable sacrifice,
and as of the meritorious price of his reconciliation, for the redemption of
all believers from Satan's head-plot. And, 5. By his said obedience in his
combat of sufserings and in his death and sacrifice, he is said to bear the
sins of the many, but how, not by taking their guilt upon him, as if God did
impute to him the sins of the elect, (as Mr Norton holds;) but he bare away
the guilt of their sins from them, by procuring his Fathers reconciliation to
them, by his said meritorious obedience in his combat of sufferings, and in
his death and sacrifice. And by the virtue of that everliving merit, he does
still make intercession for all believing transgressors. And thus I have given
the true sense of the whole 12th verse, as it has its dependence on Genesis 3.
15. And in the beginning of chapter 20. I have more fully explained the true manner
how Christ bare our sins.

6. It is said in Acts 2. 23. Him being delivered by the determined counsel and
fore-knowlrdge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. This internal counsel or covenant of God in Trinity was first externally
declared to our fallen Parents in Genesis 3. 15. for there and then God did tell
Satan, that he should have a liberty of power by his wicked instruments the
Scribes and Pharisees, to put the seed of the woman to an ignominious death, by
piercing him in the foot-soales on the Cross: and after this sort it was that
God delivered him unto Satan's power: and Christ did often put his Disciples in
remembrance thereof, saying, Let these things sink down into your ears, for the
Son of man shall be delivered into the bands of men, Luke 9. 44. Luke 18. 31,
32, 33. Luke 24. 7. Mark 10. 33, 34. Matthew 17. 22.

7. It is said in Romans 4. 25. Christ was delivered for our offenses, that is to
say, God gave unto Satan and unto his seed, a liberty of power to apprehend
him, and to pierce him in the foot-soales as a wicked malefactor on the tree,
according to his declared consel in Genesis 3 15. to try whether Satan could by
any ill usage, provoke his passions to any sinful distemper: but in case he
could not prevail, then it was the declared will of God, that he would accept
of his perfect obedience to the death of the Cross, as of the meritorious act
of his obedience, for the procuring of his Reconciliation to all believers. In
this sense only God delivered Christ to be put to death for our offenses, and
raised him again for our justification: and in that God raised him, it is an
undeniable proof that he accepted of his death, as of a most perfect and
pleasing sacrifice for the procuring of his reconciled forgiveness. But Mr
Norton does most miserably spoil the sense of this blessed Text, for he says
in page 30. "That Christ was delivered to the curse, and to the execution of
justice for sin in our stead.

8. Christ said thus unto Nicodemus in John 3. 16. God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. This word, so loved the world, means, that
God so loved it, as it is expressed in the coherence, in verse. 14, 15. namely
so, as not to spare, but to give his only begotten Son into the hands of his
envious combater Satan, to be lifted up as a sinful malefactor on the Cross,
even so, as the brazen Serpent was lifted up upon a pole, in Numb. 9. 21. or
just so, as God had declared it in Genesis 3. 15. Thou Satan shall have a liberty
of power to pierce the seed of the woman in the foot-soales, as a wicked
malefactor on the tree, to try if thou can conquer him in his patience and
obedience: but if thou can not after this sort conquer him, then he shall
conquer thee by his righteous performance of his great combat of sufferings.
And in this sense it is that Christ said unto the Jews in John 8. 28. When ye
have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am HE, namely, that
HE that is called the Seed of the woman in Genesis 3. 15. And again Christ said in
John 12. 32. If I be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men to me, this
he said, signifying what death he should dye. And, 3. Christ said thus unto
Pilate, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee
from above, John 19. 11. and from hence it follows, that Pilates power was
given to him from that liberty of power, which he had given unto Satan and his
seed in Genesis 3. 15. with Act. 4. 28, 29.

2. But on the contrary, Christ did conquer Satan and his seed that had the
power of death over him, by his righteous performance of his great combat of
sufferings, Heb. 2. 14. Phil. 2. 7, 8. for by this righteous performance he
merited his Fathers reconciliation, and by that means he did break the Devils
head plot all to pieces, Genesis 3. 15. Austin says in The City of God, page 34.
"Worthily is that spirit entitled great, that can endure calamities rather
than avoid them. And says Aust^n de Trinit. lib. 13. cap. 13. It pleased God
for the delivering man out of the Devils power, that the Devil should be
conquered by justice, and not by might, and what else is the justice (says he)
by which the Devil is conquered? but the justice of Jesus Christ, for when the
Devil found in Christ nothing worthy of death, he did notwithstanding kill him:
and surely (says he,) justice requires that the debtors which Satan held,
should be set free, (believing in him) whom Satan slew without any debt. And
this (says he) is, That by the which we are said to be justified Austin
describes a believing sinners justification, 1. By the meritorious cause of
Christ's blood And, 2. By the formal cause of Gods forgiveness, without joining
thereto the imputation of Christ's moral righteousness.
in the blood of Christ, because that blood of his was utterly void of sin,
being shed for the remission of sins; with this justice (says Austin) the
Devil was conquered. And of this justice of Christ by his righteous performance
of his great combat of sufferings. he did actuate his death as a most pleasing
sacrifice; of the which I have spoken more at large in my former printed Reply,
p. 317, 356.

9. The justice of Christ in his sufferings and death, was performed in all
things just so as his Father had commanded him, John 14. 13. and as it was
written Luke 22. 37. and according to Gods acceptable will, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10. that is to say, just according to Gods first declared will in Genesis 3.
15. and this righteous performance is truly and properly the meritorious price
or ransom of man's redemption from Satan's head-plot, 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Cor. 7.
23. 1 Pet. 1. 19. Mat. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6.

10. Christ said thus in John 6. 51. The bread that I will give is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world, that is to say, I will give my
humane nature to be combated withal, by my proclaimed enemy the Devil and his
potent seed, according to Gods declaration thereof in Genesis 3. 15. that so I may
be consecrated or made perfect thereby in my obedience to the death, even to
the most shameful and painful death of the Cosse, that so I may thereby make
my death to be a most perfect and meritorious sacrifice, for the procuring of
my Fathers reconciliation for the life of the believing world: this is the true
bread that I will give for the life of the world.

11. It is said in Gal. 1. 4. Christ gave himself for our sins, that he might
deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God our
Father: from hence it does also follow, that it was the will of God the Father,
that Christ should give himself as a voluntary combater, into the hands of his
old proclaimed enemy the Devil and his seed, to endure the utmost of his
warlike enmity, that so he might conquer him by his righteous performance of
that great combat of his sufferings: and that God should be so well pleased
therewith, that he would accept it as the meritorious price and procuring cause
of his reconciliation, and so consequently that it might be for our redemption
from this present evil world, Luke 1. 74.

12. Paul says in Gal. 2. 20. I live by the faith of the Son of God, who
loved me and gave himself for me, that is to say, he gave himself into the
hands of his old proclaimed combater, to undergo the worst of his warlike
enmity, according to Gods declaration of the combat in Genesis 3. 15. that so it
might be for his consecration, or for the perfecting of his obedience, before
he could make his death to be accepted as a meritorious sacrifice.

13. Paul says thus in Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in love, as Christ has also loved
us, and has given himself for in, an offering and a sacrifice to God, for a
sweet smelling savor. The great love of Christ to believing sinners, is here
set out by his giving of himself for us; 1. To be an offering. And, 2. To be a
sacrifice 1. To be an offering, by offering himself to be consecrated or made
perfect in his obedience, by his consecrating sufferings from his envious
combater Satan, according to Gods first declaration of the combat in Genesis 3.
15. And, 2. In making his death in the perfection of his said obedience, to be
accepted as a sacrifice of a sweet smell unto God, for the meriting of his
reconciliation to all believing sinners: by the which they are perfectly
redeemed and justified from the guilt of sin, and received into his special
favor, unto the adoption of the heavenly inheritance.

14. Paul says in verse. 25. Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, namely, to endure the utmost malice
of his combater Satan, that so it might be for his consecration, or for the
perfecting of his obedience to his sacrifice, according to the first
declaration of the combat in Genesis 3. 15. and that he might by his said
righteous performance of the combat, merit his Fathers reconciliation to all
believing sinners, and that so he might present them to himself as a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, verse. 27.

15. It is said in Titus 2. 14. Christ gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous
of good works; that is to say, he gave himself to be combated withal by his
old proclaimed enemy the Devil and his potent seed, according to the first
declaration of the combat in Genesis 3. 15. that so he might be consecrated
thereby to his sacrifice, or that so he might be made perfect in his obedience
thereby, before he could make his death to be accepted as a pleasing sacrifice,
for the procuring of his Fathers reconciliation to all believing sinners, for
their redemption from the guilt of all their iniquities, and for their
purification, i.e. for their justification from the guilt of all their sins;
and that so they might be his peculiar people, and might be zealous of good
works, in their sanctified course of life. But Mr Norton does pervert the true
sense of this Scripture, for in page 174. he makes it to say, that Christ
suffered the curse of the Law in our stead, and that curse he expounds to be
the essential torments of Hell in our stead.

16. Paul says thus in Heb. 2. 9. Jesus was made a little (while) lower than
the Angels, through his sufferings of death; for in Genesis 3. 15. God had given a
liberty of power to the Devil to pierce him in the foot-soales as a sinful
malefactor, for a little while; but after he had suffered the worst of the
Devils malice for a little while, he was crowned with honor and glory as a
righteous conqueror; for he conquered the Devil by his righteous performance
of the combat, and then in the perfection of that righteous performance, he
actuated his death formally, as a most pleasing and meritorious sacrifice: for
by that performance, he merited or procured his Fathers reconciliation for all
believing sinners. This was the true way and means, by the which Christ
conquered Satan, and broke his head-plot in pieces, as touching the elect
number: and from thence it follows in the next words, That by the grace of God
he should taste of death for every man, (that is to say, for every sanctified
man, as it is explained in ver. 11.) Mark I pray, how the Apostle says, that
it came from the special grace of God to the humane nature of Christ, that he
should be advanced to such an eminent office as to taste of death, (namely, as
a conquering combater, from his old proclaimed enemy Satan and his potent
seed,) that so it might become the meritorious price, or the procuring cause of
Gods reconciliation, for the redemption of every sanctified man: and so in like
sort it was, from the special grace and favor of God to the aforenamed
Captains in Sect. 1. that they were put upon such an eminent service as to
venture their lives in several warlike combats, for the redemption of his
Church from their oppressing enemies, as well as for their own advancement.

Mr Warren on Justific. says in page 243. "It was an act of Gods grace to
Christ, in that he tasted of death for every man, Heb. 2. 9. and that the
sufferings of his humane nature, united unto the Divine Person of the Son of
God, should be accepted as a ransom for us from eternal death. And he does
infer from these words, That Christ's death was not an act of pure justice,
but an act of justice mixed with grace. And I suppose I may truly add thereto,
that Christ's tasting of death was not any act of Gods vindicative justice at
all, but such an act of justice, as the performance of a combat is, when it is
performed according to the conditions of a voluntary and mutual contract: and
so consequently it was an act of Gods speical grace to advance the humane
nature to be the greatest conquering combater that ever was; for it was Gods
will that he should conquer Satan and his potent seed by righteousness,
namely, by his righteous performing of the great combat of his sufferings; for
it was Gods will, that by that performance, he should merit his reconciliation
for the redemption and justification of all believing sinners, from the guilt
of all their sins. (But Mr Norton gives a contrary sense of this Verse, for
says be in page 153. "Christ suffered not only a natural death, but also a
spiritual death, Heb. 2. 9. because he shed his blood together with the sense
of the wrath of God.)

17. And from thence the Apostle says in verse. 10. That it became him, (that
is to say, it became God the Father,) in bringing many sons to glory, to make
the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. And from hence it
does also follow, that all the sufferings which Christ underwent from the
malice of his proclaimed enemy Satan, are to be referred to Gods first
declaration of them in Genesis 3. 15. as to their first principle: yea, not only
his outward, but all his inward sufferings must be referred thither, because
all his inward sufferings in his heart and mind, did arise only from his
natural abhorrence of his ignominious usage, from his malicious combater Satan
and his seed, and not from the sense of Gods immediate wrath inflicted on him
from Gods imputing the sins of the elect to him; as Mr Norton does most
blasphemously affirm in page 38. and elsewhere often.

And indeed Christ could not have proved himself to be true Man, nor yet to be
a true Priest, if he had not manifested himself to be inwardly touched with the
seeling of our infirmities, from his outward sufferings from his combater Satan
and his seed. (Aquinas says in part 3. quaest. 14. art. 3. "That Christ was
made like us in bodily infirmities, as touching their nature and quality, but
not as concerning the original or cause of them: for by him they were
voluntarily assumed, but by us they are necessarily contracted, being the
deserved wages of sin. But on the contrary Mr Norton affirms, "That all the
sufferings of Christ were the deserved wages of sin, which God imputed to
him. But for further satisfaction, the Reader may see my former printed Reply,
page 96, 171, 218.) Neither could his death have been accepted of God as a
propitiatory sacrifice, unless Christ had finished the utmost period of his
consecrating sufferings, according to Gods first and future declaration of them
in Genesis 3. 15. Psa. 22. Isa. 53, etc. But as soon as God had proved his
obedience to be perfect by the great combat of his consecrating sufferings,
then, and not till then he was pleased to accept of his death, as of a most
pleasing propitiatory sacrifice, and as of the full meritorious price of his
reconciliation to all believing sinners.

18. It is said in Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch then, as the children are partakers of
flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through
death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil. In
these words observe: 1. That Christ took part of the same flesh and blood which
his children have, who are called in verse. 10. sons, and in verse. 11. his
brethren; so then by this union of his flesh, with the flesh of his children,
sons, and brethren, we may learn, that Christ did not take his flesh from any
reprobate progenitor, from Eve to the Virgin Mary: and consequently, that all
his Fathers and Mothers from Adam to the Virgin Mary were believers. And, 2.
Thence it follows, that Christ is the second Adam to all believers only, 1
Cor. 15. Romans 5. 14. and not to all mankind: and yet nevertheless, he does
tender salvation to all mankind, Christ died for all the world, upon condition
of their believing in him.
upon condition of their believing in him: but yet on the other hand, none else
can truly believe in him, but such only as are given to him by his Father to be
their Mediator, Joh. 17. 6, 11, 12.

2. From this Text it is also evident, that God had given a liberty of power to
the Devil and to his potent seed, to put Christ to death: but yet the Devil and
his potent seed were not able to put him to death formally, because Christ had
covenanted to be the only Priest in the formality of his death, And thus
through death, he destroyed him that had the power of death, in case he could
by his powerful temptations, have provoked his passions to some sinful
distemper or other. And, 2. The Devil had a power of liberty given him, to put
him to death, or to pierce him in the foot-soales on the Cross, by which power
the other two thieves were put to death formally, but Christ though he wanted
not strength of nature, yet he of his own accord died before them.

19. It is said in Heb. 2. 18. In that himself has suffered being tempted, he
is able to succor them that are tempted. This Text does plainly tell us, that
all the sufferings of Christ were occasioned from his envious combater Satan,
according to Gods first declaration of the combat in Genesis 3. 15. and that they
were ordained to be for the trial of the perfection of his obedience.

But Mr Norton denies that Christ was tempted for trial only: for says he in
page 80. "Though Christ was forsaken in way of trial, yet not only, nor
principally in a way of trial: but his sufferings (says he) were proper
punishments. And but a few lines before he said, "That Christ was a notorious
malefactor, having upon him the guilt of the sins of the elect by imputation,
and that justly before God.

By these and such like assertions, he makes all the sufferings of Christ to
arise from the demeritorious cause of sin imputed to him, and thereby he does
utterly destroy the meritorious cause of Christ's sufferings, in as bad, or
rather in a worse manner than Socinus does; for as Socinus makes no meritorious
cause of the sufferings of Christ, so Mr Norton makes no proper meritorious
cause of the sufferings of Christ, because he makes the sufferings of Christ to
arise from the proper demeritorious cause of sin imputed to him: and so
consequently he makes the sufferings of Christ to be proper punishments from
sin imputed. But in this Austin is as quite contrary to Mr Norton as I am,
for Austin affirms, "That Christ had his infirmity, not from sin as we
have, but from his own power. And I have cited Aquinas to that sense, at N. 17.
And the Apostle affirms the same truth in Heb. 5. 8, 9. Though he were a
Son, yet learned he obedience, by the things which he suffered: and being
made perfect, (thereby in his obedience) he became the author of eternal
salvation to all that obey him. But I have more at large showed, how Christ's
obedience was made perfect by his consecrating sufferings, in my former printed
Reply, in p. 92, 93, 170, 236, 294, 297, 309, 319, 344, 386, 408, 416, 427,
429, 430.

20. Our Savior said thus to his Disciples, in Matthew. 20. 28. The Son of man
came not to be ministered unto, but to give his life a ransom for the many. The
Greek word Lutron here translated a ransom, does not properly signify a
ransom, but in a metaphorical sense only, for it comes of (...) to unloose any
thing that is bound with any kind of fastening or restraint: and from thence
Lutron is metaphorically put for a ransom, or for a price of redemption,
because that price does unloose or set at liberty such as are in bondage, and
because Christ's combat of sufferings from his envious combater Satan, was
performed in perfection of obedience to Gods will, as it was declared in Genesis
3. 15. therefore God did accept of that performance, as of the Covenant-price,
for the procuring of his atonement for the ransom and redemption of believing
sinners, for their bondage or obligation to condemnation.

2. It is in this sense also that the LXX put Lutron in a metaphorical sense,
for the Hebrew word Caphar, which properly signifies to cover, (any thing,) but
in a metaphorical sense it is often put for atonement or reconciliation; for
as soon as Gods atonement is procured by Christ's sacrifice, then his angry
face against sin is covered, and then the sinner that believes, is set at
liberty for the condemning power of sin.

1. The LXX put Lutron for Caphar in Numb. 35. 31, 32. ye shall take no Caphar,
(i.e.) no covering, or no atonement, or no satisfaction to cover the face of
justice against the manslayer. Or as the LXX render it, ye shall take no
Lutron, or no price of redemption for the manslayer, buthe shall surely be put
to death. Neither, ^. Shall ye take a ransom for him that is fled to the City
of his refuge, as in verse. 32.

2. The LXX put Lutron for Caphar, in Exodus 21. 30. in a metaphorical sense,
for a price of atonement, or of redemption, or of satisfaction: all these
terms are indifferently used for the same thing by several translations.

3. The LXX put Lutron for Caphar in Prove. 6. 35. He will not regard (or life
up his face to) any ransom, (or to any price of redemption:) or as Theodosian
does render it, he will not regard any satisfaction, for satisfaction is
properly such a payment as may be refused, because it is not in the nature and
kind of that which is properly due; as for example, when a bond is forfeited,
recompense does not in strictness of Law satisfy the forfeit incurred, though
yet it is contrary to the natural equity of man to refuse such a recompense, as
makes up his full interest. But between God and man it is otherwise, because
God is not obliged by any thing that the creature can do, as receiving
advantage by it, but when his will is done in a way of satisfaction, then it is
accepted by him to that end: and this according to Vlpian 46. f. 111. l. 52.
satisfaction is that which succeeds instead of payment not made. And according
to Caius 2. f. 8. To satisfy, is to fulfill a man's desire: and God cannot be
obliged any otherwise, but by his own will to accept it to that end; but man is
bound by natural equity to accept of satisfaction, when the civil Law obliegeth
him not.

4. The LXX put Lutron for Caphar, in Exodus 30. 12. They shall give every man
the ransom, or, the price of redemption for his life to the Lord. And says
Ainsw. "This redeeming of their lives with money, taught them says in Christ's
blood, who was to redeem his people, not with the price of silver and gold, but
with his own precious blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.

2. Consider that this price which the Israelites gave, was but half a shekel
for every man's life: and with this price of redeeming their lives, (or at least
with some part of it) they bought the public sin and trespass-offerings, which
were offered for the procuring of Gods reconciliation, that so their lives
might not be taken from them, as it was done from some others.

3. From this typical price we may see the reason why the personal service of
the seed of the woman, in venturing his life in his great combat of sufferings
from Satan and his potent seed, is called a price in 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. namely,
because God covenanted in Genesis 3. 15. that the righteous performance of that
combat by the seed of the woman, should be accepted of him as of the
meritorious price of his reconciliation, for the ransom of the many from
Satan's head-plot. And in my former printed Reply, I have showed more at large,
that the essential form of this price is sounded on the Covenant between the
Trinity, in page 122, 130, 182, 183, 256, 293, 297, 308, 316, 341, 336.

Sometimes a voluntary gift of great worth, that is intentionally given for the
procuring of the reconciliation of an offended party, does fail of being
accepted; for though Moses did offer his life to God to procure his
reconciliation to Israel, yet God refused it: as I have showed it in my former
Book, page 181, 182. And Mr Baxter says, in Aphoris. p. 59. "That voluntary
service without a Covenant, does not certainly and always merit. And, 2. It is
observed by Mr Woodbridge, that a Covenant is to make due: "For says he in p.
338. if the condition had been the payment of 6d for what is worth a 100lb,
that 6d being paid, by virtue of the Covenant becomes proportionable unto that
which is worth a 100lb, otherwise it could not make it a due debt. This I
believe is a sound assertion, and so consequently Jacobs mess of pottage being
by a mutual Covenant given by him, and accepted by Esau for his birthright, it
did truly entitle Jacob to it, Genesis 25. 31, 32, 33. And, 3. Hence it does also
follow, that those Divines say truly, That neither Christ, nor any thing that
Christ could do, was of it self the meritorious price of man's redemption,
until that which he did and suffered was made the meritorious price, by a
mutual Covenant between the Trinity, which Covenant was first declared in Genesis
3. 15. as I have often expounded it.

21. It is said in 1 Timothy 2. 6. That Christ gave himself a ransom for all. I
have showed before at N. 20. that nothing else was ordained to be the price of
man's redemption but the personal service of Christ, in venturing his life in
the great warlike combat of his sufferings from Satan and his potent seed,
according to Gods declaration of the combat in Genesis 3. 15. and that Christ was
not to conquer Satan by might, namely, not by the power of his Godhead, but by
the righteous performance of the combat in his manhood: and therefore because
he performed the said combat in perfection of obedience, he did thereby merit
Gods reconciliation for the redemption of all believing sinners from Satan's
head-plot.

But says Mr Norton in page 145. "The Greek word in Mat. 20. 28. and in 1 Timothy
2. 6. do signify, not only a price, but a satisfactory price: and says he in
page 174. besides the shedding of his blood he suffered a supernatural death.

Norton does stretch the Greek word in these Scriptures, beyond the true sense
and meaning of the context, (as he does also in sundry other Greek words) 2. I
showed before at N. 20. that the Greek word in Matthew. 20. 28. does not in its
first proper sense signify a price of redemption, but in a metaphorical sense
only. 2. The said Greek word is used in Luke 21. 28. and in Acts 7. 35. without
any such kind of satisfaction. 4. His second Scripture cited from 1 Timothy 2. 6.
does not mean such a kind of satisfaction as he does cite it for. I grant that
Anti-Lutron is often used for a mutual redemption of one prisoner for another
by way of exchange: but in that sense Christ did not redeem sinners, for then
those Prisoners that he redeems should also redeem him by exchange. It follows
therefore, that this Greek word must not be taken in its most usual sense, but
it must be taken in a more general sense, to signify any kind of thing that is
given by a mutual contract, for the redemption of captives: so then, it is the
mutual contract that does make such or such a performance to be the full price
of redemption; and of this see more in my former Book, p. 125, etc. 5. I grant,
that Christ suffered a supernatural death in the formality of it, by his own
priestly power, but not the second supernatural death of his soul, under the
essential torments of Hell, as Mr Norton does expound it. The Apostle affirms
the contrary, namely, that Christ is the mediator of the New Testament through
death, for the redemption of transgressions, Heb. 9. 15. and this death he does
compare to the death of a testator, which makes his Testament valid, namely, to
a true bodily death, verse. 16. for where a testament is, there must of
necessity be brought in the death of the Testator. The Apostle should have made
a wrong inference from this comparison, in case no other death of Christ could
have made the New Testament valid, but the death of his soul, under the sense
of Hell torments, as Mr Nortons kind of arguing does carry it.

But says Mr Norton in page 130. "Christ did not only suffer for our good,
but also in our place or stead.

Reply, that Mr Norton does oversence the two said Scriptures, because he makes
the sufferings of Christ in our place and stead, by way of counterpassion to be
the counter price of our redemption, from Gods vindicative wrath, through his
imputing the sins of the elect to Christ. But I have showed, that this
fictitous supposed price of our redemption, cannot be called a meritorious
price, but rather the demeritorious cause of his sufferings.

22. The Apostle Peter does thus describe the meritorious price which Christ
performed for our Redemption, in 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of
a Lamb without blemish and without spot. But Mr Norton does thus answer it in
p. 147. "If this argument be of force, that Christ has redeemed us by a price,
then he needed not to have redeemed us by his death, but by money or money
worth.

chap. 14. at Reply 9. that the half shekels were therefore accepted, for the
full price of redeeming the Israelites lives from death, because God by his
free Covenant, had covenanted to accept them for the full price of redeeming
their lives from death. And, 2. Because God appointed this money, or part of it
at least, to buy the public sacrifices, which were to be offered for the
procuring of his atonement, for the redemption of their lives from death. And
it is from this typical price that the blood of Christ which he shed in his
victorious combat of sufferings, in obedience to Gods declared will in Genesis 3.
15. is called the price of our redemption.

23. It is said in Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, when he was made a curse for us, namely, when he suffered the ignominious
death, of being crucified upon a tree, which has relation not only to Deuteronomy.
21. but also originally to Genesis 3. 15. Thou Satan shall pierce him in the
foot-soales.

The Greek word (...) translated redeemed, is drawn from a verb that signifies
to buy, and of (...) a market; therefore according to the proper signification
of this word, this Text may be read thus, Christ has bought us from the curse
of the Law by a Covenant-price, or by a market Covenant-price. And the Apostle
Peter does assure us, That this Covenant-price is not made with corruptible
things, as with silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb, without blemish and without spot; namely, by his unblemished and
spotless performance of his warlike combat of sufferings, from his envious
combater Satan and his potent seed. The which righteous performance was
accepted of God as the meritorious price or procuring cause of his atonement,
for the redemption of all believing sinners from the guilt of sin, and so
consequently from the curse of the Law: and in which combat, God gave the
Devil a liberty of power to put Christ to death, by piercing him in the
foot-soales as a sinful malefactor on the tree, to try if he could by any
means provoke his passions to some sinful distemper or other; but because he
could not prevail to provoke his passions to any sinful distemper, God
accepted of the perfection of his obedience, both in his combat of sufferings,
and in his death and sacrifice, as of the meritorious market-price, or as of
the Covenant-counter price, for the procuring of his reconciliation for the
redemption of all believing sinners from the curse of the Law.

2. As God is said to sell his people, when he does for their sins deliver
them into their enemies hands, Psalm. 44. 13. so on the contrary, he is said to
buy them, or to redeem them, when he does by any means whatsoever, deliver them
out of their enemies hands, Isaiah 52. 2. And from thence it follows, that
those kind of means by the which they are delivered or redeemed, may be truly
called the price of their redemption.

3. Buying and redeeming are used as terms convertible, in Ruth 4. 4, 6, 10. 2 Samuel 24. 21, 24. Numb. 5. 8. Jer. 32. 7, 8, 9, 14, 44.

4. Any lawful means that is used to get any desirable thing into a man's
possession, may be called buying, Prove. 21. 16. and in this sense the labor or
pains of the mind is called the price that must be given to buy the truth,
Prove. 23. 23. and to buy wisdom, Prove. 17. 16. But in case Christ had suffered
Gods vindicative wrath from sin imputed to him, it could not (in a proper
sense) be called the meritorious price of the redemption of sinners: because
that kind of suffering is proper punishment, and therefore it is no meritorious
price, neither for himself, nor for any others.

5. The price which Christ gave unto God for the redemption of believing
sinners, is also represented unto us by another typical Law of redemption from
Egypt. God appointed them to strike the blood of the unblemished Lamb upon the
two side-posts of their doors, Exodus 12. 5. and then the Lord promised to
accept of that blood (so used,) as of the Covenant-price of redeeming their
lives from that death, which would else have fallen upon them, as it did upon
all the firstborn of the Egyptians, Exodus 12. 3, etc. But this blood
(materially considered) was not in it self a valuable price, for the redemption
of the lives of all their firstborn from death. But yet by the virtue of Gods
positive Covenant, he was pleased to make it the full and formal price of
redeeming their lives from death, which else would as certainly have fallen
upon all their firstborn, as it did upon all the firstborn of Egypt.

6. The next day, (being the fifteenth day,) God brought them out of Egypt
with a stretched out hand, in the sight of all the Egyptians: and this full
deliverance of their bodies from their former servitude, is often called their
redemption, Exodus 15. 13, 16. And Asaph does record it thus in Psalm. 74. 2.
Remember thy Congregation which thou have gotten, (or purchased,) by thy
victorious conquest of the Egyptians, Deuteronomy. 7. 8. Deuteronomy. 9. 26. Deuteronomy. 13. 5.

24. In Luke 24. 19. Christ said thus to his Disciples at his last Supper, This
is my body which is given for you, namely, by the appointment, (or by the
eternal Covenant,) of the Trinity. And, 2. By my ready obedience to that
appointment, in combating with my proclaimed enemy Satan and his potent seed
for the victory, according to the first declaration of the combat in Genesis 3.
15. For until I am consecrated or made perfect in my obedience by my said
combat of sufferings, I cannot perform the office of a perfect consecrated
Priest in my death, neither can my death be accepted of my Father, as a most
perfect and pleasing sacrifice, or as the meritorious price or procuring cause
of his reconciliation, for the redemption of believing sinners from Satan's
head-plot.

25. It is said in Romans 8. 32. God spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up for us all. The Apostle expounds Gods not sparing his own Son, by his
delivering him up; but it is a senseless thing to say, that his delivering of
him up, was to himself, (or to his own vindicative wrath,) but to another,
namely, to his old proclaimed combater Satan, that he might do his worst, to
conquer his patience and obedience, by his ignominious usage, namely, by
piercing him in the foot-soales as the worst of sinful malefactors on the
Cross, according to Gods declaration of the combat in Genesis 3. 15. And thus
God delivered him up into the hands of sinners, Mark 14. 41. namely, into the
hands of notorious sinners, (as being the Devils arch-instruments,) that they
might have a liberty of power to crucify him. And in that sense it is, that
God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. And in
this sense also it is that God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
into the hands of his envious combaters, for the trial of his perfect
obedience. But Mr Norton affirms, that God spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up to himself to suffer his own immediate wrath as a guilty
sinner, by Gods imputing to him the sins of the elect: Yea, he says in page
10. "That God spared him no more than he spared the Angels that fell, 2 Pet. 2.
4. nor no more than he spared the old world, 2 Pet. 2. 5. and he affirms in
page 122. That God tormented him without any forgiveness, and spared him
nothing of the due debt: oh blindness and blasphemy extreme.

26. In Romans 5. 7, 8. The Apostle speaking of the greatness of Gods love, and
of Christ's love to sinners says, Scarcely for a righteous man will one dye,
yet perad venture, for a good man some would even dare to dye, namely, dare to
venture their life in a dangerous warlike combat, for the redemption of a good
man, (that has been a good benefactor,) from the tyranny of his warlike enemy:
as Gideon and Jephtah did, and as others may do, John 14. 13. But says the
Apostle in Romans 5. 8. God commends his love toward us, in that while we were
yet sinners, Christ died for us, according to Gods declaration of the manner of
his death, in Genesis 3. 15. and God did there Covenant, that in case the seed of
the woman did continue constant in his obedience, through all his combat of
sufferings, he would then accept it as a propitiatory sacrifice, and as of the
meritorious price of his reconciliation, for the redemption of believing
sinners, beyond the love of any friend to his friend. Ambrose says in his
Offices, lib. 1. page 82. "Friendship proceeding from the fountain of
benevolence, fears not to undergo the greatest dangers that may befall this
life, for a true and trusty friend. And Peter Martyr says in his Com. Pl. page
608. "The people of Rome yielded obedience unto Curtius and unto the Decij,
because they vowed themselves to the death, for the safeguard of the people.
But these things (says he) being compared with the love of Christ, are
nothing; For, 1. These men should otherwise have dyed, unto which Law (of
death) Christ was not bound, seeing in him it was as well to lay down his life,
as to take it again. 2. There was present glory set before their eyes, and the
praise of men. But (says he) the death of Christ as concerning humane
judgment, had shame joined thereunto on every side. 3. (Says he) They offered
to dye for their friends, but Christ died for the weak, for the wicked, for
sinners and for enemies: and for this see more in chapter 1. Reply 11.

27. Take notice, that not only the death of Christ, but his Resurrection and
Ascension also, are set out unto us, under the terms of a conquering combater.

1. His death is set forth as the death of a conquering combater, as I have
showed it abundantly from Genesis 31. 5. and Col. 2. 14, 15.

2. His Resurrection day (on the first day of the week) is therefore called The
Lord's Day, because he did arise on that day from death; as the Lord and
conqueror of Satan's head-plot, Rev. 1. 10.

3. He Ascended into Heaven, as the conqueror (of Satan's head-plot) and led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, (as conquerors use to do,) Ephesians. 4.
8.

4. A long time after his Ascension, he did commemorate his victorious Death,
Resurrection and Ascension, saying to his poor persecuted Church and people,
Him that overcomes, I will grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also
overcame (my persecuting combater Satan and his potent seed,) and am set down
with my Father in his throne, Rev. 3. 21. Therefore Let us run with patience
the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of
our faith; who for the joy that was set before him, end ured the cross, and
despised the shame, and is now set down at the right hand of the throne of God,
Heb. 12. 1, 2.

26. Having now given the true sense of the aforesaid twenty seven Scriptures,
by referring them to the first declaration of the warlike combat in Genesis 3.
15. as to their fundamental standard, for the better trial of their true sense
and meaning; together with several other Scriptures which I have cited in my
former Book, in page 146, 178, 269, 339, 344, 419. It may serve as a tried rule
to guide any deliberate Expositor to a right understanding of all the other
Scriptures, that speak any thing of the sufferings of Christ, namely, to
refer them to this standard in Genesis 3. 15. and through Gods blessing, they
shall find this standard to be of singular use, to guide them to a right
exposition of them.

Sect. 4.
Proving that Mr. Nortons description of Christ's meritorious obedience, is
nothing else but a heap of mistakes: For, He says in page 238. " The
meritorious cause is the whole legal obedience of Christ, consisting in his
habitual conformity, together with his active and passive obedience, from the
instant of his Incarnation to his Passion inclusively, performed by him as
God-man, our Mediator, and Surety, in way of Covenant, according to the order
of justice.



1. I have showed that the meritorious cause does not lie in any natural habit;
nor yet

2. In Christ's active obedience to the Moral Law of nature: But in the Mr
Nortons description of Christ's merit by his obedience to the Moral Law of
nature, is a false description.
performance of such actions only as depend upon the voluntary election of his
will, in pursuance of the conditions of his voluntary Covenant, as it was first
declared in Genesis 3. 15. which was, that he would undergo his combat of
sufferings, for his consecration or for the perfecting of his obedience, in his
death and sacrifice: but this kind of obedience was not habitual to his
nature, neither was it any part of his moral obedience to the Moral Law of
nature; but it proceeded from his voluntary Covenant, and from the election of
his humane will, that so he might merit man's redemption thereby, Heb. 10. 7, 8,
9. John 10. 17. John 17. 19.

3. Peter Martyr does thus define a sacrifice in his Com. Pl. par. 4. page 220.
(...) obedience can properly be (...) meritori^us, but such only as are
distinguished from natural actions, by the voluntary election of the will.
"it is a certain voluntary action, which (says he) I have therefore said,
because there be some actions which they call natural: but those action (says
he) seeing they depend not of man's choice, cannot be called voluntary, and
therefore consequently, they cannot be called meritorious.

From hence I do thus reason, That seeing the whole legal obedience of Christ,
consisting in his habitual conformity, together with his actual obedience to
the Moral Law of nature, depended not on the voluntary election of his will; it
cannot be called his meritorious obedience, because it was essentially and
habitually natural to his humane nature, to perform that obedience.

This distinction upon Christ's obedience does clearly overthrow Master Nortons
foresaid description of merit, and of this see more in Chap. 4. at N. 5, 6, 9,
11, 12. and see that Argument which I have cited from M. Forbes in chapter 5. at N.
13.

4. Mr Norton does also err as much in the meritorious cause of Christ's
sufferings, because he makes him to suffer our vindicative punishments, from
the demeritorious cause of sin imputed to him. But I have abundantly showed,
that Christ's sufferings were properly meritorious, because he performed them
all in perfection of obedience, according to the Laws of the combat in Genesis 3.
15. before he could make his death to be accepted as a well-pleasing sacrifice,
and it was by that performance that he merited his Fathers reconciliation to
all believing sinners: but this combat of his sufferings was not inflicted on
him as upon a guilty sinner, because he performed the same from his voluntary
Covenant, according to the voluntary election of his will.

Peter Martyr says in his Com. Pl. page 134. "If obedience be not the root of
a sacrifice, it becomes deadly to them that offer it. He places the merit of
a sacrifice in obedience, and not in the pains it suffers; and therefore
Christ said just before he under went the great combat of his sufferings, For
their sakes I sanctify my self, John 17. 19. or, I set my self apart to
perform my said combat of sufferings, in all perfection of obedience to my
Fathers declared will in Genesis 3. 15. or, I consecrate my self, The ancient
Divines taught, that Christ's fear and sorrow in the Garden was not inflicted on
him from Gods wrath, but that he ass^med it from his own humane will.
(by my performing of my combat of sufferings, in obedience to my Fathers
will,) as the typical Priests did, before they could offer any acceptable
sacrifice unto God, as in Exodus 29. 1, 21, 33, 35. and then in obedience to
Gods will, (as soon as he came into the Garden,) he did take upon him man's true
humane affecti^ns of fear and sorrow, (in a transcendent manner,) in relation
to his approaching sufferings, from his envious combater Satan and his potent
seed: which affections were at the first inflicted by Gods wrath upon Adam, as
a true punishment for his original sin. But in that sense they were not
inflicted on Christ, but he assumed them at his own will, as it is well
observed by Aquinas, whose words I have cited before at N. 17, and 19. and
before him Austin said the same in John, Tract. 49. "Thou art troubled against
thy will, Christ was troubled because he would: It was in his power to be
affected thus, or thus, or not to be affected; where there is sovereign power,
(in the will) there infirmity is governed according to the direction of the
will. And says he in Tract. 60. "Christ was not troubled by the compulsion of
any, for when he thought it needful, he stirred by his own power his humane
affections: and thence it follows, that the less his natural necessity did
urge him, the more acceptable was his obedience to God. Christ therefore did
not admit these affections and infirmities of man's nature, through the want of
power to repress them, but he assumed them by his voluntary will, in obedience
to the Laws of the combat, that so they might be accepted as meritorious
obedience. And to this sense also does Jerome speak, "The passions of Christ
(says he) did always follow his reason, when they began first to arise; and
generally the ancient Divines do affirm, That Christ's natural affections and
infirmities did never prevent his will, and that nothing in him was forced, but
all was voluntary. And in my former printed Reply, page 367. I have cited
Damasen to this sense. And I have also showed in this Book, in chap. 1. Sect. 4
that if Adam had not sinned, he should never have been troubled with the
objects of fear and sorrow, and therefore should have been free from those
passions. But as soon as he was under the guilt of original sin, many objects
of fear and sorrow did present him, and then these affections were irregular,
and were inflicted on him as a punishment for his original sin.

5. Mr Norton does also much err in the meritorious cause of Christ's
sufferings, because he makes all Christ's sufferings to be inflicted on him,
according to the order of justice; and by his order of justice, he means
Court-justice, where the imputation of sin is the demeritorious cause of
inflicting punishments upon delinquents. In this form he does all along put the
sufferings of Christ, and not at all into the proper meritorious cause. But on
the other hand, I do all along put the sufferings of Christ into that order of
justice, that belongs properly to merit, namely, to meritorious combaters,
according as it was also done in Olympic Courts of justice: in the which
Courts of judicature, their imputation of any sin against the Laws of the
combat, did cause such a combater to lose the prize; and such a transgressor
was the Devil and his potent seed, in their warlike combating against Christ;
and therefore the Devil did according to the Laws of the combat, lose the
prize of the elect. And on the other hand, the righteous performer of that
combat was Christ, (the seed of the woman,) and therefore he did win the
prize, namely, all the elect. In this way and order of justice, I do go all
along in the point of Christ's sufferings, and so consequently I do make all his
passive obedience to be properly meritorious: and for this see more in my
former printed Reply, in chapter 6. p. 96. chapter 12. Reply 12 chapter 14. p. 256.

But says Mr Norton in p 238. "An essential part of the Office of Christ as
Mediator, was to stand as our Surety, to pay our debt, even to the death,
(namely, to suffer the execution of divine justice, to satisfy the curse due
to sin, (as he does express himself in page 52.) during which space only,
his Mediatorship has an influence into the meritorious cause.

Adams first sin, in eating the forbidden fruit, by the which sin he did
fully break the Covenant of nature: and he makes him to be guilty also of all
the personal sins of all the elect, (by Gods imputation) as the only
obligations to all his sufferings.

And says he in p. 136. "The imputation of the sins of the Elect to Christ,
is the cause (namely, it is the demeritorious cause,) of suffering the wrath of
God due to them. And (says he in page 143.) redemption is by way of
suretiship, when the Redeemer delivers the redeemed by putting himself into
the place and stead of those he does redeem.

chap. 11. and therefore as I have often showed the sufferings of Christ are no
otherwise imputed to us, than in the nature of a meritorious cause, moving God
to perform those terms of his reconcilement, which he had covenanted with
Christ to perform to all such sinners, as should believe in Christ according
to Gods declaration in Genesis 3. 15. And this is also made evident by Paul in
Romans 5. by the opposition which he makes between the disobedience of Adam, and
the obedience of Christ, in verse. 12, 18, 19. he does impute our justification
from sin to the obedience of Christ. And in the coherence of this fifth
Chapter, he does apply it to that kind of obedience, that did belong to his
death, as in verse. 8. While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us: and says
he in verse. 9. Being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him: and says he in verse. 10. We are reconciled unto God by the death
of his Sin: and from the merit of this passive obedience of Christ, he
infers a comparison between the demerit of Adams sin, in verse. 12. and the
merit of Christ's passive obedience in verse. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

2. If Mr Norton had been but as well versed (as he ought to have been,) in the
true sense of divine and humane Laws, he might have found, that there is no
such way of redemption approved of, as his said assertion does hold forth: for
he does without any sound warrant affirm, that no other sufferings of Christ
could be satisfactory to Gods justice for man's redemption, but the same
essential Torments of Hell that the elect deserved, but by this assertion he
does but lead the blind in judgment into the ditch of error with himself.

Yea, Mr Norton does proceed so far into the point of Christ's suretiship,
that he makes him to be our surety bound in both his natures, in page 11, 86,
104, 238. and from that assertion he does conclude, in page 123. "That the
divine nature was angry, not only with the humane nature, but also with the
person of the Medaitor, because of sin imputed to him.

Arrian heresy, as I have also noted it in my former printed Reply, in page
174, 388. I grant, that he may find out some poor shift to excuse it, by the
communication of properties to both the natures in the person of Christ, though
I say also, that his humane nature is no part of his person properly so called,
but an appendix only, and therefore I believe he cannot find out a satisfying
answer.

2. I cannot but wonder why Mr Norton does make the merit of Christ to begin at
the first instant of his incarnation: I have showed the contrary in my
Dialogue, and in my former printed Reply, and also in this Book on the word
anoint, in Dan. 9. 24. namely, that his act in assuming our nature, was the
act of his divine nature only: and I think it is a received Maxim, that the
act of his divine nature cannot merit, because none else can merit any thing,
either for himself, or for any other, unless he have some thing to give or to
perform that is properly his own. But the Godhead is not properly Christ's
own, because it is common to the three persons; and from thence it follows,
that it must be the humane nature of the second person, which he assumed from
the substance of his Mother, into the unity of his divine person, that must
merit man's redemption.

3. It is very observable which Dr Jackson says in his seventh Book on the
Creed, page 346. "That the proper blood wherewith God is said to have purchased
his Church, was the blood of the Son of God, the second person in Trinity,
after a more peculiar manner, than it was the blood either of God the Father,
or of God the holy Ghost: as all other creatures are by common right of
creation and preservation. It was the blood of the Son of God alone by
personal union. If this Son of God had offered any other sacrifice for us
than himself, or the manhood thus personally united to him, his offering could
not have been satisfactory, because in all other things created, the Father and
the holy Ghost had the same right or interest which the Son had, he could not
have offered any thing to them which were not as truly theirs as his: only the
fruit of the Virgins womb, which he assumed unto the Godhead, was by that
assumption so made his own, as it was not theirs, but his own, by
incommunicable property of personal union. By reason of this incommunicable
property in the woman's seed, the Son of God might truly have said to his
Father, Lord thou have truly purchased the Church, [yet, with my blood;] but so
could not the man Christ Jesus say unto the Holy Ghost, Lord thou have paid the
ransom for the sins of the world, yet with my blood, [not with thine own.]

4. Mr Norton himself does acknowledge in page 205. That Christ his incarnation
was not a Mediatorly or Office-act, but an act constituting the person to that
Office.

This assertion of his does confute his former assertion. 2. If it were not an
office-act, then it was not meritorious obedience for a man's redemption. 3.
Peter Martyr does rightly ascribe the merits of Christ to his humane nature:
for in his Additions page 90. he writes thus to the Lords of Polania: "This
Christ who is God and man, suffered, was crucified and died: But, says he, if
it be demanded in the merit or respect of whether nature? it shall be answered
of the humane nature. And finally (says he in page 91.) the holy Scriptures
when they make mention of the Passion of the Lord, and of redemption thereby,
they speak always of the body, flesh and blood, and never of the divine
nature, that it suffered for us. From this sound assertion of Peter Martyrs it
follows, That when Christ suffered from his combater Satan, (it was of
necessity,) that the divine nature should forsake or leave his humane nature,
(by withdrawing its protection,) that so his humane nature might be left alone
to try masteries (in all his sufferings,) with his proclaimed combater Satan
and his potent seed; that so by his perfect obedience to the Laws of the
combat, even to the death of the Cross, he might thereby merit his Fathers
reconciliation for the redemption of believing sinners.

And to this sense does Austin ascribe the merit of Christ to his passive
obedience, he says in the City of God, lib. 9. cap. 15. "If it be true that
all men of necessity must be miserable whilst they are mortal, then must a mean
be sound, which is God as well as man; who by the mediation of his blessed
mortality, may help us out of this mortal misery, unto immortal happiness. And
says he in lib. 21. cap. 15. "Jesus Christ the Midiator of God and Man, made
himself mortal, that we might be made eternal. In these assertions Austin does
ascribe the merit of Christ to his voluntary obedience in making himself
mortal; just as Peter Martyr does. But I shall stand no longer on this point
here, because I have spoken more at large of the meritorious efficacy of
Christ's obedience in his bodily death and sufferings, in my former printed
Reply in chap. 6. chap. 12. chap. 14. and in chap. 17. and in my Dialogue I
have exemplified my meaning in this point by two similitudes in page 84. But Mr
Norton does revile those two similitudes, because they contradict his Heterodox
assertions, and in page 142. he does call them passionate blasphemy: but he may
see, that none did more blaspheme the truth, than the high Priests did, when
they called Christ's true assertions blasphemy, Matthew. 26. 65. Luke 5. 21. John
10. 33. and just so it falls out with Mr Nortons censures of my true
assertions, for (as I noted it before,) he affirms in page 143. "That our
redemption is by way of suretiship, as namely, when the Redeemer does deliver
the redeemed, by putting himself into the place and stead of those whom he does
redeem, and thus (says he) did Christ redeem the elect.

This way of our redemption by Christ, is no less than blasphemy: neither is
this way of redemption any where else to be found, but in the Laws of Vtopia,
or in the Laws of Tyrannical Conquerors, or in the fictions of Mr Nortons brain.

And after this sort he does all along put the merit of Christ's passive
obedience into the proper demeritorious cause of his sufferings, from Gods
imputing unto Christ the sins of all the Elect, to the end, he might be made
guilty of their deserved punishments.

4. It is also worthy of all due consideration which Peter Martyr says in
Judges, fol. 64. namely, "That by the propitiatory sacrifice of Christ, God is
made merciful unto us, by the power and just merit thereof, forasmuch as by
the death of Christ only, the eternal Father is reconciled to us. And, says
he, by the merit of this one only oblation, The sins of the Elect are
forgiven: and a little after he says thus, By the death it self of Christ,
which was the chief and only sacrifice, God was for this cause especially
pleased, because Christ to no other end did offer himself, but to fulfill the
will of his Father, and to obey him as it was meet. In these words Peter Martyr
does make the obedience of Christ in his bodily death and sufferings to be
properly meritorious, and that perfect obedience of his, he makes it to be the
root of his sacrifice.

Sect. 5.
MR. Norton does make the imputation of our sins to Christ, to be the
demeritorious cause of his suffering of vindicative punishments properly so
called in page 136. And, 2. He says in page 98. "we have already proved Christ
to be the greatest offender, as being imputatively guilty of all the sins of
the Elect, both hanged upon the Cross, and others. And, 3. He does in page 93.
approve of Luthers assertion, in making Christ the greatest sinner in the
world, by Gods legal imputation of all the sins of the Elect to him, as to
their legal surety. And, 4. Mr Norton does affirm in page 53. "That Christ was
the sin-offering in truth, and that he was made sin by Gods legal imputation,
even as the typical sin-offering was made sin by a typical imputation.

Jews did ever give such an exposition, as I have also showed in my former
printed Reply, page 203. and see Maymony cited by Ains. in Lev. 16. 6, 21, 22.
and consider that the legal sin-offering was offered for the procuring of Gods
atonement in Lev. 16. 10, 11.

2. I have also showed at large in my former printed Reply, in chap. 14. that
the legal sin-offering was in no other sense called sin, but as it was offered
to procure Gods expiation of sin, by his atonement and forgiveness: and in
that sense only does Maymony explain it, in the places aforecited by Ainsworth.

3. I hay showed that this phrase, God made him to be sin for us in 2 Cor. 5.
21. does not imply, that God imputed the guilt of all our sins to Christ, no
more than the like phrase in Esaias 53. 10. does imply, that Christ made himself
guilty of all our trespasses, for Esaias does there affirm that he made himself
Asham, a guilt or a trespass; or as the LXX translate it, he made himself sin
for us, which according to Mr Nortons absurd inference should found thus, he
made himself a trespass, (i.e. the most notorious Trespasser,) by imputing all
our trespasses to himself: and so consequently, he was his own accuser and his
own judge also, by inflicting upon himself all the curses of the Law, that are
due to all the sins and trespasses of all the Elect. But I have replied at
large to this absurd inserence in my former printed Reply in page 222. And yet
I will now add thereunto this remarkable observation from Mr Woodbridge, in
his Method. page 129. "To impute sin To impute sinn^ has but two senses in
Scripture.
(says he,) has but two senses in Scripture. 1. (Says he) it is taken for
the guilt of sin itself. 2. For the punishment of sin, and from thence he
concludes in page 130. "That the use of the word impute, will not allow us to
understand it of a man's imputing or charging sin upon himself, and therefore
(says he,) it is never used in all the Scripture, to signify the act of a
man, (or of Christ,) upon himself. (Vide Guil. Esthi. in Romans 5. 13.) but
perpetually the act of another, as of Paul to Philemon.

4. Because I would be certain that this observation of his is found and good,
I have perused all the places where the Hebrew word Chashub is translated to
impute, being about two hundred and forty. And I find, that the LXX have also
translated it by various Greek words, but it is never used for imputing sin to
a man's self. And I find also that it is a Maxim in Law, that self accusation,
or imputation of capital sins to a man's self, is no sure ground for a legal
Judge to inflict the punishment of death on such a person, because it does
sometimes fall out, that such as are weary of their lives, will impute capital
sins to themselves, to the end they may be put to death.

4. I have showed before in chap. 11. that there ought to be a wide difference
put, between a surety that is bound to perform a delinquents obedience for
money-matters; and such a surety as will be bound to perform all the active
obedience that the Law requires of delinquents, and that will suffer all his
capital punishments. (In case such sureties were admitted, (which indeed are
not admitted,) by the Laws of God, or by the Laws of any well-governed
Commonweal,) and the reason thereof is, because the Law it self does
determine as well of the person, as of the thing due.

5. I cannot but wonder why Mr Norton does call Gods imputing the guilt of the
sins of the Elect to Christ, A real imputation, seeing he denies that Christ
had any personal guilt: and thence it follows by necessary consequence, that
where there is no personal guilt of any Law transgressed, it can be no less
than injustice to impute sin to such an innocent person, Romans 4. 15. Romans 5.
13. Romans 7. 8. To impute sin really where there never was any real guilt of
sin, is all one as to affirm with the Papists, that the Bread and Wine after
consecration, is really transubstantiated into the very Body and Blood of
Christ, they are both alike real fictions: doubtless there can be no real
guilt imputed, where there never was any real sin committed, because sin and
guilt are relates in the same subject, and not sin in one subject and guilt in
another: But Mr Norton does affirm, in page 119. "That Christ was so really
guilty of sin, that it made him sensible of an accusing conscience. But this
blasphemous assertion can never be proved to be true, unless he can first
prove that Christ was a true sinner personally.

6. Whereas he affirms in page 98. that he has already proved Christ to be
the greatest offender, as being imputatively guilty of all the sins of Elect:
and in page 93. does approve of Luther in making Christ to be the greatest
sinner in the world, he does therein confound his reader in the right
understanding of Luther: for Luther does not make Christ the g^eatest sinner in
the world, from Gods legal imputation of the sins of the the Elect to Christ,
as to their legal surety as Mr Norton does, but he makes Christ to be the
greatest sinner, from a kind of Christ's personal union with the Elect, as I
have noted it before in chapter 11, ult.

But Mr Norton does reason the case thus in page 41. "If Christ bear our sins
in his body on the tree, 1 Peter 2. 24. (which the Dialogue has expounded to
be the punishment of sin,) then Christ bear guilt in the account of God,
because guilt and punishment are Relates.

Reply in page 82, etc. and in this Book in chapter 11 that Christ bare punishments
improperly so called, but not such proper vindicative punishments as Mr Norton
holds.

2. I do affirm, that not only guilt and punishments are Relates, but also tha^
these three, sin, guilt and punishment properly so called, are Relates in the
same subject only, and that in Scripture Language they are to be referred to
the sining persons* But this cannot be always affirmed of sin, guilt, and
punishment that is improperly so called; because it does sometimes fall out,
that sin, guilt, and punishment may be charged upon innocent persons: and in
this sense it is that Bathsheba said unto David in 1 Kings 1. 21. Else when my
Lord the King shall sleep with his Fathers, I and 1 Kings 1. 21.
my son Solomon shall be sinners, i. e we shall be accounted to be sinners;
and so consequently we shall be put to death for notorious conspirators against
Adonijab, though we are altogether innocent. And in th^s very sense it was tha^
Christ was accused by the Scribes and Pharisees to be a notorious sinner, and a
conspirator against Caesar, and accordingly he was condemned, both by the
sentence of the Jews and by Pilate, to bear our sins, namely, the punishment
of such sins in his body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And in this since it is,
That God sent his Son, (to combat with Satan and his potent seed for the
Victory,) in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. namely, to suffer as a
sinful malefactor, through the Jews imputation of sin to him. For as I
said a little before from Mr Woodbrige, to impute sin has but two senses:
and Dr Willet says the same in Daniel page 253. "First, Either in reference to
the fault it self. Or, Secondly, In reference to the punishment: And in this
latter sense, (says he) to impute sin, is adjudicare poenae reum, to adjudge
the guilty person worthy of punishment. And in this sense is the word taken in
2 Timothy 4. 16. All have forsaken me, I pray God it be not imputed unto them,
that is, I pray God he do not punish them for it, for God does not always
impute sin, or punish the sins of his people, Psalm. 103. 9. Esaias 57. 16.

But Christ was no guilty sinner in Gods account, but in man's account only,
when he bare our sins in his body on the tree.

3. As for this distinction between guilt and punishment, see more before in
chap. 11.

I come now to the proof of my assertion, namely, that sin, guilt and
punishment are Relates in the same subject. These three, 1. Sin. 2. Guilt. And,
3. Punishment, are correlates in one and the same subject and not siene in us,
and guilt and punishment properly so called to Christ.


1. Abimelech said thus unto Isaac in Genesis 26. 10. What is this thou have done
unto us, one of the people might lightly have lain with thy wife, and thou
should have brought [Asham] guiltilesse upon us, and from the fear of
punishment from God, Abimelech said in v. 11. to all his people, He that
touches this man or his wife, shall surely be put to death: or as the LXX
render it, he shall be guilty of death; but neither guilt nor punishment by
death, was due to any, until it related to the foregoing sin of touching
her. And thence it follows, that by Asham here is meant sin, guilt and
punishment, as correlates in the same subject, and not sin in one subject, and
guilt and punishment in another.

2. Asham in Psalm. 5. 11. is rendered [condemn as guilty,] but the Greek does
render it, judge or damn them; and the Chaldee says, make guilty, (or condemn
them.) And, 2. Because destruction and desolation abides such as are damned
for crime, therefore this word is also used for desolating, abolishing,
destroying, in Joel 1. 18. Prove. 30. 10. and in this sense it may be meant in
Psalm. 5. 11. Punish, or, make them desolate, O God. It is also said in Psalm.
34. 22. They that hate the just, shall be condemned as guilty: and so from this
Scripture it does follow, that sin, guilt, and punishment are correlates in
the same subject, and not in two subjects.

3. Mr Gataker in his Annotations on Jer. 2. 3. does read the words thus,
Israel was holiness to the Lord, all that devoured them trespassed, i.e. they
contracted guilt, or made themselves [Asham,] guilty of trespass against God,
and so liable to judgment, none that wronged them escaped without some
exemplary punishment, Exodus 17. 8, 14, 16. from hence it is also evident, that
sin, guilt, and punishment are correlates in the same subject, and not sin
in one subject, and guilt and punishment in another.

4. Our English Translators, and the LXX also do thus translate Nakah in Exodus
34. 7. he will not clearing clear (the guilty,) that is, (says Ainsw.) he will
in no wise clear, (acquit or hold innocent,) (or as the LXX render it (...),)
the guilty person, but will most certainly punish such persons. The Jerusalemy
Thargum expounds it, he will not clear sinners in the day of the great
judgment. The like is said in Numb. 14. 18. clearing, he will not clear the
guilty. This word (...) guilty, is also added to this Text by the LXX, and also
by our English Translators. And from thence it does also follow, that God will
in no wise clear, acquit, or hold innocent the person that is guilty of
impenitent iniquity, trespass and sin, i.e. he will not acquit or justify
an impenitent sinner, but will punish him for his iniquity: implying also
thereby, that he is ready to acquit or justify every penitent believer from
his iniquity, as he did the penitent publican, Luke 18. 13, 14. But I have
opened this Hebrew word more at large in chapter 18.

5. It is said of him that curses his Father or his Mother, his bloods shall
be upon him, Lev. 20. 9. that is, (says Ainsworth,) his death shall be upon
his own head, for he has caused it by his sin: and the Greek translateth it
(...), he shall be guilty; and the Chaldee says he is guilty, (or worthy to be
killed, and sin, guilt and punishment are often coupled together by the LXX
and the Chaldee in this Chapter, as in verse. 11, 12, 13, 16, 27. it is said of
all those notorious sinners that are mentioned in these verses, Bloods shall be
upon them, but the LXX and the Chaldee say, they shall be guilty or worthy to
be killed, and the like they say of the Hebrew word in Deuteronomy. 19. 10.

6. The Hebrew word Gnaven is often used for iniquity, guilt and punishment: it
is said in Job 15. 5. Thy mouth utters iniquity, but the LXX render it (...),
is guilty of iniquity; so in Psalm. 79. 8. Remember not against us former
iniquities, [means,] remember not against us the guilt of our former iniquities
to punish us for them: and therefore Gnaven is often put for punishment, as in
Psalm. 9. 13. And from hence it follows, that iniquity, guilt and punishment are
correlates in the same subject, and not in two subjects.

7. The Hebrew word Chata, is very often used. 1. For sin. 2. For guilt in
Deuteronomy. 24. 4. Genesis 41. 9. Lev. 4. 3, 14. Lev. 5. 2, 10, 13. And, 3. It is put
for punishment in Genesis 4. 7. and elsewhere very often.

8. The Hebrew word for wicked is put for sin, guilt and punishment, as in
Numb. 35. 31. The murderer shall be wicked to dye, but the LXX say, (...), he
shall be guilty to dye; his sin of murder shall make him guilty to be
punished with death. These three are correlates in the same subject and not in
two subjects, for no surety may be admitted to bear the guilt and punishment of
a murderer: Judah said unto Jacob his Father in Genesis 43. 9. If I bring not
back thy son unto thee, I will sin unto thee every day, not meaning thereby
that he would sin unto him every day by new offenses, but I will be guilty of
punishment for ever, or, daily.

9. The Hebrew word which is translated evil, is also put for sin, guilt and
punishment. See Ainsw. in Exodus 10. 10. and so in Jer. 18. 8. If the wicked
turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil (of punishment) that I thought
to do unto them.

10. It is said in Exodus 20. 7. Jehovah will not hold him guiltless that
takes his name in vain, that is to say, he will not leave him unpunished that
is guilty of that sin, or of any other capital sin, as it is also opened in 1
King. 2. 9. but such sinners shall be plagued, either in this world or in that
which is to come, if they repent not.

11. (...) is used copulatively in the New Testament for sin, guilt and
punishment, in the same subject, as in 1 Cor. 11. 27. Whosoever shall eat this
bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord. This guilt he expounds, to produce judgment to
himself, as in verse. 29. He eats and drinks judgment to himself, and not to
another. (...) signifies such a guilt, as makes a man subject or fast bound,
or tied to punishment, it makes him to be guilty of a penalty, and tied to
undergo it.

12. The High Priest propounded this question to the Council conceraing Christ,
What think you, you have now heard his blasphemy? they answered, he is guilty
of death, (for his sin of blasphemy,) Matthew. 26. 66. And in respect to that
sin, they condemned him in Mark 14. 64. To be guilty of death, or, worthy to
be punished with death. From hence it does also follow, that sin, guilt and
punishment, are correlates in the same subject, conjunctim and not divisim,
unto two subjects: and so in Mark 3. 29. He that blasphemeth against the holy
Ghost, shall never be forgiven, but is guilty of eternal condemnation.

By these several places it is evident, that sin, guilt and punishment
properly so called, are correlates in the same subject, and not sin to us,
and thereby guilt and punishment to Christ: he is no such surety for the Elect,
as to suffer their proper guilt and punishment; and this I have also showed by
other instances in my former printed Reply in p. 83, etc.

13. Mr Hotchkis in his Exercitation, page 30. does rightly connex these three
together. 1. Sin. 2. Guilt. And, 3. Reatus redundans in personam, guilt
running over from the sin upon the sinner. "And concerning guilt, (he says) it
is taken in these two senses. 1. For the deserving of punishment. And, 2. For
punishment it self deserved: and says he, let the Reader observe, that when we
commonly say, that the guilt of our sins was imputed to Christ, that saying
must be understood, as guilt is taken in the latter sense, (but not in the
former,) i.e. for punishment. But saving all due reverence to his person and
calling, I dare not approve of his sense of punishment, because I think I have
made a clear distinction between punishment, that is properly and improverly so
called in chap. 11. And there I have also showed, that the punishments which
Christ suffered are improperly, and not properly so called; for in case Christ
had suffered such punishments that are properly so called, it cannot be
avoided, but he must also be guilty of personal sin. To affirm therefore that
God did legally impute our sins to Christ, as the true cause of suffering the
essential torments of Hell, (as Mr Norton does) is all one, as to affirm that
Christ was a true sinner against Gods Laws. And it is a received Maxim, both
among the ancient and many late Divines, that none can possible suffer the
second death, until they be first guilty of the first spiritual sin: and none
else can be said to be guilty of that first death in sin, but the natural
generation of fallen Adam only. And, 2. None else can suffer the second death
of Hell torments, but such only whose names are not found written in the Book
of life, Rev. 20. 14. And thence it follows, that either Christ's name was not
found written in the Book of life, or else that he did not suffer the essential
torments of Hell for our redemption.

14. In my Dialogue in page 2. I did first state the point of the meritorious
price of man's redemption, to lie only in the merit of Christ mediatorial
obedience, which according to Gods determinate counsel and covenant, was to be
tried through his ignominious sufferings, from his malignant combater Satan and
his potent seed, who had a liberty of power given them to use him as a wicked
malefactor, by piercing him in the footsoales upon the Cross; and that this
perfect obedience was the meritorious price of man's redemption, Genesis 3. 15.
this Scripture and others to the same sense I have there cited in p. 3.

But Mr Norton does thus answer in page 17. "The meritorious mediatorly
obedience of Christ was performed in such a way of satisfaction unto justice,
as includes also a suffering of justice.



2. In my former printed Reply I have replied in page 130, etc. that the ground
of satisfaction to Gods justice, does not arise from Christ's suffering of those
very punishments that are threatened to sinners, for their transgression of the
first covenant of nature, that was made with Adam their public head, as Mr
Norton does make it to be; nor yet from those sufferings that are threated to
unbelieving sinners in the covenant of grace, for no man's debt of punishment is
paid immediately by the pains which Christ suffered. But (as I said before,)
the sufferings of Christ are imputed to us in the nature of a meritorious cause
properly so called, (and not in the nature of the demeritorious cause of sin
imputed to him,) namely, that God in consideration of his perfect obedience in
his combat of sufferings to the death of the Gross, does accept of his death
so performed, as of a propitiatory sacrifice for the procuring of his
reconciliation, by the which all believing sinners are redeemed and justified,
from the condemning power of all their sins. And the internal ground of this
satisfaction does arise only from the conditions that were made between the
Trinity in their eternal Covenant, wherein all the Trinity were equal
Covenanters, and all the Articles of that Covenant were internal positive Laws,
until it pleased God to declare them externally to our first fallen Parents in
Genesis 3. 15. under a proclaimed combat of enmity, between one single seed of
the poor deceived woman, and the potent seed of the subtle Serpent the Devil,
wherein the righteous performer was to have the victory: and so according to
the Laws of combaters, he only does merit the prize that does voluntarily
undertake to perform the combat with his opposite Champion, in perfection of
obedience to the Articles of those voluntary Laws and Covenants, which were
purposely made for the trial of masteries, whereby he only does merit the prize
that does strive lawfully, until he does overcome his opposite Champion
according to those Laws: suppose it were for the redemption of a certain number
of captives that had deserved death, justice might be as fully satisfied by the
performance of a combat, according to the Laws of a voluntary combat; as if
some voluntary surety should suffer their full punishments of death for their
redemption in their place and stead, and much better also, because neither God
nor man has ordained any such way of satisfaction to justice for the
redemption of condemned captives, namely, not by the counterpassion of a surety
in their place and stead: as I have opened the matter more at large before in
chapter 11, and in chapter 12.

Sect. 6.
AS Mr Norton has most miserably confounded the meritorious cause of Christ's
sufferings, with the demeritorious cause from sin imputed: so in like sort he
has confounded the meritorious cause of Christ's death in the for mality of it,
(namely, as it was made a propitiatory sacrifice,) with the demeritorious cause
of his death from sin imputed.

For thus he says in page 41. "Had Christ suffered death without sin imputed,
his death could not have been called a punishment, for (says he in page 255.)
there can be no punishment without sin: and says he in page 79. Christ in his
death was made sin imputatively, that is, he suffered the guilt and punishment
of sin: his death was joined with the curse, made up of the pain of sense, and
of the pain of loss. And he does often make Christ to suffer that death that
was threatened to Adam, for the breach of the Covenant of nature only in Genesis 2.
17. (which I have showed in chapter 1. was no other but a double spiritual death,)
as in page 10, 20, 23, 25, 140. and in page 83. he does make Christ to suffer
that kind of bodily death, which was threatened for the punishment of original
sin in Genesis 3. 19. And thus he does heap together all the curses of the Law,
and lays them upon Christ as upon a formal sinner.

Reply in page 145, 400, 401, 435. and in this Book also in chapter 1. at Reply 11.
that the death of Christ in the formality of it, (namely, in his last act of
separating his soul from his body, could not be a penal vindicative death,
neither from the threatening in Genesis 2. 17. nor yet from the threatening of Genesis
3. 19. because those penal Laws did threaten none else but sinners themselves.
And in my former printed Reply in page 356. I have showed from sundry
expressions of the ancient Divines, that they could not hold any such
imputation of sin to Christ as Mr Norton does. And unto them I will add the
words of Alfricus Archbishop of Canterbury, which he Preached in the time of
King Elthered, Anno Christi 996. in the second leaf of that Sermon which was
Printed at Aberdene in Scotland 1624. says thus: "That innocent Lamb which the
old Israelites did then kill, had signification (after ghostly understanding,)
of Christ's sufferings, who unguilty shed his holy blood for our redemption.
Mark this he says, that Christ being unguilty shed his holy blood. From hence
it is evident, that he did not hold as Mr Norton does, that Christ was put to
death by Gods vindicative wrath, through his imputing of the guilt of our sins
to him; for then he could not have said that Christ shed his holy blood as
being unguilty of sin, but he would rather have said, that he being guilty of
our sins by Gods imputation, did shed his guilty blood as a guilty sinner: but
he affirms the quite contrary.

3. Mr Weames in his Portraiture, in page 36. does from Austin cite these
words, "Christ took our mortality upon him, but he contracted it not by sin,
but in respect of punishment he assumed it: necessity of death was laid upon
Adam for his sin, necessity of death is inbred in us, but death was willingly
assumed by Christ. 3. Austin says, De fide contra Manecheos, Christ was born,
suffered, and dyed, nor for any necessity that urged him, but of his own will,
having it in his own power.

4. It is also worth the marking which is observed by Ainsw. in Numb. 20. 28. "
Moses stripped Aaron of his Priestly Robes by reason of sin, and of his death
which was to ensue; this (says he) shows that no Priest that was a sinner,
and under the power of death, could satisfy the justice of a Law, and avoid
the wrath of God. In these words he does affirm, that Christ was not under the
power of death, by that Law that binds all the sinful posterity of Adam to
death; but that he died as the only Lord of life and death, in the quality of a
propitiatory sacrifice for manks redemption, he put himself under death by his
voluntary Covenant, that so he might through that kind of death conquer death,
and therefore he would not slay any longer under death than until the third
day, according to this prophetical predictions, Romans 6. 9. And in case Christ's
death had been a natural death as ours is, then his body should have seen
corruption in his grave before the third day, by purging in that space as our
bodies do: but his dead body could not be corruption, though it had lain forty
days in his grave, because his Godhead did reside in his dead body, as well as
it did in his departed soul, (as I have observed it in my Dialogue, page 10,
11. and therefore his dead body is called the holy One, Act. 2. 27.

5. Peter Martyr says, "That sin and death is compared as cause and In Com.
Places p. 244. and in Romans p. 11. ad milites Templi. cap. 11.
effect, but here (says he) we must exempt Christ only, who notwithstanding he
knew no sin, yet for oursakes he died. But death had no dominion over him,
because he of his own accord did suffer it for our salvation. And says he in
Romans page 121. Death has no right where there is no sin, unless we will
say, that God punishes the innocent, (he affirms that God does not punish the
innocent with proper vindicative punishments.) And a little after he says thus
to Pigghius, He can never show out of the Scriptures, that any is called a
sinner, but either he has sin in himself, or else undoubtedly he has before
committed sin, unless he will say, that God makes men guilty without any
sin committed of them. But Mr Norton affirms the contrary, namely, That God
makes Christ guilty without any sin committed by him. And Peter Martyr does
also cite Austin in p. 123. saying thus, "In original sin God does not impute
to us another man's sin, but our own iniquity, which sticks unto our nature,
even from the very beginning.

6. Bernard says, "Had not Christ dyed voluntarily, that death had not been
meritorious, (and says he,) how much more unworthily he dyed who had not
deserved death; so much more justly (man) lives for whom he dyed. What justice
thou will ask is this, that an innocent should dye for a malefactor? It is no
justice, it is mercy: If it were justice, then should he not dye freely, but
indebted thereunto; and if indebted, then indeed he should dye: but the other
for whom he died should not live yet though it be not justice, it is not
against justice, otherwise he could not be both just and merciful. In all
these sentences Bernard is quite opposite to Mr Nortons Tenets. 1. He puts the
death of Christ into the voluntary meritorious cause properly so called, and
not at all into the demeritorious cause from sin imputed, as Mr Norton does
in page 17. (unto which I have Replied before at Reply 7.) for he makes the
death of Christ to proceed from Gods penal curse, which does utterly destroy
the merit of Christ's death and sacrifice. 2. He makes the death of Christ to be
voluntary, no otherwise, but as he submitted himself to the suffering of
vindicative justice: and cooperating with subordinate instruments, according
to the concourse of the first cause with the second, he gave way (says he in
page 154.) to the course of nature, and patiently suffered a violent death. But
Bernard denies this kind of death in Christ, and affirms (in Feria 4. Heb.
panosa.) "That Christ alone had power to lay down his own soul, and that none
took it from him, but bowing his head, and being obedient unto the death he
gave up the Ghost: who can so easily sleep when he will? To dye is a great
infirmity, but so to dye, was plainly an exceeding power: he only had power to
lay down his soul, who only had like free power to take it again, having the
rule of life and death.

7. Chrysostom says in Homil. 59. on John, "Both the death of Christ, and his
rising from the dead were strong, and besides the common (or natural) course of
men: so to dye, (says he as Christ dyed,) passes the power of man, and (says
he) Christ alone was the master of laying down his life.

8. Austin says, "The Spirit of the Mediator did plainly prove, that he came
to the death of his flesh by no punishment of sin, in that he forsook not his
flesh by any means against his will, but because he would, and when he would:
and of this see more in my former printed Reply, in chap. 17. Sect. 4.

But says Mr Norton in page 59. "It had been of none effect if Christ had
suffered only a bodily death: and says he again in page 70. It is a fiction
to assert any divine prediction, that Christ should only suffer a bodily
death: and says he, there can be no reason given why the Martyrs and other
men, having received from Christ but a drop of that Spirit, (which was in him
out of measure,) should endure with joy the same death which he himself entering
but into the porch and subburbs of it, through anguish of his soul, had clods
rather than drops of blood streaming down his blessed body: A thing which was
neither seen nor heard before or since: the true reason thereof (says he,) is,
because Christ dyed as a sinner imputatively, pressed under the sense of the
wrath of God, and conflicting with eternal death: and says he in page 153. It
was not only a bodily, but a spiritual death, he shed his blood, together
with the sense of the wrath of God, because the iniquities of us all were
gathered together as in a heap and laid upon him, Esaias 53. 6. In these and
other places he makes the death of Christ to be, not only a penal bodily
death, but also a penal spiritual death; and so consequently, he makes the
finishing act of Christ's death and sacrifice to lie (not in the proper
meritorious, but) in the proper demeritorious cause of sin imputed to him.

Reply in page 309, 319, 345, 405, 408, 416, 429, etc. and there in page 302. I
have showed that such pains as do astonish the senses in Martyrs, were not at
all in Christ at his death: and therefore his death was not effected from the
same cause that the death of Martyrs is; neither was his death such a spiritual
death as Mr Norton makes it to be; but in the formality of it, it was a
supernatural bodily death, it was a death not of condition, but of Covenant
only: as I have showed in my former Book, page 296, 307, 315, 316, 333, 434.

2. I have also showed that no satisfaction was made by all the torments which
Christ suffered, but that it was his obedience that was made perfect by his
sufferings, Phil. 2. 8. that made the finishing act of his bodily death, to be
accepted as a propitiatory sacrifice, page 79, 145, 309, 315, 415, 436.

3. Zuinglius on the Passion of Christ does ascribe our full redemption to the
bodily death of Christ only, in p. 9, etc.

4. Bullenger on the Creed, and Peter Martyr also on the Creed, do expound all
Christ's sufferings both in his soul and body, of his bodily death only: they
have not a word of his spiritual death, or of his suffering hell torments in
his soul. And yet Bullenger does repeat diverse Expositions of the Article of
Christ's descending into Hell; and he lived also after Calvin, and yet he does
not mention Calvin's Exposition of Christ's suffering the torments of Hell in his
soul; and thence it follows, that he did plainly reject it, as no part of his
Creed. And Bucer makes Christ to suffer no other penal Hell or infernum but his
bodily death, his words I have cited in my former Book in chap. 7. Sect. 2.
These three eminent Expositors do often call the sufferings of Christ most
grievous punishments; but yet they understood the word punishment in no other
sense but as the ancient Divines do, namely, of Christ's ignominious sufferings
from his combater Satan and from his potent seed, as the Dialogue did at first
expound 1 Pet. 2 24.

Conclusions from the premises.

1. It is a fundamental error in the point of Christ's satisfaction to Gods
justice, to place the meritorious cause of satisfaction in the the
demeritorious cause of sin imputed, seeing no divine nor humane Laws do make
the greatest guilt and the greatest punishments that can be suffered for that
guilt, to be the meritoritorious cause of redeeming the lives of other
delinquents.

2. Though Mr Norton does place the formality of satisfaction to Gods justice
in the spiritual death of Christ's soul; yet the ancient Divines do affirm the
contrary. Austine says, "That the death of Christ was simple, and but of one
sort; but ours, says he, is double or of two sorts. Peter Martyr does explain
his sense thus in Romans 6. 9. "Death (says he) is after one manner in us, and
after another manner in Christ, as Austin says in his Book de Trinitate, His
death was simple, and but of one sort, but ours is double or of two sorts, for
in him only the body dyed, his soul was never without the eternal and true
life, for as much as sin had never any place in him. 2. Austin says also, de
Trinit. lib. 4. cap. 12. "Because the Devil dead in spirit could not invade
(Christ) living in spirit, as most desirons to kill man, he fastened on that
death which he could compass, and therefore he was suffered to kill the
mortal body which the living Mediator took for mankind: by the which it came
to pass, that the chains of many sins, deserving many deaths were loosed,
by the one death, of one in whom was no sin; and so the Devil lost man by the
very death of Christ's flesh. I pray mark how Austin puts the single death of
Christ's body into the meretorious cause of his obedience to death, and not as
Mr Norton does into the demeritorious cause of sin imputed to him. And in the
same Chapter Austin says, "We came by sin to death, but Christ by
righteousness, and so where our death is the punishment of sin, his death is
the sacrifice for sin.

3. Gregory in Morali. lib. 4. cap. 17. says, "The Mediator came 1. Our souls
became dead in sin Genesis 2. 17. and then the body was made subject to death for
original sin, Gen 3. 19.
to us that were subject both to the death of the spirit and of the flesh. And
by his single death, he loosed both our deaths; and if he should have suffered
both, he could have delivered us from neither: but he mercifully undertook one
of them, and so justly condemned both; he joined his single death to our double
death, and dying, conquered both our deaths: he then which for us took upon
him, only the death of the body, suffered the shadow of death, and hid from
Gods eyes the sin we had committed. In this last expression he makes the
bodily death of Christ to be the proper meritorious or procuring cause of Gods
reconciliation and forgiveness, for nothing else can be said to hide sin from
Gods eyes but his reconciliation so procured.

4. I have also in my former printed Reply, cited others of the ancient Divines
in page 357. that distinguish the death of Christ from all others deaths but
his bodily death only: and that do also affirm, that Christ was no way
guilty of any kind of sin in page 225, 356.

5. That common addition of fire, to signify the wrath of God, by the which
they think the death of Christ was made a sacrifice, is no way suitable to the
formality of Christ's death and sacrifice: for the formality of a sacrifice lies
in this: 1. That it must be put to death And, 2. The fire of the Altar that
burned the sacrifices, was no type of the wrath of God, in making Christ's death
a sacrifice.
That the blood thereof must be sprinkled on the Altar by a consecrated Priest.
And, 3. That the fat thereof must be burned with the fire of the Altar only.


These typical actions do teach us, (if we be not dull of hearing,) that it
does not belong to the Father to be the Priest in Christ's sacrifice, neither to
put him to death, nor to sprinkle his blood, nor yet to be the Altar, nor his
wrath to be the fire of the Altar, but that all these typical actions do
belong unto Christ only to fulfill them.

Mr Tailor on Types, in the sacrifice of Noab, does rightly make the Godhead
of Christ, in Heb. 9. 14. to be typified by the fire of the Altar by the which
his spotless and unblemished humane nature was offered a sweet sacrifice to
God.

I grant that before the blood was brought to the Priests at the Altar, the
Levites might kill the sacrifice, and receive the blood in boules, etc. as in 2 Chronicles. 23, 4, 28, 32. and 2 Chronicles. 30. 16. But as soon as these works were
done, the Levites might go no further, but only bring the said blood in
boules to the Priests at the Altar, because none else might sprinkle the blood
on the Altar, but the Priests only, because the act of sprinkling was that
most essential action that appertained to the sacrifice, 1 Chronicles. 6. 49. 2 Chronicles. 29. 21, 24. And says Maymony, "The action of sprinkling the blood upon
the Altar is a weighty matter, it is the root (or the principal) of the
sacrifice. See Ainsw. in Exodus 12. 45. and says he in Lev. 1. 5. The
sprinkling of the blood is a greater and a more peculiar Priestly action than
the killing of the sacrifice is, it is a type of the continual intercession of
Christ for us in heaven, Heb. 12. 24.

And for the more strict observation of these Rites, God commanded the Priests
to take the charge of the Alter, and of the holy place, and of the fire, and
that no stranger (whether Israelite or Levite,) should dare to approach unto
either of the Altars, either to offer sacrifice or incense, Numb. 16. 40. that
so no more servent wrath might fall upon Israel, as there had done formerly for
the breach of this Law. See Ainsworth in Numb. 18. 3, 5, 7. For not long before
this charge, Gods servent wrath fell upon Korab, (and his company,) though he
was a Levite, because he presumed to intermeddle in the Priests Office, Numb.
16. 10, 47. But as soon as the plague was begun, Moses bade Aaron to take fire
from the Altar, and to put incense thereon, and to run quickly into the
Congregation to make atonement for them, and Aaron did so, and made atonement
for them, Numb. 16. 46.
Numb. 16. 46.

Chazkuni on this place says, That incense caused death, when "it was not in
the hand of the Priest, for the Priests only were anointed and ordained for
that service, and so was not Korah, for though he was a chief Levite, yet he
was not a Priest; and therefore he might not burn incense, for that action did
only appertain to the Priests Office: they (the Priests,) shall put incense in
thine nostril, or in thine anger, that is to say, they shall put incense before
thee, to procure thy reconciliation, and so consequently to appease thine
anger, Deuteronomy. 33. 10.

3. Fervent wrath fell upon Nadab and Abihu, (though Priests,) because they did
not offer incense with the fire of the Altar, but with strange fire, Lev. 10.
1, etc.

4. Fervent wrath fell upon King Vzziah, because he intermedled in the Priests
Office, by burning incense at the Golden Altar, 2 Chronicles. 26. 19, 21. and had
not the Priests resisted him to vindicate their care of preserving their
Office, they had doubtless provoked Gods fervent wrath against themselves, as
much as it was provoked against Vzziah.

From this discourse from N. 5. I infer:

1. That God the Father could not put the fire of his wrath to Christ's soul and
body, to make it a sacrifice of satisfaction to his justice for man's
Redemption, because it would have been a breach of his own constituted order,
for he had ordained, that Christ should be the only Priest, the only Altar,
and the only fire of the Altar to make his bodily death a sacrifice, Heb. 9.
14.

2. From hence I do also infer, that those Writers who give the formality of
satisfaction to his sufferings from the fire of his Father wrath, do thereby
make the Father to be the Priest of Christ's sacrifice, and thereby they do
confound the Priesthood of the Father' (which has no Priesthood,) with the
everlasting Priesthood of Christ, quite contrary to Gods own constituted order
in Psalm. 110. and Heb. 7.

3. Hence I infer, that seeing every typical Priest must have some commanded
good thing to offer, as well for his own sins, as the sins of others, Heb.
1. 5. that Christ having no sins of his own, did offer himself for the sins
of the Elect, Heb. 8. 3. and therefore he offered himself by his eternal Spirit
without spot to God, Heb. 9. 14. He offered himself, 1. Before his death. And,
2. In his death. 1. Before his death he offered himself to perform that great
warlike combat, with his proclaimed enemy Satan and his potent seed of Scribes
and Pharisees, according to the declaration of the combat in Genesis 3. 15. where
God gave unto the Devil a liberty of power to provoke the passions of Christ to
some sinful distemper or other, to spoil his obedience in his death and
sacrifice if he could. 2. But seeing the Devil could not by his ill usage
spoil the obedience of Christ, his ill usage did but perfect his obedience, or
consecrate him to his Priestly sacrifice: and then he offered himself in the
formality of his death to God, as a propitiatory sacrifice, even by his own
Priestly power, namely, by the actual cooperation of both his natures, and by
the fire of his own Godhead, Heb. 9. 14. without any addition of that strange
fire of his Fathers wrath from the demeritorious cause of sin imputed.

CHAP. XIV.
SECT. 1.
Being an Exposition of Dan. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27.

Mr. Broughton does thus translate Daniel 9. 24. in his last Edition, printed
at Hanaw Seventy Sevens (of Years) are exactly accounted. (1) For thy people
and Holy City. (2) To finish Trespass, and end Sins. (3) To make Reconciliation
for Unrighteousness, and to bring in Righteousness Everlasting: And (4) to
Jeal Vision and Prophet. And (5) to show Christ to be the Holy of Holies. The
Seventy-sevens in Dan. 9. 24. ought not to be translated weeks, but years.


THis Number of Seventy Sevens must not be understood of weeks (as some
translate it, though much amiss) but of Years: (and therefore Broughton puts in
Years in a parenthesis.) For it is most plain and evident by Gods express
Command in Levit. 25. 8. Thou shall number unto thee seven Sabbaths of Years,
seven years seven times, and the days of the seven Sabbaths of years shall be
unto thee nine and forty years: And says Ains. The Hebrews hold that this
Commandment of numbering seven times seven years: and the Commandment of
Sanctifying the fifty year in v. 10. was given to the High Synedrion, (or
greatest Senate of Israel) only: and says he in Numb. 14. 34. A day for a
year, A day for a year: That is a year for every day, namely, 40 years for 40
days: And so in Ezekiel. 4. 6. The Prophet in a Figure bare the iniquity of
Israel so many days as they had sinned years: hereupon in prophesies days are
put for years, Dan. 9. 24. Rev. 11. 3. Mr Broughton does much lament the wrong
that is done to Dan. 9. 24. in that Translators do render it Weeks, seeing it
is so plainly meant of Years: and I have showed it more at large in ver. 27.

SECT. 2.
Are exactly accounted.

Mr. Brough. says in his first Edition, that this Hebrew word [Chatac] Seeing
Gabriel was sent to Daniel to inform him, that seventy sevens of years were
exactly accounted to the death of Christ. It can be no less th^n blasp^my to
affirm that he named a certain number for an uncertain.
being a verb singular to a substantive plural, teaches in Hebrew, That an
exact account is there meant, as Avenarius notes upon this phrase.

2. Kircherus in his Hebrew and Greek Lexicon says, That this word Chatac,
signifies Decisionem seu praecisionem. h. e. prae^i^^tionem, determinationem,
praedestiationem.

3. As God has internally decreed an exact order of Times: so he has
externally declared, that exact order of times to his Prophets for the better
instruction of his Church and people in the affairs that concern them in those
times. Paul says in Acts 17. 26. That God has determined the times
fore-appointed: and Job says of himself and others, his days are determined,
and thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass, Job 14. 5. Our Annot.
says, That Gods decrees concerning the time of man's Life, are so certain that
he cannot go beyond them, but must certainly dye when his fore-appointed time
is come.

In like sort, the said Seventy-sevens of years was so exactly declared unto
Daniel, to be determined for the death of Christ, that he could not go one day
beyond them, nor fall one day short of them; and therefore when that appointed
time was come, he did enter into his great Combat with Satan and his potent
seed, and conquered him by his Righteous performance of the Combat even to the
Death, and so he finished all things that were written of him at the just end
of the said Seventy-sevens of years: which seems in my several inferences at
the end of my Exposition of this 24. verse.

4. Seeing the Seventy-sevens of years were exactly accounted, then it must
also The beginning and ending of Daniels seventy sevens of years were exactly
acco^n^ed, and those are blinded with ignorance or prejud^ce that cannot see it.
so be determined from whence they should begin, and that is from the very hour
of Daniels prayer. And 2. It is also described to be at the time of the Evening
Oblation, Dan. 9. 21. And 3. It is also described to be in the first year of
the Reign of Da^ius, Dan. 9. 2. And 2. the End of the said Seventy-sevens, is
also exactly determined to be at the death of the Messiah, which he also
performed exactly at the time of the Evening Oblations, Matthew. 27 46.

Mr. Broughton has judiciously observed, even sundry times over, upon sundry
occasions given, that the Angel Gabriel did begin his account of the Seventy
sevens from the time of Daniels prayer, which he made at the time of the
Evening Oblation, and that they did exactly End at 490. years after, just when
Christ gave up the Ghost, at the time of the Evening Sacrifice: Exactly to an
hour, to the confutation of such Interpreters as deny Daniels Chronology to be
a certain Number of years, For sundry Interpreters do most erroneously affirm,
that the said Seventy-sevens of years, are a certain number put for an
uncertain: Such Interpreters do as justly fall under ours Saviors Reproof, as
the blind Scribes and Pharisees did, in not knowing the time of their peace (or
of their Reconciliation by the death of Christ) Luke 19. 42, 44. because they
did not know the time of Christ's death, which was most exactly foretold in Dan.
9. 24.

2. Others do read the words that Seventy-sevens of years are cut out (namely
into parts or parcels) which also is a Truth: But yet the Angel Gabriel does
first set down the whole Number of Seventy-sevens in ver. 24. and then he does
divide it into parts or parcels in the following verses: and this he did for
the better marking of the whole Number, and also for the better marking of some
particular matters that fell out in some of those parts, especially in the
first seven sevens, and also in the latter half of the last seven.

1. The Angel gives the whole Number of Seventy-sevens, in v. 24. Daniels
seventy sevens is for the more certainty sake delivered twice over.
2. Then he does begin to part it first into Seven-sevens, in v. 25. 3. Then
into sixty and two sevens, in v. 25. 4. Then into one seven, in v. 26.
As it is employed in the word [after] namely after the Sixty and two sevens, he
speaks of another seven, which is also called the last seven, in v. 27. and so
by these three parts or parcels, the first whole number of Seventy-sevens is
made up again: which twofold account of Seventy-sevens might have preserved
all diligent Expositors from making this certain Number and uncertain account
of time, as it is rightly observed by Mr. Brought. and by Mr. Ed. Holyoke in
his Dectrine of Life, page 383.

5. The Angel does also divide the last seven into two halfs, in v. 27.

The first half is passed over in silence, without marking any thing of Note
done in it, because the latter half was designed for the just time of the
Mediators extrinsecal Execution of his Office, as I shall explain it more fully
in v. 27.

5. The Angel G^briel said thus unto Daniel in v. 23. Thou art greatly beloved,
therefore understand the matter and consider the Vision: By these words he
prepares Daniels attention, first to understand that the whole Number of
Seventy sevens of years were exactly accounted; secondly, to understand that
the said Seventy-sevens were cut out into several parcels for the better
observation of some special matters that were of the greatest concernment to
him, and to the Church of the Jews.

6. This doubling of the account of Seventy-sevens, was not done only for the
help of Daniels understanding and faith, but it was done also for the
information of the Godly in after Ages, that they might by faith see the time
of Christ's death with the several Rich Benefits that should accrue to them
thereby.

7. It may be said of this doubled account, as Joseph said unto Pharaoh: In
that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice, it is because the thing is
firmly prepared (or surely proposed) of God, and because God hastenth to do it,
Genesis 41. 32. so say I; In that the Seventy-sevens was doubled unto Daniel twice
over, with a strict charge also to understand the matter and to consider the
Vision; it was so done because the said number of Seventy-sevens of years, was
exactly accounted or firmly decreed by God: namely, that at the just end
thereof the Messiah should by his death end all Sin and Trespasse-Offerings;
and 2. make Reconciliation for unrighteousness, and so bring in an Everlasting
Righteousness instead of the Ceremonial; and that God would hasten to do it in
the very time that he had exactly determined.

SECT. 3.
For thy People and for thy Holy City.

QUest. 1.
Why are the Jews called Daniels people? and Jerusalem thy Holy The Elders of
people ought to be as Foster-fathers, both in Church and Commonwealth.
City?

Answ. They are called Daniels people, because he was their Foster-Father. 1. He
fasted and prayed earnestly for their deliverance, as in v. 2, 20, 21. 2.
Because he used the utmost of his endeavors to procure a large Commission from
Cyrus for their Return with wealth and safety: In these and such like Respects
the Jews might be called Daniels people: both in v. 24. and also in Chap. 10.
14. and it was in this sense also, that the National Church of the Jews were
called Moses people in Deuteronomy. 9. 12. for he was the principal Instrument of their
deliverance from the servitude of the Egyptians, and because he did cherish
them as their Foster-father in the Wilderness, Numb. 11. 12. From whence Mr.
Ainsworth observes, that the like mildness and gentleness should be in
Governors, and God does promise to his Church, that Kings should be their
Nursing Fathers, Esaias 49. 23. And such like tender love ought the Pastors of
Churches to bear to their Flocks: and says the Apostle, we were gentle among
you, even as a Nurse cherishes her children: we exhorted and comforted, and
charged every one of you, as a Father does his children, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 11.

And for thy Holy City.

Or as it is in the Hebrew, For the City of thy Holiness: that is to say, for
the City of thy holy Contemplations in the Types of Holiness. For it was
Daniels custom to pray toward the Holy Temple, Dan. 6. 10. and David toward
the Holy Tabernacle, Psalm 5. 7. and 1 King. 8. 18.

Quest. 2.
Why does the Angel limit at these two Titles, thy People, and the City of thy
Holiness: to the last period of the seventy three sevens of Years?

Answ. Because these Titles were determined to last no longer then until the
typical use of the Holy City was finished by the death of Christ.

2. Daniel in his prayer to God, calls Jerusalem thy City and thy holy Mountain,
Dan. 9. 16. and in Dan. 11. 45. it is called the Mountain of delight of
Holiness, because the godly delighted to contemplate on the Holy Types that
were there used.

3. It is called the City of Holiness, because some sorts of unclean persons
must be separated from the City: namely the unclean Lepers: and therefore even
Mary the sister of Moses and Aaron being stricken with Leprosy, was put out of
the Camp, Numb. 12. 14. which was answerable to the City Jerusalem in the Ages
following, and all Lepers were to be put out of the Camp of Israel, Numb. 5. 2.
Lev. 13. 46. See Ains. there: In these Respects Jerusalem was called the Holy
City, Neh. 11. 1, 18. Matthew. 4. 5. Matthew. 27. 53. And says Ainsw. in Numb. 5.
3. The Hebrew Doctors say, that if a Leper did but come into Jerusalem he was
beaten with forty four shipes: and if he came into the Mountain of the House of
God, he was beaten with fourscore stripes: they did not tie themselves to forty
stripes in Capital offenses.

4, It is called the City of thy Holiness, because the bodies of the Jews in
general must be made holy from their ceremonial sins in Jerusalem chiefly, John
11. 55. by the use of the typical Rites of the Law before they might presume to
come unto Gods holy Temple: for holiness becomes thy House, O Lord, Psalm 93.
5. and it is called the Mountain of his Holiness, Psalm 48. 1. Ezr. 20. 30,
40. and the beauty of his Holiness, Psalm. 100. 3. And in Relation to this
National Church-holinesse, the whole Nation is called a holy Nation and a holy
people; See Ainsw. in Deuteronomy. 1. 41.

5. It is observed by Brough. in Revel, p. 287. that the low Jerusalem was
called This Title, The holy City, holy Land, and holy People, was to be
continued no longer to the Jews then till death of Christ.
Holy, when our Lord was baptized and tempted, Matthew. 4. 5. and when after his
Resurrection many Isaacs arose and was seen of many, Matthew. 27. 53. But (says
he) after our Lords ascension, the term is not bestowed upon it, though in
Pentecost the Spirit came plentifully to teach the Jews and the Proselytes of
all Nations, the Resurrection. And says he in Rev. 20. 8. The Jews Jerusalem
was holy: but now (says he in v. 9.) the Christian Church is the Beloved City,
and the Tents of the Holy, and I add, that now the Christians Church is also
called the Holy City, Rev. 21. 2. and in v. 10. it is called the holy
Jerusalem; for the Jews Jerusalem was utterly destroyed by the Romans about 14
years before John had this Vision. As soon therefore as the said Seventy-sevens
were expired, Christ did by his death end the use of all the holy Types; and
then the National Church of the Jews were not any longer to be esteemed the
peculiar Church and people of God; neither was Jerusalem to be any longer
styled The holy City, because the Messiah had then by his death confirmed his
Covenant of Grace for the many of all Nations, v. 27. And then the Vail of the
holy Temple was rent in twain, Matthew. 27. 51. compared with Exodus 36. 33. A
plain evidence that all the Types of Holiness that were formerly appropriated
to the Temple, to the holy City, to the holy Land, and to the holy National
Church, were now ceased and Ended, because the true Temple of Christ's body was
now by his miraculous death as it were rent in Twain; For as Epiphanius says
(Contra Ariomanitas Here Is. 69.) The Deity together with the Soul did move to
forsake the sacred Body: and says P. Martyr on this Article [He was Dead.] The
fourth and last punishment which Christ for our sakes took upon him, was the
separation of his Soul from his precious Body: the which says he (as he had
the same fully in his own power) as soon as he saw all things to be fulfilled
that were foretold of him by the Prophets, he of his own accord making a loud
voice yielded up his Spirit: And says the Dialogue in p. 101. It is evident
that the death of Christ in the formality of it was miraculous: 1. By the
Speech of the Centurion in Mark 15. 39. and 2. because he did at an instant
remove his Ghost from his Body, Matthew. 27. 50. and 3. because the Vail of the
Temple (which typified his humane Nature) did at that instant rend in twain
from the top to the bottom: intimating thereby, that the same power that rent
the Vail in twain did separate his Soul from his Body: By the which Priestly
act of his he Ended all sin and trespass Offerings and made Reconciliation for
unrighteousness, and brought in an Everlasting Righteousness to all believers
instead of the ceremonial Righteousness.

SECT. 4.
To Finish, namely to Finish Trespasse-Offerings.

1. THe Hebrew Word Cala which we translate to Finish, is by the Seventy
rendered Sunteleo, and by Sunteleo they also translate [Calah] For indeed both
these Hebrew Words to most aptly agree in sense: they both signify to Finish,
to perfect, to End, to Accomplish, or to consume a thing from its former use;
And in this sense it was that Gabriel told Daniel, that at the just end of
Seventy-sevens of years the Messiah should by his Death fin^sh all
trespasse-Offerings from their former use.

2. The Seventy render Cala (in Genesis 23. 6. and in many other places) To
prohibit or forbid.

3. They render it in Hag. 1. 10. by two other differing Words: 1. To stay
from, and 2. not to Restore.

4. They render it in Jer. 32. 2. To shut up.

5. They render it in Genesis 8. 2. To stop or restrain.

These and other differing words are used by the Seventy to express the sense
of the Hebrew word Cala; and yet they do not contradict the former term to
Finish, but rather they do help to explain it.

For 1. To consume a thing from its former use, is to finish the use of it. 2.
To prohibit or forbid the former use of a thing, is to finish the use of it. 3.
To stay a thing from its former use, is to finish the use of it. 4. Not to
Restore a thing to its former use, is to finish the use of it. 5. To shut up a
thing from its former use, is to finish the use of it. 6. To stop or restrain a
thing from its former use, is to finish the use of it. 7. The like I conceive
may be said of all the other different terms that are used by the Seventy to
express the signification of Cala: they do all signify in this place of
Daniel.
A full and absolve finishing of Trespasse-Offerings by the Death of Christ.

SECT. 5.
Trespass.

1. THis Hebrew word [Peshad] which Brought. and others translate Trespass, is
better then to translate it Transgression, because it relates to the Levitical
Trespasse-Offering, and it is not so good to call them Transgression-Offerings:
The Hebrew word is of a very large signification, as it does appear by the
various terms that are given to it by the Seventy in Kircherus Hebrew and Greek
Lexicon.

1. It is used for any kind of Trespass in a proper sense, namely for the
greatest sort as well as for the smallest sort of Trespasses: But in this place
it is not to be taken in a proper sense, but in a Metaphorical sense only: and
therefore those Translators that Render these two words [Cala and Peshad] to
restrain Apostasy do pervert the true sense of Daniel; for those two Hebrew
words will bear that Translation being taken alone by themselves without any
regard to the true sense of the Context, yet they will not bear it, according
to the true sense of the Context. For Peshad is not used only to set out the
greatest sort of Trespasses (though it is sometime put for Rebellion, with a
high hand against lawful Authority, and sometimes for Apostasy against the
Faith) but it is also used for those kind of Trespasses for the which
Trespasse-Offerings were ordained: and in that Metaphorical sense only is the
word to be taken in this place of Daniel: namely for Trespasse-Offerings.

2. Peshad in this Text must not be taken in its proper sense for a Trespass
in Fact, but in a Metaphorical sense for Trespasse-Offerings that were offered
Esaias 53. 10. The word Trespass in Dan. 9. 24. must not be taken in a proper,
but in a Metaphorical sense for Trespass-Offerings.
for the pardon of those Facts: and in this sense Christ made himself a
Trespass, Esaias 53. 10. Or he put himself to be Ashame, A Trespass or a Guilt
for us: or as the 70 Render it to be A Sin for us. But he did not make himse^f
a trespasser or a guilty sinner in a proper sense, but a Trespass in a
Metaphorical sense only: and therefore when he performed his Trespasse-Offering
by his Death, he finished the former use of all the typil Trespasse-Offerings.

3. There are two other Hebrew words which do also signify any kind of
trespass in a proper sense just as Peshad does: Namely Asham and Maghual, and
these two words are also used in a Metaphorical sense so: Trespasse-Offerings
just as Peshad is in Dan. 9. 5, 6. First Asham is put fot a Trespasse-Offering
as it is observed by Ains. in Lev. 5. 6. and in Amos 8. 14. And 2. Maghual is
likewise used for a Trespasse-Offering as it is also observed by Ains. in Lev.
5. 15. and from hence I infer, that seeing these last two words are used in a
Metaphorical sense for Trespasse-Offerings (as well as in a proper sense for
trespasses in Fact) there is the like Reason why Peshad should in like sort be
taken in a Metaphorical sense for Trespasse-Offerings in this place of Daniel.

Quest. 1.
If any one ask me how they may certainly know when these three Hebrew words
(as well as a multitude of other Hebrew words) ought to be taken in a proper
sense, and when in a Metaphorical sense?

Ans. I answer, that no better directions can be given then is given by the
Context in each place where they are used: And according to this Rule of a
right Exposition, the Context of Dan. 9. 24. does clearly direct us to take
Peshad there in a Metaphorical sense only, namely for Trespasse-Offerings.

Obj. It is objected by Mr. Norton, that this course will make the Scripture to
be full of Equivocation?
Ans. I wish that Mr. Norton may not be bold to slight this Rule of Direction;
Many words in Scripture do abound with Equivocations, namely with Metaphorical
senses: of which see more in Chapter 23. at v. 10.
seeing any one that will but search into Kircherus Hebrew and Greek Lexicon,
may soon see that the Seventy do abundantly more often translate sundry Hebrew
words from their proper sense into variety of metaphorical senses: that is to
say, into variety of Equivocations: for the advancement of the true sense of
each place, especially in such words as Relate to the typical Laws of Moses;
which Equivocations being rightly understood according to the true sense of the
Context, do not darken but illustrate the true sense of the blessed Scripture:
and on the contrary, if a wrong sense be first put upon the Context, it will
lead Expositors into many erroneous interpretation of words.

SECT. 6.
And to End Sins.

1. THhe Hebrew word Thammim, translated [To End] is not in the Line To end
sins in Dan. 9. 24. does signify to end Sin Offerings.
of the Text, but in the Margin only, and it is the more remarkable in two
Respects: 1. because it is set in the Margin; and 2. because it is in the
Conjugation Hiphil, which does much augment the force of the word: for it makes
it to signify [A Causing] namely, to Cause an End to all Sin Offerings:

2. The other word Chata translated Sins, must not in this place be taken
properly for sins of Fact; But Metaphorically only for Sin Offerings: and in
that sense is used in above a 100 places which I have cited in my former
printed Reply in page 210. and in other places: and the very Context in the
next words [To make Reconciliation) does confirm that sense.

3. These two Hebrew words do, (according to the Context) speak thus: That at
the end of Seventy-sevens of years the Messiah shall by his death cause an End
to all legal Sin Offerings, and this very sense is repeated again in v. 27. He
shall by his Death cause Sacrifice and Oblation (of all sorts) to cease.

4. This Marginal word is also translated Ended, by Bro. in Lam. 4. 22. Ended
is thy unrighteousness, O Daughter Sion: But Jeremy does use it in a differing
Metaphorical sense from Daniel; namely for the Ending of their punishment for
their unrighteousness: as if the Prophet Jeremy had said, thus Ended is the
punishment of thy unrighteousness (for it is accomplished as we translate) but
the Seventy say it shall cease or fail, and so in like sort they render the
same Hebrew word to cease or fail in Genesis 47. 15, 18.

5. The 70 Render it in Job 28. 3. The Bound, or the utmost Border, or End, or
limit of any place or thing.

6. They Render it in Job 31. 40. To Cease or End: the words of Job are, ceased
or ended.

7. They Render it in Dan. 8. 23. Fulfilled: but our Translators Render it, Are
come to the full, and in the Margin they Render it, Accomplished.

8. The 70 Render it Fulfilled in Live. 25. 9. but Ains. does Render it End: and
says he, it means the perfection as the whole Accomplishment of the Year.

9. It is translated End in Dan. 4. 29. at the End of 12 Months.

10. It is also translated Ended in Deuteronomy. 34. 8. the thirty days of mourning
for the death of Moses were Ended.

11. The 70 Render it to perish in Esaias 16. 4. or to be cast away, or to come
to naught.

All these Expressions do well agree with our translated term End, in Dan. 9.
24. For when the former use of a thing is made to perish, or to be cast away,
or to come to naught: Then the former use of that thing is Ended: And according
to this sense the utmost Bound or limit of the Levitical Sacrifices and other
Rites of Moses, were to be continued no longer but until the death of Christ:
then his Death being the perfection of them all, made them to perish or to be
cast away, or to come to naught.

12. In imitation of these phrases the new Testament does use the like phrases:
as in Heb. 9. 26. Now once in the end of the World, Christ has appeared to put
away Sin (Offerings) by the sacrifice of himself. So in Romans 8. 3. For sin,
i.e. for his sacrifice for sin, he condemned sin (offerings) in the flesh. and
in Col. 2 14. He has blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances, and ^^ok it
out of the way, nailing it to the Cross: dis^n^l^ing the former Rites, Heb 7.
18. which ceased at the death of Christ, Heb. 10. 2. And Moses put a Vail over
his face, that the children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the End of
that which is now Abolished, 2 Cor. 3. 13. These and such like phrases are used
in the New Testament, as a Commentary upon the said phrases of Daniel.

SECT. 7.
To Seal Sins.

1. THE Hebrew word Chatam, signifies to Seal. And this word is in the line of
the Text: This double Reading, 1. in the Margin, to end sins: and 2. in the
line, to seal sins: has made some Expositors so unadvised as to make this
double Reading to be a Note or Mark that the Hebrew Text is corrupted in all
those places where such double Readings are found, which are accounted by the
Hebrew Doctors to be 848. and they think that this corruption did fall upon the
Original in the time of their Captivity in Babylon; But Mr. Bro. and Mr.
Ainsworth: and others do give very pregnant Reasons to prove that these double
Readings both in the Line and in the Margin, were given at first by the same
Spirit to the Scripture-Writers for special direction how to understand the
Text aright.

2. It is also evident that these double-Readings are very ancient, because the
The double Ebrew Readings, both in the line and margin were given by the holy
Ghost at the first writing of the Scriptures.
Seventy Interpreters did make use of them for the better understanding of the
true sense, because they subjoyn both these Readings together in the very Text
of their translations in Dan. 9. 24. As it is well observed by Ainsworth in his
Advertisement at the end of Deutronomy, in p. 10. First they render the word in
the L^ne K^^ ^o^ ^ph^^gisa hamartias, i.e. And to seal up sins: Then the Margin
K^^ apale psa^^as anomias; And to wipe out (or do away) iniquities: And then
they proceed with the Sentence following, i.e. And to make Reconci^iation: and
so in like sort it seems that the Seventy have reference to both Readings, in
Judg^s 19. 3. and in P^o. 26. 2.

Quest. 1.
It may hence he demanded, what is the particular end and use of this phrase in
the line, To Seal, seeing sealing is done for sundry differing Ends and u^es?

Answ The particular End and use of the word Seal in the line, may certainly be
known by the explanation of it by the Marginal word, which I have she^ed, does
signify to cause an End; namely, of the former Levitical use of Sin Offerings:
and from thence it follows, that the particular End and use of Sealing Sins in
the line, is to testify the final Endings of the said Sin Offerings by the
death of Christ: and it cannot be denied, but that one principal End and use of
Sealing is to witness the final Endings of a Covenant, or of a decreed
Sentence, and to testify to all men that it is fully finished, and that it is
irrevocable: Sealing of Sin Offerings by the death of Christ is the last sin
shing Act of Gods decreed sentence and does witness it to be irrevocable.
a^ in Est^r 3. 12. Ester 8. 8. Dan. 6. 8, 15. Neh. 9. 38. Secondly, therefore
we must not stretch the word seal in this Text to any other End or use then to
signify the final Ending of Sin Offerings by the death of Christ, least we
over-sence the Angels words rather than explain them: and therefore the true
sense of the Angels words, to seal, in this Text is this: That at the just End
of Seventy-sevens of years, the Messiah should by his Death and Sacrifice Seal
Sin Offerings, that is to say, irrevocably End them: For as the last finishing
Act of a decreed Sentence is Sealing, so the last finishing Act of Ending of
Sin Offerings (and consequently of all Moses Rites) by the death of Christ, is
called the sealing of Sin Offerings, because his death was ordained to be the
perfection of them all.

SECT. 8.
And to make Reconciliation for Unrighteousness.

1. THE Hebrew word Caphar which we translate Reconciliation or Atonement: does
in propriety of speech signify no more [But to cover a thing] as I have opened
it in my former printed Reply in Chap. 14. and in this Book also in Chap. 15.
But when it is applied to sin and to Gods anger for sin, (as it is in this
place) then it is translated Reconciliation or Atonement, or Expiation: or as
M^nster, Paguin, Vatablus, Calvin, Melancton, and U^banus Regius do translate
it in this verse, to purge iniquity, namely, by Gods Reconciliaon or Atonement.

2. To make, or to procure Reconciliation is the act of Christ: but the formal
Christ made Reconciliation for unright cousnesse by his Priestly death and
sacrifice, or by his Oblation and Interc^ssion.
act of Reconciliation it self is the act of God the Father: Now Christ does
make or procure his Fathers Reconciliation to sins, by doing the Office of a
Priest in all things according to the Will of God, Heb. 10 9, 10. So in Esaias
53. 10. It pleased, or it delighted the Lord to bruise him and to put him to
grief when he should make his (vital) Soul a Trespass, i.e. a
Trespasse-Offering: not that God (says P. Martyr) delighted in Tormenting his
Son; but he delighted to make manifest the perfection of his Obedience thereby.

3. In the typical Law of Works, the Priests made Reconciliation for all Israel
by the sin and trespasse-offerings, Lev. 6. 67. Numb. 5. 8. and by
burnt-offerings, as in 2 Cor. 29. 24. Levit. 1. 4. Levit. 4. 20, etc. The
Priests killed them, and they made Expiation with their blood upon the Altar to
make an Atonement for all Israel; For the King commanded that the
burnt-Offering and the sin-Offering should be read for all Israel: and so in
Eze. 45. 15, 17. It shall be the Princes part to give burnt-Offerings, and
Meat Offerings, and Drink Offerings, in the Feasts, and in the new Moon^, etc.
and he shall prepare the sin-Offering, and the Meat Offering, and the
^urnt-Offering, and the Peace Offering, to m^ke Reconcillation for the house of
Israel: And in Lev. 17. 11. it is the blood that makes Atonement.

4. When God first appointed the Altar of Incense to be made: He said in Exodus
30. 10. Aaron shall make atonement upon the hor^s of it once in the year with
the blood of the sin-Offering of Atonement: once in the year shall be make
Atonement upon it, Lev. 16. 29, 30.

5. Aaron by Incense made Atonement, for as soon as the plague wa^ begun
against Corah and his Company: Moses bid Aaron to take fire from the Altar and
put Incense thereon, and to run quickly into the Congregation to make Atonem^nt
for them, and Aaron did so and ma^e Atonement for them, Numb. 16. 46. And Moses
declared that it was the Priests Office to put Incense into Gods N^strils,
Deuteronomy. 33. 16. that is to appease his anger and to procure his Reconciliation.
And so in Exodus 30. 15, 16. They gave money for an Heave Offering to make
atonement for their souls.

6. From this typical way of making Reconciliation, we may see how Christ makes
Reconciliation for the unrighteousness of believing sinners: namely by his
fulfilling the truth of all the typical Sacrifices and Oblations, by his
Oblation and Intercession: Paul says in 2 Cor. 5. 18. God has reconciled us
to himself by Jesus Christ; and in v. 19. God was in Christ Reconciling the
world to himself by not imputing their trespasses unto them: Hence observe,
that the meritorious Cause or the procuring means by the which God has
reconciled us to himself is Jesus Christ in his death, as is explained in ver.
21. For God was in Christ, that is to say, in covenant with Christ, that in
case he did make himself the true sin-Offering, he would thereby reconcile
believing sinners in all the world to himself by not imputing their sins to
them: that so they might be made the Righteousness of God by Faith in Christ,
who having made (i.e. Reconciliation] through the blood of his Cross: it
pleased the Father by him to reconcile all things to himself, Col. 1. 20. By
him alone, no creature helping, either of things in earth or things in Heaven:
and you that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your minds in wicked
works, yet now has he reconciled in the body of Christ's flesh through death to
present you holy and without blemish, and spotless in his sight, Col. 1. 21,
22. From hence observe this remarkable truth, That Gods Reconciliation procured
by the meritorious obedience of Christ in his Death and Sacrifice does present
us unto God perfectly holy and without blemish and spotless in his sight, that
is to say, perfectly righteous from the guilt of all unrighteousness: and so in
Heb. 2. 17. It behoved Christ to be made like unto his brethren, that he might
be a merciful and faithful high Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
Reconciliation for the sins of the people: Christ is called the Reconciliation
for our sins, that is to say, God sent him into the world to make
Reconciliation for unrighteousness, 1 John 2. 2. and in 1 John 4. 10. God so
loved us that he sent his Son to make Reconciliation for our sins: for if when
we were enemies we were reconc^led unto God by the death of his Son, much more
being reconciled we shall be saved by his life: neither that only, but also we
glory in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, By whom we have now received the
Atonement, Romans 5. 10, 11. And in Ephesians. 2 14. Christ is called Our Peace, that
is, our Peacemaker, or our Atonement-maker: as it is also expressed in Romans 5.
1. Being just^fied by faith we have p^ace with God (namely, Reconciliation with
God) through our lord Jesus Christ, because according to the time appointed in
Dan. 9. 24. Christ dyed for the ungodly. v. 6, 8.

SECT. 9.
For Unrighteousness.

THE Hebrew word Gnaven is often translated Iniquity; But Mr. Broughton in his
last Hanaw Edition, does translate ^t Unrighteousness according to the Seventy
Interpreters in this place, and in above seventy places more: and in this place
it must be taken in its proper sense, nam^ly for unrighteousness as it is the
obligation to punishment, and not in a metaphorical sense a^ the two former
words were: because this word does set out another End and Use of the death of
Christ besides the former, namely besides his finishing and Ending of Trespass
and sin-Offering: that is to say, that by his obedient death and Sacrifice he
should merit Gods Reconciliation for the unrighteousnesie of all believing
sinners: and thence it follows, that as soon as sinners are made partakers of
Gods Reconciliation, by Faith in Christ on their parts, their unrighteousnesses
are thereby forgiven, purged, or expiated, and so by that means they are made
sinlesse; that is to say, perfectly righteous from all their unrighteousnesses:
and this Truth is most manifest by the Context in the next words: because by
this means Christ is said in the next words to bring in Righteousness
Everlasting.

This double End and use of Christ's death was to be accomplished at the just
end of Seventy-sevens of years.

SECT. 10.
And to bring in Righteousness Everlasting,

QUest. 1.
How did Christ by his death bring in an Everlasting Righteousness?

Answ. By his passive obedience in making Reconciliation for unrighteousness:
For by the perfect on of his obedience in his Combat of suffering from A true
description of a sinners everlasting ^^ghteo^snesse, or of his everlasting
justification 1 John ^. 9.
his proclaimed, warlike Enemy Satan and his potent seed, he made his death to
be accepted of God, as of a most perfect obedient Sac^^fi^e: it was accepted of
God, as of the meritorious procuring cause of his Reco^ciliation to all
believing sinners, for their formal and Everla^^ing R^ghteousnesse: or for
their everlasting justification from all unr^ght ousnesse: and so cons^quently
a believing sinners everlasting Righteousness, is nothing else but Gods
everlasting Reconcil^ation, or his everlasting forg^v^n^sse of the guilt of
the^ unr^ght^o^snesse: and in his receiving of them into his special Favor
thr^ugh Christ: of which see more in chap. 14. at v. ^. And to this sense I
have also ex^o^n^ed, 1 Jo^. 1 9. 2. This everlasting R^ghte^usnesse is thus
t^anslated ^y Mr ^or, ^n h^s Sermon at the baptiz^ng of a J^w, Anno 1. 77. [To
br^ng in the R^ghteousnesse of the World to come] and this phras^, the
R^ghteou^n^ss of the w^^ld to come is the more remarkable, because it is a
Th^lmudique phrase: which ^n likelihood the Ancient H^brew Doctors did borrow
from this place of Daniel or from some other place: but the Hebrew word here is
plural Guolamim; and so it is in Eccl. 1. 10. It is said in Lev. 7. 34. The
wave breast, and the heave sh^ulder have I taken of the sons of Israel from off
the sacrifices of their Peace Offerings, and have given them to Aaron the
Priest and to his sons by a Statute for ever (i.e.) to continue as long as the
Law of Sacrificing should continue, that is, until the death of Christ: and
after that the typified part of the Types, which was Christ and his merits, was
to continue for ever to all believing Christians: the Body and Truth of the
types of Moses Law does continue to all Eternity.

And this Thalmudique phrase, that World to come is Remarkable; For Rab.
Menachem The Ancient Ebrew Doctors called the days of the Messiah the World to
come.
speaking of the dew that covered the Manna, says, The holy blessed God will
raise up the dead though In the time that is to come: By the dead, he plainly
means the dead in sin, and by Life, the Life of Grace, and by the time to
come, the days of the Messiah. See Ains. in Genesis 16. 13.

2. Rab. Isaac on Genesis 1. and

3. Rab Menachem on Genesis 16. do acknowledge the Manna to be a figure of the
Food of just men in the World to come. See Ains. in Genesis 16. 14. and in Exodus
6. 3.

4. Jalait. in Psalm 91. says: Why do the Israelites pray in this World, and
are not heard? because they know not the plain Name (i.e. the Name of Jehovah)
in the World to come of the Messiah, God will make it known to them, and then
they shall be heard.

5. The Apostle Paul does intimate their phrase of speaking in Heb. 2. 5. for
there he does call the days of the Messiah, The World to come: saying, he has
not put in subjection unto Ang^ls the world to come, whereof we speak.

6. DuPlessis says, that some of the Hebrew Doctors say, That all the Beasts
which are counted unclean in this Age, shall be counted clean by the virtue of
God, in the Age to come.

7. The Ancient Rabbis say, in Bresith Rabba, That all the Beasts that have
been forbidden as unclean in his world, God will cleanse and license them in
the world to come of the Messiah. See Ains. in Genesis 9. 3.

8. The Apostle does call the time when Moses ceremonies shall be Ended, the
world to come, in Heb. 9. 26.

9. They called the end of the Mosaical World, the end of days, as it is
observed by Ains. in Genesis 35. 12. and the end of the world, in 2 Esdras 2. 34.
The Ancient Hebrew Doctors might well point out the End of the Mosaical world
from this place of Dani^l, and also from Esaias 65. 17. And from thence also they
might call the world of the M^ssias, the world to come.

10. It is observable, that when John Baptist began to preach, he said, the
Kingdom of h^aven is come: so Brought. does render M^tth. 3. 2. that is to say,
That Kingdom of the M^ssias that has been so long looked for is now come, it
is just new in view:

11. Dr. G^^g^ says in Heb. 5. 2. p. 158. that these words, the world to come;
are me^^nomically put for the ^nhabitants, not in earth only but in Heaven
also: and it is here put (says he) for the whole number of Gods elected Church
that are alled, or to be called; and in this sense (says he) this world is
called the Kingdom of G^^, Matthew. 6. 33. and the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 3.
3. and the wo^ld to come, in reference to those Saints that lived before Christ
was exhibited: and which longed to see this World, Matthew 13. 7. Joh. 8 56. 1
Pet. 1. 10, 11. and after this sort John Baptist, being come, is said to be
E^ias to come, Matthew. 11. 14. in reference to the foregoing Prophesi^ of
M^la^hy. Chap. 4. 5. because their Faith was grounded on the promises of
Messiah to come.

So then Daniel does tell us the true cause why Sacrifice and Oblation, and all
the other Rites of Moses should be fully ended, was because the death of Christ
was to be the perfection of them all for the confirming of the New Testament,
Dan. 9. 24, 27. and in this respect the days of Messiah must needs be called
the world to come, by those Hebrew Doctors, that as yet lived under the
Mosaical world.

Quest.
What kind of Righteousness was it, that the Messiah was to bring into the
world to come?

Answ. 1. Negatively, and 2. Affirmatively.

1. Negatively: It was not the Righteousness of the covenant of Nature that
was made with Adam; For I have showed in Chap. 1. that the covenant of Nature
required but one transient act of eating of the Tree of Life for the fulfilling
of it: And 2. That it was extinguished and made utterly null as soon as Adam
had but tasted of the forbidden Fruit.

2. It was not the righteousness of the moral Law of Nature wherein Adam
Neither the Righteousness of the covenant of Nature, nor yet the
righteousness of the moral law of Nature are imputed to sinners for their
justification: but the supernatural righteousness of Gods reconciled
fo^givenesse procured by the meritorious obedience of Christ in his death, is a
sinn^rs only Righteousness.
was created, and wherein the humane Nature of Christ was created, for that
righteousness was no other but natural righteousness, and the covenant was
made with Adam for an Eternal Life in Heaven, for his living in that natural
righteousness: and thence it follows that that righteousness cannot now be
imputed to sinners, for their righteousness to an Eternal Life in Heaven,
seeing no such covenant was ever made for it: And 2. Because no accident (as
that was) can be made ours, or can denominate us whereof we were not the
subjects, as it is rightly observed by Mr. Baxter. And 3. Because in the case
of obedience the Law determines of the person as well as of the thing due, and
allows not a del^gation of doing by an Instrumental, or by the natural person
of another.

2. Affirmatively; The Righteousness which the Messiah was to bring into the
world to come, was his Fathers Reconciled forgiveness, which kind of
supernatural Right^ousnesse he procured for believing sinners by his
meritorious obedience in his death and Sacrifice at the just end of the said
Seventy-sevens of years: as I have showed it in my answer to the first
Question: Or thus, it was such a kind of Righteousness which was typified by
the ceremonial justifications of Moses Law, by the blood of Bulls and Goats and
the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean to the sanctifying of the flesh
(or of the bodies of the National Church from their ceremonial sins): for by
this means their bodies were justified, purified or sanctified from their
ceremonial sins, before they might come into Gods presence in his holy Temple:
for by Gods typical covenant of works at Mount Sinai these Rites were ordained
to procure Gods reconciled forgiveness to their ceremonial sins, H^b. 9. 13.
But in the new covenant of Grace and R^conciliation, the condition that is
required to be performed on the sinners part for his eternal justification from
the guilt of his moral sins, is Faith only in Christ's meritorious death and
Sacrifice, as in the only procuring cause of Gods Reconciled forgiveness, by
the which they are firmly justified from the guilt of all their moral sins:

3. The Apostle says in Heb. 12. 27. Yet once more (which) signifies the
removing of those things which may be shaken: thi^ once more, is meant of the
removing of the Jews typical covenant of works at Mount Sinai, (namely of their
typical Justification or Sanctifications from ceremonial sins) that those
things which cannot be shaken may remain; for Jesus is the Mediator of the new
Covenant or Testament, and his blood is the true blood of Sprinkling, v. 24.
that procures Gods Reconciliation for the justifying of the Conscience from
moral sins: These are the things that cannot be shaken but shall remain, as the
only unalterable way of a sinners eternal Justification, Heb. 12. 28. Acts 13.
38, 39.

SECT. 11.
And to seal Vision and Prophet.

THis is the fourth End and Use of the Death of Christ at the just end of of
the said Seventy-sevens of years.

1. The word Seal in this place must have the same signification that I gave it
before at v. 7. namely, it does here signify the Finishing, the Fulfilling, or
the final ending of Vision and P^oph^t that concerned the sufferings and death
of Christ; He would not dye until he had finished every particular thing that
was foretold of him by Vision and Prophet: for John says, that Jesus knowing
that all things were now accomplished (except one particular) that the
Scripture might Christ fulfilled every particular suffering that were foretold
by the Prophets, from Genesis 3. 15. to his giving up the Ghost.
be fulfilled, said: I ^hirst, and they filled a sponge with Vinegar, and put
it to his mouth; when Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, it is
Finished: and then as soon as he had finished, or sealed, or ended every
particular of his sufferings that were foretold by Vision and Prophet: he bowed
his head and gave up the ghost, Joh. 19. 28, 29, 30. On these last words
Bernard says, It is a great infirmity to dye, but so to dye does plainly prove
an infinite power.

2. By Prophet in the singular, is meant all the Prophets in the plural: of
which Ebrew Syntax. See Ains. Genesis 2. 2. and in Genesis 3. 2.

3. Then the true meaning of the Angels Message unto Daniel is this, that at
the just end of Seventy-sevens of years, the Messiah should by his Death and
Sacrifice seal, fin^sh, or end all those things that the Prophets foretold
should come to pass, concerning his Combat of sufferings: even all the
particulars that were revealed at sundry times in Visions to the Prophets from
Genesis 3. 15. to the very time of his giving up the Ghost, not any one particular
should remain unfulfilled: and therefore it is said, that Jesus knew from the
Beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray him, John 6.
64. And Jesus knew before his last Passe-over that his hour was come, and that
he should depart out of this world unto the Father, John 13. 1. and in v. 11.
He kn^w who should betray him; and before he was apprehended in the Garden, it
is said, that he knew all things that should come unto him, and consonant
thereto, he went forth to the Officers that were sent to Apprehend him: And he
said unto them, whom seck ye? Joh. 18. 4. and also when he was in the midst
of his greatest Tortures on the Cross, it is said, that Jesus knowing that all
things were now accomplished, Remembered that one thing more was yet to be
fulfilled, and in that Respect, he said, I Thirst, Joh. 19. 28. and thereupon
they gave him some Vinegar to drink: and then it is said in v. 30. when Jesus
had received the Vinegar, he said, it is finished, Namely, the very last
particular of my foretold sufferings from my Combater Satan and his potent
seed, is now finished: and then without any further delay he bowed his head and
gave up the Ghost: and thence it follows, that in th^s juncture of time, the
Messiah did se^l, (fi^^sh or end) Visica and Prophet: and after this sort he
become obedient to the Death, even to the death of the Cross in every
particular suffering that was written of him, Phil. 2. 8.

4. Tertullian Contra Judeos, says on this place, That Christ is also the Seal
of the Prophets in fulfilling whatsoever wa^ told of him: and unto this I add:
That Jesus took unto him the Twelve to instruct them in his particular
Sufferings: and therefore he said unto them, Behold, we go up to Jerus^lem, and
all things that are written by the Prophets con^^rning the Son of M^n shall be
accomplished (or finished, even as certainly as when a d^c^eed S^ntence is
Sealed) Luke 18. 1. and the like Ex^osition does Christ make of the S^aling or
finishing Acts of his death, in Luke 24. 27, 46. For Christ was ever mindful
of this Sealing or finishing Act.

5. This Sealing or finishing act of Vision and Prophet by the death of Christ,
is exactly limited by the Angel to be at the just End of Seventy-sevens of
years: Mr. Bro. says, that Aben Ezra being a spightfull Enemy to Christ,
speaks better (on Dan. 9. 24.) for our main battle then any of ours: For that
he says, See his Annor. o^ his Hanaw Edition in Dan. 9. 24.
The Seventy-sevens are four hundred and ninty yea^s from the B^ginning of
Daniels prayer unto the Sealing of Messiah the Holy or Holies: and says Bro.
in Revel. p. 107. or Acad^miques might be ashamed that a Jew in Rho^^s now five
hundred years ago spoke better then they do for the Gospel: and see him in his
Advertisement of Corruptions, p. 73.

SECT. 12.
And to show Christ to be the Holy of Holies, or rather thus: To Anoint the
Holy ^f H^lies.

1. I Do strongly suspect that Mr Bro. is not right in this word [Shew] and I
do rather think so, because himself does acknowledge ^n his Annot. that the
prop^ie^y of the ^ebrew word does sign^fie ^o anoin^. And 2. Because most
Translators do render it to anoi^t: unless by the word Show he does mean the
Consecration of Christ by his s^fferings to his death and Sacrifice, which was
done in the view of his Disciples: namely of James, Peter and John, who were
the witnesses of his Ago^y in the Garden: and it seems to me that this is Mr.
Broughtons meaning, beca^se he says in his Advertisemen^, p 33. That Christ
cons^crated himself for his Re^eemed, anointing or showing himself to be the
Son of God.

2. ^n his A^vert^sem^nt of Corruptions, he says in p. 40. 41. That Aben Ezra
is for^ed to conf^sse, that the four hund^ed ninty years are from Daniels
prayer unto the Seal^ng of the Messiah; and says Bro. the ordinary phrase to
anoint he learnedly expounds to Seal: so Aben Ezra (says he) showed that
four hundred ninty years are from Daniels prayer unto the time when Messiah
shall be Sealed: that is manifested (as to to the Centurion) that he was the
Son of God.

3. Because I do not find his Translation and Exposition of his translated word
show, to be clear; I will not in my Exposition follow his word show, but the
word Anoint: and for the better finding out of the true sense of the word
Anoint in this place: I will show how the anointing of the Messiah was typified
in the ceremonial Law, by a twofold degree of Anointing:

1. Anointing in the ceremonial Law is put for the first act; as for the first
beginning of the act of Consecration, as in Genesis 28. 18.

2. It is also put for the perfecting act of consecration, as in Genesis 35. 14,
etc. And in allusion to this last act, must this word anoint in Daniel be
taken. But for the better and more clear understanding of these words: To
anoint the holy of Holies.

I will show how the Messiah was four times anointed after four several manners:

SECT. 13.
1. HE was anointed in his divine Nature, as himself does testify in Prove.
Christ was four times anointed after four several manners.
8. 23. I was anointed from everlasting: that is to say, I was through all
Eternity set apart in Gods eternal Council and Decree, and so consequently by
mine own consent and covenant to do the Office of a Mediator for the Redemption
of fallen man: In this sense and after this manner Christ was intrinsecally
anointed in his divine Nature from Eternity to do the Office of a Mediator.

2. It was in this respect that Christ did justify his Authority to do the
Office of a Mediator, by saying thus to the blasphemous Jews: say ye of him
whom Prove. 8. 32. John 10. 36.
the Father has sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because
I said I was the Son of God, John 10. 36. that is to say, the Father has
sanctified me: (i.e. anointed me, or set me apart) from Eternity in my divine
Nature, and consequently he has now sent me into the World to do the Office of
a Mediator extrinsecally, and therefore I do not blaspheme in saying that I am
the Son of God: and to this sense does Mr. Trap also expound th^s verse, and so
does our Annot. on the word Messiah, in Dan. 9. 25. saying, That Christ was
anointed to the Office of the Mediator in both his Natures: But yet (says the
Annot.) he was anointed in his Humane Nature only, as to the gifts of the holy
Ghost collated upon it, and infused into it.

3. It was in this sense also that Jeremy was sanctified, set apart or anointed
to do the Office of a Prophet, before he came out of his mothers womb, Jer. 1.
5. and to this sense does our larger Annot. speak on that place.

But this first kind of anointing is not meant of the Messiah in Dan. 9. 24.

SECT. 14.
2. CHrist was anointed at another time; namely in the time of his Incarnation,
Christ's conception by the holy Ghost was no act of anointing him into the
Media^o^s Office.
when he was conceived in the Womb of the Virgin Mary by the holy Ghost, as
sundry Divines do affirm: and therefore Dr. Willet on this Text of Daniel does
labor to prove it: But as yet I could never see any sufficient proof for it;
but because it is affirmed by others, I do here Rank it into the number of the
kinds of his Anointing: that thereby I may give an occasion unto others to
search more thoroughly into the Truth: And the rather because

Mr. Norton himself does acknowledge in p. 205.

That Christ's Incarnation was not a mediato^ly office-act, But an act
constituting the person, called to that Office.

: and from thence it follows, that Christ was not extrinsecally anointed or
instaled into the Mediators Office at his conception by the holy Ghost.

2. But it seems to me that Mr. Norton does contradict his said sound
Assertion: For he does affirm in p. 240. That for our sakes Christ sanctified
himself, John 17. 19. and that from the Womb unto his last Oblation of himself
upon the Cross.

for their sakes I sanctify my self, in John 17. 19. is this: That for their
sakes I sanctify or set my self apart to undergo my consecrating Combat of
Sufferings from my proclaimed enemy the Devil and his potent Seed which are now
ready at hand to assault me in the hour of my death: and therefore though
Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost in the Virgins womb, yet he did not then
sanctify himself from the womb with such like Office Graces, as he did in his
last Oblation in the Garden and on the Cross; for in case he had so sanctified
himself from the Womb, then doubtless his Incarnation had been a mediatorly
office act, contrary to what he asserted above.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 195.

Grace was in Christ out of measure by virtue of personal Union.

: then Grace was in him out of measure in the first act of his Incarnation,
because then began his personal union with his flesh or Body before his Soul
was infused: for as it is well observed by Dr. Jackson in his seventh Book on
the Creed, p. 324. etc. That the flesh of Christ was first united to his divine
person before his Soul was infused. 2. Our Orators on Matthew. 1. 23. says, on
the word The Word did assume our flesh into the personal union before the soul
was infused.
[That] which is conceived in her, or bred of her substance [That] not [HE]
because Christ took on him the Nature and not the person of man. 3. Carlisle in
his Descent, Fol. 170. says, Indeed Christ was formed first unperfectly of the
seed of Mary: as David was, least that we should imagine with the Demerits,
that the Body of Christ was co-essential with the Divinity or Godhead: and in
the same error were the Monoth lites and Eutichians.

4. Mr. Joanes in his School Divinity, says in p. 84, 85. The humane Nature
does insist inseparably in the person of the Son of God, even then when the
flesh was but in Fieri, a making, a conceiving, when it was but a rude and
informed lump of flesh: then was this Hypostatical Union full: (And says he in
p. 98. In his Conception he was an Embrio, a little piece of unfashioned flesh)
2. Says he, at the death and dissolution of the Humane Nature: even then when
the parts of the humane Nature were separated one from another: The Word did
still remain flesh, then was this Union full: neither Soul nor Body were
separated from the second Person of the Deity: and in p. 85. he cites Bernard,
speaking sweetly to this effect; and to this purpose I speak (though briefly)
in my Dialogue in p. 11. But I find that some others do most erroneously
affirm, that the Soul was infused in the same instant when the Word assumed
flesh: and thence it follows, that he at the first assumed the person of a
man; and secondly, thence it will also follow that the Mediator should be two
distinct persons, as Nestorius held: But seeing it is granted by all the
Orthodox, that the union with his flesh was not dissolved when his Soul was
separated from his Body by death, I see not what should hinder but that he
might unite his flesh to his divine person before his Soul was infused: and
this order of his Union will prevent the Nestorian error of assuming the
person of a man in his Conception; and Mr. Trap does fall into that error in
his Annot. in Genesis 1. 1. p. 3. For he does there affirm that Christ's Soul was
created in, and with his Body in the Virgins Womb the self-same moment: But Dr.
Usher in his Sum of Divinity, does in p. 165. propound this Question: What was
the cause that the person of the Son of God did not join it self to a perfect
person of man? his Answer is threefold: 1. Because there would not then be a
personal union of both to make one perfect Mediator. 2. Because then there
should be four persons in Trinity. 3. Because the works of each of the Natures,
could not be accounted the works of the whole person: whereas now by the union
of both Natures in one person, the obedience of Christ performed: in the
manhood is become of infinite merit, as being the obedience of God who
purchased his Church with his own blood, Acts 20. 28.

5. If Grace was in him out of measure by virtue of personal union in his
conception, then it cannot be true which is affirmed by the holy Ghost, that he
did afterward grow in Grace, Luke 2. 40, 52.

6. If Grace was in him out of measure by virtue of personal union, then he
needed not any new anointing by the holy Ghost into the execution of his
Mediators Office, because no more could be added to that Grace in case it was
in him out of measure by virtue of his first personal union in the Womb.

7. If Grace was in him out of measure by virtue of personal union in the Womb,
it will from thence follow that he assumed his humane to be as a true part of
his divine Person, as our Souls are with our Bodies: But this may not be
granted; for then his divine Nature must of necessity have endowed his humane
Nature with the proportion of the Divine, and then his humane Nature could not
have suffered nor dyed for our Redemption. But I have showed in my former
printed Reply, That Christ's humane Nature was no true part of his divine
Person, but an Adjunct or an Appendix only: and therefore his divine Nature did
not necessarily endow it with the properties of the divine; nor yet with all
Graces out of measure by virtue of personal union in his Incarnation.

8. I do notwithstanding freely grant that this humane Nature was well prepared
for action by virtue of his Conception by the holy Ghost, because it was an act
that did constitute the person to the Office of Mediatorship when he should be
called extrinsecally thereunto; for by virtue of that divine Conception his
humane Nature was framed after Gods Image in moral perfections as Adam was in
his first creation: But these moral perfections of his Nature must be
differenced from his extrinsecal and supernatural Anoyntings by the holy Ghost
at his Baptism, because the holy Ghost does work as well in the Creation of
Natural Principles (as in Genesis 1. 2. with Psalm 104. 30.) as in the Creation of
supernatural Principles: and I think nothing is more clear and evident then
this, Namely, that neither the person of the Word nor of the holy Ghost did
furnish Christ in his conception with supernatural Graces out of measure for
the full execution of his Office, because he received further degrees of Grace
as he grew in Years as I noted it above, and because he was not extrinesecally
anointed to the execution of that Office with Graces out of measure until the
holy Ghost sat upon him at his Baptism.

9. I conclude, that he received not Grace out of measure until he was
Extrinsecally anointed to execute the Mediators Office at his Baptism when he
began to be thirty years of age: for until that time he lived a private Life
with Christ was not extrinsecally anointed into the Mediators Office until he
began to be thirty years of age.
his Parents, and was subject unto them and learned the Trade of a Carpenter of
his Father Joseph, and in that respect was called the Carpenter, and sometimes
the Corpenters Son: in all which time he was obedient to his Parents, as a good
Son; and was obedient to the typical Law of Works as a godly Jew, for he was
circumcised and walked in all the Ordinances of Moses without Reproof: But this
moral and ceremonial obedience of his, cannot properly be called his
Mediatorial obedience; because he was not as yet Extrinsecally anointed into
the Mediators Office: but he stayed for the execution of that Office till the
time appointed of his Father was come: and to this sense do diverse Orthodox
Writers speak.

1. Marlorat. in Matthew. 4. 1. does there cite Musculus, saying thus: when
Christ led a private life at home, we read not that he was tempted: But when he
took upon him the Office of a Redeemer, he descended into the midst of the
field to take the quarrel in hand in the Name of the Church. 2. Dr. Ames speaks
to the same effect in Medul. li. 2. c. 21. sect. 32, 33, 34, 35. and in sect.
12. to 29. 3. Dr. Lightfoot speaks to the same effect in his Harmony, part 1.
p. 76. 199. and part 3. p. 131. 4. Mr. Trap does speak also to the same effect,
in Mat. 4. 1. 5. Mr. John Forbis speaks to the same effect on Justification, p.
108, 109. 6. Mr. Lawson speaks to the same effect in his Body of Divinity, p.
135. at N. IV. and in other places. 7. Dr. Hall speaks to the same effect: for
in his second Volume on the new Testament, he says thus in p. 36. All the time
of our Saviors obscurity I do not find him set upon with Temptations, but now
(says he) that he looks forth to the public execution of his divine Office
Satan bends his Forces against him, Mat. 4. 1. 8. Dr. All, says in his
Poor-mans Library, part 2. fol. 59. The third Generation, Namely the
Conditional Generation, may be applied and referred unto Christ: for what other
thing was the immutation and change of the state and condition of Christ, when
he was by the holy Ghost dedicated, consecrated, and declared from Heaven to be
the Son of God at the Flood Jordan, when he was baptized; But a certain
Regeneration, because he was seen to be another manner of man then he was
before? Insomuch that the Inhabitants of the City did say, from whence has he
these things? what Wisdom is this that is given unto him that even such great
works are done by his hands? is not this the Carpenter Mary's Son? Mat. 3. 54.
Mark 6. 2. compared with Luke 4. 16. to 29. where they thrust him out of
Nazareth, and then he came to Capernaum, where he did the said mighty works.
Conclusion from the premises:

It follows from hence, that the Incarnation of Christ at his conception by the
holy Ghost is not to be understood of that Anointing of the Messiah that is
meant in Dan. 9. 24.

SECT. 15.
The third kind of Anointing.

Was when Christ was extrinsecally anointed by the holy Ghost into the
Mediators office at his Baptism when he began to be thirty years of age; this
was the time appointed of the Father for that purpose: and therefore at this
time Christ went on purpose to Jordan to be baptized of John in the public
view of John's Auditory, and then the Spirit of God descended like a Dove and
sat upon him, and then a voice came from the Father out of Heaven, saying, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased, Mat. 3. 16, 17. with Luke 3. 22.

2. Christ was no sooner anointed Extrinsecally into the Mediators Office, but
he was presently led by the earnest zeal of that Spirit too, into the
Wilderness on purpose to try masteries with his proclaimed enemy the Devil,
who had a liberty of power given him from this time forth to tempt him to some
sin or other: and he continued to tempt him for forty days together, and then
at the end of those forty days he had a liberty of power given him to tempt
Christ with three notable Temptations in three places of advantage.

3. It is observed that Christ was so anointed with all the Graces of the
Spirit out of measure that he conquered the Devil in all his Temptations: (for
it is said, that the Devil left him for a season, Luke 4. 13.) then Christ
remained in the Field as the most absolute Conqueror. And 2. Then the Angels
came and Luke 4. 18. Esaias 61. 1. Acts 10. 37. Esaias 11. 2.
ministered unto him. And 3. Then he returned presently by the power of this
Spirit into Galile; and he came first to the City Nazareth, and as his custom
was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and he found the place
where it is written, the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, Luke 4. 18.

4. It is much to be observed, how he does from this Text (cited from Esaias 61.
1.) calls the Graces of the Spirit which he had now received at his Baptism,
his Anoyntings. And 2. at this instant there was a man present that had a
spirit of an unclean Devil, which cried out and said, I know who thou art, the
holy one of God, Luke 4. 34. but before this the Devil did not call him the
holy One of God; but now he does not call him the holy One of God, because he
had been newly anointed at his Baptism with Office Graces, before this he was
not separated from his former Trade of Life; but now by his extrinsecal
anointing into the Mediators Office he was separated from his former Trade of
Life.

5. Take special notice also that Peter does call the gift of the holy Ghost
which Christ received at his Baptism [his Anoynting] Emphatically. The word
(says he) you know began to be published from Galile: After the Baptism which
John preached, how God Anointed Jesus of Nazareth, with the holy Ghost and with
Power: From these words take special notice,

1. That Peter does limit the time of Christ's Extrinsecal Anointing to his
Mediators Office: To begin (not at his personal union at his Incarnation and
Conception by the holy Ghost: But) after the Baptism which John preached, for
John had preached the Baptism of Repentance about five or six months before
Christ came to be baptized of him: and doubtless Christ did purposely defer
his coming until the time that he began to be about thirty years of age, in
relation to the time that the Levites did enter into their Office; for though
they had a personal Right to do the service of the Tabernacle by birth, yet
they might not enter into the full execution of the Office until they began to
be thirty years of age, Numb. 4 7. See Ainsworth there, John the Baptist (A
Levite) began also his Ministry at that Age: And Christ (fulfilling all
Figures) at that age was anointed at his Baptism, began the preaching of the
Gospel, Luke 1. 35, 36. Luke 3. 2, 3, 23. And so though Christ was by birth the
person that should extrinsecally execute the Office of the Mediator; yet he did
not glorify himself to do the Office of a Mediator extrinsecally at his Birth:
but at the first he led a private Life until the time that his Father said
unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Heb 5. 5. or raised
thee up unto the Extrinsecal execution of thy Priestly Office. Ambrose speaking
of the right manner of Electing Bishops, says in his Christian-Offices, B. 1.
p. 129. That God himself chose Aaron, that no humane desire might bear sway in
that choice, but the grace of God: not a voluntary offer, nor a proper and
private Assumption or Intrusion, but a Heavenly, lawful and public Calling:
as it is written, no man takes this honor upon him, but he that is called of
God, as was Aaron: Thus far he, Aaron was called by Name to the Priestly
Office, Exodus 28. 1. and this is applied to Christ in Heb. 5. 5, 6. And as soon
as the Priests were extrinsecally consecrated to that Office they began to
offer Sacrifices, and to make Atonement for all Israel: So

Christ was begotten or raised up at two several times after two several
manners: as it is expressed in Acts 13.

1. Paul said thus in v. 23. God according to his promise has raised up to
Israel a Savior Jesus. Now the punctual time when God did raise him up is thus
expressed Act. 13. 23, 24.
in v. 24. Namely, it was when John had first preached before his coming, the
Baptism of Repentance to all the people of Israel, which was just at the same
time as I expressed it before from Peter's words in Acts 10. 37.

This is the first time wherein God raised up Christ to his extrinsecal
execution of his Mediators Office: and this raising up is further proved in v.
33. by this testimony of Scripture, This Day have I begotten thee: and from
hence it follows that these two phrases, Gods raising, and Gods beg^tting are
terms convertible in this place of Acts 13. 23. and v. 33. This Day of Christ's
anointing to the Mediators Office when he began to be thirty years of Age, is
the Day of Gods raising him up to that Office, or it is the day wherein God
has begotten him to the extrinsecal execution of that Office.

2. The second sort of Gods raising up of Christ, is his raising him up from
The Father did beget or raise up his Son Christ to the extrinsecal execution of
the Mediators Office when he did first anoint him by the holy Ghost at his
Baptism before John's Auditory when he began to be thirty years of Age.
the dead, as it is expressed in v. 30. And this the Apostle does prove by two
other Testimonies, in v. 34. and v. 35. And this is called his raising up from
the dead in v. 30. but the Apostle does not call the former raising, his
raising up from the dead; But as Dr. Gouge does rightly observe in Heb. 1. 5.
this day have I begotten th^e, is produced by the Apostle unto the time that
the Son of God was manifested in the flesh, when he showed forth his Son unto
the World by his extrinsecal anointing by the holy Ghost before John's Auditory.

3. It is also observable that in Acts 13. 33. the Apostle does use the same
Greek word for the Mediators extrinsecal raising up or begetting to the
execution of his Mediators Office that is used in the same sense in Heb. 5. 5
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten th^e, or raised thee up to the high
Priests Office.

4. The Scripture does often mention this extrinsecal begetting or raising up
of Christ to the extrinsecal execution of his Mediators Office, as in Deuteronomy. 18.
15, 18. Jer. 23. 5. Luke. 1. 69. Acts 2. 30. Acts 3. 22, 26. Heb. 5. 5.

5. This raising up or begetting of Christ into his Mediators Office is called
his Anointing by the holy Spirit in Esaias 61. 1. And Mr. Gataker in his Annot.
on Esaias 11. 2. says, The Spirit of the Lord did not come upon him only, as it
did upon his Mother in the conceiving of him, Luke 1. 35. But it did Rest and
Abide with him, and take up in a more special, yea singular manner its
perpetual and never interrupted or eclipsed Residence with him, and in him: and
this, says he, was typified by the holy Ghosts descending in the likeness of
a Dove at his Baptism, and resting upon him, Mat. 3. 16. And says he a little
after, the Prophet goes on to recite some Heads of those particular Endowments,
wherewith the Messiah in his own Nature should be superabundantly furnished
above all Creatures, Men o^ Angels, not for his own private use and honor
alone, but for the managing of his Spiritual Kingdom.

6. Another eminent Divine says thus: The Prophets did not always speak by
the instinct of the holy Spirit, but sometimes they were destitute of that
Spirit: But the Son of God becoming man had this prerogative only, he had the
Spirit of God always remaining or abiding in him, John 1. 32, 33. Upon whom
thou shall see the Spirit descending and abiding upon him, the same is he that
Baptizeth with the holy Ghost, Mark these words: remaining and abiding upon
him; for by this fullness of the Spirit he is distinguished from all other men
whatsoever: for though the Spirit descending upon others, yet it did not remain
and abide upon them as it did upon Christ; as it is also observed before by Mr.
Gataker at N. 5. And therefore when Christ said, My God, my God why have thou
forsaken me, the inward supplies of the Spirit were not Eclipsed.

7. Tertullian does fully accord to this fullness of the Spirit wherewith
Christ was extrinsecally anointed to the execution of his Mediators Office: as
I find it cited at large in Bullengers Decades, p. 729.

Conclusion from the Premises.

From the said Remarkable observations it follows, that though Christ in his
Conception and Birth was created after God Image in moral perfections: yet
before he could extrinsecally execute the Office of a Mediator he stood in need
of a supernatural Unction, of all the Graces of the holy Spirit to remain and
abide upon him for the better performance of his Mediatorial obedience in his
Combat of sufferings until he had performed the same as a sweet smelling
Sacrifice to God for the procuring of his Fathers Reconciliation to all
believing sinners for their full Redemption from Satan's head-plot.

But Mr. Norton does run in a contrary strain, for he says in p. 239. That
there was more habitual Grace in Christ then there is duty in the Law, because
Christ was Godman, and received the Spirit out of measure.

Norton does hold, though much amiss, in p. 140. 197, 199.

2. Mr. No^ton does run into another great error, in that he makes the Law to
be an imperfect Rule of duty in Relation to Christ: for (says he) there was
more habitual Grace in Christ, then there is duty in the Law; But happily he
may think to salve up this error by some distinction upon the word Law: For
the word law may be taken either for the moral Law of Nature wherein Adam and
Christ's humane Nature were created: Or 2. Into the Law of the Covenant of Grace
and Reconciliation; for it is manifest by the second Commandment, that God in
Trinity (and in special Christ as Mediator) does promise to do mercy unto
Thousands (of the fallen sons of Adam) that do love him and keep his
Commandments: and from thence it follows, that this showing of mercy does
require as much duty from Christ as Mediator, as should abound to the
Redemption, Justification and Salvation of all the Thousands of Repenting and
Believing sinners that shall be saved. And 3. The word Law, may be taken for
that peculiar Law of the Eternal Covenant, wherein Christ had obliged himself
to do the whole Office of the Mediator.

In the first sense, there was no more habitual Grace in Christ's humane Nature
then there is duty in the moral Law of Nature, or else God should not have
given a perfect Rule of the moral duty to Christ's humane Nature. And this Mr.
Norton himself does affirm but three lines before, Namely, That Christ's
Original Righteousness is that gracious inherent disposition of his, from the
first instant of his Conception, whereby he was habitually conformable to the
Law, Namely to the moral Law of Nature; and therefore his habitual
Righteousn^sse was exactly answerable to all the duties of that moral Law, and
not more, nor less.

2. There was not, as I conceive any more habitual Grace in Christ then there
was that special Law of Mediatorship, for that Law did require him to be
anointed extrinsecally with the Spirit out of measure, even above all his
Fellows, Psalm 45. 7. for the complete fulfilling of his Mediators Office, as I
have at large showed before; and therefore according to this Law it may be
said, there was more acquired grace in Christ then there was duty in the moral
Law of Nature, but not more habitual Grace.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 199.

Polanus says, That from the time wherein Christ took upon him the Form of a
Servant, he began to pay the price of our Redemption: Namely from the time of
his Conception, as he has explained himself in other places, cited before at
Reply 2. and Reply 3.

John's Auditory at his Baptism, and that was when he began to be thirty years
of age, Luke 3. 23. as I have at large opened the matter but a little before:
Then, and not till then, he began to take upon him the Form of a Servant,
namely the Office of a Mediator extrinsecally.

2. This Truth is made further manifest by a judicious comparing of those
Scriptures wherein Christ is called A Servant. The time when Christ did first
take upon him the Form of a Servant extrinsecally was from the time that he
took upon him the extrinsecal form of a Mediator when he was anointed at his
Baptism, beginning then to be thirty years of age.


1. He is called Gods servant in Esaias 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold
(i.e. whom I uphold by my extrinsecal Anointing of him by the holy Ghost) as it
is expressed in the next words [I have put my Spirit upon him] Namely, to abide
and remain always upon him for the effectual enabling him to execute the
office of a Mediatorial Servant.

2. God calls him his righteous Servant in Esaias 53. 11. because of his
righteous performance of his great Combat of consecrating sufferings, for the
perfecting of his obedience before his death could be made a propitiatory
Sacrifice for the procuring of his Fathers Atonement and Forgiveness, for the
justification of the many believing sinners from the guilt of their sins: and
in this sense it is said he shall bear (away) their iniquities (from them:)

3. God says thus in Zach. 3. 8. Behold, I will bring forth my servant the
Branch, Namely that servant that I have called the Branch in Esaias 11. 1. I will
bring him forth by my extrinsecal anointing him by the Spirit of Wisdom, etc.
Esaias 11. 2. (i.e.) with the fullness of all the Graces of the Spirit, which was
done superabundantly at his Baptism, to enable him thereby to do the Office of
the Mediatorial Servant in his great Combat of sufferings from Satan and his
potent seed in perfection of obedience: that so in that perfection of his
obedience he might make his death to be accepted of God, as a meritorious
Sacrifice of propitiation for the effectual procuring of his Fathers
Reconciliation to believing sinners: and in Relation to this sacrifice of
Atonement, God does promise in Zach. 3. 9. I will take away the iniquity of
that Land in one day; alluding thereby to the day of Atonement: For in that one
day of the year God did take away from the whole Land of his National Church
all their ceremonial sins by the slain-Goat, and by the Scapegoat which God
had ordained to be for the procuring of his Atonement and Forgiveness:
typifying out thereby the meritorious efficacy of the Death and Sacrifice of
Christ for the procuring of Gods Atonement and Forgiveness to the whole
spiritual Land of believing sinners.

4. God is said to bore the Ear of this Servant in token of his Free Covenant
to do the Office of a Mediatorial Servant, as it was typified in Exodus 21. 6.
Dan. 15. 17. compared with Psalm 40. 6. in which Psalm Christ's Ear is put by
the figure Synecdoche for his whole Body, because the Ear is the only member of
the body that does hearken to Gods Commands, and therefore the Seventy render
it, a Body have thou prepared me: and the Apostle Paul does follow their
translation in Heb. 10. 5. saying, A Body have thou prepared me, not only with
Natural, but also with supernatural Endowments, by being anointed extrinsecally
by the holy Ghost at his Baptism, for his infallable performance of his great
Combat of sufferings from his proclaimed Enemy the Devil and his potent seed,
according to Gods declaration of the Combat in Genesis 3. 15. And to this very
sense does Isaiah expound the boring of Christ's Ear, in Esaias 50. 5. as I have
also explained in my Dialogue in p. 22.

5. God does call Christ his servant David, not in Relation to the time of his
Conception, but in Relation to his extrinsecal execution of his Shepherds
Office, Ezekiel. 24. 23. And he began not to exercise his Shepherds Office
extrinsecally until he was extrinsecally anointed at his Baptism, but from that
time forward he did extrinsecally execute the office of a Shepherd 1. By his
preaching the glad tidings of Salvation, and also by his Example of Life, Eze.
34. 12, 14, 15. Esaias 40. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 25. And 2. By his meritorious obedience
in his sufferings: and in that Respect he said, I am the good Sh^pherd that
gives his life for the sheep, John 10. 11, 15, 17. John 15, 13. Heb. 13. 20.
He gave his life, namely his vital Soul for the Ransom of the World, Mat. 20.
28. That is to say, he did most Freely pour it out to death, Esaias 53. 12.

6. God calls him his servant David in Relation to his Extrinsecal Kingly
Office, Ezekiel. 34. 22. compared with Ezekiel. 37. 24. Jer. 23. 5. Hos. 3. 5. with
John 1. 49.

7. Peter said thus to the people that wondered at the cure of the Criple, The
God of our Fathers has glorified his servant Jesus, Acts 3. 13. in that he
has in his Name made this man sound. And 2. says he in ver. 26. Unto you has
God raised up his servant Jesus: he does not speak this of his raising him up
by his Conception and Brith, but he speaks of his raising him up to do the
service of a Mediator extrinsecally, by anointing him extrinsecally to that
Office at his Baptism, as I have expounded, Acts 13. 33. but a little before.

2. In both the said verses of Acts 3. 13, 26, Mr. Broughton does render the
Greek word servant: and it is evident that the Greek word does signify servant
as well as Son; and therefore King James' Translators do Render it servant in
Acts 4. 25. and in Luke 1. 54, 69. and in Mat. 8. 6, 8, 13. and Mat. 12. 18.
and Luke 7. 7.

3. An Hebrew servant in Exodus 21. 2. is called A Son of Israel by the Chaldy.

4. It is said in Deuteronomy. 32. 43. That God will avenge the blood of his servants:
but the Seventy render it the blood of his Sons: and Indeed faithful servants
are often called Sons.

8. Our Savior calls himself A servant in Relation to his great Combat of
sufferings in Matthew. 20. 27, 28. For that he says to his Apostles, Whosoever
will be chief among you let him be your servant: (For the honor of Superiority
stands in the doing of difficult services) Even as the Son of Man came not to
be saved, but to save, (as a Faithful Combating Servant against his proclaimed
Enemy the Devil, and his potent seed) by giving his Life as a Ransom for the
many: and this Truth is so clear, that our last Translators does in the margin
of this Text cite Phil. 2. 7. as a parallel to this Form of a servant, in
giving or venturing his Life in his great Combat with Satan, as the
Covenant-Price for the Ransom of the many.

9. Christ is called a servant or servitor of the Sanctuary and of the true
Tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man, Heb. 8. 2. not in Relation to
his taking of our Nature into personal union with his divine Person in his
Conception, but in Relation to his extrinsecal anointing, to do the service of
the true Sanctuary and of the true Tabernacle. 1. By by his consecrating
sufferings whereby his obedience was proved to be perfect; and then 2. By
making his death in the perfection of that obedience to be accepted of God as a
most perfect and pleasing sacrifice for the procuring of his Reconciled
Forgiveness to all believing sinners, as it is expounded by Heb. 9. 11, 12.
Namely, that Christ being become a high sacrifice of good things to come, by a
greater and more perfect Tabernacl^ not made with hands: that is to say, not of
his building (by the ordinary way of Generation) neither by the blood of Goats
and Calves, but by his own blood he Entered in once into the holy place having
obtained Eternal Redemption for us: and according to this Christ is called the
perfect Tabernacle, and the servant of the true Sanctuary; and therefore in his
Combat of his consecrating sufferings, he did offer up prayers and
supplications to God with strong Crying and Tears, and then being consecrated
or made perfect in his obedience he became the Author of eternal Salvation to
all that obey him, inwardly by believing in him, Heb. 5. 7, 8, 9, 10.

10. God says thus in Esaias 52. 13. My servant shall deal prudently, he shall
be exalted, and be extolled, and be very high. Tremelius, Luther, and P.
Galatine begins the 53. chapter at this verse: and indeed this verse has a
necessary dependence on the Argument of the 53. chapter: In consideration
whereof this word prudently, must relate to Christ's prudent behavior in his
management of his Combat of sufferings from his proclaimed Enemy the Devil and
his potent seed, until he had conquered them by his righteous performance of
that Combat; and until he had by that righteous performance merited his Fathers
Reconciled Forgiveness for the Redemption of believing sinners from Satan's
head-plot. And 2. It is in relation to that performance, that God does promise
that this Servant of his shall be exalted and extolled, and be very High. And
3. To this very sense does the Apostle speak in Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. First,
says he in ver. 7. He made himself of no Reputation (but not intrinsecally and
properly, for in that sense the divine Nature cannot put off any of his divine
Glory; But) extrinsecally it did, because he did not now set forth the Glory of
his Godhead; Phil. 2. 7.
but did as it were hide it and obscure it by taking upon him the extrinsecal
Form of a Combating Servant: 2. The Apostle does not mean that Christ took on
him the Form of a Servant when he first took on him the Form of Man, because
that act of assuming the Form of man was not an Office-act (as Mr. Norton does
acknowledge in p. 205.) but he took on him the Form of a Servant when he was
anointed, and took on him the extrinsecal Form of a Mediator [And he was made
in the likeness of men] Namely, in the likeness of sinful men, or of sinful
flesh as I have opened, Romans 8. 3. by the evil usage of the wicked generation
wherein he lived, as I have also Expounded, Esaias 53. 8. and in Luke 9. 44. The
Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men.

Ver. 8. And being found in fashion of a man, (Namely as a common man, without
the glorious manifestation of his Godhead for the most part) He humbled himself
and became obedient unto the death, even to the death of the Cross: In all
points he humbled himself to be used as a sinful Malefactor, according to Gods
declaration of the Combat in Genesis 3. 15. and in Psalm 22. and in Esaias 53.

Ver. 9. Wherefore God has highly exalted him; 1. By raising him up from the
dead, and by taking him up into Heaven, and by placing him there at his Right
hand, that he might there continually execute his Authoritive Office of
Intercession. And 2. God has also given him a Name above every Name.

Ver. 10. That In the Name of Jesus (not at the Naming of Jesus) every knee
should bow: For there is no Redemption or justification and salvation from sin,
but in his Name only, Acts 4. 12. Mat. 12. 21. And says Christ in John 14.
26. The Father will send the Spirit in my Name; that is to say, in the Name (or
for the sake) of my meritorious obedience in my Combat of sufferings, death,
and sacrifice; so, In the Name of Jesus: means in the Authoritive Virtue of his
mediation (by his Oblation and Intercession) every knee shall bow; that is,
yield reverence, obedience and subjection, Mat. 12. 21. Psalm 72. 9. Romans 14.
11. Esaias 66. 19, 20. Col. 3. 17. [Both of them in Heaven, and them on earth,
and them under the Earth]: By them in Heaven is meant the Angels, that are
known to worship Christ as he is the Mediator and Savior of believing sinners,
Heb. 1. 6. Luke 2. 13. Mar. 1. 13. 2. By them on Earth, is meant believing
sinners that live there on Earth. 3. By them under the Earth, is meant the
Bodies of those believers that are buried under the Earth, and yet their Souls
in Heaven do worship Christ as their only Redeemer and Savior: All this do
Exalt and Extol Christ as Mediator, and make him very high with their Praises
and joyful Thanksgivings of obedience.

Mr. Broughton shows that the Greek Fathers did follow Heathens, for this
last phrase, who term the place of all dead (...) under the ground: See him
more at large in his positions on the word Hades in p. 2. and in Eccles. the
last leaf of the Book to the Reader, and in his Lo. Family, F. 4.

2. The souls of the godly who are now made perfect in Heaven (though their
bodies lie under the Earth) do worship Christ as their Mediator and Redeemer.

3. Peruse Romans 5. 13. Es 26. 19. Esaias 45. 23. Psalm 22. 30.

Conclusion from the Premises.

By this comparing of Scriptures together it is evident: That the Time when
Christ did first begin to take upon him the extrinsecal Form of a Servant was
not as Mr. Norton makes it to be, from the time of his Conception; as if his
taking upon him the Form of a Servant, were nothing else but his taking upon
him the Form of a man, which is nothing else but the receiving of an old stale
Error: For Ambrose in his third Book of Christian-Offices, says in p. 3.
Christ the Lord when he was in the Form of God made himself of no Reputation
that he might take upon him the Form of a Man: He puts the Form of Man instead
of the Form of a Servant: But by comparing of Scriptures together: I have
showed that the Form of a servant is a Name of Office, Namely of his
Mediatorial Office, and not the natural property of his humane Nature: and in
that respect I say, That the time when he did first begin to take upon him the
form of a servant, was at the same time when he did first begin to take upon
him the Extrinsecal Office of the Mediator, Namely when he was extrinsecally
anointed to that Office at his Baptism, which was when he began to be thirty
years of age: as I have also explained in chap. 13. sect. 4. at N. 2. and also
in my former Book.

This third kind of Anointing is also somewhat different from that fourth kind
of ^nointing that is meant in Daniel: and yet this third kind of Anointing is
inseparably united to the fourth: But the fourth kind of Anointing that is
meant in Daniel, is his consecration to his Combat of sufferings, as I have
before expounded, John 17. 19. in Reply 2.

SECT. 16.
The fourth kind of Anointing the Messiah, was done by his consecrating
sufferings to his Death and Sacrifice.

1. HE could not make his death to be accepted of God as a propitiatory
sacrifice, The fourth kind of anointing the Messiah, was by his consecrating
sufferings at the time of his death.
until his obedience was thoroughly tried and made perfect by his consecrating
sufferings from his warlike Enemy the Devil and his potent seed, unto whom God
gave a liberty of power, Genesis 3. 15. to pierce him in the foot-soals as a
wicked Malefactor, to try if thereby they could provoke his passions to any
sinful distemper, and in case they had prevailed they had gotten the victory
over the seed of the Womrn; but because they could not prevail to provoke his
passions to any sinful distemper, therefore their Combat of suffering was but
for the consecration, or for the perfecting of his Obedience to his Death and
Sacrifice.

The wicked Jews are often said to lay wait for Christ to take him and to kill
him, a good space of time before the expiration of the Seventy-seven years, as
in Mar. 11. 18. Mar. 12. 12. Mar. 14. 1, 11, etc. but yet it was not in their
power to lay hands upon him and to put him to death, until the appointed time
(which Christ had covenanted with his Father) was come, no man could take his
Life from him until he laid it down of himself, John 12. 16. and he would not
lay it down until the said Seventy-sevens of years were just come, and when
that hour was come, he did but say, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit,
and at that very instant he breathed out his soul, not through any weakness of
his Nature, but by the powerful and joint concurrence of both his Natures,
John 10. 18. Heb. 9. 14. And this last Act was properly the Formality of his
Death and Sacrifice.

2. It is most evident by Heb. 2. 10. and by Heb. 5. 8, 9. and by other places,
that Christ was not to be anointed to his death by his consecrating sufferings,
before his death could be accepted of God as a most perfect and obedient
sacrifice: and thence it follows that this phrase, to anoint the Holy of Holies
(at the just end of Seventy-sevens of years) must be understood of his said
consecrating sufferings which in this juncture of time he suffered from his
Warlike Enemy Satan and his potent seed.

3. This word [To Anoynt] may also be an allusion to Comba^ing-Champions: For
Austin says thus in the City of God, l. 14. c. 9. Paul, that blessed man,
Christ's Champion, taught by him, anointed from him, and crucified with him: His
Commenter-Vives does thus explain these phrases of Austin: on the word
anointed, he says, That Austins Allusion runs through the anointing
Exercise and Fashion of Champions: and on the word crucified, he says, they
had certain bounds that they might not pass in any exercise.

4. Ambrose in his first Book of Offices; says in chap. 16. They who have not
Such Combaters as subscribed their names to undergo the burden of the Combat,
were wont to be anointed by way of preparation to the Combat.
subscribed and given up their Names as Wrestlets for the Garland, are not held
to the burden of the Combat; They who have not entered the lists of the Race,
anoint not themselves with Oil.

From these customs of Combaters, we may see that such as undertake the Combat
were anointed, for their better performance of the Combat.

5. It is also evident by Esaias 21. 5. That anointing was used for the
preparation, or for the consecration of such as undertook a warlike Combat:
Arise ye Princes (of the Medes and Persians) anoint the shield against the
Babilonians: that is to say, prepare or consecrate your selves to this warlike
Combat by anointing; and to this purpose also does God speak in Esaias 13. 3. I
have commanded my sanctified ones, or my anointed ones, to destroy Babylon by a
Combat of war; And to this purpose also does God speak to the Babylonians in
Jer. 6. 4. Sanctify (i.e. prepare or consecrate) war, or anoint your selves
from a warlike Combat against Judah; And according to this custom Jesus Christ
was anointed to his great warlike Combat with his old proclaimed Enemy the
Devil and his potent seed the Scribes and Pharisees, just at the end of
Seventy-sevens of years in the Garden and on the Cross; he was then in his
Resolutions prepared, sanctified or set apart, or anointed to undergo his said
warlike Combat in perfection of patience under all his greatest sufferings, by
which perfection of his patience was also made manifest, that so through his
perfect obedience to death, even to the shameful and painful death of the
Cross, he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the devil,
Heb. 2. 14.

6. The Psalmist says in Psalm 89. 31. That the Devils wicked generation
should reproach the footsteps of the Lords anointed; and from thence it
follows, that when he was pierced in his Footsteps, he was anointed, i.e.
prepared to bear those Reproaches when they pierced him in the Foot-soals
between two thieves on the Cross, as esteeming him thereby to be the worst of
all Malefactors.

7. In the Wars of Israel God ordained a chief Priest to be anointed for the
War, that so he might prepare the people to be courageous, Deuteronomy. 20. 2.

It is also said of the Koathites, that they must enter into the Army from
thirty years old and upwards, Numb. 4. 3. To war the warfare (i.e. to work) or
to serve the service of the Congregation with all exact care and diligence, as
it is explained in verse 23. and in that sense Paul does exhort Timothy to war
a good warfare, that is, to do the work of the Minister diligently.

8. Though the M^ssias was first anointed by the holy Ghost extrinsecally at
his Baptism to do the Office of the Mediator: yet after this, and not long
before his death, he was in a more peculiar manner anointed to his Combat of
sufferings at the time of his death; Namely at his Transfiguration, For then
Moses and Elias told his three Disciples [of his Departure] Name of his
departure, or decease by death, which (shortly after) he should accomplish at
Jerusalem, Luke 9. 31. And then presently there came a voice out of the Cloud
saying, Luke 9. 31.
This is my beloved Son, Luke 5. 35. in whom I am well pleased; that is to say,
in whose Righteous performance of the great Combat of his sufferings, and of
his death and sacrifice I am well pleased, or Reconciled to all believing
sinners, therefore hear him: and accordingly, about eight days before this he
told his Disciples, that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be
rejected of the Elders, and chief Priests and Scribes, and be slain, ver. 22.
And the next day after his Transfiguration, v. 27. he said to his Disciples in
v. 41. Let these things sink into your ears, for the Son of man shall be
delivered into the hands of men, namely, into the hands of notorious sinful
men: as I have expounded in Phil. 2. 7. a little before.

9. Though Christ was a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which Heb.
5. 8, 9. Heb. 2. 10, 17. Genesis 3. 15.
he suffered: And being made perfect, he became the Author of salvation to all
that obey him (by believing in him) Heb. 5. 8, 9. Dr. Hammond says on the word
[made perfect] That he was consecrated by his sufferings, as the Priest was by
the ceremonies of his consecration: This Annot. of his and that in Phil. 3.
(d.) is worthy of special marking: And why else is it said in Heb. 2 10. that
it became God (the Father) to consecrate the Prince of our salvation through
sufferings: but because God had given a liberty of power to the Devil and to
his potent seed in Genesis 3. 15. to pierce him in the foot-soals, and thereby to
try the perfection of his obedience and ignominious Reproaches, and by painful
Tortures on the Cross: and because his obedience was thereby proved to be
perfect, God accepted his death so performed as of a most pleasing and
acceptable sacrifice, for the procuring of his Reconciliation to all believing
sinners, and so consequently it was accepted of God, as the meritorious price
of their Redemption and justification from the guilt of all their sins, and of
their being received into Gods special Favor.

10. Though many particular Rites must concur to the consecration of the Priest
besides his anointing, Exodus 28. 41. Exodus 29. 7, 21. Yet the act of Anointing
Exodus 40. 15. Exodus 28. 41. Exodus 29. 21. Heb. 2 10. Esr. 5. 9. Heb. 7. 28.
was so eminent an act that it is often put for the Office sake, unto the which
the Priest was anointed, Numb. 18. 8. Lev. 21. 10, 12. Lev. 6. 22. Lev. 7. 35,
36. And 2. The Anointing is last named in Exodus 40. 15. because it was for the
confirmation of their full consecration to the execution of their Priestly
Office. 3. In like sort the Priest is called the anointed Priest in Lev. 4. 3.
by which Anointing his whole consecration is meant by the figure Synecdoche. 4.
Take special notice of these three Synonimous terms in Exodus 28. 41. Thou shall
anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them: All the men in the World
cannot give a better Exposition of the true sense of the word Anoint, then is
here given by the holy Ghost, by the word Consecrate and Sanctify. 5. As
Anointing is figuratively, put for the Priest that was anointed in Lev. 7. 35.
so Oil is put for Christ in Esaias 10. 27. because he was anointed with the oil
of gladness above measure.

11. Another Rite that belonged to the consecration of the Priest, was, That he
must be sprinkled both with Oil and Blood, Exodus 29. 21. and according to this
Type Christ was consecrated:

1. With the Oil of grace above his Fellows at his Baptism, and then at last
with his bloody sufferings before he could make his death to be accepted as a
consecrated sacrifice, Heb. 2. 10. Heb. 5. 9. Heb. 7. 28. and in the Levitical
Law this Oil and Blood was used for the cleansing of Lepers, by putting it upon
the tip of his right Ear, right Thumb and right Toe; and unless it were in
this very order put on, it made no Atonement for the Leper by the Hebrew
Cannons. See Ains. in Lev. 14. 15, 18. The like may be said of the anointing of
the Messiah: That in case it had been done without his consecrating sufferings
for the By the decree of the blessed Trinity Christ was to be consecrated or
made perfect in his obedience through sufferings before he could make his death
to be accepted as a pleasing sacrifice for the procuring of his Fathers
Reconciliation. John 4. 34. Gal. 1. 4. Luke 22. 31.
perfecting of his obedience, his death had made no Atonement: For Gods Oath
does assure us in Heb. 7. 28. that it was eternally decreed and covenanted
between the blessed Trinity, that Christ must be consecrated or made perfect in
his obedience by his sufferings, as it was first declared in Genesis 3. 15. before
he could make his death to be accepted of God, as the meritorious sacrifice of
his Reconciled Forgiveness to believing sinners.

2. It is also further evident by Mat. 26. 32, 42. and by John 11. That it was
the decreed will of God that Christ should be consecrated (i.e. anointed to his
death by a combat of sharp sufferings before his death could be accepted as the
meritorious and procuring Cause of Gods Reconciliation for the Redemption of
believing sinners, and Christ's will was united to his Fathers will in the said
eternal Covenant and decree, Psalm 40 8. with Heb. 10. 7. Yea Christ affirmed,
that it was his meat and drink to do the will of him that sent him, and to
finish his work, John 4. 34. John 5. 3. John 6. 38. And Paul affirms, That
Christ gave himself (to perform his great Combat of sufferings from his
proclaimed Combater Satan) according to the will of God, Gal. 1. 4. even
according to the declared Will of God in Genesis 3. 15. And it is as certain also,
That God works all things after the Council of his own Will, Ephesians. 1. 11. By
the which Will of God we are sanctified (or made holy, or justified from sin)
through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all, Heb. 10. 10.

12. Another Rite that belonged to the consecration of the Priests was, That
their hands must be filled with the parts of the Ram of consecration, Exodus 29.
22, 24. and then it was the Priests duty to wave those parts to and fro before
Jehovah: But the Original word says Ains. For wave, is sometimes used for
sifting in a sieve, Esaias 30. 28. and that sifting signified Trials and
Afflictions, Luke 22. 31. And the Prophets apply this word unto Troubles, Esaias
10. 32. Esaias 13. 2. Esaias 30. 28. which Troubles do shake the mind too and from:
But as I noted it Every grace of the Spirit wherewith Christ was anointed for
the execution of his Mediators Office, was to be tried with bruising
afflictions.
before at N. 10. This and all the other Rites of Consecration are comprehended
by the figure Synecdoche under the word Anointed.

13. It is also worthy of all observation, which is noted from Hebrew Doctors
by Ainsworth in Exodus 30. 25, 30. That the Anointing oil was made of four sorts
of Spices, and that every one of these four sorts must be pounded severally by
it self: typifying thereby that every several Grace of the Spirit wherewith
Christ was anointed for the execution of his Mediators office should be tried
(especially at his death) with bruising afflictions as they are called in Esaias
53. 5.

14. It was in relation to these and such like Types of consecration that
Christ in his prayer just before his great Combat of sufferings: said thus to
his Father, For their sakes I sanctify my self, John 17. 19. that is to say, I
do prepare my self to undergo my great Combat of sufferings from my malignant
Combater Satan, in perfection of patience, that I may thereby evidence the
perfection of my John 17. 19.
obedience to the death, even to the death of the Cross. Or thus: I sanctify
my self, i.e. I consecrate or anoint my self; For as I showed before at N. 10.
these three terms are all Synonimous in Exodus 28. 41. I sanctify, anoint, or
consecrate my self by way of preparation to undertake that great Combat in Genesis
3. 15. that is now at hand to be tried; For God in Genesis 3. 15. has given a
liberty of power to my old proclaimed Combater the Devil and his potent seed,
to pierce me in the Foot-soals on the Cross, as if I were the worst of
Malefactors; to the end that thereby they may try whether they can provoke my
passions to any sinful distemper: But I have beforehand anointed, consecrated
and sanctified my self, i.e. prepared my self to undergo this great Combat with
perfect patience and obedience, to the end I may in that perfection of my
obedience make my death to be accepted of my Father, as of a most perfect and
well-pleasing sacrifice, for the appeasing of his Wrath, and for the procuring
of his Reconciliation to all believing sinners: and therefore sorasmuch as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, be also himself likewise took part
of the same that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is the Devil, and deliver them, who through fear of death were all
their lifetime subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. And that he might be a
faithful and a merciful high Priest to make Reconciliation for the sins of
the people; for in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to
succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2. 17, 18.

Conclusion from the Premises.

That kind of anointing which the Angel told Daniel, that the Messiah should be
anointed withal at the just End of Seventy-sevens of years, must be understood
of his consecrating sufferings, which I have now described: and of which I have
also largely spoken in my former printed Reply in p. 90. 92, 93, 294, 344. But
Aben. Ezra calls this last kind of Anointing, Sealing, as I have noted it
before in Sect. 11. ult.

SECT. 17.
The Holy of Holies.

1. CHrist is here called the Holy of Holies by way of allusion to the most
Christ is called the Holy of Holies by allusion to the most holy typical Rites
that were consecrated with the most holy anointing oil.
holy consecrated Types both of his humane Nature, and also of the holy
performance of his Priestly Office and Sacrifice.

2. Therefore as soon as God had instructed Moses how to make the holy
anointing oil in Exodus 30. 22. He told Moses in v. 26. what things must be
anointed or consecrated therewith, that thereby they might be made the Holy of
Holies: Namely, the Tent of the Congregation, the Ark of Testimony, and the
Table and all the vessels thereof, and the Altar of Incense, and the Altar of
burnt-offering and all the vessels thereof, and the Laver and the foot thereof:
Thou shall sanctify them (by the said Anointing Oil) and they shall be holy of
Holies: And thou shall anoint Aaron and his sons, and sanctify them to
minister in the Priests Office unto me, Exodus 30. 26, 27, 28, 29. Lev. 21. 6.

2. As soon as these things were so anointed, they were called Holy of Holies:
so Christ as soon as he was anointed with his consecrating Afflictions, from
his Combater Satan and his potent seed, at the end of the said Seventy-sevens
of years, he is called the Holy of Holies.

3. The Meat Offering is called the holy of holies, Lev. 2. 3, 10. Lev. 6. 17.
Lev. 10. 12. Lev. 24. 9. And the sin-Offering is also called the holy of
holies, Lev. 6. 25. 29. Lev. 10. 17. Exodus 30. 10. and the trespass-offerings
is also called the holy of holies, Lev. 7. 1, 6, etc. Lev. 14. 13. And in that
Respect these things are distinguished from other holy things, which are called
leighter holy things by the Hebrew Doctors, as it is observed by Ainsworth, in
Lev. 6. 17. and in Numb. 18. 9, 10. and every devoted thing is called most holy
to the Lord, Lev. 27. 28.

From hence I infer, that seeing the humane Nature of Christ is called the holy
of holies. And 2. Seeing his Priestly actions in his sufferings, death and
sacrifice, is called holy of holies; It should advise all deliberate
Interpreters to take heed how they expound, 2 Cor. 5. 21. How God made Christ
to be sin for us, lest they make him a sinner in a proper sense, by his
imparting to him the guilt of the sins of all the Elect (as Mr. Norton does
over and over) seeing the sin-Offering is called [Sin] above a hundred times
over, and yet it is also properly called the holy of holies, Lev. 6. 25, 29.
Lev. 10. 17. Exodus 30. 10. And Christ is called the holy one, and the just,
even then when he was crucified for a sinful Malefactor, Acts 3. 14. and even
then when he was made a sin and Trespasse-Offering: And Rombam confesses, as
Galatinus cites his words, that the holy of holies is Messiah; The sanctified
from the sons of David. And Aben Ezra cited before at the end of sect. 11.
calls the Messiah, the holy of holies.

4. Mr. Broughton on the Lords-Prayer, says in p. 28. and in his Oration on
Daniel, That the Angel gives three Titles to our Redeemer:

1. He calls him the holy of holies in v. 24. 2. Messiah; and 3. King in v. 25.
And all these three Titles have Relation to his anointing by his consecrating
sufferings: that so his death might be accepted of God, as the finishing act of
all Trespasse-Offerings, and as the final act of causing all Sin Offerings to
be ended, and as the procuring cause of Gods Reconciliation for
unrighteousness; and so consequently as the procuring cause of an Everlasting
supernatural Righteousness to all the Elect (for their everlasting
justification from the guilt of all their sins) and for the Sealing or
finishing act of all Visions and Prophetical predictions, and for the anointing
of the holy of holies to his death and sacrifice by his said consecrating
afflictions: And in v. 27. For the confirming of the New Testament for the many
in the last seven, because in the latter half of that seven, he should End the
lawful use of all legal Sacrifices and Oblations, and so bring in the Heathens
into equal share in the Covenant with the Jews, John 10. 16. For the Messiah,
by his death, did confirm the New Testament for the Many, that is to say,
forth Elect of all Nations: and therefore after his Resurrection he gave a
Commission to his Disciples to go into all Nations, and baptize them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, Matthew. 28. 19.

Conclusion

From my said Exposition of Dan. 9. 24. I will draw up three Inferences.

SECT. 18.
1. FRom the time of Daniels Prayer, which is said to be made: first, in the
first year of the Reign of Darius. And secondly, and more particularly, when he
understood by the Book of Jeremy the Prophet, that the number of the seventy
years of their Captivity were accomplished, Dan. 9. 2.

And thirdly, His prayer was made more particularly at the time of the Evening
Daniels Seventy-Sevens of years are exactly accounted, from the time of his
prayer to the death of Christ.
Oblation, Dan. 9. 21.

From these three marks of time, the Seventy-sevens of years must exactly have
their Beginning. And 2. They must have their full End at the death of Christ
exactly to the hour of the Evening Oblation, Mat. 27. 46. Mar. 15. 34.

This Beginning and Ending of the Seventy-sevens of years is very often
insisted on by Mr. Broughton, not only in his Daniel, and in his Concent of
Scripture, but also in diverse others of his Books wherein he does purposely
dispute this point: The word however being taken for the Jews large hour of
Sacrificing, which comprehends under it three of our small hours, as I have
explained it more at large in my Treatise of holy Time. And from thence I
infer, That the Seventy-sevens in Dan. 9. 24. are an exact Chronology of time,
from the time of his Prayer to the death of Christ.

2. The certainty of this time is further demonstrated by the Angels words to
Daniel in v. 22. I am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding,
Namely, of the particular point of time when the Messiah should finish
Trespass and end Sin Offerings, which point of time thou knew not before:
but yet Daniel knew before the Angel came to him, that all the Elect should be
Redeemed from all their unrighteousness by the death of Christ, but he knew
not the exact time when it should be wrought by the death of Christ: therefore
the Angel was now sent unto him to give him that Skill and understanding of the
particular point of time when it should be accompl^shed, of which point of time
Daniel was wholly ignorant until the Angel came to instruct him in it: and
therefore the Angel did stir up his attention, saying in v. 22, 23, 24. I am
come to give thee skill and understanding, therefore understand the matter, and
consider the Vision, that Seventy sevens of years are exactly accounted, etc.

But in case the Angel had given him a certain time for an uncertain, as some
Interpreters do most unadvisedly affirm: then the Angels said doubled
exhortation, to understand the matter and to consider the Vision, that the said
Seventy-sevens of years were most exactly accounted, had been no better then a
mere dissimulation and deceit: For from thence it will follow, that the Angel
was not sent as he said he was in v. 22. to give him skill and understanding,
seeing he made him to understand no more then he knew before; For he knew
before that Christ should by his death make Reconciliation for
unrighteousness, but he was uncertain of the point of time when he should do
it by his death; and then the Angel should have been the grossest deceiver that
ever spoke (as Mr. Broughton does speak.) But Daniel does acknowledge in v 22.
That the Angel did inform him of some particular thing that he knew not before:
and that particular can be nothing else but the informing of him of the
particular point of time of Christ's death; Therefore that point of time was it,
for the which God sent his Angel to give Skill and Understanding unto Daniel.

I have observed in my Dialogue in p. 97. That from Daniels prayer which he
made at the hour of the Evening Obl^tion unto the death of Christ, the
Seventy-sevens of years were exactly accounted: for Christ gave up the Ghost at
the ninth hour which was the hour of the evening Oblation. He could have lived
longer by virtue of his natural strength, but he would not live any longer then
that appointed hour: neither would he give way to the Jews to put him to death
sooner, though they sought often to lay hands on him to put him to death, Mar.
11. 18. Mar. 12. 12. Mar. 14. 1, 11. John 19. 3, 47, etc. Christ would not dye
neither sooner nor later, but at the exact hour which was appointed of his
Father, on purpose to fulfill the prediction of Dan. 9. 24.

3. The Apostle does affirm that the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, Heb.
2. 2. and that every Transgression (against their Message) received a just
Recompense of Reward: And from thence I infer, That such as do Transgress
against the point of time that was spoken of by the Angel Gabriel unto Daniel,
ought to look to themselves, least they receive a just Recompense of Reward,
especially such as do call that point of time A certain number for an
uncertain: neither will it sufficiently excuse them, though they do from other
Scriptures prove that sometimes a certain number is put for an uncertain (as in
Dan. 7. 10. Rev 20. Heb. 2. 2. 1. Pet. 1. 10, 11.
2, etc.) unless they can prove that it must be so taken universally, and
unless they can prove more particularly that it must be so taken in Dan. 9.
24. (Notwithstanding the Angels doubled charge to Daniel to understand the
point of time) but I believe it cannot be found, that where a certain number is
put for an uncertain, there is not the like doubled charge (as in Daniel) to
understand the matter, and to consider the Vision of Seventy-sevens of years to
be exactly accoun^ed.

4. The former Prophets enquired and searched diligently, 1 Pet. 1. 10. not
only of the Grace that should come unto them, but also in v. 11. They searched
in what manner of time the Spirit of Christ, which was in them did signify,
when it test^fied beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that
should follow. Romans 5. 6. Ephesians 1. 10. G^l. 4. 4. John 8. 20. John 7. 8. M^tth
26. 18. John 12. 20, 21, 23, 27, 28,
From hence we may see that the former Prophets are commended for their
diligent search, not only for the matter of our Redemption, but also for the
point of time of the performance of it, they longed to see the accomplishment:
and yet the point of time was not Revealed to any of them until it was first
Revealed unto Dan^el by the Angel Gabriel, and yet all the former Prophets did
see the day of Christ afar off and rejoiced, as Abraham did, John 8. 56. But
the exact time of Christ's death was not declared unto any of them until it was
declared unto Daniel as a most Choice Favor unto him, Because he was greatly
beloved, ver. 23.

5. The Apostle says, that God has determined the times Fore-appointed, Acts
17. 26. But this determined time (when Christ by his death and sacrifice should
finish Trespasse-offerings, etc.) was reserved in Gods secret mind from all the
Prophets, until it was first revealed unto gracious Daniel, because he was
greatly beloved. And from thence it follows, that the Devil can stir up no
greater Adversaries to the Angels Heavenly Message, then such as do affirm,
that this Seventy-sevens of years is a certain number put for an uncertain.

6. There are several Scriptures in the new Testament, that do strongly confute
such as do expound Daniels Seventy-sevens of years to be a certain number put
for an unce^tain.

1. Pau^ says in Romans 5. 6. That in due time (that is, according to the
appointed time in Dan 9. 24.) Christ dyed for the ungodly: But in case Daniels
Seventy-sevens of years be taken for an uncertain time, how can it be known
that Christ dyed in due time, seeing no Prophet does reveal the due time of his
death, if it be not done by Dan. 9. 24.

2. Paul says in Ephesians. 1. 10. In the dispensation of the fullness of the times:
This Dispensation (or ordering) of the fullness of the Times, has Relation to
the time of Redemption by the blood of Christ, as the Context speaks in v. 7.
with v. 10. but how can such make a clear Exposition of this ordering of the
fullness of Times, as expound Daniels Seventy-sevens of years, to be no more
but a certain number for an uncertain.

3. Paul says in Gal. 3. 4. When we were children we were in bondage under the
Rudiments of the world: But (says he) when the Fullness of time was come,
(called also the appointed time of the Father, in v. 2.) God sent forth his Son
to Redeem them that were under the Law: All the men of the World cannot expound
this Fullness of time appointed of the Father to Redeem them that are under the
Law, so well as it is done to our hands by Dan 9. 24.

4. Christ said to the Jews in John 7. 8. Go ye to this Feast, I go not up to
this Feast, for my time (i.e. the time of my death) is not yet fully come: But
that full time was not revealed by any other Prophet, but by Dan. 9. 24.

5. No man laid hands on him, for his hour was not yet come, John 8. 20.
compared with John 7. 8. namely the hour of his death (spoken of by Daniel) was
not yet come; therefore it is that perverting or confounding of the true sense
of this, and many other Scriptures, to make Daniel's Seventy*Sevens to be no
more but a certain number for an uncertain.

6. When his time was at hand, he said unto his Disciples, Go into the City to
such a man, and say unto him, the Master says, my time is at hand, I will keep
the Passover at thy house with my Disciples, Mat. 26. 18. But no other Prophet
did tell him that his time was at hand but Daniel 9. 24.

7. There came certain Greeks to Jerusalem to worship at the Feast, and that
desired also to see Jesus, John 12. 20, 21. And when Jesus was told of their
desire to see him, he did in v. 25. make this interpretation thereof, The hour
is come that the Son of man should be glorified (of such Believers as these
Greek Jews were) because they knew by Dan. 9. 24. that the time of his death
for man's Redemption was now come, as it is also explained in v. 27, 28.

Quest.
If any please to demand upon what information these Greeks did come out of
heathen Countries to worship at this Feast of the Jews, and also to see Jesus
in expectation that the time of his death was now come.

Answ. The Answer is, They were directed thereunto by no other means, but by
the account which they kept of Daniel's Seventy-Sevens of years; and it was in
that respect, that they took the opportunity to come to this Feast, both to
worship God in Temple, and also to see Jesus before his death; for they being
either Greeks, Jews or Pproselytes that lived in Synagouges with the Jews,
they might well know the hour of Daniel's Seventy-Sevens, when the Messiah
should make reconciliation for unrighteousness, and bring in an everlasting
Righteousness instead of the Ceremonial, to all believing sinners, by his death
and sacrifice.

From the seand such like Scriptures, it will be evident to all that love the
truth of the Scripture-Chronology before the lying Chronology of humane
Writers, that Daniel's Seventy-Seven of years is not a certain number put for
an uncertain, but that it is a most exact account of time from the time of
Daniel's prayer, (at the time of the Evening-Oblation) unto the death of
Christ, which he also finished at the ninth hour, or at the hour of the
Evening-oblation.

SECT. 19.
My second Inference from my said Exposition of Daniel 9. 24. is to reprove
such as in this time of Light are still ignorant of the certainty of Daniels
Seventy-Sevens of years.

1. OOur Savior reproved the Jews for their gross ignorance of this time,
saying in Luke 12. 56. (and in Mat. 16. 3.) Ye Hippocrites, ye can discern The
Jews ignorance of the certain time of Daniels Seventy-Sevens was the cause of
their ignorance of the time of Christ's preaching, and also of the time of his
death to the blinding of their minds in unb^lief. Luke 12. 56. Luke 19. 41, 42.
the face of the earth, and also of the Sky, but how is it that you discern
this time? But our Savior had not had so just a ground to reprove them for
their gross ignorance at this time, in case Daniel's Seventy-Sevens had been no
other but a certain number put for an uncertain.

2. Our Savior wept over Jerusalem, for their gross ignorance of this time:
saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
belonging to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes, Luke 19. 41, 42.
This pathetical Complaint of our Savior for their gross ignorance of this
time of his preaching: implies, that they might have known it at the least in
this their day the things belonging to their peace, if they had but regarded
the golden opportunity of the foretold time of his death by Daniels
Seventy-sevens, but because they did not regard to keep in mind that exact
Account, they were now blinded with the unbelief of it, and in that Respect it
was that our Savior did so pathetically reprove them: but no other Prophet did
Reveal this time but Daniel only.

3. But above all, they do most lamentably pervert the true sense of Daniels
Chronology, and of diverse other Scriptures also that do confound the certainty
of Daniels Seventy-sevens, with the lying Chronology of the Olympiades; the
uncertainty of their Chronology is declared by Mr. Broughton, both in his
Apology for the certainty of Daniel, and in his Seder Olam.

4. They also are to be Reproved as great perverters of Daniels Chronology,
that make the Roman Monarchy to be the fourth Kingdom in Daniel.

5. They also are as much to be Reproved for the perverting of Daniels
Chronology, That make Daniel to speak of the time of Antichrists Fall: which
they could not do, if they did not make Daniels Chronology to run further in
length then it does, for it reaches no further then to the death of Christ,
and to the destruction of Jerusalem in the next generation after.

6. They deal as bad or worse, that make Daniel to speak of the personal Reign
of Christ here on earth for a thousand years together before the full end of
the World. This Tenent has no footing in Daniel, if the true sense of his
Chronology be preserved; For as I said before, his Chronology extends to
further them to the death of Christ, and to the desolation of Jerusalem in the
next generation.

7. This is a Foundation Truth. 1. That Daniel speaks of no other Troubles in
propriety of speech, but of such Troubles as belonged only to the Church of the
Jews, and not at all properly of the Troubles that belong to Christian Times
under Antichrist, if his genuine sense be kept sound as it ought to be.

8. All such as are well-studied in the certainty of Daniels Seventy-sevens
will be strongly fortified against all the said corrupt Tenants, and will
account them no better then the mere figments of man's brain.

9. Such as have diligently searched into the true sense of Daniel from the
Context, have utterly rejected the said Inventions of man's brain: And I my self
before I had studied Mr. Bro. Labors on Daniel, was led by others into a
confused uncertainty: but after I had well weighed his Labors I was established
in the true sense of Daniel; and I see that Dr. Willet in Daniel, does in the
most difficult places conclude with Mr. Broughtons Exposition as the best of
all, especially in chap. 7. chap. 8. chap. 9. chap. 10. chap. 11. chap. 12.

SECT. 20.
My third inference from my said Exposition of Dan. 9. 24. is for instruction
how to understand many phrases of the New Testament from Daniels phrase, To
Finish Trespass, and to End Sin Offerings.

1. IT is said in Heb. 9. 26. Now once in the End of the World, has he
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Daniels phrase of Ending
Sin Offerings, and Paul's phrase of putting away Sin Offerings by the death of
Christ, do sweettly open each other. Heb. 9. 26.


2. Two things are remarkable in these words:

1 Touching the true sense of the word appeared; It must not be understood of
his first appearing in his flesh at his Birth, as Mr. Norton does mis-interpret
it in p. 45. But it must be understood of his Priestly appearing at the just
End of Daniels Seventy-sevens of years, to make his death a Sacrifice, by which
Appearing only he put away sin; that is to say, the further use of all
Sin Offerings, as the Context in v. 25. does evidence it: and to this sense I
have expounded it in my former printed Reply, in p. 195. 196. Three times a
year God Commanded all Israel to appear before him, namely at their three
solemn Feasts: But this Appearing was not only, or barely personal by showing
their bodies in the Temple, but God commanded them to appear with a Sacrifice
to represent unto them the death of Christ for their Redemption: See Ainsworth
in Exodus 23. 15. and see my former printed Reply in Chap. 13. In the word n^ar
in Jer. 30. 21.

2. The punctual time when Christ did appear to put a sin-Offering by the
sacrifice of himself, was in the End of the World, Namely, in the end of the
Mosaical or Judaical World, for that part of the World is here called the world
by the figure Synecdoche, because that part of the world only Christ did end
the use of Sin and Trespasse-Offering by his death and sacrifice, and bring in
an Everlasting Righteousness instead of the ceremonial, at the just end of
Seventy-sevens of years: and thus the phrases in Dan. 9. 24. and in Heb. 9. 26.
do sweetly expound and open each other.

2. The said phrases in Daniel are also opened by Ephesians. 2 15. having abol^shed
in his flesh the Enmity, even the law of Commandments, contein^d in Ordinances
that he might Reconcile both, (i.e. both Jews and Gentiles) unto God, in one
body on the Cross having slain Enmity thereby: Now to parallel this, the Angel
told Daniel, that at the end of Seventy-sevens of years the Messiah should by
his death Finish Trespass and end sin-Offering, or abolish them: For the
Hebrew words are sundry ways rendered by the Seventy, as I have showed on the
word Finish, in sect. 4. and on the word End, in sect. 6.

3. The like Equivolent terms, may be observed in 2 Cor. 3. 13. The children of
Ephesians. 2. 15. 2 Cor. 3. 13. Col. 2. 14. Heb. 10. 3. Romans 8. 3. Heb. 10. 9
Israel could not steadfastly look to the End of that which is now abolished,
(or abrogated or done away) (or made to perish, or to be cast away or come to
naught) as it is explained by the Seventy, and by v. 14. or taken away, as it
is also explained in v. 16. these terms in these places, and in Daniel do
explain each other.

4. It is said in Col. 2. 14. Blotting out the Handwriting of Ordinances, that
was against us which was contrary to us: These terms of Blotting [or wiping]
out the Handwriting of O^dinances [or the Book of Decrees, as in Exodus 24. 4,
7. with Heb. 9. 19. 2 Kings 23. 2, 21. 2 Chronicles. 34. 30.] which was contrary to
us, because that Bill of Decree by washings, sacrifices for him, did put us in
continual remembrance again of sins made every year, Namely, on the day of
Expiation, especially Heb. 10. 3. And then in the second place it is said, That
Christ took away (the said Handwriting of Ordinances) and nailed it to the
Cross. These terms of Blotting out, and taking away the Handwriting of
Ordinances, these terms do sweetly explain Daniels terms, to finish Trespass
and to end Sin Offerings: For it is all one, as if he had said, the Messiah
shall by his death at the end of Seventy-sevens of years, blot out, or wipe
out, or take them away, nailing them to his Cross, as being dead and buried
with him.

5. It is said in Romans 8. 3. And for sin, be condemned sin in the flesh; or as
it is in the margin, for his sacrifice for sin in the flesh, he condemned sin;
Namely, the after use of all Sin Offerings: For it has no good sense in our
Language to say, for sin he condemned sin: but according to the true sense of
Daniel it must be thus understood; Namely, that the Messiah shall by his
sacrifice for sin (at the end of Seventy-sevens of years) Finish Trespass and
End (or condemn) Sin Offerings: The Greek word, to condemn, signifies to
condemn in judgment, or justly to pronounce Sentence of condemnation against
the after-use of Sin Offerings as wicked, or as guilty of frustrating the death
of Christ, as insufficient for the Justification of sinners, unless the works
of the Law be continually added thereunto. Mr. Bro. says thus to Rab. Elias in
his Requier, p. 85. Ye have felt now above fifteen hundred years eternal
destruction, while ye dream of hope by the works of the Law, Sabbath and
Circumcision, though ye break all the rest, when ye say, the Sabbath is weighed
as all the Law, Circumcision is weighed as all the Law; but says Bro. to him,
the keeping of either after the end of Daniels Sevens, is death to you.

6. Paul says in Heb. 10. 9. He takes away the first, that he might establish
the second; that is to say, he takes away the first typical use of trespass
and sin offerings (and so consequently he takes away the first typical
Covenant of Works) that he might establish the second; namely, that he might
establish ^is own trespass and sin-offering, as the perfection of them all (and
so consequently, that he might confirm the New Testament for the many) for by
his ^id Death and Sacrifice, he procured Gods Reconciliation, and thereby has
^rought in an everlasting Justification from all Moral sins, instead of the
Ceremonial.

Conclusion of Dan. 9. 24.
Mr. Bro. says in his Advertisement of Corruptions, p. 22. That as the
Moun^ains are about Jerusalem, so are the Scriptures about the Oration of holy
Ga^riel, who taught all at Babels fall, that 490. years after that year, the
King of Glory should be killed, but Death should not hold him, but his Justice
should appear by his Resurrection, that he was killed not for himself, but to
make Re^onciliation for our sins, and to seal Vision and Prophet, and to make
Heathen -^issoma, one Body with Israel.

Dan. 9. 25. Is thus translated in Bro. Hanaw Edition: Know then and
understand, from the out-going of the word, to restore and to build Jerusalem
unto Messiah the King, shall be seven sevens, and sixty two Dan. 9. 25.
sevens (In the other) it shall be restored and builded, street and wall: And
troublous shall these times be.
The Angel in this verse does divide the whole number of Seventy-sevens in^^
parts, for the more special observation of some particulars in the first
seven-^^vens: and therefore the Angel said unto Daniel, Know then and
understand, The first seven-sevens, or forty nine years, is divided by the
Angel for the famous observation of the restoring of the Temple and City.
^^t from the out-going of the Word, or of the Proclamation of Cyrus (as it is
re^orded in Ezekiel. 1. 1, etc.) to restore and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah
the King, ^^all be seven-sevens of years; that is to say, forty nine years. The
like charge ^^e Angel gave unto Daniel to attend and mark in v. 22. And again,
in v. 23. and 24. he charged him to understand the matter, and to consider the
Vision; ^amely, of the whole number of Seventy-sevens of years, that they are
exactly ^ccounted: And now in this 25 verse he does again renew his former
charge of ^ttention, touching the exact time of Seventy-sevens of years, for
the restoring and building of Jerusalem unto Messiah the King.

2. The out-going of the Word.
Means, according to the Ebrew Dialect, any thing or matter that is mentioned
by speech, as it is observed by Ains. in Genesis 15. 1. and in Psa. 7. 1. and
^ometimes Word is put for Commandment, in Exodus 34. 28. and in Deuteronomy. 10. 4.

2. The time when this Word, or Commandment, or Proclamation of Cyrus went out,
is observed to be in the first year of Da^ius, when the Seventy years were
accomplished in the desolations of Jerusalem, Dan. 9. ^. and in the first year
of Cyrus, Ezra. 1. 1. And 2. It was at the beginning of Daniels prayer, which
he made at the time of the Evening Oblation, Dan. 9, 21. and 23. and from
thence it follows, that the first beginning of the whole number of Seventy
sevens of years, and also the beginning of the first seven-sevens of years for
the building of Jerusalem, must be exactly accounted from these marks of time.

3. Shall be seven-sevens, and sixty and two sevens, (in the other) it shall be
restored and builded.
[In the other] namely, in the first partition of seven-sevens, it shall be
restored or builded by virtue of the word or Proclamation of Cyrus; and yet
notwithstanding the work was hindered after the first three years by Camb^ses,
until These word^ [In the other] are not in the Text; yet says Bro. for
further light of Argument, they may well be used: So do the best that profess
to follow the Ebrew, they think it no departing, to add words of expl^cation;
and says he, nothing is more usual, and it is marvel, that some of judgment do
blame so usual and lawful a matter. See ^is view of the Persian Monarchy.
the second year of Darius Artaxerxes the King of Persia, Ezra 4. 24. But at
last Darius Artaxerxes, Esters Son, did send Ezra to Jerusalem to encourage the
work, Ezra 7. 1, etc. And after that, in the twentieth year of his Reign, he
sent Nehemiah to build up the walls, and to set up the gates, Neh. 2. 1. All
this was done within the compass of the said seven-sevens of years. And says
Mr. Bro. in his Apology, p. 19. no other reason can be rendered why this forty
nine years should be spoken of alone in Dan. 9. 25. But for the time of the
chief work; namely, for the finishing of the building of the City J^rusalem by
Nehemiah, who doubtless in his undertaking, had special regard to the said
seven-sevens, as being set apart for that work: Neither could he well have set
a time to Artaxerxes when he would return again, as he did in Neh. 2. 6. if he
had not stuck to the prefixed time of seven-sevens of years: And says
Beroaldus, Nehemiah had this Embassage in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes
Pius, Neh. 2. 1. that is to say, thirty years after Ezra was sent Ambassador
to Judah, Ezra 7. 7. and Nehemiah was the Ruler and Protector over Judah twelve
years, Neh. 5. 14. And how great pains he took in fortifying the City
Jerusalem, and compassing it with a wall, is declared from chap. 2. to chap. 7.
And the great diligence which both he and the Jews used in fortifying the City,
is declared in chap. 6. 15. so great a work being finished in fifty two days.
And thus the first seven-sevens of years are fully ended in the twentieth year
of Artaxerxes Pius, Esters Son, as the Jews affirm.

4. And troublous shall these times be.
The History of these troublous times is set forth at large in Ezra and
Nehemiah: And says Beroaldus, The hostile attempts of the Adversaries of Gods
people, and their detestable counsels, practices, against the godly; also the
niggardliness of the rich toward the poor; all which are largely described in
Ezra and Nehemiah, do fully manifest the troubles and miseri^s of these times.

2. The word Times in this plac^ (as well as in others) is put for times of
distress. See Ains. in Psa. 10. 1. and in Psa. 13. 16.

5. Sixty and two sevens.
This partition of sixty and two sevens, is made chiefly to continue the
account of the Seventy-sevens; and it is put in as a Parenthesis between the
first famous seven-sevens; and the last seven; which is also divided into two
halfs in v. 27. because the latter half of it is of most famous note for time
of the Mediators extrinsecal execution of his Office.

2. Though no particular matter of note is allotted to the said 62 Sevens: yet
by other Scriptures, we know that the Jews were often captived in the time of
these 62 Sevens, Namely, under the ten Horns or Kings* of the fourth Beast,
i.e. under the strange parted Greek Monarchy, in Dan. 7. For five of those ten
Horns (or Kings) were from the North part of the said Greek Empire called the
Selucidae from the Selucas the first of those Kings: and in Eze. 38. these
Warriers are called Gog and Magog. And the other five Horns or Kings were from
the South part of the said Greek Empire, called the Lagidae, from the first
King, called Ptol. Lagus: But the greatest persecutor of all the ten Horns,
was Antiochus Epiphanes, in the North parts: But because the Jews were not
constantly or always persecuted for their Religion in these 62 sevens as they
were under the first seven sevens: Therefore this partition of 62 sevens, is
but to continue the account of Sevens, and to distinguish the first famous
seven sevens, and the last half of the last seven, for special observation.

6. To Restore, and to build Jerusalem.
The holy Temple was builded by Zorobabel in Ezra's time, and the wall of the
City by Nehemiah: both these were to be restored, because the typical
Ceremonies that were appropriated to them, were to be restored as the
sanctified Types of Christ's death, until by his death which was the perfection
of them all, he did for ever finish the use of them:

7. Unto Messiah.
Mr. Ainsworth says in Psalm 2. 2. That though Mashiach in Hebrew (or Messiah)
be a general term for the ancient Kings, Priests and Prophets, that were
anointed with Oil (Psalm 89. 21. Psalm 105. 15. Esaias 45. 1. Numb. 3. 3. 1 Kin.
19. 16.) yet it is principally the Name of the Son of God our Savior, Dan. 9.
John 1. 4, John 4. 25.
25, 26. who was known in Israel by the Name Messiah, John 1. 41. Joh. 4. 25.
and among the Greeks by the Name, Christ.

2. Mr. Broughton says in Dan. 9. 25, 26. Here only in Hebrew, and twice here
Messiah comes a proper Name: and from hence (says he) it was made famous,
Though Messiah is a name of office commonly, yet in Dan. 9. 25, 26. it is the
proper name of Christ the Redeemer.
as we may see by John 1. 41. and by John 4: 25. And in his Advertisement, p.
33. he does sharply reprove Mr. Lively, for denying that Messiah is a proper
Name in this place of Dane^l, and in his Lords Family. H. 2. he says, the Name
Messiah is twice in Dan. 9. 25, 26. and that it means Christ, properly and
undeniably: But Mr. Lively (says he) denies Messiah in the Angels tongue to
sound the Redeemer, to agree therein with the basest of all faithless Jews,
and to grieve all Christian minds: For every place of the new Testament which
still calls us unto the Name Messiah or Christ, in Dan. 9. And says he, to
deny Messiah here to mean our Lord, is nothing else but to deny all the new
Testament. And Mr. Ed. Holyoke says in his Doctrine of Life, in p. 388.
Wherever we read the Attribute of Christ in the N. Testament, we must remember
it to be the Attribute of Messiah from Daniel 9. there given as a proper Name
to the Son of God; and no place else in the Old Testament, but Daniel uses it
as a proper Name.

8. The King.
The Hebrew Nagid is diversely translated by the Seventy: But in 1 Chr. 29. 22.
and in Prove. 28. 16. they translate it King. 2. Pilate in his first Question
asked Christ, art thou the King of the Jews? John 18. 33. and presently after
he asked him again, art thou a King then? Christ answered, To this end was I
born, and for this cause came I into the world, John 18. 37. and this answer of
his is called John 18. 37. 1 Timothy 6. 3. The Messiah was not to be a pompous
worldly King, but a spiritual King to his spiritual Kingdom,
a good Confession in 1 Timothy 6. 13. Though the malignant Jews that were acted
by Satan did scoff at it, Man. 27. 42. Mar. 15. 22. But Nathaniel that was a
true Israelite indeed did make this confession of his Faith to Christ in John
1. 49. Thou art the King of Israel. And the like confession did the better sort
of the Jews make, when they cried Hosanna, blessed is the King of Israel, John
12. 13. But Mark says in chap. 10. That when they cried Hosanna, they said,
blessed be the Kingdom that comes in the Name of the Lord our Father David;
alluding thereby unto the eternal Kingdom that was promised unto David, 2 Samuel
7. 13. And all these acclamations were done to fulfill the Prophecy in Zach.
9. 9. and though the Pharisees were much offended at their acclamations, yet
Christ did justify them for it, Mat. 21. 15. Luke 19. 29. It seems by these
acclamations, they did apprehend that the Kingdom of Christ should be of a
Spiritual and Heavenly Nature, as it is expounded in Luke 1. 32, 33, 69. and
the Spiritual Jerusalem is called the Throne of this King, Jer. 3. 17. and
Jehovah; Christ does build this Jerusalem continually by the preaching of the
Gospel, Psalm 147. 2, 3.

2. It has been a received Maxim among the Ancient Hebrew Doctors, that their
Messiah should be a King, and that he should sit upon the Throne of David for
ever. See Ains. in Genesis 49. 11. and in Genesis 14. 18. But at last the carnal
Jews, thought that this promise was, that he should sit as a pompous King upon
the worldly Throne of David; But our Savior corrected their mistake: he told
them his Kingdom was not a worldly Kingdom, but that it was of a Spiritual and
Heavenly Nature, John 18. 36. Luke 22. 30. And the ^ngel told Daniel in v. 26.
That the Messiah the King should suffer, or be cut off, or executed as a wicked
Malefactor on the Cross by his old proclaimed Combater, Satan and his potent
seed: By which words he gave Daniel to understand, that the Messiah should be
such a King as should Conquer Satan by his righteous performance of his said
Combat of Sufferings: and therefore that his Kingdom must needs be of a
Spiritual Nature, and in that Respect he must be called the King of
Righteousness, Heb. 7. 2. and the Scepter of his Kingdom, a Sc^pter of
Righteousness, Psalm 45. 8. And Jesus said unto Pilate, my Kingdom is not of
this world: if my Kingdom were of this world, then would my Servants fight
that I should not be delivered to the Jews, but now is my Kingdom not from
hence, John 18. 36.

Solomon the Son of David was chosen by God to sit upon the Throne of David;
and he was such a King as had all the Royalties that this world could afford:
and yet at last upon his own long study and experience, he tells in
Ecclesiastes, That all things under the Son be vain: and from thence also it
follows, that the quality of the Kingdom of the perpetual Throne of David, (2 Samuel 7. and 1 Chr. 17. and Psalm 89.) must be acknowledged to be of a Spiritual
and Heavenly Nature; Namely, for the attaining of the World to come; and in
that Respect it is, that the Spiritual Kingdom of Gods elect Church here on
earth is called the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 3. 2. Mat. 4. 17. Mat. 10. 7. Mat.
11. 11, 12. Mat. 13. 11, 24, 31, 33, 34, 45, 47. Mat. 18. 1, 4, 23. Mat. 23.
13. Mat. 25. 1, 14. and indeed the members of it are all built upon Christ the
Heavenly King, and upon Spiritual and Heavenly Principles of Grace. This is the
true Nature of the Kingdom of Christ, when he was promised to sit upon David's
Throne. But as I said before, he is called King in Daniel, in relation chiefly
to his Kingly Conquest of Satan in his Combat of sufferings, and in his death
and sacrifice by his righteous performance of the whole Combat.

Dan. 9. 26. is thus translated in Mr. Bro. Hanaw Edition, In that after sixty
and two sevens Messiah shall suffer, but not for himself: thereupon the City
and holy place shall he destroy; the Kings own people to come: and their End
shall be with a flood, and at the end of war it shall have a final judgment to
desolation.
In this verse Daniel tells the Jews, That when their long expected Messiah
shall come among them to make Reconciliation for unrighteousness by his death
and sacrifice, they shall be so wicked, that they will put him to a most
ignominious death, as if he were the worst of all Malefactors.

1. In that, after sixty and two sevens.
This word After is very remarkable, because it does point unto the last famous
seven years, which should come next after the said sixty and two sevens, and
this seven is called the last seven, in v. 27.

2. Messiah shall suffer.
Or as it is in his former Edition, Messiah shall be k^ll'd: But Mr. A^ns. in
Lev. 1. 5, 8. and others read it, he shall be cut off: or he shall be executed
as a notorious Malefactor on the Cross; Or as the Sev^nty render it, he shall
be destroyed, and so the Hebrew is rendered in Jos. 11. 21. The Hebrew word is
of a large signification, and will bear all these expressions in our Language:
but the main skill is to make a right sense of them all according to the meaning
of the Context: But indeed that is already done to our hands by the four
Evangelists, in The Angel told* Daniel, that at the just end of Seventy-sevens
of years, the Messiah should suffer a most ignominious death by that wicked
generation werein he lived without all sin.
the History of Christ's sufferings at his death; They all do declare that the
Scribes and Pharisees, the seed of the old Serpent did cut off, or execute, kill
and destroy the Messiah, as a worse Malefactor then the Murderer Barabas, Acts
3. 14. Mat. 27. 20. and just so did the men of Anathoth plot the death of
Jeremy, they said, let us cut him off from the land of the Living, that his
name may be no more remembered, Jer. 11. 19. The Hebrew word is the very same
that is in Daniel; and the Evangelist Esaias did by an interogation of
admiration, foretell how the wicked Scribes and Pharisees would cut off the
Messiah, saying in Esaias 53. 8. But who shall declare his generation, Namely,
the extreme wickedness of his generation wherein he lived; For though he did
no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 22. yet (by
their restless accusations of him to Pilate) they cut him off out of the land
of the Living. But this Hebrew word in Esaias Jer 11. 19. Esaias 53. 8. Acts 3. 18.
Acts 17. 3.
53. 8. though we translate it cut off, yet it is not the same with that in
Daniel, but yet it is the same in true sense, for both places mean, that the
M^ssias should be cut off as a wicked Malefactor, by an ignominious death, by
that generation wherein he lived: and all this came to pass just as it was at
the first declared ^n Genesis 3. 15. Namely, that the Devils seed should pierce
him in the foot-soals as a most wicked Malefactor on the Cross; And for this
cutting off, see more in my former printed Reply in p. 352. And Histories do
Report, that the Priests and Scribes of this generation, were exceedingly
addicted to converse familiarly with the Devil: and their Ancient Doctors did
foresee by the Scriptures the exceeding wickedness of this generation, and
therefore Rab. Nehoray says, That m^ns Countenances shall at that time be past
shame; and Rab. Nehemiah says, That wickedness shall be multiplied without
measure, and that there shall be nothing but untowardnesse; and hereby
insomuch, that as Rab. Notranai says, they shall say, that the Miracles which
the Messiah shall work, are done by Magic and unclean Spirits: and so they
said indeed, Mat. 9. 34. Mat. 12. 24. Luke 11. 15. And for this of the Rabbis,
see more in the Trueness of Religion, p. 502. 539.

2. In reference to these predictions of Daniel and Isaiah, Christ did often
inform his Disciples, that he must suffer many things of the Elders and be
killed, Mat. 16. 21. Mat. 17. 12. Mar, 8. 31. Nar. 9. 12. Luke. 9. 22. Luke.
17. 25. Luke 18. 31, 32, 33, 34. Luke 22. 15. Luke 24. 46.

3. Peter said unto a public Concourse af the Jews: Ye have killed the Prince
of Life, Acts 3. 15. and says he in v. 18. Those things which God before had
showed by the mouth of all his holy Prophets that Christ should suffer, he has
just so fulfilled. Here the word suffer, is put for his ignominious death upon
the Cross as the worst of Malefactors; and Paul affirmed, that ^e preached no
other things then those which the P^ophets and Moses said should come to pass,
That Christ should suffer, Acts 17. 3. Here also both the word suffer, and the
word Christ is borrowed from this place of Dan. 9. 26. Mr. Broughton says in
his Exposition of the Article of Desce^t, p. 33. that Paul has (...), from
Dan. 9. 26. most exactly translated in his Article of Difference, having the
exact propriety on his side: And says he in Lords Family, H. 2. Wheresoever
the Name Christ is in all the New Testament, it calls the Reader to return
unto Daniel, especially those two places of John 1. 41. John 4. 25. (where
M^ssias the Hebrew word is in Greek letters, and that in the mouth of simple
Folk, as Andrew the fisher, and the Samaritan woman: showing, that the
Samaritans then as well as the Jews, knew that M^ssias or Christ should come
into the Wo^ld.

3. No^ For himself.
That is to say, not for any just fault of his own, for he did no sin, neither
was there any guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 22. The Seventy render it,
for matter was not found in him, (or matter worthy of judgment was not found
in him) Mr. Ainsworth, says in Deuteronomy. 16. 6. Judgment is guilt, as the Chaldy
explains it: so then, matter of guilt worthy of judgment, or of the sentence
of death was not found in him by the Magistrate; But yet the High Priest
propounded this Interogation to the Council: You have he^rd his blasphemy, what
think you? they answered, he is guilty of death, Mar. 4. 64. John 10. 33.

But yet 2. When our Savior was entering into his sharpest Combat with Satan
and his potent seed, he said, the Prince of this world comes, and he has
nothing in me, i.e. Nothing within me, no corrupt inclination in my soul, to
move me to any discontented affections, either at the shamefulnesse, or at the
painfulnesse of my approaching sufferings: A Commission indeed he has to tempt
me from Genesis 3. 15. and therefore he comes to try me by his ignominious usage,
John 4. 30. but he cannot find any matter of original sin in me to work his
temptations upon: and from thence it follows, that none of Christ's sufferings
were for himself, and therefore they were for us, as the only meritorious and
procuring Cause of his Fathers Reconciliation to all believing sinners. David
said in Psalm 17. 3. Thou have tried me, but thou have not found, to wit, any
dross of deceit, or any corruption, as it is added in the Chaldy, but the
Seventy render it iniquity was not found in me. Namely, no personal iniquity
against Saul, neither in my words nor in my actions: and yet in other respects
David was a sinner, Namely, he was guilty both of original and actual sins, but
so was not Christ; David was tried many times in respect of Saul's accusations,
as in Psa. 26. 2. Psalm 66. 10. Psalm 105. 19. But Christ was tried to the
purpose; but because his inside was free from all inward corruptions, his
outside was free also.

4. And thereupon the City, the ho^y place shall he destroy.
The Hebrew word translated [thereupon] is most usually translated And; But Mr.
Ainsworth does translate it [therefore] in Genesis 31. 44. which is all one with
thereupon: and it is all one also with And; and therefore sometimes (says he)
the Hebrew word uses the one for the other: as in 2 Samuel 5. 9. [And he called]
is in another Prophet [Therefore they called] 1 Chronicles. 11. 7. and in the Greek
[And] is [From thence] in Acts 7. 4. therefore no just exception, (but high
approbation) is due to this translated word Thereupon; and indeed all the said
terms have alike conjunctive notion to that which went before.

2. HE, Namely HE, the Messiah shall destroy the City and holy place, Matthew.
21. 41. for their wicked abusing and contemning him that come to make
Reconciliation for them: and so in like sort Moses does threaten, that every
soul that will not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed, or cut off from among
the people: See Ains. in Deuteronomy. 18. 19. and in Numb. 15. 30. and consider my
further answer to the next Question at N. 6.

3. This difinitive Threatening, does assure us that the death of Christ, all
the typical worship of Moses Law should be abolished, both from the holy
Temple, and from the holy City, and from the holy Land, and that it should
never be restored to them any more, because their City and Sanctuary should be
utterly destroyed, even for ever.

4. Though Vespatian and Titus his son, and the Roman Armies were the visible
instruments of the destruction of the City and holy Place, yet the efficient
cause thereof, was the justice of Christ for their palpable injustice, in
putting him to such an ignominious Death, that was the holy One, and the Just.

5. The Kings own people to come.
Namely, to come in the next Generation after the death of Christ, Mat. 24. 34.
and so Bro. does translate it in his first Edition: and Dr. Willet, also says
most truly in his Daniel, p. 348. That by the Prince of the people to come, is
signified Vespatian and Titus his sons, together with the Roman Armies: by the
which they should besiege the City and destroy both it and the Temple; and in
this sense does Bullenger, Calvin and Osiander understand it: and this, says
Dr. Willet, is agreeable to the prediction of our blessed Savior in Luke 19.
43. The days shall come upon thee, when thy en^mies shall cast a Trench about
thee, etc. and make thee even with the ground.

6. And their end shall be with a flood.
This phrase, with a flood, does notify their destruction, either more
generally or more particularly.

1. This word Flood, does note the general ruin and destruction of any People
or Nation for their impenitent sins by sundry kinds of Troubles, as it is well
observed by Ainsworth in Psalm 32. 6. and there he does cite this place of
Daniel to prove it: and Dan. 11. 22. Nabum. 1. 8. Esaias 59. 19. Rev. 12. 15, 16.
Cant. 8. 7. Psalm 69. 2.

2. More particularly this word Flood, does in this place note out the utter
destruction both of the City and holy place by a flood of Roman Armies: for
great Armies of Enemies are often called a Flood; and therefore Israel and
Syria are threatened to be destroyed by the flood of the Assyr^an Armies, Esaias
8. 7. And the Philistines are threatened to be destroyed by the flood of the
Babylonian Armies, Jer. 42. 2. Amos 8. 9. Amos 9. 5.

3. Their End shall be with a flood: signifying thereby their last End.

Quest.
Why does the Angel threaten the utter ruin of their City and of their holy
place, before he had spoken of the last famous Seven years, in the latter end
whereof the Messiah was to finish Trespass, and to end sin Offerings by his
death: seeing the City and holy place was not to be utterly destroyed until
about forty years after the death of Christ?

Answ. Because the Angel having instructed Daniel of the extreme wickedness of
the Jews of that Generation wherein Christ lived, in that they cut him off, or
put him to an ignominious death most unjustly: Namely, not for any sin that was
in himself: therefore that he might make their wilful murder to appear the
more odious, he does thereto subjoyn the utter destruction of their City and
holy place by the irresistible flood of the Roman Armies, which he empowered to
execute that vengeance on them.

2. This Reason is also given by Dr. Willet, and by Pererius on this Verse, and
by Mr. Brightman in Dan. 12. 11. and our Savior does expound it to this sense;
for as he was led to his execution, he did admonish those that wept, not to
weep for his ignominious kind of death, but for the miseries that should
shortly fall upon them and upon their children, Luke 23. 28.

3. When the Scribes and Pharisees said: This is the Heir, come let us kill him
that the Inheritance may be ours; they caught him, and cast him out of the
Vineyard, and slew him: When the Lord therefore of the Vineyard comes what
will he do to those Husbandmen, they said unto him, he will miserably destroy
those wicked men, and let out his Vineyard unto other Husbandmen, Luke 23. 28.

4. Though Pilate and the Roman Deputy did put Christ to death yet the Jews are
said to kill Christ, because Pilate did it by their instigation. P. Martyr,
says in his Com. pl. p. 386. That the Jews no less killed Christ then the
Romans: this he cites from Austin; and for this see more in my formor printed
Reply p. 406. and in that Respect it is, that the Jews are called Murderers,
Matthew. 22. 7. Acts 7. 52. and no Ransom may be taken for Murderers but their
own blood, Numb. 35. 31. and therefore those wilful murdering Jews were
miserably destroyed by the revenging justice of Christ, by impowring the Roman
Armies to do it.

7. At the end of war it shall have a final Judgment to Desolation.
1. Take notice of the method of this definitive threatening. 1. It shall be cut
often by Desolations, as it is translated in the margin: and to this sense it is
expounded by our larger Annot. on Esaias 10. 22, 23.

2. Their [Eng] shall be with a flood of Roman Armies: and 3. At the end of war
it shall have [a final judgement] to desolation, or it shall finally be cut off
by desolations one after another, until it have a final judgment to
desolation.

8. From this Exposition of ver. 26. observe these inferences.
1. From hence we may see the Reason why these Christian Kings and Princes Such
as do yet look for a glorious Church of converted Jews, and for their
restoration to the Land of Canaan, are extremely ignorant of the definitive
Sentence of the final desolation of that Land and City.
of Europe could not prosper in their warlike Enterprises, which they underto^k
for two hundred years together, to recover the holy Land and the holy City
Jerusalem; The Reason of it was, 1. Because Christ by his death had finished
those typical Titles of holiness to that Land and City: and 2. It was because
they went about to frustrate this definitive threatening of the final desolation
of the City; for these Reasons they labored in vain to uphold the Title of the
holy Land, and of the holy City, seeing they were by the said definitive
threatening denoted to final desolations. This was the only true Reason why
their great Armies perished most miserably for two hundred years together.

But in case they had but understood this definitive Threatening, (as the
learned of those times might have done, if God had not blinded their eyes by
their superstitious conceits) they would never have gone about (as they did) to
uphold the holiness of that Land and City, seeing God had by this definitive
Sentence decreed it to utter destruction, or to a final judgment to
desolation, or to be cut off by desolations, not only by the Roman War under
Vespatian, but also under Titus, and then by divisions and distractions among
themselves: and lastly for the greater certainty of th^s final Judgment, The
Angel does repeat it again with most Emphatical Expressions in v. 27.

2. Mr. Broughton says in Revel. p. 88. The Pope deceived Princes, to spend
their strength two hundred years as Gods Enemies, to bring the Land cursed for
ever into Glory, to make God a liar in Dan. 9. 26, 27. And says he in p. 279.
As for the old Jerusalem, Christ pronounced, that it should be Jebus, or
trodden down for ever; Luke 21. 24. and says he in p. 280 The Pope to weaken
Princes, did set them on to recover the holy Land, which God would have to
abide cursed, that Jews might see their sin in killing Christ. And says he in
p. 49, 50. Christ had told, that Jerusalem should be desolate unto the Worlds
end, Matthew. 24. As he caused Moses to tell in Deuteronomy. 28. 58, 59. But (says he)
The false Prophet to weaken Princes (who would be deceived, and not excel in
Gods Word, as they most of all might do) caused him to go for two hundred years
from Enggland, France and all the West, Men, Women and Children, to recover the
cursed Land. And before this (says he) The Apostate Julian to falsyfie our
Lords Words, stirred faithless Jews to Repair Jerusalem, being himself at
great Charges. But (says he) in Melchised^c H. 1. Christ showed his Truth, for
the Theodorit, v. 3. 20. in every Nation against Julius 2. p. 301.
Mould, which Thousands carried in the Daytime, was in the Night removed; and
in like sort their Mortar and their plaster, Winds, Tempests and Storms
dispersed, and their further madness an Earthquake terrified; their building
falling upon many, quelled them. Plain tokens of the wrath of Christ against
them.

3. In all their former d^s^lations and captivities before Christ, the J^w^
(through the mercy of God) had a fixed time set for their del^verance; as from
Egypt, and from Babylon, and from the rage of Antiochus: But now they have no
set time revealed for their deliverance from their dispersion in E^^ope, Asia,
and Asrica; neither have they any promise for their Restoration to their
Earthly Canaan, or Jerusalem, except it be by taking some promises in a
litteral sense, which ought to be taken only in a spiritual sense.

4. Though Ezekiel had a Vision of terrible fiery desolations and captivity for
seventy years, Ez^k. 1. yet there was a Rainbow in the Vision, to show that God
in wrath remembered mercy, and therefore they had a return after seventy years.
But as touching the desolations that were made by the Roman Infidels in Z^^n. 9
26, 27. no Rainbow of mercy is mentioned: But on the contrary, God has
declared by his definitive sentence, that the City and Holy Place shall have a
final Judgment to desolation, or it shall utterly be cut off by desolations
from time to time, as I also noted it above at N. 2. Those Jews therefore and
Christians also, that do yet look for another glorious Church of the Jews in
the Land of Canaan, do build their Faith and Hope but upon a mere Fiction, I
mean, upon the false interpretation of several Scriptures, by taking them in a
litteral sense instead of a spiritual sense.

5. This consideration may advise those that interpret Zach. 12. 6. of the
building again of the Earthly J^rusalem in her own place, that they must find
another sense of that promise, to avoid the absurdities of the litteral sense;
and of that other promise also in Zach. 14. 10. and so consequently of all the
other promises that are made to believing Jews since Christ ended Sin Offerings
(and all the other Holy Types) by his death, especially ever since this
definitive threatening of a final desolation. As for example, take that promise
(among others) in Es. 2. 3. Out of Zion shall go forth the Law* and the word of
the Lord from J^rusalem; for repentance and remission of sins was to be
preached in his Name to all Nations, b^ginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47. And
the Scepter of his Power (at the first) went out of Zion, Psa. 110. 2. Romans 11.
26. Mr. Bro. says in Melchisedec, H. 1. that the blessing promised in Esa. 2.
3. was performed before Jerusalem was abolished, and the Word of the Lord did
not fail: But as touching the utter desolation of the City, they and we were to
look to the Curse; For M^ses tells, that upon denying the Lord, the Land
should have an Eternal Compa^e Deuteronomy. 28. 58, 59. with Dan. 9. 26, 27.
desolation (Deuteronomy. 28. 58, 59.) And now Gabriel tells their particular
deniance in killing Christ, Dan. 9. 26, 27. not esteeming of the Covenant-Blood
wherewith we are sanctified. Our Lord told, that by the abomination of
desolation, Mat. 24. 15. (which is an Host besieging Jerusalem, Luke 21. 20.)
that it should be destroyed, and continually abide desolate, whilst the
G^ntil^s Calling continues (which doubtless will be to the end of the world)
And said Mr. B^o. to Rab. Elias, Rambam i^ B^thbechira, dreameth (as ye do all)
of a return to Canaan to build a third Temple: But (says B^o.) that hope was
success^ss, ever since Esaias told you of a Jerusalem that should reach over the
world, Esa. 66. 23. And Daniel (says he) has expressly told you, that your
City shall suffer a Del^ge, Dan 9. 26, 27.

Daniel 9. 27. is thus translated in Bro. Hanaw Edition: But he shall confirm
the Testament for many: The last seven; when in half that seven he shall end
Sacrifice and Oblation; afterward, by an Army of Infidels, he shall make a
desolation, even till utter destruction and final Judgment come flowing upon
the desolate.
The Angel does again in this verse tell Daniel of the two former great ends of
Christ's death.

1. To confirm the Testament of Grace and Reconciliation. 2. Thereby to end the
Typical Testament of Sacrifices, and of all Moses Rites,
1. He shall confirm the Testament.
A Testament is not confirmed, but by the death of the Testator, Heb. 9. 15,
16, 17. Thence it follows, that the Death of Christ is here signified to be
effected at the just end of Seventy-sevens of years, for the confirming of the
said Testament.

The Typical Testament was only confirmed by the death of beasts, Exodus 24. 7,
8. But those beasts were not Testators, and therefore the blood of those heasts
had not the virtue of Confirmation by any natural right, but by Gods positive
Covenant only: It was Gods positive Covenant only that made the blood of Bulls
and Goats to be the Confirmation of the Typical Covenant, to the purifying or
justifying of the Bodies of the National Church from their ceremonial sins; and
in that respect, God commanded Moses to sprinkle that blood, both upon the Book
of the Testamental Covenant, and also upon the people (in their
Representatives) for every Tribe had their Representative at the confirming of
the said Testamental Covenant. In like sort, the Death of Christ had its
Meritorious Efficacy from the conditions that were agreed on in the Eternal
Covenant betwixt the Trinity, for the Confirmation of all the Blessings of the
New Testament, Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17, 22, 23, 24. Heb. 13. 20. Mat. 26. 26, 27,
28. which Testament contrives these two general Heads. 1. A new heart. 2.
Pardon of sin. And in this last respect it is said, that the Blood of Christ
has virtue to purge the Conscience from the dead works of moral sins, Heb. 9.
14.

Mr. Ball on the Covenant says, p. 196. It is called a Covenant, in respect of
the manner of Agreement; and a Testament, in respect of the manner of
Confirming: A Covenant, in respect of God; a Testament, in respect of Christ,
who died as a Testator, and confirmed by his death the Testimentary Promise
made before (of God) for the obtaining of the Eternal Inheritance, by remission
of sins.

2. Hence it follows, that the way of justifying the Bodies of the National
Church from their ceremonial sins, by the typical works of the Old Testament,
was to last no longer then till the New Testament was confirmed by the Death of
Christ; and that the New Testament after that, was to continue without any
alteration to the end of the world, and in that respect it is called the
Everlasting Testament, Heb. 13. 20. Genesis 9. 16. Genesis 17. 13. 19. And in Esa.
55. 3. I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David: As it is also in 2 Samuel 23. 5. And secondly, By the way and order of the
Jews typical justification from ceremonial sins by the blood of Bulls, etc. we
may learn, that the way and order of a sinners justification under the New
Testament, is by the Meritorious Efficacy of the Blood of Christ, whereby his
Fathers Reconciliation is procured for the Everlasting Justification of
believing sinne^s, 2 Samuel 9. 20.

2. ^o many.
Many, in this place, is put for the many of the Elect of all Nations. And
hence it follows, that Christ by his Death and Sacrifice, has confirmed the
Legacies of the New Testament, for no others, but for the many believers of a^l
Nations: And in this sense Christ said in Mat. 26. 28. This is the Blood of the
New ^estament, which is shed so^ (the) many for remission of sins: and for the
many only Christ prayed, that they might believe, J^h. 17. 9. 20. and this
truth is further confirmed, both by E^a. 42. 6. Esa. 49. 8. Gal. 3. 8, 9, 14,
29. and also by good Expositors which I have cited elsewhere.

3. The last seven: when in half that seven he shall end Sacrifice and Oblation.
1. He calls this seven the last seven, because it makes up the whole number of
Seventy*sevens.

2. He divides this last seven into two halfs, because the last half only was
designed for the extrinsecal execution of the Mediators Office: For as I have
Christ did extrinsecally execute the office of a Mediator but for three y^ars
and a ha^f only.
showed on the word Anoint, he was first extr^nsecally anointed into the
execution of the Mediators Office at John's Baptism, when he began to be
thirty years of age, Luke 3. 23.

2. As soon as he was extrinsecally anointed by the Holy Ghost, before John's
Auditory, he was driven, by the servent zeal of that Spirit, into the
Wilderness to try Masteries with the Devils Temptations for forty days
together; and then as soon as those Temptations were ended, he went presently
into Galil^e, and preached the glad tidings of the Gospel in their Synagogues,
and confirmed his Doctrine; and his Mediators Office, by the miraculous works
of his Godhead: and last of all, at the end of the last half of this last
S^ven, he proved the perfection of his obedience, by his Combat which he had
with his malicious Combater Satan, who had a liberty of power given him in Genesis
3. 15. to pierce him in the footsoals on the Cross with ignominious and
long-lingring torments, as the worst of Malefactors: But the Devil, and his
potent Seed, could not by all this provoke his passions to any sinful
distempers; and therefore his Death being made in the perfection of that
obedience, it was accepted of God as a most pleasing and meritorious Sacrifice,
for the procuring of hi^ atonement to all believing sinners, for their
everlasting justification from all their sins, and so consequently, it was the
perfecting end of all Sacrifices and Oblations: And after this sort, he did in
the last half of the last seven, finish the extrinsecal execution of his
Mediators Office.

3. Mr. Bro. says in v. 26. That they who doubt in what part of this last
seven our Lord should die, are too negligent: For that (says he) was ^aught
first of all, before any partition was made; namely, it was taught, that it
should be finished at the just end of the Seventy-sevens of years, in v. 24.
and from thence it follows, that the last end of the last half of the last
seven, must be meant in this 27 verse, when he should confirm the Testament for
the many.

4. It is further evident, that the only reason why this last seven is parted
into two equal halfs, is to set out the bounds and limits of the extrinsecal
execution of the Mediators Office, as I have noted it above, and also more
fully on the word Anoint, in v. 24.

Dr. Willet says in Daniel, p. 353. the best interpretation then is this, That
his last week (for so he calls the last seven years) must begin seven year
before the death of Christ. The first half went before his Baptism (as a
preparation thereunto) and in the later half these things were performed, as
the next words show: and for the confirmation of this Interpretation, He cites
Mr. Bro. in his Concent.

The whole week (says he) is named (but the best Translation is, the whole
seven years) because these things were done in the last week, (Namely, in the
last half of the last seven years) but not in all the week, (not in all the
seven years) but only in the later half thereof, beginning at Christ's Baptism;
and so Hugo expounds it, Quia non in principio, etc. because these things were
not done in the Beginning of the week, therefore he determines when they
should begin: Namely in the later half of the week, which began in the
fifteenth of ^iberias, when Christ was baptized.

6. One Rab. Jonathan, who might well be of the Apostles Age, faith, (as it The
Ancient Hebrew Doctors held that Christ should declare, himself openly, but for
three years and a half.
is observed by Mr. Bro. in Melchisedec D. 3.) Three years and a half was the
Majesty standing upon Mount Olivet; and preaching, Se^k the Lord while he may
be found, but they regarded not. And Du-Pl^ssis says in his Trueness of
Religion, p. 536. Rab. Haderson, writing upon Daniel, says, in half a week,
(that is to say, in three years and a half) the Messiah shall make an end of
Sacrificing, and the day also cites Rab. Jonathan, saying, three years and a
half has the proper sense of the Lord, cried upon Mount Olivet, saying, Se^k
God while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near at hand; and in
the Psalms he says, God would teach his Church in his own person: From these
and such like speeches of the ancient Hebrew Doctors, we may see how they did
understand this last half of the last seven years in Dan. 9. 27.

7. Broughton does often blame Mr. Lively, for translating Dan. 9. 25. seven
weeks: he means, says Mr. Broug* seven sevens of years, but (says he) He
loves Darkness. In like sort, Mr. Broughton does much lament, that K. James
Translators did render Dan. 9. 27. He shall confi^m the Covenant with many for
one week; The Covenant, says B^o. is perpetual, and not a Covenant for one
week: I remember my faults this day, in that I did in my former printed Reply
follow King James' Translators for seventy weeks, but now I see cause to be
ashamed that I was no better advised, seeing Years are so plainly meant.

4. He shall end Sacrifice.
The Hebrew word Shabath, [Translated End] is in the conjugation Hiphil: and
therefore it is rendered by King James' Translators: he shall cause to cease:
This Hebrew word is of a large signification, as it appears by the various
terms that are given to it, both by the Seventy and also by our English
Translators.

1. Exodus 12. 15. We translate it, Ye shall put away, [Namely leaven] but
Ainsworth does render it, ye shall cause old leaven to cease.

2. In Lev. 26. 6. We translate it, I will rid out, (Namely, evil Beasts out of
the Land) but Ains. does ^ender it, I will cause evil Beasts to cease out of
the Land: these two places he does render as above.

3. In 2 Kings 23. 5. We translete it, put down (Namely, the Idolatrous
Priests) and in v. 11. we translate it, he took away; Namely the Horses, which
the Kings of Judah, had given to the Sun.

4. In Exodus 21. 19. We translate it, the loss (Namely, of his time) but Ains.
reads it, his sitting still; namely, from the businesses of his ordinary
Calling.

5. But we do most usually translate this word, to cause to cease, as in Esaias
13. 11. I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and in that
Conjugation we do translate it in Jer. 7. 34. Jer. 16. 9. Eze. 16. 41. Eze. 23.
27, 48. Eze. 26. 13. Eze. 34. 10. Hos. 1. 4. Ho. 2. 11. Dan. 8. 18.

6. Yet sometimes, we do also render it to rest, as in Genesis 2. 2, 3. Exodus 16.
23. Exodus 23. 12. Exodus 34. 21. because in all these places, God does cause men
to rest from the works of their ordinary Calling upon the Sabbath Day, that so
they may rest their Souls by Faith upon Christ only.

These and several other significations of the word, do not cross, but rather
help to explain each other. In these words the Angel does tell Daniel, That at
the just end of the said Seventy-sevens of years, and at the just end of the
last half of the last seven years, the Messiah should by his death and
Sacrifice (as it is the perfection of all sacrifices) cause an end to all
typical Sacrifices and Oblations, that is to say, he should cause them to
cease, or to be put away, or to be rid out, or to be put down, or to be taken
away, or (as the Seventy do here render it, to be expelled, or to be dissolved,
or to be made to perish, or to be consumed, or to be destroyed: and so
consequently, he should cause the legal use of the Sabbath or Seventh Day, to
cease from that day, and to be changed into the first day of the week.

7. Mr. Ains. says in Numb. 10. 17. That the taking down of the Tabernacle and
removing thereof, and the setting of it in another place, did figure the
instability of the legal figurative worship which Christ was to abolish by his
death, Heb. 12. 27, 28. For the Law having a shadow of good things to come, and
not the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they
offered year by year continually, make the comers thereto perfect, for then
would they not have ceased to be offered, because the wo^shippers once pu^ged,
should have had no more conscience of sins, but in those sacrifices there is a
rem^mbrance again made of sins every year (Heb. 10. 3. with Col. 2. 14.) For it
is not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins,
wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and Offering thou
would no^, but a Body have thou prepared me, etc. Heb. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and by his own offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified,
Heb. 10* 14. his own Offering was the perfection of all: and from thence it
follows, that it has caused Sacrifice and Oblation, and all the other legal
Rites of Moses to cease for ever.

5. Oblation.
This word Oblation, means the Meat and Drink Offerings: for every
Meat Offering had its Drink Offering. See Ains. in Lev. 2. 1. and Numb. 15. 5.
12. Lev. 7. 38. Psalm 141 2. And these offerings were ordained for no other use
but to shadow out the death of Christ, E^h. 5. 2. Psalm 40. 7. with Heb 10. 5,
8, 10. our Savior told the carnal Jews that followed him for the Loaves-sake,
whosoever eats of my flesh, and d^inketh of my blood has eternal life, and I
will raise him up at the last day, for my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed (Namely, in the true performance of the typical Sacrifices and
Oblations) John 6. 54, 55. as soon therefore as the Messiah had performed his
death and sacrifice, these Oblations must cease: and now it has pleased Jesus
Christ to abolish these things, and to ordain the use of Bread broken, and of
Wine poured out at his last S^pper for the perpetual memorial of his death and
sacrifice, whereby Gods everlasting reconciliation is procured for the
everlasting Righteousness of believing sinners.

6. Afterward by an Army of Infidels.
Namely, by the Army of Roman ^ouldiers, under the conduct of V^spatian and
Titus: and says Mr. Broughton in his Sinai Sight, Apud finem, The Roman Camp
in Dan. 9. 27. is named an abominable Camp. And (says he) If God had not
shortened the days of this War, no flesh of the people had been saved; Eleven
hundred Thousand in few months perished: But God saved a R^mnant, Mat. 24. 15.

7. He shall make a Desolation.
HE: Namely the Messiah, shall by his Executioners the Roman Armies make
desolation of those M^rcherers. 2. Our Savior did foretell this desolation to
his Disciples, saying in Luke 21. 20. When ye shall see Jerusalem compassed
with Luke 21. 20, 22 23, 24. Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles,
until the time of the Gentiles calling to the Faith be fulfilled: and their
calling to the Faith shall last to the Worlds End.
Armies, then know that the foretold desolation (by Daniel) is nigh: and said
he in v. 22. these be the days of Vengeance, that all things which are written
(by Dan^el 9. 26, 27.) and says he is v. 23. There shall be great d^stress in
the land, and wrath upon this people: and in v. 24. They shall fall by the edge
of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all Nations: and Jerusalem
shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled: that is, until the time of the Gentiles calling to the Faith be
fulfilled, as Broughton does expound it, which I have cited in verse 26. ult.
and their calling to the Faith shall last to the end of the World.

8. Even till utter destruct^on and final judgment come flowing upon the
desolate.
There is a further addition of the Wrath of Christ expressed in this v. then
was expressed in v. 26.

1. Utter dest^uction; and 2. Final Judgment: and this Judgment is amplified,
in that it shall come flowing upon the desolate. In this verse, the said
definitive Sentence (in v. 26.) is doubled for the stronger certainty sake that
they might take the more heed to it; and in the like sense Joseph said unto
Pharaoh; The dream is doubled twice, because the thing is firmly prepared (or
surely decreed or purposed) of God: and because God hasteneth to do it, Genesis
41. 32. So say I, this definitive Sentence is doubled twice: 1. That the
desolation of Jerusalem shall be an utter destruction: and 2. a Final
Judgment, because it is firmly prepared (or decreed) of God, and he will
hasten to do it: and therefore it is added, that it shall come flowing upon the
desolate, first by the flood of the Roman Armies, and then by the flood of the
Turks Armies, and by other barbarous Nations.

Conclusion from the Premises.
1. That those Jews and Christians that do yet expect the Restoration of the
Jews to Canaan, and to re-build Jerusalem upon her own heap, may look their
eyes out before they shall see it: For though all the Kings and Princes of the
world should join their power and policy together to effect it, yet they shall
not be able to effect ^t, unless they can first defeat the definitive Sentence
of the justice of Christ which was first declared unto Daniel in v. 26. and
doubled twice more in ver. 27. It is in vain* therefore for any to comfort the
Jews with the hope thereof, as some godly persons do through their
misunderstanding of the mistical promises, that are made to the Elected Jews
of all Nations in the Prophets.

2. As in former times the Jews would not believe Jeremy, when he told them
that their City should be desolate for seventy years by the Baby onians: so
(says Mr. Broughton in Lam. 1. 11.) they did not now believe the Angel that
told them of a second destruction, again and again, that their City should have
a final destruction: and says he in his Epistle Dedicatory to Daniel, p. 2.
Christ at his Ascension began to Reign in the House of David for ever, and
destroyed utterly as with a flood City and Temple, to show that such outward
things of man's work could not be fit to be meant in the most glorious promise
to David; and says he in his Concent (3960.) The openest enemies of Christ now
are the Jews that denied him: And the Romans by whose policy he was crucified;
The King (Messiah) was upon this to destroy the Kings own Nation, their City
and Sanctuary; and he foretold them, that their place should be desolate,
Matthew. 24. And the proper token, when Jerusalem should be besieged by an Host,
Luke 21. and refers men to Dan. 9. where Gabriel teaches the full Doctrine
touching Christ, in ver. 24. and the destruction of the Jews (in ver. 26, 27.)
and the whole state and scope of the same: saying, If we let him go (as by his
Resurrection they could not choose) All men will believe on him: and the Romans
will come and destroy our place and Nation, John 11. 48. They confessed this
Truth, and yet when Steven did affirm the same Truth, Namely, that Jesus of
Nazareth would destroy that place (though he had the Countenance and the words
of the Angel Gabriel when he spoke it) they held it blasphemy in him, to speak
so of their holy place, Acts 6. 14. And the Lord closely limited the time:
saying, That Generation should not pass until all these things should b^
performed: and by most men's account it was forty years after the death and
R^surrection of Christ, and so it falls, a Day for a Year for their
misbelieving of his Resurrection. Thus far out of Bro.

CHAP. XV.
Proving from the Hebrew word Caphar: That Gods Forgiveness for the sake of
Christ's Sacrifice: is a Believing sinners perfect Holiness and Righteousness,
to Everlasting Life.

SECT. 1.
Holiness and Righteousness is of two sorts: 1. Natural; 2. Supernatural.

1. Natural, this was in Adam (and also in Christ) in his first Creation: as I
have showed it in Chap. 1 sect. 4.

2. Supernatural: and this holiness and righteousness is also of two sorts:
1. Intrinsecal, and 2. Extrinsecal. Or thus: It is 1. A new Heart; and 2.
Forgiveness of Sins.

And under these two sorts of supernatural Holiness, is comprehended many
several and particular blessings of the Covenant of Grace.

1. Under a new heart is comprehended, not only the first act of Regeneration,
Inherent holiness and righteousness was not ordained to justify sinners in
Gods sight, because it cannot make them so perfect from all sin, as Gods
forgiveness does.
but also the continual exercise of Faith and Repentance, and other Graces
also, Jer. 31. 33. Eze. 36. 26, 27, 28. Heb. 8. 12. But this kind of inherent
Holiness and Righteousness, cannot be called a sinners perfect Holiness and
Righteousness, because it does not cleanse them from the guilt of original and
actual sins, though yet through the power of Gods Regenerating Spirit the Elect
are in part renewed here: but yet not so fully renewed, but that the said
Original corruption does make the thoughts and imaginations of their Heart, to
be evil, and only evil, and that continually; and in that Respect the most
eminent in Grace have cause to cry out (as Paul did) O spoiled man that I am,
who shall deliver me (Redeem me, or justify me) from this body of death (in
sin)* The Apostle does give this satisfactory Answer to himself in v. 25. I
thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, because at last God will free me from
this body of death in sin, through the mediation and intercession of Christ's
meritorious Sacrifice; Romans 7. 24.
namely, at the time of my Resurrection then this corruptible Body shall be
raised up, not as it is now corrupted with original sin, but it shall then be
raised up a spiritual and glorified Body; But until that time I cannot be
perfectly delivered from this body of death in sin by any degree of inherent
Grace, because Gods definitive Sentence was in Genesis 2. 17. in the day thou
eatest of the forbidden fru^t thou shall dye the death: 1. By deprivation of my
concreated Image. And 2. By corruption of Nature that will necessarily follow
the former: This definitive Sentence has taken such fast hold upon all the
fallen sons of Adam, that I must feel the justice of it as long as I live in
this world: and the rather because God was pleased to give a liberty of power
unto Satan to tempt this corrupt Nature to sin continually: and therefore all
the godly as long as they live in this world, can have no peace with God by
resting on their inherent Sanctity: neither does God justify any from the
guilt of sin until they be qualified for it by the said inherent Grace of
Regeneration, and by the inherent Grace of Faith in Christ.

2. It was therefore the good pleasure of God in the Riches of his mercy to
ordain a second sort of extrinsecal holiness and righteousness for believing
sinners only: 1. By the meritorious obedience of Christ in his Combat of
Sufferings, and in his death and sacrifice: and 2. By Gods Reconciliation
procured thereby for the said believing sinners; And this consideration made
Bernard to say, That Righteousness given is safer to rely upon, then on that
which is inherent. But I pray ma^k the Caution which I have before given:
Namely, That Gods Reconciled Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice,
does not extend to justify any Believer from the guilt and punishment of Adams
first sin in eating the forbidden Fruit, nor from the punishment of
deprivation: Namely, not from the deprivation of that natural holiness and
Righteousness wherein God created Adam after his own Image: but every child of
Adam does and must bear that punishment (by Gods definitive Sentence in their
own persons, as a satisfaction to Gods justice for the breach of that Covenant,
as long as they continue in this World: But yet nevertheless, God does for the
sake of Christ's meritorious obedience in his death and Sacrifice, justify
believing sinners from the guilt of their original sin, and also from the
numberless number of all their actual sins, and so consequently from the
condemning power of them.

But Mr. Norton affirms in p. 137.

That the obedience of Christ discharges Believers (which are his seed) not
only from the gui^t of that one act of the disobedience of Adams sin, in eating
the forbidden fruit, but also from the guilt of all other disobedience, both
original and actual.

In these words, Mr. Norton denies that God pronounced any definitive Sentence
Reply 1.
by deprivation for Adams first sin against the Covenant of Nature, in eating
the forbidden Fruit, which is a fundamental Error touching that Covenant.

2. I assent to the last part of his Assertion: Namely, That the obedience of
Christ (in his death and sacrifice) does discharge Believers from the guilt
both of their original and actual sins, because they are such sins as come only
under the punishment of the Covenant of Grace; But as I said above, the guilt
and punishment of Adams first sin is not forgiven by the obedience of Christ,
but no Son of Adam does and must bear it as a satisfaction to Gods vindicative
Justice for Adams breach of the Covenant of Nature.

3. Seeing all the blessings of the New Covenant are comprehended under the
said two general Heads of supernatural Holiness and Righteousness: it
follows, that the latter of the two as well as the former: Namely (Gods
Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice) must needs be a very large and
Comprehensive Blessing: and this is most evident by the sundry remarkable
Titles that are given to it.

1. It is called Gods Atonement or Reconciliation: of which I will speak in the
next Section. 2. It is called Gods merciful Forgiveness, because it does
fully justify believing sinners from the condemning power of all their sins,
in Chap. 16. 3. It is called Redemption from sin, in Chap. 17. 4. It is called
Expiation, Washing, Cleansing, Purging and Purification (i.e. Justification
from sin) in Chap. 18. 5. It is said, to make a believing sinner sinlesse, in
Chap. 19. 6. It is called Gods bearing of sin away from believing sinners, in
Chap. 20. 7. It is called Gods healing of sinners, or, his making them sound
and whole, in Chap. 21. 8. It is called Gods not imputing, or, his not strictly
marking sin, or, his not remembering sin, but his blotting it out of his
Remembrance, in Chap. 22. 9. It is called Gods Repentance, or, his not
punishing sin, in Chap. 23.
SECT. 2.
GODS Forgiveness, is called his Atonement, or his Reconciliation, of which I
have spoken much in my former printed Reply, from p. 233. h. h. to p. 259. But
yet I conceive it will be here needful to repeat some things, and also to
enlarge them.

1. I have there showed that the Hebrew word Caphur; translated Atonement or
Reconciliation, does in propriety of speech signify nothing else, but [To
Cover] but what kind of cover is meant in every place where it is used, cannot
be better known then by the Context: Namely, by the circumstances of each place
where it is used. Gods reconciled forgiveness for the sake of Christ's
sacrifice, does fully justify believing sinners from all sins.


2. When God does cover sin from his sight, or cover his Anger from breaking
out against sin and sinners, then the said Hebrew word is translated Atonement
or Reconciliation, because God does no otherwise cover sin from his sight, or
cover his Anger from breaking out, then by his atonement; Namely, by his
gracious Forgiveness, and by his receiving of such sinners into his special
Favor, for the sake of the meritorious obedience of Christ in his Combat of
sufferings, and in his death and sacrifice.

3. This Exposition of Gods reconciled Forgiveness, is sweetly represented to
us by the typical Schoolmaster, of sin offerings, trespasse-offerings, and
burnt-offerings.

1. The burnt-Offering was ordained to be the procuring cause of Gods Atonement
and Forgiveness to repenting and believing sinners, in Lev. 1. 3, 4. Job 1. 5.
Job 42. 8. 1 John 2. 2. Heb. 10. 8, 10.

2. The Sin-Offering was ordained, to procure Gods Atonement and Forgiveness
to repenting and believing sinners, Lev. 4. 20, 26, 31, 35. Numb. 15. 25, 26,
28.

3. Trespasse-Offerings were also ordained, to procure Gods Atonement and
Forgiveness to repenting and believing Trespassers, Lev. 5. 10, 13, 16, 18.
Lev. 6. 7. Lex. 19. 22. Dan. 9. 24.

4. This Hebrew word is often used in the Law, for covering, or taking away
Exodus 29, 36. Lev. 1. 4. Psalm 65 4.
offenses (out of Gods sight) by his merciful Forgiveness, for the sake of
Sacrifices, Lev. 4. 40, 26, 31, 35. Lev. 5. 6, 10, 13, 16, 18. Deuteronomy. 21. 8. and
consequently, for the appeasing of Gods Anger by Sacrifice; For when Gods Angry
Face against sin, is covered by the Sacrifice of Christ, then God is truly
appeased, and does receive such sinners into special Favor, Lev. 1. 4. When
Jacob heard that Esau was coming to meet him with four hundred men, he was
afraid, Genesis 32. 6. and then he said in v. 20. I will appease his face with the
present that goes before me; here the said Hebrew word Caphar is translated to
appease, or to cover Esaus angry face with an excellent Present; And it may in
like sort be applied to the appeasing of Gods Angry face against sin by that
most excellent gift of the Sacrifice of Christ.

5. Mr. Ainsworth says in Psalm 65. 4. Our Trespasses thou will mercifully
cover them, expiate, propitiate, and purge them away, and so consequently wilt
mercifully cover them: that is to say, forgive them: and says he in Psalm 78.
38. he being compassion^^e, merc^fully covered in^quity. and in Psalm 79. 9.
mercifully cover our sins: Mr. Ainsworth does most fitly add the word Merciful
to the word Cover, because the Hebrew word Capo^eth is applied to the Cover of
the Ark, which is also called Gods Mercy-seat, Exodus 25. 17, 22. From which
Mercy-seat God did usually manifest his merciful Atonement to repenting and
believing sinners by the Cloud of his Presence there, Lev. 16. 2. secondly, The
word merciful or proptitious is also added to Gods Forgiveness in Heb. 8. 12.
where the Holy Ghost does follow the like addition that was first made by the
seventy Interpreters in Jer. 31. 34.

6. The blood of the Sin-Offering was ordained to make Atonement for the holy
Place, because of the uncleanness of the Sons of Israel, and because of their
trespasses and of all their sins, Lev. 16. 16. and in v. 19. he shall sprinkle
of the blood upon the Altar seven times, and [shall cleanse ^t and sanctify it
from the uncleanness of the Sons of Israel:] Now the only reason why the
blood of the sin-Offering was ordained to cleanse and sanctify the Altar of
the Incense from the uncleanness of the sons of Israel, was because it was
ordained to procure Gods Atonement, or his Reconciled Forgiveness for the
uncleanness which the Altar had received from the sins and trespasses of the
sons of Israel: and from thence it follows, that Gods Reconciled Forgiveness
procured by the blood of the sin-Offering, did cleanse and sanctify, i.e. did
justify the Altar from the uncleanness of the sons of Israel: And the like
double expression is in Heb. 9. 13. where the word Sanctify and Purify (or
cleanse) are both alike used for justification from sin, as I have often showed
it.

7. God ordained that the High Priest should once a year make atonement for all
the National Church, to cleanse them from all their sins, that they might Lev.
16. 16. 19. 29. 30. Exodus 30. 10.
be clean from all their sins before the Lord, Lev. 16. 13. Now the Priest made
or procured this atonement for them no otherwise, but by offering unto God
their public Sacrifices, and Gods atonement so procured, did fully cleanse
them, i.e. justify them from all their ceremonial sins. This did typifie that
our High Priest Christ Jesus, by his meritorious obedience in his Death and
Sacrifice, has procured his Fathers atonement for the full cleansing (or
justifying) of believing sinners from the guilt of all their moral sins. And 2.
From thence it does also follow, that Gods forgiveness (for the sake of Christ's
Sacrifice) is not an antecedent to his atonement, as Mr. Norton does make it
to be in p. 162. but it is a true part thereof, or rather the whole. 3. Whereas
it is sometimes said, that Gods atonement does cleanse them from all their
sins before the Lord; and sometimes, that their Sacrifices does cleanse them;
the meaning is, that Sacrifices did cleanse them, as they were ordained to be
the meritorious or procuring cause of Gods atonement. But 2. That it was Gods
atonement so procured, that was the full and formal cause of their cleansing.

8. The tenth day of the seventh month, is called a day of Attonements, to
make an atonement for all the National Church before the Lord your God, Genesis
23. 27, 28. Mr. Ainsworth observes that it was called a day of Attonements, in
the Plural, that so they might have the forgiveness of all their sins (for that
was the main use of Gods Atonement.)

9. Mr. Ains. says in Exodus 30. 10. The blood of the Sin-offering of
Attonements, was a figure of the Blood of Christ reconciling us to God, Heb. 2.
17. and signified, that sins are to be pardoned and purified by his Blood and
Death, (namely, as it was the meritorious and procuring cause of Gods
Atonement) this positive Ordinance typed out the Power and Efficacy, both of
the Priesthood* and of the Sacrifice of Christ; namely, that it was the only
procuring cause of Gods Atonement, or of his reconciled forgiveness, for the
full and perfect cleansing of believing sinners from the guilt of all their
moral sins, that so they might be clean (or that so they might be justified)
from all their sins before the Lord.

10. Dr. Gouge does fully concur with my said Exposition of Gods Atonement and
forgiveness; for in his Annot. on 1 Ch^. 6. 49. he says, That Gods 1 Chr. 6.
49. Heb. 2. 17.
Atonement is to pardon sin, and to pacify wrath, Psa. 78. 38. In which
place, says he, it is translated, He forgave iniquity: But the Ebrew is, He
covered iniquity: And (says he) the Ebrew word is frequently translated, to
expiate, that is, to purge away, or to take away uncleanness, so that it may
not be imputed: And (says he) by the Priests making atonement legally,
Christ's making Reconciliation between God and Man was typified: and, says he,
in his Commentary on Heb. 2. 17. The Greek word translated [To make
Reconciliation for] the sins of the people, has reference sometimes to the
party offended, and then it signifies, to be propitious or merciful in
pardoning the offense, as where the penitent Publican said unto God, Be
merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18. 13. But 2. says he, it has reference
sometimes to the thing that gives the offense, and then it signifies to
expiate, or to make satisfaction for, that so the party offended may be
pacified thereby. And thus it is taken here in Heb. 2. 17. and it imports as
much as this phrase in Heb. 1. 3. he purged our sins.

11. It is further evident, that Gods merciful forgiveness (for the sake of
Christ's Sacrifice) is the whole of his Reconciliation, because God does make
this gracious promise in his New Covenant, saying, I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sins no more, Jer. 31. 34. And this promise
is thus expounded by Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness,
and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more. 1. Take notice, that
this expression in Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful, is exchanged for this, I
will fo^give. 2. That this expression, I will be merciful, does also signify,
I will be p^opitious, or I will be attoned, or I will be reconciled to their
unrighteousn^ss. 3. Observe, that the Greek word Hileos, in Heb. 8. 12. was
first used by the Seventy, to express the force of the Ebrew word Cap^ar, in
Deuteronomy. 21. 8. where Tremelius and Ainsworth do translate it, to make expiation,
or to make atonement; and to that very sense does Dr. Gouge speak in Heb. 2.
17. But the Seventy in Jer. 31. 34. and our English in Heb. 8. 12. render it, I
will be merciful, or I will be attoned, or I will be reconciled to their
unrighteousness: Both expressions in Jer. 31. 34. and in Jer. 31. 34. Heb. 8.
12. As sin is called unright^ousn^ss, so Gods forgiveness for the sake of
Christ's Sacrifice, ought by the rule of contraries, to be called a believing
sinners righteousness, or his J^stification from sin.
Heb. 8. 12. may be joined together thus: I will mercifully forgive their
unrighteousness. And of this see more in Chapter 16.

4. As sin is called unrighteousness in Heb. 8. 12. and in 1 John 1. 9. and in
very many places by the Seventy; as in 1 Samuel 3. 14. 1 Samuel 25. 21. Jer. 3. 13.
Jer. 13. 22. Jer. 14. 20. Jer. 16. 10. Jer. 18. 23. and in Jer. 31. 34. Jer.
36. 3. Jer. 50. 20. Ezekiel. 3. 18, 19. Ezekiel. 7. 16. Ezekiel. 9. 9. Ezekiel. 14. 3.
Ezekiel. 18. 19. 20. 30 Dan. 9. 13. 16. 24. Hos. 14. 1, 2. Mic. 7. 18. Zach. 3. 9.
and in many other places. So in like sort, Gods merciful forgiveness in taking
away unrighteousness, ought by necessary consequence, to be called a believing
sinners perfect righteousness: By the said Antithesis, and no truth is more
clear then this; and this also is most clear by Romans 5. 17. where Gods
forgiveness is called, the abundance of the grace of the gift of righteousness:
But this gift of righteousness by Gods gracious forgiveness, is another kind of
justification then Adams natural righteousness was, because this Justification
is the supernatural righteousness of the Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation:
Mr. Traheron says in Rev. 4. as darkness is contrary to light, being a
quality, so darkness must be referred to the same house that light is, and from
that rule it follows, that as unrighteousness is contrary to righteousness,
being a quality, so unrighteousness must be put into the same predicament,
order, or row, that righteousness is in: And thence it follows, that as
unrighteosness is a quality whereby man's nature is corrupted, and made thereby
worthy to be condemned; so Gods gracious forgiveness for the sake of Christ's
Sacrifice, does put believing sinners into the quality of righteousness,
namely, of such justification as does free them from the condemning power of
sin, and bring believing sinners into special favor, as adopted Children to
the Heavenly Inheritance, as it is most lively exempl fied to us in the example
of the repenting Prodigal, his Father did not only forgive him, and so leave
him, but he received him also into special favor, as his beloved Son, Luke 15.

12. For the fuller manifestation of this last truth, take notice, that when
David Gods atonement is not only his bare forgiveness, but it does also
comprehend his receiv^ng of believing sinners into special favor. 2 Samuel 24.
23. Heb. 11. 4. Psa. 51. 19.
went to offer his Burnt-Offering, to atone Gods anger for his sin in numbering
the people, Auranath met him, and said unto him, The Lord thy God accept thee,
2 Samuel 24. 23. that is to say, the Lord thy God be attoned to thy sin, or grant
thee not only the bare pardon of thy sin, but receive thee also into special
favor again; or else if Gods atonement had not comprehended both these
blessings, Auranath had spoken deceitfully to David, when he said, The Lord thy
God accept thee.

13. When any did bring their Sacrifices to be offered by the Priest for the
procuring of Gods merciful forgiveness, by their Faith of dependence on the
true Sacrifice, God is said to accept, or to be well pleased with such persons,
as he was with Abel, because he offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice
then Cain did, by the which he obtained witness, that he was righteous, i.e.
justified from the condemning power of sin, God testifying of his gifts, Heb.
11. 4. And from thence it came to pass, that when any did bring their
Sacrifices to be offered unto God for the procuring of his atonement and
forgiveness, they were called Sacrifices of righteousness, which God
delightfully accepted, Psa. 51. 19. implying thereby, that God (for the sake of
the true Sacrifice) did not only pardon their sin, but also delightfully
received them into his special favor, even with the same delight that he
received the Sacrifice of Christ: And it was in this respect also, that God
ordained Burnt-Offerings to be offered for sinners for their favorable
acceptance. See Ainsworth at large for this in L^v. 1. 3. and Lev. 22. 19. and
Lev. 23. 11. And Solomon Ja^chy does frame this speech for God, Bring the thing
that is meet, to make you acceptable before me, that it may be for your
favorable acceptance.

14. Christ said to his Disciples at his last Supper, This is my blood which is
shed for (you and the) many, for the remission of their sins, M^t. 26. 28.
(i.e. Mat. 26. 28. John 6. 53. Lev. 1. 3.
for the procuring of Gods atonement for the remission of their sins.) But Mr.
Norton does curtail this large and ample blessing of the New Testament: He
says, that remission of sins, does only deliver sinners from hell, but gives
them no right to heaven: But I have showed, that Gods merciful forgiveness is
the whole of his atonement or reconciliation, namely, it is such a
forgiveness, as does also receive sinners into his special favor. And to this
sense does Mr. Gataker dispute the point against Gomarus in p. 45. And Mr.
Woodbridge says also, in his method, p. 175. that Christ invites us to eat his
flesh that we may live, John 6. 33. 53. And 2. says he, Justification and
pardon of sin are so far from being excluded, that indeed it is the principal
blessing that is included in the life here promised, as it is manifest (says
he) from the Lords own words in the administration of his Supper, Th^s is my
body which is broken for you, this is my blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for many for the remission of sins, Mat. 26. 28. Ergo, says he, remission
of sins is that life which the Flesh and Blood of Christ gives to the world:
And faith he a little after, what can hinder good things from us but sin? and
sin, if it be pardoned, can no more hinder, then if it had never been
committed: And says he in p. 13. The Apostle makes that one act of Election,
the cause of all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. of which Justification is
one, in v. 6, 7. no less then Adoption is in v. 5. which, says he, is an act
of the same common nature with Justification, and is by some eminent Divines
made a part of it, See Dr. Reynolds in his Life of Christ, p. 403. and Baxters
Confess. p. 22. at Argument 34. which I have also cited in chap. 20.

15. This kind of Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice does Co-note a
state of Favor that the subject is put into by means thereof, Psalm 32. 1.
even as justification and reconciliation do, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. and in that
respect Gods Forgiveness may most fitly be called his Reconciled Forgiveness,
as I noted it before from Heb. 8. 12.

From these and such like Scriptures we may learn how to understand the Titles
of Gods merciful pardons, as in Exodus 34. 7. Psalm 51. 1, etc.

16. Mr. Hotchkish, in his Treatise of Forgiveness, does in p. 148. make Gods
Forgiveness and his Reconciliation to be the same, both in the meritorious,
and also in the formal Causes, and in p. 121. He says, that Gods Forgiveness
does co-note a state of Favor; For (says he) as sin does cause an enmity
between God and the sinner, so this enmity does continue no longer then till
God is reconciled by the procuring cause of Christ's sacrifice; Then, and not
till then, the sinner that believes is forgiven: Then, and not till then, God
is at Rest, pacified and quieted: and it was for this very end that God
ordained Burnt-Offerings, Sin Offerings, and Trespasse-Offerings, yea, and
Peace Offerings also, that they might be our typical Schoolmaster to Christ;
Namely, that they might be for a savor of Rest to God, Exodus 29. 18. Lev. 1.
9. Lev. 3. 5, 16. Lev. 4. 31. Lev. 17. 6. Numb. 15. 3. Numb. 28. 6, 8. Eze. 20.
40, 41. And this Savor of When God is reconciled to believing sinners by the
pleasing sacrifice of Christ then he is at rest from his anger against their
sins.
Rest to Jehovah, is by the Seventy rendered, a sweet Savor; and the Apostle
does follow their phrase in Ephesians. 5. 2. saying, Christ has given himself for us
an offering and a sacrifice to God, for a smell of sweet savor: That is to
say, for a savor of Rest; For as sweet smells do please the senses, so they do
make them to Rest in quiet: so the sweet sacrifice of Christ does please God,
and atone his anger for our sins, and so makes him to Rest in quiet. P. Martyr
says in Lev. 1. The sweet smell of Rest signified, that the will of God was
contented, as in a thing done according to his pleasure.

Conclusion,
1. From the Premise it follows, That as soon as God is atoned to believing
sinners by the sweet sacrifice of Christ, they are at the same time put into a
state of Favor with God; and so consequently, they must at the same time be
put into a state of Holiness and Righteousness from sin, or into a state of
Justification from the guilt of sin to the Right of the Heavenly Inheritance:
and to this sense confer these places, Exodus 28. 38. Lev. 1. 4. Eze. 43. 24.
Ephesians. 1. 6. And see Ains. in Genesis 19. 21. And see Mr. Greenhil in Eze. 20. 40.
In my holy Mountain there will I accept them: Gods accepting (says he) does
first import his pardon, and passing by what ever offended him, 2 Samuel 24. 23.
and when God said, I will not accept them, in Jer. 14. 2. he means, I will
not pardon them; Lev. 1* 4, 6.

2 Says he, Receiving into favor, is in French, I will be propitious to them,
I will remember their sin no more.

3. The Reasons above said, do prove that Gods gracious Forgiveness for the
sake of Christ's sacrifice is not an antecedent, but a true part, o^ rather the
whole of Gods atonement; and therefore that Gods gracious pardon for the sake
of Christ's Sacrifice, does include his receiving of believing sinners into his
special Favor, even to the adoption of the Heavenly Inheritance.

SECT. 3.
Does show that Gods Atonement, or his Reconciled Forgiveness is a believing
sinners perfect justification from the condemning power of sin.

THis I have in some good part made evident in the former Section: but yet I
will now labor to make it more evident, both from the typical, and also from
the typified use of Gods Atonement and Forgiveness.

1. In the Typified Use: God was pleased to ordain at Mount Sinai sundry Gods
atonement or his reconciled forgiveness procured by Christ's sacrifice, does
make believing sinners to be as perfectly holy or justfied from sin as the
covenant of reconciliation does require them to be to their attaining of the
heavenly inheritance. Exodus 29. 33, 36, 37. Exodus 36. 10, Deuteronomy. 30. 43. Lev. 6.
26. Esaias 6. 7.
sorts of Sacrifices to procure his Atonement and Forgiveness for the purifying
and sanctifying of the bodies of the National Church from their ceremonial
sins. The Apostle says in Heb. 9. 13. That the blood of Bulls and Goats, and
the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, does sanctify (or make the body
holy from ceremonial sins) to the purifying of the flesh; that is to say, to
the justifying of the body from their ceremonial sins, for their acceptable
appearing before God in his Sanctuary, as I have before showed it at large.

2. The Hebrew word Caphar, which we translate Atonement or Reconciliation, is
rendered by the Seventy, to sanctify in Exodus 29. 33. Aaron and his sons shall
eat those things, by the which Atonement is made; but the Seventy render it, by
the which they were sanctified, (i.e. consecrated) for they could not be
consecrated or made perfect from sin, until their Atonement was made for their
sins: And from thence it follows, that according to the judgment of those
Ancient Jews, Gods Atonement procured by Sacrifice, did sanctify or make
their bodies holy from their ceremonial sins. The whole verse according to the
Seventy should run thus: Aaron and his sons shall eat those things by the which
they were sanctified, to perfect them, and to sanctify them: or to consecrate
and to sanctify them: the G^eek calls their consecration, perfecting,
because hereby the Priests were fully and perfectly authorized to do the
Priests Office; and this Greek word Paul uses in speaking of the Priesthood of
the Son of God (in Heb. 7. 28) who is perfected (or consecrated) for ever.

3. We translate the 36. verse thus: Thou shall cleanse (or purify) the Altar
when thou have made atonement for it: but the Seventy render it thus: when thou
have sanctified it. From these translated terms it follows, that Gods Atonement
procured by sacrifice did perfectly cleanse or make holy, or justify the Altar
from the pollutions of their ceremonial sins: and in Lev. 6. 26. The Priest
that offers the sin-Offering, for sin; or as the Chaldy says, that makes
atonement by the blood thereof, shall eat it, in the holy place. For in this
action, the Priest was the peoples typical Mediator for the procuring of Gods
atonement or forgiveness for the ceremonial sins of the Congregation: and by
this means the Priest did bear away sins, as in Exodus 28. 38. These typical
expressions were their Schoolmaster to Christ, because they did most clearly
describe the true Nature of a sinners justification from sin: so that none else
but such as are carelessly ignorant, or desperately perverse will gainsay them.

4. We translate the 37. verse thus: Seven times shall thou make atonement for
the Altar and sanctify it; but the Seventy translate it thus: Seven times
shall thou purge the Altar and sanctify it. These ancient Hebrew Doctors do
explain the true Nature of Gods Atonement, that it does purge away, and
sanctify (or make holy, or justify) the Altar from sin.

5. The S^n-Offering of Atonements in Exodus 30. 10. is by the Seventy rendered,
the purgation of sins: which phrase Paul uses of Christ, saying, he made a
purgation of our sins, Heb. 1. 3.

6. It is said in Deuteronomy. 32. 43. He will make atonement for his Land: but the
Seventy render it thus: He will purge out the sins of his land and people.

7. In Esaias 6. 7. The Hebrew runs thus: thine iniquity is taken away, and thy
Gods merciful fo^givenesse for the sake of Christ's sacrifice, is as large a
b^essing as his aton^ment is.
sin is covered; Namely, by Gods Atonement: but our Translators do not follow
the propriety of the Hebrew word Caphar, which signifies to cover, but they
follow the Seventy in translating it thus: thine iniquity is taken away, and
thy sin is purged: And Tindal renders it, it is forgiven: And Tremelius does
render it, it is expiated. So then from these various translated terms it
follows, that Gods Atonement and his merciful Forgiveness for the sake of
Christ's Sacrifice, is but one and the same thing, as I have showed also in the
former Sect. at N. 11.

8. In Esaias 27. 9. We render the Hebrew word Caphar thus: By th^s therefore
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, but the Hebrew is [Covered] Namely, by
Gods Atonement and Forgiveness; And the Seventy render it thus: the iniquity
of Esaias 27. 9. Lev. 10. 13, 14, 17. Lev. 16. 19. Job 1. 5.
Jacob shall be borne, (or carried away) that so it may be covered out of Gods
sight by his merciful Forgiveness.

9. The holy Place in Lev. 10. 13. is called no more but a clean place, in v.
14. but yet the Seventy do call that clean place, a holy place: and the Reason
of it is good, Namely, because Gods Atonement which was procured by Sacrifice
did fully cleanse both the Temple and the Altar, and all the gifts of the Sons
of Israel from their ceremonial sins: and being so cleansed from sin, they are
said to be made holy, that is to say, to be fully justified from the pollution
of their ceremonial sins.

10. I will here repeat what I have before cited in sect. 2. at N. 6. That the
blood of the Sin (Offering) was ordained to cleanse the Altar (of Incense) and
to sanctify it from the uncleanness of the Sons of Israel, Lev. 16. 19. and
the only reason why the blood of the sin, did cleanse and sanctify the Altar
was, because it was offered to procure Gods Atonement; and from thence it
follows, that Gods Atonement procured by the blood of the sin, did cleanse and
sanctify the Altar from the uncleanness of their ceremonial sins; that is to
say, Gods Atonement so procured did justify the Altar or make it holy from
their ceremonial sins.

11. Job sent and sanctified his Children after they had done their Feasting,
Job. 1. 5. but the Seventy instead of sanctified, say, he sent to them to purge
(or to purify) themselves from those sins that had escaped them in their
Feasting. 1. By washing their bodies, which was used as the typical Sign of
their repentance: and then they must come to the place of sacrifice where Job
offered Sacrifices for the procuring of Gods atonement, to make them perfectly
holy from their sins in case they had Faith in the procuring cause of Christ's
Sacrifice.

12. God made this gracious promise in Esaias 4. 3. It shall come to pass, that
he that remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy; how so? because I will by
my atonement, or by my reconciled Forgiveness make them perfectly holy from
the guilt of all their sins: and this is so expounded in v. 4. when the Lord
shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Sion, then, and not till
then, they shall be called holy. And this washing is done, 1. On the sinners
part by his Repentance, and by Faith in Christ, Esaias 1. 16. 2. It is done on
Christ's part by the Esaias 4. 3, 4. Esaias 6. 7. Psalm 86. 2. Esaias 60. 21. Esaias 62.
12.
meritorious efficacy of his obedience in his Combat of Sufferings, and in his
death and sacrifice, 1 John 1. 7. Rev. 1. 5. And 3. It is done fully and
perfectly on God the Fathers part, by granting his atonement, or his Reconciled
Forgiveness, Jer. 33. 8. Eze. 36. 25. Heb. 8. 12.

13. An Angel took a Coal from the Altar and laid it upon Isaiahs mouth, and
said, Lo, this has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy
sin is [Caphar] covered, Esaias 6. 7. or as the Seventy say, is purged: which
purging says our Annot. is then most properly done, when propitiation or
atonement is obtained, Es. 22. 14. Lev. 1. 4. Romans 3. 25.

14. David says thus in Psalm 86. 2. Keep my soul, for I am holy: Namely, holy
from the guilt of sin, because through my Faith in Christ's Sacrifice I have
obtained Gods atonement or his Reconciled Forgiveness; David does not mean
that he was now made perfectly holy by his inherent holiness, for he knew that
his original sin did and should abide in him as long as he lived in this World:
and therefore his meaning can be no other, but that he was now made
extrinsecally holy by being justified from the guilt of sin by Gods atonement,
or by his Reconciled Forgiveness; and in that sense he did truly say, Keep my
soul, for I am holy from the guilt, or from the condemning power of sin; I am
one of those true Israelites that are all Righteous, Esaias 60. 21. and all holy
(from the guilt of sin) Esaias 62. 12. and in this sense it is promised, that the
whole seed of Israel shall be justified, Esaias 45. 25. Namely, all Believers, as
it is expressed in v. 23. and so all Israel shall be saved, Romans 11. 26.

15. The Hebrew word Thummim, signifies Perfection; either of Number, Person,
or Thing, but in Prove. 2. 21. the Seventy translate it Hosios, that is, holy;
Our Translators render the word thus: The upright shall dwell in the land, and
Prove. 2. 21. Prove. 10. 29. Josh. 24. 14.
the perfect shall remain in it: but the Seventy say, the holy shall remain in
it: But none else can be made perfectly holy but such only as are justified
from the guilt of sin by Gods atoned Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's
Sacrifice; and for this word see more in chap. 18. N. 17.

16. In Prove. 10. 29. The way of the Lord is strength to the perfect, Here the
Hebrew word Thummim is translated perfect: but the Seventy say, it is strength
to the holy; Namely, to such as are extrinsecally justified or made holy from
the guilt of sin by Gods atoned Forgiveness.

17. When Joshua renewed the Covenant of Grace, between the National Church and
the Lord: he exhorted them, saying, Fear the Lord, and serve him in perfection,
Josh. 24. 14. The Hebrew word Thummim, translated perfection, is rendered
Dicaiosune by the Seventy, that is, in righteousness, or in that way that God
has ordained you to walk for your justification from the guilt of sin: and
therefore look not so much after the way of your bodily justification from your
ceremonial sins by the blood of Bulls, etc. as at the exercise of your Faith in
Christ's meritorious obedience in his death and sacrifice, as the only procuring
cause of Gods atonement for your perfect justification from the guilt of your
moral sins: for there is no other perfection that sinners can attain to in this
life, but this.

18. P. Martyr, in his Exposition of these words, called to be Saints, in Romans
1. 6, 7. says, If we will search out the strength of the signification of the
word Romans 1. 6, 7.
Sanct^, i.e. Saints or ^oly: It comes (a^ Austin, de simbolo and side
teaches) of this word Sanctio, To Constitute: for that (says he) is called
holy, which is Constant and Firm, and appointed to abide: But nothing does more
let us to abide for ever then does sin. Therefore it comes to pass, that
Holiness consists chiefly in the forgiveness and Remission of sins. 2.
Says he in the same 1 Cor. 6. 11. Romans 12. 1.
page, our being sanctified in 1 Cor. 6. 11. is done by the forgiveness of
sin: 3. Says he in Romans 12. 1. Ulpian says (de signif. verborum) That Sanctum
signifies all one with Firm, fixed and stable: and that Sanciere, is all one,
with to appoint, and constantly to Decree.

19. Luther shows who are rightly called Saints, in Gal. 5. 19. p. 267. B.
But now in the light of the Gospel (says he) we plainly see who they are whom
Christ and his Apostles calls Saints; not they which live a sole and single
life, or that do straightly observe days, meats, apparel, and such other things:
But they, who being called by the sound of the Gospel, do believe that they be
justified and cleansed by the death of Christ. So Paul writing every where to
the Christians, calls them holy, and the children and heirs of God, etc.
whosoethen do believe in Christ are Saints, through such a holiness as they
freely receive: not through such a holiness as themselves have gotten by their
own industry, good works and merits. And a little after he says, God forbid
that I should straitwayes judge those which are weak in faith and manners, to
be profane or unholy; If I see they love and reverence the word of God, and
come to the Supper of the Lord, etc. for God has received these and commits
them righteous through the Remission of sins, etc. And says he a little after:
Let us now learn by the holy Scriptures, That they which faithfully believe in
Christ, are Saints.

Therefore (says he) we rightly confess in the Articles of our Belief, That
there is a holy Church, but yet it is invisible, dwelling in Spirit and in a
place that none can attain to, and therefore her holiness cannot be seen: for
God does so hide her and cover her with infirmities, with sins, and errors,
and with diverse Forms of the Cross and Offenses, that according to the
judgment of Reason, it is no where to be seen, etc. But thus ^each we, That
the Church has no spot nor wrinkle, but it is holy through Faith only in Jesus
Christ: but yet not in such sort that she is delivered from all evil desires,
or purged from all wicked opinions and errors: For the Church always
confesses her sins, and prays that her faults may be pardoned: and she
believes the forgiveness of her sins: The Saints therefore do fall and also
err, and therefore they have remission of sins; And if through ignorance they
do also err in Doctrine, yet is this pardoned, for in the end they acknowledge
their error, and rest only upon the Truth, and the grace of God offered in
Christ, as Jerome, Gregory, Bernard, and others did.

It is very profitable therefore for them to feel the unclean lusts of the
flesh, least they should be puffed up with some vain or wicked opinion of the
righteousness of their own works, as though they were accepted before God for
the same.

The Monks being puffed up with this opinion of their own Righteousness,
thought themselves to be so holy, that they sold their Righteousness and
holiness to others, although they were convinced by the testimony of their own
hearts that they were unclean: So pernicious and pestilent a poison it is for a
man to trust to his own Righteousness, and to think himself to be clean; But
the godly, because they feel the uncleanness of their own hearts, cannot trust
to their own Righteousness: This feeling makes them to stoop, and humbles
them, that they cannot trust to their own works, but are constrained to fly
unto Christ their Mercy-seat and only Succor, who has not a corrupt and
sinful, but a most pure and holy flesh which he has given for the life of the
World: In him they find sound and perfect Righteousness, and pray that for his
sake their sins may be forgiven them.

Wherefore (says he) in the next Section; Do you endeavor with diligence,
that ye may discern and rightly judge between true Righteousness and
Holiness, and that which is Hypocritical, then shall ye behold the Kingdom of
Christ with other eyes then carnal Reason does, that is, with Spiritual Eyes:
And certainly judge those to be true Saints indeed which are baptized and
believe in Christ, whereby they are justified and their sins, both past and
present are forgiven: and so these Remnants of unclean lusts and sins do
nothing at all hinder, but do greatly further the godly; for the more they feel
their infirmities and sins, the more they fly unto Christ the Throne of Grace,
and more heartily crave his aid and succor, To wit, that he will cover them
with his Righteousness (not with his Natural Righteousness, but with his
Meritorious Righteousness in his death, as I have showed his meaning to be
elsewhere:) and thus true Christians do constantly wrestle with sin, and yet
notwithstanding in wrestling they are not overcome, but obtain the Victory, etc.

20. Austin de justitia Christi, against Celestinus says; The godly lived
innocent, perfect and unblameable, because the infirmities and sins which they
commit, shall not be imputed unto them, because of their Faith in Christ,
according to that saying of David, Blessed are they whose iniquities are
remitted, and whose sins are covered, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not sin, Psalm 32. 1, 2.

2. Austin says in his Retractations: All the Commandments are accounted to
be done, when that is pardoned which is not done.

3. Austin says, Et cinitate Dei, l. 19. c. 27. Our Righteousness consists
rather in Remission of sins, then in Virtues perfection.

21. Bishop Jewel, says in fol. 316. 317, 318. That our very Righteousness it
self is so imperfect in this life, that it stands rather in forgiveness of
sins, then in perfection of Righteousness.

22. I have cited Dr. Bilson in chap. 5. sect. 2. and Dr. Barnes, and Austin,
in chap. 18. N. 20. and Luther, in chap. 22. N. 7. to the same sense with the
forecited Authors.

Conclusion.
Nothing else does sanctify, or justify, or make a Believing sinner to be
perfectly holy and righteous from the guilt of sin, but Gods atoned
Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's meritorious obedience in his death and
sacrifice: But Mr. Norton does affirm in p. 228. that this Negative holiness
and righteousness is a pestilent fiction and abomination; But O blindness and
blasphemy extreme It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks of so many
clear Scriptures which I have cited, together with the judgment of many
Orthodox Writers.

SECT. 4.
Showing more particularly, that Gods Reconciled Forgiveness is a believing
sinners perfect justification from the guilt of sin.

1. TAke special notice, that several sorts of Sacrifices, are called
sacrifices of Atonement: because they were ordained to be the meritorious or
procuring cause of Gods Atonement.

1. The Sin-Offering is called the sin of Atonements, Exodus 29. 36. with Lev.
5. Exodus 29. 36. Exodus 30. 10. 2 Chr. 29. 24.
13. and Exodus 30. 10. 2. The Priests are said to make Reconciliation with the
blood of the sin to make atonement for all Israel, 2 Chronicles. 29. 24. and see
more for this in chap. 19. N. 1. 3. The Burnt-Offering, was ordained to procure
Gods Atonement, Lev. 1. 4. Lev. 5. 10. 4. The Trespasse-Offering. The Priest
shall make atonement for him with the Ram of the Trespass, Lev. 5. 16. 5. The
Peace Offerings figured Christ's Peace Offering, as procuring Gods
Reconciliation for our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16. Acts 13. 47. Heb. 5. 9. Heb.
9. 28. Exodus 24. 5.
2. Take special notice also, that these very Sacrifices which are called
Sacrifices of atonement, are in other places called sacrifices of Tzedec, that
is to say, Sacrifices of justification from sin: The burnt-Offerings,
Sin Offerings, and trespasse-Offerings, and Peace Offerings are all inclusively
called sacrifices of Righteousness, in Deuteronomy. 33. 19. Psalm 4. 5. Psalm 51. 19.
to assure us (if we be not dull of understanding) that these Sacrifices were
lively Types of Christ's Sacrifice, as the only meritorious and procuring cause
of Gods atoned Forgiveness for the full justification of believing sinners
from the guilt of sin: and the Seventy do render Tzedec in all these places by
Dicaioma; And Kircherus does render Dicaioma in all these places by
Justification, and not by (Justitia) Righteousness.

But none of the National Church had any atonement for their ceremonial sins,
but such only as did exactly observe all the prescribed Duties that concerned
their Sacrifices.

1. The sinner must bring his Sacrifice to the Priest to be offered. 2. Then he
must impose both his Hands with all his might upon the head of his Sacrifice.
3. Then he must make his confession to God of those sins, for the which he
desires his reconciled Forgiveness.
These are the Conditions which God required to be performed on the sinners
part, or else his sacrifice should not be accepted of God as the procuring
cause of his atonement for their ceremonial sins, neither might the Priest
offer it until he had performed the said Duties on his part: but as soon as the
sinner had performed the said Duties; then the Priest offered his perfect
Sacrifice as the procuring Cause of Gods atoned Forgiveness for his full
justification from his ceremonial sin: but of these Conditions I have spoken
more at large in chap. 8. sect. 2.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 208. Sacrifices were not called Sacrifices of
Righteousness, because they did cause Righteousness to sinners, but because
they were offered in Righteousness, that is say, by Faith contrary to those
which the Prophet reproves in Mal. 1. 14.

Rep^y. 1. This Answer is not better then a mere evasion to my Argument from my
Argument in my Dialogue, in p. 117. was taken from these words in Romans 8. 4.
That the Righteousness of the Law (typified by sacrifices of Atonement) should
be fulfilled in us: For I showed that the Burnt-Offerings, Sin Offerings and
Trespasse-Offerings, did typifie and teach how believing sinners might be made
Righteous, or justified from sin, and that is by Gods atonement Romans 8, 4. Romans
10. 4. Heb. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. Romans 8. 3.
procured for them, and the meritorious Cause of Christ's obedience in his death
and Sacrifice; This was the only way or means that God ordained in his typical
Law or Testament to make sinners righteous in his Sight: and in this sense it
is, that the Righteousness or justification of the Law might be fulfilled in
us that believe; And in this sense it is, that in my Dialogue I do make the
sacrifices of the Law to be called sacr^fices of Righteousness: and in this
very sense it is, that Christ is called The (great) End of the Law of
Righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. And in this sense it is
that Christ said thus to his Father, in Heb. 10. 8. 9. In burnt-offerings and
sacrifices for sins, which are offered by the law thou have had no pleasure:
then said I, lo I come, in the Volume of thy Book it is written of me, that I
should do thy will, O God: He takes away the first (legal Sacrifices and their
legal atonements) that he might establish the second: by the which will of the
Father (in establishing the Sacrifice of Christ and his atonement procured
thereby) we are sanctified or made holy from sin through the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once for all, Heb. 10. 9, 10. And says Dr. Gouge in Heb.
10. 9. Christ made himself the perfection of all Sacrifices: that he might do
that by his Sacrifice which the Law could not do (Romans 8. 3.) For the first
typical Covenant or Testament of the Law made nothing perfect, because the
works thereof procured no more but Gods legal pardon for the ceremonial sins of
the body only: that so he might establish the Sacrifice of Christ which came in
the Room of the sacrifices of the Law, which made nothing God made the death of
Christ to be a sacrifice of righteousness, 1. in relation to his righteous
performance; and 2. Because it procured Gods atoned forgiveness, for the
perfect justification of believing sinners from the guilt of sin,
perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did.

2. From hence it follows, that the righteousness of the Law (which Christ
has fulfilled by his Sin-Offering, as in v. 3. to the end, that the
righteousness thereof) might be fulfilled in us that believe: is no other
righteousness but Gods Reconciled Forgiveness procured by the meritorious
obedience of Christ in his Combat of consecrating sufferings, and in his death
and sacrifice: this is the true scope of the Dialogues Argument; and therefore
Mr. Nortons Answer is no better then a mere Evasion.

3. Yet I grant also, that the Sacrifice of Christ may also be called a
sacrifice of Righteousness in other Respects: Namely, in Respect of his own
Righteous Nature, and also in Respect of his own righteous performance of it;
for under the Law no sacrifice was accepted of God, unless it were of a
righteous Nature: Namely without spot or blemish. See Ainsworth in Exodus 12. 5.
Lev. 22. 21. and therefore in relation to these holy Types, Christ must be of a
righteous Nature and of a righteous Life and Conversation, and therefore he is
called the holy One and the just, Acts 3. 14. 2. Christ's sacrifice may be
called a sacrifice of Righteousness in Respect of his own righteous
performance of it: For such a High Priest it became us to have, who is holy,
harmless, and undefi^ed and separated from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. and such a Lamb
as was without blemish, and also without Romans 5. 18, 19. with John 16. 10.
spot, 1 Pet. 1. 19. and so he offered himself without spot to God, Heb. 9. 14.
and in this last Respect, Christ's obedience in his death and sacrifice is
called the Righteousness of one, Romans 5. 18. And by this righteous performance
the Many in v. 19. are made Righteous, because it was the procuring Cause of
Gods Atonement; and he is said to convince the world of this Righteousness of
his in his death and sacrifice, John 16. 10. because I am risen and go to the
Father: and you that are wicked shall see me no more as you were wont to do in
your Synagogues: and from thence it follows, that it can be no less then
blasphemy to make Christ a sinner in his death and sacrifice by Gods
imputation, as Mr. Norton does affirm, but in that he goes as directly opposite
to the true sense of the Types, as the darkness of Egypt was to the light of
Goshen.

4. I grant also, that Sacrifices may be called sacrifices of Righteousness in
another Faith is a sinners righteousness no otherwise: but as it is the
condition to be performed on his part for his justification from sin. Mal. 3. 3.
Respect; Namely, in Relation to the Faith of the Owner, as I have observed it
in my Dialogue in p. 128. There I said, that Sacrifices of atonement are called
sacrifices of Righteousness, because they must be presented to God in
Righteousness; that is to say, in Faith, Mal. 3. 3. For Faith is the principal
Condition that God requires to be performed on the sinners part for his
recovering of Gods atoned Forgiveness for his full justification from the
guilt of sin; And of this see more in chap. 20. at Reply 1.

But says Mr. Norton in p. 121. It is better said, that atonement is obtained
by the sacrifice of Righteousness, then that Righteousness is obtained by the
sacrifice of atonement.

Reply. 2. Both Assertions are sound and good, if they be understood in the
sense of the Dialogue, in p. 121, 128. but not as they are understood in Mr.
Nortons unsound sense.

2. I have showed in my former Reply, That Gods atonement is procured by the
Sacrifice of Righteousness: Namely, by Christ's Righteous performance of his
Combat of sufferings, and of his death and Sacrifice.

3. I have also showed, that Gods atoned Forgiveness procured thereby, is a
Believing sinners perfect Righteousness, or his perfect justification from the
guilt of sin: and that Christ's active Righteousness to the moral Law of Nature
is not meritorious, because it is merely natural, and therefore God made no
Covenant for it. And therefore 2. God does not impute it to sinners, neither as
a meritorious cause, nor yet as the matter of their Righteousness: It is said
indeed, that Christ is made unto us of God, Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. but
that is not to be understood of the material Cause, but only of the meritorious
Cause of our Righteousness, or of our justification from sin; and to that
sense does the confession of Saxony expound it in the Article of Remission of
sins and justification; Christ (says that Confession) is our Righteousness,
as Paul and Jeremy say, because that by his merit we have Remission: so that in
their judgment Christ is our Righteousness no otherwise, but as he is the
meritorious Cause of Gods Reconciled Remission. And 2. Thence it follows, that
in their judgment, Gods Remission is the formal cause of a believing sinners
justification from sin.

4. In the typical pattern of a sinners justification: The Leper that was
justified from his ceremonial sins of uncleanness, was justified therefrom by
two birds, whereof the one was slain, and the other, after it was first dipped
in the blood of Lev. 14. to ver. 20, 49, 52, 53.
the slain bird, was let go alive. These two birds did typifie the Death and
the Resurrection of Christ, Lev. 14. 1. to v. 20. and in v. 49. they were
ordained to be the procuring cause of Gods atonement for the full cleansing
both of the Leper, and also of the leprous House from their ceremonial sins:
and upon their performance of these typical works of the Law, God annexed this
promise, that they shall be clean, Namely, fully justified from their
ceremonial sins by his Atonement that was procured thereby; as in v. 8. with v.
52, 53. And the like promise of perfect cleanness by Gods atonement, is made
to the Leper in v. 20. and from this typical pattern of justification which is
our Schoolmaster to Christ; we may see how we are justified in the typified
sense from our moral sins, namely, by the blood of Christ, as it is the
procuring cause of of Gods reconciled Forgiveness.

5. Mr. Ainsworth makes Atonement to comprehend under it, both the meritorious
and Formal cause of a sinners justification: his words in Lev. 8. 18. run Mr.
Ains. does clearly make the sacrifice of Christ to be the procuring cause of
Gods atonement for the justification of believing sinners.
thus; The Sin-Offering in v. 14. Taught them to have Christ for their
justification and atonement, for the forgiveness of their sins: and says he
in v. 30. The Altar figured Christ, from whom they were to receive blood for
atonement and justification. And says he in Lev. 9. 21. By these Sacrifices
the sanctification of the people was signified: by the Sin-Offering and the
Burnt-Offering they had Remission and justification from their sins, and
Reconciliation unto God; And says he in Numb. 15. 24. The Burnt-Offering
signified Gods Atonement and sanctification by the death of Christ. By these
and other like speeches, he does most clearly make the Sacrifice of Christ to
be the procuring cause of Gods Atonement, Remission and Justification from sin:
and to this sense also does P. Martyr speak in Romans p. 228.

6. Mr. Calvin says in Justit. B. 3. c. 11. sect. 11. They be judged Righteous
that be reconciled to God; And the manner how is declared, for that he
justifies by forgiving.

7. Tindal says thus in his Prologue to Romans Ult. By justifying (says he)
understand no other thing, then to be reconciled to God, and to be restored
into his Favor, and to have thy sins forgiven thee; and to this sense speaks
Dr. Twisse, cited in chap. 17. at N. 8.

8. Mr. Woodbridge says in his Method, p. 220. What is called Justification in
Romans 5. 9. That (says he) is called Reconciliation in verse 10. (and say I, it
is also called Atonement in verse 11.) And says he in page 223. Justification
and Reconciliation are here used to signify the same thing: Ergo, says he, to
receive Atonement, is all one with the receiving of Justification and pardon of
sin, Acts 26. 18. Acts 10. 43. And to this sense I have cited Luther in chap.
22. at N. 7.

But Mr. Norton does all along oppose this way of Justification; and opposes
such solid Authors as I cite, and follows the Fiction of his own Brain, and of
mis-leading Authors, that make a sinners Righteousness to lie in the natural
Righteousness of Adams con-created Nature: which should never have brought Adam
to Heaven if he had stood in it.

CHAP. XVI.
Showing from the Hebrew word Salach, that Gods Reconciled forgiveness for the
sake of Christ's sacrifice, is called His merciful Forgiveness; and that it
does fully justify a Believing sinner from the guilt of all his sins.

THE Hebrew word (Salach) is by Ainsworth translated Gods Gods forgiveness for
the sake of Christ's sacrifice, does not end in a bare forgiveness, but it
extends also to his receiving of believing sinners into special favor.
[mercifull Forgiveness] for the sake of a Sacrifice of Pacification, and it is
often used in the Law: such a kind of merciful forgiveness as does also
receive sinners into special Favor, upon Oblation and Intercession, made by
the typical Priest in Relation to their ceremonial sins: and in the typified
sense from their moral sins also, by the Oblation and Intercession of the true
Priest Christ Jesus, as these places do testify, Exodus 34. 9. Lev. 4. 20, 26,
31, 35. Lev. 5. 10, 13, 16, 18, 19, 22. Numb. 15. 25, 26, 28. Numb. 14. 9, 20.
with Neh. 9. 17. 2 Chronicles. 6. 21, 25, 27, 30, 39. Jer. 31. 34. and in this last
cited verse, God says thus: I will forgive (namely, mercifully forgive) their
iniquity or unrighteousness; but the Seventy render it thus, I will be
merciful, or I will be propitious or atoned to their unrighteousness: And the
Apostle citing this verse of Jeremy, in Heb. 8. 12. does use the same word that
the Seventy do (...), be merciful, be propitious, be atoned, be favorable to
their unrighteousness: and the Seventy use it for the said Hebrew word in the
like large sense in Numb. 14. 20. 1 Kings 8. 30, 34, 36, 39, 50. 2 Chronicles. 6.
21, 25, 27, 39. 2 Cheon. 7. 14. Jer. 5. 1, 7. Jer. 36. 2. Jer. 50. 26. Amos 7.
2.

2. The Seventy translate the said Hebrew word in Psalm 25. 11. by (...), which
does also signify to be merciful, or to be atoned, or to be Exodus 34. 9. Jer.
31. 34. Heb. 8. 12. Neh. 14. 20. Psalm 25. 11. Psalm 86. 5. Romans 3. 25. 1 John
2. 1. Psa^m 130. 4.
propitious, or to appease, or to reconcile God by Sacrifice. Mr. Ainsworth
does thus open the word in Psalm 25. 11. For thy Namesake, O Jehovah, even
mercifully pardon will thou mine iniquity. David says, he takes this from
Moses, who first used this word in a case of great offense, in Exodus 34. 9. and
it betokens to speak or pardon upon pacification of Grace and Mercy; and
says he, it is interpreted by the Apostle in Greek, to be merciful,
propitious, or appeased, Heb. 8. 12. from Jer. 31. 34. and it is often used in
the Law for Forgiveness upon Oblation or intercession made by the Priest (for
the procuring of Gods atonement) Lev. 4. 20, 26, 31, 35. Lev. 5. 10, 13, 16,
18, etc. Psalm 86. 5. In these words Mr. Ainsworth does most evidently declare,
that Gods merciful Forgiveness procured by Sacrifice, is one and the same
thing with his merciful Atonement; and the like Expressions of Gods merciful
Forgiveness, in Neh. 9. 17. and in Numb. 14. 19. and in Psalm 99. 8. and the
said Greek word is also used to express the force of the said Hebrew word in
Dan. 9. 19. and in 2 Kings 5. 18. and 2 Kings 24. 4.

3. The said Hebrew word, is thus translated in Psalm 86. 5. Thou Lord art a
pardoner; but the Seventy say, Thou Lord art favorable, indulgent, or gentle;
and Aquila and Theodotian, render it thus: Thou Lord art a Reconciler or
Propitiator, and in this last sense it must be applied to Christ, who is called
the Propitiatory or Mercy-seat, Romans 3. 25. Heb. 9. 5. and by his Death and
Sacrifice he is also called a propitiation, 1 John 2. 2. 1 John 4. 10. and so
in Psalm 130. 4. with thee is forgiveness that thou may be feared; but the
Seventy say, with thee is propitiation by sacrifice, that thou may be
feared, or worshipped with reverend fear; and the very same Interpretation they
make of Gods forgiveness in Dan. 9. 9.

4. The said Hebrew word is rendered by the Seventy in Numb. 30. 8, 12. by a
word that signifies to be made clean or purified, i.e. justified from sin:
teaching Number. 30. 8, 12. Psalm 103. 3. 2 Chronicles. 6. 30. 2 Chronicles. 30. 20. Es. 6.
10. Exodus 34. 9.
us thereby, that Gods merciful Forgiveness does justify believing sinners,
or make them clean from the guilt of sin.

5. In Deuteronomy. 29. 20. The Lord will not forgive; But the Seventy say, the Lord
will not h^ld them excused: The Geneva says, the Lord will not be merciful;
and our last Translators say, the Lord will not spare. It is also said in Psalm
103. 3. who so gives all thine iniquities: but the Seventy say, that excuses
all thine iniquities: And the Reason why he excuses all their iniquities, is,
because he accepts of the Apology that is made for them by the meritorious
Mediation and Intercession of Christ's Death and Sacrifice; and from thence it
follows, that Gods merciful forgiveness so obtained, does fully justify
believing sinners from the guilt of all their sins.

6. The said Hebrew word is translated forgive, in 2 Chronicles. 6. 30. but the
Seventy render it by a word that signifies to heal, or to make one that is
diseased to be perfectly sound and whole: and consequently it heals the Souls
of Believers of the contagious guilt of their original and actual sins: and in
this sense God is said to heal the people when he forgave the guilt of their
ceremonial sins of uncleanness, 2 Chr. 30. 20. And that which Isaiah speaks
of healing the people, in Esaias 6. 10. Mark does expound it of the forgivenes of
their sins, Mar. 4. 12. and when Christ healed diseases, he forgave their sins
also, Mat 9. 2, 6. and the healing of men in Mat. 13. 15. is expounded to be
the forgiving of their sins, in Mar. 4. 12. From hence it follows, That Gods
merciful forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice is a very large
Blessing, because it is set out unto us by so many remarkable Expressions.

7. We translate the said Hebrew word by pardon, in Exodus 34. 9. pardon our
iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine Inheritance; but the Seventy say,
Bear our iniquities and our sins, and we shall be thine: They make Gods
pardoning Mercy to comprehend his receiving of Believing sinners into special
favor also: and they make Gods pardoning Mercy to be as large as his Atonement
is, as I have noted it also in chap. 15. sect. 2.

8. We translate the said Hebrew word, by pardon, in Numb. 14. 15. Pardon I
beseech thee the iniquity of this people: But the Seventy say, dismiss or
discharge Gods forgiveness does discharge believing sinners from the guilt of
their sins. Numb. 14. 19. Numb. 15. 25. Jer. 33. 8.
the iniquity of this people: that is, discharge them from the guilt of their
sin, as it is the Obligation to punishment; and Tindal renders it, Be merciful
to the sins of this people; And in Numb. 15. 25. We translate the said Hebrew
word thus: It shall be forgiven them; but the Seventy say, it shall be
discharged or dismissed: How, or upon what account? The Answer is in the Text;
The Priest shall make on atonement for all the Congregation (Namely, by their
Burnt-Offering and by their Sin-Offering) and it shall be mercifully forgiven
them, as Ainsworth does translate it; but the Seventy say, it shall be
discharged or dismissed, i.e. the guilt of punishment; and the Seventy do often
explain Gods Forgiveness, through the procuring cause of Sacrifices; by the
said phrase: as in Lev. 4. 20, 26, 31, 35. Lev. 5. 10. Numb. 26. 23. Neh. 9.
17. Esaias 55. 7.

9. God says thus in Jer. 33. 8. I will cleanse them from all their iniquity
whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their iniquity: but
the Seventy render the word pardon, thus: I will not call to mind their
iniquities; Hence also observe, that Gods merciful Pardon is first called a
cleansing; and 2. by the Seventy, it is called a not remembering of their
iniquities.

Conclusion from the Premises.

1. That Mr. Norton has no just ground to say as he does, That Gods
Forgiveness is an antecedent to his Atonement; but I have showed that it is as
large a Blessing as his Atonement is.

2. That Gods merciful forgiveness for the sake of Christ's sacrifice, is so
comprehensive a Blessing that it does not end in a bare forgiveness, as Mr.
Norton does curtail it: but that it does also comprehend Gods gracious
Receiving of believing sinners into his special Favor as much as his Atonement
does: and that is as much as is promised in the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation.

CHAP. XVII.
Showing from the Hebrew word Caphar: and from the Greek word Lutron; That Gods
forgiveness for the sake of Christ's sacrifice, is called Redemption; That is
to say, Justification from the guilt of Sin.

1. IT is said in Exodus 30. 12. They shall give every man [Caphar, A covering]
to Gods anger: for his (vital Soul or) Life; but we render it, They shall give
every man a Ransom for his Soul to the Lord. And Tremelius, does render it a
Redemption for his life to the Lord; but the Seventy call it Lutron, which
signifies a deliverance or freedom from any kind of bondage; and because a
price is often given for such a deliverance, thence it comes to pass that
Lutron is put for the price of Redemption; that is to say, It is by the Virtue
of Gods positive Covenant, that the obedience of Christ in his sufferings and
sacrifice is accepted as the meritorious price of man's redemption and
justification. Exodus 3. 12. Psalm 49. 7, 8. Mat. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6.
for such a price as God has covenanted to accept for the pacifying of his
anger: Namely, half a shekel for every man, that so no plague from Gods angry
face might be upon them to take away their Lives, as he had done from some of
them: but the price was no more but half a shekel for every man, which being
materially considered, cannot in Reason be esteemed a sufficient price for the
redemption of their Lives from death; For as Psalm 49. 7, 8. says, no man can
by any means redeem his Brother, nor give to God a Ransom for him: for the
Redemption of their Soul is precious, and it cease for ever; but yet by
virtue of Gods positive Covenant, the said half shekels were accepted of God
for the full price of the Redemption of their lives from death, because it was
employed (or part of it at least) to buy Sacrifices for the procuring of Gods
Atonement; But in case they had offered many Thousand shekels on their own
heads without the intervention of Gods positive Covenant, it would not have
been accepted of God as a sufficient price for the atoning of his anger, and
for the Redemption of their lives from death, Mic. 6. 7. and as I have also
noted it in my former printed Reply, in chap. 8. in the case of Ababs Offer to
Naboth, 1 King. 21. 3.

It was Gods declared Will and Covenant in Genesis 3. 15. that made the Combut of
Christ's sufferings, and his Sacrifice to be the meritorious price of Gods
atonement for the full Redemption and Justification of all Believing sinners
from the guilt of their sins, and so consequently from their Obligation to
eternal punishment: and in this sense it is that Christ came to give his life a
ransom for the many, in Mat. 20. 28. that is to say, he ventured his life in
his great Combat of sufferings with his proclaimed enemy, the Devil and his
potent seed, who had a liberty of power given them to put Christ to death by
their ^ortu^es, if they could, but because Christ was not conquered by them in
his perfect patience and obedience. His said Combat thus performed on his part,
was the Covenant-price which God had ordained and accepted for the procuring of
his atoned forgiveness for the Ransom or for the Redemption of the many
Believers of all Nations from the guilt of all their sins, and so consequently
by the Eternal punishment of Hell: and in this very sense it is said, that
Christ gave himself a Ransom for all (Believers) 1 Timothy 2. 6.

2. The said half shekels are called an offering to the Lord to make atonement,
Exodus 30. 15. and they are also called atonement-money in v. 16. because with
Exo. 30. 15, 16. 2 King. 12. 16. Neh. 10. 32, 33.
this money or with part of it at least they bought the public
Burnt-Offerings, that were offered daily for all the twelve Tribes to procure
Gods daily atonement for the ceremonial sins of the whole National Church, but
yet none of them were everlastingly pardoned as to their moral sins: but such
believers only, as looked to the true Sacrifice.

3. With another part of this atonement-money they bought the public Sin and
Trespass-Offerings, for the procuring of Gods Atonement to them for their sins
and trespasses: and in that respect the said half-shekels is called sin-money,
and trespasse-money, 2 Kings 12. 16. Numb. 10. 32, 33. but we translate this
Money in Exodus 30. 16. Atonement-money; and the Seventy, and the Geneva call it
Redemption-money; and Tremelius calls it Expiation-money; and Tindal calls it
Reconciling-money, but all these terms do mean but one and the same thing:
Namely, that the perfect obedience of Christ in his Combat of sufferings, and
^n his Death and Sacrifice, was ordained to be the only meritorious, or the
only Covenant-price of Gods atoned Forgiveness for the full Redemption and
Justification of believing sinners from the guilt of all their moral sins, and
so consequently from the punishment of eternal damnation.

4. That Money that was given for the Redemption of the 273. Israelites, which
were more in number then the firstborn Levites, Numb. 3. 46. is called
Redemption money in verse 49. and this money was given to Aaron the Priest
because of his attendance at the Altar, for the procuring of Gods atonement for
all the twelve Tribes of Israel for their ceremonial sins.

From this instance and the former, we may see the Reason why we are said to be
bought with a price, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Namely, because the blood of Christ in
his Combat of consecrating sufferings, was made the price of our Redemption by
the eternal Covenant that was made between God and Christ.

5. In Phil. 1. 4. Christ is said to give himself for our sins according to the
will of God, by venturing his life for us in that great Combat that God had
first declared in Genesis 3. 15. where God gave unto the Devil and to his seed a
liberty of power, to do the worst they could to provoke the passions of the
seed of the Woman to some sinful distemper or other, by piercing him in the
foot-soals, as an ignominious Malefactor on the Cross, with the most
ignominious and longlingring torturing sufferings they could devise: but this
blessed seed of the Woman conquered them all by his righteous performance of
the whole Combat; and therefore seeing it was done according to the Will of
God, it was accepted of God as the meritorious and Covenant-price of his
atonement, by the which all believing sinners are fully Redeemed and justified
from the guilt of all iniquity. And so in Tit. 2. 14. he gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us and purify us to himself for his peculiar people: and
from hence it follows, that redemption and purifying from iniquity in this Text
are terms convertible: And 2. because this blessed seed of the Woman, did in
the perfection of his said obedience make his death a meritorious Sacrifice: he
did by his said blood enter into the holy place (of Heaven) having obtained
eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. and in ver. 15. it is called a
redemption from such transgressions as remained unpurged under the first
Testament; for under the first typical Testament no other sins were purged by
the blood of Beasts, but ceremonial sins only: But the purging of the
Conscience from moral sins was reserved to the blood of the New Testament, as
it was the procuring cause of Gods Atonement, God made no covenant with man for
an eternal life in Heaven by the works of the first typical Testament, and
therefore all moral sins remained unpurged by the works of that Testament. 1
Cor. 6. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Romans 3. 24, 25. Gal. 1. 4. Tit. 2. 14. Heb. 9.
12. Esaias 44. 22.
as I have showed it in my Exposition of Joel 3. 21. in chap. 18. N. 17. and in
chap. 25. at ver. 3. And also in my Exposition of Acts 13. 39. compared with
Heb. 10. 4.

3. This Redemption in the formal cause of it (by Gods atonement) is also
called Justification, in Romans 3. 24, 25. Being justified freely by his grace
through the Redemption: that is, in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be
a propitiatory, or a seat of Mercy; or as the Seventy call it, in Exodus 25. 17.
A propitiatory covering: and by them it is also applied to Christ, who is also
called Gods Hilasterion, or Propitiatory, or Mercy-seat, in Heb. 9. 5.) Through
faith in his blood, Romans 3. 25. For the remission of sins, in whom we have
Redemption through his blood: The forgiveness of sins, according to the riches
of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 7. In this Text also, the Blood of Christ is put for the
meritorious price of Redemption, and Gods atoned Forgiveness that is thereby
procured, is the full or formal cause of Redemption and of Justification from
sin: and so it is said, in Esaias 44. 22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy
transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins: Return unto me for I have redeemed
thee; Namely, fully and formally by my Reconciled pardoning of thy
transgressions and thy sins, that are as a thick cloud for the multitude of
them: And from these Scriptures it follows, that our full and formal Redemption
and Justification from sin, is effected by Gods Atonement.

4. When Isaac sent Jacob to Padan-Aram, he said unto him, God Almighty give
thee the Blessing of Abraham, Genesis 24. 4. which Blessing, as it is well
observed by Ainsworth, consists chiefly in Redemption from the Curse of the
Law, by forgiveness of sins: In these words, he makes the formal cause of
Redemption to lie in Gods atoned forgiveness of sins.

6. It is further evident, that Redemption and Justification from sin, is no
otherwise effected fully and formally, but by Gods atoned Forgiveness only: For
Act. 13 38, 39* Rom 5. 16, 17. Luke 18. 13, 14
as the Apostle says, in Romans 5. 16. Judgment was by one offense to
condemnation: or (as Martyr, and Bro. and Dr. Hammond on John 12. 48. d. do
render it) guiltiness was by one to condemnation: But the Free Gift (Namely, of
Gods Reconciled forgiveness, as Bullenger and others do expound it) is of many
offenses unto justification: and this free Gift is called the gift of
righteousness (or the justification from sin) in v. 17. and it is also called
justification to life, in v. 18. because Justification from sin does make such
sinners to be the only capable subjects of Eternal life in Heaven.

7. The Publican smote his breast, saying in Luke 18. 13, 14. God be merciful
to me a sinner, i.e. God be propitious, or be atoned to me a sinner: and so Dr.
Gouge does expound it; and so does Heb. 8. 12. expound the word merc^ful: and
from this petition of the Publican; Christ concluded in v. 14. That this man
went down to his House justified (from his sins) and not the other, (or rather
then the other) Namely, not the Pharise, that justified himself by his outward
conformity to the Law.

8. Paul said thus to the men of Antioch, in Acts 13. 38, 39. Be it known
therefore unto you men and brethren, that through this Man is preached unto you
the forgiveness of sins: and by him all that believe are justified from all
things (i.e. from all those moral sins) for which ye could not be justified by
the Law of Moses; Namely, not by the blood of Bulls, etc. nor yet by any other
of the typical works of Moses Law; for those works of the Law were ordained to
do no more but to justify the body only from ceremonial sins: they were not
ordained to justify the Conscience from moral sins, that Virtue was reserved
only to the blood of Christ: (as I noted it before at N. 5.) Through this man
is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are
justified from all those moral sins from the which ye could not be justified by
the works of Moses Law.

9. Mr. Jesop. on the Covenant of Grace, cites Dr. Twisse in p. 6. saying thus:
The Redemption performed by the death of Christ, is (meritum justificationis
nostrae) The merit of our justification, or of the Remission of our sins, or
Reconciliation with God: but the actual justification, which is wont Gods
Tribunal from whence he does give forth the sentence of his reconciliation for
the justification of believers from their sins: is no other but his
propitiatory, or his Mercy-seat in Christ's blood, Romans 3. 25.
to be called The application of the Redemption performed by the Death of
Christ, is to none but those who do believe. And says he in page 24. Our
Redemption or Reconciliation with God, purchased by the death of Christ, is
said to be applied (by God) by a pronunciation, or by a kind of Judicial
applycation, and absolution from sin, for Christ his sake apprehended by Faith:
and (says he) God as it were from his Tribunal, does give forth the sentence
of our Reconciliation, (and Redemption from sin) procured by Christ (quae
quidem est nostri justificatio) which is indeed our Justification: These two
Assertions cited from Dr. Twisse, do fully agree to what I have asserted all
along: and unto him I will add what Bullenger says in his Decades, Ser. 6. God
forbad the eating of blood, in Lev. 17. 11. because the Life of the flesh is
with blood. And 2 Because I have given it to you upon the Altar to make
atonement for your Souls: Lo, (says he) There is in these words a most evident
Reason given, why it was not lawful to eat blood: because (says he) it was
that which God had ordained for the sanctification of man: for, says he, God
gave blood to be the price of Redemption, whereby men should be absolved from
their sins: Mark I pray, how he does 1. Call Gods Atonement, (procured by
blood upon the Altar) man's sanctification (from sin.) And 2. He calls the blood
that procured it, The price of Redemption (give to God) whereby men should be
absolved from their sins.

10. The Year of Jubilee, is called in Eze. 46. 17. A Year of liberty, and by
the Chaldy, a Year of Releases, (Namely, of certain eminent Releases above the
Releases of every seven-year) and by the Seventy, is called a Year of
Remission, and in Lev. 25. it is called a Year of Redemption in sundry
Respects: and it is also called the acceptable Year, in Esaias 61. 2. Luke 4. 18,
19. And as soon as Christ was extrinsecally anointed into the Mediators Office,
he began his public preaching with the joyful Tidings that was typified by
this Year; saying, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed
me to preach the Gospel to the poor: He has sent me to heal the
brokenhearted, and to preach deliverance to the Captives, and the recovering
of sight to the blind, and to set at liberty them that are bruised, and to
preach the acceptable Year of the Lord.

This Freedom from sin: This Redemhtion from sin: This Justification from sin;
comes first from the meritorious obedience of Christ in his Combat of
sufferings, and in his Death and Sacrifice. And secondly, it comes from the
Fathers Atonement, as the only formal cause thereof. And thirdly, it comes from
the grace of Faith, in the subject recidient.

11. The Ancient Hebrew Doctors did from the liberties of the Jubilee Year
foresee, that the Messiah should dye in a Jubilee: The divine Majesty (say they)
will be to Israel in a Jubilee, Freedom, Redemption, and Finisher of Sabbath.
This is cited by Broughton in his Requier of Concent, page 13. and in his
Sionsight, 2560.

Conclusion

From the Premises: It follows, that Redemption and Justification from sin, is
no other but the very same thing, both in the meritorious, and also in the
formal causes.

CHAP. XVIII.
Showing from the Hebrew words Taher, Chibes, etc. That Gods forgiveness for
the sake of Christ's sacrifice, is called Washing, Purging, etc. that is to say,
justification from sin.

1. DAVID says thus, in Psalm 51. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and
cleanse me from my sin. From these expressions we may see that David was well
versed in the spiritual sense and application of the legal washings: for though
in their typical sense, they were commanded to be done no otherwise but for the
justification of the bodies of the National Church from their ceremonial sins:
yet in the typified sense they were commanded to be done for the washing away
of the sins of their Souls: 1. By their Repentance; and 2. By their Faith in
the cleansing Virtue of Christ's blood, Namely, as it was ordained to be the
procuring cause of Gods Reconciled Forgiveness for the full cleansing of the
Soul from the guilt of their moral sins: As these Scriptures do declare the
whole, Exodus 19. 10. Lev. 11. 25, 40. Lev. 13. 6, 34, 54, etc. Lev. 14. 8, 9,
47. Lev. 15. 5, etc. Lev. 16. 26. Numb. 8. 7, 21. Numb. 19. 7, 10, 19. Jer. 4.
14. By these typical Washings, David saw that the washing of his Soul from the
guilt of his moral sins, was chiefly intended, 1. By his Repentance and
confession of sin on his part; 2. By the water of Regeneration on the Gods
washing of believing sinners from the guilt of their moral sins by his
reconciled forgiveness, does make them whiter in his sight then Adam was in
his ^^nocent Nature.
part of the holy Spirit; 3. By the blood of Christ meritoriously; and 4. By
Gods Reconciled Forgiveness, as the formal cause of the said washing of the
Soul: and in this sense Ananias said unto Paul, in Acts 22. 16. Arise and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the Name of the Lord (i.e.) wash
away thy sins, 1. by thy Repentance: and 2. by Faith, in calling upon the Name
of the Lord Christ, to be the procuring cause of his Fathers atoned
Forgiveness, for the full and perfect washing away of the guilt of all thy
moral sins: that is to say, for thy perfect justification; and the like
exhortation is in Esaias 1. 16. and in Jer 4. 4. and in Luke 3. 3.

2. Regeneration is called washing, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.
5. and though David was thus washed, Namely, by Regeneration and by his
Repentance, yet for all that he does most fervently call upon God by his Faith
in Christ for a further and a fuller kind of washing: Namely, that God would
thoroughly wash away the guilt of his sins by his atoned Forgiveness for the
sake of Christ's meritorious obedience in his Combat of sufferings, and in his
Death and Sacrifice.

3. David does amplify his petition: saying, in Psalm 51. 7. Purge me with
Lev. 12. 7, 8. Lev. 16. 30. Psalm 51. 7. Exodus 29. 36. Numb. 19. 9, 12, 13.
Hyssop and I shall be clean; he does also borrow this word, purge from the
legal Types: the Hebrew word is Chata, and because it is in piel, therefore it
is thus translated by Ainsworth, Purge thou me from sin, or make me sinlesse,
or expiate my sin with Hyssop: or as the Seventy render it, sprinkle me with
Hyssop: but David meant it in the typified sense, sprinkle my guilty Conscience
with the meritorious blood of Christ, that so it may be the procuring cause of
thy atonement, for the full and perfect justifying, or purging away of the
guilt of my sin: This I have also noted in chap. 19. at N. 5. And in this
sense, the Sin (Offering) is rendered the expia^ion for sin, both by the
Seventy, and also by Tremelius, in 2 Chronicles. 29. 24. and in Eze. 43. 22. And it
is also rendered, the cleansing, in Exodus 29. 36. and in Lev. 8. 15. and in Lev.
9. 15. And thus the Law was (from the first promulgation of it) ordained to be
a teaching Schoolmaster unto Christ.

4. The purifying water that was made with the ashes of the red-Heifer, is
called a sin, in Numb. 19. 9. (i.e.) a purification from sin, and therefore it
is said in v. 12. he shall purify himself, or make himself sinlesse, with it:
But in case he that touched a dead body did not purify himself, or did not
make himself sinlesse with it, then in v. 13. he is said to defile the
Tabernacle of Jehovah; and therefore that his Soul (or life) should be cut off
from Israel: and the like threatening is in v. 19, 20. and in Numb. 31. 20. and
in Lev. 14. 49, 52. And 2. Because this Sin water was sprinkled with Hyssop on
men, and on other things also that were defiled with ceremonial sins, (as in
Number. 19. 16, 18. Lev. 14. 4, 6, 49. Exodus 12. 22. Heb. 9. 19.) And 3. Because
this sprinkling was the last finishing act of the purification of the unclean:
therefore David does by Faith apply it in the typified sense, to the perfect
cleansing or justifwing his Conscience from the guilt of his moral sins by the
meritorious sprinkling of the blood of Christ, Heb. 12. 24. And to this very
sense the Apostle does argue the case, in Heb. 9. 13, 14.

5. Then I shall be clean, Psalm 51. 7. that is to say, then I shall be
justified from the guilt of sin. The Hebrew word Tahar, translated clean; here,
and in v. 2. is there rendered by the Seventy (...), just or righteous. And so
in Pro. 30. 12. there is a generation that are clean in their own eyes: there
the Seventy say, that are righteous, or just in their own eyes, and yet they
are not washed or justified from their filthiness: and Tahar, translated a
clean heart, in Pro. 22. 11. is in the Seventy, a holy heart; and the clean
place in Lev. 10. 14. is in the Seventy, a holy place; and this Hebrew word,
clean, put for the cleanness of the Sanctuary, Pro. 22. 11. Lev. 10. 14. 1 Chronicles. 30. 19. Number. 8. 6, 7, 8. 1 John 1. 7, 9.
1 Chronicles. 30. 19. they render it, the holiness of the Sanctuary; and in other
places they render it, purging: as in Lev. 14. 32. and Lev. 15. 13. and
purified, in Numb. 8. 7. And we also translate this Hebrew word, purifying, in
Lev. 12. 4, 6. but in v. 7. 8. we translate it, clean; The Priest shall offer
the burnt-offering and the sin-offering (for the woman that has been first
washed from the uncleanness of her childbed) to make an atonement for her,
and (then) she shall be clean; that is to say, then she shall be more fully or
perfectly clean by Gods Atonement obtained by her Sacrifice, then she was by
her former washing, because then, and not till then she was fully justified
from the ceremonial sins of her Childbed; and the like promise of cleanness
from ceremonial sins by Gods atonement, is made to other polluted persons: as
in Lev. 14 7, 8, 9, 11, 19, 20, 53. and to all the National Church, in Lev. 16.
30. Namely, that on the day of atonement, the Priest shall make an atonement
for you to cleanse you, and you shall be clean from all your sins before the
Lord; that is to say, you shall (then) be fully justified from the guilt of all
your ceremonial sins before the Lord. And from the said several translated
terms of Ta^ar by the Seven^y, we may see the better how to understand the like
various terms, in Heb. 9. 13. 2. God said thus to Moses, in Numb. 8. 6, 7. Take
the Levites from among the Children of Israel, and cleanse them: and thus shall
thou do unto them to cleanse them, sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and
let them shave all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes and make
themselves clean, (or as the Seventy render it, let them make themselves
purified) and then it is said, in v. 21. The Levites purified themselves, or
made themselves sinlesse: they did that which was required to be done on their
part for the making of themselves sinlesse: (and this legal act of theirs does
typifie, that our moral sins must be washed away on the sinners part by true
Repentance, and by Faith in Christ's Expiatory Sacrifice, as it is the only
procuring cause of Gods atonement for their full justification from the guilt
of sin.) And then Aaron offered them as an Offering before the Lord and made an
atonement for them to cleanse them. And from hence it follows, that Gods
atonement is the full and formal cause of a sinners justification from sin. 3.
It is also to be marked, that this sprinkling of the Levites with the purifying
water, was the final Right of their cleansing: and from thence it follows by an
undeniable consequence, that Gods Atonement for the sake of Christ's meritorious
obedience in his Death and Sacrifice, does fully or formally cleanse, i.e.
justify the Souls of believing sinners from the guilt of all their moral sins:
and to this very sense does our Annot. on Job 14. 4. explain this Hebrew word:
But yet take notice I pray, of the order of the several actions, that must
concur to their ceremonial justification, because it is our teaching
Schoolmaster, Gal. 3. 24. to our moral justification. 1. The ceremonial sinner
must perform the legal Condition that was required on his part by washing his
body: so must the moral sinner wash away his sins by his repentance toward
God, and by his faith in the blood of Christ. 2. As the Blood of Bulls did
cleanse the body meritoriously from ceremonial sins, Heb. 6. 13. so the blood
of Christ does much more cleanse the Soul meritoriously from moral sins, 1 John
1. 7. 3. As the blood of Bulls, etc. procured Gods atonement for their full
justification from the guilt of their ceremonial sins: so the blood of Christ
did much more procure Gods atonement for the full justification of Believing*
Sinners from the guilt of all their moral sins: For God is Faithful and Just
(in the performance of his Covenant) to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us,
i.e. to justify us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 9. but of this Verse,
and Ver. 7. see more at N. 15.

6. Wash me and I shall be whiter then snow. I have spoken of the typical use
of washing before at N. 1. But yet I will speak a little more of the Efficacy
of this washing; Namely, as it does make Believing Sinners to be whiter then
snow: For David does in these words, compare the cleanness that Sinners do
receive from Gods atoned Forgiveness to the whiteness of snow: yea, he does
prefer it in the superlative degree to be whiter then any snow, and yet in man's
eye there is nothing that is whiter then the snow in Salmon, Psalm 68. 14. But
David does affirm, that Gods atonement procured by the Sacrifice of Christ,
does make Believing Sinners to be whiter in his sight, then any snow can be in
our sight: and consequently, that his said atonement, does make them to be
whiter in his sight then Adam was in his Innocence; For that concreated moral
Righteousness, wherewith he did adorn Adam in his first Creation, was but
Natural R^ghteousnesse: and therefore it belonged but to his comfortable
Natural life, in the sweeter contents of an earthly Paradise only: And
therefore 2. It could never have advanced him to the Heavenly Inheritance; But
now by the Covenant of Gods supernatural Grace and Reconciliation God does make
Believing Sinners to be supernaturally whiter in his sight then any snow can be
in our sight, because he does by his said atoned Forgiveness, not only make
them Sinlesse from the guilt of all their moral sins, but does thereby receive
them also unto the adoption of the Heavenly Inheritance; and so by this
supernatural means, God does make them whiter in his sight then Adam was in his
natural and innocent condition, in case he had been confirmed in that natural
Righteousness by his Covenant; eating of the Tree of Life in the first place.
But Mr. Norton does not distinguish this supernatural Righteousness from Adams
natural Righteousness: he makes no other Righteousness for the justification
of believing sinners, but the conc^eated moral Righteousness of Adams nature
which Christ performed, and which he supposes, God does impute to Believing
sinners for their perfect righteousness to the Heavenly Inheritance. But I have
showed the contrary: Namely, that in case Adam had been confirmed in his
Natural, or in his concreated moral Righteousness, it could never have made
him the Son of God to the adoption of the Heavenly Paradise: so, as the
supernatural Grace of Gods reconciled Forgiveness does to all believing
sinners.

2. Isaiah does set forth the efficacy of this washing, saying to the
impenitent, wash you and make you clean, (by repentance toward God and by
Faith in Christ) Psalm 51. 7. Esaias 1. 18. Numb. 6. 1, 3, 9, 10, 11. Jer. 33. 8.
Eze. 36. 25. Eze. 37. 23.
and put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes (for all your best
Services (through the lack of Faith and of true Repentance on your part, are
evil in mine eyes,) Esaias 1. 16. and then in Ver. 18. He does add this gracious
promise to encourage them to set upon this Duty; saying, Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow, though they be red as Crimson; they shall
be as wool: For upon the performance of true Repentance, and of Faith in
Christ's Expiatory Sacrifice, you shall enjoy my atoned Forgiveness of all your
moral sins, by the which you shall appear in my sight as white, or justified
from the guilt of all your sins, as the whitest snow can possibly be in your
sight.

3. The Efficacy of this washing, is typified by the purity of the Nazarites:
for why also are they said to be purer then snow, in Lam. 4. 7. or as the
Seventy render it, more purified then snow? But because of their manifold legal
Purifications, Sanctifications, or Justifications from their ceremonial sins;
For they were subject to be polluted with more accidents of ceremonial sins
then other Jews were, and therefore they were enjoined to be the more strict
in their Diet, Habit and Conversation then other Jews were: For in Numb. 6. 1.
when any one did separate himself (or as the Seventy render it, when any one
did sanctify or purify himself (which phrase of theirs is also approved by
the holy Ghost, in Acts 21. 24.) To be a Nazarite, he must separate himself
from wine, and from all that grows on the Vine: (or as the Seventy render it,
in Numb. 6. 3. He shall be sanctified from wine; Namely, from the ceremonial
sin of drinking Wine: For in case he did drink any Wine, it should be a
ceremoniel sin to him, and so it should spoil his Nazarites Vow; or in case he
did sin by the touch of a dead body, then in Ver. 9. be shall shave his head in
the seventh day: and then, in V. 10. he shall on the eighth day bring two
turtle-Doves, or two young Pigcons to the Priest: and then the Priest, in Ver.
11. shall make the one a sin-offering, and the other a burnt-offering, and
shall make atonement for him that sinned by the dead: and then he shall
sanctify his head that day, i.e. then he shall begin the new account of
performing his Nazarites Vow: (For head is here put for the first beginning of
a new account: and so head is put for the beginning of a thing, in Psalm 119.
160.) And from hence it follows, that Gods Reconciled Forgiveness procured by
his said Sacrifices, did fully justify him from the guilt of his said
ceremonial sin, and then he was sanctified or made perfectly holy again to
begin his new account: and by this means he was made whiter again in Gods sight
then any snow is in our sight. These and such like Types were ordained to be a
teaching Schoolmaster unto Christ, for justification from sin to all believing
sinners, Gal. 3. 24.

7. The Efficacy of this washing was typified by Gods promise to the godly
Jews in Captivity, in Jer. 33. 8. I will cleanse them from all their iaiquity
whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon their iniquities whereby
they have sinned against me. This promise is firsty expressed by the word,
cleanse: and secondly, this cleansing is explained to be done by pardoning
their iniquities: Of which see more in N. 21.

8. Gods promise in Eze 36. 25. runs thus: I will sprinkle clean water upon
you, and you shall be clean from your filthiness, and from your Idols I will
cleanse you. This clean Water, which God does promise to sprinkle upon
Repenting and believing sinners, is nothing else but his Reconciled
Forgiveness. which does fully justify the said sinners from their
filthiness, and from their Idols: And then 2. God says in Ver. 33. In the day
that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities, I will cause you to
dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be builded: (God fulfilled this
promise in the days of godly Ezra, and Nehemiah.) 3. God renewed this promise
in Eze. 37. 23. I will save them out of all their dwelling places (in the time
of their captivity) wherein they have sinned: and I will cleanse them, and so
they shall be my people, and I will be their God: From this promise, it does
also follow, that as soon as God has cleansed (i.e. justified) Repenting and
Believing sinners from the guilt of their sins, he does at the same time
receive them into special Favor, as his peculiar people in the Covenant of
Grace and Reconciliation: for his Forgiveness is not a bare Forgiveness: but
it is a full Reconciled Forgiveness.

9. I have showed before at N. 2. That to purify, justify, and sanctify from
sin, is one and the same thing in the Levitical Law: and this is further
manifest also by Lev. 8. 15. and by 1 Chronicles. 23. 28. For in these places the
purifying of Holy things, is called the sanctifying of holy things, in Neh. 12.
47. 2. To pollute or profane, is contrary to Sanctifying, in Lev. 18. 21. Lev.
22. 32. Number. 18. 32. To pu^ifie, justify and sanct fie from sin, is one and
the same thing in the levitical Law.
So the Law that ordained how they should be sanctified was in the first place
by washing, Exodus 19. 10, 14. Numb. 11. 18. Josh. 3. 5. Josh. 7. 13. 1 Samuel 16.
5. 1 Chronicles. 15. 12. 2 Chronicles. 30. 17. Joel 1. 14. Joel 2. 15, 16. Job 1. 5. And
from hence it comes to pass, that washing and sanctifying is put for the same
thing in the Levitical Law, in Lev. 20. 7. and Lev. 13. 58. and so
consequently, this washing or sanctifying of the body from cenemonial sins, did
typifie how the Soul should be cleansed from moral sins. 1. By Repentance, and
by Faith in Christ's blood on the Sinners part: and 2. On Christ's part, by his
merit^rious obedience in his Combat of sufferings, and in his Death and
Sacrifice; and 3. On God the Fathers part, by his reconciled Forgiveness, for
the sake of Christ's said obedience in his Death: These particulars are clear by
the true sense of these Scriptures, Psalm 51. 2, 7. John 13. 10. Acts 13. 24.
Acts 19 4. Acts 22. 16. Matthew. 3. 11. Heb. 9. 10, 14. Heb. 10. 22. Romans 5. 11.
John 11. 55.

10. The efficacy of this Washing, is the purifying of the heart by Faith, Acts
15. 9. Now the heart is purified from sin, when the believing Sinner does go to
God for his Reconciled Forgiveness, through the meritorious cause of Christ's
obedience in his Death and Sacrifice; for in this 15. Chapter, the Apostle does
not dispute with the false Apostles about the point of inherent Sanctification,
but Acts 15. 9. 1 Sum. 21. 5. 2 Samuel 11. 4. Lev. 15. 28, 29, 30. Romans 5. 9, 10,
11.
about the point of Justification: For the false Apostle held, that sinners are
justified from all sin in Gods sight by the works of the Law. 2. No man's heart
is so perfectly and inherently sanctified, that he can say, my heart is clean
in Gods sight from every evil thought and imagination: But yet as soon as a
sinner has by his Faith in Christ attained to Gods reconciled Forgiveness, he
may truly say, my heart is fully cleansed, i.e. just^fied from the condemning
power of every sin; and therefore a clean heart, in Pro. 22. 11. is by the
Seventy called a holy heart; and the clean place, in Lev. 10. 14. is by he
Seventy called a holy place; and the cleanness of the Sanctuary, in 1 Chronicles.
3. 19. is by the Seventy called the holiness of the Sanctuary. 3. When the
Temple was cleansed from the defilement of the Idol of Jupiter Olympus, it is
in the Hebrew said, to be justified, in Daa. 8. 14. and from thence it follows,
that the Levitical cleansing did sanctify or justify the persons and places
from their ceremonial sins: of which see more at N. 15. 2. From this typical
cleansing, it follows in the typified sense, that Gods atoned Forgiveness for
the sake of Christ's Sacrifice, does fully justify or make holy believing
sinners from the guilt of all their moral sins.

11. David told the Priest, in 1 Samuel 21. 5. That the Vessels, or Bodies of the
young men were holy, he says, their Bodies were holy, because they had been
purified from their ceremonial sins, and by their legal washings but three
days before for their keeping of the New Mood Feast: and since then (said he)
they have not been defiled by women: (which phrase I have also explained
elsewhere) And says Dr. Hammond, in 1 Cor. 7. d. The Hebrew word Kadash, is
vulgarly to sanctify (or make holy) and says he, it signifies among the
Jews, to wash; and says he, the High Priests washing of his hands and feet
ten times on the day of Expiation, is called ten Sanctifications, Jo^^a c. 3.
sect. 3. and Ains. speaks to the same sense, in Lev. 16. 23.

12. It is said in 2 Samuel 11. 4. that Bathsheba was purified (i.e. justified
from the ceremonial sins of her Childbed) But the Hebrew is, she was
sanctified, (i.e. justified or made holy from her said ceremonial sins) 1. By
washing her Body; and 2. She would have brought her Sacrifices to the Priest
for the obtaining of Gods atonement for her fuller justification from her
ceremonial sins, as in Lev. 12. 6, 7, 8. had not David intercepted her for the
present by his too hasty desires. 2. The Woman that was legally unclean by an
issue of blood, must bring on the eighth day her burnt-Offering, and her
sin-Offering to make an atonement for her before the Lord for the issue of her
uncleanness, Lev. 15. 28, 29, 30. and then it is said in Ver. 31. Thus shall
you sanctify (i.e. justify or make holy) the Children of Israel from the
ceremonial sins of their uncleanness.

These and other such like instances, do teach such as are willing to be
instructed by this teaching Schoolmaster, wherein the true nature of
justification from sin does lie: Namely, it lies fully in Gods atonement, or in
his Reconciled Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's meritorious Death and
Sacrifice: and therefore a believing sinner may say with Paul, in Romans 5. 11.
We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
atonement: for our perfect Justification from the guilt of sin, as it is also
employed in Ver. 9. And says Mr. Woodbridge, in his Method, p. 220. What is
called Justification in Romans 5. 9. is called Reconciliation (or Atonement, in
Ver. 10. And says he in p. 123. Justification and Reconciliation, are here
used to signify the same thing: Ergo, to receive Atonement, is all one with
the receiving of Justification, or pardon of sin, as in Acts 26. 18. and Acts
10. 43.

13. It is further evident, by Heb. 9. 13. compared with the Apostles inference
in Ver. 14. That Gods reconciled Forgiveness does fully justify believing
sinners from the guilt of all their moral sins: For the Apostle does thus
Reason: If the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling
the unclean sanctifies (i.e. makes holy from sin) to the purifying of the
flesh (i.e. to the justifying of the Body from ceremonial sins:) and from
thence he does infer, in Ver. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ purge
your Conscience, i.e. cleanse, sanctify, or justify your conscience from dead
works (which proceed from your spiritual death in sin.)

14. This purging, sanctifying or justifying of the conscience from dead works,
is called the purifying of the heart by Faith, in Act. 15. 9. For as I said
before at N. 10. This purifying of the heart by Faith, must not be understood
of the inherent Sanctity of the heart, (as many do expound it, though much
amiss) but it must be understood of the extrinsecal justifying of the heart
from the guilt of sin by Faith in Christ's meritorious Death and Sacrifice, as
it was ordained to be Heb. 9. 13, 14. Acts 15. 9.
the only procuring cause of Gods reconciled Forgiveness; by this means only
the heart is fully purified from sin.

P. Martyr, says in Romans 11. p. 392. This Text of Act. 15. 9. is an Answer to
the Question touching Circumcision, and such other legal purifyings as
concerned the point of Justification. And Mr. Chibal, in his Trial of Faith,
does at large show, that this puifying of the heart by Faith, must be
understood of Justification from sin, by Acts 10: 14, 15, 24, 28. and that
Faith can no otherwise purify the heart from the guilt of sin, but as it
believes in Christ whom God has set forth to be the procuring cause of his
Reconciled Forgiveness.

15. It is said in Dan. 8. 14. Then shall the Sanctuary be justified, so the
Hebrew word is; But the Seventy, and our Translators render it, Then shall the
Sanctuary be cleansed (from the defilement of the Idol of Jupiter Olympus,
which Antiochus had set up) by the appointed works of the Law; which works were
ordained to cleanse or justify any person or thing from their ceremonial sins.
2. It is also said, in Job 4. 17. Shall mortal man be more just then God, or be
more free from sin then God? Or as Mr. Bro. does render it, shall mortal man be
holden just before the Puissant; but the Seventy, for just, do render it,
clean, or undefiled Dan. 8. 14. Job 4 17. Amos 6. 11. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Psalm 92.
16. Romans 6. 7. Lev. 11. 44, 45.
before God. 3. Where the Hebrew word does signify pure (or purified from sin)
there the Seventy render it just, or justified, as in Amos 6. 11. should I
count them pure which have wicked balances? but the Seventy say, should I
justify wicked balances: and so does Tindal and the Geneva render it; And 4.
God is said to be Just and Righteous, in Deuteronomy. 32. 4. but the Seventy render
it, Just and [holy] is he, i.e. Holy or Righteous from sin, as the foregoing
words do teach us to understand it: and so it is also expounded in Psalm 92.
16. Jehovah is Righteous, because no iniquty is in him. From these translated
and explained terms, it follows, that Believing sinners are then fully
righteous in Gods sight, when they are freed or justified from the guilt of
sin; and so says the Apostle, Romans 6. 7. he that is freed from sin, is in the
margin said, to be justified from sin; and also those sinners that are
justified from sin, are said to be holy as God is holy, Lev. 11. 44, 45, Lev.
19. 2. Lev. 20. 26. Lev. 21. 6, 8. In all these places, such sinners as are
cleansed from the guilt of sin by Gods atoned Forgiveness, are said to be holy
as God is holy: and consequently, they are as holy and righteous in Gods sight
as his Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation does require them to be to the
Atonement of the Heavenly Inheritance.

16. The perfect man, in Pro. 2. 21. is in the Seventy, the holy man, as I
noted it before, in chap. 14. sect. 3. N. 15. But no sinner can be any
otherwise made perfect and holy, then by being justified from the guilt of sin
by Gods atoned Forgiveness: and it is in that respect only that David said, in
2 Samuel 22. 24. Pro. 2. 21. Psalm 18. 24. Psalm 19. 13.
and in Psalm 18. 24. I was perfect with him (so the Hebrew is here, and in
Psalm 119. 1, 78.) but The Seventy say, I was without blemish before him (i.e.
because I was justified from the guilt of sin by his atoned Forgiveness; Por
that Forgiveness does make sinners to be without blemish and without spot in
his sight, Ephesians. 5. 22. And then says David in the next words, I have kept my
self from mine iniquity, that is to say, from that iniquity unto the which I
was most prone by Nature, and thus I have conjoined by sanctified walking to my
justified condition: but he that is most inherently sanctified cannot say, I
have kept my self from all iniquity without spot or blemish by my inherent
sanctity; and yet they may say in Relation unto their justified condition, I
have by Faith in Christ's meritorious death and Sacrifice obtained Gods
Reconciled Forgiveness for my full justification from the guilt of sin: and in
that state they may say unto God as David did, in Psalm 19. 13. Cleanse me from
my secret sins, and from presumptuous sins withhold thy servant, let them not
have dominion over me: Then shall I be perfect and made clean from much
Trespass, i.e. perfect from the guilt of the multitude of my Trespasses. And
Mr. Ainsworth says, that the original word Nakah, translated (made clean) do
signify to make innocent and free from guilt (of punishment) And says he, the
word is used for Exempting, or for Absolving, or for freeing from punishment
due to sin, Exodus 24. 7. Exodus 34. 7. This cleansing therefore is nothing else
but justification from the guilt Exodus 20. 7. Nabum 1. 3. Exo. 21. 19, 28. Joel
3. 21. Exodus 34. 7.
of sin; the Geneva does translate this Hebrew word [Clear] in Nahum 1. 3.
(i.e. void of guilt) and so it must be understood, in Genesis 20. 5. where
Abimelech said thus to Abraham, in the innocence (or cleanness of my hands have
I done this, but the Seventy render it Dicaiosune: in the righteousness of my
hands have I done this; They put Righteousness for Innocence, or for being
void of guilt (as Abimelech did in relation to his cause: and in this sense the
Hebrew word is often used, as in Exodus 34. 7. Numb. 5. 11. Genesis 24. 8, 41. Genesis
44. 10. 1 Samuel 26. 9. and this Hebrew word is also translated acquitted from
guilt, in the case of murder or manslaughter, in Exodus 21. 19, 28. And it is
also translated freed, as from the sin of Adultery, in Numb. 5. 19, 28. and in
Ver. 35. it is translated guiltl^sse: When the jealous Husband does bring her
to be tried by Law, then she shall be guiltless, or justified, or freed from
the sin of Adultery, 2. It is also said in Jo^l 3. 21. I will cleanse their
blood that I have not cleansed: that is to say, I will cleanse the Believing
Gentiles by my atoned Forgiveness from the guilt of their moral sins, though I
have not cleansed them from their ceremonial sins by the typical works of the
Law, as I have cleansed my people Israel by those works, which unto them were
given to be a teaching Schoolmaster unto moral justification by Christ. This
Scripture I have before expounded in Chap. 17. at N. 5. and diverse other
Scriptures to the same sense. 2. This place of Joel does much help to explain
the true sense of Romans 9. 30, 31, 32. and of Romans 2. 26, 27, 28, 29.

17. The Apostle says in Heb. 9. 22. without shedding of blood there is no
remission, and thence the Apostle does infer in ver. 23. That it was therefore
necessary that the pattern of things in the Heavens (Namely, of those things
that are of a spiritual and heavenly Nature) should be purified with those
(that is to say, justified from ceremonial sins with these typical
purifications) Namely, with the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an
Heifer sprinkling unclean, which sanctified to the purifying of the flesh from
ceremonial sins by Gods atoned Forgiveness that was thereby procured, Heb. 9.
13: But the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices then these,
Namely, with the meritorious blood of Christ in his Combat of sufferings, and
in his Death and Sacrifices, as Heb. 9. 22, 23, 26. Heb. 10. 1, 2, 19, 20, 22.
Heb. 9. 8. Heb. 1. 3.
the only procuring cause of Gods Reconciled Forgiveness to believing Sinners
for all their moral sins.

2. Without shedding of blood there is no Remission: in this, the Apostles
meaning must be fetched from the manner of procuring of Gods Forgiveness to
their ceremonial sins on Expiation day, (for the Apostle alludes in this
Chapter to the typical services of that day) Then the High Priest was ordained
to procure Gods aronement for the ceremonial sins of the* whole National
Church, by the blood of their Sin and trespass-Offerings, and without the
shedding of that blood there was no Remission: and thence the Apostle infers in
Ver. 23. That it was therefore necessary that the pattern of things in the
Heavens should be purified with better sacrifices then these, Namely, with the
blood of Christ, as abovesaid: But at other times of the year, sundry sorts of
ceremonial sins were remitted to particular persons by their typical washings
only, as I have showed it at large elsewhere.

3. I pray take special notic^ that in these Verses, the Apostle does make the
ceremonial justifications of the National Church by the blood of their Sin and
Trespasse-Offerings to be the pattern of true justification from sin; and
thence he concludes in Ver. 26. that now once in the End of the world Christ
has appeared to put away sin (Offerings, and all other legal justifications)
by the Sacrifice of himself: For all the former legal Sacrifices which were
offered on Expiation-day, year by year, Heb. 10. 1, 2. could not make the
comers thereto perfect (from moral sins) for then they would not have ceased to
be offered, from one generation to another to the worlds end, because the
worshippers once purged or justified from the guilt of their moral sins should
have had no more conscience of the guilt of sin; and from thence he concludes
with this Exhortation, in Verse 19. 20. Having therefore Brethren boldness (or
liberty) to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living
way which he has consecrated (or made perfect for us) through the Vail, that
is to say, his flesh: and having a High Priest over the house of God, let us
draw near (to this High Priest a Sacrifice) with a true heart in full assurance
of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed (from moral sins) with pure water (i.e. with the purifying water of
Christ's blood, as it is the procuring cause of Gods purifying Forgiveness)
This is that new and living Way which God has ordained for justification to
life to all believing Sinners. Dr. Gouge says, in Heb. 9. 8. The way into
heaven was not made manifest while the first Tabernacle stood: i.e. The true,
right, and proper means of entering into Heaven was not exhibited by those
typical works of the Law that belonged to the first Tabernacle: But (says he)
the true and proper means of entering into Heaven, was done by the exhibition of
Christ himself.

4. As soon as this High Priest had by himself purged our sins (by his
meriterious obedience in his Death and Sacrifice, as it procured his Fathers
Reconciled Forgiveness to believing Sinners) he sat down on the right hand of
the Majesty on High, Heb. 1. 3. Mr. Calvin says, that the Apostle does put an
Emphasis upon this word [By himself] he purged our sins, because the shadows
of Moses Law were of no force to assist him in it: And 2. This phrase, he
purged our sins, does allude to the Expiation of their ceremonial sins, by the
blood of the Sin-Offering, in Exodus 30. 10. where the Seventy call it, the
purgation of sin: And 3. This Emphasis by himself is also used in Gal. 1. 4.
and in Tit. 2. 14. He gave hemself that he might Redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify to himself a peculiar people.

18. It is said in 1 John 1. 7. That the blood of Jesus Christ his Son does
cleanse us from all sin: Namely, as it is the meritorious cause of Gods
Atonement, which does only cleanse us fully and formally from the guilt of all
moral sins: as it is also explained by the Apostle, in Ver. 9. saying, If we
confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, (Namely, by his atoned Forgiveness) 2.
Solomon says, he that confesses his sins and forsakes them shall find mercy,
Prove. 28. 13. (i.e. he shall find Gods merciful atonement and forgiveness. 3.
Observe the Apostles manner and method of cleansing Sinners. 1. He says in
Ver. 7. the blood of Jesus Christ his Son does cleanse us from all sin: and
then 2. in Ver. 9. he says, that God (the Father) is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness: He is faithful
and just according to his Covenant of Reconciliation with Christ and with all
the Elect in him, to cleanse us fully and formally (by his atonement^) from all
unrighteousness. And 3. From thence it follows, that as soon as Gods atoned
Forgiveness has cleansed sinners from all unrighteousness, they must of
necessity ^e thereby made is perfectly righteous as Gods 1 John 1. 7, 9. Romans
5. 10. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation does require them to be: Of which see
more in chap. 15. at N. 7. 4. It is well observed by Mr. Calvin, that this word
cleanse or purge, in Ver. 9. seems to be taken in another sense, then the
word cleanse is in Ver. 7. For, says he, the Apostle in V. 7. said, we are
cleansed by the blood of Christ; but now (says he) after he had spoken of
forgiveness by the blood of Christ: he adds in Ver. 9. That God does also
purge us from unrighteousness. This member, says he, may be diverse from the
first: and says he, the Apostle signifies thereby, that a double fruit does
arise of confession; namely, that God being pacified by the Sacrifice of
Christ, does in the second place forgive us.

Take notice I pray, that Mr. Calvin does here speak to the very same sense of
the meritorious and formal causes of a Sinners justification, as I have done
all along: and of this see more also in chapter 19. at N. 1. 5. Mr. Calvin does
also speak to the very same sense, in Romans 5. 10. We (said he) were reconciled
to God by the death of Christ, because it was the sacrifice of Reconciliation,
whereby God was Reconciled to the world: hence also, I entreat the Reader to
mark his double sense of the word Reconciliation: 1. In the meritorious, and
2. in the formal cause.

19. It is said in Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. That Christ gave himself for his Church,
that he might sanctify it and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
Word, and that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without
blemish.

1. This expression, Christ gave himself for his Church: means, that he put
his life in his hand when he undertook that great Combat of his sufferings from
his old proclaimed enemy, Satan and his potent seed, according to the
declaration of the Combat in Genesis 3. 15. in which Combat he got the Victory
(not by the power of his Godhead, but) by his righteous performance of it in
his Humane Nature, according to Gods declared Will, in Genesis 3. 15. and Gal. 1.
4. and because it was so performed, God did accept it as the only meritorious
cause of his atonement to all his Elected militant Church of believing sinners:
by which means they are made perfectly holy and righteous from the guilt of
sin, and thereupon Christ does present them to himself as a glorious Church,
not having spot or wrinkle or any guilt of sin, but are holy and without
blemish: and in this sense Christ says thus to his Elected Church, in Cant. 4.
7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no blemish in thee: and in this sense it
is also said in Rev. 14. 1, 5. that the 144 Thousand, that stood with the Lamb
on Mount Sion, are without blemish before the Throne of God: But all this
perfection of their unblemishednesse, does come fully and formally from Gods
atoned Forgiveness through the meritorious procuring cause of Christ's obedience
in his Death and Sacrifice. And 2. Hence it follows, that as soon as Sinners
are made holy and without blemish by Gods Reconciled Forgiveness, they are
thereby made as perfectly holy and righteous in Gods sight, as his Covenant of
Grace and Reconciliation does require them to be for their attainment of the
Heavenly Inheritance; and therefore this supernatural kind of holiness and
righteousness by Gods atoned Forgiveness, is to be preferred far above that
Natural holiness and righteousness wherein Adam was created: for that Natural
holiness and righteousness should never have brought Adam (and his Natural
posterity) to the Heavenly Paradise, as the foresaid supernatural holiness and
righteousness does to all believing sinners, as I noted it in chap. 1. sect.
4. to the utter conviction of Mr. Nortons kind of Justification by Adams
Natural Holiness performed by Christ, and imputed by God (as he surmiseth) to
all Believers.

3. It is also observable, which Dr. Barnes says in his Book annexed to
T^ndals Austin de Verb. Aposti Ser. 29. and de Verb. Dom. Ser. 50.
works, p. 245. The cleanness of this holy Church (says he) is the mercy
toward her through Christ, for whose sake God lays nothing to her charge:
and Austin (says he) says, The whole Church prays, Lord forgive us our
sias: wherefore (says Austin) she has spots and wrinkles: But by
acknowledging them, her spots are washed away: and from thence Dr. Barnes
concludes, that through Gods mercy nothing is imputed unto her; and that
through Christ the Church is made fair: first she was filthy in sins, and
afterward by Gods gracious pardon she is made fair.

4. These and such like considerations about Gods Atonement, as it is the full
and formal cause of a sinners justification to the fruition of the heavenly
Paradise, made me say in my Diologue, in p. 158. That Gods Atonement was the
Top Mercy of all mercies that makes poor sinners happy, because it is the great
Purchase of Christ's meritorious Death and Sacrifice: But Mr. Norton does oppose
Gods atonement procured by the meritorious death and sacrifice of Christ is the
Top-mercy of all mercies that makes poor sinners happy.
this blessed Truth; For he says in his Answer, p. 265. That the great Act of
Mercy, is the gift of Jesus Christ to be our head and Savior: and no benefit
(says he) that follows the gift of Christ, is to be compared with Christ
himself: I have formerly replied, That neither Christ himself, or any thing
that he could do of himself, could merit any blessing to sinners without his
intervention of a mutual Covenant between the Trinity from Eternity; and
therefore it is the fulfilling of that Covenant on Christ's part that gives the
Form of merit to him: 2. I wonder that he takes no notice, that my words in my
Dialogue does include Christ eminently, as he was the meritoricus cause of Gods
atonement, which is the greatest work he could perform for man's good: But Mr.
Norton does most unhappily labor to cartail this great and large Blessing to
the half of it: For he makes Gods Reconciled Forgiveness to extend no further
then to deliverance from Hell, without giving any Right to the Heavenly
Inheritance: But I have showed, that Gods atoned Forgiveness does not only
deliver from Hell, but that it does also receive believing sinners into special
Favor unto the Right of the Heavenly Inheritance. And 3. I have showed, that
Gods Reconciled Forgiveness, and his imputation of Righteousness to believing
sinners, is but one and the same thing: and from thence it follows, that Gods
atonement so procured, must needs he the Top-mercy of all Mercies that makes
poor sinners for ever happy, Terminative (as they say) in the effects of it
until it has obtained the utmost Terminus, which is everlasting life in
Heaven. 4. It is also rightly observed by Mr. Burges on Justification, p. 185.
and by Mr. Woodbridge, in his Method, p. 31. 39. and by P. Martyr, in Romans p.
107. That it was a greater matter to Restore us to Life, to justify us, and to
Reconcile us to God, then it is to bring us, being now justified, to Felicity.

20. Gods Reconciled Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice, is called
cleansing, in Jer. 33. 8. I will cleanse them from all their iniquity whereby
they have finned against me, and I will pardon all their iniquities: In these
words the Prophet does expound Cleansing from iniquity, to be done by Gods
merciful pardoning; the Hebrew word for pardon, is Salach: which I have largely
expounded in Ch^p. 16. to be such a kind of merciful pardon as is obtained by
Oblation and Intercession of the Priest.

21. Such as have their sins forgiven by Gods atonement for the sake of Christ's
Sacrifice, are said to be washed, sanctified, and justified, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
These J^r. 33. 8. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Heb. 10. 9, 10.
three terms are synonimous in this Text, and all of them do figuratively set
out the true Nature of Gods Reconciled Forgiveness: 1. You are washed from
your sins fully and formally by Gods Reconciled Forgiveness (as I have
abundantly opened the Metaphor) 2. You are sanctified or made holy from sin by
Gods said Reconciled Forgiveness (as I have also abundantly opened this
Metaphor) 3. You are justified from sin by Gods said Reconciled Forgiveness:
and to this sense does P. Martyr expound these three terms in this Text, and
also in Romans 1. 6, 7. and to this very sense does the Apostle expound the word
sanctified, in Acts 26. 18. Christ, says he, has sent me to the Gentiles to
open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light. 1. For the working
out of their inherent Sanctity. And 2. That they might receive the forgiveness
of their sins (for their formal justification) and inheritance among them that
are sanctified (from sin) by Faith in me. Hence it follows, that Gods
Forgiveness does not only deliver from Hell, but also that it gives a Right to
the Heavenly Inheritance, among them that are sanctified from sin by Gods
Reconciled Forgiveness.

2. Sanctified is put for Justified, in Heb. 10. 9, 10. By which Will of God
(performed by Christ in his Combat of sufferings, and in his death and
sacrifice) we are sanctified, that is to say, justified, or made holy from sin:
for it was the will of God, that in case Christ did perform his said combat of
suffering and his death and sacrifice, in perfection of Obedience, that it
should be accepted of him as the meritorious procuring cause of his Reconciled
Forgiveness, for the full and formal sanctification of believing sinners from
the guilt of sin.

3. This word Will, says Dr. Gouge, is applied to God the Father: But withal,
faith he, there is an intimation given of the will of Christ, in that he says
in Ver. 7. Lo, I come to do thy will; they both agree in one, and both their
wills is the Sacrifice of Christ made perfect: The will of the Father was the
cause of Christ's being made a Sacrifice, and because it was the will of the
Father, the Son did willingly offer himself, that so his Sacrifice might be the
procuring cause of his Fathers reconciliation: and in this sense Christ said, I
came down from Heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent
me, Joh. 6. 38. John 4. 34. John 5. 30.

4. This word sanctified, is used by the Seventy in Exodus, 29. 33. for
justification from sin by Gods atonement. The Priest shall eat those things, by
which atonement was made to consecrate and to sanctify them: but the Seventy
render the word atonement thus, they shall eat those things by which they were
sanctified, i.e. justified from their ceremonial sins.

5. The blood of Christ in Heb. 10. 29. is called the blood of the Covenant
wherewith we are sanctified, because it was ordained to confirm the Covenant,
Dan 9. 27. Mat. 26. 28. and consequently, it was ordained in that Respect to be
the meritorious Exodus 29. 33. Heb. 10. 29. John 17. 19.
cause of Gods atonement, whereby we are formally sanctified from sin, i.e.
justified from the guilt of sin.

6. Christ says thus, in John 17. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my self,
that they also may be sanctified through the Truth: Bullenger says in his
Decades, page 772. That Christ gave himself to be a Sacrifice for our sins,
that we might be sanctified, i.e. purged from our sins fully and perfectly, and
not ceremonially: or as the Text does phrase it, that they also may be
sanctified through the Truth, i.e. through the true performance of Gods
Atonement, which was procured by Christ's sanctifying of himself, to perform his
Combat of consecrating sufferings and Sacrifice, for the procuring of Gods
Atonement for the sanctifying, i.e. for the justifying of all Believers from
their moral sins: and in this sense is the word Truth, to be taken, in John 8.
32, 36. The Truth shall make you free, i.e. the true performance of sin and
trespass*offering by my death and sacrifice, shall not only make you free from
the bondage of those legal Observances: but also my Death and Sacrifice shall
procure Gods Atonement, by the which ye shall be made free from the guilt of
sin: if the Son therefore does thus make you free, you shall be free indeed,
i.e. justified from the guilt of sin.

But Mr. Norton does darken this clear Distinction of the meritorious Cause,
and of the formal Cause of Gods Reconciled Forgiveness; For in his Answer to
my Dialogue, in page 230. he does confound the Righteousness of God, in Romans
3. 21, 22. with the Righteousness of Christ in point of a S^nners
justification: The Righteousness, says he, whereby a sinner is justified, is
called the Righteousness of God, because God is the Author of it: It is as
much as is called the Righteousness of Christ, in Romans 5. 18. The imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ, says he, is the formal cause of our
justification, and it is the act of God the Father: the word Father, not being
taken personally for God the Father, but essentially for all the three persons,
God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

: I have often showed that they must be put into two distinct causes: Namely,
into the meritorious, and into the formal cause.

2. It is another great Error, to make the word Father in the act of imputing
Righteousness to believing sinners, to be taken essentially for all the three
Persons. Mr. Warren on Justification, says in page 116. Wheresoever we find
the Name of God, put in opposition to Jesus Christ (as it is in Romans 3. 21, 22.
and in 2 Cor. 5. 21. It must not be understood Essentially but Personally; and
for this he cites, 2 Cor 5. 19. John 3. 16. 1. John 2. 1. Secondly, Mr. Norton
says in John 1. 1. page 50. Wheresoever God: and the Son, or Jesus Christ are
mentioned together, thereby God the Father is signified.

3. Mr. Estwick, in his Answer to Bidle, says in p. 290. These words: The word
was with God, in John 1. 1. Seeing there is but one God, The Word God must not
be taken for the Godhead simply and absolutely, but for God the Father; the
Person is signified, and not the divine Nature.

4. Consider, that in the Creation of Natural Beings: which was before the
second Person was distinguished into the person of the Mediator: all the works
of the Trinity, were the works of the three persons equally: But in the works
of Regeneration and Redemption from sin, there must be some differing
considerations in the order of their working: as it is also observed by Dr.
Field, in page 43. When the second person (says he) does quicken, give life,
and impart the Spirit of Sanctification, to whom he pleases: It is done with a
kind of concurring of the humane Nature: Meriting, Desiring, and Instrumentally
assisting: This kind of working is not common to the three Persons, but it is
proper to the Son of God manifested in our flesh.

5. Dr. Jackson, shows in his seventh Book on the Creed, in page 255. and in
his eighth Book, in page 77. That the divine Nature is distinguished in it^
operation, in the person of the Father, and in the person of the Son, and in
the person of the holy Ghost, both in the internal Covenant, and also in the
external work of man's Redemption.

Conclusion from the Premises it follows:

1. That neither Mr. Norton, nor any other, can describe the true Nature of a
sinners justification, better then God himself has done by his Teaching
Schoolmaster; Namely, by his typical Pattern of justifying of the bodies of
the National Church from their ceremonial sins by their typical washings, and
by the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the
unlcean, to the sanctifying of the Body from ceremonial sins, and to the
purifying of the Body, i.e. to the justifying of the Body from the guilt of
their ceremonial sins, Heb. 9. 13.

The foolishness of God in this typical Pattern is wiser then Mr. No^ton, or
any others, that will have no other Righteousness to be imputed to believing
Sinners for their eternal justification, but the perfect natural Righteousness
wherein Adam was created, and yet that Righteousness could never have brought
him to the Heavenly Inheritance, as I have showed it in chap. 1. sect. 4.

And I think I have made it evident, that God has ordained no other
Righteousness in the Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, to bring believing
sinners to the Heavenly Inheritance, but the supernatural Righteousness of
Gods Reconciled Forgiveness.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 211. 212. To say that pardon of sin is
Righteousness it self, is to confound the effect with the cause: and (says
he) it is not possible to be Justice.

Dialogue, which does much relate to the said Levitical Pattern, he could not
have called that positive Righteousness, a pestilent fiction and abomination,
as he does, in page 214. 228. And then 2. He could not have affirmed as he
does, That the Popes p^rdon and the Dialonges, how differing soever in their
nature, may go together in Respect of their efficacy. These and many the like
blasphemous speeches he has uttered, in page 223, 224, 237, etc. O blindness
extreme in the typical sense and use of the word Sanctified (purified, cleansed
and ^ustified) from sin.

Will it not be a strange thing for any to affirm, that the Jews were made a
holy People, and a righteous National Church, in Exodus 19. in Relation to the
moral righteousness of Adams Nature? was it not rather in Relation to the
Negative Righteousness of Gods atoned Forgiveness obtained by the typical
works of the Law, which God ordained to be their teaching Schoolmaster of
justustification by Christ, who was thereby set forth as the only End of the
Law for justification to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. as I have noted
it more at large in Chap. 5. His other Errors I have Replied to elsewhere in
this Book.

CHAP. XIX.
Showing from Chatta. in Piel. That Gods Reconciled Forgiveness for the sake
of Christ's Sacrifice, does make believing sinners to be sinlesse, That is to
say, to be as perfectly holy and righteous as the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation does require them to be, to their attaining of the Heavenly
Inheritance.

1. CHatta: Sin, when it is in Piel, does signify a Sin (Offering) whereby
Gods Atonement is merited or procured: or it does signify, to make an
Expiation for sin, and so consequently it makes believing Sinners to be
sinlesse: that is to say, to be as Negatively holy and righteous as the
Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation does require them to be.

2. It is said in 2 Chronicles. 29. 24. That the Priest killed the Sin (Offerings)
and that they made Reconciliation with their blood (by sprinkling it) upon the
Altar, to make a Reconciliation for all Israel: but the Seventy, and Tremelius
render it thus: they made expiation with their blood upon the Altar, to make
expiation for all Israel: The word Reconciliation, or Expiation, is twice over
repeated in this Verse; from two several Hebrew words: 1. From Chatta in Piel:
and 2. from Caphar; and yet these two Hebrew words in this Verse have but one
and the some sense in our Language, only they differ in their causes: For 1.
Chatta must be understood, in the meritorious cause of Gods atonement or
Expiation, by the Priests sprinkling of the blood of the Sin-(Offerings) upon
the Altar. But 2. Caphar must be understood of Gods atonement or Expiation, as
it is the formal cause of purging sin-guiltinesse: but of this last word I have
spoken at large in chap. 15. and also in Dan. 9. 24. Therefore I shall in this
Chapter endeavor to give the true sense of the first word Chatta: S^n.

1. The Priests are said in Ver. 24. To make Reconciliation or Expiation with
the Blood of the Sin upon the Altar (meaning, with the blood of the
Sin Offerings) 2. Thence it follows in the typified sense, that Christ is the
true Sin, i.e. 2 Cor. 5 21. with 2 Ch^on. 29. 24.
the true sin-Offering, and that God made him, i.e. appointed him to be sin for
us, that we might be made the right^ousnesse of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. that
is to say, that we might be made Righteous from sin by Gods Reconciled
Forgiveness, as soon as we are in him by Faith. This Text of 2 Cor. 5. 21.
cannot be better expounded, then by referring it to the meritorious and formal
causes of Gods Reconciliation, as it is lively typified, in 2 Chronicles. 29. 24.

2. I have before observed the like double kind of Atonement and Forgiveness in
the meritorious and formal causes, from 1 John 1. 7, 9. in the former Chapter
at N. 19. with the concurrence of Mr. Calvin therein.

3. It is also worthy of special observation, that this Sin is called
Atonement; not formally, but because it was the meritorious or procuring cause
of Gods atonement: This I do the rather observe to confute Mr. Nortons unjust
Exception against my Dialogue, because I do therein sometimes call Christ's
Sacrifice, a sacrific* of Atonement, in page 122. and elsewhere: and see my
fuller Rep^y for this, in chap. 15. sect. 4.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 222. If righteousness for sinners be purchased
by Christ's sacrifice of Atonement, neither then can Atonement be a sinners
righteousness: that which procures or purchases is the cause, That which is
procured is the effect: The cause cannot be the effect.

Reply, in page 249. Replied sufficiently to this Cavil: and yet for the
Readers sake I will enlarge my Reply further. 1. It is a usual thing to give
the name of the Effect to the meritorious Cause of it, as in Exodus 21. 21. The
Bondslave is called his masters money, because he was purchased The name of the
Effect is often given to the procuring cause.
with his Masters money: and it is a common expression to say, this Land or
this House is my money, because it was purchased with his money: for money
answers all things, Eccl. 7. 12. Eccl* 10. 19. and in this sense it is, that
the Poll-money that was employed to buy public sacrifices for the procuring of
Gods atonement, is called Atonement-money, Exodus 30. 16. and Trespasse-mon^y,
and Sin-money, 2 Kings 12. 16. and Redemption-money, Numb. 3. 49. In like sort,
2 Cor. 5. 21. Esaias 53. ult.
the S^n-Offering is called by no other Name but Sin, in above a hundred places
which I have cited in my former printed Reply, in chap. 14. sect. 2. and in
that very sense only God made Christ to be sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21. and therefore the
Geneva Bible cites 2 Cor. 5. 21. to Exodus 29. 14. where the sacrifice is called
Sin; and Trespass, Esaias 53. 10. because he was the true Sin and
Trespasse-Offering that procured Gods atoned Forgiveness of the sins and
trespasses of all believing sinners: and in this sense it is, that the
sin-Offering is called the sin of Atonements, Exodus 30. 10. Numb. 29. 11. and
the Ram of Atonement, Numb. 5. 8. because these Sacrifices were ordained to
procure Gods atonement; And it is also a usual thing among the Hebrew Doctors,
to call the sin-Offering their atonement: they say, that the Woman after the
time of her Childbed, brings her atonement, and the Leper brings his atonement
for his cleansing, i.e. his several Sacrifices for the procuring of Gods
atonement, for his full cleansing from his ceremonial sins: and for this see
Ainsworth, in Lev. 12. 6. and in Lev. 14 9, 15. and often elsewhere: And David
says, that he would not drink of the water of Bethlem, because it was the
blood of those men that bought it, i.e. it was purchased with the hazard of
their blood, 2 Samuel 23. 17. and 1 Chronicles. 11. 19.

I cannot therefore but wonder at Mr. Nortons unjust, and I fear wilful Cavil
at the Dialogue.

2. Consider that Christ is called our salvation, Heb. 5. 9. and our peace, in
Ephesians. 2. 14. not formally, but as the meritorious cause of it, as it is also
explained, in Ephesians. 2. 16. and so in like sort he is called our Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. not formally, but
as he is the meritorious cause of these Blessings: and from thence it follows,
that Mr. Nortons said Exception, is very unjust, and I fear wilfully so.

3. Chatta: Sin, is also put for purging or sprinkling from sin, as in Exodus
29. 36. Thou shall cleanse (or purge, or purify) the Altar, when thou make
atonement for it: but Tremelius renders it, Thou shall purge it (or sprinkle
it) from sin, when thou make an Expiation for it: but the Seventy say, when
thou do sanctify it, i.e. when thou do make it holy from sin, by procuring
Gods atonement. And Tindal does render it thus: thou shall hollow the Altar,
when thou reconcilest it. From these several translated Terms (which do all
suit very well to express the true sense of the word cleanse by atonement) we
may learn from this teaching Schoolmaster, that to cleanse, purge, or justify
from sin, or to hollow or sanctify from sin, in the meritorious cause, as well
as in the Ephesians. 2. 14, 16. Exodus 29. 36. Deuteronomy. 24. 4. Numb. 35. 33. Psalm 51. 7^
formal, is called Atonement, or Expiation, or Reconciliation, or
Sanctificatian: and from thence it comes to pass, that these terms are used
interchangably, sometimes for the meritorious, and sometimes for the formal
cause of a sinners justification from sin.

4. It is said in Deuteronomy. 24. 4. Thou shall not cause the Land to sin: but the
Seventy say, thou shall not cause the Land to be polluted: Hence I observe,
that the Seventy do render Chatta, by polluted, they put the Effect for the
Cause: For as their ceremonial sins had this effect, to pollute their bodies
legally, so their public moral sins (unrepented of) had this effect; to
pollute the whole Land, Namely, to make the whole Land guilty of moral sin,
Number. 35. 33. Psa. 106. 38. Jer. 3. 1, 2. Eze. 36. 16, 17, 18. and thence it
follows by the Rule of Contraries, that Gods Reconciled Forgiveness does fully
cleanse the body from the guilt of their ceremonial sins: and does also fully
cleanse the Soul from the guilt of moral sins: so that cleansing must
necessarily be called holiness, or sanctification, or justification, or
Righteousness, or Redemption from the guilt of sin; and so consequently, Gods
Sanctification, Justification, or Redemption from the guilt of sin, is but one
and the same thing: first in the meritorious, and then in the formal causes of
it: as I have noted it more at large, in Chap. 17.

5. David says thus, in Psalm 51. 7. Purge me (or as the Seventy render it,
sprinkle me with Hyssop) and I shall be clean; or as it is more emphatically in
the Hebrew, make me sinlesse with Hyssop (in the meritorious cause) and then by
Gods atonement thereby procured, I shall be fully clean in the formal cause;
alluding thereby to the effects of the sin-water, because it was sprinkled on
men (and on other things also) that were defiled with ceremonial sins, with a
bunch of Hyssop to purge them, or to purify them, i.e. to make them sinlesse,
Numb. 19. 6, 18. Lev. 14. 4, 6, 49. Exodus 12. 22. Heb. 9. 19. This I have noted
also at the beginning of the former Chapter, at N. 3.

2. Take notice, that this sprinkling was the last part of the purification of
the unclean and that it typified the efficacy of Christ's Expiatory Sacrifice,
as it is the only meritorious and procuring cause of Gods atoned Forgiveness,
which does fully and formally cleanse, purify, and justify the Souls of
Believing sinners from the guilt of all their moral sins.

6. The Apostle, in Heb. 9. 13. does also allude to this Levitical purifying:
If (says he) the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies (i.e. makes the body holy from ceremonial
sins,) to the purifying of the flesh (i.e. to the justifying of the Body from
its ceremonial sins: Thence he does infer, in Verse 14. How much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God, purge your conscience from dead works, etc. This word purge, in this 14
Verse, must comprehend as much under it as the typical word sprinkling does, in
Ver. 13. and the meritorious effect of that sprinkling, was to procure Gods
atoned Forgiveness to the sanctifying, and to the purifying of the flesh of
the National Church from their ceremonial sins: and therefore consequently, the
Blood of Christ is much more meritorious to procure Gods atoned Forgiveness
for the Heb. 9. 13, 14. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Heb. 10. 22. Heb. 12. 24.
purging, i.e. for the sanctifying and purifying of the Soul from the guilt of
all its moral sins.

2. The sprinkling of the blood of Christ, in 1 Pet. 1. 2. has the same Greek
Word for Sprinkling, that was first used by the Seventy, in Psalm 51. 7.

3. The blood of Christ is again called the blood of Sprinkling, in Heb. 10.
22. and in Heb. 12. 24. to note out the meritorious Efficacy of it.

4. Seeing the word Purge, in Heb. 9. 14. is deduced from the former word
Sprinkled, in Verse 13. it does from thence necessarily follow, that it must
have the like signification in its Effects: But whosoever lives and dies
without Faith in Christ's Expiatory Sacrifice, can have no Right to Gods atoned
Forgiveness, to cleanse them from the guilt of their ceremonial sins, Es. 22.
14 1 Samuel 3. 14. Heb. 11. 6.

7. Chatta, Sin; is by the Seventy rendered Propitiation, in Exodus 30. 10. Eze.
43. 21. Eze. 45. 19.

2. It is also rendered, a pleasing of God, or an appeasing of his anger for
sin, Exodus 30. 10. Eze. 44. 27. Rach. 13. 1. Numb. 19. 9.
in Eze. 44. 27.

3. It is also rendered, for an exchange by the Seventy, in Zach. 13. 15. But
Ainsworth does translate the Seventy [for a removal away] For he does thus
paraphrase this Verse of Zachary, in Numb. 19. 9. For sin (says he) is for a
purification for sin, and for a water of separation from uncleanness, which
two phrases, (says he) the Greek interpretech, 1. for a removal away, and 2.
for a sprinkling.

4. Says he, this word sin, in Numb. 19. 9. is the Name of the Water that
purified from sin, as it is manifest by Verse 12. Wherefore, says he, the
Greek translateth this ninth Verse a sanctification, or a purification: and
(says he) a purification for sin is often used for a sin-Offering, or for a
Sacrifice that does expiate sin, as in Lev. 4. 3. Numb. 8. 7. And these two
terms, a sanctification, or a purification are also used by the Apostle, for
the blood of Bulls, etc. in Heb. 9. 13. and, says he, this Sin-(Water) is also
called by the Greeks and Chalde Version, water of sprinkling, (because it was
sprinkled on the unclean to purify them) Numb. 19. 18, 19. according to which
phrase, Christ's blood is called the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12. 24. because
it purifies the Conscience; and therefore it was figured by this
sprinkling-Water, in Heb. 9. 13, 14.

5. I will now return again to expound this phrase, in Zach. 13. 1. For sin: It
is rendered by the Seventy, for an exchange; For Kircherus does translate their
Greek word (...), by mutatio, which signifies a Change, or an Exchange: but
Ainsworth, does render this Greek word, for a removal away: and therefore it
will not be amiss to see how these two translated phrases may suit to the true
sense of the Hebrew word Chatta, Sin.

1. Therefore consider, that the issues both of Men and Women (besides other
sorts of ceremonial sins) caused them to be removed away from coming unto Gods
holy Temple: until they were first cleansed according to the purification of
the Sanctuary; and after the Woman's issue was stopped, she was still Lev. 15.
28. Zach. 3. 3, 4. Amos 8. 14.
in part unclean; and therefore she was commanded to number unto her self seven
days, and then she was to wash her self, and then after that she shall be
clean, Lev. 15. 13, 28. Namely, so far as to fit her for her going so far
within the holy Ground, as to bring her sin-Offering to the Priest on her
eighth day, i.e. Two Turtle-Doves, or two young Pigeons: she shall bring them
to the Priest to the door of the Tent of the Congregation, and the Priest shall
make the one a sin-Offering, and the other a burnt-Offering, and the Priest
shall make atonement for her before Jehovah for the issue of her uncleanness,
and then she shall be (fully) clean: From hence it follows, that until she had
obtained Gods atoned Forgiveness by her said sacrifices, she did continue
Removed away from having full communion with God in his holy Temple.

2. But as soon as her atonement was procured, her condition was changed or
exchanged (as Kircherus does translate the said Greek Word) from singuiltinesse
to purification, or to justification from sin, or from uncleanness to
cleanness; from pollution, to sanctity; from enmity, to Reconciliation with
God.

3. When Christ said unto those that stood by Jebosua, take away the filthy
Garments from him: and as soon as they were taken away, he said unto him, I
have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee: And I will cloth thee with
change of Raiment, Zach. 3. 3, 4. This Change was brought to pass by that
living Fountain of Christ's Blood which God has set open to all Nations for a
Change, or for an Exchange from sin-guiltinesse to justification from sin:
Namely, as the blood of Christ is the infallible meritorious Cause of Gods
Reconciled Forgiveness, to believing Sinners all the World over.

8. Chatta, Sin, is very often used in a metaphorical sense for Sin Offerings,
just in the same manner as Asham is for a Trespasse-Offering: as in Lev. 5. 6.
Amos 8. 14. They that swear by the Trespass, i.e. by the Trespasse-Offering,
which the Priests of Samaria did offer unto God to procure his Atoned
Forgiveness for their Trespasses: and in that Respect the Seventy do render
Asham, the proptiation of Samaria: and thence it follows, that they did
believe, that upon Gods accepting of it, they should not need any other
Righteousness to bring them to Heaven, but his Reconciled Forgiveness only.
And 2. Thence it follows, that in case it had been a received Truth among them
that no sinner could get to Heaven, unless God did impute the moral
Righteousness of Adams con-created Nature unto them, they would doubtless
have left some footsteps of that Faith, either in the Ancient Translation of
the Seventy, or in those Records that are cited from their ancient Hebrew
Doctors; but I do not find neither in Mr. Broughtons works, nor in Mr.
Ainsworth, nor in any others that have searched into their ancient Records,
that they do make any mention of that Tenent: but the contrary does appear, by
their Expositions of the Sacrifices: They held them to be the only procuring
cause of Gods Reconciled Forgiveness, and Rested in that as the only
Righteousness that God had ordained to bring them to Heaven.

CHAP. XX.
Showing from the Hebrew word Nasa, That Gods forgiveness for the sake of
Christ's sacrifice, does bear on carry the guilt of sin from Believing Sinners.

1. I Have by the help of Kircherus Hebrew and Greek Lexicon, perused the
various Translations of the Seventy, on this Hebrew word Nasa; and I find that
in the proper sense of it, it does sign fie to bear, or to carry, or to lift up
any thing that is weighty. 2. I find also that it has many metaphorical
senses, as well in Relation to the Souls affections, as to the l^mbs of the
Body, and that it Relates also to Gods acting toward sin and Sinners, either in
the way of Wrath or of Mercy: But I do not find it used for Gods imputing unto
Christ, either of the sins or punishments of the Elect in a way of Wrath: which
is the great point that Mr. Norton contends for from this Hebrew word.

2. As Nasa relates to impenitent sinner, so it is put for their bearing of sin
by Gods impuration in a way of punishment: But yet still of sin and punishment,
in the same subject, as in Exodus 28. 43. Lev. 1. 17. Lev. 19. 8. Lev. 20. 17,
19, 20. Lev. 22. 9. Lev. 24. 15. Numb. 5. 31. Numb. 9. 13. Numb. 14. 34. Number.
18. 1, 22, 23. Numb. 30. 15. Eze. 4. 4, 5, 6. Eze. 14. 10. Eze. 23. 35, 49.
Eze. 44. 10, 12. Gal. 6. 5. Gal. 5. 10.

3. Christ is also said to bear the sins of many, in Esaias 53. 12. And 2. He is
said also to bear punishment in his Body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. But Peter
does not say, that he bare punishment from Gods Wrath as a guilty sinner, from
his imputing to him the sins of the Elect, as I have noted it in my Dialogue,
in page 28. 29. and in this Book, in chap. 11. But I have showed how Christ
bare sin and punishment,

1. He bare the sins of many (i.e. of all the Elect) in the self-same manner
Es. 53. 12. Exodus 28. 36. Lev. 10. 18. Heb. 9. 28.
as the typical Priest and Sacrifice did did bear the ceremonial sins of the
National Church, and no otherwise: For, in Exodus 28. 38. the Lord appointed the
High Priest to bear the iniquity of all the holy things of the sons of Israel:

1. By his Priestly appearing before Jehovah, with the eight Priestly Robes
that belonged to his Office, whereof the golden plate that was put upon his
forehead was the last, in the which also was engraven, holiness to the Lord: it
shall be upon his forehead, and Aaron shall bear the iniquities of the holy
things which the sons of Israel shall hollow, Exodus 28. 38. for until his eight
Garments were upon him, his Priesthood was not upon him, but then it was upon
him. See Ainsworth in Exodus 28. 4, 43.

2. By his Priestly offering of the holy things of the sons of Israel, he did
procure Gods atoned Forgiveness for their ceremonial sins: and by this way and
means it was that he did bear, i.e. bear away the iniquities of their holy
things. And just after this sort it was, that our consecrated Priest Christ
Jesus did, and does by his Oblation and Intercession bear (i.e. bear away) the
sins of the many, Esaias 53. 12.

3. The Lord said thus to Eleazar and Ithamer the Priest, in Lev. 10. 17.
Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin-offering in the holy place, seeing it is
most holy, and God has given it to you, To Bear the iniquity of the
Congregation, to make an atonement for them before the Lord.

In my Dialogue, I said in page 29. That the latter part of the two last
Clauses does expound the former, i.e. that by making atonement for the
Congregation, the Priest did bear the iniquities of the Congregation: because
they by their offering of the sin-Offering, did procure Gods atoned
Forgiveness to the Congregation for their ceremonial sins. 2. By the Priests
eating of it in the holy place, they did feast with God as Mediators: For in
this act they had a double Communion, both with the Lord, and with his people:
whereupon Solomon Jarcty says, The Priests were they that did eat, but the
owners were they that had the Atonement. And Mr. Baxter, says in his
Confession, p. 288. The Priest acted as a middle-person on the behalf of the
people, and for their good, but not in the very person of the sinner, so that
in Law the sinner did what the Priest did: and hence it follows, that their
atonement was not formally procuted by the Sacrifice, until the Priest had
eaten the peoples sin-Offering, as Mediators before the Lord in the holy place,
but then it was fully and formally made. 3. Hence it follows, that when Christ
by his Death and Sacrifice did procure Gods atonement for the iniquities of all
believing sinners, he did bear (or bear away from them) the guilt of all their
iniquities.

4. Christ bare all our sins meritoriously by his Death and Sacrifice; For
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of the many, Heb. 9. 28. And thus by
Paul's Exposition, Christ did bear our sins, so as it was typified by the
Priests bearing of the ceremonial sins of the Congregation: Namely, because he
did as our Priest and Sacrifice thereby procure his Fathers atonement, which
does formally bear away the sins of all Pelievers.

2. The Apostles words in Verse 26. are to be considered: now once in the end
of the world: (Namely, of the Mosaical world) has he appeared to put away sin
(i.e. Sin Offerings) by the sacrifice of himself: Then says he in Verse 27. As
it is appointed unto men once to dye (because death was appointed to be the
general punishment of original sin) So (in Ver. 28.) Christ was once offered to
bear the sins of many: Hence take notice, that the Apostle does vary the term
of Christ's death, from the condition of our death; for he does not say nor
mean, that Christ was appointed to dye by the same justice that death is
inflicted upon all the fallen sons of Adam: but, says he, he was offered to
bear the sins of the many: and therefore the Apostle does not mean, that Christ
bare sin and punishment in a proper sense as guilty sinners do by Gods
imputation, as Mr. Norton does make this Text to speak, in page 45. to maintain
his Heterodoxal imputation of sin to Christ, for then his death must have been
inflicted as the punishment of original sin, as our death is, (as I have also
noted it in my Dialogue, in page 9.) and then it could not have been accepted
of God as a perfect Sacrifice without spot and blemish: But he bare the sins of
the many by his meritorious obedience in his Combat of sufferings, and in his
Death and Sacrifice, by the which he procured Gods atoned Forgiveness for the
many: and by this means it was that their sins were quite born from them; and
of this see more in my former printed Reply, in page 147. 195.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 44. It is very true, that God laid our sins upon
Christ as our sacrifice, Esaias 53. 12. And says he, in page 46. Christ did both
carry up and bear the load of our sins imputed to him upon the Cross, etc.

Nortons Exposition of Nasa, sounds thus in Abigals case: I pray thee, said she
to David, bear the Trespass of thy Handmaid, 1 Samuel 25. 28. Now according to
Mr. Nortons Exposition of the word Nasa, she should mean thus: I pray thee bear
the guilt and punishment of my Trespass, in my stead to free me from it, 1 Samuel 25. 28. Genesis 50. 17.
for you can no otherwise free me from it except you bear it properly in my
place and stead. This Exposition doubtless will be accounted very absurd of
all Rational men, and yet this very Exposition of the word Nasa, in the manner
of Christ's bearing sin and punishment, is much approved by Mr. Norton in his
Exposition of Es. 53. 12. and in 1 Pet. 2. 24. But Abigals meaning in her
Request to David, was this only: I pray thee bear away the trespass of thy
Handmaid, by thy Reconciled Forgiveness: and her meaning is so expounded by
David, in Ver. 1. as soon as he had received from her hand that provision of
meats which she had brought him, he said unto her, go in peace to thy house,
see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and I have born thy person: intimating
thereby, that he had born away all offense from her person, and that now he was
Reconciled and well-pleased with her.

2. Consider the true sense of Nasa, in the case of Joseph's brethren, in Genesis
50. 17. They said thus to Joseph, Thy Father commanded before he dyed, saying,
so shall ye say unto Joseph: Bear I pray thee now the trespass of thy Brethren
and their sin, for they did evil unto thee, and now we pray thee bear the
trespass of thy servants. Now according to Mr. Nortons foresaid Exposition of
Nasa, they should entreat Joseph, to bear the guilt and punishment of their
trespass in a proper sense to free them from it: But as I said before, so I
say again here, that the true sense of their petition was this: Bear away the
trespass of the sin of thy Brethren, by thy reconciled Forgiveness.

3. I have also showed in my Dialogue, in page 130. and also in my former
printed Reply. page 168. That Nasa, is more often applied to God the Fathers
bearing of the sins of the Elect, then it is to Christ: and thence it follows,
that in case Christ did bear the guilt and punishment of our sins by Gods
imputation in a proper sense: then God the Father must also bear the guilt and
punishment of our sins by his own imputation in a proper sense also: This
Argument is of weight, and I did first use it in my Dialogue, in page 30. and I
have also enlarged it in my former printed Reply.

4. David prays thus to God the Father, in Psalm 25. 18* Look upon mine
affliction and my pain, and bear all my sins: Mr. Ainsworth, does expound the
manner of God the Fathers bearing of sin, in Genesis 4. 7. to be his bearing of it
away from Repenting sinners by his Reconciled Forgiveness. 2. Our larger
Annot. on Job 7. 21. does expound it to the same sense. 3. That Verse does also
expound it self to the same sense, saying, why do thou not bear my
transgression, and Psalm 25. 18. Job 7. 21. Psalm 32. 1, 5. Romans 4. 7. Exodus
34. 7. Number. 14. 18, 19.
take away mine iniquity; Any rational man may soon see that the latter Clause
does expound the former: But the Seventy render this Verse thus: why do thou
not do my transgression, and purge away mine iniquity; For Nasa, say they, why
do thou not do: this word do, is an Ebraism, and it is used for Sacrificing,
as I have noted it in ch^p 9. sect. 1. N. 7. As if Job had said in more words,
why do thou not do away my transgression for the sake of Christ's meritorious
death and sacrifice; the Metaphor is very sit: for when the guilt of sin does
lie upon the Conscience, it is the greatest burden in the world: and therefore
God is most fitly said to bear away the guilt of sin by his Reconciled
Forgiveness: there is nothing else that can bear it away. In like sort, God
the Son is said to bear away our sins meritoriously, by his most perfect
obedience in his Combat of sufferings, and also in his Sacrifice, because his
obedience is the only procuring cause of his Fathers Reconciled Forgiveness,
John 1. 29. 1 John 3. 5. When a believing sinner therefore has obtained God
the Fathers bearing of his sins, then he is fully and formally justified from
sin and received into Gods special Favor.

5. David does thus explain the Fathers bearing of his sins, in Psalm 32. 1.
saying, blessed is the man whose transgressions are born: so the Hebrew word
Nasa here does signify, But Paul does expound this word Nasa by the same Greek
word, that the Seventy used in Psa. 32. 1. saying, blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven, Romans 4. 7. And David made no scruple to call him a
blessed man whose transgressions are born away, or forgiven by God the Fathers
Reconciled Forgiveness: and this Forgiveness is cited by the Apostle, for the
justification of believing sinners, in Romans 4. 7.

2. David, says thus in Psalm 32. 5. I will confess my transgressions to the
Lord: and thou barest the iniquity of my sin, Selah; that is to say, the guilt
and the punishment of my sin: these words taken in their literal sense, are
very dangerous to be applied to God the Father, therefore David's meaning must
be this: That upon his confession of his transgressions, God the Father did
bear away the iniquity of his sin: Namely, the guilt and punishment of his sin,
by his Reconciled Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice.

Hence it follows, that these three expressions, in Psalm 32. 1, 2. First,
blessed is the man whose transgressions are born: 2. whose sins are coved: 3.
whose iniquities are not imputed, do most sweetly expound each other: and being
all put together, they do most ellegantly set out the true nature of a
believing sinners full and formal justification from the guilt of all his sins:
Namely, when their sin-are born away, covered, and not imputed by the Fathers
Reconciled Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's meritorious obedience in his
Combat of sufferings, and in his death and Sacrifice.

6. God does proclaim his merciful Forgiveness to repenting and believing
sinners, in Exodus 34. 7. Keeping mercy for Thousands, bearing iniquity, and
trespass, and sin: But we translate it, forgiving iniquity, and trespass, and
sin, and that is the true meaning of Gods bearing iniquity; For God does no
otherwise bear iniquity from believing sinners, but by his Reconciled
Forgiveness. 2. This Proclamation of Gods keeping away and bearing iniquity
implies, all manner of good things that God will do for sinners, according to
the full extent of the Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation; and therefore it
is most unworthily affirmed by Mr. Norton, That Gods Forgiveness does only
deliver from Hell, and that it gives no right to the Heavenly Inheritance.

7. Moses does enforce his Request to God for the murmuring Israelites, saying
in Numb. 14. 18. (from the true nature of the Covenant of Reconciliation) now I
b^seech thee let the power of the Lord be great, according as thou have spoken,
saying, The Lord is long-suffering and of great mercy, Bearing iniquity and
transgression: but we translate it, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and
the Seventy translate it, taking away iniquity. And then in Ver. 19. Moses does
again enforce his Petiton thus: Bear, I beseech thee the iniquity of this
people, according to the greatness of thy mercy. (But the Seventy translate
Nasa thus: I beseech thee be propitious, or be merciful, and so does Tindal
render it) As thou have forgiven this people from Egypt, even till now: Hence
note, that this latter part of the Verse, does expound Gods bearing of sin to
be done by his Forgiveness. 2. Hence note, that in both these Verses, Gods
bearing of sin is done according to the greatness of his Mercy in the Covenant
of Reconciliation, therefore his bearing of sin is a very large blessing, and
does not end in his bare Forgiveness and delivering from Hell, but it
comprehends his Receiving of such sinners into his blessed Favor, even to the
right of the Heavenly Inheritance.

8. The Prophet says thus, in Psalm. 99. 8. Thou wast a God that barest them:
but here the Seventy translate Nasa (...), Thou wast a God that wast propitious
unto them, by bearing away from them the gui^t of their sins, by thy propitious
Forgiveness.

9. God said thus to Cain, in Genesis 4. 7. If thou do well, is there not a
bearing, i.e. is there not a bearing away of thy sins (as well as of Abels) by
my atoned Forgiveness, provided thou do but perform that Condition that is
required in the Covenant of Reconciliation to be done on thy part (as it is
performed by Abel on his part) when thou do offer thy Oblation, do it well,
Namely, do it by Faith in the promised seed of the Woman, that shall break the
Devils Head-plot for thy Redemption; and without this Faith be thus exercised
on thy part, I cannot by my Covenant of Grace bear away thy sins by my
Reconciled Forgiveness: But in case thou do offer thy Oblation in Faith (as
Abel does) then thy Offering, both in the type and in the typified part of it
shall be accepted, and shall as certainly procure my atoned Forgiveness to
thee, as it does to Abel; and that Forgiveness shall bear away thy sin from
thee, and bring thee into my Favor, even to the fruition of the Heavenly
Inheritance; For as Malachy says, every oblation must be offered in
Righteousness, i.e. in Faith, according to the condition that is required in
the Covenant of Grace, Mal. 3. 3. And God says thus, in Lev. Psalm 99. 8. Genesis
4. 7. Mal. 3. 3.
6. 2. If a Soul sin; then in Ver. 6. he shall bring his trespasse-Offering to
the Lord (and shall lay his hands upon the Head of it with all his might,
implying thereby his Faith of dependence on his Trespasse-Offering) And then,
in Ver. 7. The Priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord: and then
the promise annexed is, that it shall be forgiven him. In like sort, when Job
offered Sacrifices for his three Friends: He did by Faith pray unto God (in the
Name of the true Sacrifice) and the Lord was Reconciled to them, and received
them into his special Favor, Job 42. 8. The like instance is in Genesis 20. 17.
But in neither of these, nor in any the like instances is there any mention of
Gods imputing to them the moral Righteousness of Adams con-created Nature, to
make them righteous in his sight.

But says Mr. Norton in page 47. Paul, in Romans 4. 6. finds imputation of
Righteousness, in David's non-imputation of sin, Psalm 32. 1, 2. And says he
in page 227. The non-imputation of sin presupposes the imputation of
Righteousness, in Romans 4. 6, 7. Evangelical imputation of Righteousness,
supposes the Righteousness that is imputed to be another subjectively and
inherently, therefore to be applied as ours by Faith, meaning the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness to the moral Law of nature, in the which Adam was
created: as he does often express it.

Paul does speak of the imputation of Righteousness to Believing sinners, yet
he does not mean it of the Righteousness of the moral Law of Adams con-created
Nature (as Mr. Norton makes it to be) For I have showed in chap. 1. sect. 4.
That if Adam had stood in that righteousness, it should never have brought him
to the Heavenly Paradise. 2. I have showed also, that the Righteousness of the
moral Law of Nature, in the which Christ's humane Nature was conceived and
bound: cannot be imputed to sinners for their Righteousness, because that
Righteousness being but an accident will perish, if it be but once removed
from its subject, as it perished as soon as it was removed from Adams person by
Gods deprivation. 3. From thence it follows, that the imputation of
Righteousness mentioned, in Romans 4. must not be understood of the moral
Righteousness The only reason why faith is imputed unto righteousness, is
because it qualifies sinners to be the subjects of Gods reconciled
forgiveness, for their perfect justification from the guilt of sin.
of Adams Nature, nor of Christ's Nature; but it must be understood of the
supernatural Righteousness that belongs only to the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation: which on the sinners part is Faith in Christ only, because it
was ordained of God to be the Condition that qualifies the subject to be made
righteous by the supernatural Grace of Gods Reconciled Forgiveness for the
sake of Christ's Sacrifice, and this Faith God does impute unto sinners [unto
Righteousnesse]: and this imputation of Faith unto Righteousness, is mentioned
about eight times in Romans 4. In opposition to that justification that the false
Apostles taught from the works of the Law: as in Verse 3, 1, 9, 11, 13, 21, 22,
23. And it is most evident also by Ver. 6. and by the last clause of Ver. 11.
that God imputes nothing else to Believers for their full and formal
justification from the guilt of sin, but his Reconciled Forgiveness only, as I
have also noted it, in Chap. 15. at Reply 1.

Mr. W^tton does affirm, de Reconsi. pec. part. 1. l. 2. c. 4. That Calvin held
Forgiveness of sins, to be a believing sinners formal justification: The
Justice of Calvin held the formal cause of justification to lie only in Gods
forgiveness.
Faith, says Calvin, in Just. l. 3. c. 11. N. 21. 22. is Reconciliation with
God, which consists only in Forgiveness of sins: and says he a few lines
after: It is certain that they whom God does embrace, are not otherwise made
just, then as they are purified, by having their spots wiped away through
Forgiveness of sins: so that this Justice is such, that it may well be called
the Forgiveness of sins. And says Calvin, at N. 22. The Apostle coupleth
Justice with Remission of sins, in such sort, that he shows in Acts 13. 38.
that they are altogether one and the same thing: and says Calvin, at N. 4. the
Apostle, in Romans 4. 6. calls Justification, the imputation of Righteousness,
and makes no doubt to place it in the Forgiveness of sins: The man, says he,
is said by David to be blessed, to whom God accounts (or imputes)
righteousness without works, as it is written, blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, etc. Surely (says he) the Apostle disputes not there
of a part of justification, but of the whole: And moreover, accounts that
David sets down the definition thereof, when he pronounced them to be blessed,
who obtain the free pardon of their sins: And says Calvin, at N. 11. Surely he
brings not the Prophet for a witness, as if he taught that Forgiveness of sins
is a part of our Righteousness, or that it concurreth to justification (as Mr.
Norton holds) But he shuts up all our Righteousness in the free pardon of sin:
pronouncing him to be blessed whose iniquities God has forgiven, and to whom
he imputes not his transgressions.

2. Mr. Wotton does also affirm, That this was Calvin's perpetual and constant
judgment, and he makes it clear be there Reasons:

1. Because he never assigns any other justice for the formal cause of
justification, but forgiveness of sins only: 2. Because in his whole
Disputation, he brings not so much as one Reason to prove, that any other
justice belongs thereunto. 3. Because his speeches are such ordinarily as do
exclude from justification, all other kinds of justice whatsoever, but only
remission of sins, Justi. l. 3. c. 11. N. 21. He there affirms; that we are
no otherwise made just, and that justice and remission of sins, are one and the
same thing: and that Remission of sins is not a part, but our whole
justification. 4. Calvin is of the same mind in his Antidote against the
Council of Trent, in chap. 8. where he reproves that Council, for denying that
justification does consist only in forgiveness of sins, and he refutes them
thus: These are Paul's words, in Romans 4. 6. David describ^s the blessedness of
the man, to whom God imputes righteousness without works, saying, blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, etc. And now (says Calvin) if the Apostle
does rightly gather the definition of free Righteousness out of this sentence
of David, it follows, that Righteousness does consist in Remission of sins, for
so Paul expounds David: Namely, that he is said to be just to whom God imputes
Righteousness, by not imputing sin: And a little after he concludes thus, from
2 Cor. 5. 19. That nothing can be accounted more plain, then that we are
accounted just before God, because our sins are so purged by Christ's Sacrifice,
that they cannot be laid to our charge any more: And says he afterward,
Justification is added in Acts 13. 38. by way of interpretation to Remission of
sins: and out of doubt signifies Absolution; and he adds, that he is
justified by Faith, that has his sins purged before God by the free Remission
thereof; and he says also in his Commentary, on 2 Cor. 5. 19. That men are
then received into Gods Favor, when they are accounted just, by having
Forgiveness of sins. And much more is cited by Mr. Wotton out of Calvin.

3. Mr. Wotton does also show his own judgment, in Chap. 7. where he disputes
the point from Romans 4. 6. and affirms, that the Justice or Righteousness that
is imputed without works, is forgiveness of sins: But because his Dispute is
large and full of learned arguing, I will refer the Reader to him for his
further satisfaction, in part. 2. chap 7. and chap. 16.

4. Mr. Lawson says (in his Body of Divinity, p. 296.) That Remission of sins,
and imputation of Righteousness, are to be taken for the same, in Romans 4. 6,
7, 8. even as David describes also, the blessedness of the man to whom the
Lord [imputeth righteousnesse] without works: saying, blessed is the man whose
[in^quities are so given] and whose sins are covered, blessed is the man to
whom the Lord imputes not sin; And says he in page 312. at N. 5. This
imputation of Righteousness is the forgiveness of sins: for to have Faith
counted for Righteousness is explained by David, to have sin forgiven, covered
and not imputed: and says he in Ver. 7. That party, to whom Righteousness is
imputed, is he that believes in him that raised up Christ from the dead, and
not he that believes that Christ performed obedience active to the Law (of
Nature) in his person; For though he perfectly obeyed the Law, as without which
he could not have Offered himself an unspotted sacrifice for us, yet he did it
not that, that active personal Righteousness should be imputed to us: though
God by his absolute power might have done so; yet his Wisdom did not think good
to do it, neither do we Read that he does it. The chief thing to be noted is;
That this is the Principle, if it be not the only place that speaks of the
imputation of Righteousness: and this imputation is Remission of sins by the
Sentence of the Supreme Judge. Thus far from Mr. Lawson, (and see more cited
from Lu^her, in Chap. 22. at N. 3.) And for the trial of Mr. Lawsons speech,
that this place of Rom 4. 7. is the only place that speaks of imputation of
Righteousness: I have examined all the places where the word impute is used,
being thirty four: and I find that there is no other that speaks of imputation
of Righteousness; but Jam. 2. 23. Abraham believed God (i.e. his promise of
blessedness by Christ, as the procuring cause of his Reconciled Forgiveness)
and it was imputed unto him unto Righteousness.

5* Mr. Woodbridge replies thus to Mr. Air; The Apostle supposes the
imputation of Righteousness, and the non-putation of sin, to be one and the
same act, Romans 4 6, 8. (differing only in Respect of the Terminus a quo and ad
quem) David describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
Righteousness without works: saying, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will
not impute sin. 2. Says he, Mr. Air argued not far before, that God promised
nothing in his Covenant which Christ has not purchased: But non-imputation of
sin is the special Blessing promised in the Covenant of Grace, Heb. 8. 12. and
pardon of sin, and the non-imputation of sin is all one, in Romans 4. 7. Ergo, it
was so procured in the death of Christ. 3. Says he, according to the model of
this distinction: The death of Christ procured the imputation of Righteousness,
but not the non-imputation of sin, that is it procures positive Blessings, but
not the destruction of, or deliverance from the evils and miseries of sin,
which makes our Lord but half a Savior. 4. Says he, I would that Mr. Air had
told us what is that imputation of Righteousness, which in its formal action
includes not the non-imputation of sin, or that non-imputation of sin which
^ludes not essentially the imputation of Righteousness. 5. Says he, in page
220. what is called Justification, in Romans 5. 9. that is called Reconcili^tion,
in Verse 10. And says he, in page 223. Justification and Reconciliation, are
here used to signify the same thing, ^rgo, to receive the atonement, in Romans
5. 11. is all one with the receiving of Justification, or pardon of sin, in
Acts 26. 18. Acts 10. 43: I pray take special notice of the speech, to receive
the atonement, in Romans 5. 11. is all one with the receiving of Justification:
This does fully agree with what I have all along asserted; That Gods atoned
Forgiveness is the full and formal cause of a Sinners justification from sin.
This I cited before, in Chap. 15. and I think it fit to cite it here again for
the better observation of it. 6. Says he, in page 13. The Apostle makes that
one act of Election, the cause of all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. of
which Justification is one, in Ver. 6. 7. no Dr. Reynolds in the Life of
Christ, p. 402. and Baxter, in his Confession, page 202. at Arg. 34.
less then Adoption, in Ver. 5. which is an act of the same common nature with
Justification, and by some eminent Divines made a part of it, and that suitably
enough to the Scripture phrase, even when it is made consequent to our Faith,
John 1. 12 Gal. 3. 25. Gal. 4. 5, 6. And Mr. Wotton, de Reconsi. does at large
thew, that Justification and Adoption are comprehended under Gods atonement: as
I noted it before, in Chap. 15. N. 7. 8. And I have also showed Gods
Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice, is as large a blessing as his
Atonement is.

7. Mr. Woodbridge says, in page 118. The merits of Christ do not concur in
our justification as any purt of that formal act, by the which we are
justified: and no man can imagine (says Mr. Wotton) that the merit of any
obedience can be our formal justice: so that it were absurd to make any
question of it; But Mr. Norton is so absurd: For says he, in page 245, 246. the
good Virtue and Efficacy of Christ's moral obedience, is imputed to believers
for their formal justification: In these words, he makes the moral and natural
obedience of Christ to the moral Law of his Nature to be of a meritorious
Virtue: which is contrary to the definition of merit cited from P. Ma^tyr. But
in case he had said, that Christ's perfect obedience in his great Combat of
consecrating sufferings had been properly meritorious of his Fathers Reconciled
Forgiveness, and that Gods imputation of that Atonement does formally justify
Believing Sinners, I had concurred with him in my Dialogue, page 118. But Mr.
Norton does condemn this kind of imputation with notorious detestation in his
Answer, page 257. but Mr. Wotton on the contrary does much approve it, de
Recons. l. 1. part. 2. c. 10. and sundry others which I have cited.

8. Mr. Woodbridge does reason thus at N. 5. Before God promised nothing in his
Covenant (of Grace and Reconciliation) which Christ has not purchased: and to
affirm that Christ has purchased the con-created moral Righteousness of Adams
Nature for the full posterity of Adam, to be their formal Righteousness is
extreme blindness, seeing God by his definitive Sentence, in Genesis 2. 17. has
deprived Adam and all his natural posterity of that concreated Image of God, in
moral perfections. 2. Though Christ has not purchased that natural blessing,
yet he has purchased the supernatural blessing of the Covenans of Grace, which
are all comprehended under these two large Blessings, Regeneration, and pardon
of sin.

9. I have cited Dr. Bilson, and Dr. All, in chap. 5. sect. 5. who do also
make Gods Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice, to be Gods imputing
of Righteousness to Believing Sinners.

10. I could cite many others to the same sense, but because others have done
it to my hand, I will refer the Reader to them for his further satisfaction.
See John Goodwin, in his Vindiciae Fidei, part. 2. p. 118, 119. and Mr.
Clendon, on Justification justified. And says Mr. Gataker, in his Answer to
Mr. Walkers Vindication, page 131. I would request Mr. Walker but to tell his
mind plainly, what he thinks of those who stiffly hold and maintain, that
Justification consists wholly in Remission of sins: and that Christ's
Righteousness in fulfilling the moral Law, is not imputed for Justification;
and then refers Mr. Walker to those Authors which he has cited, in his
Postscript to Mr. Wotlons Defense, in p. 58. and after he had named nine or ten
Divines of great Note and Name; he cites whole Synods of Reformed Churches that
affirm the same: The French Confession says thus: in Artic. 18. We believe
that our whole Righteousness does consist in the remission of our sins which
we have by Jesus Christ, and that in it alone all our righteousness before God
is contained; and that Synod for the proof of it, does cite Psalm 32. 1. with
Romans 4. 6. And Mr. Baxter in his Aphorisms, does cite several others of great
Note that affirm the same. And in my former printed Rep^y, in page 229. I have
cited Tindal, P. Martyr, Mr. John Forbes, Mr. Bale, and others that affirm the
same.

In my Dialogue I said thus, in page 127. This Doctrine of a sinners
Justification and Redemption from sin by the promised Seed of the Woman, was
familiarly explained to the Fathers, and to the National Church of the Jews by
several sorts of Sacrifices, which were offered unto God as the procuring cause
of his Atonement: by the which (as in a Glass) they saw how the Mediator
should by his Sacrifice procure his Fathers atonement for the Redemption and
justification of believing Sinners: And after this manner, the Fathers and all
the Faithful from Adam, to the Virgin May, knew as well as we do now, and I
think better also: because the common Doctrine of imputing Christ's moral and
natural Righteousness, did not blind their eyes as it does ours.

2. Says the Dialogue: In this sense it was that Paul proved, that Abraham's
Faith was accounted unto him unto Righteousness, by a testimony taken from
David, in Psalm 32. saying, even as Davil also describes the blessedness of
that man unto whom God imputes Righteousness without works, saying, blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven and whose sins are covered, blessed is
the man to whom the Lord does not impute sin; Came this blessedness upon the
Circumcision only* No, says the Apostle, it came upon any other Countrymen,
as well as upon the Circumcision: if they have but Faith as Abraham had, to
Apprehend and receive the Fathers Atonement: by which means only their sins are
forgiven, covered, and not imputed.

What other Reason (says the Dialogue) can any man else render, why the
Apostle should enterlace this Testimony of David, but to describe how Abraham's
Faith did make him righteous, but because he by his Faith did apprehend and
receive the Fathers Atonement, whereby his sins were forgiven, covered, and not
imputed.

And a little after, the Dialogue says, This Doctrine of a sinners
justification by Faith, was taught and preached by all the Prophets: For Peter
affirms, that all the Prophets do witness, that through the Name of Christ,
whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins, Acts 10 43. with
Ver. 45. And from thence I concluded, That a sinner is justified be Faith no
otherwise, but as it is that Grace of the Spirit whereby a sinner is qualified,
fited, or enabled to receive the Fathers merciful Atonement; and because
Abraham did thus receive the Fathers atonement, through the mediation of the
seed promised, God did impute that Faith to him unto Righteousness; and to
this Tenor, says the Dialogue, does the Apostle explain the use of Faith in
the point of a sinners justification, in Phil. 3. 9. and in Romans 10. 4, 6, 10.
with the heart man believes unto Righteousness: But the Hebrew, in Genesis 15. 6.
says, God imputed it (Namely, Abraham's Faith) to him justice; this defect is
thought to be supplied by our Translators, by adding to it the word [For] but
Mr. Woodbridge says, in page 58. That (...) should be translated unto
Righteousness, in Romans 4. 3, 9, 22, 23. and unto Righteousness (to every Son
of Abraham's Faith) in Ver. 5. 11, 24. It is said, in Romans 10. 10. with the
heart man believes unto righteousness: and that Greek word cannot be rendered
For, without darkning and perverting the true sense of that Scripture; and
where as ^^Nr^^ is rendered For, in Romans 4. 3. it does much darken the true
sense, as it is also observed by Mr. John Forbes, on Justification, page 171.
172: 173. and says he, the word For, makes many to fall into dangerous Error
thinking that the very act of believing is imputed for Righteousness. But
says he, in page 173. that Greek word which we render, unto, in Romans 10. 10.
must in Romans 4. 3. be taken in one and the same sense.

3. The Church of Auspurge, in the Article of Justificat^on, says, where Paul
says, Faith is reckoned for Righteousness, he speaks of a Trust and
confidence of mercy promised for Christ his sake: and therefore the meaning of
Paul is, that men are pronounced Righteous, that is, Reconciled through mercy
promised for Christ his sake.

Thus far I have repeated the true substance of my own Argument, with the
concurrence of others.

Mr. Norton does thus Answer, in page 227. If atonement, pardon, and
forgiveness, be the effect of justifying faith, then they cannot be our
righteousness, for that is the object of our justifying faith: and
Righteousness is before justifying Faith, as the object is before the act,
Atonement is after it, as the effect is after the cause: To say, the cause and
effect is the same, is to say, a thing is before and after it self.

Dialong, does all along call Gods atonement, the formal cause of a believing
sinners justification, and does all along call it, the effect of Christ's
meritorious obedience in his combat of sufferings, and in his death and
Sacrifice: and it does all along make Faith, to be imputed for Righteousness,
no otherwise but as it does apprehend and receive the Fathers atonement, in
page 128. and in that Page, I conclude, that a sinner is justified by Faith no
otherwise, but as it is that Grace of the Spirit, whereby a sinner is enabled
to apprehend and receive the Fathers merciful atonement; And again, I say, in
page 129. That Faith does no otherwise justify a sinner, but as it is that
Grace or Instrument of the Spirit, whereby a sinner is enabled to apprehend and
receive the Fathers atonement according to the Apostles Discourse, in Romans 3.
21, 22, 23, 24, 25. And in page, 130. I say, that Romans 3. 22. does not say, that
Faith is their Righteousness, but that the Righteousness of God is theirs by
Faith; for with the heart man believes unto Righteousness, Romans 10. 10. Faith
is the way, or it is the Instrumental means, whereby sinners do rece^ve Gods
merciful atonement for their full and perfect Righteousness: and in page 131.
I say, when the sinner brought his Sacrifice to the Priest, he must lay both
his hands with all his might upon the head of his sacrifice, to teach and
typifie unto sinners, how they must by Faith Rest and depend upon the sacrifice
of Christ, as the only meritorious procuring cause of the Fathers Atonement for
their full and perfect Righteousness; and no man's sacrifice did make atonement
for him without this imposition as I have explained it, on Esaias 53. 6. And in
page 132. and in sund^y other places I used the like expressions: But in the
middle of these Expressions, Mr. Norton has found out this unfit expression,
that forg v^n^ss^ of sin is the offect of justifying Fath; he might easily
perceive by my several Expressions, both before and after that, that expression
was a mere escape through oversight, and therefore now I refuse this translated
word [for righteousness] and say that Faith is imputed [unto Righteousness]

But Mr. Norton takes the word Just^fication in another sense then I do;
Namely, for the fulfilling of the moral Law of Nature: For in page 225. he
says,

Abraham was made partaker of the righteousness of the moral Law, or of the
Law of works, by faith without works: because no man can attain Eternal life
without fulfilling the Law, either in himself or in his surety, without the
righteousn^sse of the Law there is no life, Lev. 18. 5. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Ezekiel. 10.
11. Gal. 3. 10.

Chap. 5. at Rep^y 18. and in other places also, to which I refer the Reader.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 246. To impute: is for God in his act of
just^fying a sinner to account the righteousness of Christ (to the moral law
of Nature, as he does express it in other places) to be ours by Grace, and
that as verily and really ours, as if it were w^ought by us; and in this sense
the word Impute is used ten times, in Romans 4. 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 11, 22, 23, 24.

Reply 1. but I will now add other Considerations: See his Discourse taken
from, de veritate religionis, page 128. and 107,


1. Grotius affirms, and that most truly, that this kind of Righteousness,
which they call imputative, the mere devices of m^n are thrust upon us instead
of divine Dictates: And says he, in page 107. The Righteousness of Christ
imputed to us, as if we had performed it all: and of Faith, whose Office it is
to embrace that Righteousness so imputed: there is not one word in the sacred
Letters: And though I do believe these Assertions to be most true: yet I say
also, that I dare not fully concur with his Description of Just^fication.

2. Mr Woodbridge, says most truly in his Method, page 96. That the A true
description of the imputation of Christ's righteousness for the j^stification
of beli^ving sinners.
Act of God by the Law of Grace (i.e. by the promise of the Gospel, gives us
R^ght to impunity and Eternal Life for the sake of Christ: This (says he) is
formalissime, the imputation of Christ's Righteousness: And (says he) The
Righteousness of Christ is imputed to Believers in their Justification,
inasmuch as that for his merits we are reputed just before God. And says he,
in page 3. The formality of Justification consists (as I take it) in a legal
discharge of a sinner from his Obligation to punishment, and a donation of
Right and Title to Eternal Life: which discharge and Gift, because it was
merited by the Obedience of Christ without any contribution of merit from the
Sinner himself, is truly called the imputation of Christ's Righteousness. And
(says he) this is the sense of that phrase in the use of our Divines: and in
this sense I have all along affirmed, that Christ is our Righteousness;
Namely, in the meritorious Cause of his Righteous performance of his
consecrating Combat of Sufferings, and of his Death and Sacrifice; for this
performance is called the Righteousness of Christ, in Romans 5. 18. and in John
16. 10. And it is in Relation to this Righteous performance, that he is called
Gods Righteous Servant, in Esaias 53. 11. By the knowledge of him shall my
righteous servant justify the many: So does P. Martyr read it, in Romans p. 392.
And Bullenger, in his Decades, page 48. And Marlorat, in Matthew. 27. 38. And our
Annot. says, That by our Knowledge of him, is meant our Knowing Faith (and
confidence in his righteous performance of his said Combat and Sacrifice) He
shall justify many: and the Reason is added: because he shall bear their
iniquities, by procuring his Fathers atoned Forgiveness: After this manner he
shall bear their iniquities, and so consequently justify the many from their
sins: but Mr. Norton does interpret it, that Christ in a proper sense did bear
the guilt and punishment of the sins of the Many: as a Porter bears a burden.
But I believe I have given the right sense of this bearing, in sect. 1. and of
the rest of this Text, in Chap. 13. sect. 3.

CHAP. XXI.
Showing from the Hebrew word Rapha: That Gods Forgiveness for the sake of
Christ's Sacrifice, does so thoroughly heal a sinner, that it makes him as
perfectly sound, whole and just, as the Covenant of Reconciliation does Require
them to be.

3. THe Prophet Isaiah says, in Chap. 53. 5. Christ was wounded for our
Transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, and that the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and that with his bruises (or stripes) we are healed.

I have often showed how Christ was wounded and bruised by his envious Combater
Satan, and by his potent seed: according to Gods declaration of the Combat, in
Genesis 3. 15. Thou (Satan) shall pierce me in the foot-soals as the worst of
Malefactors on the Cross: but because his passions shall not be provoked
thereby to any sinful distemper, he shall perform the Combat in perfection of
patience and obedience, which shall be so meritorious and acceptable in my
sight, that it shall procuce my atoned Forgiveness to all believing sinners
for their peace, and for the perfect healing of their Souls from the guilt of
sin: and in this sense his wounds, bruises, and stripes were suffered for their
peace, and for their perfect healing: and by this performance, the seed of the
Woman did break the Devils Head-plot, as to the Elect Number.

In this sense only it must be understood, that the wounds, and bruises, and
chastisements, and stripes which Christ suffered in perfection of patience and
obedience to the declared will of God, did merit and procure Gods Reconciled
Forgiveness, for the peace, and for the healing of all believing sinners from
the guilt of all their sins. Es. 53. 5. Lev. 14. 3, 48, 49.


2. Consider that the original word Rapha, translated healed, does signify
such a healing, as makes sick and unsound persons to be perfectly whole and
sound, not only in bodily sicknesses which Christ made perfectly sound and
whole, but also in Soul-sicknesses.

3. The force of this word may the better be discerned, by comparing it with
other Scriptures where it is used: as in Lev. 14. 3, etc. When the Leper was
healed of his Leprosy, he might not presently run into Gods holy presence, to
his holy Temple, but first the Priest must look upon him, and then in case he
does judge that his leprosy is perfectly healed, he must make an atonement for
his former uncleanness: and then, and not till then he was made perfectly
sound and whole, both from his leprosy and his ceremonial sin of uncleanness
that did cleave thereto, until he had received Gods atonement; The Hebrews say,
that leprosy is the Finger of God, and that the only healing is by the hand of
the Priest that makes atonement, for by Mercy atonement is made for iniquity
(Prove. 16. 6.) See Ains. for this, in Lev. 14. 3. and also in Ver. 48, 49. when
the plague was healed in the House: then the Priest must make atonement for the
House with the blood of the Bird that was slain, and with the living Bird that
was dipped therein; then, and not till then it was made perfectly clean, sound
and whole. And hence it follows, that Gods Atonement procured by Christ's
meritorious Death and Sacrifice, is the only thing that does perfectly cleanse,
heal, and make sound the guilty Souls of believing sinners.

4. When such as had Issues were cleansed, they must also bring their Sacrifice
for their full cleansing and healing, Lev. 15. 13, 14, 15. But says Ainsworth,
the time when he was first cleansed (i.e. healed of his Issue) is not declared:
but by the Rites and Sacrifices following; God would teach them thereby, that
his Grace in Christ makes them whole (i.e. that his merciful Atonement through
the meritorious Death and Sacrifice of Christ, does make their sinful Souls,
as well as their Bodies whole) And says he, in Lev. 13. 18. The healing of the
Bile, figured Forgiveness of sin, and the Release of punishment for Lev. 15.
13, 14, 15, Lev. 13. 18. Luke 17. 19. Mar. 4. 12.
the same: and in this sense it is, that our true Priest Christ Jesus does heal
our leprous Souls, that are all over infected with the running Issue of
original sin: because he by his meritorious Death and Sacrifice does procure
Gods atoned Forgiveness, for their full healing and Justification from the
guilt of sin.

5. Our Savior said to the Samaritan Leper (that was first cured in his Body:
and) that returned to give thanks, Luke 17. 15. and then also Christ did heal
his Soul: saying, in Ver. 19. Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made thee
whole; and oftentimes when Christ healed Diseases, he forgave their sins for
the perfect healing of their Souls, Matthew. 9. 2, 6. and in Chap. 16. at N. 6. I
showed that God is said to heal the people, when he pardoned their ceremonial
sins of uncleanness, 2 Chronicles. 30. 20. And that which Matthew speaks of healing
the people, in Matthew. 13. 15. that does Mark speak, of forgiving their sins,
Mar. 4. 12. Esaias 6. 10.

6. It is said in Psalm 47. 3. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up
their griefs: Christ does expound these words in his Sermon at Nazareth;
saying, in Luke 4. 18, 19. God has sent me to heal the broken-hea^ted, to
preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, and
to set at liberty them that are bruised, and to preach the acceptable Year of
the Lord. Christ did meritoriously heal the brokenhearted, etc but it was Gods
atonement that was thereby procured, that did fully and formally heal the
brokenhearted.

7. As sickness and diseases did figure out sin and punishment, in Exodus 9. 9,
10. Deuteronomy. 28. 27. Revel. 16. 2. So Gods healing of them did figure out the
healing Virtue of Gods Atonement, as in Exodus 15. 26. Psalm 41. 6. And Solomon
made this Request to God at the consecration of the Brazen-Altar, That
whatsoever prayer or supplication shall be made of any man when he shall know
his own fore, and his own grief, and shall spread forth his hands in this
House, then hear thou from Heaven thy dwelling place: And forgive; but the
Seventy render it, Heal, 2 Chronicles. 6. 29, 30. By which word it is manifest, that
the Seventy knew, that Gods atoned Forgiveness did perfectly heal or just fie
the Souls 2 Chr 6. 29, 30. Exodus 15. 26. Psalm 103. 3. ^o^ 32, 23.
of believing sinners from the guilt of their sins: and that they needed no
other kind of righteousness to be added thereto to heal their Souls more
perfectly.

8. David did stir up his Soul to bless God, in Psa. 103. 3. because he
forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals all thy diseases: implying thereby,
that Gods Forgiveness did heal his soul from the guilt of his sin, as well as
his body from sickness.

9. Elihu told Job, in Chap. 33. 23. That if a Messenger (or a Teacher) one of
a Thousand, be sent to such as lie sick in body, to teach them their
Righteousness: (i.e. to teach them how their Souls might be justified from the
guilt of sin by the meritorious Death and Sacrifice of Christ, as it is the
procuring cause of Gods atoned Forgiveness) then in Ver. 24. God will be
gracious unto him, and say, deliver him from going down to the pit, I have
found a Ransom; Thus the sick man's Soul is first healed of the guilt of sin,
and then his body is also healed of his sickness.

10. It is written, in Numb. 21. 8. Make thee a fiery Serpent (of Brass, as in
Ver. 9.) and set it upon a Pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one
that is bitten, when he looks upon it shall live, i.e. he shall be perfectly
and soundly Gods forgiveness does not only deliver from hell, but it does al^o
give a right to heaven to believing sinners,
healed: This Serpent of Brass, was the Representative of those fiery Serpents
that did bite and kill the people: and the healing Virtue that it had came not
from any natural cause: Namely, not from any natural Virtue that it had, but it
was given to it by Gods arbitrary Covenant: and it was ordained to be a type of
the healing Virtue that was given by Gods Eternal Covenant to the merit of
Christ's bloody Combat with his proclaimed Enemy Satan, in Genesis 3. 15. by the
which he procured Gods Reconciled Forgiveness, for the perfect healing of
believing sinners from the guilt of sin: And to this very sense does Christ
himself expound it; saying, in John 3. 14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in
the Number. 21. 8, 9. Joh. 3. 14, 15, 16. Luke 15. 21, 22, 32.
Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up as the worst of
Malefactors on the Cross, that whosoever looks upon him by the eye of Faith,
should not perish, but have everlasting life, i.e. that looks upon him as the
meritorious cause of his Fathers Reconciled Forgiveness, should not perish but
have everlasting life: But this Brazen Serpent, though it was made in the
similitude of the venomous Serpents, yet it had no venom in it; but on the
contrary, it had a healing Virtue in it by Gods positive Ordinance: Even so,
though God did send his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. (i.e.
in the likeness of a sinful Malefactor on the Cross) yet he was without any of
sin in his Death, Heb. 4. 15. But his Death on the contrary had a healing:
Virtue in it, as himself does expound it us, John 3. 14, 15, 16. For God so
loved the world (of his Elect) that h^ gave his only begotten Son (into the
hands of his envious Combater Satan, to be lifted up as a sinful Malefactor on
the Cross, which in Gods account, was but to make his obedience more manifest
and perfect, that so his death might be accepted as a most pleasing Sacrifice
for the procuring of Gods Reconciled Forgiveness) that whosoever believes in
him should not p^^ish through the venom of singuiltinesse, but be made sound
and whole to everlasting life.

And from hence it follows, that Gods gracious Atonement procured by the
meritorious obedience of Christ in his Combat of sufferings, and in his Death
and Sacrifice, does not only in some good part heal the Souls of believing
sinners (by delivering them from Hell) but it does also fully and perfectly
heal their Souls of the guilt of sin, and it does bring them also into the
Favor of God, as heirs to the Heavenly Inheritance: For as none that are
deadly sick, can be said to be perfectly healed by delivering them in some part
from death, unless they be also fally restored to health: so Christ's death
could not restore sinners to perfect health, in case he had not merited Gods
atonement; and therefore when the penitent Prodigal did confess his sin to his
Father, his Father did not only barely forgive him, and so leave him to
himself, Luke 15. 21. but at the same instant, he did also receive him into
special Favor, Ver. 22. saying to his servants, bring forth the best Robe and
put it on him, and put a King on h^s hand, and shoes on his feet, and bring
hither the fatted Calf and kill it, and lit us eat and be merry: and when his
eldest: Son did show his Anger at his Fathers kind entertainment, his Father
said unto him, in Ver. 32. It was meet that we should make merry and be glad,
for this thy Brother was dead, and is ^live again, was lost, and is sound. Here
is a clear and most pregnant Example of the large extent of Gods atoned
Forgiveness to repenting and believing sinners: Namely, that it does net
deliver from Hell, but it does also receive them into special Favor, even to
the Adoption of the Heavenly Inheritance; and so consequently, it makes
believing sinners to be as perfectly found and whole, as it made this penitent
Prodigal, in Ver. 27. This I have also noted in Chap. 15. at N. 72. Observe
also, that this Robe, which his Reconciled Father did put upon his penitent
Son, was a Representation of that Robe of Righteousness which his Reconciled
Father did put upon him; and acco^ding to this sense, Luthe^ does call the Robe
of Righteousness, Gods Forgiveness; his words I have cited in Chap. 9. sect.
8.

11. From the aforesaid festival joy at the Prodigal^ conversion, and his
Fathers Reconciled Forgiveness. A just occasion given to expiate the joy
Believing sinners should have for their communion with Gods reconciled
forgiveness: for indeed it is a ground of the greatest joy and rejoicing that
can be expressed by believing sinners: this the penitent Prodigal found by his
experience to be most true.

2. Paul says thus, in Romans 5. 11. We also joy in God through our Lord Jesus
Gods atoned so givenesse is a true ground of the greatest joy and rejoicing to
believing sinners that can be expressed or conceived.
Christ, by whom we have now received the aton^ment: therefore Gods atonement
procured by Christ, is a ground of great joy: for the original word does
signify toexalt, or t^iumph for Joy.

3. This Truth is illustrated by several Types of great Joy in Gods Atonement.
1. The whole burnt-Offering was a lively Type of Christ's Death and Sacrifice,
Heb. 10. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Heb. 9. 14. And at the Offering of this typical
Sacrifice, which procured Gods atonement, there was exceeding great Joy
expressed: For when the burnt-Offering began, the Song of the Lord began also
with Trumpets and with other Instruments, which were ordained by David the
Prophet, and King of Israel, and all the Congregation worshipped, and the
Singers sang, and the Trumpets sounded, and all this continued until the
burnt-Offering was finished, 2 Chronicles. 19. 27, 28. with 2 Chronicles. 30. 21.

2. They said the Song also over the Peace Offerings of the solemn Assembly,
and also in all the days of their solemn Feasts, and in the new Moons: also
there were Priests blowing with Trumpets in the same hour of Sacrifice, Numb.
10. 10. Psalm 81. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Lev. 23. 24. And these Sacrifices are also
called Sacrifices of great Joy, Psalm 27. 6. And the chief Reason why thee
National Church must exercise their triumphant Joy at the offering of these
Sacrifices, was, because these Sacrifices procured Gods Atonement, and figured
how the sacrifice of Christ should procure Gods atoned Forgiveness to
believing sinners, for their formal justification from the guilt of sin.

3. They exercised their Joy in Christ's Sacrifice, and in Gods atonement, that
was procured thereby, by three types of spiritual Joy:

1. By feasting on their Peace Offering. 2. By Music, as is above expressed.
3. By Dancing at certain Feasts, Judge. 21. 21. 2 Samuel 6. 14.
And all these three sorts of Joy were used, when the Repenting Prodigal was
made partakers of his Fathers atoned Forgiveness.

2. They were also fulfilled at the conversion of the J^y^o^; for when he knew
that his sins were forgiven him, and that his Soul should be saved thereby, he
did skip and dance for joy, as the Greek word does signify, in Acts 16. 34.
And Gods atoned Forgiveness did also make David's broken bones to rejoice,
Psa^m 51. 8. For in the former Verse, Gods atoned Forgiveness did purify and
wash his Soul so thoroughly clean from the guilt of his sins, that it made him
whiter then snow in Gods sight.

12. The true Converts, in Hos. 14. 2. say thus unto God: Take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously: and God does thus answer their Petition,
in Verse 4. I will heal their back sliding, and I will love them freely, for
mine anger is turned away, i.e. I am Reconciled to such Repenting Sinners
through the merit of the true Sacrifice; and my Reconciliation so procured
shall perfectly heal their Souls of the guilt of their sins, and receive them
graciously into my special Favor. Hos. 14. 2. Esaias 57. 15. Esaias 30. 26. John
7. 23.


13. God says thus, in Esaias 57. 15. I dwell in the high and holy place, and
with him also that is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of
the humble, and to revive the heart of contrite ones: and then God made this
gracious promise to such humbled Sinners, in Verse 18. I have seen his ways
and will heal him, and will also restore comforts unto him and to his mourners:
I create the fruit of the lips to be peace peace, and to him that is afar off,
and to him that is near, says the Lord: and I will heal him. Two remarkable
points are in this 18 Verse: 1. That God does send his Prophets and Ministers
to preach peace, (i.e. to preach his doubled Reconciled Forgiveness, for the
perfect healing of the guilty Souls of repenting and believing sinners. And 2.
Then he does also by this means restore comforts to such mourning Souls: and
God does promise that when they shall be in captivity, that in case they return
unto him with all their heart and Soul that he will return their captivity: but
the Seventy render it, will heal thy sins, Deuteronomy. 30. 3.

14. God made this gracious promise to repenting and believing sinners, in Esaias
30. 26. That the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the
light of the Sun shall be sevenfold as the light of seven days: in the day
that the Lord shall bind up the breach of his people, and heal the stroke of
their wound: From hence it is also evident, that Gods atoned Forgiveness does
heal, and make perfectly whole and sound the guilty Souls of wounded Sinners:
For the Prophet does set forth this Healing Virtue by the excelling light of
the Moon, to be even as the Sun: and by the excelling light of the Sun, to be
as great as the light of seven days: and consequently the healing Virtue of
Gods atoned Forgiveness, should transcendently heal the guilty Souls of
believing Sinners.

15. When Christ healed a man on the Sabbath Day, ^t is said, that he made him
every whit whole, John 7. 23. (i.e. in Soul as well as in Body: and hence it
follows, that Gods atoned Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's meritorious
Sacrifice, does make the guilty Souls of Believing Sinners to be every whit
whole, and every whit clean, John 13. 10. (i.e. To be every whit justified and
sanctified from the guilt of sin: and so the converted Prodigal was not only
forgiven, but received also into special Favor, even with great Joy on both
sides. This is the Transcendent healing Virtue of Gods Reconciled Forgiveness
to believing Sinners, that are made partakers of his Covenant of Grace.

CHAP. XXII.
Showing from Shashab and Zacar, etc. in the Adverb, That Gods forgiveness, is
called His not imputing sin, His not marking sin, His not remembering sin: But
it is his blotting of it out of his Remembrance.

THE Apostle says, That God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself:
not imputing their Trespasses to them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. In these words, the
Apostle does define Gods Reconciliation, by his not imputing Trespasses to
believing sinners.

2. David does also define the justification of a believing sinner, by Gods not
imputing sin to them, To L. 4. 5, 6, 8. taken from Psalm 32. 2.

From these Scriptures it follows: That in case Gods non-imputation of sin
were not a certain mark, of a believing sinners perfect justification and
Reconciliation: it could not be said to make him blessed; For we see by
experience that a Judges bare forgiveness of a Malefactor by his non-imputation
of sin, does not entitle him to the Judges special Favor in such manner as
Gods non-imputation of sin does; in the fulfiliing of his Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation to believing sinners: Neither does the Kings general act of
indemnity, receive sinners into special favor, as Gods non-imputation of sin
does for the sake of Christ's meritorious Sacrifice; And thence it follows, that
in the Covenant of Grace, Gods non-imputation of sin is as large as his
Reconciliation is, and therefore Gods non-imputation in the Covenant of Grace,
does signify, not to reckon, not to impute, not to mark, or not to remember
sin, with any proper vindicative punishments: but it signifies, that God is
Reconciled to such sinners, and that he does receive them into special favor,
as the Father did his repenting prodigal Son.

3. Repenting Shimei said thus to David, in 2 Samuel 19. 19. Let not my Lord
impute iniquity to me, neither do thou remember that which thy Servant did
perversely; Shimei does acknowledge that he did perversely, and therefore he does
acknowledge, that it were just for David to impute unto him that which h^ did
perversely; but by these words, let not my Lord impute iniquity to me, He does
entreat David's reconciled forgiveness, and his being received again into his
former Favor, 1 Samuel 19. 19. Zach. 7. 10. Eze. 18. 21. Eze. 33. 16.
he does not acknowledge that David's non-imputation of his iniquity, and his
not remembering his sin to call him to an account for it, would not only be his
acquital from punishment, but that it would comprehend his being received into
David's former favor.

4. Zachary does exhort the returned Jews, to repent and to reform their ways:
saying, in Deuteronomy. 7. 10. Let none of you imagine evil against his Brother in his
heart: But the Hebrew is, let none of you impute evil to his Brother in his
heart: and the Seventy render that Hebrew word thus, let none of you remember
evil in his heart: and from thence it follows, that not to impute evil, and not
to remember it, is the same thing in the understanding of the seventy
Translators.

5. God says thus, in Eze. 18. 21. If the wicked will turn from all his sins
that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes, (as they were given for a
Covenant of Grace by Faith in Christ) and do that which is lawful and right
(according to the said Covenant of Grace, which requires the doing of all
things by Faith in Christ) he shall surely live, he shall not dye, all his
transgressions that he has committed shall not be mentioned unto him: (i.e.
they shall not be imputed unto him, or, they shall not be remembered: Namely,
not so to be remembered, as to be punished with any proper vindicative
punishment) in his Righteousness that he has done (by doing all by Faith in
Christ) he shall live.

6. God says thus, in Eze. 33. 16. None of his sins that he has committed
shall be mentioned unto him; Or as P. Martyr says, They shall not be
remembered: and says he, in that God will forget and not Remember; it is as
much as to say, he will not take revenge on such sinners, in his Com. Pl. part.
3. page 273. but that on the contrary, he will forgive their sins, and receive
them into special Favor.

7. Gods not marking iniquity, is a Note of his Reconciled Forgiveness, as it
is expostulated by David, in Psalm 130. 3. If thou Lord should mark
iniquities, Psalm. 130. 3, 4.
O Lord who shall stand (or subsist) The Gen^va Note says exceeding rightly:
he declares, that we cannot be justified before God but by forgiveness of
sins: They make Gods not working sin, to be Justification from sin, by his
forgiveness: But (says David, in Ver. 4.) with thee is mercy (Namely, merciful
Forgiveness) that thou may be seared (i.e. that thou may be reverendly
worshipped.) Luther on this word says, Mercy is not our own merit Luther makes
a believers righteousness to be nothing else but Gods pardon and forgiveness,
and that his not looking upon sin, to mark it, is to justify, or to pronounce
a man righteous.
or deserving, but a free and undeserved Remission of sins, forgiveness and
pardon through Christ: And in this one Thing alone (says he) does Conscience
feel Rest and quietness, that simply and singly without any condition of our
own worthiness, It commits it self in most naked wise unto the naked Mercy
of God through Christ: And says, O Lord, I have thy Promise, That
Righteousness comes of Mercy alone, the which Righteousness is nothing else
but thy Pardon and Forgiveness; that is to say, that thou will not mark our
iniquities: (This clusion of Luther, I cited in my Dialogue, but by Mr. Nortons
Answer, it is called Heresy.) And says Luther in his next words: I commend
unto you this Definition of David, touching Christian Righteousness, That when
God does look upon sin to mark it: It is to condemn man: and on the contrary,
not to look upon sin, is to justify, or to pronounce a man Righteous, and that
righteousness is this: when sins are not looked on, or strictly marked: but
Forgiven, pardoned, and not imputed, or laid to our charge; Even as in another
place, he calls such a man Blessed; even as Paul does very aptly allege the
same Definition, in Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. saying, Blessed is the man unto whom the
Lord does not impute sin: He says not, blessed is that man that has not any
sin: but he to whom the Lord imputes not that sin that he has; Even as here
also he says, when sin is not marked.

These words of Luther are thus Remarkable; and I have cited several other
Orthodox Writers, in Chap. 20. at Reply 1. That call Gods Reconciled
Forgiveness, A Sinners Righteousness; as Luther does many times over and over.

8. Luther says thus, in Gal. 2. 16. Fol. 66. We are sometimes left of the
Holy Ghost to fall into sin, as Peter, David, and other holy Men:
Notwithstanding (says he) we must always have recourse unto this Article,
That our sins are covered; and that God will not lay them to our charge, Psalm
32. with Romans 4. And says he a little after, we do therefore make this
Definition (of Justification) That a justified Christian, is not he who has no
sin: But he to whom God imputes not his sin through Faith in Christ: and
therefore (says he) It is not without good cause that we do so often repeat,
and beat into your minds the Forgiveness of sins, And (thereby) imputation of
Righteousness for Christ his sake. 2. From hence also the Reader may take
special Notice; That Luther calls Gods Forgiveness through the Faith of
Christ, The imputation of Righteousness for Christ his sake; for as I formerly
noted it, Luther denies that we are made Righteous by the Righteousness of the
moral Law of Nature; and in Chap. 5. sect. 5. I have cited others to the same
Judgment, and also in Chap. 15. at N. 18.

9. Luther says thus, in Gal. 3. 6. Christian Righteousness consists in
these two things: 1. In Faith that gives glory to God; and 2. In Gods
imputation (of Righteousness) That is to say, that God will not lay to our
charge the remnant of sin: that is to say, that he will not punish nor condemn
us for it, but will cover it, and will freely forgive it as though it were
nothing at all, not for our sakes, or for the worthiness of our works, but for
Christ his sake, in whom we do believe: In these words, Luther does make Gods
imputation of Righteousness to lie in his Reconciled Forgiveness, for the sake
of Christ; and his Reconciled Forgiveness, to be his imputation of
Righteousness to believing sinners.

10. Gods not imputing sin, is his not remembering it to punish it with any
proper vindicative punishment (though he does often punish them with
castigatory punishments for their greater good.) For God says thus, in Heb. 8.
12. and in Heb. 10. 17. I will be merciful to their unrighteousnisse, and their
sins, and their iniquities I will remember no more. This comprehensive Promise
of the Covenant of Grace is taken from Jerem. 31. 34. where Gods Promise runs
thus: I will forgive their sins, but the Apostle says as the Seventy do, I
will be merciful to their unrighteousness: the Greek word signifies (more
largely) I will be atoned, or I will be propitious to their unrighteousness,
and their sins and iniquities, I will remember no more. And hence it follows,
that Gods not remembering sin and iniquiry to punish it with vindicative
punishments, signifies taht he will mercifully forgive, or be atoned, or be
propicious to their unrighteousness: These two positions are reciprocal, and
therefore they are joined together, not only in Heb. 8. 12. but also in Esaias
41. 25. I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, and will not remember thy
sins; and hence it follows, that when God does not remember sin to punish it,
it is all one as to blot it out.

11. God promises, in Jer. 33. 8. I will cleanse them from all their
iniquities whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their
iniquities: But the Seventy, instead of the word Pardon, say, I will not call
to mind, or, I will not remember any of their iniquities: These three terms, I
will cleanse them from their iniquities, and I will pardon their iniquities,
and I will not remember their iniquities, are synonimous terms.

12. God says thus, in Jer. 50. 20. In those days, and at that time, says
the Lord: Namely, when the godly Jews shall return from the Babylonian
Captivity) the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none,
and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found (because the guilt of them
shall be clean done away by my atoned Forgiveness; And it is in this Negative
sense also, that Balaam said, God has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, Numb. 23.
21. (Namely, not to punish it with proper vindicative punishments) Mr.
Ainsworth says, That Balaam does here bless Israel the second time. 1. By
pronouncing their Justification in the sight of God, even that blessedness
which they have, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered,
Romans 4. 7. When God (says he) does not behold, or see iniquity in sinful man,
it is to hide his face from their sins, and to blot out all their iniquities,
Psalm 51. 9.

2. In this 50 Chapter, Jeremy does in his conclusion, in Verse 20. show the
Reason why their iniquities and sins cannot be found: and that is (says God)
because I will pardon them whom I reserve (to return home out of their
captivity;) From hence take notice, that when God does forgive sin, He
forgets it, and blots it out of his sight, and out of his remembrance for
the sake of Christ the true Propitiatory, Romans 3. 25. In the time of the first
Captivity God sent the godly out of Jerusalem, to be preserved in Babylon as a
basket of good figgs, until the time of their return home again, whose sins he
did pardon, i.e. did justify them from the guilt of their sins through the
meritorious efficacy of Christ's obedience in his Combat of sufferings, and in
his Death and Sacrifice. And 2. From hence it may be concluded, that the forty
nine Thousand that returned from captivity, in Ezra 2. 64. were truly godly, or
at least the greatest part of them.

13. When David did feel the guilt of his Adultery and murder to lie upon his
Conscience, he did most importunately implore the mercy of God, Psalm 51.
saying, 1. According to the multitude of thy mercies. 2. According to the
multitude of thy kind mercies. And 3. According to the multitude of thy tender
(bowels of) mercy, wipe away, or blot out my Trespasses: And in Verse 9. Hide
thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities, that the guilt of them
may never be laid to my charge, to punish me with proper vindicative
punishments: though yet David did suffer castigatory punishments.

14. God does persuade his people to Repentance, because he is ready to
forgive; For in Esaias 43. 24, 25. He says thus: Thou have wearied me with thine
iniquities: (But now if thou will repent) I, even I am he that blotteth out thy
Transgressions for mine own promise sake (in the Covenant of Grace) and will
not remenber thy sins. Our Annot. on this 25 Verse, says, that in the term of
blotting out, there is a Metaphor taken from the blotting of something out of a
Book: as in Exodus 32. 32, 33. and Matthew. 18, 24, 27, 33. Luke 7. 41, 43, 47,
48. and Luke 11. 4. which being once blotted out and done away, neither are we
any more charged with them, Eze. 18. 22. nor God any more Wroth with us for
them, Esaias 54. 9. Esaias 44. 22. Acts 19. 2. This blotting out of sin, may also
be an allusion to the blotting out of Curses that were written against the
suspected Woman, in Numb. 4. 23. for when she was found innocent of the Crime,
then all the curses that were written against her were blotted out, and then
she was not only justified from that accusation, but she was also received
again into her Husbands favor.

15. Though sin after it is committed, has no physical or natural existence:
yet it has a moral existence by its guilt or desert of punishment: but through
Gods atoned Forgiveness procured by Christ's meritorious obedience in his death
and Sacrifice, the actual ordination of it to condemnation is taken away: yea,
and sometimes also (upon the sinners repentance) God does forgive temporal
punishments, which also may be called a temporal justification, Psalm 78. 38.
Of which see Burges, on Justification, page 40. and Mr. Clendon, on
Justification, page 5, etc.

CHAP. XXIII.
Showing from the Hebrew word Nachum and Shubh, That Gods Forgiveness is
called His Repentance, or His not punishing sin.

GODS Repentance is of two sorts: 1. It is his not continuing of good to
impenitent sinners, Or 2. It is his not punishing of repenting sinners.

1. It is his not continuing of good to impenitent sinners: as in Genesis 6. 6.
God repented that he had made man, because he saw that the wickedness of man
was great in the Earth, Ver. 5. and therefore, in Ver. 7. he says, I will
destroy man whom I have created from the face of the Earth; in Verse 6. God is
said to have repented: even as when we see the Potter to break the same Vessel
which he had made good at first: we thereupon think that he repented that he
had made it, because he sees something in it that had happened to it, for the
which he disliketh it and breaks it: Even so at the first God made man good,
even according to his own Image and likeness: but presently after, he saw that
sin through Satan's temptation had happened to mankind: Now in respect of this
mutability in man (not in God, for he repents not, 1 Samuel 15. 29. Jer. 4.
28.) Moses says, that God Repented that he had made man. 2. In this very sort,
he repented also that he had made Saul King, because Saul did not execute When
God is said to repent of his threatened punishments to believing sinn^rs, it is
a true note of his atoned forgiveness, and of his receiving them into his
favor as justified persons.
his vengeance on Amaleck, 1 Samuel 15. 11, 35. 3. God says thus, in Jer. 18. 9,
10. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom
to build it and to plant it: if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my
voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them.
Our Annot. on this Verse, does expound it to the sense abovesaid.

2. The second kind of Gods Repentance, is his not executing of his threatened
punishments, on such sinners as do repent: and in that Respect Gods Repentance
is often used for a Note of his Reconciled Forgiveness to Repenting and
Believing sinners: As for Example, as soon as God had certified Moses of the
peoples sin, in making a Calf, and in offering sacrifices thereto, he told
Moses, that he was purposed to consume them; then Moses made intercession for
them, saying, Turn from the hotnesse of thine Anger, and repent of the evil
against thy people, Exodus 32. 12. But for this word Repent, the Seventy render
it, be merciful, or be propitious, or be reconciled to the evil of thy people:
which thing, says Ainsworth, is here employed: but says he, the Hebrew phrase
means also, the evil of punishment, which Moses desired God to repent of,
i.e. not to inflict it upon them. And then, in Verse 14. It is said, that
Jehovah repented of the evil (of punishment which he had spoken to do unto his
people, i.e. forgive Exo. 32. 12, 14. Numb. 14. 13, 20, 21. Psalm 90. 13.
their guiltiness, and receive them again into thy favor: but the Seventy, for
repented, say, the Lord was propitious, or atoned for the evil he thought to do
unto them.

2. In Psalm 90. Moses confesses the sin of the people in the Wilderness,
when they thought to have stoned Caleb and Joshua, for their faithful Report of
Gods power to Conquer the Land of Canaan, notwithstanding the evil Report of
the ten misbelieving Spies: whereupon God threatened to destroy them, but Moses
made intercession to God for the pardon of their sin, in Numb. 14. 13, etc. and
in Verse 20. he obtained it: Namely, thus far, that they should not all be
consumed as one man, at an instant: But in Verse 21. God swear that all the
grown men that had seen his Signs in Egypt, should not enter into the Land,
but should dye in the Wilderness. Now in this time of their mortality in the
Wilderness, Moses prays thus, in Psalm 90. 13. Let it repent thee concerning
thy servants: but Moses could not prevail for them in this case, because God
had sworn that they should not enter into Canaan; for that Oath of God made his
said Threatening to be a definitive Threatening; Gods Oath to any thing makes it
as unalterable as his Eternal Council is: Gods Oath is a sure proof that it was
so decreed by his unalterable Council: of the which he does never Repent, Heb.
6. 17. with Psalm 110. 4. And 2. He does never swear against, but always for
the performance of the Articles of his Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation,
i.e. that He will be atoned to the guilty Souls of Repenting and believing
sinners: as it is evident by Eze. 33. 11, 12 As I live, says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked may turn from
his way and live. And the Psalmist does also magnify Gods Mercy, in Psalm 106.
44, 45. saying, when distress was on them, he heard their cry: and he
remembered toward them his Covenant, and Repented according to the multitude of
his mercies. 3. God says thus, in Jer. 18. 8. If that Nation against whom I
have pronounced (Destruction) turn from their evil ways, I will repent of the
evil I thought to do unto them, i.e. I will be Reconciled unto them, by
forgiving their sins, and by receiving them into special favor, according to
the unchangeable conditions of my Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation.

3. When the Grasshoppers had eaten up all the Grass of the Land: then Amos
Eze. 33. 11, 12. Jer. 18. 8. Amos 7. 1, 2. 3, 6. Jonah 3. 9, 10. Jonah 4. 2.
Joel 2. 12, 13. 1 Chr. 21. 17.
did thus pray; O Lord God, forgiv^ I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise,
for he is small: And the Lord repented for this (and said) it shall not be,
says the Lord, Amos 7. 1, 2, 3, 6. But for the Hebrew word Salach, translated
Forgive, The Seventy say Hileos: be merciful, or be propitious, or be atoned;
Therefore in their understanding, Gods Repentance is his merciful, or his
atoned Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice; in whose Name the Godly
put up their prayers. 2. The Seventy use Hileos, for far be it from thee, or
let it rep^nt thee. See Ainsworth, in Genesis 18. 25. 3. They do also use Hileos,
to express the sense of the word peace, i.e. as it relates to Gods atoned
Forgiveness, in Genesis 43. 23.

4. The King and people of Nineveh believed the preaching of Jonah, That they
should be destroyed within forty days, if they repented not: and thereupon
they set upon that Duty in good earnest, as far as they were able: for they
said, who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
Anger that we perish not: and God saw their works that they turned from their
evil way, and God repented of the evil that he said he would do unto them, and
he did it not, Jonah 3. 9, 10. Yea, Jonah knew beforehand that God would
Repent of the evil, because he was gracious, Jonah 4. 2.

From these Scriptures ^t follows, that Gods Repentance is his non-Execution of
his threatened punishments: Namely, it is his Reconciled Forgiveness upon man's
Repentance.

5. When Joel had declared unto Sion the terriblenesse of Gods Judgments for
their provoking sins, he did also exhort them to Repentance, Joel 2. 12, 13.
saying: Thus says the Lord, Tura you even to me with all your heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, and rent your heart and not your
Garments, and turn to the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow
to Anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the Evil.

From hence it follows, that Gods Repentance upon man's Repentance, is nothing
else but his merciful Atonement, or his Reconciled Forgiveness; for in this
Text his repentance is conjoined with four Attributes of his reconciled
Forgiveness. 1. He is gracious. 2. Merciful. 3. Slow to Anger; and 4. Great in
Kindness. And from these Attributes of his reconciled Forgiveness he repented
him of the evil threatened, so that his Repentance on man's Repentance, is
nothing else but his abundant Reconciled Forgiveness. And 2. From thence also
it follows, that his Repentance, is his abundant readiness and willingness
of his non-Execution of his threatened punishments upon man's Repentance: These
five Attributes of Gods reconciled Forgiveness (with others also) should
encourage sinners to set earnestly about the great Duty of sound Repentance, as
in Exodus 34. 6, 7. Psalm 51. Psalm 103, etc.

6. When the Lord was wrath with David, for his proud confidence in the Arm of
flesh, which he declared by his numbering of his people: he was at last smitten
with the consideration of his sin, then he repented, and did most earnestly beg
of God, that his anger might be rather executed against him, then against his
innocent Subjects, 1 Chronicles. 21. 17. and then when David Repented, the Lord is
said to Repent; and then he directed David, in Ver. 15. where to build an Altar
that he might offer burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings thereon: and then David
did in the Name of the true Sacrifice, call upon the Lord again for his
Reconciled Forgiveness, and the Lord was then pleased to answer his Request,
by sending fire from Heaven to burn his Sacrifice, and commanded his Angel to
put up his Sword again into the sheath thereof, 1 Chronicles. 21. 26, 27.

And thus David by his typical sacrifices did exercise his Faith in Christ the
true burnt-Offering, and the true Peace Offering, as the only procuring cause
of Gods Reconciled Forgiveness, and then also he was received again into Gods
special favor, as he made it evident by sending a fire from Heaven to burn his
sacrifices.

Conclusion

From the Premises it follows, that Gods atoned Forgiveness for the sake of
Christ's Sacrifice, is his Reconciled Repentance, 1 Chro. 21. 15. by the which
he does not only acquit Repenting and Believing sinners of the guilt of sin and
punishment, but does also receive them into special Grace and Favor, as
persons fully justified from the guilt of sin, and adopted to the Heavenly
Inheritance.

2. Take notice that the last nine Chapters, touching the true Nature of Gods
Reconciled Forgiveness, are intended chiefly to set out the true Nature of
justification from sin, hoping that it will give a fit occasion for the better
clearing of the true Nature of a sinners justification by the industry of
others.

CHAP. XXIV.
Wherein every word of Esaias 53. 5. is expounded.

I have had occasion to expound some particular words of this Text: as of the
word Wounded and Bruised, in Chap. 12. and of the word Healed, in Chap. 21. but
now I have endeavored to give the true sense of each word.

He was wounded for our Transgressions, Esaias 53. 5.

He was bruised for our Iniquities,
The chastisement of our peace was upon him,
And with his bruises [or stripes) we are Healed.
THE Hebrew word Chalal, rendered wounded, is of large signification: But first
I will show the proper sense, and then the metaphorical senses.

1. It does properly signify, to bring forth children with pain by the Mother;
Psalm 51. 5.

2. From thence it has many metaphorical senses, and it is used to signify
any other bringing forth, either of person, or thing, Prove. 8. 24, 25. his
observation I have borrowed from our larger Annot. on Job 15. 7. And 2. Our
Annot. on the word Formed, in Job 26. 5. does in the Hebrew signify: 1. To
bring forth children out of the Womb when they have their right Form, as in Job
39. 1. And 3. Because Children are brought forth with much pain and outcries
both to the Mother and Child: it does thence also signify, to be in Anguish,
to groan grievously, or to mourn like a Woman in Travel, as in Deuteronomy. 2. 25. But
says our Annot. in Job 26. 5. here it is taken in the first sense: And 4. Our
Annot. on Esaias 53. 5. says, This Hebrew word comes Regularly from a Root, that
properly signifies, to be in pain, as Women, or other Creatures that bring
forth in pain, are wont to be in the time of their Travel, Ps. 51. 5. where one
word there used, has in it a notion of heat or delight in Conception: (but my
Exposition of the Hebrew word speaks of a differing kind of heat, in chap. 2.)
so the other word, is of sharpness of pain in production, Job 39. 1, 2, 3. and
thence it is used commonly for any grievous Torment, or pain proceeding from
vexation, affliction, or fear, Job 15. 20. Prove. 26. 10. Esaias 13. 8. Esaias 26,
17, 18. Esaias 51. 9. Jer. 5. 3. I suppose therefore (says the Annot.) that the
better reading of Esaias 53. 5. He was tormented, or pained. 5. The Seventy and
the old Latin, read it, wounded: and this sense is also very suitable to
Christ's Combating Offerings from the malice of Satan and his potent seed. And
I find that the Seventy have used this word for wounded, in above 60
Scriptures, and also for the slaying of men by Warlike cruelty: yea, though
sometimes absolute death is not meant, but wounding only, as in Esaias 51. 9.
Judge. 9. 40. J^r. 51. 52. Lev. 2. 12. And says Carlisle, in his Descent to
Hell, page 166. 167. The Soul is said to be gone out of the Body, when it is
but sickned, grieved, and vexed, in Psalm 107. 5. Psalm 61. 3. Acts 20. 7, 10.
1 Samuel 25. 37, 38. 1 Kings 10. 5. 2 Chronicles. 9 4. And indeed Christ's Soul was not
forced out of his Body by his tormenting wounds from his Combater Satan and
his potent seed: but he laid it down of himself, John 10. 18.

6. This Hebrew word is also used for wounded in a man, Estate or Name, as in
Prove. 7. 20.

7. It is also used for the Torment or pain of the mind, arising from those
tortures that are infl^cted on the Body from Warlike cruelty: for those
cruelties do usually possess people with horrid frights and fears in their
minds, which are also compared to the fears of Women, in the pains of
Childbirth. 2. The said Hebrew word, is used for the pain of the mind with
fear at ignominious tortures, as in Eze. 30. 4. compared with Esaias 13. 8. And
in this sense it was that the sensitive Soul of Christ, (which was of a more
quick and tender sense then any other man's can be) was more tenderly touched
with the fear of his most ignominious Tortures (from his Combater Satan) then
any other Son of Adam can be, Match. 26 38, 39. compared with Psalm 69. 26. and
Psalm 109. 22. And it was Gods declared Will, in Genesis 3. 15. that he should be
so tenderly touched, Heb. 4. 15. Heb. 5. 7, 8.

8. This Hebrew word Chalal, is also rendered reproached, and profaned, in Esaias
43. 28. there God says, I have profaned the Princes of the Sanctuary, and
have given Jacob to the Curse, and Israel to Reproaches, Our Aanot. says, I
have profaned the holy Princes, by exposing them to the curse of shame and
reproach, as in Esaias 47. 6. Psalm 44. 13, 14. Jer. 23. 40. Jer. 24. 9.

8. The said Hebrew word is also rendered d^filed, or polluted by the Seventy,
in above forty places, because at the birth of the Child, both the Mother and
the Child were ceremonially defiled or polluted for certain days, as in Lev.
12. Lev. 15. and Eze. 7. 22, 24. And 2. Because such also as touched a man that
was slain by warlike Wounds were thereby made unclean, or polluted for certain
days, Numb. 19. 16, 18. Numb. 31. 19. and because ceremonial pollutions are
opposite to ceremonial holiness; thence it come to pass, that the said word
is also used for profaning, in Exodus 31. 14. Eze. 22 26. Eze. 49. 33.

10. Because the said Hebrew word in its proper sense, does signify, the
bringing forth of a child to its birth with vigorous pains: thence it comes to
pass that it is used in a metaphorical sense for the vigorous bringing forth
of any thing, as in Genesis 9. 20. Genesis 10 8. Genesis 11. 6, etc.

11. Seeing this Hebrew word has so many metaphorical or equivocal senses: Mr.
Norton does east an Odium upon some metaphorical senses in my Dialogue, by
calling them Equivocal senses
it should advise all judicious Interpreters to take the greater heed to the
Circumstances of each Text where it is used, and to render it in that sense
that is most suitable to the true scope of the Text with the Context.

12. Take notice, that Dr. Gouge does make a wide difference between such
Equivocations as do accord to the true sense of the place, and Sophistical
Equivocations, in Heb. 11. sect. 89. 2. I find also, that the Seventy do use
Equivocations abundantly to express the force of the sundry Hebrew words,
sometimes, in ten or twenty metaphorical senses (sometimes more, sometimes
less) and those metaphorical expressions are so many Equivocations of the
Hebrew word, as any one may see that will but peruse Kircherus Hebrew and Greek
Lexicon, especially in such words as relate to the Levitical Rites: and it is
in that Respect (as I conceive) that the Hebrew Doctors say, The Law has
seventy Faces, because it looks many ways in its metaphorical senses. And P.
Martyr, says in his Additions to his Com. pl. page 33. That there never were
any Rethoritians of this World, that have had so many O^naments, Figures,
Tropes, Colors, and manners of speaking as the holy Ghost has used in one and
the self-same thing, infinite ways to be handled: And there is not (says he)
upon earth so great variety of Herbs, Flowers, Plants and Fruits, as there is
abundance of divine senses in the holy Scriptures: and therein (says he) the
holy Ghost has Reserved many things (as yet) secret to himself, that he may
have us to be Scholars to the end of the World.

13. From this Hebrew word Chalal, the Hebrews derive that, which (says Dr.
Bilson) with them does signify a Curse: and (says he) it notes to make vile
and contemptible, as if shame, reproach and contempt were the greatest outward
curse that could befall any man in this life, Esaias 43. 28. which is so
expounded before at N. 8.

14. The said Hebrew word therefore, in Esaias 53. 5. must be interpreted of such
a wounding of our Savior, as did proceed from his old proclaimed Combater
Satan, who had a liberty of power given him to pierce him in the footsoals as
the worst of Malefactors on the Cross, according to Gods Declaration in Genesis
3. 15. that so the Devil and his potent seed might do what they could to spoil
his obedience in his Death, that it might not be accepted of God as a perfect
Sacrifice, for the procuring of his Reconciled Forgiveness to the Elect
Number: for the Devil knew by Gods Declaration of the Combat, in Genesis 3. 15.
that in case he could not by all his stratagems hinder the seed of the Woman
from making his Death a perfect Sacrifice, that then it should procure his
Reconciliation for the Redemption of all the Elect from the power of his grand
Head-plot: therefore the Devil did what he could to provoke his passions to
some sinful distemper or other by his ignominious usage, and by his long
lingering torments on the Cross: But the Devil had no power given him to tempt
the seed of the Woman inwardly in his mortal Soul, as I have noted it in Chap.
4. at Object. 2.

But Mr. No^ton, does make God the Father to wound both the Body and Soul of
Christ with his vindicative wrath of Hell Torments, as if he were the Warlike
Combater against Christ: But on the contrary, I make God the Father to be the
party, that was now Reconciled by the meritorious obedience of Christ in his
Combat of sufferings.

2. He was bruised for our iniquities.

The Hebrew word Daca, translated bruised, is most fitly joined to the word
wounded, and besides its proper sense it has many metaphorical senses.

1. Job says thus, in Chap. 6. 9. That it would please God to destroy me, or,
to beat me to pieces by mortal strokes, i.e. by such strokes as do usually
cause death to follow: as it is observed by our Annot. and in this sense the
word is also used, in Psalm 94. 5. and it does also signify, crushed as a
moth, Job 4. 19. and so crushed to death, 2 Kings 7. 20. Job 34. 25.

2. The said word is also used for the crushing of men with Tyrannical words,
Job 19. 2.

3. For the crushing of men with Tyrannical carriage, Job 22. 9.

4. It is also used for a heart that is made cont^ite or broken, either with
the sight and sense of sin-guiltinesse, or of punishments, Esaias 57. 1^. Psalm
51. 17. Psalm 34. 18. Jer. 44. 10.

5. See more of the large sense of this in our Annot. and in my former printed
Reply, page 178, etc.

6. Though the Hebrew word Daca, translated bruised, in Esaias 53. 5. be
different from the Hebrew word that is translated bruise, in Genesis 3. 15. yet
they are of the same signification and meaning in both places: God told the
Devil, in Genesis 3. 15. That he should have a liberty of power to bruise, or to
pierce the seed of the Woman in the footsoals on the cross; and Isaiah says,
in this 5th Ver. and also in Ver. 10. That it pleased the Lord to bruise him
(yet not by his owm immediate wrath) but by his proclaimed Combater Satan, and
by his potent seed for the trial of his obedience, which being (upon trial)
found to be perfect through all his painful and ignominious sufferings on the
Cross, God was so well pleased therewith, that he exalted him above every
Name, Phil. 2, etc.

7. Take notice that these two words, wounded and bruised, are of the same
force, and that they do also relate to two other words, smitten and stricken,
in the latter part of the 4th. Verse: but the former part of that 4th. Verse,
does Esaias 53. 4.
not speak any thing at all of the sufferings of Christ (as Mr. Norton does
make it to do) but that former part of the Verse, does speak only of his divine
bearing away of sundry infirmities and sickness from diseased persons, as I
have expounded it both in my Dialogue, and also in my former printed Reply, in
p. 162, etc. but as I said before, the latter part of this 4th. Verse does
speak of the sufferings of Christ, as if the Prophet had said thus to the
Jews: Though you saw the Glory of Christ's Godhead shining clearly in his
miraculous Cures, as it is expressed in the former part of this 4th. Verse
(compared with Mat 8. 17.) yet says he (in the latter part of this Verse) You
Jews are so blinded with prejudice, that you do esteem him to be no better
than a wicked Imposture; and therefore you account his miraculous cures to be
done by the power of Belzchu^, and not by the power of his Godhead, and
therefore they judged him to be justly smitten and stricken by Gods wrath, as a
notorious Malefactor for his own deserved faults.

8. But in this 5th. Verse, the Prophet does inform them of the true Reason why
he was smitten and sticken, and why he was wounded and bruised: And that was
(says he) not from Gods wrath for his own deserved faults: but he was wounded
for our transgressions, and bruised for our sins, because God had given to the
Devil and to his potent seed a liberty of power, in Genesis 3. 15. to smite him,
and to strike him, to wound him and to bruise him as the worst of Malefactors
on the Cross, for the trial of his obedience: and because he was constant in
his obedience, God was so well-pleased therewith that he did highly exalt him
for it, and accepted it as the only meritorious and procuring cause of his
Reconciled Forgiveness to believing sinners: In this sense only it was that he
was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities.

3. The chastisement of our peace was upon him.

1. Consider, that God does chastise his people for a double End: 1. For
correction All Christ's sufferings were but chastisements for the trial of his
obedience, before he could make his death to be accepted as a perfect sacrifice
for our peace and healing, and Gods reconciled forgiveness.
of sin; And 2. For the trial of their Graces.

2. God does chastife the wicked as well as the godly for the correction of sin,
as in Jer. 30. 14. He is said to chastise the whole Nation with the
chastisement of a cruel One: and this chastisement was for the punishment, and
also for the amendment of the wicked as well as of the godly, in Ver, 17. 18,
19,

3. God said thus to the whole Nation of the Jews, both good and bad, in Lev.
26. 28. I will walk contrary to you in fury, and I, even I will chastise you
seven times for your sins: to the end that thereby I may provoke you to sound
Repentance and amendment, as it is evident by Verse 41. and by Esaias 26. 16.
Hos. 5. 15. Psalm 78. 34.

4. God does also chastise the very Heathens for their amendment as he did
Abimclech, in Genesis 20. 6. as Mr. Ainsworth shows: and when he did threaten
the destruction of the Ninevites: It was but to provoke them to Repentance; and
therefore as soon as they did repent (though it was but temporary) the Lord is
said to repent of his threatened punishments, and consequently, to be Reconciled
to them for that time.

But says Mr. Norton in page 37. All evils that are inflicted on Reprobates,
Mr. Baxter does show, that chastisements are punishments, and that they belong
to the godly as well as to the wicked, in his Confess. p. 119. 121, 123, 164,
165, 178, 193, 275, 461. and Mr. woodbridge in his Method, 164. ult. and Mr.
Cledon, on Justifica.
whether corporal or spiritual, are strokes or acts of Gods vindicative Justice.

Repl. 1. Though they may be strokes of his vindicative Justice in his secret
will, in Relation to their eternal estate, yet it is not so in his revealed
Will: but in his revealed Will he does chastise them, to bring them to the
sight of their sins: and so consequently, to such a degree of Repentance as may
deliver them from Hell, or at least from greater temporal plagues: as in Jer.
18. 8. and in Jonah 3. 10. But no Scripture I believe can be found, that does
call the Essential torments of Hell, Chastisements, because they are not
inflicted to bring any that suffer them to Repentance and amendment, as Gods
chastisements upon the wicked are: and thence it follows, that the
chastisements which Christ suffered for our peace, in Esaias 53. 5. cannot be
called (in a Scripture sense) the Essential Torments of Hell, as Mr. Norton
does often call them, seeing the chastisements which Christ suffered, were not
inflicted to bring him to Repentance and Amendment.

2. Therefore the chastisements which Christ suffered for our peace, were
chastisements of Trial only: and God does often chastise his own people for the
trial of their Graces, as I have showed it in the case of Job, and in the case
of Christ, in my former printed Reply, Chap. 12. Reply, 4. 5. 2. Mr. Burges
says on Justification, page 28. Though Job was not without sin, yet God
seems not to punish him for sin, his calamities were rather for the exercise
of his Grace then for the correction of his sins: his calamities were to him,
what a storm or tempest is to a skillful Pilot, or what a valiant Adversary is
to a stout Champion; Namely, for the trial of his Graces: and for this see
more, in P. Martyrs Com. pl. page 364.

3. Therefore God gave unto Satan a liberty of power to wound and bruife the
Body of Christ, that it might be for the through Trial of his Obedience, and
that his obedience being found to be perfect by his sharp chastisements, it
might be the only meritorious cause of Gods Atonement for our Peace, and for
our Healing; And this I have more at large handled in my former printed Reply,
page 169. 178, 266, 311, 375.

But says Mr. No^ton, in p^g. 37. Satan and men were Instruments in the
inflicting of such a stroke: therefore to say, it is no straak of divine
Justice, is no good consequent. 2. Says he, The sufferings of Christ included
in this Text, are not only such wherein Satan and men were instruments: B^t
(says he) some of them were inflicted immediately of God.

Satan and men were employed as Gods Instruments in the inflicting of such a
stroke (as was done in the case of Job and Christ) it is from Gods vindicative
Justice, is no good consequent, which is the thing he ought to prove: and thus
his Assertion is retorted on himself.

3. Though it is said in Psalm 69. 28. That Christ was wounded and smitten of
God, yet it must not be understood that he was wounded and smitten from Gods
immediate and vindicative wrath: seeing God did no otherwise wound him, but as
he gave the Devil a liberty of power to pierce him in the foot-soals, as a
sinful Malefactor, on the Cress for the trial of his obedience only, as I have
expounded Genesis 3. 15. and Zach. 13 7. compared with Matthew. 26. 31.

4. The true nature of the greatest s^fferings of Christ are comprehended by
Isaiah, under this word Chastisement, (and no chastisement for the present
seems to be joyous but grievous) and Paul affirms the same that Isaith
does: Namely, that the greatest of Christ's sufferings were but chastisements:
saying, in Heb 5. 8. Though he were the Son of Go^, yet he learned obedience by
the things he suffered: in this Text, Christ's learning of obedience, is put for
the subjection of a Son to his Fathers chastisement: and thence he is said, in
Ver. 9. to be consecrated, or made perfect in his obedience.

5. It is observable that the Seventy, by the figure M^^ynomia, do put the word
obedient for the word chast-sement, in Pro. 13. 1.

6. They do also put Paideia, for learning obedience by chastisements, in Esaias
50. 4, 5.

7. The blood of the Ram of consecration, was not put upon the tip of the right
Ear, right Thumb, and right Toe of the Priest to consecrate them: This typified
the perfect obedience of our high Priest Christ Jesus, under all his bloody and
consecrating sufferings, Exo. 29. 19, 20.

8. God laugheth at the trial of the innocent, Job 9. 23. he rejoices to make
their Graces perfect by trials and by sufferings: And David also says in Ps.
11. 5. Jehovah will prove the just one, and the wicked one also, by sundry
so^ts of sufferings and afflictions; and in this sense God did not only prove
the Graces of Christ by his said Combat of sufferings, of which I have spoken
in Chap. 12. and also in my former printed Reply, page 93, etc. and in page
171. I have showed also, that the godly may suffer wounds in their bodies, as a
deserved punishment for their personal sins, both from Gods wrath, and also
from the vindicative wrath of the Magistrate: And that Christ also did suffer
such like wounds in his Body from the vindicative wrath of the Magistrate, but
not from Gods vindicative Wrath, as the godly sometimes do: but that all his
wounds and bruises were by Gods appointment inflicted on him by his Combater
Satan, and his potent seed for the trial of his obedience only, which he
manifested to be most perfect by his perfect patience under his greatest
sufferings, to the death of the Cross; and in that perfect obedience, he laid
his life down as a most perfect and ple^sing sacrifice for the procuring of his
Fathers Reconciliation, whereby the Redemption and Justification of believing
sinners is formally effected: and thereby also received into the Adoption of
the Heavenly Inheritance.

9. Mr. Wilson, in his Christian Dictionary, speaking of the several sorts of
Chastisements, says thus: The word chastise does signify, to beat, or st^^ke
on the face, to the making of a bloody wound: as Wrestlers used to do to master
their Mates: And the word chastisement, in Esaias 53. 5. does most fitly agree to
this sense; for Christ's Combater Satan had a liberty of power given him, in
Genesis 3. 15. to pierce him in the footsoals, in the most ignominious manner he
could invent: In the which bloody Combat, Christ got the victory by his
righteous performance of the Combat, and by that righteous performance he
merited the price: Namely, Gods Reconciled Peace to all the Elect, for their
full Redemption and justification from sin, and in this meritorious sense only,
It is said here, that the ch^st^sement of our peace or Reconciliation was upon
him, and having made peace through the blood of his Cross, God has by him
reconciled all things to himself, Col. 1. 20. And in this sense Joseph said to
his Brethren, peace be to you, fear not, Genesis 43. 23. Here peace is opposed to
fear: and so it is, in Job 21. 9. The Seventy for peace, use Hil^o^, i.e.
Mercy, or Propitiation, or Atonement be to you: and so Peace and Reconciliation
is but the same thing, in Ephesians. 2 14, 15, 16, 17. and Col. 1. 20. and therefore
the Seventy do render the word peace, by propitiation, in Eze. 7. 25.

10. P. Martyr says, that such a kind of fear might be found in Christ, who
indeed otherwise could neither fear sin, nor Hellfire, nor yet the Fatherly
Chastisements of God, in his Com. pl. part. 3. page 67. This Golden Assertion
of his is worthy of all acceptance, and it is worthy of weighty consideration:
But if any man (says he) will say that he feared death, (as he did very
greatly in Matthew. 26. 36. That (says he) must be understood of natural fear:
and in his Additions, page 66. 67. he does speak very largely of Christ's
natural fear, and grants, that Christ feared the chastisements which he
suffered with natural fear, at his ignominious and torturing kind of death on
the Cross; but the true sense of his words does imply, that he could not fear
chastisements from Gods Wrath through his imputation of sin to him; and says
he, in Romans, page 159. There is none chastised or afflicted which are without
sin: For this thing only suffered our Savior, who without any fault committed
o^ him suffered most bitter pains: These Assertions of P Marty^s being put
together, do soundly confute Mr. Nortons Assertion, That Christ was a sinner by
Gods mputation, and that he bare the Essential Torments of Hell that are due
thereto. But in case his Assertions had been true, and that he had been
sensible of an accusing Conscience through Gods imputing of sin to him, as Mr.
Norton affirms, thence it follows, that he could not otherwise choose but that
his Rational Soul should not only duly have feared sin, and the Fatherly
chast^sements of God for sin: But which is more, he should also have feared
Gods vindicative punishments of Hellfire; but P. Martyr denies that kind of
fear to be in the Soul of Christ, and so do sundry of the Anc^ent Divines deny
it.

1. Cyril, speaking of these words of Christ, in M^tth. 26. 38. My soul is
sorrowful unto death: faith unto such as objected, that Christ feared Hell, sed
inf^r^^^m t^mu^t inquiunt: mirum est quod haec audeant dicere: But he feared
Hell (say they) It is a mavelous thing that any dare say so: (yet Mr. Norton
dares to say so.)

2. Hil^^y, having cited Christ's prayer in the Garden, and his complaint on the
Cross, cited by some others, as if Christ feared Hell: says, Will thou
believe that Christ feared Hell-gulf, and those burning flames and depth of
paenal Vengeance: when as he told the Thief on the Cross; This day shall thou
be with me in Parad se?

3. Fulgentius says, d^gnum suit ut anim un dolor non contigisset inferni quam
servi^us requirit tenere peccati: It was a meet and right thing that the pains
of Hell should not touch that Soul, whom the servitude of sin could not fasten
on.

These Ancient Divines did labor to confute such as only imagined, that the
fear of Christ in the Garden, might proceed from his fear of Hell Torments: But
now Mr. Norton is sprung up to affirm the same thing in substance, in
down-^ight terms over and over: But in case his Assertions had been as
confidently held in their days, as he told them, I believe they would have
condemned them for downright Heresy, as much as they did the Arian Tenants.

11. The last Sentence, in Esaias 53. 5. With his stripes we are healed: The
Original word signifies a stripe, or a wayl of a blow on the flesh: (or a
bruise on the flesh;) Now Christ was twice beaten with Rods, 1. By the chief
Priests, in Matthew. 26. 67. And 2. By Pilate, Matthew. 27. 26. These ignominious
stripes were done in Satan's intent, to provoke his passions to some sinful
distemper or other, to the end it might spoil the perfection of his obedience,
and consequently, that his Death might not be performed nor accepted as a
meritorious Sacrifice; But in Gods intent it was done for the perfecting of his
obedience, and for the perfecting of his Priestly Consecration, before he could
make his Death to be accepted as a meritorious and well-pleasing Sacrifice, for
the procuring of his Fathers Peace or Reconciliation, and for the healing, i.e.
for the justification of Believing sinners from the guilt of all their sins:
And from thence it follows, that Gods Reconciled Forgiveness so procured, does
perfectly heal the Souls of all believing sinners, and makes them as perfectly
sound and whole in Gods sight, as the Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation does
require them to be, to the attaining of the Heavenly Inheritance.

12. The Apostle Peter, does also teach us to expound this Text of Esaias 53. 5.
of Christ bodily sufferings only from his unjust Judges (and not of his
immortal Souls sufferings from the immediate Wrath of God, as Mr. Norton does
expound Peter) Peter says, That Christ bare our sins in his body on the Tree,
1 Pet. 2. 24. just as sintull Malefactors do, when their bodies are crucified
for their scandalous crimes; For in this Text the word Sins, is put for
ignominious punishments: for both in the Hebrew and Greek Text, punishments are
often called sins, because they are the Rewards of sin, as in Genesis 19 15. 2
Kings 7. 9. Psalm 31. 10. and in many other places. And the Apostle Peter did
therefore exhort believing Servants, to suffer unjust punishments from their
Heathen Masters with all patience as Christ did, who did no sin, ^n^th^r was
there any guile found in his mou^h, who when he suffered threatened not, but
committed his cause to him that judges righteously. But in case his sufferings
had been inflicted on him from Gods vind^cative Justice, and from his imputing
of sin to him: then his appeal to God to do him justice for his unjust
punishments had not been suitable to his appeal, when he committed his case to
God to do him justice.

13. Of the last word Healed, I have spoken at large, in Chap. 21. to the which
I refer the Reader for satisfaction: and for the bodily death of Christ, See
Chap. 13. at Reply 6.

CHAP. XXV.
Showing 1. Negatively, that the Righteousness of the Law, in Romans 8. 2, 8, 4.
ought not to be understood of the righteousness of the moral Law of Nature,
imputed to sinners for their justification, as Mr. Norton does corrupt the word
Law to speak. 2. Affirmatively, that the righteousness of the Law must be
understood only of the negativ^ righteousness, that is taught in the Covenant
of Reconciliation for the justification of Sinners, by Gods not imputing sin to
them.

SECT. 1.
THere is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. 1.
Mr. Woodbridge says in his Method, Romans 8. 1.
page 157. That the Apostle does here describe Just^fication, by
non-condemnation.

2. (Says he) the Apostle opposes Justification to Condemnation, as
consistent with it, on the same person at the same time, Ver. 33, 34.

3. Mr. John Goodwin says, in Vindiciae Fidei, part. 2. page 5. That there is
no middle, or third Estate between these two: Justification, and Condema^tion,
Romans 5. 18. Deuteronomy. 25. 1. Romans 8. 33, 34. But this (says he) appears most
especially, from Romans 8. 1, 2. compared with Verse 3, 4. where you will find
J^stification described by non-Condemnation, V. 1. and in V. 2. by freedom from
the Law of sin and ^eath: (and Justification is in like sort opposed to
Condemnation, in Romans 5. 16, 18. Bullenger in his Decades says, in Sermon. 6.
The Apostle says, in Romans 5. 16. Judgment entered by one offense unto
condemnation, but the guist is of many sins to justification, Hence observe 1.
That he makes Justification the contrary to Condemnation. 2. Says he, the
Apostle does plainly call justification, a gift, that is, the forgiveness of
sins: and then he says, in Ver. 18. Even as by the sin of one, condemnation
came on all men: so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men to justification of life. Here again (says he) is the justification of
Life made the contrary to condemnation: therefore justification of Life (says
he) is an absolution from sins, and a delivery from Death.

4. This is also most evident from the Context, Namely, from Rom, 7. 24, 25.
For there the Apostle speaks of Justification, as it is opposed to
Condemnation: Romans 7. 23, 24, 25.
For first, the Apostle says thus, in Ver. 23. I see another law in my members
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the. law
of sin which is in my members: This sight of his corrupt nature made him to cry
out, in Ver. 24. O spoiled man that I am, who shall deliver me (or who shall
redeem me, or who shall justify me) from this body of death (in original sin?)
Then in Ver. 25. he gives himself this satisfactory answer, I thank God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. P. Martyr says in his Preface to Romans: That in the
seventh Chapter, is showed, the manner how we are exempted from the Law; and
that says he, is, that inasmuch as there is not in us a full and perfect
Regeneration whilst we live here, because corrupt affections do continually
resist the Law of God: It is brought to pass by the Grace of Christ that we
are delivered from sin, (i.e. justified from the guilt of sin, as his whole
arguing does speak) although it does still inhabit in our members. And Dr.
Gouge, on the Heb. says, in p. 228. That for which the Apostle does give
thanks to God, is, that Christ has delivered him from the said bondage: And
this (says he) is further confirmed, that the words, in Romans 8. 1. There is
now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; And (says he) That
Redemption that is frequently attributed unto Christ, intends this
deliverance to them.

Ver. 1. Who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. These words are a
further description of the foresaid justified persons: 1. Negatively, they walk
not after the flesh. 2. Affirmatively, But after the Spirit,

1. By their not walking after the flesh, he means, such as do refuse to walk
after the corrupt affections of the flesh, and also after the Religion of the
flesh, which is only outward, and to be seen with the Eye, when it is no more
but an outward conformity to the Duties of Religion, without any true Faith in
Christ at all: or thus, flesh does often signify an outward conformity to the
ceremonies of Moses Law, as in Gal. 3. 3. and Gal. 6. 12.

2. Flesh signifies unbelief, and all the motions of the Soul that be evil: and
all our words and works that are done without Faith in Christ, how good or
holy, or spiritual soever they seem to be in show: It is that part of man that
is unregenerate, and that serves the Law of sin, Romans 7. 25.

3. Therefore by flesh understand, 1. The Religion which is outward in the
flesh without any true Faith in Christ. And 2. The fulfilling of the corrupt
lusts of the flesh, for both these are alike called flesh: and I conceive that
the Apostle does Relate to both these senses, in Romans 8. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8. And from thence it follows, that the word flesh in these Verses, must be
understood according to their co-herence, in Chap. 7. 4, 6, and 25. Sometimes
jointly in both the said senses: and sometimes severally, as the Context in
each place does best direct.

5. Therefore there is no condemnation (but justification from the condemning
power of sin) to them that are in Christ Jesus: Namely, in him by the union of
a true and lively Faith: Or thus, There is no condemnation to them that walk
not after the Religion of the flesh, but after the Spirit of Moses Law; But
none else can walk after the Spirit of that Law but such as are in Christ Jesus
by the union of Faith, and none else can be in Christ Jesus by Faith, until
they are regenerated by the holy Spirit of Grace, and are begotten again to a
lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3.

6. Therefore it does from these considerations follow, that the word flesh in
all these eight Verses, does betoken not only the pravity of our nature, but
especially, that whatsoever worship we do unto God without true faith in
Christ, is but flesh: for the word flesh is here opposed, to walking after the
Spirit of Moses Law, which is Christ, and faith in Christ. And 2. This word
flesh, is called the wisdom of the flesh, in Ver. 8. which imports the best
thing of the flesh, even the best Religion of the flesh.

Ver. 1. But after the Spirit. Namely, After the Spirit of the Letter of all
Moses Law: Now Christ, and faith in Christ is that Spirit, both of the
Decalogue, and of the Types: For the whole Law of Moses did set forth Christ to
be believed in: and the whole National Church of the Jew^s, did covenant with
God that they would keep that Law by Faith in Christ (as I have formerly showed
it) But because their mind was blinded with ignorance and unbelief, they could
not see Christ to be the true end and scope of the whole Law: therefore their
very mind in doing the Law with no more but with the best outward service that
the flesh could perform, was no better then flesh; and yet such was the
blindness of their minds, that they thought they did the Law as effectually
for their justification, as the Covenant at Mount Sinai did require of them:
But the Apostle told them, That because they trusted to their bodily doing of
the Law for their justification, they did Abolish Christ (from the Law) Gal. 2.
21. Gal. 5. 2, 5. and they were puffed up with this their fleshly mind, Col. 2.
18, 19. compared with Romans 8. 6, 7. In which seventh Verse, you may see that
the very understanding part of the Soul when it does worship God without Faith
in Christ is called, but flesh. Of which see more also, in Ver. 8.

SECT. 2.
To the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the
law of sin and Death.

THE word For, in this Verse does note the Reason, why the Apostle does The
spirit of the Law which is nothing else but Christ, and faith in Christ, does
fully free a sinner from the law of sin and Death.
call the foresaid Spirit of the Law, the law of the spirit of life in Christ
Jesus; it is because as I said before, Christ, and faith in Christ Jesus, is
the Spirit of the Law of life: and therefore none else shall have any life by
the Law, but such only as are in Christ Jesus by Faith, for Christ is the only
end of the Law for justification from sin to every one that believes, and to
none else, Romans 10. 4.

Ver. 2. Has made me free from the Law of sin and death. In these words the
Apostle does tell us, what this Law of the Spirit of Life does effect for the
present, and also for the future; It does free or justify all such as are in
Christ Jesus by Faith, from the law of sin and death.

1. The Apostle does make Christ to be the Spirit of the Law: namely, to be the
Spirit of the Letter of the Decalogue, and also to be the Spirit of the Types:
And also in 2 Co^. 3. 6. he does call Christ the spirit of the Letter; and in
Verse 17. He says, that the Lord (Christ) is that Spirit; and then, says he,
where the spirit of the Lord (Christ) is, there is libe^ty: Namely, from that
double Vail that is expressed, in Ver. 14. and 15. First from the Vail of Types,
which was also signified by the Vail that was put upon Moses shining Face:
Christ was the shining l^ght of Moses Law to such as had Faith: But yet the
carnal Jews could not discern him, because he was veiled under Types.
Secondly, the Jews in general were also under another Vail: namely, of
blindness of mind through their unbelief, which could not be taken from them
until they were regenerated and had attained to Faith in Christ, as it is
expressed in Ver. 16. But as soon as they had attained to Faith in Christ. Then
in V^r. 17. They should see the Lord Christ to be the Spirit of the Law:
namely, to be the Spirit of the Letter of the Decalogue, and of the Types which
should set them at liberty from the two foresaid Vailes: and make them see that
Christ was the only end of the Law for justification to every one that
believes.

2. Dr. Howard does rightly observe, that Ishmael is said to be born according
to the flesh, and Isaac according to the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. This word Spirit
(says he) in Ver. 29. and the word Promise, in Ver. 28. do signify the same
thing in this place: and from thence it follows, that Christ is the Spirit of
the Promise that was made to Abraham, in Genesis 12. 3.

3. I have also showed in Chap. 6. and sect. 6. how Christ is the Spirit of
Life in Moses Law, for justification to every one that believes: And this
Truth the Apostle does also express, in 2. Cor. 3. 13. The children of Israel
could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished, i.e. The
greatest part of the children of Israel, could not steadfastly look to Christ
the true end of that part of the Law of Types that is now abolished by his
Death and everlasting Sacrifice: because they were but flesh, and wanted the
spiritual Eyes of Faith to look unto Christ the true end of the Law. The Jews
drank water out of the Rock to quench their bodily thirst, but the Spirit of
that Rock was Christ, and Faith in Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. The Apostle says,
They drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ;
and they did all eat the same spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10. 3. For Christ was the
Spirit of the Manna that was hid (between two dews) Rev. 2. 17. He was the true
Bread which his Father gave from Heaven, John 6. 31, 32, 48, 49, 51. And Christ
called himself the Rock, in Mat. 16. 18. And the Seventy do for the term Rock,
in Deuteronomy. 32. 4, 15, 19, 30, 31, 36. put Theos, God for it. And David calls
Christ, Jehovab my Rock and Redeemer, Psalm 19. 14. Christ was the Spirit of
that Rock that yielded a whole River of water to follow them, and to refresh
them in their Travels in the Wilderness, Numb. 20. 11. Psalm 105. 41. Esaias 43.
20. Esaias 48. 21.

4. Christ is called the law of the spirit of Life by a Paraphrase, in John 6.
51. I am the living bread which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever, and the bread that I will give him is my flesh,
which I will give (to be combated with all, according to Gods declared Law of
the Combat, in Genesis 3. 15.) for the life of the world; Then said the carnal
Jews that observed the letter of the Law, but wanted the spiritual Eyes of
Faith to see Christ to be the true end of this Typical Bread, how can this man
give us his flesh to eat? Then Jesus said unto them, in Ver. 53. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you, (i.e. Except you have the spiritual actings) of
Faith, to feed upon the flesh of Christ in his meritorious Death and Sacrifice,
ye have no regenerating Life in you: And in Ver. 63. Christ said thus to these
carnal Jews: It is the Spirit of Regeneration, that quickneth the flesh, i.e.
the Religion of the flesh profits nothing: The wo^ds that I speak unto you
they are Spirit and they are Life, i.e. The words that I speak unto you, they
are the spirit of the letter of all Moses Law: I am the Spirit of that corporal
Manna, which your Fathers did eat with their bodily Teeth: and I am the Life
that was promised to all Believers in Moses Law, (i.e. I am the meritorious
Author of that Life, because I have by my meritorious Obedience in my Death and
Sacrifice purchased the Spirit for this Regeneration to the Life of Grace from
the death of sin; and I also by my said meritorious death and Sacrifice have
purchased my Fathers Reconciled Forgiveness to all believing sinners: In this
sense only it is that Christ said unto them, the words that I speak unto you,
they are spirit and they are life, to all such as have attained to the
spiritual teeth of Faith. 2. Hence it follows, that Christ did not speak unto
them of eating his flesh with their bodily teeth in a natural way, as their
carnal minds did understand him, for that kind of eating his flesh would not
have profited their Souls at all: But as Austin says, These words of Christ
must be understood spiritually; and then (says he) they are spirit and life.

5. It is further evident, that the Law of the Spirit of Life is nothing else
but Christ, the only true end of the Law for justification to them that
believe, by the words which Christ said to his Disciples, in John 6. 3. to 36.
If ye continue in my words, then shall ye be my Di^ciples indeed, and ye shall
know the Truth. (i.e. You shall know Christ to be the only truth, both of the
letter and of the D^calogue, and of the Types of Moses Law, and to be the only
truth of the Promise, in Genesis 3. 15. Genesis 12. 3, etc. 2. Then ye shall know him
to be the true Serpent that was typically lifted up upon a Pole, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but should be healed of the sting of sin by
Gods atoned Forgiveness, and consequently have everlasting life. 3. As soon as
you do by Faith know Christ to be the Truth, both of the Letter and of the
Types: this Truth shall make you free; that is to say, this Christ shall by his
performing of the truth of the Types by his Death and Sacrifice so please God,
that it shall merit his Reconciliation, which shall make every believing sinner
to be free (or to be fully justified) from the condemning power of their sins.

But the carnal Jews made an Objection against this, in Ver. 33. saying, We be
Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man: how say thou, ye shall
be made free? Jesus does thus answer them, in Ver. 34. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin, and the servant
abides not in the House for ever, but the Son abides for ever, if the Son
therefore make you free (by procuring Gods atoned Forgiveness for your sins)
ye shall be free indeed; that is to say, you shall be fully justified from the
condemning power of your sins, Romans 6. 7, 14, 18, 22. Romans 7. 24, 25. with Romans
8. 1.

6. Christ is the Law of the Spirit of life in all the law of Moses: and so
Christ says, in John 14. 6. I am the Way, the Truth and the Life, no man
comes to the Father but by me (i.e. Moses taught no other way to the Father,
but by me: Namely, by my meritorious Obedience in my Death and Sacrifice, which
I am ready to perform according to his first declared Will and Law, in Genesis 3.
15. 2. There is no other Truth of the types of Moses Law, but by my performance
of the great Combat of my sufferings according to Gods declared Will, in Genesis
3. 15. 3. There is no other procuring cause of Life to be found in Moses Law,
but me and my said Obedient Death and Sacrifice; and thence it follows, that no
man comes to the Father by the bodily doing of all Moses Law, but by me, and
by Faith in me.

Object. 1.
Many Interpreters do expound this Law of the Spirit, to be no other Spirit but
the holy Spirit, that does regenerate sinners?

Answ. What though many good Interpreters do expound this Law of the Spirit, to
be the Spirit of Regeneration, or of inherent Sanctification; yet other good
Interpreters do expound it of Christ, as I have done. And indeed, it is not the
Office of the holy Spirit to make the fallen Sons of Adam to be free from the
Law of sin and Death by inherent Sanctity; For by Gods definitive Sentence, in
Genesis 2. 17. the Law of sin and death shall abide upon all the fallen Sons of
Adam, yea even upon the most regenerate persons as long as they live in this
World. And therefore Rolloc does expound this Freedom (or Deliverance) from the
law of sin and death, of a full and absolute deliverance from sin and death:
which, says he, is in Remission of sins, and not in Regeneration, which is but
in part. And Luther says, in Gal. 2. 16. Fol. 68. does cite Romans 8. 2. And
then he says, that no Law may be suffered to Reign in the Conscience, but only
the Law of the Spirit and Life, whereby we are in Christ made free from the Law
of the Letter and of Death, from the works thereof, and from all sins, not
because the Law is evil, but for that it is not able to justify us, for it
has a plain contrary effect and working: It is a High and Excellent matter to
be at peace with God; and therefore in this case we have need of a far other
Mediator then Moses or the Law: here we must do nothing at all but only receive
the Treasure, which is Christ, and apprehend him in our hearts by Faith, though
we feel our selves to be never so full of sin. In these words, Luther does make
Christ to be the Spirit of the Law, in opposition to the Letter.

Object. 2.
Justification by remission of sins, does not make a full and absolute
deliverance (no more then sanctification does) from the law of sin and death,
for several learned men do affirm, that our justification shall be more perfect
at the day of judgment then it is in this life, and that our bodies are not so
justified now as they shall be then?

Answ. 2: I have often showed that as long as we live in this World, we cannot
be perfectly freed from our sinning Nature, or from our spiritual death in sin,
which Sentence was inflicted on Adam and all his natural Posterity by the
definitive Sentence of God, in Genesis 2. 17. Nor yet can they be freed from the
putrefaction of their bodies in the Grave until the Resurrection. And yet for
all this, these very sinners, as soon as they do believe that Christ's
obedience, death and Sacrifice in the meritorious cause of Gods Reconciled
Forgiveness, they are thereby perfectly freed from the guilt, and from the
condemning power, both of their original and actual sins: and in this sense it
is that Rolloc and other sound Divines do mean, when they affirm, that our
justification is a full and absolute deliverance from the law of sin and Death:
Namely, that it is such a deliverance only as does free them from the guilt of
sin, as it is the Obligation to eternal death and damnation, which our inherent
Sanctity cannot do in this life: and from thence it does also follow, that this
deliverance from the body of sin, which Paul does thank God for, in Romans 7. 25.
does stand only in non-condemnation to such as are in Christ by Faith, and that
walk not after the wisdom or Religion of the flesh, but after the Spirit of the
Law of Moses, that is to say, after Christ by Faith, Romans 8. 1.

SECT. 3.
Verse 3. For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh
God (has done by) sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and
for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh.

THis word [For] is here put for another Conjunction causal to Ver. 2. For it
does express another Reason drawn from the meritorious cause, why there is no
condemnation, but freedom from the condemning power of the Law of sin and death
to all such as are in Christ Jesus by Faith, who walk not after the outside
Religion of the flesh, but after the Spirit of Moses Law, which is done only by
Faith in Christ.

And this Reason is double: 1. Negative, And 2. Affirmative.

1. Negative, For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the
flesh: The Law did not hold forth any justification from moral sins to the
Observers of the bodily Rites, though it did justify such Observers from their
ceremonial The Law of works was ordained to justify the bodies of the National
Church from their ceremonial sins: but those works of the flesh were too weak a
means to just^fie the conscience from moral sins.
sins: but those Observers of the Law by the flesh were weak in respect of
justification from moral sins. In these words the Apostle does affirm, that the
whole Law though it were kept never so exactly by the flesh, or by the bodily
parts of man, it is in that respect weak and not able to justify such kind of
Law-workers from their moral sins, because God never made any such condition
that any man's performance of the Law by his flesh or body should justify his
Soul from the condemning power of his moral sins; no, though he could keep the
whole moral Law of Nature as perfectly as Adam did in his innocence; for no
such condition was made that it should have brought Adam to Heaven if he had
stood in it. But at Mount Sinai God made a Covenant of Works with his National
Church, with this condition, that in case they did observe the Law of Rites by
their bodily performance, it should justify their bodies from their ceremonial
sins; and so says the Apostle, in Heb. 9. 13. If the blood of Bulls and Goats,
and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean sanctisieth (or makes the
body holy from ceremonial sins) to the purifying of the flesh, i.e. to the
justifying of the body from the guilt of the said ceremonial sins: but these
legal works were too weak through this fleshly performance, to justify the
Soul from the guilt of their moral sins: for it is not possible (says the
Apostle, in Heb. 10. 4.) that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away
(moral) sins. And again, he says in Ver. 11. That such sacrifices can never
take away (moral) sins: And again, he says, in Heb. 9. 9. Gifts and Sacrifices
could not make him that did the service perfect: (i.e. free from the guilt of
his moral sins) as pertaining to the Conscience. And the Reason of the weakness
of this Law to justify from moral sins was, because God by his special
Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, had reserved the perfecting of the
Conscience from the dead works of moral sins, to the meritorious efficacy of
Christ's Blood, and to the condition of Faith in Christ's blood to be performed
on the sinners part, Heb. 9. 14. And then, in Verse 15. his Death is said to
redeem them from those (moral) transgressions that remained unpurged under the
bodily works of the first Testament; and this is also confirmed by the Apostle,
in Acts 13. 39. By Christ (says he) all that believe are justified from all
things, (i.e. from all those moral sins) from which ye could not be justified
by (the works of) Moses Law; and of this see more in Chap. 17. at N. 5.

2 The weakness of Moses Law to justify the Conscience from moral sins by the
fleshly performance thereof, is evident by this, because all those works are
called by no better name, then fleshly or carnal justifications, in Heb. 9. 10.
As it is also well observed by our Annot. and by diverse other Authors: and now
I will add Dr. Gouge unto them: By this Greek word, translated Ordinances, Some
(says he) do understand Justifications or Expiations, and that upon two
grounds: 1. Because the performers of the Legal Rites were legally cleansed
(i.e. justified) 2. Because they prefigured a true Expiation: This Observation
of his is worth the marking: 1. Because he expounds the legal justifications,
to concern the flesh or body only; by this phrase, were legally cleansed. 2.
Because this bodily justification was ordained to be a type of true
Justification from moral sins. And 3. Because he calls true Justification by
the name of Expiation, which Expiation is no otherwise effected formally, but
by Gods Reconciled Forgiveness, procured by the meritorious Efficacy of
Christ's Sacrifice, and apprehended by the Faith of believing Sinners.

3. Dr. Gouge, says also, in Heb. 10. 9. That Christ made himself the
perfection of all Sacrifices which the Law could not do, Romans 8. 3. His words I
have cited, in Chap. 15. at Reply 1.

4. Tindals Bible, does hint at the weakness of the Law in the foregoing
sense: For, in Rom 8. 3. he does in the Margin cite, Heb. 7. 19. (as a parallel
to it) which speaks thus: The Law made nothing perfect, but was an introduction
of a better Hope, by the which we draw nigh to God; and this Text being
conferred with its Context, in Ver. 16. There the Apostle does call the
ceremonial Laws of the Priesthood, a carnal Commandment: And then says he,
in Ver. 18. There is a disanulling of the Commandment for the weakness and
unprofitablenesse thereof, because the Law made nothing perfect: And then to
this 19th. Ver. Tindal does in the Margin cite, Romans 8. 3. What the Law could
not do in that it was weak through the flesh; and by the which double citation
in both places, he does set out the weakness of the Law, in Respect of
justification from moral sins.

5. Mr. Wilson in his Christian Dictionary, does give another hint of the said
Exposition of the weakness of the Law through the flesh to justify; For there
at N. 10. he does thus interpret the word flesh, in Romans 4. 1. What has
Abraham gotten according to the flesh? This word flesh, says he, is expounded
in Ver. 2. to be the works of Abraham, in observing the ceremonial Rites of the
Law, (such as were in use in his time) which works did not justify his Soul
from (moral) sins in Gods sight: and thus, says he, does Beza and Piscator,
interpret this place: And 2. Says he, the word flesh, in Gal. 6. 12, 13. and
in Gal. 3. 3. does signify the ceremonies of Moses Law.

6. Ambrose, and also Gloss. In^erl. does by the word flesh, in Romans 4. 1.
understand Circumcision, and the other Rites that were afterward ordained in
Moses Law: and indeed Circumcision is often named for the whole Law of Rites,
because it was the first work of the Law that was done upon every male from
Abraham's time, for the justification of the body from the ceremonial sin of
uncleanness, that did accompany the body in the birth.

7. Cameron, does expound the word Flesh to this sense in his
Threefold-Covenant: For in Thesis 74. he says thus: The Sacrifices and
Sacraments of the Old Testament, are deservedly called carnal: And then in
Thesis 75. he says, the Sacrifices, Sacraments, and Ceremonies of the Ancients
had their carnal use, over and besides their spiritual signification. So says
he, in Th^sis 76. We deny not, but even the Sacraments of the New Testament,
may have a carnal use by the institution and custom of man, but not any such
prescribed to them by any word of God (as the Rites of the Jews had.) And
says he, in Thesis 77. The second difference is placed in this, that the
Sacraments, Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Old Testament, did set forth
Christ, not primamarily (because they did belong primarily to the first typical
Covenant of Works, which were ordained primarily for the bodily justification
of the National Church from their ceremonial sins) But Secundarily, and that
but darkly. But the Sacraments of the New Testament show forth Christ
primarily, and that clearly. And says he, in Thesis 78. Their Sacrifices and
Cleansings, Represented primarily, a certain carnal Holiness (as I have
expressed it above in the Parenthesis) They figured out Christ and the benefits
of the New Testament.

8. The weakness of the Law (through the flesh) to justify the Conscience
from moral sins, is thus described, in Heb. 7. 18. There is verily a
disanulling of the Commandment going before for the weakness and
unprofitablenesse thereof: This Commandment concerning the levitical Priesthood
(says Dr. Gouge) is here said to go before, in reference to Christ's
Priesthood; For, says he, the levitical Priesthood was a type of Christ,
Therefore the Commandment concerning that, must needs, (even in time) go
before this, for this succeeded that, even to accomplish what that could not:
(he does reason just so as the Apostle does Reason in the words before cited,
from Romans 8. 3.). 3. Says he, The weakness hereof consisted even in this,
that the Law was utterly unable by it self, and by the strict observance of the
Rites thereof, to do that which was needful to be done: which was to make the
Observers thereof perfect (namely, to be perfectly justified from the
condemning guilt of moral sins.) 4. Says he, The unprofitablenesse thereof
implies, that though a man be zealous of the Law, and take much pains, and be
at great cost threabouts, yet he shall not get any thing thereby, but lose all
his pains and costs: And this the Apostle found true by experience, for after
he had set forth his zeal about the Law, (even about the whole Law of Moses)
and had declared how blameless he was touching the Righteousness which is of
the Law, he adds, what things were gain to me, those I counted loss and dung
for Christ, Phil. 3. 6, 7, 8.

8. The Apostle says, in Heb. 7. 19. The Law made nothing perfect. By nothing,
says Dr. Gouge, is meant, no man: The Law made no man perfect: and this,
(says he) will most clearly appear thus:

The Law which makes nothing perfect is weak and unprofitable: But the Law of
the levitical Priesthood makes nothing perfect; Therefore it is weak and
unprofitable.

And this (says he) is evident, because the End of a Law, is to make those to
whom it belongs perfect. Now the Law which cannot effect this (which is the
main end thereof) must needs be weak and unprofitable: But the mere bodily
performance of the Law, was not able to make perfect, i.e. to justify the
Conscience from the guilt of moral sins: and yet notwithstanding, the same Law
when it is done by Faith in Christ (the true end of the Law for justification)
then it will make such sinners to be perfectly justified from the condemning
guilt of all their moral sins. And says Dr. Gouge, in Heb. 10. 9. Christ made
himself the perfection of all Sacrifices, that so he might do that by his
Sacrifice which the Law could not do, Romans 8. 3.

And Mr. Holyoke, in his Doctrine of Life, says in page 8. The ceremonial Law
was weak to justify, Romans 1. 3. For it was impossible that the blood of Bulls
and Goats, and Washings, should cleanse the Conscience from the guils of sin.

9. The weakness of the Law to justify the Conscience through the bodily
performance of it, was the great Dispute of Paul against the false Apostles.

1. He argued thus, in Romans 3. 20. By the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be
justified in his sight; and therefore he says in Verse 28. We conclude, that a
man is justified by Faith (only) without the deeds of the Law.

2. He reasons thus, in Romans 4. 2, 3. If Abraham were justified by the Law, he
has whereof to glory, but not before God: For what says the Scripture,
Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him (as the Condition to be
performed on his part) unto justification from the guilt of his moral sins.

3. Paul does Reason thus, in Gal. 2. 16. Man is not justified by the works of
the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even as (We) have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works
of the Law: for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. But in
Verse 19. he says, I through the Law (i.e. through the Law of Faith in Christ
(who is the only true end of the Law for justification to every one that
believes) am dead to the Law (i.e. am dead in my affections to the bodily
observation of the works of the Law) as he also speaks, in Romans 7. 4, 6. and in
Romans 2. 27, 28. and in Gal. 5. 18. he says, if ye be led by the Spirit ye are
not under the Law; namely, not under the bodily observation of the works of the
Law for your moral justification.

10. The weakness of the Law through the flesh to justify, is evident,
because it is often called flesh, as in Gal. 3. 3. Are ye so foolish? having
began in the Spirit, are you now made perfect by the flesh? (i.e. by that
bodily observation of the whole) 2. Says he, in Phil. 3. 3. We are the (true)
Circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh, i.e. which have no confidence of justification
from moral sins by the bodily exercise of Moses Law. And 3. He says, in Ver.
9. That I might be sound in him, not having mine own justification which is of
the Law; Namely, by the typical works of the Law, which did also justify the
body of every Jew from their ceremonial sins, Heb. 9. 13.

4. The Apostle, in Gal. 4. 23. Does tell such as are for justification by the
works of the Law, that they are born only after the flesh. And in Verse 29. He
compares them to Ishmael, that was born after the flesh; namely, after the
wisdom of the flesh; For when Sarah was past Childbearing, she consulted with
her carnal Reason, and concluded that now she might have the promised Son by
giving her Bondmaid Hagar unto Araham, and so Ishmael was born to her,
according to the wisdom of her fleshly mind; and just so the false Apostles,
out of the wisdom of their fleshly minds, did persuade others to observe the
outward works of the Law, not only for their bodily justification, but also for
the perfect justification of their conscience from the guilt of their moral
sins: And in this Respect, such Observers of the Law are called the children of
the flesh, in Romans 9. 8. Because they have no new birth at all from the Spirit,
but from the flesh only; and their observing of the Law by bodily exercise, is
called the wisdom of the flesh only, Romans 8. 8.

5: Paul does tell the believing Galatians, That as many as make a fair show in
the flesh, did confirm them to be circumcised, Gal. 6. 12. But says he, in
Ver. 13. Neither they themselves who are circumcised, keep the Law, (i.e. they
do not keep it so as it was given to be kept by Faith in Christ, For without
Faith in Christ it cannot be kept in that sense as it was given for a Covenant
of Grace and Reconciliation: But these false Apostles desire to have you
circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh, i.e. in your bodily conformity
to Moses Law.

6. Christ said thus to the carnal Jews, in John 7. 19. Did not Moses give you
the Law, and yet none of you keeps the Law, i.e. because none of you have
Faith in Christ, the true end of the whole Law.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 207. The Law is weak through the flesh, because
it was unable to justify by reason of sin: which all know to be the Law of
works: (given to Adam.)

flesh here, in Romans 8. 3. not for the bodily exercise of the Law of works, as
it was given for a typical Covenant at Mount Sinai; but for the corrupt
viciousness of our nature: supposing that in case men could keep that moral
Law of Nature in the which Adam was created, it would ipso facto, justify them
with perfect Righteousness: But I have given several Reasons for my denial, in
Chap. 5. and in Chap. 6.

2. I have also showed in the beginning of my Exposition of this third Verse,
That the word flesh, does comprehend under it the external works of the
Religion that was required of them, by the typical Covenant at Mount Sinai,
(and that the said works were also ordained to be as a Teaching Schoolmaster
unto Christ) So then, this word flesh is sometimes used for the pravity of the
flesh, and sometimes for the Religion of the flesh, and sometimes jointly in
both senses together: and therefore the best Rule to know the right sense of
it, is the judicious consideration of the circumstances of the place where it
is used: and accordingly the word flesh, in Romans 8. 3. and so on to the end of
Verse 8. does, in my best observation of all circumstances, chiefly relate to
the bodily exercise of the works of the Law, as they were given for their
bodily justification in the first typical Covenant at Mount Sinai, of the which
also Paul did speak before, in Chap. 7. 4, 6. But in Gal. 5. 19, 20. He does
couple them, both to the visciousnesse of the flesh, and also to the corrupt
Religion of the mind by Idolatry and Heresy: and he concludes against them
both, that such shall never enter into the Kingdom of God; and he does also
conclude against the Religion of the carnal mind by trusting to the bodily
performance of the works of the Law that Christ is dead in vain to such, Gal.
2. 21. and that Christ shall profit them nothing, Gal. 5. 2. and that Christ is
of none effect unto such, but they are fallen from Grace, Verse 4.

SECT. 4.
Thus far of the Negative part of the Apostles Reason, in Romans 8. 3. I come now
to expound the Affirmative part.

THE Apostles Affirmative Reason, why there is no condemnation but
justification, to them that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, is,
Because God has done that (which the Law could not do) by sending his own Son
in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh.

In these words the Apostle does tell us, That God sent his own Son for three
great Ends:

1. To be in the similitude of sinful flesh. 2. To be for sin. 3. To condemn
sin in the flesh.
1. He says, that God sent his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, i.e.
He sent him to be used as a sinful Malefactor, by his old proclaimed enemy the
God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, when he sent him to be used
by Satan and his seed as the worst of sinful Malefactors for the perfecting of
his obedience before his death could be made and accepted as a perfect pleasing
sacrifice.
Devil; unto whom God had given a liberty of power, in Genesis 3. 15. to pierce
him in the Foot-soals as the worst of sinful Malefactors on the Cross; But yet
Gods intent in this, was no more but to make the perfection of Christ's
Obedience the more manifest under those ignominious usages, as I have expressed
it more at large in several places: and to this sense I did at first expound
this Text, in my Dialogue, page 116.

2. This is no new upstart Exposition, as Mr. Norton makes it to be, but it is
an ancient Orthodox Exposition; For it is in this sense, that Austin calls the
Death of Christ, not a Death of Condition, but of Crime, because he was put to
a most shameful and painful death on the Cross, as the worst of those criminal
persons that were crucified with him: As I have also opened Austins meaning, in
Chap. 12. at the end of sect. 2.

3. P. Martyr says thus, in Romans 8. 3. God sending of his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, Does mean nothing else, but that he was subject to
Heat, Cold, Hunger, Thirst, Contumelies and Death: For (says he) These things
are the effect of sin, and therefore the flesh of Christ might well be called
the flesh of sin, because it was put into the likeness of sinful flesh.

4. Closs. I^terl. Lyranus, Melanchton, do give this expression; and Mr.
Gataker also, in his Annot. on Esaias 53. 4.

5. It was in this Respect also that Christ's death upon the Cross, was
Resembled John 3. 14. Gal. 3. 13.
to the Jews, by a Serpent that was lifted up upon a Pole, in Number. 28. 9. John
3. 14, 15.

6. It is in this Respect also, That Christ is said to be made a curse for us:
For it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree, Gal. 3. 13.

7. It is in this Respect also, that he suffered as a Malefactor without the
Gate of Jerusalem, in the common place where sinful Malefactors used to Esaias
53. 8. John 8. 28. Romans 8. 32.
be put to death for their greater ignominy and Reproach, Heb. 13. 12. And he
was accounted as the worst of Malefactors, because they preferred the Murderer
Barrabas to be saved before him: and because he was crucified between two
Thieves as the worst of them: Many of the Jews were astonished at him, because
his Visage was so marred more then any man, and his form more then the sons of
men, Esaias 52. 14. Es. 53. 2, 3. He was taken away by Distress and Judgment as
the worst of Malefactors: Who shall declare (the wickedness of) his
generation, for he was cut of, out of the land of the Living as a notorious
sinful Malefactor, Es. 53. 8. which I have more largely expounded elsewhere.

8. Christ himself did foretell his infamous Death, when he said thus to the
blinded Jews: When ye have lifted up the Son of Man (Namely, in the likeness
of sinful flesh upon the Cross) then shall ye know that I am HE, John 8. 28.
Namely, that He that shall break the Devils Head, in Genesis 3. 15. And that shall
be pierced by Satan and his seed in the Foot-soals as sinful flesh on the
Tree.

9. In this very sense it is also said, in Romans 8. 32. That God spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all, i.e. He delivered him up to the
malice of his Combater Satan, to be used as a notorious Malefactor, that so he
might be put to death in the likeness of sinful flesh.

10. All these Temptations of Trial were by Gods Wise disposing Providence,
ordained to be for the perfecting of his Obedience; and so consequently for his
consecration to his Priestly Sacrifice, Heb. 5. 8, 9. For it became God (the
Father) for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many
sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through
sufferings, Heb. 2. 10, 17. For the Law makes men High Priests who have
infirmity, but the word of the Oath which was since the Law makes the son who
is consecrated (or made perfect in his Obedience) for evermore, Heb. 7. 28.

SECT. 5.
The second great End, for which God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, was, To be For sin.

i.e. TO be a Sacrifice for sin: In the Law it was Gods established Order, That
no Priest should after any Sacrifice, until they were first consecrated to do
that Office; But then as soon as they were perfectly consecrated, they did
presently offer Sacrifices for sin, which are also called [Sin] in the Hebrew
Text. So in like sort, as soon as Christ was consecrated or made perfect in his
Obedience by his Combat of consecrating sufferings, from his malignant Combater
Satan, he did forthwith in that perfect Obedience, make his Death to be
accepted as a most sweet smelling Sacrifice to God, for the procuring of his
Reconciliation to beiieving sinners, for their Formal justification from the
guilt of all their moral sins: and in this sort it was* that God sent Christ to
be for sin, i.e. To be a Sacrifice for sin.

SECT. 6.
The third great End, for the which God sent his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh for sin, was, that he might thereby condemn sin in the flesh.

i.e. THat thereby he might condemn the after-use of all legal Sin Offerings,
because His sin-Offering was the perfection, or the accomplishment of them all:
The word condemn, in Greek, does signify to condemn in Judgment, or to
promise justly the sentence of condemnation against the after use of all
Sin Offerings as wicked, or as guilty of frustrating the Death of Christ, as
sufficient to procure Gods Reconciled Forgiveness, for the justification of
the Souls of believing sinners from the guilt of their moral sins, unless the
works of the Law be continually added thereunto; Of which see more, in Chap.
14. in sect. 19. at N. 5. But now (says the Apostle) once in the End of the
world, (i.e. of the Mosaical World) has he appeared to put away
sin-(Offerings) by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9. 26. Dan. 9. 24. Col. 2.
14, 17, 20. Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.

Conclusion

From the Premises it follows, that it can be no less then a Heterodoxal
Exposition to make these words, for sin, in Romans 8. 3. to signify Gods
imputing our sins to Christ, as Mr. Norton does interpret it, in page 208.
where he does also refer his Reader to his Answer of my Exposition of 2 Cor. 5.
21. (in page 53.) seeing it is so clearly meant of his being made a Sacrifice
for sin. And to that sense does Tindal and P. Martyr, expound that phrase, in
Romans 8. 3. And so does Calvin, Or^gen, Melanchton, Bucer, Pererius, Vatablus,
and others expound it: and to this sense I did expound it in my Dialogue.

SECT. 7.
I come now to expound, Verse 4. That the Justification of the Law may True
justification from moral sin was typified by the bodily ^ustifications of the
Jews, and then typified j^^^^ficat^on is fu^fi^led in th^^, (...) th^se
fleshly just^fica^i^^s, b^t after the Spi^^t, which is Christ, and ^aith in
Christ's death and S^cr^fice.
be fu^filled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

THis 4th. Verse, is an Amplification of the former Reason, why there is no
condemnation, but Justification to them that walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit, just as it was at first expressed, in Ver. 1. and now it is
again repeated in this 4th Verse.

And the Reason is, That so, the (typical) justification of the Law may be (in
the typified sense) fulfilled in us, that walk not after all those fl^shly
justifications (of the body from ceremonial sins by the works of the Law) but
after the Spirit of those Justifications, which is Christ, who is the only true
End of the Law for justification to all that believe; so that the j^st^fication
of the Law is then only truly Fulfilled in us, when we do by Faith look to
Christ as the only true End of the Law, for the procuring of his Fathers
Reconciled Forgiveness to all believing sinners, by his most perfect Sacrifice.

In the first typical Covenant at Mount Sinai, the Condition that God required
to be performed by the National Church for the justification of their bodies,
was the washing of their bodies, and for some ceremonial sins they must add
thereunto the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling
the unclean to the sanctifying of their flesh; and that the typified part of
this typical Justification of the Law might be Fulfilled in us, that walk not
after the fleshly part of this Law, but after the Spirit of this Law, (that is
to say, after Christ by Faith) God sent his own Son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, and for (his perfect Sacrifice for) sin, he has condemned sin, (i.e.
the after-use of all legal Sin Offerings, and thereby all bodily justifications
from ceremonial sins (for now there are no such sins) That so the typified
justification of the Law, may be Fulfilled in us, that walk not after that
carnal justification, but after the spirit of that justification, that is,
after Christ, who is the only true End of the Law for justification to every
one that believes, Romans 10. 4.

2. The Greek word which we translate Righteousness, in this 4th. Verse, means
not that proper natural Righteousness wherein Adam was created, but that
supernatural Righteousness which is called just^fication from sin; and
therefore it is translated Justification by the Syriaque: and therefore
Tremelius does render the Syriaque by Justification, and not by Justitia,
Righteousness.

3. The vulgar Latin does also translate it, Justification.

4. King James' Translators, do in Romans 5. 16, 18. Render this Greek word,
Justification.

5. Our large Annot. does render it, ca^nal Ordinances, i.e. justifications of
the flesh or body, in Heb. 9. 10.

6. Mr. Ainsworth, and Dr. Hammond, render it Ordinances, in Romans 8. 4. and
says Mr. Ains. This Greek word Dicaioma, does signify, the just Ordinance, or
the Righteous Statute of the Law, i.e. of the Law of Types chiefly, as he does
at large show it, in Numb. 31. 21. Deuteronomy. 14. 1, 14. Psalm 2. 7. But yet it is
sometimes put for positive Judgments.

3. This justification of the Law that must be fulfilled in us that believe in
Christ, the true Spirit of the Law, must be understood, 1. N^gatively, 2.
Affirmatively.

1. Negatively, It must not be understood of that natural Righteousness
wherein Adam was created, and wherein Christ's humane Nature was created, which
Mr. Norton says, is imputed to us for our Righteousness; Neither must it be
understood of the Righteousness of the Covenant of Nature, as Mr. Norton does
also make it; For that Righteousness was nothing else but Adams transient act,
of eating first of the Tree of the twofold Life: and because he did not first
eat of that Tree, but did first eat of the Forbidden Fruit; that Covenant was
totally extinguished as soon as he had received the threatened punishment of a
double spiritual Death.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 207. It is plain enough by the dependence of
this 4th. Verse, upon the foregoing Verse, that the Law here spoken is the same
with the Law there spoken of, which was weak through the flesh: that is (says
he) it was unable to justify by reason of sin, which all know to be the Law of
works (made with Adam) and to this sense he does also speak, in page 233. and
in other places also.

Law, in this place, because I have abundantly expressed them, in Chap. 5. and
in Chap. 6.

But says Mr. Norton, in page 233. Faith does not only justify a sinner,
which the Law could not do, Romans 8. 3, 4. but also in some respects it
justifies him in a more excellent manner then the Law could have justified an
innocent person.

Justification; But in my sense of Justification from the guilt of sin, it is
true. For I have showed, that Gods Reconciled Forgiveness procured by Christ's
Sacrifice, does make a believing sinner to be whiter then snow in Gods sight;
yea far whiter then Adam was in his innocence by the moral Righteousness of
his Nature: For his Righteousness was no more but a con-created natural
Quality, and therefore it could never have made him the Son of God by Adopt^on
to the Heavenly Inheritance, as the supernatural justification of believing
sinners does by Gods Reconciled Forgiveness: And therefore by how much the
joys of the Heavenly Paradise, does exceed the joys of an earthly Paradise,
by so much is the justification of believin^ sinners, to be preferred to the
righteousness of Adams Nature; I or in case Adam had Fulfilled the Covenant of
Nature, by eating first of the Tree of the twofold Life, yet he should not
thereby have merited any other happiness, but the confirmation of his natural
Righteousness in the sweet Contents of an earthly Paradise: as I have showed
it more at large, in Chap. 1. sect. 4.

2. There is not any color of Reason why the word Law, in this Text, should be
understood of the moral Law of Nature, seeing there never was any such Law
given since the Fall of Adam, in an abstracted sense from the Covenant of Grace.

3. It is also notoriously known, that the Jews did never seek for their
justication by their perfect obedience to the moral Law of Nature, but by their
obedience to all the Oeconemy of Moses, and most especially by their obedience
to The word Law, is the Apostles dispute with the false Apostles about the
point of Justification, must be understood of the whole Economy of Moses.
the ceremonial Laws: which Laws they did not account to be ceremonial, but
to last for ever, as I have elsewhere cited their saying: and therefore it is
out of all question, that the Apostle in his Disputations with them about the
point of Justification, does mean the word Law, in the same latitude wherein
they meant it, or else he should not have argued with them, ad idem, nor have
reached to their apprehension and meaning.

4. It is most evident, that the Jews by the term Law, did understand all the
Economy of Moses. And it is observed by Mr. Broughton, in his Explication of
the Article of Descent, page 25. and in his Principal Positions for the ground
of the holy Story, page 3. That all the Old Testament is called the Law, by the
Thalmudiques, in San. Fol. 92. And 2. Says he, in his Positions for the Hebrew
Tongue: This term Law, as enacted by the Scribes for all the Old Testament,
against the Sadduces, which admitted none but (the five Books of Moses)
Therefore in opposition to them, they enacted to call all the Old Testament,
the Law; and this phrase of theirs our Lord confirmed, in John 10. 34, 35.
citing it from Psalm 82. 6. which Christ does there call, their Law; and so
Christ said again in Joh. 15. 25. It is written in their Law, namely, in Ps.
35. 19. And the History of Genesis, is called the Law, in Gal. 4. 21. This word
Law to the History of Genesis; is a Thalmudique Expression; For Rab. Menachem,
says thus: Mavelous Mysteries are in the Histories of the holy Law, that
none is able to tell the praise of the Excellency thereof, and of the hid
things of the same: yea, even then when Histostories are found in the Law,
which may be thought unnecessary, and unprofitable: and when we Read in the
Law, we bless God for the Histories, by which he has planted Eternal life
among us, as by the Ten Commandments. See Ainsworth, in Genesis 30. 43. And the
Apostle Paul* does cite sundry Texts of Sripture, in Romans 3. (from ver. 10. to
ver. 18.) from Psalm 10. and 14. and 53. And from Esaias 59. 7, 8. And then from
all these several Scriptures, he says, in ver. 19. Whatsoever things the Law
(before cited) says, it says to them who are under the Law: And from thence it
follows, that the word Law must be understood in this large sense, in ver. 20.
21, 27, 28, 31. and in almost all the New Testament, in 1 Cor. 14. 21. He calls
Esaias 28. 11. the Law; see Ainsworth, in Ps^^^ 19. 8.

2. It is also very observable that the word Law, in Romans 10. 4, 5. is by the
Context as large in sense as the word Scripture is, in ver. 11. And it is
evident that the word Scripture, is often put for all the Old Testament, as in
John 5. 39. Luke 24. 27, 32, 45. 1 Pet. 2. 6. 2 Pet. 3. 16.

5. The Ancient Hebrew Doctors, do interchangeably use these terms, the Law,
the Covenant, and the Testament, for the same thing that was given at Mount
Sinai, as in 1 Mac. 1. 56, 57, 63. and in 1 Mac. 2. 26, 27, 50. And one of of
the seven Martyrs, in 2 Mac. 7. 30. does call the laws of Moses, the Covenant
of Everlasting life, in verse 36. And so does Ben. Syrach call them, in Eccles.
17. 11, 12. and in Eccles. 45. 5, 7, 30, 36, 37. And the Rabbis express it by
several other Titles, in 1 Esd. 8. 7. and Chap. 9. 40, 41, etc. and in Eccles.
24. 23.

2. These Titles are also expressed, in L^v. 26. 15. where God says thus to
his National Church: If you despise my Statutes, and if your soul loath my
judgments, so that you do not all my Commandments, but break my Covenant.
Then says God, in ver. 25. I will bring upon you a sword that shall avenge the
vengeance of the Covenant: or as the Chaldy Paraphrase does expound it: It
shall avenge on you the vengeance, for that ye have transgressed the words (or
commands) of the law. But yet says God, in ver. 41. If their uncircumcised
heart be humbled, th^n I will remember my Covenant with Jacob, called by the
Chaldy Paraphrase, my Cov^nant made with Jacob; And on the contrary God
threatened Solomon, because he kept not his Covenant, 1 Kings 11. 11. But the
Seventy interpret this Covenant, to be [his Precepts.]

From th^se instances it is evident, that the Ancient Hebrew Doctors, did make
the whole Law of Moses, to be no other Covenant (in the true sense of it) but
the very same Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation that God made with Jacob,
with Isaac, and with Ab^aham: and God does call this Covenant, my Covenant of
Peace, in Es^y 54. 10. Eze. 34. 25. and Eze. 37. 26. Or, of my Reconcilement to
thee, Romans 5. 1, 10. Romans 8. 35, 38, 39. And this Covenant and the conditions
of it he commanded to be observed to the Thousand Generations, Psa^m 105. 8.
Psalm 111. 9. Psalm 133. 3.

3. In this Respect it is that Moses Law is called, the inheritance of the
Church of Jacob, Deuteronomy. 33. 4. And from thence it is that David says, Thy
Testimonies have I taken as an Heritage for ever, Psalm 119. 111. And from
thence it is said that through Faith we inherit the Promises (of this Covenant)
Heb. 6. 12. Gal. 3. 11. Heb. 11. 9, 10, 16.

4. I have also showed, in Chap. 5. Reply 9. at N. 7. That the Covenant at
Mount Sinai, is called A Testament; and Mr. Norton also says, in page 183.
that it is called A Testament; which (says he) is a Name that is proper to the
Covenant of Grace, Heb. 9. 19, 20. And 2. Says he, it is never attributed to
the Covenant of works (made with Adam) Had he but kept close to these
Affirmative and Negative Observations, they would have kept him from many
Errors: But alas, he has started from them like a warping bow: For in page
182. He does there make the Law at Mount Sinai, to be the same Covenant of
works that was made with Adam.

These two contrary Assertions, do argue the unsteadinesse of his Judgment,
and the unsteadinesse of his Answers to my Dialogue; seeing he does after this
sort contradict himself.

This Excellent Rule of Direction, how to understand the term Law, in the New
Testament, I have also Recorded, in my Book of the Jews Sy^^gogue-Discipline,
in page 30.

6. Mr. Broughton, says also in his Miscelanea for the study of Theology; The
Jews numbering the Letters of the Decalogue, find them to be 613. In which
Decalogue, all things that concern Faith and Practice in life, are contained:
Hereupon they divided all things that are either commanded or forbidden in
Moses, into 613. Laws: They could have reduced them to another Number, but
Religion commanded them thus to compare them together, for the honor of the
Decalogue; And to this sense he does also speak, in Revel. page 113. namely,
That it is evident by this, that the Ancient Hebrew Doctors held the Decalogue
to comprehend the whole Doctrine that is contained in all the five Books of
Moses.

7. Mr. Ainsworth, in Lev. 4. 2. does expound this phrase [All the
Commandements] of Prohibitions, or Forboades. God, says he, commands both to
eschew evil, and to do good: (of which double command, see his Anno^. in Number
15. 22) and most of the Ten Commandments, in Exodus 20. are Forbiddings of sin.
And in like sort, the holy Ghost does use the word Commandment, both ways, in
Deuteronomy. 4. 23. least you make you the likeness of any thing, which Jehovah thy
God has commanded thee; that is, has Forbidden thee: And contrariwise, God
says, in Deuteronomy. 17. 3. And have served other Gods which I have not commanded
(to be done) Hereupon, says A^nsworth, The Hebrew Doctors divide the Laws
into Commandments to be done, and into Commandments which should not be done:
The Commandments given by Moses, they have summed up to be 613. of them; They
make Affirmative Precepts, to be done, 248. so many as they say, there are
bones in a man's body: And of negative Precepts, or Prohibitions, 365. so many
as there are days in the Year: But yet Mr. Ainsworth, to omit to speak of the
Reason, why they made all Moses Laws to be 613. But that Mr. Broughton
supplieth: saying, it was in Relation to the number of the Letters in the
Decalogue: But by both their observations laid together, great light is given
for the better understanding of the term Law, at Mount Sinai: Namely, that it
must be taken for all the Economy of Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 13, 14. and not for the
moral Law of Nature, as it was given to Adam in his innocence, in any
abstracted sense from the Covenant of Grace, and of their latitude of the word
Law, see Chap. 6. sect. 5. at N. 10.

8. It is observed by Dr. Gouge, that in Psalm 119. There are ten several words
used to set out the Law, or word of God; But I do not find that any of those
ten words do make the moral Law of Nature, in an abstracted sense from the
Covenant of Grace to be meant thereby.

2. He observes that the word Law, is of a more large and general sense then
the word Commandment (especially in some places of Scripture:) But yet I find
by Kircherus Hebrew and Greek Lexicon, that [Tsanah] translated Command, in
Genesis 2. 16. has Relation to the Forbidding positive Command of the Law of the
Covenant of Nature, in ver. 17. and in Genesis 3. 11, 17. But Terah, translated
Law, is not used in these places.

3. Tsanah, is often used for sundry sorts of transient positive Commands.

4. It is also used for the commanding of the Types of the Covenant of Grace.

5. It is also used for moral positive Commands, as in Deuteronomy. 5. 12, 15. Namely,
as they are joined with the Statutes and Judgments that appertain to the
Covenant of Grace, as in Deuteronomy. 5. 29, 31.

6. It is also translated Justifications by the Seventy, in Deuteronomy. 30. 16. and 1
Kin. 2. 3. Namely, as it Relates to the Commandments, that concerned the Types
of the Covenant of Grace, which appertained to their typical Justifications: But

7. According to my Examination of the word, it is never put neither for the
Affirmative, nor for the Negative part of any Command that belongs to the moral
Law of Nature. But yet 3. Dr. Gouge says, that the Hebrew Verb translated
Precepts, in Psalm 119. 4. (from which the Hebrew Nown translated Precepts, is
derived) does signify (among other things) to require; and says he, The
Rabbis say, That those Precepts, especially which are written in man's heart,
are intended under this word: But yet I rather think that Mr. Ainsworths
Exposition of this word Precept, in Psalm 19. 9. is the most genu^ne sense. 4.
Dr. Gouge, does in sect. 10. restrain the word Commandment, in H^b. 7. to
levitical Ordinances: And then in sect. 38. He does make the word Law to be
more comprehensive: These things I propound for the further Examination of the
Extent of the word Law, in Romans 8. 4.

9. From the Premises it follows, That the Term Law, in Paul's Disputation about
Justification with the false Apostles, must be understood generally of the
Economy of Moses. But 2. More especially of the Law of Rites by the Figure
Synecdoche. And 3. Not at all of the moral Law of Nature; wherein Adam was
created in an exstracted sense from the Covenant of Grace: as Mr. Norton does
all along take it to be for Rela^ion to a sinners perfect Righteousn^sse, to
the great conf^sion of the true sense of a sinners justification; and also to
the great confusion of the true sense of a great part of the Bible.

SECT. 8.
I Come now to my Affirmative Answer: Namely, that the Justification of
Dicaioma transl^ted Law, in Romans 8. 4. is to be understood of the law of
Statutes, as it is no^ed by Ains, in Deuteronomy. 6. 1. and as it appears by the
continual use of the word, in Exo. 12. 24, 43. Exodus 27. 21. Exodus 29. 9. E^ed.
30. 21.
the Law which must be fulfilled in us; must be understood of that kind of
justification that was typified by that outward part of the Law, that is called
the Law of works (at Mount Sinai) and by the best search that I can make, the
Greek word Dicaioma here used, is never used for the moral Law of Nature, and
therefore the Seventy do most often use it for the translating of the Hebrew
word Chok, which we translate Statutes, namely, for the Statutes of the
ceremonial Law, as in these places: Genesis 26. 5. Exodus 15. 25, 26. Lev. 25. 18.
Numb. 27 11. Number. 30. 18. Numb. 31. 21. Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 5, 8, 14, 40, 45. Deuteronomy. 5.
1, 31. Deuteronomy. 6. 1, 2, 17, 20, 24, 25. Deuteronomy. 7. 11. Deuteronomy. 8. 11. Deuteronomy. 10. 13.
Deuteronomy. 11. 1. Deuteronomy. 17. 19. Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 27. 10. Deuteronomy. 28. 45. Deuteronomy.
30. 10, 16. 2 Samuel 22. 23. 2 Kings 17. 18, 19, 34, 37. 2 Kings 23. 3. 1 Chronicles.
19. 10. Psalm 18. 22. Psalm 50. 16. Psalm 89. 31. Psalm 105. 45. Psalm 119. 5,
8, 12, 16, 23, 33, 48, 54, 71, 80, 112, 117, 135, 145, 155, 171. Psalm 147. 19.
Eze. 36. 21.

2. It is also very observable, that in all these sixty-one Verses Kircherus
does translate, the Seventy, Word Dicaioma, by Justification, and not by
justitia, Righteousness; and so the Sacrifices of Tzedec, in Deuteronomy 33. 19. and
in Psalm 4. 5. and Psalm 51. 19. are by the Seventy translated, Dicaioma: and
Kircherus does render all the said Verses by (Justificatio) Justificaion, and
not by j^st^^i^, Righteousness; and thence it follows, that the said places
may most fitly be translated, Sacrifices of justification; Of which see Chap.
15. sect. 4. N 2.

3. It is also very observable that the Seventy do use this word Dicaioma, for
the justification of things, as well as for the justification of persons: For by
the ceremonial Law, many things which were without life were defiled with
ceremonial sins: as in Numb. 31. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 34. And so the Tabernacle
and the most holy place also were sometimes made guilty of sin ceremonially, by
Reason of the uncleanness of the Sons of Israel, Lev. 16. 16, 18. and then
they were justified from sin, or made holy and righteous again (not by imputing
to them the Righteousness of the moral Law of Nature wherein Adam was created,
but) by the works of the Law. As for Example, when the Temple was defiled by
the Idol Jupiter, Olympus, which Antiochus caused to be set up therein: it is
said, to be justified therefrom by the cleansing works of the Law, Dan. 8. 14.
^ Dan. 8. 14.


4. Dicaiomita in the plural, is also used by the Seventy for certain positive
Commandments of Moses Law: Namely, for such Commandments as Related to the
typified sense of the Statutes: as in 1 Kings 2. 3. and in Deuteronomy. 30. 16. I
command thee this day to love Jehovah shy God, to walk in his ways, and keep
h^s Commandments, o^ his Dicaiom^ta, his justifications, as the Seventy render
it, or his Precepts, as Tremelius does render it in both places: Mr. Ainsworth
says, This keeping of his Commandments, is an effect of Love, John 14. 15. 1
John 5. 3. And this is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, 1 John 3. 23. and therefore in
these Respects, these Commandments cannot be understood of the moral Law of
Nature; For that Law does not command such a supernatural Love, as to believe
in Jesus Christ: And in both the said places Kircherus does render the word,
which we translate Commandments, by Justifications: as I noted it also from
the Seventy, at N. 2. The Adjunct being put for the Subject, that was thereby
justified.

5. Dicaiomata, is put by the Seventy for the positive Judgments: many of
which were also typical; and for this see Ainsworth, in Exodus 21. 5. In Numb.
15. 15. And says he, in Deuteronomy. 7. 12. Under these Judgments are the
Commandments and Statutes also contained: This is a Remarkable Observation.

6. The Seventy put Dicaiomata for Ordinances: Namely, for such Ordinances as
do respect the Statutes: as in 1 Samuel 30, 25. and Eze. 11. 20. There it is set
out as the work of Gods special Grace to enable men to keep his Ordinances,
Eze. 11. 20. and Eze. 20. 11.
as they were given to be the typified part of the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation: and therefore for the enabling of men thereunto; God does in
the first place promise, I will give them one heart, and I will put a new
spirit within you, and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, that
they may walk in my Statutes, and keep (my Dicaiomata) my Ordinances to do
them: Or as others, that they may keep my judgments. As Zachary and Elizabeth
did, in Luke 1. 6. And therefore I cannot but wonder at Mr. Nortons great
negligence, that does cite this place of Eze. 20, 11. which is just parallel to
this Scripture to prove, That the doing of Gods Statutes and Judgments there
spoken of, is meant, of doing the Covenant of Nature made with Adam, in page
225. seeing the Sun at Noonday is not more clear then this; Namely, That the
doing of Gods Statutes and Judgments, in Eze. 11. 20. and in Eze. 20. 11. is
meant, of the supernatural doing of them by Faith in Christ, according to the
Condition that is required to be done in the Covenant of Grace.

7. This word Dicaioma is added, for the judgment of God, in Romans 1. 32. But
says Dr. Willet there; This word Dicaioma, is not here to be understood of the
moral Law, (i.e. not of the Ten Commandments) which the Gentiles had not: but
of the Heathen Judicials, in punishing sin, which they accounted also was for
their justification from sin.

8. This word Dicaioma, is used also for the Religious Rites of the Heathens
which they also used for their justification from sin: But those Rites, because
they were but the devices of their own brains, they are called by God, Statutes
of abomination, in Lev. 18. 30. And these Statutes are also called the
Ordinances of the Heathens: Namely, such as they used for their justification
from sin, 1 Mac. 1. 14, 51. after the Geneva translation, but in our latter
translation it is, 1 Mac. 1. 13 49. and 1 Mac. 2. 21. And there Dicaiomata, is
also put for the Ordinances of Moses.

9. Dicaioma, is translated justified by the Geneva, in Ecclesiasticus 14. 20.
but that Verse is not in our latter Translation.

10. We may also from hence observe a Reason, why Gods positive Judgments are
sometimes put for Rites, in Numb. 27. 11. And that is, because it did belong
unto the judicial Laws to see the Rites duly observed, and to punish the
Transgressors thereof, as I have formerly observed it in the Jews
Syndgogue-discipline, in page 47, 48. And Mr. Ainsworth says, in Psalm 81. 5.
That Judgment is a Right or Ordinance made by God, and a duty to be performed
to him: And in that Respect, Judgment is put for duty, in Deuteronomy. 18. 3. And it
was the duty of the Judges of the Synedrion, to judge in all levitical matters
that were in difference.

11. Though I have made diligent search, yet I cannot any where find that the
justification of the Law, in Rom, 8. 4. is put for the Righteousness of the
moral Law of Nature, which Mr. Norton does contend for.

12. I have in the beginning of this Verse showed, how the justification of the
Law is Fulfilled in us, and also in my former printed Reply, in page 239. 241.
and also in my Dialogue.

Conclusion from the Premises it follows,

1. That the word Law, in Paul's Dispute with the false Apostles about the
point of Justification, must be Taken for the whole Economy of Moses
inclusively, though it must also be often taken Synecdochically for that part
especially that Relates to the Law of Rites, for their bodily justification
from their ceremonial sins.

2. That the typical pattern of a sinners justification does no where teach us,
That sinners are justified, by Gods imputing to them the Righteousness of the
moral Law of Nature.

SECT. 9.
I Will now speak very briefly of Verse 7. 8. which runs thus: Because the
Verse 7. 8.
Wisdom of the flesh, or the carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not
subjest to the law of God, neither indeed can be: so then they that are in the
flesh cannot please God.

Dr. Barnes speaks against man's Free Will to good since the Fall, does thus
interpret these Verses, in page 296.

1. He calls the Carnal mind, the wisdom of the flesh, and so does the Geneva:
and he does thus paraphrase the words: The Wisdom of the flesh is enmity to
God, it is not subject to the Law of God, nor can be, For they that serve the
flesh cannot please God: From hence says he it is plain, That Man's Will,
Reason, Wisdom, Heart, or whatsoever thing is in man without the Spirit of God,
is but flesh, and cannot be obedient, he says not, he will not, But, he
cannot, he has no might, he has no power, let him intend his best, and do all
that lies in him with all his might, and with all his power, yet he cannot
please God, for it is but flesh, (and yet such outward Worshippers are puffed
up with their fleshly mind, Col. 2. 18.)

2. Luther, in Gal. 2. 16. faith, in Fol. 69. That by flesh, is sign fied the
whole Nature of Man, with his Reason, and all other powers whatsoever that do
belong to man: And this flesh (says he) is not justified by works, no, not of
the Law: Flesh therefore (says he) according to Paul, signifies all the
Righteousness, Wisdom, Devotion, Religion, Understanding and Will, that is
possible to be in a Natural Man: So that, if a man be never so righteous,
according to Reason and the Law of God: yet with all this Righteousness,
Works, Merits, Devotion and Religion, he is not justified; Flesh therefore
(says he in Chap. 3. 3.) is taken here for the very Righteousness and Wisdom
of the flesh, and for the judgment of Reason, which seeks to be justified by
the Law; Whatsoever then is most excellent in man, the same does Paul here call
flesh: as the Wisdom of Reason, and the Righteousness of the Law it self.

3. Dr. Willet, says on this 7th. Verse; The Apostle does here give a Reason
of the former Verse: why the wisdom of the flesh is death; It is (says he)
because it is at enmity with God, from whom comes Life: But, says he, The
Wisdom of the Spirit is not so the cause of Life and Peace with God, as the
Wisdom of the flesh is the cause of Death; For, says he, This last is the
meritorious Cause; But so is not the Wisdom of the Spirit of the other.

Willet means the holy Spirit of Regeneration: But I take the word Spirit here,
to be the Spirit of the Law, which is Christ, as I have expounded it, in Verse
2. And from thence it follows, That seeing Christ is called the true Spirit of
the law of Moses, he is in that Respect the true meritorious cause of Life: as
the Wisdom of the flesh is the demeritorious cause of Death.

Conclusion:
It can be no less then a Foundation Error in Mr. Norton,

1. To build (as he has done) the great Point of Christ's satisfaction, upon
his suffering of the threatened punishment of the Covenant of Nature that was
made at first with innocent Adam, in Genesis 2. 17.

And 2. To build the great Point of a Sinners justification upon Christ's
Fulfilling of that Transient, and now Nullified Covenant of Nature.

3. These two great Points cannot Relate to any other Covenant, then the
supernatural Law and Covenant of Gods Grace and Reconciliation that was made
only with Adam, in Genesis 3. 15. The promise of which Covenant is, That whosoever
believes in the seed of the Woman for the breaking of the Devils Head-plot for
man's Redemption, shall be saved: And the Threatening is, that whosoever dies in
the unbelief thereof, shall be judged to Eternal Torments with the Devil and
his Angels.

FINIS.
A Table of Chief Heads.
CHAP. I.
1. PRoving that the kind of Death, that was threatened in the Covenant of
Nature, Genesis 2. 17. must be understood of no other kind of death, but of a
double spiritual death in this world only. 2. Proving that the Covenant of
Nature was totally extinguished as soon as Adam had but transgressed it by his
first act of tasting the forbidden Fruit. Page 1 3. It Is a Rule of Right
Exposition, that one and the same word (death, or any other word) in one and
the same text: can have no more but one proper sense. p. 1 4. The Death
threatened in the Covenant of Nature, must not be expounded in any larger sense
then is intended by that Covenant. p. 2 5. Both Sripture and Reason does
sometimes teach us to Restrain the sense of general words to the proper sense
of the place where they are used. p. 3 6. The vindicative punishment which God
inflicted upon Adam and upon all his natural posterity, by depriving him and
them, of his con-created Image, must carefully be distinguished from original
sin, This Annot. must be placed in page 6. at N. 2. with your Pen. 7. The Death
threatened, in Genesis 2. 17. has two parts: and in that Respect it may fitly be
called a twofold-spiritual Death: and so on the contrary, in case Adam had but
first eaten of the tree of Life, he should have been confirmed in a twofold
natural life. p. 8, 21, 36. 8. The matter of original sin, passes not away as
the matter of actual sin does: and yet though actual sins have no physical or
natural existence after the commission of them: they have a moral existence by
their guilt or desert of punishment. p. 8 9. God annexed three general
punishments to the Covenant of Grace: which were ordained by that Covenant to
be but chastisements to the Elect; But yet to be for vindicative punishments to
the Reprobates. p. 10, 69 10. The Elect themselves do bear the vidicative
punishment of that death that was threatened in the Covenant of Nature, as a
satisfaction to the Justice of God in that Covenant. p. 11 11. The obedience of
Christ does not discharge the Elect from the guilt and punishment of Adams
first sin in eating the forbidden Fruit: but yet it does discharge them from
the guilt of all their original and actual sins. p. 12 12. The bodily death of
Christ was not a proper vindicative punishment, as the death of Reprobates is:
neither was it a castigatory death, as the death of the Elect is: but it was a
death of Covenant only, that so it might be performed and accepted as a
meritorious Death and Sacrifice. p. 14 13. It was of necessity that Christ must
dye, by the necessity of the Eternal Covenant. p. 15 14. The meritorious cause
of Christ's death, was his free and voluntary performance of it according to the
conditions of the Eternal Covenant, as it was declared in Genesis 3. 15. His death
was not inflicted on him through the demeritorious cause of sin imputed. p. 16
15. Dr. Usher, does make Eternity to be an Ess^ntial part of Hell Torments. p.
17 16. Several ancient Authors have expounded the word death, in G^n 2. 17. of
a spiritual Death in Sin only. p. 19 17. The Hebrew Doctors do place much
Emphasis in the doubling of Verbs: and therefore when God does doubse his
threatenings, it does assure us that they are definitive, except some condition
be expressed or employed to hinder the execution. p. 19 18. The word Day, in
Genesis 2. 17. must not he taken for a time to come, but for the point of time in
that very Day, in the which Adam should but taste of the forbidden-Fruit. p. 20
19. The visible glorious Church of Christ, which some hold, shall yet be here
upon Earth without any sin for a thousand Years, is justly confuted by Gods
definitive Sentance of death in sin, which he has inflicted upon Adam, and
upon all his natural posterity, in Genesis 2. 17. to the end of the world. p. 21,
417 20. It is no less then Blaspemy, if it be not Heresy to affirm, that
Christ was our Surety to suffer that kind of vindicative death which God
threatened, in Genesis 2. 17. p. 21 21. The Covenant of Nature made with Adam, was
ordained to last no longer then until Adams obedience or disobedience was tried
by one transient act of eating. p. 23 22. The death threatened in the Covenant
of Nature, in Genesis 2. 17. cannot be understood neither of a bodily death, nor
of an Eternal death in Hell, because these kinds of death were not strictly and
Formally executed in the time of Adams eating, as a spiritual death in sin was.
p. 24 23. Gods Arbitrary Will made it just, that in case Adam, (the Head of the
Covenant of Nature) did but first taste of the forbidden-Fruit; it should
involve all his Natural Posterity, both in his sin, and also in his guilt and
punishment: But that arbitrary Law and the justice of it, does not in like sort
bind posterity to the sin, guilt and punishment of Adams moral Transgressions.
p. 27 24. Gods Arbitrary Laws and Covenants must be strictly obeyed, (or else
the threatened penalties will be executed) though many times they could not be
obeyed unless men transgressed the moral Law: and thence it follows, that
Gods arbitrary and positive Laws may well be called his supreme Laws, p. 28
25. Original sin is not imputed to the conception in the Womb, until it is
become a person by the infusion of the soul, as Adam was a person when he was
deprived of Gods con-created life of moral perfections. p. 31 26. It is left
for a further disquisition to the Reader, whether the Sensitive life be not in
the Body, before the immortal Soul is infused, though it be not confirmed until
the Soul is infused. p. 33 27. Some call the Sensitive Affections, the
inferior part of the Rational Soul. p. 34 28. Lupsets description of a natural
death is: That the Body (whereof the vital Spirits are a part) does in a manner
leave the soul, before the soul leaves the Body. p. 34 29. A true description
of the Promise, and threatening of the twofold Life and twofold Death which God
declared to Adam in the Covenant of Nature. p. 34 30. Adams con-created Life of
moral perfections was not supernatural, but con-natural only. p. 35 31. The
double life of Adams Soul is explained. p. 36, 8, 21 32. The first main End why
Jesus Christ did set a Warlike Defense about the Tree of the twofold Life, was,
to make Adam and all his natural posterity know, that the Condition that God
required to be performed in the Covenant of Nature, was now become utterly void
and null. p. 37 33. The second main End, why the Covenant of Nature was to last
no longer, then until the trial of Adams obedience was made by his act of
eating, was, because else God cannot be said to have completely finished the
heavens and the earth and all their several Hosts, within the compass of the
first six days, unless Adam did Fall, and were also created anew before the
End of the sixth Day, as a part of Gods spiritual and heavenly Host. p. 38 34.
In all the natural Creation, Christ must be considered but as the second person
in Trinity; but yet in the supernatural Creation of our first Parents (who must
be so created) before the end of the sixth day, he must be considered as
Mediator, or as God-man of the Seed of the deceived Woman. p. 38 35. Mr.
Baxter, and many others do affirm, That the Covenant of Nature is become
utterly null and void ever since Adam received the threatened punishment of a
spiritual death in sin. p. 39 36. Perfect obedience to the moral Law of Nature,
was not made the condition of Life in the covenant of Nature: but the only
condition of Fulfilling that Covenant, was no other but a trausient act of
eating first of the Tree of the twofold Life. p. 39 37. If the covenant of
Nature had been made in Relation to the moral Law of Adams Nature (which abides
for ever) then the same threatening must have still continued against the moral
law of Christ's humane Nature, which is of dangerous consequence to be affirmed.
p. 40 38. Mr. Nortons first Foundation, Proposition, in page 2. upon the which
his whole Book is builded, is opposed by Mr. Lawson: especially in the point of
Christ's doing the Law in a way of works. p. 42. 39. Diverse Orthodox Writers do
hold and affirm, That the kind of Life that was promised to Adam in the
covenant of Nature, was no other but the confirmation of his con*created life
after the Image of God, in moral perfections, in the sweet contents of an
earthly Paradise. p. 44 40. Spirituality, in 1 Cor. 15. 41. is opposed to
Animality: For a spiritual and glorified Body, is supported immediately without
any corporal means: But Adams animal Body was to be supported in Paradise by
corporal means. p. 44 41. Adam in his Innocence might not kill and eat the
flesh of any Creature: but being now fallen he has a liberty to eat flesh
through Christ's Sacrifice; For God ordained that Fallen-Adam should kill
harmless creatures for typical Sacrifices, and to eat part of that flesh: and
so consequently to kill and eat flesh at other times also. p. 47 42. No humane
Body is yet in Heaven, but the body of Christ only. p. 49 43. By the threatening
of the Covenant of Nature, Adams twofold spiritual death should have been
perpetuared in this World only, without any bodily death: in case Adam could
have kept himself from his after-sinning quality against the moral Law: For
then Gods Justice had not been provoked to inflict a bodily death upon all
Adams Fallen Posterity: and yet in that punishment, the Elect are of his rich
Grace distinguished from the Reprobates by their Faith in Christ. p. 52 49.
Between the covenant of Nature and the covenant of Grace there are five main
differences. p. 52 45. A further Description of the second part of our
spiritual death: namely of death in sin through the corruption of Nature, as it
was also threatened, in Genesis 2. 17. p. 54 46. The word Dead, is often used by
the Thalmudiques, for dead in sin: and from their familiar usage of that
phrase, our Savior and his Apostles did often use it in the New Testament, as
approving the care of their godly Ancestors in making it common. p. 55

CHAP. II.
47. Showing, That the kind of Death that is threatened in Genesis 2. 17. ought not
to be understood of a bodily Death. p. 58 48. A bodily death was not threatened,
until after the covenant of Reconciliation was first declared, in Genesis 3. 15.
and then in verse 19. it was first declared. p. 58 49. Such as hold a bodily
death to be threatened; in Gen 2. 17. cannot convince the Pelagians that a
bodily death was threatened for the punishment of original sin in Infants. p. 59
50. The death that was threatened, in Genesis 2. 17. did not breed any fear in
Ad^ms innocent-nature, because it was not threatened absolutely but
conditionally, only if he did eat of the Forbidden Fruit: But the bodily death
that was threatened after his Fall, in Genesis 3. 19. bred a present Fear in him,
because it was absolutely threatened for the punishment of his now begun
original sin. p. 60 51. As long as Adam stood in his innocence, there was no
object of natural Fear set before his eyes to provoke his possion of Fear. p.
61, 87 52. Symmachus Translation of Genesis 2. 17. and of Genesis 3. 15. is very
erroneous from the true sense, of that death that was threatened in the covenant
of Nature, in Genesis 2. 17. and 2. From the true person that was to break the
Devils Head-plot in the covenant of Reconciliation, in Genesis 3: 15. p. 63 53. In
the interval between Adams first begun original sin, and the Declaration of the
covenant of Grace, in Genesis 3. 15. A bodily death was not due to him by natural
necessity, until it was made due by the declared Will of God, after he had
first declared his new Covenant of Reconciliation, in Genesis 3. 15. But then he
made it due by his declared Will, in ver. 19. p. 67 54. It was not written in
the heart of Adam, that God would punish his new sinning quality, either with a
bodily death, or with an Eternal death in Hell. p. 68 55. God ordained three
general punishments in the covenant of Grace for original sin. p. 69, 10 56.
Such as look for a perfect sinlesse li^e under the Fift-Monarchy
(phantastically supposing that the Romans is the Fourth-Monarchy in Daniel) may
look their eyes out before they shall see it. p. 71, 299, 417, 423, 407. at N.
6.

CHAP. III.
57. Showing, that an Eternal death in Hell was not threatened in the covenant
of Nature, in Genesis 2. 17. p. 72 58. Sundry good Authors deny that an Eternal
death in Hell was threatened in the covenant of Nature, in Genesis 2. 17. p. 72.
59. The sufferings of Christ were not inflicted on him from the threatening of
the covenant of Nature, nor yet from the threatening of the covenant of Grace:
But they were inflicted on him from the enmity of his proclaimed Combater
Satan, which was also done by Gods appointment for the perfecting of his
Priestly consecration to his Sacrifice. p. 76 60. We are all by Nature the
Children of Wrath, because we are all born under the sin of Unbelief. p. 76 61.
It is proved by two Arguments taken out of Mr. Baxter, That neither a bodily
death, nor yet an Eternal death in Hell were threatened, in Genesis 2. 17. 1.
Because Christ is the Author of the Resurrection; and 2. Because Christ is the
Author of the last Judgment. p. 77

CHAP. IV.
62. A Further discussion of the covenant of Nature, and proving that Adams
natural understanding and will, were made in perfect obedience to the moral law
of his nature by Creation only, and not obliged thereunto by any superadded
Covenant. p. 80 63. Christ's obedience to the moral Law of nature, was no
obedience to the covenant of Nature, seeing the covenant of nature required no
other obedience for the fulfiling of it, but Adams once eating of the Tree of
Life in the first place: and from thence it follows, that Christ's obedience to
the moral law of Nature cannot be the matter of a believing siners
justification by Gods imputation. p. 80 64. Adams and Christ's obedience to the
moral law of Nature was not rendered unto God out of their voluntary choice, or
as it were Covenant-wife, but it was required of them as a due debt by the God
of Nature, and therefore that obedience that was so naturally due, cannot be
called meritorious obedience; of which see more in Chap. 13. sect. 4. p. 81 65.
Adam was put under the obedience of a mere transient positive Law by Gods
supreme command of the covenant of Nature, and not by Creation. p. 84 66. A
brief Description of the covenant of Nature made with Adam p. 84 67. The
Transient covenant of Nature was not made with Adam, until several distances of
time after his Creation. p. 84 68. Though Eve did first eat of the Forbidden
Fruit, yet she was not first put under the punishment of a spiritual death in
sin; God suspended her punishment until Adam the head in the Covenant had eaten
thereof. p. 85 69. Eves sin was not a wilful sin against the light of her
moral principles. p. 86, 96 70. As long as Adam continued in his innocence, no
object was set before his eyes that might necessarily provoke his natural Fear.
p. 87, 61 71. The Devil had not been subtle, in case he had first persuaded
Adam to eat of the Forbidden Fruit, For then the Devil after that could not
have persuaded the Woman to eat of it. p. 87 72. In case Adam had refused to
have eaten of the Forbidden Fruit from Eves hand: all his posterity should have
been confirmed in his con-created moral perfections. p. 88 73. The sin of the
Angels, was, their disobedience to Gods positive Command to attend upon Adam in
Paradise. p. 89 74. The Image of God after the which Adam was con-created,
stood in a perfect cnoformity to every circumstance of the moral law of Nature,
but not to every circumstance of his arbitrary or positive laws. p. 89 75. The
Reason why Adam before his Fall, and many others since, have transgressed Gods
arbitrary positives, was, because God was pleased to hide the internal Reasons
of those laws in his secret Decrees. p. 90 76. The arbitrary law of the
covenant of Nature did no way depend upon the moral law of Nature, as the
judicial and ceremonial laws did upon the Decalogue. p. 91 77. 1. The moral
law of Nature. 2. The transient arbitrary Law of the covenant of Nature; and 3.
The Law of Grace, are three differing sorts of laws: and therefore they are no
where comprehended under one and the same word Law, in one Text of the Bible:
(and of this see more in Chap. 5. at Reply 3.) p. 91 78. The con-created moral
law of Adams Nature was so perfectly made after the Image of God in moral
perfections, that he needed no positive law to be added thereto to make him
more perfect in moral Duties: and therefore as long as he stood in that
condition, he needed no Sabbath to prompt him to serve God better in one day
then in another: But it was Gods arbitrary Will to try his obedience by a
transient law about a transient act of eating. p. 92 79. Mr. Baxter, does
rightly make the Decalogue to differ from the moral law of Adams Nature. p. 93
80. Adams eating of the Forbidden Fruit, was no sin against any part of the
moral law of his Nature, neither could he sin against it, until he had first
sinned against the transient law of the Covenant of Nature: For which sin, God
deprived him of his moral perfections. p. 94 81. It is no small error to
affirm, That Adams act in eating the fo^bidden Fruit, was a sin against all the
ten Commandments. p. 96. 82. Adams sin was not a wilful sin: It was but an
unadvised stumble, through the d^ceit of Satan. p. 96, 86 83. A right
distinction must be made between the moral law of Nature, and the transient law
of the covenant of Nature: to preserve Expositors from many Errors. p. 98 84.
Adams first sin, did not depend upon his will and affections as they were made
by God, but on his transient bodily act of once eating only. p. 99 85. The
Devil could not tempt Eve inwardly, but outwardly only. p. 100

CHAP. V. Proving,
86. FIrst, that the law at Mount Sinai was given for no other Covenant, but of
Grace and Reconciliation only: namely, in the spiritual sense of it. p. 106 87.
Secondly, Though it was given for a Law of works to the National Church yet it
was so done in a typical Relation to the Covenant of Grace only p. 106, etc.
88. Thirdly, The ten Commandments is called The law of works, as it
comprehends the typical laws, but not in any Relation at all to the covenant
of Nature that was made with Adam. p. 106, etc. 89. The term moral Law, is
often ill applied by Mr. Norton, to the Ten-Commandements: 1. in Relation to
the moral law of Nature, and 2. to the covenant of Nature: seeing the
Ten-Commandements relate only to the Covenant of Grace. p. 106, 113, etc. 90.
Adam in his innocence could not believe in Christ, because justifying Faith was
inconsistent with that estate. p. 108 91. The cause of the Fall of one part of
the Angels, was, for their Refusing to attend on such Earthly Creatures as Adam
and Eve were: and the cause of confirming the other part, was their obedience
in attending on Adam and Eve. p. 110 92. The Elect Angels did accoiding to Gods
positive Law and Covenant, attend upon Adam and Eve in Paradise: but they did
not attend on them from any natural Instinct, for there was no natural
likeness between them, but in obedience to Gods positive Command only. p. 110
93. First, The moral law of Nature: 2. The transient law of the covenant of
Nature; and 3. The Law of the Covenant of Grace, must be distinguished into
three distinct sorts of Laws, and not confounded together under the same word
Law at Mount Sinai, as Mr. Norton does. p. 113 94. A true Description of Grods
positive Laws: Gods positive Laws are not such laws as are inbred,
imprinted, or infused into the heart of man: as the moral law of Nature was
into Adams heart: neither are they infused into the heart of man by the law of
Grace; but they are such laws as are imposed only by the external Command of
the supreme Lawgiver: so they have the name Positive, from the external
imposition or constitution of the Lawgiver, and not from the internal law of
Nature. p. 116 95. God made many positive Laws and Covenants for the trial of
obedience, by some particular bodily acts only. p. 116 96. God made many
positive Covenants, for the bodily good of some particular persons, upon
condition of their performing the bodily act, either of seeing, hearing,
eating, etc. p. 118 97. It is a great Error, to make the Low at Mount Sinai,
to comprehend three distinct and different kind of laws, in a proper sense. p.
124 98. Mr. Rutherford, denies the Decalogue to belong to the Law of works
given to Adam. p. 125 99. The Law at Mount Sinai, was given for no other
Covenant, but of Grace for Fallen man's salvation in Heaven: and therefore it
cannot comprehend the law of the covenant of Nature that was made with innocent
Adam. p. 125 100. The Covenant made at Horeb, was the same in substance that
God made with Abraham. And of this see more in Chap. 6. sect. 5. N. 8. p. 126
101. All the Promises and Threatenings, from Genesis 3. 15. to the end of the
Bible, do descend from the Covenant of Grace, and not from the covenant of
Nature made with Adam. p. 128 102 The typical laws are a part of the covenant
of Grace that was made at Mount Sinai. p. 132 103. The word Law, in abundance
of Scripture, does Relate to that internal sense of the word Law, as it was
given for a covenant of Grace at Mount Sinai, p. 132. add this note with your
Pen to line 8. 104. The covenant made with Adam, was not given to him as a law
of works in the plural. p. 133 105. There is no other law of works (in the
plural) in all the Bible, but the levitical works, which God ordained at Mount
Sinai for the typical pattern of the Covenant of Grace. p. 135. 106. 106. None
that were defiled with ceremonial sins, might presume to come into Gods holy
Temple, under the penalty of cutting off, until they were made holy again, by
being justified from those sins by the works of the levitical Law, p. 136 107.
God promised to Forgive the guilt of ceremonial sins to all the National
Church, in case they did but observe the outward works of the levitical Law: ex
opere operato. p. 136 108. The Jews were called a holy Nation, in Relation to
their typical Church-holinesse, as well as in Relation to the true typified
holiness, which such only had that were Believers among them. p. 136 109. It
was in Relation to the law of works that Jesus Christ ordained many lawful
things at Mount Sinai, to be ceremonially sinful to the defiling of their body
(though not to the defiling of their Consciences) that so they might be
justified therefrom by the typical works of the Law. p. 137 110. As God did
command the National Church to do the outward works of the levitical Law, as
the only condition to be performed on their part, for the justification of
their bodies from their ceremonial sins: so he has in like sort commanded such
as sin morally to believe in Christ, as the only condition to be performed on
their part for their souls justification from their moral sins. p. 137, 140
111. A Description of those works of the Law which were ordained for their
bodily justification from their ceremonial sins. p. 139 112. The command to
wash Garments, did always include a command to wash the body for the effecting
of their bodily justification from certain ceremonial sins. p. 139 113. The
Condition that was required to be performed by the Jews for the justification
of their bodies from their ceremonial sins, was by their bodily doing of the
typical works of the Law: which way of their justification was also ordained to
be for an exemplary pattern of their Souls justification from their moral sins:
on condition they did believe in Christ the meritorious cause of Gods
Atonement, and forgiveness for their Formal justification. p. 140, 137. 114.
Christ is the Spirit of the Letter, and also of the Types of Moses Law, to all
such as have Faith in him, as I have also showed in my Exposition of Romans 8. 2.
p. 142 115. The Ancient Rabbis did look into the spiritual sense of the letter
of the law, and also into the spiritual sense of the Types, which included the
Doctrine of Regeneration, and also of justification from moral sins. p. 142
116, It is a great Error, to make the moral law of Nature to be the matter of
a sinners justification. p, 145 117. The Covenant at Mount Sinai is called Two
Covenants, because the Covenant of Grace was typified by the covenant of Works:
but in case the Covenant made with Adam had been still in being for a sinners
justification, then the Apostle should have called them (not Two, but) Three
Covenants: or else he did much forget himself in his Account. p. 146 118. The
Law was ordained to be a teaching Schoolmaster unto Christ for justification by
Faith in him. p. 146 119. Mr. Woodbridge, denies that a sinners justification
does proceed from the matter of Adams obedience to the covenant of Nature: and
2. he denies that Covenant to be now in force point blank against Mr. Norton.
p. 148 120. God can make the Formal cause of a sinners justification without
any matter that is properly so called, though man cannot by his natural Reason
Form any thing without matter. p. 154 121. Arguments taken a Simili, in
transferring unto God the same order of causes, that man's natural Reason is led
by, in his order of working: is of dangerous consequence to the hatching of
many great Errors in Divinity. p. 154 122. The two Tables do in some sense
belong to the typical Law of works. p. 159 123. Luther denies the moral
obedience of Christ to be the matter of a sinners just^fication, he makes the
passive obedience of Christ to be the only procuring cause of a sinners
justification. p. 161 124. Luther says, That the Garment of Righteousness
according to the Gospel, is not to be apparaled with the law, or with works:
but with Remission of sins, whicht for Christ his sake is given to believing
sinners for their perfect Righteousness. p. 163 125. He that is acquitted from
all sin by Gods Forgiveness, is thereby made perfectly Righteous to Eternal
Life. p. 168 126. Adam in his innocent Estate needed a confirmation, but no
Justification properly so called. p. 172 127. Dr. Willet denies the obedience
of Christ in his sufferings, in his Death, in his Conception, in his
incarnation and in his Miracles, to be any part of moral obedienc^ and affirms
it to be but positive obedience only. p. 175,

CHAP. VI.
178 GIving some directions for the right understanding of the word Law, in the
Apostles Disputation with the false Apostles p. 117 179. The word Law, is to be
taken most commonly in a large sense for all the Economy of Moses, but yet
sometimes it is to be taken by the Figure Synecdoche for a part. p. 177 180.
The word Law, is sometimes put by the Figure Synecdoche, for the typical works
or Rites of the Law. p. 178 111. The typical works of the Law were not ordained
for their own sakes good, but to be as a teaching Schoolmaster unto the
covenant of Grace. p. 179 182. The National Church covenanted to do the whole
Law, not only outwardly with their bodies, but by Faith in Christ in their
Souls. p. 180 183. The legal promises that were made for the justification of
the body from their ceremonial sins by the typical works of the Law, were
typical promises of the souls justification from moral sins by the procuring
cause of Christ's moritorious death. p. 182. 184. The Elected Infant that dies
before it has gotten Faith by hearing, has it wrought in its Soul by the holy
Spirit, as the condition of its justification. p. 138 185. A godly Woman in
Childbed was morally justified by her Faith in Christ, and yet nevertheless
she was unjustified legally until she had done the typical works of the Law for
her bodily justification. p. 183 186. The Covenant at Mount Sinai, is called
Two Covenants, because it had an outward typical part, as well as an inward
typified part. p. 184 187. If the covenant made with Adam, had been
comprehended under the Decalogue, then the Apostle should have called them, not
two, but three Covenants. p. 184 188. The New Testament is called the better
Testament, because it does just^fie the Soul from moral sins. p. 185 189. Every
particular, both of the typical, and also of the typified part of the Covenant
made at Mount Sinai, may be truly called the Covenant by the figure Synecdoche.
p. 187 190. Persons that were guilty of ceremonial sins, might appear before
God in his Synagogue-worship every Sabbath Day, but not in the holy Temple upon
pain of cutting off, or of death until they were justified therefrom by the
works of the Law. p. 189 191. The Decalogue does in some Respects belong to the
law of Rites, by 2 Cor. 3. 7, For the typical Worship that was commanded to be
used by the second Commandment, and the typical Rest that was commanded to be
observed by the fourth Commandment, were engraven in stone: and yet all this
was to be done away by the death of Christ. p. 190 192. Some moral sins was
ordained by Gods positive Law to defile the Body, and the holy place also
ceremonially, as well as the Conscience morally. p. 190 193. The Seventy for
Tzedec justified in Dan. 8. 14. and in Job 4. 17. do render it by (...),
cleansed or purified: and thence it follows, that such as are cleansed from sin
by Gods Atonement, are Formally justified thereby. p. 191

CHAP. VII.
194. MR. Nortons Exposition of Gal. 3. 10. of doing the whole Law by perfect
Nature as in Adam by Christ our Surety, for our justification, is briefly
confuted. p. 196 195. The False-Apostles taught the believing Gentiles, that
their faith in Christ was not sufficient for their justification from all sin,
unless they did join the works of the law thereto. p. 200 196. The degenerated
Hebrew Doctors, do not expound the Statutes, in Lev. 18. 5. as Mr. Norton does
of the law of the covenant of Nature, but of their bodily doing of all the
Statutes, as the condition to be performed on their part for their eternal Life
in Heaven; and 2. They also say, That those works are to be done as the
condition of Eternal life to the end of the world. p. 202 197. The Apostle does
confute their Doctrine of justification by the works of the Law, by three sorts
of Arguments. p. 203

CHAP. VIII.
198. BY every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
Book of the Law, is meant, every one that continues not to perform their
Covenant, which they promised to perform at Mount Sinai, by getting into their
hearts the grace of Faith in Christ, who is the only true End of the whole Law.
p. 204 199. The whole National Church promised to do the whole Law by Faith in
Christ, or else to suffer the Curse of it as Covenant-breakers, by saying Amen
at the end of every Curse that was pronounced. p. 206 200. Seeing the Law at
Mount Sinai, was given for no other Covenant but that of Grace; it does from
thence follow, that the National Church did covenant to do it by Faith in
Christ, when they said with one mouth, All that Jehovah said we will do. p. 207
201. The Law at Mount Sinai, did promise Forgiveness to repenting and
believing sinners, therefore it was not given as the moral Law of Adams
concreated Nature in that separated sense as it was given to Adam, but in a
conjunct sense to the Covenant of Grace. p. 208 202. A true Description of the
true Fear of God. p. 209 203. This phrase, he that continues not, is borrowed
from the Seventy, in Dan. 27. 26. and means no other but the same, that is
expressed by the word confirm. p. 211 204. Nothing but Faith in Christ does
make sinners to continue to do the whole Law, as it was given for a Covenant of
Reconciliation: therefore such as did it by bodily exercise only without Faith,
did not continue to do the Law but were Covenant-breakers. p. 211 205. No sin
does utterly break the Covenant of Grace, but finnal Unbelief. p. 211, 224 206.
Gods Reconciliation procured for beileving sinners by the mediation of Christ,
does make them holy and without blemish, and spotless in his sight, that is to
say, it does Fully and Formal^y justify them. p. 212 207. The true nature of
Faith, is a steady and firm persuasion of the Promises. p. 218 208. Imposition
of hands upon the head of their sacrifices was ordained to be a typical sign of
their faith of dependence upon the true sacrifice which was ordained to be only
the procuring cause of Gods Atonement for their justification. p. 214 209. The
Hebrew Doctors did usually call sacrifices their Atonement. p. 215 210. By [All
things] in Gal. 3. 10. is meant, 1. Every command. 2. Every promise, and 3.
every threatening. p. 215 211. Faith in Christ is the most principal part of
those all things, all that is commanded in the Law, to be done for an eternal
life in heaven. p. 216.

CHAP. IX.
212. Showing what is meant by this phrase to do them. p. 216 213. By this
phrase to do them, is meant the true doing of the Law (as it was given for a
Covenant of Grace) by faith in Christ only; who is the true end of the whole
Law. p. 217 214. Cornelius is said to work the righteousness of the Law no
otherwise but by his faith in Christ: seeing he lived in a heathen Country
where the chief works of the Law by sacrifices might not be used. p. 218 215.
The doing of Gods Statutes in Lev. 18. 5. is not meant of that kind of doing
that was required of Adam in the Covenant of nature, but of the true doing of
them in the typified sense by faith in Christ. p. 222 216. In what sense the
end of the commandment is love, 1 Timothy 1. 5. and how fath works by love, Gal.
5. 6. p. 224, 240, 233, 250 217. The seventy render the word Statutes, in Deuteronomy.
6. 1, 2, 17, 20, 24. by Dicoiomata, justifications. p. 226 218. In the Covenant
of Grace and Reconciliation God has ordained no other kind of justification
for believing sinners, but negative holiness and righteousness by his
reconciled forgiveness procured by the meritorious obedience of Christ in his
death and sacrifice. p. 226 219. The Covenant of grace was given, not only to
visible believers, but to their children also upon the only condition of
believing in Christ. p. 227 220. The Prophet Ezekiel does expound the true
doing of all Moses Law to be by faith in Christ. p. 229 221. None can truly
keep Gods Statutes, but such as truly repent of their sins p 230 222. Gods
forgiveness through faith in Christ, is called a sinners righteousness. p. 230
223. The speeches of the godly under Moses Law, do in their prayers,
meditations and exhortations, witness that they do understand the doing of
Gods Statutes to extend to the true doing of them (in the typified sense) by
faith in Christ. p. 232 224. Such as have faith in Christ, the procuring cause
of Gods atonement and forgiveness are justified from the guilt of all sin: and
thereby are accounted of God to keep the whole Law perfectly, as it was given
for a covenant of reconciliation. p. 233, 238, 240, 250 225. David makes a true
description of a sinners justification in Psalm. 103. 17, 18. p. 233 226.
Sinners must labor to get the supernatural work of faith into their souls by
the diligent use of the means, before they can be justified from the condemning
power of their sins. p 234. 227. Faith in Christ does make repenting sinners to
be as perfectly righteous, as the Law of Moses does require them to be. p. 238,
233, 240, 250 228. The New Testament does expound the true doing of all Moses
Law to be by faith in Christ only. p. 239 229. The grace of love and of faith
that works by love, does make a sinner keep Gods Commandments perfectly. p.
240, 224, 233, 238, 250 230. Luther in Gal. 3. 10. does interpret these words,
To do them of such a doing as is by faith in Christ, or else to be under the
curse of the Law. p. 250, 233, 238, 240 231. Luther held, That faith in Christ
was taught in the first, second and third Commandments, and also in the whole
Law of Moses. p. 251 232. The whole moral righteousness of Adams nature
performed by Christ cannot be the matter of a sinners justification. p. 251
233. Mr. Wotton says, That the imputation of righteousness which is often
mentioned by Luthe^ in his Commentary on the Galatians, is merely remission of
sins, and Gone accepting us thereby, as if we were righteous. p. 252 234. Lev.
18. 5. is expounded by ^uther of the inward doing of the Law by faith in
Christ; and his Expsiotion is much approved by Mr. Wilson in his Theological
Rules for the right understanding of the Scriptures. p. 253 235. Mr. Norton
does approve Luther, for making Christ the greatest sinner in the world: But
Mr. Ga^aker does condemn him for it. p. 254

CHAP. X.
236. BY the curse of the Law in Gal. 3. 10. is meant the eternal curse of the
Covenant of Grace, and not the curse of the Covenant of Nature, as Mr. Norton
does hold, to the utter confounding of those two different Covenants. p. 255

CHAP. XI.
237. Showing that Christ is called a Surety of the better Testament in Heb. 7.
22. in relation to his eternal intercession in heaven, and not in relation to
the Covenant of nature that was made with Adam. p. 259 238. Christ could not by
the Justice of Gods Law be made the Surety of the Elect, to do the command, and
to suffer the curse of the Covenant of nature made with Adam. p. 260, 263 239.
The wrath of God defined by Austin. p 262 240. Christ as Mediator could not be
the Surety of the Elect in the Covenant of nature, to do the command, and to
suffer the curse of it for man's redemption. p. 263. 260 241. The word Surety in
Heb. 7. 22. is put for Certainty to our faith, because God by his oath did make
him to be a certain, or a sure high Priest, to make continual intercession for
believing sinners, according to his promise in the better Testament. p. 267
242. Not only the Law of Nations, but also the Law of God does forbid to admit
Sureties to suffer the same corporal punishments, that is due to capital
offenders. p. 271 243. Grotious in his war and peace does confute Grotious in
the point of Suretyship formerly declared de justificatione Christi. p. 27^
244. Sometimes Sureties are admitted for Delinquents in some cases, but yet n^^
to suffer their bodily pains, much less to suffer death for them; but by paying
a certain sum of money, in case they appear not at the the time appointed to
answer the justice of the Law. p. 274 245. Punishments improperly so called
must carefully be distinguished from punishments that are properly so called.
p. 275 Dr. Manton says on Jam. p. 18. We must not forget the distinction
between punishment and trial: The fruit of punishment is despair and murmuring:
But of Trial, Patience, and sweet submission. And says he, in p. 20. Inocency
is best tried by iniquity. 246. A Surety cannot in propriety of speech be
justly punished for the fault of another. p. 276 247. If merit of punishment be
personal, then the sufferings of Christ cannot in propriety be called
punishments, unless it be Proved, that he was first personally guilty of sin.
p. 276 248. It is no good justice to punish innocent Children for their
Fathers. sin. p. 277 249. Suerties or hostages of war, (if personally innocent)
ought not to be put to death for the delinquency or trachery of others. p. 277
250. It is a dangerous Assertion to say, That God imputed the sins of the Elect
to Christ, as the obligation to vindicate punishments. (Of which see more in C.
13. in Sect. 4. p. 280 251. By Christ's righteousness Luther does not mean his
moral righteousness, but his righteous performance of his sufferings and death.
p. 281 252. The Doctrine of our spiritual union with Christ does not make us
the same person with him in his obedience, both in his doings and sufferings,
p. 281 253. There is a wide difference between a surety for mony-matters, and a
Surety that suffers the punishment of capital offenders; in case any such
sureties were allowed by law. p 285 254. In some cases men may, as voluntary
sureties lay down their lives for others, but not as bounden Sureties for
Delinquents. p. 285

CHAP. XII.
255. GOds declaration of the first Warlike Combat, was delivered with
terror to the devil; But yet as it was delivered in the hearing of our first
fallen Parents, it employed a promise of Grace and reconciliation to them. p.
287 256. The second person as Mediator does appear in a humane shape to
threaten the breaking of the devils head-plot, by a double warlike Combat,
for the redemption of our fallen Parents. p. 288 257. Dr. Manton says on James
p. 258. 2. 8. The same Lord Jesus that gave the Gospel, gave also the Law. Asts
7. 38. And says, He the Apostle proves, (in Heb. 12. 25. to the end) That it
it was the voice of the Lord Jesus that shook mount Sinai: And says he, It is
a known Rule in Divinity, that the Father never appeared in any shape; and
therefore all those apparitions in the old Testament were of the second person:
Add this note to page 288 258. The occasion how enmity come first into one part
of the Angels, is described in p. 291. Add this note with your pen at N. 2.
259. Christ did not take flesh from any unbelieving Parent; and therefore when
Judah committed Incest with Thamar, (which she knew to be that sin) they were
then believers, and repented, and were pardoned, and never after committed that
sin. p. 296 260. Christ was ordained in the Covenant of Grace to be the head of
all believers. p. 296 261. Adams conversion is evidenced and recorded, by
giving of the new name, Evah, (life) to his wife, after their death in sin. p.
296 262. The second Warlike Combat between the devils potent seed, and one
single seed of the poor deceived woman, is described. p. 299. 263. Such as do
yet expect an universal glorious Church of Christ in this world thereby go
about to frustrate the declared decree of God of that perpetual warlike enmity
which he has caused to be put between the godly seed of Eves faith, and the
seed of Satan. p. 299. Add this note with your pen at line 4. and see the like
observation in. p. 71. 417. 423 264. Bullenger makes the Decalogue and the Law
of rites, which were both given at mount Sinai, (to be both alike given) for
the Covenant of grace. p. 302 265. The word He in Genesis 3. 15. does comprehend
both the natures of Christ in personal union. p. 305 366. The devil is said, To
have a head, because of the head-plot of all the Angels that fell to deceive
Adam and Eve. p. 306 267. God gave the devil a liberty of power to pierce the
human nature of Christ in the footstools, as a wicked Malefactor on the cross:
p. 307 268. How and in what sense Austin calls the death of Christ, not a death
of condition, but of crime. p. 309 269. The promise made to Abraham in Genesis 12.
3. depends upon Genesis 3. 15. for for its true opposition. p. 310 Genesis 49. 10,
depends on Genesis 3. 15. For its true sense and meaning how the Nations shall be
gathered unto Shilo by the preaching of Christ Crucified. p. 312

CHAP. XIII.
270. A Price in general described. p. 315 271. The meritorious price which is
sometimes given for some eminent thing, is the performance of some dangerous
warlike personal service. p. 315 272. P. Martyr describes the meritorious
price of man's redemption, by Christ's performing of a Warlike combat. p. 317
273. Mr. Wotton describes the meritorious cause of Reconciliation, (and of man's
redemption thereby) to the meritorious running of a Race, or the like. p. 320
274. The imputation of any sin to voluntary combats by the Masters of the
game, does cause such combats to loose the prize. p. 320 275. The punishments
which Christ suffered from his proclaimed Combater Satan, and his seed was
suffered without any imputation of sin from Gods vindicatiue justice. p. 320
276. Abundance of Scriptures that speak of, the sufferings of Christ cannot be
so well understood, as by referring them to Genesis 3. 15. for their true sense
and meaning. p. 320 277. Austin describes a believing sinners justification: 1.
By the meritorious cause of Christ's blood. And, 2. By the formal cause of Gods
forgiveness, without joining thereto the imputation of Christ's moral
righteousness. p. 325 278. Christ died for all the world, upon condition of
their believing in him. p. 328 279. Mr. Nortons description of Christ's merits,
by his obedience to the moral Law of nature, is a false description. p. 336
280. No Act of obedience can properly be called meritorious, but such only as
are distinguished from natural actions, by the voluntary Election of the Will.
p. 337 281. The ancient Divines taught, That Christ's fear and sorrow in the
garden, was not inflicted on him from Gods wrath, but that he assumed it from
his own humane will, according to covenant, that so it might be meritorious. p.
337 282. To impute sin has but two senses in Scripture. p. 343 283. These
three, 1. Sin. 2. Guilt. And, 3. Punishment are Correlates in the same subject,
and not sin in us: And guilt and punishment (properly so called) in Christ. p
345 284. Our souls became dead in sin, Genesis 2. 17. and then the body was made
subto death, as a general punishment for original sin, Genesis 3. 19. p 254 285.
The fire of the Altar that burned the Sacrifices, was no type of the wrath of
God, in making Christ's death a Sacrifice. p. 354

CHAP. XIV.
286. BEing an Exposition of Dan. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27. The seventy-Sevens, in
Dan. 9. 24. ought not to be translated weeks, but years. p. 369 287. Seeing God
sent the Angel Gabriel to Daniel, to inform him, that the number of
seventy-Sevens of years were exactly accounted to the death of Christ: It can
be no less then blasphemy to affirm, that he named a certain number for an
uncertain. p. 370, 403 288. The beginning and ending of Daniels seventy-Sevens
of years were exactly accounted: and thence it follows, that such as cannot see
it are blinded with ignorance or prejudice. p. 370 289. Danie^s seventy-Sevens
is for the stronger certainty sake delivered twice over. p. 371 290. Rulers of
people ought to be as foster-Fathers both in Church and Commonwealth. p. 372
291. This Title, holy City, holy Land, and holy People, was to be continued no
longer to the Jews, then until the death of Christ. p. 373 292. The word
Trespass, in Dan. 9. 24. must not be taken in a proper sense, but in a
metaphorical sense only, namely, for Trespass-Offerings. p. 375 293. Many words
in Scripture do abound with Equivocations: namely, with variety of metaphorical
senses: (Of which see more in Chap. 24 N. 10. 11, 12.) p. 375 194. To end sins,
in Dan. 9. 24. does signify, to end Sin Offerings. p. 376 295. The double
Hebrew Reading, both in the line and Margin, were given by the holy Ghost at
the first writing of the Scriptures* p. 377 296. Sealing of Sin Offerings by
the death of Christ, does signify the last finishing act of Gods decreed
Sentence, and does witness it to be Definitive. p. 378 297. Christ made
Reconciliation for unrighteousness by his meritorious Death and Sacrifice. p.
378 298. God bruised Christ with the self-same delight that he took in the
efficacy of it: the salvation of the Elect which did prosper by his Hands in
the last clause of the same verse of Esaias 53. 10. and with the same delight
Christ did Gods acceptable Will, in his death, Psalm 40. 8. Add, note this with
your Pen to page 378. at N. 1. 299. A true Description of a sinners everlasting
Righteousness: namely, of his evelasting justification from the guilt of sin.
p. 380 300. The Ancient Hebrew Doctors called the Days of the Messiah, the
world to come. p. 381 301. Neither the Righteousness of ^he covenant of
Nature; nor yet the Righteousness of the moral law of Nature are imputed to
sinners for their justification: nothing else is imputed to them for their
justification, but the supernatural Righteousness of Gods Reconciled
Forgiveness, for the sake of Christ's meritorious obedience in his death and
Sacrifice. p. 382 302. Christ Fulfilled every particular suffering that was
foretold by the Prophets, from Genesis 3. 15. to his giving up of the Ghost. p.
383 303. Christ was four times anointed, after four several manners. p. 385
304. Christ's Conception by the holy Ghost, was not his anointing into the
Mediators Office. p. 386 305. The Word did assume our flesh into personal
Union, before his immortal Soul was infused. p. 386 306. Christ was not
extrinsecally anointed into the Mediators Office, until he began to be thirty
Years of age. p. 388, 391, 393 307. The Father did beget, or raise up his Son
Christ to the extrinsecal execu^ution of his Mediators Office, when he anointed
him by the holy Ghost at his Baptism, which was done before John's Auditory
when he began to be thirty Years of age. p. 391 308. The time when Christ did
first take upon him the extrinsecal Form of a Servant, was from the same time
that he took upon him the extrinsecal Form of a Mediator, which was, when he
was anointed at his Baptism, beginning then to be thirty Years of age. p. 393,
420, 421 309. The fourth kind of anointing the Messiah, was, by his
consecrating sufferings at the time of his death. p. 397 310. Such Combaters as
subscribe their names to undergo the burden of the Combat, were wont to be
anointed by way of preparation to the Combat. p. 398 311. By the decreed
Covenant of the blessed Trinity, Christ was to be consecrated or made perfect
in his obedience through sufferings, before he could make his death to be
accepted as a pleasing Sacrifice, for the procuring of his Fathers Reconciled
Forgiveness to believing sinners p. 400 312. Every Grace of the Spirit
wherewith Christ was anointed, for the execution of his Mediators Office, was
to be tried with bruising afflictions. p. 400 313. Christ is called the Holy of
Holies, by allusion to the most holy typical Rites, that were consecrated with
the most holy anointing Oil. p. 401 314. The Jews ignorance of the certain
time of Daniels seventy-Sevens, was the cause of their ignorance of the time of
Christ's preaching, and also of the time of his Death, to the blinding of their
minds in Unbelief. p. 406 315. Daniels phrase, of ending Sin-(Offerings) and
Paul's phrase, of putting away of sin-(Offerings) by the death of Christ, do
sweetly open each other. p. 407 316. The first seven Sevens, or forty nine
Years, is divided by the Angel, for the more eminent observation of the just
time of the building and Restoring of the Temple and City. p. 409 317. Though
the Messiah is commonly used for a name of Office: yet it is also used for the
proper name of Christ the Redeemer, in Dan. 9. 25, 26. p. 411 318. Messiah the
King, in Dan. 6. 25. was not to come as a pompous King, but as a spiritual Kin
to his spiritual Kingdom. p. 412 319. The Angel told Daniel, in Chap. 9. 26.
That Messiah the King should suffer a most ignominious death, by that wicked
generation wherein he lived, without any sin, namely, at the just end of the
said seventy-Sevens of years. p. 413 320. Such as do yet look for a glorious
Church of converted Jews in the land of Canaan, are extremely ignorant of the
definitive Sentence of the final Desolation of that Land and City. p. 417, 423,
and p. 271, 299 221. Christ executed his Mediators Office extrinsecally but for
three years; and a half, p. 420, 391, 393 322. The Ancient Hebrew Doctors held,
That Christ should declare himself openly but for three years and an half. p.
421 323. Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the G^ntiles, until the time of
the Gentiles calling to the Faith be Fulfilled: and it is certain that their
call^ng to the Faith, shall last to the end of the world. p. 423, 417

CHAP. XV.
324. PRoving from the Hebrew word Caphar, That Gods Reconciled Forgiveness
for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice, is a believing sinners perfect holiness and
Righteousness to everlasting life. p. 425 325. Inherent holiness and
Righteousness, was not ordained to justify sinners in Gods sight, seeing that
holiness does not make them perfect from the guilt of all sin, as Gods
Reconciled Forgiveness does. p. 425 326. Gods Reconciled Forgiveness for the
sake of Christ's Sacrifice, does Fully justify believing sinners from the guilt
of all their sins. p. 427 327. As sin is called Unrighteousness or iniquity,
so Gods Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice, must, (by the Rule of
Contraries) be called a Believing sinners Righteousness: Or his Equity of
Justification from sin. p. 430 328. Gods Atonement is not only his bare
Forgiveness; but it does comprehend also his Receiving of believing sinners
into special Favor. p. 431, 442 329. When God is Reconciled to believing
sinners by the pleasing Sacrifice of Christ, then he is at Rest from his Anger
against their sins. p. 432 330. Gods Reconciled Forgiveness procured by
Christ's Sacrifice, does make believing sinners to be as perfectly holy and
righteous in Gods sight; as his Covenant of Reconciliation does require them to
be. p. 433, 438 331. God ordained the death of Christ to be a Sacrifice of
Righteousness, 1. In Relation to his righteous performance; and 2. In Relation
to the Efficacy of it, in procuring Gods atoned Forgiveness for the perfect
justification of believing sinners from the guilt of all their sins. p. 439
332. Faith is a sinners justification no otherwise, but as it is the condition
to be performed on the sinners part, for his perfect justification from the
guilt of all his sins. p. 440, 476 333. Mr. Ainsworth, does clearly make the
Sacrifice of Christ to be the procuring cause of Gods atonement for the
justification of believing sinners. p. 441

CHAP. XVI.
334. GOds Reconciled Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice, is called
His me^cifull Forgiveness, because it does Fully justify believing sinners
from the guilt of all their sins. p. 442

CHAP. XVII.
335. Showing from the Hebrew word Caphar, and from the Greek word Lutron: That
Gods Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice, is called Redemption: that
is to say, justification from the guilt of sin. p. 445 336. It is by the virtue
of Gods positive Covenant, that the obedience of Christ in all his sufferings,
and in his death and Sacrifice, is accepted as the meritorious price of man's
Redemption and Justification. p. 445 337. God made no covenant with man for an
Eternal Life in Heaven, by the works of the first typical Testament: that
Covenant was only made to be as a teaching Schoolmaster to the covenant of
Grace: because it ordained those typical works but for the justification of the
body from their ceremonial sins, and not from their moral sins: those kind of
sins remained unpurged by the works of the first typical Testament. p. 447 338.
Gods Tribunal, from whence he does give forth the Sentence of his Reconciled
Forgiveness for the justification of believing sinners from the guilt of all
their sins, is no other but his Propitiatory, or his Mercy-seat in Christ's
blood. p. 448

CHAP. XVIII.
339. Showing, that Gods Forgiveness for the sake of Christ's Sacrifice, is
called w^shing, purging, cleansing of sin: that is to say, Justification from
sin. p. 450 340. Gods washing of believing sinners from the guilt of their
moral sins by his Reconciled Forgiveness, does make them to be whiter in his
sight them Adam was in his innocence. p. 450 341. To purify, justify, and
sanctify from sin, is one and the same thing in the Levitical Law, which was
ordained to be as a teaching Schoolmaster unto justfication by Christ. p. 455
342. Gods atonement procured by the meritorious obedience of Christ in his
Combat of sufferings, and in his death and Sacrifice, is the Top-mercy of all
mercies, that makes poor sinners happy. p. 461, 387

CHAP. XIX.
343. Showing from Chatta in piel, That Gods Reconciled Forgiveness for the
sake of Christ's Sacrifice, does make believing sinners to be sinlesse: that is
to say, to be as perfectly holy and righteous as the covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation does require them to be, for their attaining of the Heavenly
inheritance. p. 465, 484 344, The name of the effect is often given to the
procuring cause. p. 466

CHAP. XX.
345. Showing from the Hebrew word Nasa, that Gods Forgivevesse for the sake of
Christ's Sacrifice, does bear, or carry the guilt of sin from believing sinners.
p: 471 346. The only reason why Faith is imputed unto Righteousness, is,
because it qualifies sinners to be the Subjects Recipient of Gods Reconciled
Forgiveness for their perfect justification from the guilt of sin. p. 476, 440
347. Calvin held the Formal cause of Justification, to lie only in Gods
Forgiveness. p. 476 348. A true Description of the Imputtaion of Christ's
Righteousness for the justification of believing sinner. p. 482

CHAP. XXI.
349. Showing from the Hebrew word Rapha, That Gods Forgiveness for the sake
of Christ's Sacrifice, does so thoroughly heal a sinner, that it makes him as
perfectly whole, just and sound from the guilt of sin, as the Covenant of
Reconciliation does require him to be. p. 484, 465 350. Gods Reconciled
Forgiveness does not only deliver from Hell, but it gives a Right also to
Heaven to all believing sinners. p. 486 351. Gods Reconciled Forgiveness is a
true ground of the greatest joy and rejoicing to believing sinners that can be
expressed or conceived. p. 487, 461

CHAP. XXII.
352. Showing from Cheshab and Zacar, etc. in the Adverb, That Gods Reconciled
Forgiveness is called, his not imputing sin, his not remembering sin, but it is
called, His blotting of it out of his Remembrance. p. 490 353. Luther makes a
Believers Righteousness to be nothing else, but Gods gracious Pardon and
Forgiveness: and that Gods not looking upon sin to mark it, is to justify or
pronounce that man to be Righteous. p. 491

CHAP. XXIII.
354. Showing from the Hebrew word Nachum and Shubh: That Gods Forgiveness is
called, His Repentance, or his not punishing sin. p. 495 355. When God is said
to Repent of his threatened punishments to believing sinners, it is a true mark
of his atoned Forgiveness, and of his receiving them into special Favor, as
justified persons. p 495

CHAP. XXIV.
356. EXpounding every word of Esaias 53. 5. p. 499 356. Sundry Hebrew words have
many metaphorical senses. p. 501 358. All Christ's sufferings were but
Chastisements, for the trial of his Obedience before he could make his death to
be accepted as a pleasing Sacrifice for the procuring of Gods Recnociled
Forgiveness for our peace and healing. p. 503 359. Mr. Baxter does show, That
Chastisements are Punishments, belonging to the godly as well as to the wicked,
in his Confession, p. 119. 121, 126, 164, etc. and Mr. woodbridge, he does
affirm the same in his Method, p. 164. And Mr. Clendon, on Justification, p.
403.

CHAP. XXV.
360. Showing 1. Negatively, That the Righteousness of the Law, in Romans 8. 2,
3, 4. ought not to be understood of the Righteousness of the moral Law of
Nature, imputed to sinners for their justification, as Mr. Norton does corrupt
the word Law, to speak 2. Affirmatively, That the Righteousness of the Law,
must be understood of that negative Righteousness that is taught in the
covenant of Reconciliation for the justification of believing Sinners, by Gods
not imputing sin to them. p. 508 361. The Spirit of the Law, in Romans 8. 2. is
nothing else but Christ, and Faith in Christ, by which means sinners are
perfectly freed from the Law of sin and Death. p. 511 362. The Law of Works was
ordained to justify the bodies of the National Church from their ceremonial
sins: But those works were too weak to justify the Conscience from moral sins,
as the false Apostles taught. p. 515 363. God sent his Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh: because he sent him to be used by Satan and his seed as the
worst of sinful Malefactors, for the perfecting of his Obedience by those
consecrating sufferings, before he could make his Death to be accepted as a
pleasing Sacrifice for the procuring of Gods Reconciled Forgiveness for the
justification of believing Sinners. p. 520 364. True justification from moral
sins was typified by the bodily justifications of the Jews: and that typified
Justification is fulfilled in them that walk not after those fleshly
Justifications, but after the Spirit of Justification, which is Christ: and
Faith in Christ's Death and Sacrifice. p. 522 365. The word Law, in the Apostles
Dispute with the false Apostle about the point of Justification, must be
understood of the whole Economy of Moses. p. 524 369. Dicaioma, translated
Law, in Romans 8. 4, is to be understood of the Law of Statutes, as it is noted
by Ainsworth, in Deuteronomy. 6. 1. and as it appears by the continual use of the
word, in Exodus 12. 24, 43. Exodus 27. 21. Exodus 29. 9. Exodus 30. 21.

ERRATA, Good Reader* if thou desire not to mistake the Authors true meaning,
th^^ be pleased to correct these Errataes, before thou read, for many of them
pervert my sense.
Page 7 ^in. 45 and likeness in moral. p 10 l 12 in perfection of. l 46 by
regeneration. p 12 l ult. That Covenant. p 13 l 30 of marking this. p 15 l 31
hand of man. p 19 l 21 the proposition. p 20 ^ 4 imply a surety, or. p 22 l 20
mount Sinai. l 14 Jews: no otherwise but. p 24 marg. not strictly and form^rly.
l 30 internal intentions. p 27 l 28 it should. p 38 l 25 and thus they. p 39 l
39 is still. p 49 l 28 Trinity consulteth. p 54 l 3 the First. l 27 in that
covenant. p 55 l 26 they held a. p 63 l 1 abhorred as. p 76 l u^t^^ eternal
death. p 93 l 25. (at least for. p 112 l 27 See Dr. Alley. p 113 l 11 immutably
evi^. p 116 l 5 after sundry manners. p 123 l 37 Decalogues. p 133 l 4 to show
sin p 134l 15 the curse. p 153 l 10 and also he affirms. p 155 l 45 typical
pattern of the. p 169 l 7 repugnant. p 183 l 3 might be cut o^^. p 188l 15
lions. p 189 l 4 of new England. p 191 l 29 [By clensed]. p 192 l 39 this
sense. p 196 l 14 the command of the Covenant made with. p 198 l 32 Law, in
both. p 204 l 25 bodily. p 206 l 1 there was not a. p 220. l 2 much am^ss)
through the strength. p 221 l 16 without faith. p 226 l 30 whereby their. p 235
l 11 perfect keeping of. p 247 l 4 the devils head-plot. l 37 the property. p
255 l 36 the sons of Adam. p 269 l 43 namly, then the. p 276 l 41 Emperons:
punishment. p 280 l 37 without any addition of. p 281 in the marg. the doctrine
of our spiritual union. p 284 l 44 and indeed in case. p 285 l 5 a surety for
money matters, and for such. p 287 l 23 by these supplies. p 294 l 25 for now
she did. p 297 l 32 ^^s most evident also. p 301 l 26 and Pharise^s, and the. p
305 l 3 Rev. p 246 l 42 shall break^of Christ p 306 l 21 break or crush p 310 l
14 Genesis 22. 18. l 38 by his constant. p 312 l ult. Jesuahs death. p 318 l 30
the Phylistms did^p 320 the marg. suffered from his proclaimed. p 330 l 6 from
their* l 13 from the. 347 l 43 spiritual death in sin. p 350 l 33 could not
see. p 370 l 22 of which see more in my. p 371 l 6 an ^ncertain account. p 372
l 25 ^^mmit these two. l 21 as Peshad is by Daniel, in this 24 v. l 37 may not
be so bold as to s^eght. p 378 l 32. 2 Chro. 35 ^e made for all Israel. p 379 l
2^ made peace (i.e. Reconciliation) p 381 l 11 the dead therewith. l 18 Jalcut
in Ps. 91. p 382 l 21 and no covenant was made. l 29 an ^nstrument, or by. p
383 l 14 Sect. 7. p 384 l 19. Luke 18 31 l 25 our Academiques. p 385 l 18 I was
from. p 387 l 1 Mr. Jeanes l 40 his humane nature as a true. l 43 with the
properties of. p 389 l 27 to go into. p 390 l 13 and with power, Acts 10. 37,
38. l 25 and th^n he began. l 26 Luke 3. 23. l 5 he does call him. p 391 l 46
descended. p 393 l 1 in Christ, God-man Mediator, then there is duty in that
special. p 395 l 2 for thus l 5 be served, but to serve. p 399 l 42 peruse Rev.
513. p 397 l 1 reviving p 398 l 2 Christ must be anointed. l 28 your selves
for. l 34 by which perfection: his patrence. p 399 l 26 obedience, by
ignomin^ons. p 4^0 l 20 Mat. 26. 39, 42. And by John 18* 11 p 402 l 18 holy of
holies in Dan. 9, 24. it. l 28 sin in a metaphorical sense only: above. p 403 l
19 the word hour. p 406 l 22 you discern not, l 24 ignorance of. p 407 l 9 no
further. p 508 l 5 to put away. l 31 w^shings and sacrificings for ^ins. l 38
blot them out, or wipe them out. p 409 l 41 Seven sevens p 415 l 6 and Herefie:
in so much. p 415 l 27 that at the death. p 417 in marg. Theoderit, l 3 20
Greg. Nazian against Julius 2 p 301. p 419 l 28 which Test^ment conteins. p 420
l 3 in Dan. 9. 24. p 421 l 23 and then he does also cite Rab. Jonathan. l 24
has the presence of the Lord. p 424 l 23 whole state spoke the same. p 425 l
^0 9 16 27 may be both filled. p 426 l 8 that they must. p 427 l 2 but every
son of Adam. p 429 l 22 Lev 23, p 436 l 24 counts them righteousp 440 l 23
for his receiving. p 542 l 11 in the Law for such. l 31 David (says he) l 32
to spare or pardon. p 446 l 33 In Gal. 1. 4* l 12 consequent^y from. p 449 l 19
recipient. p 455 l 41 ceremonial sins by their. p 457 l 18 believing sinners. l
19 when they are freed, or, p 459 l 15 high Priest and Sacrifice. p 462 l 37
and by both. p 463 l 44 Secondly, Mr Wotton. p 473 l 28 by David in v. 35 for.
p 475 l 6 Gods taking away and bearing. p 484 l 15 pierce him in the. p 487 l
35 a just occasion is given to expiate the joy o^. l 42 to exult. p 491 l 8
Zach 7 10. p 500 l 9 Christ combating susscrings. p 505 l 5 of sufferings: but
he did also prove the warlike enmity of Satan, and of his potent seed against
Christ: of. p 506 l 8 not only have. l 31 as ^e holds them. p 508 l 2 Romans 8 23
4 l 13 p 151 l 16 as inconsistent. p 509 l 25 by these words in Romans 8 1. p 511
l 32 Dr. Hammond does. p 512 l 14 Pariphrasis. l 43 them that believe. Christ
said to his Disciples in John 8 31 to 36. l 45 the letter of the Decalogue. p
513 l 42 and Luther in Gal. 2. 16 p 514 l 18 and sacrifice is. p 515 l 2 those
observations of the law. p 520 l 18 this exposition. p 521 l 24 should offer
any. p 522 l 8 or to pronounce justy. l 10 as insufficient: also the margin
note must be corrected as I have done it in the Table. p 524 l 45 was enacted.
p 526 l ult. Mr. Ains. does omit to. p 527 l 16 Thorah. l 44 in relation. p 529
l 37 1 Mac. 1 14, 51. p 530 l 30 to good, since the fall.

A Table of Scriptures Expounded or Illustrated, by being joined with such as
are Expounded.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 29 47 2 1, 2 38, 39 2 7 33, 34, 35 2 9 33, 34, 44, 49, 84 2
16 527 2 17 1, 3, 7, 15, 18, 20, 21, 24, 34, 54, 55, 63, 74, 129, 138, 260,
426. 2 23 297 3 3 103 3 7 85 3 8 39, 288 3 10 68 3 13 86 3 15 2, 3, 4, 6, 38,
41, 49, 56, 63, 65, 66, 77, 95, 125, 227, 284, bis, 286, 289, 301, 383, 400,
414, 445, 446, 460, 502, 505, 521, 317, 318, 320, 321, 323, 324, 325, 327, 329,
330, 348. 3 16 58, 69, 295 3 16, 17, 18, 19. 70, 128, 292 3 19 3, 6, 7, 15, 52,
54, 58, 59, 60, 71, 73, 77, 354. 3 20 297 3 22, 24 37, 43, 46, 47 4 7 221, 238,
264, 474, 475. 6 5 8, 41 7 22, 23 35 12 3 227, 310, 311 15 6 126, 214, 243 17
1, 2 126 17 7 127, 129 17 8 143 17 11 33 17 14 28, 33, 183 19 17, 26 119 20 6
105 22 16, 17, 18. 265, 267, 268, 290. 26 5 132 26 10, 11 ^45 32 1, 2 291 42 37
274 43 9 346 49 10 312 50 17 473 Exodus.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 2 36 2 24 126 3 15 227 12 5 334 15 13, 16 334 15 26 486 16
4, 28 132 17 12 214 17 8, 14, 16 345 19 6 136 19 7, 8 180, 206, 207 19 10, 14
450, 455 20 2 126 20 5, 6, 7 108, 131, 240, 458 20 7 346 20 19 104, 207 21 6
394 21 14 272 21 19, 28 458 21 30 330 22 31 135 24 4, 5 206, 207 24 6, 7, 8 207
24 8, 12, 16 127, 131, 132, 134, 146. 28 36 471 28 38 433, 471 28 34 399 28 43
471 29 19, 20 504 29 33 433, 462 29 36, 37 428, 433, 438, 451, 467. 30 10 378,
429, 434, 436, 466, 468. 30 12 330 30 15, 16 379, 446, 466 32 12, 14 496 34 4,
5, 6, 7 208, 345, 458, 474, 475. 34 9 442, 443 34 27, 28 132 36 10 433
Leviticus.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 3 431 1 4 428 1 9 432 4 3 469 4 27, 31, 35 136, 140 6 2, 6,
7 475 6 26 433 7 38 132 8 15 454 10 13, 14, 17 434, 451 10 17 472 10 18 471 11
25, 40 138, 450 11 44, 45 135, 136, 457 12 2, 4 137 12 7, 8 451 13 18 485 14 1,
to 20, and to, 49, 52, 53. 441 14 3, 48, 49 485 15 13, 14, 15 485 15 18, 19 137
15 28, 29, 30 456, 469 15 31 136 16 16, 18, 19 428, 434, 528 16 30 451 17 11,
14 33, 378, 448 18 4, 5 222, 245, 247, 253 19 2 135, 143, 445 19 19 121 20 7
455, 121 20 9 346 20 8, 22 223 20 8, 25, 25, 27 135 23 27 429 26 3, 12 244, 235
26 15 187, 234, 525 26 25 129, 257, 525 26 44, 45 227 26 46 132 27 34 129
Numbers.
Chap. Verse. Page 4 7 390 4 23 494 5 8 466 6 1, 3, 9, 10, 11 120, 135, 454 8 6,
8 452 10 10 488 11 12 147 11 33 105 14 18, 19 345, 444, 474, 475 14 3, 20, 21
442, 496 14 31 264 15 25 444 15 38, 39, 40 135 16 46 379 16 10, 40, 46, 47 355
19 6, 18 468 19 9, 12, 13 451, 468 19 18, 19 469 21 8, 9 486 23 21 136, 493 25
17 293 28 9 520 29 11 466 30 8, 12 443, 445 35 31 272, 330, 346 35 32 272, 330
35 33 467 Deuteronomy.
Chap. Verse. Page 4 1, 5 225 4 13, 14 527 5 1, 2, 3 209, 225 5 15 222, 527 5
27, 28, 33 180, 209 6 4, 5, 6 241 7 12 126, 227 7 23 117 10 12, 13 126 10 16
137 11 10, 22 213 11 29 205 11 32 227 12 1, 28, 32 228 14 21 135 15 17 394 19
10 272 21 23 399, 311 24 4 346, 467 24 16 28 25 1 152 25 19 293 26 14, 16, 17
228 27 15, 26, 27 205, 216 27 1, 26 228 27 18 264 28 58, 59 418 28 45 226 29 1
126, 188, 189 29 10, 11, 18, 19, 20 256 29 13 180 30 3 489 30 6 237 30 6, 11,
12, 13, 14 127, 137, 143. 30 16 527, 528 30 19, 20 216, 225 30 43 433 32 4 457
33 16 379 33 19 438, 528 Joshuah.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 13 119 6 2, 18, 19, 24 27, 279 7 11, 12 27 8 2, 29 279 8
30, 34 205, 257 15 16, 17 316 22 5 224 23 6, 8 229 24 14 435 Judges.
Chap. Verse. Page 5 18 318 6 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 116 7 6, 7 116 9 17 316 11 9,
10 317 13 120 1 Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 25 3 3 14 3, 468 17 26 316 18 25, 27 316 21 5 136, 455 25
28 473 30 25 529 2 Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page 5 24, 25 119 7 13 412 11 4 455 19 19 490 24 23 431 1 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 21 344 2 3, 4 338, 527, 528 2 31 272 8 58 235 9 8 117 11 11
525 11 34, 38 233, 237 13 9, 24 117 13 15, etc. 97 13 18 90 17 9 117 20 28, 42
117, 279 2 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 10, 12 119 3 16 118 4 3 118 5 10 118 12 16 446 17 13 208,
239 1 Chronicles.
Chap. Verse. Page 6 49 355, 429 9 6 317 21 17 497 23 28 454 29 18 232 30 19 451
2 Chronicles.
Chap. Verse. Page 6 14 290 6 29, 30 443, 486 29 24 355, 378, 438, 451, 465,
466. 30 20 443 Ezra.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 64 493 Nehemiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 5 290 1 7, 8, 9 208, 229 8 38 210 9 14 222 9 29 229 10 29
256 10 32, 33 446 Job.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 5 434 4 17 143, 457 7 21 474 9 23 505 15 5 346 21 9 505 22
22, 23 132 32 23, 24 486 42 8 476 Psalms.
Psalm. Verse. Page 2 7 286 2 8 297 2 12 104 4 5 438, 528 5 11 345 11 5 505 18 24
457 19 7 236 19 12 96 19 13 457 22 17 309 24 10 38 25 11 442 25 18 474 32 1, 2
437, 474, 490 35 5 474 37 27 253 40 6 394 45 13 289 47 3 485 49 7, 8 445 50 5
136 50 5, 6, 7 221 51 1 493 51 2 450 51 5 30, 31, 599 51 7 228, 451, 453, 467
51 8 488 51 9 493 51 19 431, 438, 528 65 4 428 69 26 500 69 28 504 72 17 313 78
1, 5 234 78 7 208 78 30, 31 105 78 38 429, 494 79 8 346 79 9 428 86 2 435 86 5
443 89 31 398 90 13 496 91 11 291 92 16 457 99 8 475 103 3 443, 486 103 17, 18
217, 233 105 8 526 110 3 297 110 4 264, 296 111 9 526 111 10 235 119 1 457 119
18 236 119 68, 124, 135 233 119 122 267 119 160 454 130 3, 4 443, 491, 492 139
21 294 Proverbs.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 21 435, 457 6 29 105 6 35 330 8 23 385 10 29 435 11 15 266
13 1 504 16 6 485 22 11 455 22 26 266 23 23 333 28 13 459 Canticles.
Chap. Verse. Page 14 7 460 Esaias.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 221, 225, 450, 453. 1 18 453
1 19, 20 264 2 3 418 4 3, 4 434 6 7 433, 434, 435 6 10 443 7 14 306 9 4 317 10
27 400 11 10, 12 314 27 9 434 30 26 488 41 25 493 42 1 393 43 24, 25 494 44 22
447 45 25 435 50 4, 5 394, 484, 504 52 14 520 53 4 502 53 5 320, 499, 505, 506
53 7 285 53 8 300, 306, 413, 520 53 10 297, 378, 466 53 11 321, 393, 483 53 12
269, 307, 322, 471, 472, 473. 54 9 494 54 10 525 55 7 128 57 15, 18 488 60 21
435 61 1, 2 390, 391, 449 62 12 435 66 23 418 Jeremy.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 5 385 7 22, 23 132 9 25, 26 239, 258 11 3, 4, 8 257 11 19
413 18 8 346, 496 24 22, 23 394 31 32 148, 186 31 33 425 31 34 430, 442, 494 33
8 435, 444, 454, 462, 493 50 20 493 Ezekiel.
Chap. Verse. Page 11 19, 20 229, 290, 529 18 19, 20, 21, 22, 31. 230, 491 20
11, 19, 20, 21 230, 529 21 26, 27 313 30 15, 16, 19 230 33 8 9 33 11, 12, 19
231, 496 33 15 230 33 16 491 36 25 454 36 27 217, 290 36 26, 27, 28 425 37 23
454 37 24 232 43 21 468 44 27 468 46 17 449 Daniel.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 8 135 7 8, 20, 24 312 8 10, 11, 13 38 8 14 143, 191, 455,
457, 528 9 4 240, 290 9 22, 23, 24 299, 369, to 408 9 25 409, to 412 9 26 208,
300, 306, 413, to 418. 9 27 419, to 424, and 463 Hosea.
Chap. Verse. Page 14 2 488 Joel.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 12, 13 497 3 21 447, 458 Amos.
Chap. Verse. Page 6 11 457 7 1, 2, 3, 6 496 18 14 470 Jonah.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 9, 10 497 4 2 497 Nahum.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 3 458 Zachary.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 3, 4 469 3 8 393 3 9 393 7 10 491 9 9 412 10 11 212 12 6
418 12 10 309 13 1 468, 469, 142 13 7 504 14 10 418 Malachy.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 3 440, 475 4 4 124 Matthew.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 23 305 3 7 300 5 17, 18, 19, 20 163, 242 8 22 ^^6 10 34, 35
294, 299 12 21 297 12 37 152 13 19, 39 297 16 18 512 16 23 292 19 16, 17, 21
239, 253 20 13. 14 80 20 27, 28 395 20 28 329, 394, 445, 446 21 32 65 22 35 240
22 40 106 23 33 300 23 38, 39 500 25 46 17 26 18 220 26 28 420, 431, 463 26 36
505 26 39, 42 400 26 66 347 26 67, 68 318 27 20 318 Mark.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 27, 28 121, 144 3 29 347 4 12 485 5 13, 14 292 14 61 286 14
64 347 15 37 284 16 15, 16 53, 73 Luke.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 6 135, 529 1 31, to 35 301 1 70, 71, 72, 74 290, 325 ^ 23
390, 420 3 38 51 4 18, 19 449, 485 4 34 390 9 31, 35, 41 399 10 25, 28 240, 253
12 49 294 12 51 299 12 56 406 15 21, 22, 32 487 15 32 56 17 10 81 17 19 485 18
13, 14 429, 448 18 31 384 19 41, 42 406 22 19 244 22 31 400 22 36 294 23 46 286
24 19 334 24 44 131 John.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 14 166, 220 1 18 288 1 29 474 1 41 411, 414 3 8 306 3 14,
15 120, 314 3 16 240, 324 3 14, 15, 16 486, 520 3 18, 36 73, 257 4 25 411, 414
5 24 257 5 25 50 5 22, 27, 28 77 5 30 462 6 27, 29 241, 242 6 38 462 6 51 325 6
51, 52, 53, 54 6, 194, 242, 423, 431, 512. 7 8 405 7 19 519 7 23 489 8 5 9 8 20
405 8 28 324, 520, 521 8 31, 32, 36 212, 463, 512 8 44 300 8 56 299 9 7 119 10
11, 15 266, 321, 394 10 16 402, 483 10 17, 18 260, 397, 500 10 34, 35 525 10 35
15 10 36 385 11 48 424 11 55 136 12 19 386, 401 12 21, 22, 27, 28 405 12 32 314
12 39, 40 288 13 10 489 14 6 166 14 15 240 14 21 241 14 30 101, 414 15 5 235 15
25 525 16 9 73 16 10 149, 440 16 33 101 17 19 463 18 11 400 18 34, 36, 37 412,
309, 313 19 11 324 19 28, 29, 30 383 Acts.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 23, 24 308, 324 2 27 350 2 29, 40, 41 127 3 13, 26 394 3 14
402 3 18 414 3 23 308 3 25, 26 227, 290, bis. 5 31 311 10 14 135 10 28 137, 142
10 35 218, 233 10 37, 38 390 10 43 127, 241 11 16 57 11 3, 18 137 13 23, 24 390
13 33 391 13 30, 34, 35 391 13 38, 39 144, 158, 159, 214, 447, 448, 477, 515.
14 22 212 15 1 127, 144, 146, 200, 220, 237. 15 9 237, 240, 455, 456 16 34 488
21 20 200 21 24 454 22 12 200 22 16 450 24 14 131 26 18 441, 462 Romans.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 5 218, 257 1 6, 7 436, 462 1 16 293 1 32 529 2 13 242, 243,
251, 253 2 25, 26 132, 217, 234 2 27, 28 518 2 28, 29 237 3 3 198 3 10, to 18
525 3 20 132, 304, 518, 525 3 21, 22 463, 525 3 24, 25 319, 443, 447, 448, 151,
153. 3 27 132, 157, 234 3 31 43, 243, ^25 4 1, 2, 3 127, 516, 518 4 3, 5, 9,
11, 13, 21, 22. 476, 481 4 6, 8 150, 151, 476, 477, 490, 492. 4 7 474, 478 4
11, 13 143, 217, 234, 237, 298. 4 14 243 4 15 343 4 25 169, 323, 324 5 1, 2
198, 210, 379, 525 5 3, 4 285 5 6, 7, 8 268, 279, 335, 405 5 10 525 5 9, 10,
11. 379, 456, 460, 578 5 12 59, 74, 85, 321 5 13 96 5 14 328 5 15 56 5 16 77 5
15, 17, 18 96, 430 5 16, 18 508 5 18, 19 6, 339, 440, 483, 305, 149, 153. 5 20
95, 194 5 21 5 6 7 457, 513 6 9 308, 350 6 13 56, 57 6 23 5 6 24 57 7 1, 4, 6,
7, 8, 9 177 7 4, 6 518 7 14 266 7 17, 20 3, 8, 58, 71 7 23, 24, 25 11, 57, 425,
509 8 1 11, 508 8 2 178, 194, 510 8 3 141, 147, 335, 377, 408, 439, 486, 516,
517. 8 4 234, 439, 522 8 7, 8 530, 531 8 8 518 8 10 7 8 19, 20, 21 70 8 29, 30
46 8 32 334, 520, 521 9 8 518 9 31, 32 203, 218, 147 10 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
218 10 4 165, 166, 214, 217, 243, 244, 439, 465, 523, 525. 10 5 245, 253 10 6
127, 248 10 8, 9, 10 439 10 9 517 10 17 294 11 1 436 11 15 57 11 17 258 11 20,
22 211 14 14 100 1 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 18, 24 293 1 30 149, 440, 467 6 11 436, 462 6 20 271, 447 7
1 105 7 14 137 7 19 237 7 23 271 10 3, 4 512 11 27, 29 347 13 1 224 15 12, 21,
22, 52 77 15 24, 25, 27 41 15 44, to 49 45, 48, 157, 167, 195. 15 50, 52, 54 72
15 47 13, 45, 48 15 56 15 16 13 295 2 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 6, 14 57, 185, 511 3 6, 7 159, 193, 194 3 8, 9 194, 238 3
10 195 3 11, 12 195 3 13 195, 214, 236, 248, 377, 408, 511. 3 13, 14, 15 202 3
16, 17, 18, 19 193, 195, 236, 511. 4 7 71 5 7 112 5 14, 15 56 5 18, 19, 21 379
5 19 379, 477, 490 5 21 159, 222, 343, 40^, 463, 466, bis. 6 7 298 6 16, 17, 18
235 7 1 235 10 4 294 10 5 218 11 3 86 Galatians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 4 325, 400, 466, 460 2 3, 5 200 2 16, 19 203, 240, 518 2 20
326 2 21 159 3 1 314 3 8 310, 311 3 9, 10 74, 196, 240, 250 3 11 304 3 12 144,
192, 217, 232 3 9, 10, 11, 12 218 3 13, 14 280, 311, 333, 520 3 17 132 3 17,
19, 21, 24 178, 290 3 18 127 3 16, 26 223, 303, 310, 311 3 21 160, 161 3 24
135, 140, 224, 452, 454. 4 3 401 4 4 167, 305, 405 4 3, 10 142 4 9, 10, 11 200,
238 4 21 525 4 23 518 4 24 91, 146, 147, bis, 184 4 28, 29 511 4 29 518 4 30
258 5 1 195 5 4 161, 238 5 6 240, 253 5 16 237 5 18 518 6 12 518 Ephesians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 3 194 1 7 447 1 10 405 1 11 68 2 1 56, 86 2 3 76 2 6 38 2
8, 9 203 2 14 379, 467 2 15, 16 201, 290, 408, 438, 505. 4 8 336 4 18 56 4 24
112, 121, 122, 157 5 2 422, 326 5 14 56 5 22 457 5 25, 26, 27 326, 460 6 10, 11
295, 298 Philippians.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 7 395 2 8 141, 149, 153, 325, 352, 384. 2 7, 8, 9, 10 323,
395 3 3 237, 518 3 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 201, 517 Colossians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 20 110, 379 1 21, 22, 23 212, 379, 505 2 7, 8 204, 238 2 10
110 2 13 56 2 14 377, 408, 422, 522 2 15 286, 308 2 17 142, 522 2 16, 17, 18,
19, 20 201 2 18 530 1 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 16 208 2 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 8 257 1 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 5 224, 240, 241 1 18 298 2 6 331, 332, 445 2 14, 15 69, 85*
87 5 14 292 6 12 295, 298 6 13 412 2 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 3, 4, 5 295, 298 2 15 296 3 14, 15 212 4 16 345 Titus.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 14 166, 326, 447 3 5 450 Hebrews.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 3 430, 434, 459 1 5 391 1 14 89, 291 2 2 404 2 5 381 2 9
327 2 10 38, 398, 400 2 11 296, 327 2 14 386, 318, 325, 328 2 15 60 2 16 110 2
17 379, 429, 430 2 18 329 3 12 256 4 3, 9, 10 222 4 12 294 4 15 500 5 5, 6 390,
391 5 7, 8 500, 504 5 7, 8, 9, 10. 395, 398, 399, 400 5 8, 9 329, 467, 504, 521
6 12 526 6 14 267 6 17, 18 231, 265, 268 7 11 146 7 14 312 7 16 142 7 18 517 7
19 516, 517 7 22 21, 259, 264 7 26 149 7 28 400, bis, 433, 521 8 2 356 8 3 220,
395 8 5 140 8 6, 7 146, 207 8 8 212 8 9 212, 213, ^34 8 12 425, 426, 430, 442,
492. 9 1 201 9 8 458 9 9 142, 144, 515 9 1, 10 200, 515, 141, bis, 152. 9 11,
12 220, 322, 395 9 12, 15 447 9 13 382, 429, 433, 451, 452, 456, 464, 468, 466,
515, 136, 140, 141, 143, 147, 156. 9 14 52, 141, 147, 156, 244, 354, 355, 356,
397, 440, 468, 487, 515. 9 15, 16, 17 22, 23, 24, 332, 419, 515. 9 18, 19 127 9
19 207, 468, 526 9 19, 20 131 9 22, 23, 26 458, 140 9 26 377, 381, 407, 522 9
27 3, 71, 73, 78, 79 9 28 472, bis 10 1, 2 377, 459 10 3 408, 422 10 4, 11 144,
244, 447, 515 10 5 222, 394, 422 10 7 400 10 9, 10 378, 400, 409, 462 10 14 422
10 17 492 10 17, 20, 22 148 10 20 66, 207 10 21 214 10 22, 23 458, 468 10 26,
27 78 10 29 463 10 38, 39 212, 257 11 4 221, 238, 431 11 6 216, 218, 224, 468
11 19 243 11 28 220 11 33 234 12 1, 2, 3, 4 320 12 24 269, 286, 355, 468 12 27,
28 209, 383, 422 13 6 268 13 11, 12 269, 520 13 20 322, 419 James.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 13, 14 110 2 21, 22 243 1 Peter.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 2 4^8 1 2, 23 344 1 5 223 1 9 112 1 14, 15, 16 135 1 18, 19
201, 330, 331, 332, 446, 447. 1 19, 20 271 2 22 286 2 24 471, 473, 506 3 6 298
3 22 110 4 6 56 2 Peter.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 10, 11 404 3 7 70 1 John.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 7 173, 452, 459 1 9 380, 430, 452, 459, 466. 2 1, 2 228,
397, 443 2 19, 24 212 3 5 474 3 12 221 3 14 56 3 23 242 4 10 379 5 12 57, 73
Revelations.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 7 309 1 16 294 1 10 335 2 17 512 3 1 57 3 21 336 12 1, 17
298 14 1, 5 460 16 2 486 20 6 56 20 14 347 20 15 18 22 14 151, 244

FINIS.

