SIX Philosophical Essays Upon Several SUBJECTS: VIZ. Concerning,
I. Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth. II. Wit and Beauty. III. A Public
Spirit. IV. The Weather. V. The Certainty of Things, and the Existence of a
Deity. VI. The Cartesian Idea of God.


By S. P. Gent. of Trinity-Colledge in Oxford.

Quid est praecipuum? Erigere animum supra minas and promissa Fortunae. Nihil
dignum putare quod speres. Quid enim habet dignum quod concupiscas? Qui a
divinorum contemplatione quoties ad humana recideris, non aliter caligabis quam
quorum oculi in densam umbram ex claro sole rediere. Sen. Not. Quaest. lib. 3.
LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Tho. Newborough at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCC.

TO THE Reverend and most Ingenious Mr. Jeremy Collier.
SIR,
BY many Titles you claim my poor Endeavors, but by none more than that of the
Example you have given me; on which account, how much soever the World is
obliged to you, I, for my part, must acknowledge my self more especially
indebted; since of our Moderns, none has afforded me a more perfect Idea of
Genuine Eloquence and Reason than Mr. Collier. Kindly therefore receive a
Creature thus in an inferior Sense your own; encourage its Address, and
protect it from the Censures and Criticisms of a squeamish Age: Protect it, I
beseech you, laboring under so great Disadvantages, as its Author's
Immaturity, the Impediments of his present Circumstances, and the burden of its
own Defects; Obstacles that must have proved insuperable, but for the benign
Influence and Condescensions of that Learned President and Society under whose
Discipline I live, and by whose Instructions and Conversation I endeavor to
improve.

Instead of troubling you with any occasions of my ensuing Performances, I
shall only inform you of the occasion of a remarkable Omission, I mean my
neglect of Mathematical Arguments, of which the World is become most
immoderately fond, looking upon every thing as trivial, that bears no relation
to the Compasses, and establishing the most distant parts of Humane Knowledge;
all Speculations, whether Physical, Logical, Ethical, Political, or any other
upon the particular results of Number and Magnitude. Nor is it to be
questioned, but the Dominion of Number and Magnitude is very large. Must they
therefore devour all Relations and Properties whatsoever? It Is plainly
unreasonable. In any other Commonwealth but that of Learning, such attempts
toward an absolute Monarchy would quickly meet with Opposition. It may be a
kind of Treason, perhaps, to intimate thus much; but who can any longer
forbear, when he sees the most noble, and most useful portions of Philosophy
lie fallow and deserted for opportunities of learning how to prove the Whole
bigger than the Part, etc.

I expect also some Doctrines of that Essay, which treats of the Certainty of
Things, and the Demonstration of a Deity, will be disrelish'd by a Party of Men
amongst us at this time not inconsiderable. But the Author assures all such,
that as he understands his Inferences in that Essay to be just and sure,
however agreeable to this or that Hypothesis, so he has neither taken advantage
of any Errors, nor from any Acquisitions of Mr. Lock, having not read that
Gentleman's elegant Essay of Humane Understanding, till some time after he had
composed his own Discourse, wherein he resolved to quit all Authority for the
simple Evidence of his own naked Reason.

And here I cannot choose, but hint, how much it were to be wished, your self,
Sir, would put an end to the Dispute now prosecuted by that Gentleman. I am
confident a Judgment so penetrating, adorned with a Rhetoric so powerful,
might easily decide that subtle Controversy both to the satisfaction of the
Antagonists and their Readers. But, I confess, I cannot handsomely urge this
motion, when I recollect how vast a design you are already forming, a design
which will redound as much to the Credit of your Country, as did once the
Athenian Columns, the Egyptian Pyramids, or the Roman Registers to the Glory of
those States, and from the pursuit of which, to detain you longer, were
altogether unpardonable in,

Good Sir, Trin Coll Ox^n. Febr. 20. 1699. Your most Obliged, and most Devoted
Humble Servant, Sa. Parker.

THE FOUNDATIONS OF Dr. Burnet's Theory OF THE EARTH, Considered in A
CONFERENCE BETWEEN Philalethes and Burnetianus.
Phil. GOOD morrow, Sir, You look somewhat pale; methinks, and heavy about the
eyes this morning.


Bur. And so, Philalethes, would I always contentedly, for such a surfeit of
pleasures as I enjoyed last night.


Phil. Dry, Sober, and Philosophical ones, I suppose; for a little of any other
serves your turn.


Bur. Philosophical if you please, but not dry. O thou prodigious,
incomparable, divine Burnet! thou foiler of all Philosophers, High Priest of
Nature!


Phil. Nay, if you're there-abouts, I ask no more Questions, but should be glad
if you could govern your self so far as but to learn my Prescriptions against
your Nightmare.


Bur. Prescriptions! I hope you will not undertake to do more than so many
eminent Mathematicians and Vertuoso's have done yet. The sortress you would
beleaguer is altogether impregnable; and let the fate of others teach you, that
whosoever attempts the Theory, had as good strike at a Spirit.


Phil. However, with your permission, I will venture the consequences, but
shall premise this in your favor, that I think all Characterizings and
personal Representations ought to be carefully avoided in the dispute. I Am sure
that will never confute a mistake, how much soever it may lessen the Lapser.
Nor will I remind you of any thing hitherto urged by the Learned and Ingenious
against your Theory; only give me leave to communicate a thought or two of my
own, and be free to find what flaws you can.


Bur. Very fairly proposed, and you shall be as fairly heard.


Phil. I thank you. Then know in the first place, it has been my opinion all
along, that the work might be cut much shorter. I was never a Friend to
multiplying Problems and Propositions. The Theory is from first to last a
plausible pretty Chain of Physical Effects, wherein you need ruin but one link
to ruin the whole. Make but one breach, and your impregnable Fortress is lost.
Compasses and Slate may as well hang in their places, for a little good Logic
and natural Philosophy are sufficient to make head against the Mischief. Yet
because the surest way is to strike at the root, I shall examine your
Theorist's foundation, and presume if he be caught tripping there, you will
easily give up his After-conclusions.


Bur. You may depend upon it.


Phil. Very good. Then if I make it appear that the form of the Ante diluvian
Earth was not different from the form of the present Earth, you will no longer
maintain that the Deluge was brought to pass by the Dissolution of any form of
the Earth different from the present.


Bur. No longer I promise you; but yet I shall be at a loss for any better
Hypothesis to clear those difficulties, which otherwise the Notion of an
Universal Flood must necessarily carry with it.


Phil. As for that, further Speculations may in time bring forth a satisfactory
Hypothesis: but if they should not, thus much we know, That the Flood was
either the ordinary Effect of second Causes, though the measures of their
Operation be hidden from us, or if it could not be such an Effect, that it was
the direct and immediate Atchievment of Omnipotence it self, and let that hush
all your Scruples.


Bur. That were self-resignation with a Vengeance: What? Shall I be obliged to
acquiesce in a Miracle, because I cannot fathom Nature's measures?


Phil. Mistake me not. I say fathom 'em if you can: if that is denied, enquire
whether the Supposal implies any Contradiction or Absurdity in respect of
Nature's usual proceedings. If it does not, take it for granted 'twas no more
than the result of ordinary Combinations: if it does, you may be confident
'twas Miracle all, and then trouble your head no further.


Bur. I submit, be pleased to proceed to your Argument.


Phil. The Theorist you know presumes it infallibly certain, that the Earth
rose out of a Chaos at first, and that such a Chaos as himself describes
(Theor. Book 1. Chap. 4.) a fluid Mass, or a Mass of all sorts of little Parts
and Particles of Matter mixed together and floating in confusion one with
another. And this Supposition he lays down as a Postulate, whereas I must tell
you, it ought to have been offered with such restrictions as render it wholly
unserviceable to his main design. For why must this Chaos be a fluid Mass? Why
might it not be as well a drift or shower of Atoms yet unamass'd, disorderly
dancing one amongst another, and at various distances?


Bur. But this is no better, Man, than out of the Drying Pan into the Fire. You
dread the pernicious Doctrines of the Theory, and therefore take Sanctuary in
those of Epicurus. In good time I beseech you consider the Poet's Maxim, Dum
vitant (you know who) vitium in contraria currunt.


Phil. God forbid using of Epicurus's terms should make me his. All that I
would have amounts to thus much. That the Chaos or material Elements of our
Earth which were originally created by a Divine Power, and afterward by the
same Divine Power so disposed and compounded as to form this Sublunary World,
might as well be a Company or Chorus of Atoms of diverse kinds dispersed and
dancing in the great Inane, without any just order or distribution, as a fluid
Mass of mixed Particles.


Bur. What becomes then of the Authority of the Ancients? who (not to cite'em
particularly) understood by their Chaos nothing but a mere Hotch-potch of
matter, a rude, undigested Mixture or Collection of the several Seeds of things
animate and inanimate.


Phil. It Is even as good as ever 'twas, that is, in my opinion none at all
(sacred Authority always excepted whereto my Hypothesis is not that I know of
any way repugnant) for if the Tradition of the Ancients avails any thing in the
present case, it therefore avails because they lived at a less distance of time
from the Chaos: but alas! neither their earliness, nor the credit of their
Tradition qualify 'em to be better Judges than we of what neither they nor
their Forefathers could know more than the latest of their Posterity: and it is
impossible they should be better acquainted with the Chaos than their
Offspring, unless they and the Chaos had been Cotemporary. Not to mention how
much they are indebted to Moses for their Notions, as also that most of your
Authorities are either properly Poetical, or else pure Hypothesis, and Theory
like your own.


Bur. Do you not believe then that the Primitive Inhabitants of the Earth might
at least give a better guess from the Contemplation of it in its Infancy, and
most simple condition (supposing even its first form the same as its present)
than we who behold it at so great a disadvantage, and almost in its ruins, what
might be the Constitution of the Chaos?


Phil. By no means, 'till you can prove Harmony a good Comment upon Disorder:
for whether your Chaos or mine were the true, the first People of our world
could, I suppose, see no farther into a Millstone than their Successors. No
doubt they were equally Strangers to all beyond the Superficial parts of our
Globe as our selves; consequently as much in the dark about the distribution of
the Chaos, much more about the state of it before that distribution. Neither
did the righteous Man and his Family, that we know of, make any remarks at the
time of the Deluge which might give us some light into the matter, or granting
they left a Tradition behind them relating thereto, and lost many Ages ago,
which however there appears no manner of reason why we should grant, still I
say those remarks must be very imperfect, and contribute little enough to our
knowledge of the Distribution of the Chaos, nothing at all to our knowledge of
its Constitution before that Distribution -- But I entreat you oblige me not to
any longer Digression upon this Topic, which else will lead us very much out
of our way.


Bur. I shall not, but pardon me if I observe to you that unless your dancing
Atoms will answer all the ends of our fluid mass, I shall hold it reasonable to
pay some deference to the Authority of the Ancients which at least confirms the
original state of Nature to be such as is fairly solvable according to our
Hypothesis of the Chaos.


Phil. With all my heart, when you can allege a just cause why my dancing
Atoms as soon as they are gathered into a body will not serve the true genuine
purposes of a Chaos as well as the Theorist's fluid Mass.


Bur. Admitting therefore your Conjecture, I cannot conceive of what use it
will be to you in the present Disquisition.


Phil. Of singular use, believe me; for the Atoms or Particles of my Chaos
being free and separate, and not sorted into distinct Orders and Species, nor
allotted their proper distances from each other, it is very probable many less
Detachments of them would unite distinctly from any greater Combination, and
being united into such smaller Masses, would in time encounter the larger
Combination (such an one as we may understand to consist of the grossest matter
of all being the likeliest to reach the Center soonest) and by their accession
render the Superficies of it however Spherical and regular in it self (which
according to our Supposition it could scarce be to a Nicety) very uneven and
mountainous. All this would be but a natural result, and yet requires a more
immediate Interposition of Providence to frame the great ball of our Earth so
regular as it now appears to be; as indeed all Events in the natural World do,
and ever did, and the Deluge no less than the rest, notwithstanding the large
Province you would assign to second Causes. Thus we see what a doughty
Postulate your Theory leans upon.


Bur. Still we stand both upon the same bottom, and if I should assent to your
Hypothesis you cannot, I think, deny but you have as much reason to assent to
mine. Only this advantage I retain above you, that those Conclusions which the
Theory infers afterward from my Hypothesis, are so just and apposite, and
otherwise so perfectly inexplicable as to turn the Scale on my side, and
strengthen not a little the probability of our Proposition.


Phil. As for the inexplicableness of those Conclusions, I have spoke to it
already, and need only admonish you to beware of such circular Argumentations.
The Conclusion is good because the Premises are so, and the Premises are good
because the Conclusion is so.


Bur. To whom do you apply that?


Phil. To no worse a Friend than your self. The Flood came to pass by the
disruption of that Crust of Earth which enclosed the Abyss. How could that be,
unless there was such a Crust? But there was such a Crust formed when the Chaos
was digested into Order. Why do you believe so? because the Flood which ensued
upon the dis-ruption of this Crust is best accounted for upon such a supposal.
And yet bating this Argument, I do not see but my Scheme deserves to be as
fairly received as that of the Theorist, consideratis considerandis. But I am
ready to quit my own Notion of the Chaos, offered only to show the
precariousness of the Theorist's, and supposing the state of the Tohu bohu to
have been such as he describes it, I hope in the next place to convince you
that the ditribution of its parts could not be such as he would have it, not
that Incrustation, upon which he builds so confidently, be effected after such
a manner as he imagines.


Bur. Heroically threatened! make but your words good at last, Et eris mihi
magnus Apollo.


Phil. You may remember the Theorist having delineated his Chaos, presently
after, takes notice that from such a Chaos it is impossible should arise a
mountainous, uneven Earth, for that no Concretion or consistent State which
this Mass could flow into immediately, or first settle in, could be of such a
form or figure as our present Earth, neither without nor within; not within,
because there the Earth is full of Cavities and empty Places, of Dens and
broken Holes, whereof some are open to the Air, and others covered and enclosed
wholly within the ground.


Bur. And pray are not both of these unimitable in any liquid Substance, whose
parts will necessarily flow together into one continued Mass, and cannot be
divided into Apartments and separate Rooms, nor have Vaults or Caverns made
within it?


Phil. Not at all unimitable, if I may be a Judge, for let us but conceive the
agitation of the Parts of this liquid Chaos to be pretty quick and violent,
which why it should not I know of no better reasons you can give than I can why
it should; I say, suppose their agitation somewhat of the quickest, and your
Theorist's Axiom will appear a plain mistake, unless he will please to exempt
some of the main constituent Principles of this sublunary World out of his
Chaos.


Bur. I cannot apprehend what you would drive at no more than why you should
doubt of the comprehensiveness of our Chaos. I know no reason why we ought to
exclude either Fire, or Air, or Earth, or Water, I mean the constituent parts
of them, and if you will consult the Theorist's own description of his Chaos
(Book 1. Chap. 5.) you will see he is much of the same mind.


Phil. I am glad to hear it; I was almost afraid the two former Elements would
get no House-room, at least that commodious Utensil, Fire; and the more,
because in that same Description of his which you cite, he has forgot to reckon
it amongst his principles of all Terrestrial (I suppose by that word he means
sublunary) Bodies.


Bur. But do not you know the Theorist is so liberal of that Element, as to
furnish out of the Center with it even to profuseness?


Phil. With just as good a pretense as Mr. Hobbs himself has sometimes
acknowledged such a thing as a Law of Nature, but yet by the constant Tenor of
his Argumentations would abolish the very meaning of it* Thus the Theorist
tolerates a Central Fire, and at the same time forgets how upon the secretion
of his Chaos he tumbles down all the course miry rubbish directly thither. But
this only by the by: so long as he is reconciled to any mixture of Igneous and
Ethereal Particles I am content, seeing the consequence runs thus, That these
Igneous and Ethereal Particles being driven, and put into motion in common
with the rest may not unlikely occasion rarefactions, at least in concurrence
with the sulphurous Particles. This I presume may pass with you for a Result
natural enough.


Bur. Not so very natural neither, 'till you can make out the necessity of your
quick and violent motion. Did you never see Water and Ashes mixed in a Kettle
before 'twas hung over the Fire? if you ever did, I much question whether you
could find a motion so brisk among the parts of that Liquid, as to cause
rarefactions.


Phil. Pardon me, Sir, if I think the case quite different in the Chaos, not
only because its parts are supposed to be ten Thousand degrees more minute and
mobile with respect to each other than the gross ones of common Water and
Ashes, but also because in such a composition before it is hung over the Fire,
there are no such ingredients as igneous Particles, nor yet any sulphurous, at
least at liberty. But upon the insinuations of the igneous Particles you may
behold how the more subtle parts of the mixture are easily rarefy'd, and the
gross ones crowded one upon another. In like manner I cannot but believe the
grosser and earthy parts of the Chaos by the rarefaction of the Igneous and
Ethereal would gather into Cakes and Masses around the Spheres of rarefaction,
which if practicable, then might the interior parts of the Chaos be divided
into Apartments and separate Rooms, and have Vaults and Caverns made within it,
for the Masses so formed being unequal, irregular and disjointed, either of
themselves or by Explosions, when the rarefaction is violent and restrained,
encounter and tumble upon one another, by that means falling into greater
Masses, and those greater Masses being craggy and cliffy, and settling among
one another no less irregularly, must necessarily leave within them those
Vaults and Caverns, so little expected by the Theorist.


Bur. Very good. Then it seems you fancy the Chaos boiling up like a Mess of
Frumenty?


Phil. Not so fast, my Friend. But this I imagine that what an overproportion'd
degree of heat (to use again your own Similitude) prevents in a Mess of
Frumenty, viz. The clotting or coalition of the grosser parts, that would a
degree of heat proportionably less very naturally effect in the Chaos. Nor do I
think it can be doubted but a Concourse of principles, so contrary, will beget
Fermentations, and by those Fermentations the more feculent parts must needs be
separated from the finer and lighter into Masses of various Bulk and Figure,
which if granted upon your Theorist's own terms his Hypothesis unavoidably
perishes.


Bur. As how, I beseech you?


Phil. Why if the grosser parts must be collected into Masses before the
Descent of any of them toward the Center, as the case will stand if they were
collected by and during the Fermentation, then will they upon their Descent
lodge themselves so immethodically one upon another, and ruinously, as both to
form Hills and Eminencies on their Surface, and leave hollownesses within their
Substance, and so the Primaeval Earth will be every whit as ill shaped as that
we poor Mortals inhabit, even in spite of the Theorist's lucky invention. Nay
further, I see no reason why, if we should excuse all Fermentations whatsoever,
the grosser Particles should not either in their common state of Fluidity, or
in descending, gather into such Masses of different Form and Size, according as
larger or less numbers of 'em encountered, and according as their postures and
modifications differed which circumstances, as they must be very various and
uncertain in a Mass so compounded as the Chaos, and withal so disorderly in
the motions of its parts, so they cannot but be the cause of horrible
irregularities and deformities both upon and within the great collection of the
ponderous solid parts. within we shall have Chasms, Gulphs and Labyrinths:
a'top vast rugged Cliffs and wide capacious Channels.


Bur. Do not, dear Friend, celebrate your Triumph before you have conquered.
How much soever you may flatter your self, I have yet a Quere in reserve that
perhaps may dispose you to lay down your Arms at last.


Phil. What may that be?


Bur. Which way these Masses are bound up and fastened together, so as not to
be washed asunder again by the motion of the free parts of the Fluid?


Phil. Either by Hitching, and Articulations, no matter how accurate, as it may
frequently happen, or else by the Astriction of that Oily matter which the
Theorist assigns after the Distribution of the Chaos for the foundation of his
great vaulted Crust.


Bur. But is Oil of so glutinous a Nature?


Phil. For the uniting of earthy Particles, your Theorist has thought it so
upon another occasion as well as my self.


Bur. But he first took care to gather it into a body, and fetch it to such a
Consistency as might handsomely sustain the impression, and support the weight
of that shower of Particles which was to light upon it.


Phil. How unwarrantably he compassed all that we shall presently evince. In
the mean while I would gladly be informed why oleaginous Particles meeting with
earthy and gross in a common Fluid may not couple and hold them together very
tightly and effectually, especially if it be considered that it is the property
of Oily Particles to concorporate when they encounter, and consequently that by
their Combinations they become so much the better capable to collect and retain
such dispersed Particles of Earth as come in their way. But this is certain,
that during its state of Fluidity the Oily Parts of the Chaos when earthy
occurr to them, must adhere pertinaciously to the earthy, so that in the
distribution of the Chaos they cannot disengage themselves, but are obliged to
subside along with them, and what will you do now for a Sphere of Oil a' top of
your Water, when the parts of your Chaos are to be digested into order? Yet
without it you must utterly despair of a Crust, and without a Crust, of an
universal Deluge occasioned by the disruption and dissolution of it.


Bur. I confess, Philalethes, you have shocked me a little, yet perhaps if you
will give me leisure to weigh your Objection more accurately, I may come to
find out where the Fallacy lies.


Phil. As much leisure as you please, only before you set about the matter, let
me desire you to take another Animadversion of mine along with you; That
however plausible or exact any Physical System or Hypothesis which varies at
all from express accounts of the Divine Oracles may appear at first glance,
when you have looked a little deeper into it, you will find the Philosophy of
it very empty and incongruous. Nor do I design this to the disparagement of the
Theorist, for whose excellent Parts and Learning I profess my self to have as
profound a Veneration as even his coram Vindicator. And now I ask your Pardon
for detaining you so long with a Dispute which indeed the Theorist himself has
according to the Rules of equitable Interpretation determined beforehand in
favor of me, for if for confirmation he so willingly appeals (as he often does
most willingly) to the testimony of the Sacred Writings, it is to be presumed
his pleasure that his cause should stand or fall thereby, and then I think it is
impossible for any body to read in Genesis, but he must perceive that ingenious
Gentleman has fairly cast himself in his own Court.


Your Servant.

That Wit and Beauty are naturally the Concomitants of Virtue.
IT has always surpassed the skill of our Wits to define their own Excellency.
What Mr. Cowley and Mr. Dryden have achieved in the Undertaking is perhaps
better known and (if I may dare to say so) less considerable than to challenge
the mentioning at present. It seems to be altogether as intimate an affection
as even simple Perceptions either of Understanding or Sense, and though very
clearly known to it self, yet never can shine out beyond its head. I confess
that numerous party of Mankind, who are no more than qualified to listen and
admire, may command a faint Idea of it. They know there is something tickles in
such a certain choice and order of words, but how the Pleasure is first formed,
and by what art insinuated, they apprehend but very imperfectly. Nor does the
Vanity of the Polytheism of the Ancients appear to me more surprising and
extravagant than their founding a whole College of Gods and Goddesses for the
Super-intendency of Wit, seems (with respect to Polytheists) consistent and
reasonable. For besides its strange variety of Feature, and the force of its
Influence, the manner of its presenting it self resembles not a little a divine
Impulse: it darts in upon the Imagination unpremeditated, and often violently.
Its motions are rapid, and so capacious its embrace, that the farthest points
of distance lie within its clasp, and every thing between 'em dances after its
pleasure like a Puppet to the strings. It amuses the Understanding and checks
it in the Carreer of a sound or false reasoning. How often has the Poinancy of
a single proposition, or the quaintness of a reply determined Life and Death?
No more than O! Solon, Solon, rescued a Monarch almost in the very article of
Fate, and snatched him from the Pile already kindled, to the embrace and
confidence of the Victor. King Athelstan's Cupbearer, at whose instigation
amongst others, that Prince had some years before murdered his Brother, at
length became the instrument of Divine Vengeance against himself, and that by a
pure Lapsus Linguae, for chancing to slip one day when he reached the Ewer, but
recovering himself on the other Leg, that is as it should be, cried he,
designing only to out-jeer the miscarriage, one Brother helps the other; but the
words, it seems, made a far different impression upon the King, and easily
admonished his conscience to do justice upon the person that uttered 'em.
Kingdoms and States have sometimes been transformed by an Elegancy. Almost a
Troop in season has taken Towns, and routed Armies. Now so singular a Privilege
as this it is certain it most especially concerns the great Distributer to
conferr critically.

Where Events of such consequence depend upon it, both his Justice and
Omniscience engage him to exactness. Were it a light ordinary concern, he might
sometimes seemingly recede from the direction of the Plummet, and by an
After-decree correct the deviation: But true Wit is a gratuity too valuable to
be put into the hands of those who are ready and resolved to pervert it when
conferred to the worst purposes. Like the sweetest and most volatile Perfumes
it becomes by abuse most offensive and pernicious, and diffuses as wide, if not
wider than before. Yet this reasoning will by no means hold universally.
Exceptions present themselves too frequently for such a comprehensiveness, and
no where to our shame more frequently than at home, even to such a pass, that
Dissoluteness and Irreligion are made the Livery of Wit, and no body must be
conscious of good parts, but he loses the credit of them unless he take care to
finish 'em with Immoralities. However, as much as these Examples crowd in upon
us, there is this yet to be said, that the gloss is too slight to hold. They
may ring the changes a while upon words, but the sense and the sound expire
together, and the Organ of hearing is no sooner composed again, but the minds
of the Audience recollect themselves, and nauseate the emptiness of the
Quibble. I dare say, no body ever yet read the Obscenities of my Lord
Rochester, or the Omnis enim per se of Lucretius, but upon cooling saw the
Cheat, and grew, at least in his heart, out of Love with it. Dactyl and Spondee
cannot take fast hold enough. The murmurs of a Cascade may lull us in a Grotto,
but when we are once come abroad, any relics of the noise in our ears serve
only to disturb us. So that what Providence might have prevented in the Cause,
it has utterly defeated in the Effect, and our Beau'sprits must think of giving
warning to their Licentiousness, and listing under Virtue, if esteem is their
Scope. Indeed the conditions of their Depravity are such that the Habit
endangers the Faculty. There is so much of the Absurd in all irreligious
Notions, as is even apt to obscure and confound the fancy, or however reduces
its pittance of Elegancies to Oxymoron and Hysteron-Proteron. A civil War
presently breaks forth between the Judgment and Imagination, the former will be
continually bearing down upon the latter, continually bearing down upon the
latter, continual mortifying its pertness, and disappointing its motions. But
then if Intemperance goes hand in hand with Profaneness, it is a desperate
case. For Wit is no more proof against the Fumes of Luxury and Indigestion,
than a Feather against Smoke; in spite of Fate they waft it all away, and it is
out of reach before you think on it: Quin Corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque affigit humo divinae particulam aurae.


Some Genius's, it is true, retain their alacrity longer than others. Some can
hold out a Trojan Siege; others perhaps scarce a twenty-years course of
Bestiality shall effectually reduce, and there are of a third sort that are
almost obnoxious to one Bottle extraordinary. Nay I have generally observed,
that the more refined the Genius, the more suddenly extinguished. Many acute
Persons instead of being elevated, find themselves rather doz'd by the
operation of Wine. Many again grow Bacchanals in an instant, and had need only
clap spurs to their Imagination to make it run away with them. A few tempers
it is confessed are Masters of the Medium; but none always. Assiduity in the
practice will effect at long run what Circe compassed with a single Charm. It Is
recorded of Alexander the Macedon, that he was a man of Stratagem and singular
Acuteness, and the progress of his Arms declares him no worse a Politician than
Commander, but when for some time he had abandoned himself to Sensuality and
Supineness, he not only lessened his Authority amongst his Soldiers, but soon
became guilty of the grossest follies 'twas possible for him to commit,
destroying his best Friends, burning his own Cities, crowning his own Captives,
insomuch that had he lived a few years longer, instead of weeping for want of a
world to conquer, he might have whimper'd for the loss of that he had conquered
already. And much better it is, never to have had, than at length to have
forfeited an eminency of Understanding. He who was born with common Intellects,
neither knows the worth of Wit, nor the want of it. He escapes all notice, and
takes none. He values no Character like that of a downright Dealer, and prefers
a Shop Beesom to the Bays. Whereas he that makes Shipwreck of his Talent meets
with a Destiny much severer; he carries his Ignominy in his forehead, and sinks
from a Father of Jests into the matter of 'em. There Is not half the
inconvenience in being beggared or cashiered. They are misfortunes common to
the Wit with the Blockhead, and where circumstances and conditions do or may
jump, the multitude behave themselves toward a sufferer the more heartily for
their own sakes. But they never have any mercy for him whose losses are foreign
to all of their own Capacity, especially if he has brought the Calamity upon
himself, and that by methods only befitting them. This they think a just
occasion for Triumph, and therefore insult without measure upon such a
Proselyte to Stupidity. Do You see that poor Dog there? (cry the Journey-men and
Prentices as you walk the Street) since I remember him, he was a modest, sober,
gentile, pretty Gentleman, and moreover a man of as clear a head, and as clever
a Tongue as any within forty Miles of him, 'till we got him into our Club,
fox'd him every bout for a Twelvemonth together, and now we have drunk the
Bastard out of his Wits, we are even resolved to drink him out of all his Money
too, and then turn him over to the Boys and the Bailiffs. Besides, no Wit is so
lively as that which is accompanied with a Complacency and Luster of mind.
Their Bosom-Monitor will be troublesome to Rakes of Railery. Remorse never
fails to balk all their good things. Good Wits, as Plutarch has observed, and
before him Aristotle, are the most subject to Melancholy of any people in the
World, but loose ones lie under a double Shagrin, and till they reform, are
like to play their parts but very awkardly.

The same is to be said of Beauty as of Wit: all the difference is, The one
engages by the Ear, the other by the Eye. But Beauty is a charm of a more
universal sway. A fourth part of Mankind, I believe I may safely say, are, if
not utter Strangers to the notion of Wit, yet little affected with the
Gallantry of it. And in general those who are without it themselves, are apt
secretly to envy their Neighbors too much to be generously and heartily
delighted with it. But in Beauty the case is far otherwise. Nothing of that
seems acquired; and we may admire without reproaching our selves that
excellency in another which is perfectly fatal to him. Not that I think Wit
altogether an acquired Excellency. For my present purpose, it is enough that
those who want it at home so often mistake it for such abroad. Idiots and
Infants experience the force of Beauty, nay better perhaps than Philosophers.
The Peasant takes the infection as soon as the Prince. In a word, the Dominion
of Beauty reaches to both the Poles, and it is withal so despotick as often to
endanger the great Charter of our Reason. Therefore Providence will be sure to
interest it self more remarkably in the assignment of this property than of the
other. But how does this Argument comport with the daily testimony of our eyes?
Have not Traitors, High-way-men, and Prostitutes Complexion and Feature as
taking as Saints? Yes verily, more taking than those of one sort of Saints. Nay
we generally incline to fancy a Padder in the Cart, or a Curtezan without her
Mask, singularly handsome. And sometimes too, yet not so often, a Rebel shall
carry an attracting Countenance, though in our Country, I believe, more
instances might be brought of the contrary. But here we ought to make ample
allowances for Compassion, Presumption and Prejudice. We hope to mitigate the
Prisoner's fate by helping out the blemishes of his defects by our
Illustrations of his good Qualities. Again, we understand to what violent and
frequent Temptations a blooming Beauty is exposed; and thence infer the Women
of the Town cannot be ugly. And then as for Traitors, God knows they too
usually pass with the Multitude for either the Messengers of Heaven if they
prosper, or if otherwise, for the Martyrs of its cause, not to appear at least
Angelical. Whereas these false Optics laid aside, we shall fairly discern an
air very disobliging in each of these lewd Masterpieces. Guilt, Discomposure,
and Depravity pass the Pores of the Cheeks, and tarnish all their genuine
Luster. For it must be remembered that all the Irregularities of Passion and
Appetite are equally a Distemper of the body as of the Mind, and imprint their
foul Characters in the Countenance as well as in the Conscience. The Soul after
its fall cannot rest till it has involved the body in its Forfeiture, and
resents it at a high rate that the Servant should fare any better than the
Mistress. Yet these acquired Deformities are most visible in sudden and violent
cases. Indignation does the seat in a trice, and creates a new face as readily
as a Mirror represents it. The Forehead gathers, the Eyes flash, the Cheeks
whiten, the Teeth are set, the Mouth trembles, and the Foam boils at each
corner of it, and thus the fair Medusa's metamorphos'd into a Gorgon. Nor is
Lust less active: the Blood overflows the Face, the Eye flames, and dances, the
Postures of the Body are light and various. All Grace and Decency fly off, and
the man personates the Monkey without looking so well. Of Intemperance the
consequences are little better. It entails a ridiculous Inflammation upon the
Cheeks and Nose, and fastens a perpetual Small Pox upon the Countenance. It
scares a man from all use of his own Looking-glass, and renders him one to
every body else. Envy poisons the Visage, but the Poet may interpose not
unseasonably upon this head, Pallor in ore sedet, Macies in corpore toto, etc.
Paleness intense besets her Meager Face;
Her strutting Ribs extend their Vellum Case:
Her Eyes obliquely cast their noxious Rays,
While on her Heart an inbred Venom preys.
Perished her Teeth, and Gangreen in her Tongue,
Nor smiles, but when with Indignation stung.


A very exquisite Beauty indeed! and yet as much as here seems to be of
Fiction, the Vizard is no more than natural. Avarice very much favors Envy.
It Is a famished raw-bon'd Vice, and happier only in this single respect, that
it is ever so sollicitous about the Dust, as to remain utterly unconcerned for
any thing else. Prodigality makes a fine show for a little while, appears
bright and gay, and keeps its color so long as it keeps a Support in the
Pocket, but makes a wretched figure in rags, with fallen Cheeks and a lank
Belly. Instances innumerable might be tacked to these, if they were not
notorious enough of themselves. Yet one more I must not omit, the Dissembler.
And it is plainly impossible for him to have, or at least to preserve any good
looks from Forehead to Chin, and Ear to Ear. It Is a mere Posture-Master: And
artificial Convulsions ruin a good set of Features sooner than natural. The
most pliant parts of the Face, which are the Eyes and the Mouth, carry a great
sway in its Symmetry, and are the principal Organs of Dissimulation. These are
turned, and wreathed, and modeled sometimes different ways at once, that to me
it seems a Miracle that all Hypocrites don't squint, but come off without
inverted Pupils, Sparrow-Mouths and blubbered Lips, especially, whenas it
happens sometimes, two opposite Species of Dissimulation concenter in the same
person, at one time pretending himself worse than he is, at another time
better. But the first of these, which Theophrastus has incomparably
uncharacterized is much more easily practiced, much more compatible with comely
Features, although less in use than the other. But old men, I have observed, have
the slight on it beyond all else, the Philosophy whereof I cannot understand,
for where, I wonder, should they have a Modicum of Spirits active and subtle
enough to vary countenance and complexion? Such an Achievement, if I mistake
not, requires strength of Nature. To create Faces, and (if I may so speak)
Counterfaces, implies vigorous Blood and a Skin yet supple. However it is
certain we play our parts best in the last Act, except down right Dotage
overtake us, although that too's dissembled often enough.

But to return to the main Argument, and sum up the Evidence; I know of
nothing that can encourage the great Endower to conferr or continue these
Excellencies of the second Magnitude so much as a right use of them; nothing
that can provoke him to withold or remove them so much as a perverse one. It
asks no extraordinary Energy of Omnipotence to make a man either a Fool or a
Thersites. A slight alteration in the Brain, Blood or Nerves brought about by a
natural course will do the business. If this be so, it is best looking to our
selves, for when the genuine brightness is lost, borrowed Lines and bought
Charms expose more than recommend. At last to turn Dry-Nurse to the Children of
other People's Brains argues both impotence and indigence Spanish-Wool upon the
Wreck and Ruins of Beauty sits worse than fresh Vermillion in an old rusty
Head, though an Original of some eminent Master's. But Virtue infallibly
conveys to us both Wit and Beauty. It Is confessed indeed Socrates had a flat
Nose, and St. Paul a contemptible presence, yet no question the Effulgency of
the Proto-Martyr's face descended to a sufferer so eminent as St. Paul. And as
for Socrates, we know his repenting Countrymen soon after his Death erected a
Statue in honor of him, which but for the Virtues of the Original had been
only a most severe aggravation of his Sentence. Not that I imagine good Manners
make a new face, but what then? may they not brighten a native coarseness? may
not the serenity and transport of the Mind add life to the Eyes, and smiles to
the Mouth, and color to the Cheeks? and not only so, but elevate and prompt
the Imagination? It Is no less than a necessary effect, and he that thinks
otherwise, may perhaps retain the Graces of his Phiz, but has foregone the other
thing already, that is certain.

Yet at last, as the most ingenious Mr. Collier says, no man's Face is
actionable; and I may add, nor his Dullness outlawry. Let it suffice that the
observation holds true in the Main. When the odds are so considerable, it is a
madness to venture, and the more so, because when the Cargo is once sunk,
there is no diving for it ever after. However the broken Merchant may in time rig
out again, but a Wit or a Beauty Bankrupt remains a Bankrupt at least to the
day of Judgment. The Brain untuned very rarely and very late, if at all,
settles to rights again, and faded Beauty must be acknowledged all the world
over a desperate case. In short, we mistake Virtue, when we conceive her homely
and rough-hewn, disaffected to all the Race and Ornaments of Wit, and more
injurious to a man's person, than Dislocations or Diseases, whereas on the
contrary, nothing can so fairly merit, nothing so certainly provide, nothing so
effectually, and to so long a period preserve both Quickness of Parts and
Comeliness of Form as VIRTUE.

Of a Public Spirit.
THere cannot be a clearer Confession of the heinousness of Offenses against
the Public, than every Catiline's pretending to be a Patriot: it is true their
own Interest often, if not always counsels it, for what blunder so unpardonable
in the Politics of those men who aim at the subversion of Government and Laws
as to practice nakedly and without a gloss. But still as they vaunt and pride
themselves in appearing instrumental to the common Good, they evidently bear
witness to the dignity of the Virtue, and expose the monstrousness of their own
proceedings: so that one would admire not so much how the Plebeian world comes
to be imposed upon by the Sophistry, as how such pestilent Assertors can
dexterously manage the matter between their Words and their Actions. However
these Incendiaries, at least if they chance to be understood before they have
crowned their enterprise (for if they can once grasp the end of their hopes
they are sure of a good title) in the proper notion of 'em are odious and
detestable everywhere. Yet at the same time whole thousands may lie in a
Common wealth mere mortified Limbs, and as unnecessary as Lap-dogs. Men of
ample Capacities and Fortunes may without any disparagement lurk in their soft
retirements, and when a Storm gathers or breaks upon the state, when Tyrants
and Invaders are pillaging and proscribing, it is but a commendable and sober
caution, forsooth, to keep close and supinely contemplate the Destruction, or
rather to make ones self even not so much as a Spectator. But should the
Retirer exert the strength of so much as his little Finger in the service of
his Country, should he run the Risque of having the Crusts of his Cheshire
Cheese, or the Drippings of his March Beer confiscated, he would presently suspect
he had forfeited his Patrimony for a Fool, as if to be wanting to his Country
were not an indirect kind of Sedition, and not to abett her cause, to
strengthen and animate that of her Enemies. What opinion, I wonder, of Piety to
his fellow-Citizens must such a man have embraced? how must he look upon
Political Duties as mere Platonic Ideas? a sort of pretty, airy, fabulous,
romantic Whimsies, and nothing but Brats of the Imagination, obligatory upon
none but Superstitious and Hypocondriacal Consciences? Thus therefore he
argues, What, am I indebted to my Country more than my Country's indebted to
me? so long as my interest is wrapped in hers, I thing my self bound to expose my
self for us both, but when the Posture of public Affairs does not immediately
affect mine, even let my Neighbors shift for themselves, and the people at the
Helm steer just as they please. For what is the King and his Council to me? and
how can I help it, if Constitutions will change? alas! Omnium rerum
vicissitudo. Providence decreed it, and 'twere impious to resist its Decrees,
and so for my part, I Will not trouble my head with the justifiableness or
unjustifiableness of matters, but study my own convenience and repose, and let
the World roll on as it pleases. Behold Sir Sociable Self-love in Epitome, a
little nasty inconsiderate Drone, without courage enough to put him upon
Action, and yet without sense enough to frame his Excuse. And then how discreet
the Resolution! for a Powder-Monkey to talk of enjoying himself under Hatches,
when he knows the Pilot's about to drive him upon a Rock, because indeed he
knows himself to be a Powder-Monkey. But does he believe his insignificancy
will be his security in the common danger, a Passport through the Waves? Such
a decree of Providence, I Am sure he has no reason to depend upon. Or does he
fancy his Hammock will serve him for a Longboat, and that he alone shall swim
to shore upon his back without striking? It Is a jest to talk of solacing at
home and indulging Genius in the midst of public Distractions and Confusions.
Every Individual must be a party in spite of his Teeth, and obscurity of
condition instead of exempting, makes a man more the object of Rage and
Oppression, and I dare say, if your Suburb-Gentlemen would but carry along with
them this Maxim, That he whom at first a public Evil least respects, in the
conclusion becomes most obnoxious to it, although then least of all able to
divert it, we should have them bestir themselves in the first place. They would
scowre up the old Muskets and Head-pieces in the Hall, shake off the delicious
Lethargy, and take the Field before the Veterans. The first Alarm would fetch
'em out of their Quarters, and self-preservation would work Miracles. And
certainly nothing can be more obvious than that an Innovator will be tempted to
lay the severest burdens upon them, of whose Pusillanimity he has had such
experience, and whom he very well knows to be always unprovided against his
Encroachments. Nothing can solicit an usurping power so much to exercise its
violence more upon one man than another, (excepting in the Case of Competition)
as meanness of Spirit joined with littleness of condition. Be it so, yet these
Neutrals are prepared to gratify the Public, and establish their own
reputations some other way. One perhaps by laying out the Cash he knows not how
to dispose of, upon public Edifices and Endowments. It Is but erecting an
Hospital, a Country-School, or a Chapel of Ease, and then he counts so highly
of his merit, that Heaven, he presumes, may very well compound for a thousand
Tergiversations and Compliances: as if, like the Masons of Babel, he hoped to
build his way up thither. Another sets so much by his Intellectuals, that he
thinks the fruits of his Understanding may expiate for the perverseness of his
Will and Affections. Upon this Presumption he veers to all Points, deserts a
Cause, or espouses it, as he holds most convenient, and thinks if his Volumes
of Arts, Sciences, Languages, and Antiquities keep pace with the black Volumes
of his Trespasses, he bids fair for future Glorification. And if he can dandle
some men's curiosity, and perhaps do a little serious good in the opinion of
others, instead of seeming a Cipher in his Generation, he looks upon himself a
main prop of the State, and in the high road to Preferment and Esteem. A third
pitches upon a different method, distributes his Money, his Loaves, and his
Small Beer every Market Day; and whether he be a Guelf or Gibelline, for Turk
or Pope, Monarchy-man, Fifth-Monarchy-man, or no Monarchy-man, Whig, Tory, or
Trimmer, all, or some, or none, he has made such Friends both in this World and
in the next, that he need not question, but he shall have very good usage here,
and no uncomfortable reception when he leaves us. Such Refuges as these give
birth to that abjectness and indifference of temper so universally both
affected and applauded. Now the sum of all is this, They don't much care, if
they benefit the Commonwealth a little, when they are to receive the interest
of their own Benefaction, provided also they may take their own measures: but
if any Mortification's to be undergone, if the prick of a Pin must be endured,
Fire and Sword may consume a whole Continent before they will stir a foot from
their Dormitories. Now for my part, I think these men might as well declare
openly and ingenuously against a Government, as remain thus reserved and
unactive, for as silence in general is interpreted Consent; so in a public
Cause, it may justly pass for an approbation of the worst Practices, since it is
not to be doubted, but he who has not courage enough to assert and suffer in
the interest of the Community, has not integrity enough to be trusted in its
concerns; although Perfidiousness and Disingenuity more than enough to make its
Enemies depend upon him. On the other hand, what spectacle so glorious as a
generous Maintainer of his Country's true Liberties, courting all Hazards and
embracing all Misfortunes for her preservation and advantage, quitting the
little dirty satisfactions of Life, loathing and deriding the dull empty
excuses and alleviations of Deserters, yet never to be brow beaten out of his
Modesty, good Humor or Cheerfulness. He receives the worst indignities with a
smile, indulges and caresses the very Enemies of his cause, and will do any
thing but take their example: for Complacency and Orderliness ever accompany
the Generosity of a Public Spirit. Then too the shyest part of Mankind will
readily repose a confidence in him, who relinquishes all present enjoyments and
conveniences, rather than the Greatness and Constancy of his mind. No secrets
but those of Traitors in their proper trade shall escape his hearing; so safe a
repository is his breast, that how much soever the sentiments of those who know
him may differ from his, they had rather disburthen their minds to him than to
one another. Nor is he only Master of their thoughts, but often works them
insensibly into a concern and esteem, if not for his cause, yet however for
himself, at least so far, as to have his necessities relieved, and his
Principles valued, for Providence never omits to preserve such a force of
humanity in the bosoms of most Revolters, as may solicit a provision for
perseverers. But then what inexpressible exultations does the brave man
conceive within, when he calls over his principles and practices, while his
Conscience entertains him with such Music as this? Happy Hero! whom no
allurements of Riches, Pleasure, and Parade; no tumults of Faction, no menaces
of Tyrants, no inflictions of those Threats can prevail upon to renounce thy
regard of the Public! Triumph, for ever triumph within thy self, and
commiserate the weakness of those Wretches, who either want judgment and
consideration enough to learn the momentousness of that duty, or (which is
worse) have not the heart to perform it. It Is true, they deserve thy
Indignation and Contempt, and have too much Charity for themselves to have
almost any just Title to any body's else: Yet deny them not thy pity and good
wishes; nay condescend even to familiarity and respect. But be sure remain
proof against all their gay promises and all their stupid Satyr. Let Curtius,
Cocles, and the Horatii haunt thy imagination, and refine upon their Virtues
with the more excellent Principles of thy own Religion. Thus reign as perfect
as the Stoics Pattern, and wanton in the glorious transports of thy noble Soul.

O ravishing Harmony! what Mind so frigid, but at this would sicken for further
opportunities to signify its Zeal? or in case, even the main and last stake of
all must be parted with, the gallant man collects his vigor, redoubles his
Fortitude, calmly submits to the pleasure of Heaven, bequeaths his Friends and
Family to its protection, receives the fatal blow, forgets on a sudden his past
Calamities, and feels himself Divine.

Of the Weather.
ABout three Months since, invited by a Friend to share the pleasures of his
rustication, and enjoying a short respit from a knotty concern, I scorned to
decline the proffer, but was attended all my Journey long, and the best part of
my stay at his house, with a most uncomfortable season of Weather, enough to
have made me repent my forwardness, but that the good Coversation of the
Family, and some Parlour-diversions we found out amongst us, diverted the
Spleen, till such time as matters mended, which fell out, I remember, one night
at Eleven of the Clock, when my Companions had all betaken themselves to their
repose; but I resolving the Moon should not shine so seldom to so little
purpose, even took a solitary walk of a Mile, and at the Mile's end arrived at
a large stump of a Tree, by some honest lazy Hind, hatcheted into an Elbow
Chair. Here I squatted, and after a little blessing my self for my being once
more restored to the open Air, fell to meditating upon the past dismal Scene,
when from an hollow Tree, just over against me, starts forth a person of a sage
and serious Countennace, wrapped in a Morning-Gown, with a large Ruff round his
Neck, a Broad-brim'd, high-crown'd Hat upon his head, under his right arm a
Terrestrial Globe, and under his Left a load of Books. This appearance did not
a little terrify me: my Hair bristled, my Blood curdled, and Nature had for
certain done a diskindness to my Breeches, unless I had been animated in the
nick by the courteous address of my Visitant, who entreated me not to fear, for
that he presented himself with no other design than to assist me in my
Contemplations. I was, said he, formerly your Countryman, in an age when
Letters and Ingenuity, which are now so coldly encouraged, were amply honored
and rewarded, as well as Plain-dealing and Honesty, and for my own part, as I
always loved the latter (though I know what some people have thought of me) so
I made it my business to promote and improve the former. Who I am, these
Volumes will teach you; and at the same instant he displayed the Title Page of
the uppermost, wherein was in capital Letters to be read, NOVUM ORGANON. But to
pass directly to the present business, continued he, which by what I overheard
of your Soliloquy, I understand to be the unaccountableness of the Weather, I
must first entreat you to dismiss all fear, and in the next place, know that
notwithstanding by that nearer admission to Physical secrets which since my
retreat from this nether world, I have obtained, it might suffice, should I
simply relate the measures Nature has taken in bringing about these unusual
Events, yet because I am to discoutse with such a Being as can draw no
Inferences, but upon sight of their Connection with Premises, and because by
that Being, the matter is to be signified and published amongst others of the
same Species, I shall not only make appear the reasonableness of my Assertions
by their just dependence upon one another, but give you the liberty of
interposing, when any Scruples arise. I confess, when I carried Flesh and Blood
about me, being much inclined to amplify the several parts of Philosophy and
Learning, I introduced a considerable number of obscure Terms, especially in my
Book of the Copiousness of the Sciences, but then I always expounded their
meaning, and am now as desirous both to express my self intelligibly, and
maintain my Arguments rationally. Nay more, to make appear with what Candor
and Condescension I design to treat you, before I lay down any Hypothesis of my
own, I request from you a concise account of the Sentiments of your Vertuosi
upon this point, which we departed Philosophers seldom trouble our selves
about; not that they lie beyond the Sphere of our apprehension, but our own
Illuminations are so great, that all the Acquisitions of Mortals, as
extraordinary as you imagine some of your latter to be, are less valued by us
than poor Aristotle, and the Schoolmen by the generality of you. Here he
paused, expecting my Narrative, toward which I thus set forward: In the first
place, I would not have your Lordship presume my Catalogue of Opinions
complete, for since no one Vertuoso, that I know of, has hitherto communicated
his Sentiments upon this Question to the Public; a shrewd Sign they are little
interested in Acres or Orchards, I can answer your demands no otherwise than by
enumerating the several private Conjectures, which, as my Friends tell me, have
been made by sundry of the Learned. Indeed one would almost conclude either
Life or Fortune lay at stake; else in despite of the Itch of Curiosity, that
next these, has the powerfullest influence upon our Latitudinarian Vertuoso's,
they could as soon have kept Lent, or invented an Hypothesis for
Transubstantiation, as left this argument untouched. Besides, these violent and
frequent alterations in the Weather serve for a perpetual Monitor, by
discomposing their Constitutions, blunting their Inventions, and splenetizing
the poor Gentlemen allover, Like Quevedo's Necromancer in the Bottle, they are
loath to uncork and come abroad for fear of the mischiefs reigning without,
although too, most of them are Evils of their own brooding. There, they think,
they may lie snug, and swim daintily in Metaphysics, which once reckoned the
Diet of Philosophic Camelions they have now, if you will believe 'em, beat up to
a Consistency, and rendered more substantial and solid than the Creed it self.
I am unwilling to particularize Persons; though if I were to name any, it
should be the dull Bogtrotting Abstractor, that by a worse bargain than the
foolishest Hag in all Lapland, pawned his Soul in prospect of reputation, and
in the conclusion lost his purchase. But I beg your Lordship's pardon for my
Digression, and now pass to the Conjectures that have already been made amongst
Friends about the Question we are upon. The first and most common is, That by
some unlucky shove, our Globe of Earth has been justled out of its primitive
Position; that the North Pole has suffered no inconsiderable Declination, and
that to this Declination is owing all that excessive Cold Rain and Wind which
we on the Northern Side have felt for so long a succession of Years. Nothing
but this, as the Defenders of the Hypothesis maintain, could possibly beget
such wonderful Changes, and rather than forego the least matter that may
advantage their cause, they pretend to trump up the device of the old
Astronomers, who having by means of an accurate tradition learned that the
fixed Stars had shifted their Site within a certain term of years, ascribed it
to such an unheeded Jogg. But methinks, what was objected to those Sages then,
may as reasonably be thrown in the dish of these: which way such a thing might
happen without being perceived, and whether they thought all Mankind were in
that minute so fast, that the Jolt could not wake them? I was proceeding, but
his Lordship cried, Hold; and setting down his Globe upon the seat, look you,
says he, it is evident I cannot depress the North Pole of this Globe, which now
exactly answers our Elevation, but the Position of it, with respect to the
fixed Stars and the Courses of the Planets will be necessarily changed; so that
if the Depression were of Thirty Degrees, the Stars, which before were Vertical
to the Twentieth Degree of Northern Latitude, would be manifestly removed
Twenty Degrees Southward: nothing like which appearing in the face of the
Heavens, that alone refutes the assertion. Neither could Sun and Moon rise and
set as they used to do; whereas these Speculators must have lost their
Eyesight by the great improvement and use of their Glasses, unless they have
observed the contrary. Presumers indeed! that fancy it is but giving the Earth a
kick, and the whole difficulty's solved. I would also know from what causes
this Convulsion should arise. Nature is not given to starting: her motions are
equal, orderly and gentle. All things circulate by an insensible Transition.
There is no surer sign of Inconstancy and Irregularity than Abruptness. The
cap'ring of a Beau, and the catchings of a dying Man, though effects of
opposite Principles agree in this, that they are alike the Symptoms and
Consequences of Distemperature. The Celestial Bodies are all constant to the
same degrees and lines of motion, and the spiral progress of the Sun was never
to be charged hitherto, unless on the score of a Miracle, with interruption or
deviation. Be pleased, therefore, to proceed to the second. I shall, replied I,
acknowledging you have more fully convinced me than I had my self of the
absurdity of that opinion, the next, to which is, in my judgment, never a jot a
more rational, being chiefly adapted to the extravagancies of the Cardanists,
men that value no other Solutions than those fetched from the Postures of the
Stars, or Conjunctions of Planets: not that they have yet erected a Scheme, or
particularly examined the state of the Heavenly Bodies: but they are sure the
whole matter may be illustrated this way, and care not a Straw how the Heavens
are accommodated, as long as they can accommodate their Notions to them: as for
example, are Mars and Venus in Conjunction? It Is a sure signification of an
extraordinary Wenching-Season at Venice and Naples, because, forsooth! the
familiarity of those two Planets is so very notorious; in Hungary, of success
to the Turks, denoted by Mars superior to Venus; or of the contrary, Venus
expressing the effeminacy of the Sultan, and Mars the power and vigor of the
Emperor. In England, a Peace, a Plot, or any thing that falls out. But I ought
not to forestall your Lordship, considering you, since your Manumission from
Mortality, may have taken a Voyage, as by a late Author we understand of
Monsieur des Carts, through the Regions of the Upper Worlds, and learned what
their Correspondence and mutual Impressions are. Be that so as you suspect, or
otherwise, said he, it is sufficient that by knowledge atchievable in this
world, you may learn the ridiculousness of their Pretensions, who would make
you believe they can interpret the Language of all Revolutions and Aspects over
their heads, as easily and certainly as the Pythagoreans undertake to prick
down their Harmony; a Crew that do no more than disgrace all humane Learning
and Philosophy, but infest and undermine the Commonwealth. Thus Ephemerides
and Almanacks are become a Political poison; a man cannot look what day of the
Month it is, but seditious Dogrel stares him in the face. Nor will ever any
Conjunction be more auspicious, than of such miscreant Heads with Pillory or
Halter. Besides, what order or disposition of the Heavenly Bodies will these
men pitch upon, as effective of such consequences? or how will they prove such
a disposition so effective: Since they themselves have not done it, much less
will I, Sir, trouble your head with examining particularly what have been the
motions and postures of the heavenly bodies for these dozen years past. In
general, I know of no such extraordinary Conjunctions as such extraordinary
Effects require. Have Orion and the Pleiades been in Trine with Aquarius? or
has Virgo been troubled with a Diabetes so long? Proceed, I beseech you, Sir.
Others, answered I, seem rather inclined to believe that the last Comet was the
Parent of all our unseasonable Weather; and this comes from very judicious
persons, who not unjustly suspect, that the main Effects of a Comet are late
and rarely to be perceived till a considerable time after the appearance. And
for my own part, I do not only think this Conjecture probable, but further
believe, that instead of civil, they always portend natural Changes. Battles,
Rebellions, and State-Revolutions seem to have very little affinity with their
fiery Streamers, unless in the destructiveness of the Element, and the
irregularity of the motion. Your judgment of Comets, replied his Honor, is
very apposite; but I am sorry your men of such a singular sagacity should link
an Effect to a Cause before they have discerned the dependence of one upon the
other. It Is venturing too far, and laying a Brat to the next comer. We ought to
be cautious in pronouncing so near relations, especially when they succeed one
another at so long a distance of time; from which circumstance we may pretty
securely gather, that if a Cause, Comets are however a remote Cause of such
Innovations, and if Naturalists will solve Effects by remote Causes, at that
rate a man may be said to be the effect of Beef and Mutton. Comets may indeed
have miraculous Influences, but who can be confident of their aptness to
produce those Events, much less, of their begetting them immediately, and
without the intervention of other Causes. Though least of all, methinks they
should be the cause of abundance of Rain, as rather suited to dissipate all
collections of moist Bodies, and proving too often the forerunners of
excessive heats, and those Epidemical Mischiefs which are thence derived. Once
more I therefore return to your self, and demand the next Hypothesis. There
remain yet, said I, some behind, but I desire another may content you; and that
such as is by some contended for with no less vehemence than any of the rest.
However, it is but a partial Solution, and reaches no further backward than last
Christmas, about which time you may remember the Czar made us a visit, and
brought along with him all the Winter and bad Weather in Muscovy. Then could
not, cried Verulam, Experiment convince this Sect, for I dare say, had any of
them approached within breath shot of that mighty Prince, they would soon have
perceived he had brought them over more Heat than Cold. However if he brought
it, yet since he has not carried it back again, it is fit we make a further
enquiry into the reason of its continuance: and because you say you are cloyed
with other people's Notions, avoiding Preambles, I shall now begin to you my
own Lecture, your kind attention first bespoken. You have heard, I make no
question, and read much about Central Fire, and may have observed that
notwithstanding Philosophers disagree among themselves as to the material
Causes, the means of Perpetuation, and several other circumstances, so far they
all consent, that there certainly is such a thing. And indeed the existence of
any part of nature is perhaps the ultimate object of natural Philosophy.
Essences and Forms are an intricate sort of concern, and will never be
effectually unriddled till Matter may be reduced to an indivisible, yet
discernible Minuteness. This is the only sure method to come at them; they lie
more closely immured, than Gems in the foundation of a Rock, and nothing less
than a total dissolution of their subject can bring 'em to light. This I speak
with respect to you Mortals, for I am not to tell you what advantages the
casting my Carcass has brought me, least you should follow old Empedocles's
steps, and caper out of the world the better to come acquainted with it. The
Experiment indeed looked brave, but Central Fire is no such lambent Flame that
a wise man should like to wallow in it. Elementary or not Elementary, gray
Beards will singe by it. And therefore of the many Vertuoso's who have exercised
their Wits upon this subject, none have been since so frolic some as to make
such a desperate proof of those Flames. Instead of sensible Demonstration all
rest satisfied with their own rational Inferences. Plato for his part troubles
himself with no more than the confession of its Being. Aristotle persues the
matter further, and tells you in his second Book of Meteorologicks; the eighth
Chapter, the cause of this fire, which he takes to be the accension of Spirits
upon violently encountering one another in Air very much attenuated. Lucretius
in his account of Aetna speaks much to the same purpose, and counting from even
Thales, that trusty Friend of the element of Water, down to Father Kircher and
Burnet, you will find the number of those who deny Central Fire to be very
inconsiderable. Some, it is true, have placed Water in the room on it, and others
Adamant, but upon no other account than to support an Hypothesis, for which
your peremptory Systematist boldly distorts Nature, and stuffs her inside with
any thing that may best serve his turn. Thus when a great Ox is made to bear up
the World, a Tortoise must be added to sustain the Ox. Not that I advise you to
lay too great a stress upon Authority, especially in cases which admit of a
better proof, as does the present. The System of things, when we behold it, at
first view suggests as much, and that very remarkably. Vesuvius, Aetna, Hecla,
the Philippine, Molucca, Canary Islands, and a thousand other places besides in
the several quarters of the World are evident and unexceptionable Arguments.
Those inexhaustible Sources of Fire cannot but have a deeper root than is
ordinarily imagined, even Borellu's Arguments notwithstanding. Add to this, how
necessary such a common Stove must be for the propagation and preservation of
all Beings animate and inanimate. The Sun, it is true, is a great Cherisher, but
he plays only above-board, and seems rather to consummate and polish, than
primarily generate. So cold a Birthplace as the Surface of the Earth,
especially for Plants and Trees of a tender Constitution, would be apt to chill
the Embryo, unless a moderate warmth rose from beneath as well as descended
from above. And the Fruits, those Sweetmeats of nature, as a certain Bard very
elegantly sings, must be utterly spoiled in the confection, should the Dame be
too sparing of her Fuel, which yet why she should, seems very unaccountable,
seeing she is so plentifully furnished with it: as I could show at large by an
Induction of particulars, but choose rather to refer you at your leisure to Dr.
Burnet's second Part of his Theory. Though Father Kircher's remark being short,
I shall here give you, because he was eminently acquanted with the lower
Labyrinths of the Earth, and had in a great measure anticipated Purgatory ever
he left the upper. How is it possible, says he, such an abundance of Sulphur,
Bitumen, Naptha, and all sorts of Minerals should be found so commonly, and
that in the cold confines of Horror and Darkness, quite beyond the reach of the
Sun's Influence, unless the Womb of Nature supplied a secret invigorating
Warmth? The observation's good, and as we cannot conceive for what end she
should lay in such a vast stock, unless for the sustenance of this mighty
Flame, so the readiest and most likely course of preparing and concocting these
large portions of matter seems to be by the action of Central Fire. Not to
mention the gradual increase of heat, which the illustrious Mr. Boil in his
Treatise of the temperature of the Subterranean Regions has taken notice of.
Nor need I send you further for proof than to the common Newspapers, which
have been daily full of terrible relations about Aetna and Vesuvius; how
violent their late Irruptions have been, and what vast quantities they have
discharged of Stones and Ashes, laying utterly wast all the adjacent Parts, and
frighting the Neighborhood out of their Houses and Wits. The poor unkennell'd
Friars thereabouts I dare say are ready to bear me out in my Assertion, and
convinced to their cost of the reality of Central Fire: Which being by this
time made good, I have yet farther to explain, how this Fire not only lasts,
but increases. How it should be continually fed is a question somewhat
difficult in appearance. It must have continued so long, and consumed in that
time so great a portion of Aliment, that you will be apt to wonder with your
self which way the stock should last out till this time; a Riddle as perplexing
as that of many a beggarly Beau's living up to the condition of a Peer of the
Realm. And indeed if that matter which sustains the Central Fire were as
suddenly to be consumed as such a ones fortunes, the Central Fire of necessity
had been extinct long ago, for it cannot live upon tick, and no sooner misses
its usual Food but vanishes. Hence it is easy for some to infer, that the
Aliment already dissipated by the Flame, must according to the Laws and Order
of Nature's Revolutions be converted again into matter suitable to maintain the
Fire as it did before; yet what may be done without these Transmutations I
shall presently discover, but before I attempt this Discovery, must desire to
hear your Scruples about any thing already offered, that I may, as it is but
just, endeavor to remove 'em. I made answer, that what he had said carried in
it a great deal of probability; that I was sufficiently satisfied of the
Central Fire, and did not at all doubt of his being able to state the measures
of its Conservation: Yet notwithstanding that I had these two Queries to
propose, first, Why the Center of the Earth might not be solid and of Stone:
next, Why if not solid, it might not however be a Pool of Water; about which
two points I thought his Lordship had discoursed more sparingly than he needed.
The Arguments, said he, which I have already brought to confirm your belief of
a Central Fire suffice without any other to answer both your Queries, no more
being requisite to prove the Center of the Earth neither Water nor Stone, than
evincing it to be Fire: but because you may be more fairly satisfied, I shall
not decline to bring some further evidence of the Supposition. And I am sorry
it is my misfortune that the Argument I shall now urge is of that kind, against
which I my self have so strenuously inveighed. However, now I am become
sensible of my error, and declare that I think the Tendencies and Ends of
things contribute mainly to the knowledge of their natures. Accordingly I would
gladly know to what purpose the Center should have been either a Rock or a
Puddle. If indeed this mighty Globe could have been fashioned no otherwise than
a Snow-ball, or had been destined to the office of a Water-bottle, something
like it might be presumed. For as for any further use of one or the other, I can
by no means understand what it should be. Those inmost Regions ought much
rather to be the seat of the first Springs of Motion and Virtue, than a mere
dead pond^rous Quarry. Perhaps you will tell me it is sixth there for Ballast. But
how it should serve for such, is to me as unintelligible, as if you should say
it is there for a rowling-stone. Instead of poizing, I look upon such a Mass as
rather fitted to unpoize, and break those Mystic Chains upon which the body of
the Earth hangs. I grant indeed that of whatever matter we constitute the
Center, we shall be equally puzzled to find out a stay. That fine Ethereal Gulf
in which the Earth swims, is of so yielding a temper, that Waters far more
capable of supporting Gold than that its Treasure. However if any one Species
of Matter be more convenient than another, Fire being the lightest and the most
active should certainly be it. You have, I presume, been often an eyewitness
of its power to carry heavy Bodies through the Air. Your Bombs, which have been
invented since my Halcyon days, are a singular Specimen of this. And that
Element which forces such ponderous Matter so rapidly through the air, cannot
but most suit with its hanging in it. Then as for the use of Water, that is
acknowledged to concern more immediately the provisions of Life, and a Pool
situate so low, could neither furnish us with Fish, if it entertained
wholesome, nor serve for the Sun to exhale Vapors from, or us to sail upon. To
those who would make it a Cistern for the supply of Ocean and Rivers, I need
only hint that natural property of all Water never to transgress the level of
its own Superficies, unless when Violence is offered it. Thus your two
Questions are, I hope, satisfactorily answered, and if you have any other
doubts remaining propose 'em, or expect me to proceed. I thanked his Lordship
for his fair dealing, and acquainted him I had no more Objections to enter, for
as for what some surmiz'd that there is nothing but a large Cavern at the
Center filled with Mists and Exhalations: the grounds of their belief appeared
to me so slight, that I would not trouble his Lordship to discuss them. Then
his Lordship thus again put forward, According to that which I lately offered,
I shall next instruct you in what manner the Aliment of this Fire is
perpetually provided: and this I cannot better do, than by beginning at the
Operation of the Fire it self, which penetrating the Pores of the matter lodged
next to it, and severing the various Particles of it, devours as many of 'em as
are light and manageable, but sends up the moist and phlegmatic through Chinks
and Passages of its own creating into Regions nearer the Earth's Superficies,
or where it can obtain a vent, quite out of it. The order of which Analysis
exactly corresponds with that of the Chemists, for first of all rise their two
Mercuries and Phlegm, and then their Sulphur and Salt. The only difference is,
that the Chimist's Fire being much less vehement than the Central, and the
enclosures of the Central confining the sulphurous, implicated, and heavier
parts, that they cannot rise as in an Alembick, such sulphurous and heavier
parts are by the power of the flame so broken and intermixed, as to become
constant nourishment for it. And thus, as is evident, it does not merely
sustain it self, but propagates too, and diffuses upon the ruins of its
Neighbors. By what stated degrees it prevails, is hard to guess, there being
no mover in the world more undisciplined and inconstant: besides that the
Aliment it self is variously and unequally digested. Sometimes a large Vein of
nothing but pure Sulphur occurs, and then the Fire becomes most furious on that
side. Afterward perhaps succeeds a more Phlegmatic sort of Earth, and then
again it slackens and languishes, at the same time, perhaps, gaining ground on
another more unctuous part, (in consideration of which, we may now very
reasonably expect, after so tedious an Extreme of Wet and Windy Weather, the
contrary Extreme of Calm and Dry, at least for some time, and in some of the
Northern Climates:) and in a word, as it encounters matter more or less
obnoxious to its force, it becomes more or less violent. Thus it is likely that
within these Twelve or Fourteen Years past, it has met with larger Magazines of
the more combustible kind under the Northern Regions of the Earth, by the
accension and advantage of which it is nearer arrived, and with much greater
vehemence, to the superficial part of the Northern World, where causing those
moist and phlegmatic Particles, which it has from the beginning drove up
before it, together with what others were properly and of course allotted to
those superficial Regions themselves, and also a large quantity out of the
Ocean and Rivers to exhale, it easily produces those Events, of which I shall
now give you a particular Account.

And first, the perpetual and amazing Showers of Rain which of late have, for
instance, watered our Island, arose primarily, we may presume from this cause,
in as much as by its situation it is peculiarly liable to the inconveniences
of Vapors discharged from the Ocean as well as of others from it self. Hence
it comes to pass, that the Markets every where abound with Complaints and Sighs
no less than the Hospitals; that a Vine leaf is as rare a thing as once the
Grapes; that Green passes for the most fashionable Complexion amongst so many
Ladies; that Physicians, of all people, gather most Money next to the
Collectors of the Taxes; and that the Apothecaries get more by the Fruiterers
than of old by the Wine-Coopers. For it is hardly conceivable what a flight of
Vapors daily issues from under and about Great Britain, which either being
collected into Clouds, immediately and directly fall in Showers, or else by the
Sun at the short intervals of his appearance and action are rarefied and
deflected to the Pole, whence when once gathered to a preponderous Body they
return, and become the material cause of our extraordinary Showers of Rain, and
Storms of Wind. Nor does it follow hence that no other Wind could blow besides
the North, for the Collection of Vapors in revolving is broken and parted into
a great many lesser Clouds, which as they variously actuate one another, and
are actuated by the heat of the Sun, impel and move the Air differently, and
often oblige it to change its course, especially where high Rocks and Mountains
obstruct its passage. It is no wonder therefore if the Sun be grown such a
stranger, when Fogs and Gloominess interpose so impregnably, that it is as much
as he can do to make a peeping-hole through 'em once in a Month, and instead of
fructifying barely satisfy his Curiosity. Nor is this the Fate of Great
Britain only, though no Climate has had a larger share on it: France, the
Low Countries, Germany, Poland, Denmark, Swedeland, and almost all Tracts of
Europe to the North have felt the same calamity. The Vintages on one side
seldom answering expectation, nor the Crops on the other: but over and above
all Excesses of Rain and Wind they have suffered very remarkably by terrible
Tempests, Thunder, and Lightning, etc. to the destruction of Cattle, Houses,
Men, besides frequent and dreadful Earthquakes. And these may be justly
ascribed to dry Exhalations, the matter of which abounds under those Regions,
and is expelled along with the moist Vapors by the approach of the Central
Fire, through which means it fortunes often that Lightning and Hail fall in the
same Tempest. For that Heat which is derived from the accension of the dry
Exhalations in Thunder and Lightning cannot prevent the congealing of the cold
Vapors, which perhaps are so intimately confederated and congealed
beforehand, that the sudden and violent accension of the Exhalations, instead
of melting or dispersing 'em serves only to precipitate their Descent.
Accordingly, without the blind Salvo of Antiperistasis many a funking Boor may
have had his Pipe lighted by a Flash this minute, and beat out of his mouth by
a Pellet of Frost the next. In violent cases the concurrence of two contrary
extremes ought not always to be looked upon as a Paradox. Indeed without
repugnancy the very notion of violence ceases. Thus have I brought you
acquainted with my Hypothesis relating to the strangeness of the seasons for so
many years past in most of the Northern Climates, but shall not desert the
argument yet, till I have mentioned an observation or two confirming my
opinion: First, that the Eruptions of Vesuvius and Aetna have within our last
twenty years been more violent than ever. To give you a punctual History of
them down from that time would neither be edifying nor entertaining, especially
to one, who, I make no doubt, is inquisitive at least after the more general
occurrences of the material World. And many say the Pope has been so miserably
scared, that in order to their Pacification, he is delegating half a dozen
Cardinals to turn all the Tuscan Sea into Holy Water. However what dreadful
Effects such Enormities may have wrought, is easy to be guessed by
recollecting only the ancient Accounts that have been left us of the latter of
those Mountains, at a time when 'twas far less furious, and amongst others,
that incomparable one of Virgil: -- Horrificis sonat Aetna ruinis, etc.
-- Near the Shore
With loud Convulsions Aetna's bowels roar.
Often from its Iaws in towering Vollies rowls
Thick sooty Night, with Showers of livid Coals.
Bright Spouts of wavy Flame it belches high,
Which with a lambent Summet court the Sky.
From Earth's deep Womb its rushing Fire ascends,
And off the noisy sides vast rooted Masses rends.
Often it disgorges with a deaf'ning groan
Ribs of it self in Oar of scalding Stone.


This very description seems enough to shock an ordinary Courage, but I am
afraid even so vast a Genius of Poetry, of whose Memory I ask pardon for my
injurious Translation, would have found it exceed his power to form a just
design of it, as its condition is now. I cannot tell what surer proof you would
have of the Predominancy of Central Fire, unless you were to feel it your
selves. Another observation that not a little strengthens my Hypothesis is
this, That although a small share of your Fruits have ripened to a due
perfection, yet you have had as great or greater shows in your Fields and
Gardens about the beginnings of the Summers as formerly. The Blades have rose,
and the Ears multiplied most successfully. The Trees for some Autumns have been
almost over-loaden; and abroad the Vineyards thick-hung. But the main thing of
all, a just Maturity has never or very rarely followed Crude and green they
have proved at the best, and the Relics of 'em continue so upon the Boughs
till the next hard Frost mortifies the Stalks. Much the same fortune, or rather
a little better has come to the Harvests. But how should your Springs and
Summers prove so promising, and your Autumns so treacherous, unless the Central
Fire were become now more capable of assisting the Sun's influence during the
two first Seasons, and invalidating it upon the return of the latter. A third
observation, and that my last of this kind may be, that the Frosty Seasons are
much longer and severer, (the present Winter excepted) than of old. It may look
perhaps paradoxical that the predominancy of the Central Fire should be the
cause of this: and yet it seems to be so, though remotely; for the heat of the
Sun being by the means aforesaid excluded, the Frosts on the Surface of the
Earth must commence earlier, continue more intense, and end much later,
especially penetrating a great deal deeper into the Collection of moist Vapors
retired upon the Central Fire's approach toward the Earth's Surface. Thus, what
with Rain and Floods one part of the year, and Ice and Cold the rest, you may
expect in time to see your Country Holland complete, and the next Generation,
believe me, shall all be Scaters. Then perhaps the Physicians and Apothecaries
may blow their Fingers, and the Surgeons, grown so poor since your Civil Wars,
come once more into play. But I have already been too tedious upon the
Efficient Causes of your unseasonable Weather, and shall now directly pass to
the Moral Occasions of it, in all respects as extraordinary as the other, in
the consideration of which I shall not be so particular as I might, my term of
absence from a better place being almost expired: and besides the generality of
Mankind had rather hear the natural History of such Calamities than any rebukes
for deserving them; that is, they would have their Curiosities satisfied
without awakening their Consciences, which indeed neither ought, nor in
Questions of this nature can be done. The bare recollection of such Evils will
necessarily beget horror in those that procured 'em, especially where the
Provocations have been universal, as among you of this Island, which, I
believe, can vie with any Continent under Heaven for Vice and Impiety. I could
be very prolix upon this Topic, but I know 'twill be in vain, and I should
purchase nothing else by my admonishments, but to be called a preaching,
canting Shadow, and dismissed for a damned foolish Apparition, stop their
Vitals. If I were to cry, Repent, you would answer me, It Is time enough: If I tell
you You're hardened, ye excuse your selves by saying, It Is then too late. Thus
most ambidextrously ye keep on the old pace; and to stop you in your Career
makes ye but the more impatient to be upon the Wing again. The practical part
of Religion, I confess, had been laid aside long before my time, yet our Faith
stuck by us, and though we too often made a may game of the Ten Commandments,
we retained a sincere Veneration for the Creed. Yet that, in process of time
is, it seems, gone after the other, even from I believe in God, to the Life
Everlasting. In short, ye are once again as true Saxons as Austin first found
you, bating the business of Idolatry: For year by this time better versed in
the Argument a Majori, than to trouble your pates with any other, after ye have
deserted the true God. And were but your Actions a little more Saxonick,
'twould be something however of a Palliation. But ye scorn it. Rapine,
Oppression, Fraud, Rudeness, and Treachery were detestable names to the
generality of them: And now a' days forsooth! these are British Virtues. He
that would live must be eminent in one of them, and he that would thrive, in
all of them. Then here is the jest on it in the upshot, that all these foul crimes
must be wrapped up in Hypocrisy; for ye dote so wretchedly on your wickedness as
to turn even impolitick in it, and keep the old trade of Dissimulation on foot,
when ye desire your Villainies should be proclaimed. Heretofore fine plausible
Pretenses were of mighty use, because then there was at least so much integrity
abroad as might often baffle and confound an open opposition; but now it is high
time, one would fancy, to lay aside the Cloak, when a Rascal's sure to be a
loser, should he be mistaken for a Fair-dealer. -- But hark! the Cocks crow,
and daylight spreads. I must away; however let me leave this one Truth more
behind me, That you must never expect the Weather should mend till your selves
do. And thereupon back stepped his Lordship into the hallow Tree, and I directly
to my Lodgings.

A Demonstration of the Certainty of Things, and of the Being of a God.
AS there is not a more valuable Privilege bestowed by the gracious Donor of
all good things upon any part of his Creation than that which the Possessors of
it call by the name of right Understanding or Reason, so could there not have
been a greater Curse inflicted on rational Beings than if what they term right
Reason were nothing but Delusion and Infatuation: for beside that Principle,
which is unalienable from a rational Nature, of eschewing all Error as such,
the consequence would have been either, that we must have pursued false Ends
through sincere Means, or real Ends through false Means, or lastly false Ends
through false Means; and the effects of either of these had proved intolerable,
the more because the inconvenience would not have attended two or three
Counsels of our Lives only, but all our Motions and Endeavors whether of
greater or less Importance: nay so miserable had been our state, that if we
could have been sensible of it, no more comfort could have been had than
remedy; and if insensible, the whole drudgery of the Delusion must have been
first entirely finished, ever we could so much as know we had taken such pains
to be disappointed. Annihilation were certainly more eligible, or at least not
to be is as good as to be in vain, for if an end is unattainable, it is all one
in the effect, as if there were no pursuant to attain it. It nearly concerns us
therefore, as many as are conscious to our selves of possessing this Principle,
to examine the Pretenses of it, and whether it is infallible in all its
Determinations or only in some, and if but in some, which they properly are: to
inform himself whereof I do not think it by any means necessary for a man to
strip off Flesh and Blood, to benumb himself all over, to give his person the
lie, to close up his Eyes and forget his faculty of feeling. For this is
endeavoring to reduce himself to that sleeping state in which the great
Advisers of this method suppose the most subtle delusion. It Is a mere waking
Dream, and Nature must undergo many a bitter pang before she can wreath her
self into the Monster. When with half the trouble I can state a Principle or an
Axiom in my mind that shall be never the worse for my being in my senses, which
therefore if they may not be credited, may however be decently neglected. And
although in the formation of abstracted* Ideas they often divert and interrupt
us, yet they are undoubtedly a far greater hinderance when so much violence is
offered them. If lest to themselves they might perhaps sometimes retard, or
bring us out of the way: they might interpose their gross compounded Objects,
and mix again those simple Conceptions which the Understanding has with much
labor refined and sorted: they might confound Notes of Discrimination with
Notes of Identity, reverse general Ideas, and detain us with the sensible
Properties of Individual. Nay further, they might counterfeit the Species of
Objects, and surprise and perplex us with their Incoherences: yet if we attempt
to discipline and restrain them, much more utterly to discard and null them,
they grow twice as troublesome, and instead of diverting the Mind by fits as
before, perfectly distract it, and find it so much trouble in subduing and
governing them, that unless it were capable of more Operations than one at
once, it cannot pursue the contemplation of those Notices and Ideas, for the
more accurate perception of which it relinquishes all the Benefit and
Instruction of the Senses. Thus for instance, when I take upon me to abstract
the individuating Properties whereby this man differs from that, and he again
from a third, and so forward, in order to constitute an Idea of such a number
of Properties as are common to the whole College of Individuals, which is the
Idea of a Species, the presence of any of those Individuals before our eyes may
solicit the Soul to return to a compound Contemplation of it, or else the
Imagination may of a sudden reunite what the Intellect had separated, may
perversely range the Concretes before it, and so retard the Operation: but then
if all these Individuals are to be reduced to the State of a Species, and at
the same time our Faculties must be continually upon the Watch, continually
suppressing and chastizing the Insolences of sense; if the Intellect must look
two ways at once, mark out her Lines and form her Planes, while she repulses a
Sally; this would be hard service indeed, and she would find her self at last
necessitated to attend altogether one of the two, or atchieve but half of
either. And of this the Cartesians appear eminent examples against themselves,
who endeavoring to form an Hypothesis in despite to their Senses, meet with so
violent an opposition from them, that while they are disputing the Field with
them, and subjecting the Rebels to the Understanding, the work of ratiocination
halts, and many times as soon as one Premise is handsomely placed, a sudden
strife of the Senses for liberty shall commence, against which the
Understanding must make head, and after the Fray is a little over, forgetting
her self, she presumes she had before laid down two Premises, and in that
assurance demurs not to draw a Conclusion: or perhaps, when she has stated both
her Premises, the senses begin to heave, and she must correct them, upon which
she loses the judgment she had passed upon the Ideas of her Premises, and so
fetches a wrong Inference from them. Thus in essaying to demonstrate the
Immateriality of the Soul from the Essence of it, as being contradistinct to
that of the Body, they propose to prove, that the body may not exist, but the
Soul must, and from thence infer, that the Souls Essence cannot be the same
with the body's, and that therefore the Soul cannot but be immaterial: now the
possibility of the Nonexistence of their Bodies, which at first they barely
proposed they presently after presumed, which such curious and scrupulous
Reasoners could hardly have done, but that by the untractableness of the Senses
their Intellect was so disturbed and annoyed, as upon recollection to look upon
that as warrantably presumed, which was but gratis supposed: accordingly it is
made a foundation for a further Conclusion, that the Soul is immaterial because
its Essence is distinct from the Bodies which is material: and here again a
short skirmish with the Senses seems to have intervened between the Premises
and Conclusion, else it could never have been, that such cautious Philosophers
should derive the evidence of the latter from the former, because if they had
carried it along with them, that at most they had but evinced the possibility
of their Body's not existing, and the certainty of their Soul's existence, they
could never, unless for the reason I have now given, have alleged it as a
necessary consequence from such Premises, that the Essence of the Soul and
Body are contradistinct; since it is obvious to every one who will faithfully
connect these Premises with this Conclusion, and that in their full and proper
Sense and Extent, that if the Body as truly exists as the Soul, they cannot
differ on the score of Existence, and that until the Existence of the Body can
be proved utterly false as well as questionable (not that I think there are any
grounds for attempting the latter) it cannot be necessarily concluded from
possible Premises, that the Essences of the Soul and Body are contradistinct,
nor from that conclusion as founded on such Premises, that the Soul is
immaterial. The occasion of which and many more mistakes in men so diligent and
jealous could be no other than the many Advocations and Diversions they
received from their Senses, and therefore they ought to be a warning to us not
to pick any Quarrels with our Senses in order to the stating solid Principles,
nor to hold for an Axiom, that the Corruption of the Senses is the generation
of Reason.

And yet on the other hand it were not safe with Epicurus to confide wholly on
the Senses, to yield an implicit assent to all their Informations, and to be
directed either in the search of Truth or Good solely by their conduct,
although I think there is no harm in being so much a Stoic, as to impute those
errors which result from the Impressions of the Senses so long as they keep
their natural Disposition and Tenor) not to the Organs, but to the Objects:
however as long as between the one and the other we are in some cases liable to
be deceived, a wise man would use their assistance warily, and be sure to look
upon them as bare instruments, not free Agents: for we are naturally disposed
to commit our selves to all determinations indifferently of a free Agent, and
no less ready by reason of so near a relation between them to confound the
Senses with the Intellect, being very prone to be guilty of the same Metonymies
in the common cases of Life. Thus the Painter himself will tell you that his
Pencil will draw a small Line, and such Drugs will make a good Color if mixed
together; the Countryman that his Plow-share cuts the Glebe; and the Shepherd
that his Crook pulls his Sheep: and this way of speaking being familiar to us
when we talk of the instruments of Mechanics, we have unfortunately contracted
a habit of expressing our selves by the same figure when we discourse of those
instruments of our Understanding, the Senses: which we are also the more easily
inclined to through our not observing what I mentioned before, the true nature
and just bounds of the relations between our Senses and Understanding. But when
we consider them as instruments only, we regard them proportionably, we decline
all assent to them till such time as circumstances are weighed, and all those
conditions answered, without which their Testimony is exceptionable; such are
the suitable Site and Distance of the Object, the due Temperament of the Organ,
the thickness or rareness of the Medium, and the like. So when a Mountain
appears a Cloud, the distance of the Object is to be inquired; when the color
of the Plumes varies on the neck of the Dove, the nature of the Medium, when
the Snow seems yellow, the disposition of the Organ: and when all these
conditions are duly examined, we shall learn what grounds we have to assent,
and by becoming acquainted with the defects of our Senses be able to form
judgments as certain from them in cases wherein they are faulty, as in cases
wherein they are faithful: for if we can tell what is wanting to the
perfection of a thing, we cannot but know withal the true state of that thing
while under such an imperfection as clearly as if that imperfection were away,
we should know the state of the same thing in its perfection; an instance of
this is that choice one among the Academicks of an Oar half under water, of
whose real Figure, notwithstanding so plausible an appearance, I can as
confidently judge as if the whole were out of the Water, seeing I know my eye
to be in that case incapacitated to represent to my mind the true state of the
Object, and withal understand how far and wherein its representation deviates
from a just one: whence I can deduce sure Inferences either in relation to that
appearance which I know to be false, or to that state of the Object which I
know to be real. But beside this, another Discipline no less pernicious has
obtained as generally almost among the Learned as the former among the
Plebeians, of confounding the Senses one with another, a miscarriage occasioned
by that admired Theorem, That all the Senses are concluded in that one of
feeling, which by an easy consequence disposes us to believe it necessary that
whatsoever affects us by one sense, would, if in like manner applied to the
Organs of our other Senses, affect them also, and that therefore when an Object
has past the Test of one, there is no further need to examine it by the rest,
because all are affected after one manner, so that if any thing acts upon my
Faculty of seeing, it ought to be a sufficient evidence, that it is in the
power of the same to act as effectually upon my Faculty of hearing, etc. till
at length we come to imagine that whatsoever our Eyes represent to us under the
Figure of a Palpable Substance, is in it self such. Thus while some
Philosophers have beheld the Azure of the Sky, they have been moved to fancy
it a solid Arch compacted as it were of Blew Stone, or some such kind of
matter, whence arose that wild System of solid Orbs, by which the Ancients made
a mere Paper-mill of the Heavens; although I confess we are not so often by
this means deceived in the general intrinsic properties of Substances, as in
their external modifications, in the discerning of which we should not behave
our selves so like Infants, if we would not so often rely upon the Authority of
one Sense for the certainty of that which can only be proved by another Sense.
How often have we known wise people scared with the luster of Phosphorus,
rotten Wood, and stinking Fish, only because they supposed such an Affinity
between the Senses, that if one received such an Influence from its Object as
is proper to that Sense, the other would also upon trial receive those
Influences from the same Object which are proper to them? Now where these two
Rules are observed, that we look on the Senses as bare instruments, and that we
do not confound them one with another, I think we may safely trust to and rely
upon them, for the first will prevent our assenting too soon, and the latter
will be a means of knowing when it is time.

But the most simple way of reasoning is certainly the best; for although the
Authority of the Senses is not to be utterly rejected, nay, although it is for
the most part to be received; yet if more simple evidence can be had, the
Understanding is doubly gratified, and the Will by far more plyant; for
evidence is as precious to the one, as it is prevalent upon the other: the
first is not capable of any clearer information, nor the latter of a stronger
impression. Whence it comes to pass, that it is impossible for a man to be a
Sceptick. He may indeed affect the name, but cannot be the thing: because when
he would seem to deny an Axiom, he must be understood to want evidence, and to
have it at the same time: to want it, because he says so, and to have it,
because he can bring no other argument for his not having it than a bare
denying of it, which is none at all. It Is true indeed, every man knows best how
he feels himself affected at any time, but if his Neighbor find it out of his
own power to evade the force of such and such a proposition, he may assure
himself that the same proposition can be no more evaded by the Pretender to
Skepticism than by himself, unless he believes that Pretender's Understanding
and Will to be of a quite different constitution from his own, or else that
such a Pretender is endowed with neither, or denied the use and liberty of
them, or last of all that the Pretender's faculties transcend his own, and that
by virtue of a more sublime apprehension he understands that to be false, which
to another appears necessarily true. In one of these three conditions the
Pretender must be, if he can really within his own breast deny the truth of an
Axiom that is properly such: for if his Faculties be exactly of the same kind
and extent with his Neighbors, it is impossible but what affects those of the
latter in such a certain degree, must affect those of the former in the same
degree, seeing where the cause is one, and the Patients on which an Effect is
to be wrought by that Cause are the very same in kind, the Effect must also be
the same: for else two different Effects could be produced, caeteris paribus,
by the same Cause, which in a Cause supposed to move at least one of the two
Patients fatally and inevitably as soon as addressed to that Patient (and such
is the self-evidence of a proposition to the Faculties of the Pretenders
Neighbor in our case) cannot be, because if addressed to one of the Patients
it unavoidably begets in it such an Effect, it must as unavoidably, when
addressed to another Patient, perfectly the same, beget in it the same Effect:
otherwise its Effect would be necessary and yet not necessary, which the
Pretender's Neighbor knows of himself cannot be true, nor can the Pretender's
faculties be of a different kind, provided they be of the same extent as his
Neighbor's, (for if they are larger or narrower, we are to consider them as
supposed to be such afterward) because there can be no Species of Rational
Faculties distinct in Essence and Nature from his own, for whoever has a power
of Apprehending, of Judging, of Concluding Coequal with his, must apprehend,
judge and conclude as he does, for if he have distinct powers equivalent to
these, he must apprehend, judge and conclude by the help of those powers in the
same degree as his Neighbor, and if he cannot, his powers are not equivalent,
and are therefore to be considered, when we shall speak of them as supposed
less. Do his Faculties therefore differ from ours only in order? that is, Does
he judge before he apprehends? or conclude before he judges? in that respect
again, his Rational Powers will be inferior to his Neighbor's, and therefore
they cannot be of a different kind from those of the latter, and equivalent to
them. Neither may they be superior, since if they surpass the Believer's
either in alacrity of Perception, strength of Judgment, or security of
Ratiocination, which is what I mean by Superior, instead of disbelieving what
his Neighbor cannot but assent to, his knowledge of it must be more clear and
ample, and his conviction much fuller than his Neighbor's, who assisted with
that poor capacity that he is endowed with, finds himself obliged to
acknowledge the truth of manifest Axioms, and plainly perceives that they
cannot be false: how much rather then must the Pretender be sensible of their
evidence, being assisted with Faculties so much larger and perfecter, in as
much as that which approves its own certainty to Faculties less capable of
apprehending it, must approve it no less, for the reasons already alleged,
where we demonstrated it impossible, that Faculties exactly of the same kind
and extent should be alike affected by the same Impressions, to Faculties more
capable of apprehending it? Nay, must over and above approve it self so much
the more effectually to them, as they are degrees more apprehensive of it than
the less capable: for carrying in it self the unquestionable tokens of truth,
so that as soon as it reaches the apprehension, it convinces the judgment, it
cannot offer it self to a more eminent apprehension, but it must be more
intimately known to it, nor convince at the same time a clearer Judgment, but
with a proportionably greater evidence. For notwithstanding that evidence which
convinces the Assenter be to him so clear, that nothing can be clearer, yet it
is not to be doubted but that Faculties more exquisite can more readily
conceive and easily entertain such evidence. However it is sufficient for us,
if the evidence but equally convince both. But may not the Pretender's
Faculties be inferior? May they not be fewer? May they not be less perfect?
And indeed it seems a difficult matter to prove him a Master of Right Reason,
who declares himself proof against the first Principles of it. In this security
it is that the Pretenders hug themselves. It looks like an errant
Impossibility, that their Faculties should lie thus naked and exposed to every
Body's else. But they are deceived, and as little able to conceal their own
abilities as they are averse. The disguise will not stick on long enough for
them to enter upon their part, but betrays them ever the very first act. For
the Assenter knowing by himself that first Principles or Axioms exercise only
the Judgment or second Operation of the Mind, and terminate in it, may resolve
himself, that if that Operation is in the Pretender's power, he cannot but
apprehend the certainty of those Axioms which of themselves and antecedently to
any Ratiocination imprint a security of their Truth, and that this Operation is
in the Pretender's power, himself evinces, when he forms that Proposition by
which he declare himself unaffected with the evidence of those Axioms; for he
who denies that this thing can be predicated of that thing, is obliged to such
an act of examining the relation between one Idea and another, as we call
Judgment, and furthermore by exerting this Act demonstrates himself to have the
power of assenting or dissenting, seeing he that denies such a relation to be
between one Idea and another, or affirms that there is no such relation between
them, expresses by that very act an assent to the latter proposition, or a
dissent to the former. Nor matters it any thing whether this act be called an
Act of Assent or Dissent, for either of them consists in a Persuasion of Mind,
be that Persuasion either of the one kind or of the other. He therefore that
pronounces a Proposition in which he denies the truth of another Proposition,
at the same time signifies his Persuasion, and no more than both these
capacities is requisite to the being such a Patient as the Assenter's first
Principles or Axioms when offered, necessarily affect in such a manner and
degree. But suppose the Pretender is not persuaded of what he pronounces. If he
is not, then he is either persuaded of the contrary, and so becomes one with
the Assenter, or is altogether unaffected, or at best but dubiously with either
Proposition, and neglects or discredits no less what himself pronounces than
what the Assenter pronounces. But this he cannot do, as being qualified to
pronounce such a judgment, for in pronouncing it he unites and divides Ideas
according to his own choice, and choosing to unite this Idea with that, or
divide it from it, is an Act of Assent or Distent. Unless therefore the
Pretender, when he pronounces his Judgment is supposed to be acted by a blind
Principle, and his words to be no more than sounds formed by a fatal motion of
the Organs of Speech, not the Interpreters of an Intelligent Being, (which
being supposed, we make the Pretender incapable of being a Sceptick as much as
before, for if he is only a blind unintelligent Nature, he cannot perceive in
himself an indifference to the force of the Proposition in which consists his
Skepticism) the whole extravagant Mask drops off o'course. Not that if he could
keep it on ever so long, the Assenter is concerned to force him to common sense
against his Will so long as himself is sincerely satisfied of the truth of such
undeniable Propositions, and upon Propositions of this kind, we now purpose to
proceed.

The Propositions which I shall expect to be granted me, are these two,
Whatsoever affects, has a being. Whatsoever is affected, has a Being.


Nor will I yet dare to assume them, although clear enough by their own light,
without assigning just reasons for so doing. The truth of the first is no way
to be questioned, if that which assects can affect only by application of it
self to that which is affected, and this it must necessarily do either
immediately to that which is immediately affected by it, or by communication of
other intermediate Afficients. And more certain nothing can be, than that That
which is nor cannot so apply it self. As necessarily also must every thing that
is affected in any manner exist, because that in order to be affected, it must
be such a Patient as is capable of receiving and sustaining the Afficient when
it applies it self, which a mere Negative cannot be. And this without reducing
the matter to any Axioms of the Schools cannot but be so far convictive.

Seeing therefore I am conscious to my self of being in the number of those
things which find themselves affected, I am certain, that I truly and really
exist, and that not only as to that part of me which is a Judge of the reality
of my being affected, but as to that part also which is only capable of being
affected, not of being a Judge of it, because whether the latter part, by which
I design the purely sensitive part, is or is not consummated but by the former
or purely cogitative part, a question which might admit of a long dispute if it
were necessary, it is certain, that I am truly and properly affected in both
parts. That I am affected in the first, the very doubting of it evidently
proves, much more, as I have already shown, the denying of it; it being
impossible, but that he which suspends his Judgment, must find himself no less
affected by the matter of his suspense, than if it were become the subject of
his Assent or Dissent, for although it does not affect him so as properly in
the event to dispose or determine his Will, yet it makes him equally sensible
of the presence and application of such matter, as the same would do, if become
a Subject of his Assent or Dissent: which it does, as has already been evinced
when such matter passes once into an Affirmation or Negation. And because that
Operation of the cogitative part, by which it conceives the certainty of its
being affected, is indeed a Judgment consisting of an Idea of Affection either
in general or special, the thing affected, and the act of affecting, for
whoever conceives thus much of himself, I am affected, must apprehend such a
thing as Affection implied in the word Affected, something also affected
declared by the person I; and lastly, the application of the former to the
latter: and seeing that there is no man, whether he doubts, affirms, or denies,
(and one of these three every man as to his cogitative part must do) but
conceives or feels the certainty of his being affected, it necessarily follows,
that that portion of the cogitative part truly exists, which exerts the Act
called Judgment, and not this only, but because (which has been proved above)
in all Acts of Judgment is comprised an Assent or Dissent, and these appertain
to the Will, that the Faculty of the Will no less truly exists. And as for the
Imagination and Memory, the first of them consisting in simple apprehension is
so contained in the Faculty of Judgment, that it is evident he who is possessed
of the latter, must be as truly endowed with the former, but whether those
Sensibles about which this Faculty is conversant be true and sincere, we shall
presently examine. The Memory is indeed all consciousness, being no more than a
power of restoring the perception of Affections already past, but so far as it
is distinct from simple apprehension or Judgment, it is no more than a bare
security of having received such and such Impressions; which security where
ever it is lodged, is its own Testimony, and he that has it cannot but know he
has it, because if he denies he has it, he must form to himself such a
Judgment, as will evidently show that he has it, for in forming such a
Judgment, he must, in the first place, consider himself as the subject of which
he denies such an Attribute to be predicable, then the Attribute it self; and
lastly the extent of relation between them, so that unless he can conceive all
these together, he must have it, which yet he cannot conceive together, because
if he could, a due order of Succession in the terms of such a Judgment were not
absolutely necessary, both the Relatives and the Relation between them being so
to be conceived at the same instant as any one of them: Whereas such a Judgment
cannot be formed as shall consist of fewer terms than these, nor the dependence
of these terms pronounced, unless they be disposed in a certain due order and
succession. The necessity therefore of such a succession being thus evinced, it
appears, that he who denies himself to have Memory, must consider himself being
the first term in such a Judgment, not with the other terms in the same instant
of Conception, but as the first of the line and the others in their order
distinctly afterward, and when he has reflected upon each of them, must to
perfect the Judgment compare and weigh the relation of the Predicate with the
Subject, which is not to be effected without restoring that Perception or
Apprehension of the Subject wherewith he was affected, when in the order of his
Reflections he first considered that subject as the first term of the Judgment,
and this is Memory. The same argument will hold, if instead of denying he
pretends to doubt whether he has Memory or not, for I cannot conceive within my
self thus much, I doubt of such a thing, but by a Judgment, in which the case
is all one as before: Thus the certainty of the Existence of all the Faculties
or Portions of the cogitative part of me is demonstrated upon the foregoing
Principles, and consequently of the whole. Many more arguments might be fetched
to enforce these now alleged; but perhaps one is more than necessary, nothing
being more out of the power of a thinking Being than in good earnest to
persuade it self that it is no Being. Nay even supposing it possible that it
should be verily persuaded that it has no Being, it cannot but when it feels it
self so persuaded, be at the same juncture assured that it really is; so that
while I suppose such a thing possible, I must suppose it impossible, and that
being a direct contradiction cannot be true; therwise the Principles so lately
granted might be true and not true, and whatsoever affects or is affected be
and not be. We are therefore next to examine whether there is the same security
of the real Existence of the sensitive part, and this upon the same Principles.
Certain it is that I perceive my self affected as well in this part as in the
other, but whether or no this Perception is entirely owing to the cogitative
part, or cannot be wrought without the intervention of Organs external to that
and Corporeal, may by some Scepticks be offered as matter of Dispute, because
if such Perception can be effected without such External Organs, those Organs
may be no more than mere Phantom, Emptiness and Delusion; and on the other
hand, if it cannot be effected but by such External Organs, those Organs must
be both distinct from the thinking part, and as properly existent as that. To
proceed therefore regularly, it is necessary that we contemplate what those
Affections are which are proper to the sensitive part, and whence they arise.
In themselves they are such as can only inhere in, and arise from Beings
extended; of which we shall hereafter prove that by the laws of its nature it
cannot be other. Nor is the consequence of this Demonstration to be evaded, for
if these Affections of the sensitive part can only inhere in an extended Being,
and arise from the Essential Properties of an extended Being; and if all
extended Beings must be real, the sensitive part must therefore be real and
truly distinct from a Being incapable by it self of receiving immediately those
impressions unless in a far more imperfect manner, which it ultimately receives
and consummates by virtue of the Affections belonging to that External Being
which constitutes the sensitive part, provided it be also demonstrated, that
that Being which constitutes the cogitative part is indeed incapable by it self
of receiving immediately those Impressions, unless in a far more imperfect
manner. And this I question not but to perform in its proper place. In the mean
while to prove that the Affections of the sensitive part only inhere in, and
are proper to an extended Being: I think the first thing to be done is to
enquire what they are, and that by Particulars according to the vulgar Division
of them, by which they are distributed into the five external Senses, and the
common internal: where yet it ought to be remembered that external is not
opposed as before, to a Being Incorporeal, seated within the External, but to
an extended one (extended so far as it is properly sensitive, as shall be
hereafter shown) more External with respect to the Incorporeal Being than what
is here called internal. The first of these is the power of perceiving the
Dimensions and Complexions of Objects, both which are proper to no Beings but
what are extended, for all Dimensions whether incomplete, as a Point, Line, or
Superficies; or complete, as Prosundity in conjunction with the former, cannot
be conceived but in a subject capable of such Dimensions: not but in more
abstracted Speculations those Dimensions may be contemplated without particular
regard had to the Subject of them, but if we consider them in the relation
which they bear to a Being extended, we shall easily learn how inseparable they
are from it, and therefore how necessarily that Being wherein such Dimensions
are found is extended; and again it is no less evident that Objects carrying
Complexion or Color must be also extended, because all Color, whether it
arises from the Modification of the superficial parts of a Body; or whether it
be what the Aristotelians call a Form, (if indeed they are to be distinguished)
or whatever its Essence is, must be co-extended with a Superficies, insomuch
that when the Intellect abstracts it from a real Superficies, it cannot be
conceived any otherwise than circumscribed and expanded to certain Bounds and
Limits on all sides as a Superficies, and because it cannot be conceived
without the Dimensions of a Superficies, nor a Superficies out of a Being
extended, supposing, as I said before, we consider both the former, in the
relation which they bear to the latter; we cannot but conclude that Color or
Complexion, wherever it is found, must be in a Body truly and really extended.
I say therefore, as Dimension and Complexion are proper to no Beings but what
are extended, and from these inseparable; so we are also sure, that the
sensitive part, by which we obtain the Perception of these Properties is it
self extended, because thus much is certain, that either the Intellect by its
intuitive Faculty does immediately obtain these Impressions of Dimension and
Color, or if not, either it must receive them from the Objects themselves
without the Interposition of any other extended Being, or by the conveyance of
some other, unless it be granted that some other Incorporeal Being is the
Author of this communication; and then that as being an Afficient or Operator
must exist, if a Finite, independence on, and by virtue of an Infinite, as the
sequel shall demonstrate; if an Infinite, so much therefore of our Argument is
made good without further study. Now the utmost our Intellectuals can archieve
by their intuitive Faculty of it self, is to feign an Object to be, and to be
present, not to perceive it properly as real and present. It can form an Idea
of Dimension in general, or any one kind of Dimension, as also of Color in
general, or any particular sort of Color, but then this Idea shall be variable
at pleasure; the Dimensions shall be larger or less, of this Form or that Form,
and the complexion of this kind or that kind, as the Soul pleases; whereas the
Figure and Color of those Objects which affect us, as to what we call sight,
are not in our Power nor Subject to that Faculty which can vary those
particular Dimensions and Colors it self has formed at discretion. These
latter affect us without any antecedent counsel or resolution of the Soul,
whereas the Faculty of Imagination cannot set to work without being first
determined by a plain Act of the Will: so I cannot beget in my self the
Perception of any figure without a motion first made in my Soul to form such a
Conception, and a tacit consent also to pursue that motion, whereas we often
find that Figures and Colors too surprise us, and are not, as in other cases,
to be removed or changed at the decree of our Will. Seeing therefore they
affect us, and not by our own procurement, and seeing the variation of them
does not depend on our own Faculties, it is evident they must so far, as things
are so and so figured and colored, be distinct from them, because whatsoever
is figured and colored, must, as has been shown above, be extended; and that
the Faculties of the Soul cannot be, as shall be shown hereafter: although if
they could, it would avail nothing against us, as shall be also shown
hereafter. Nor matters it as to the question in hand, whether that which
appears to be just so and so figured and colored, really is so, but whether it
only appears in such a manner to be so figured and colored as that by the
power of my Intellectual Faculties I cannot make it otherwise, and as that it
offers it self unsought and unlooked for so disposed. Esse and apparere in this
case are one, and if we are not able to vary these Dimensions and Colors which
affect us, though they may not perhaps truly and properly, as they are of such
a particular kind belong to such a Subject, it is Demonstration as they are
Dimensions and Colors in general, they exist in some extended Being distinct
from my Intellectuals. And by this Principle it is easy to solve those
Difficulties which may be started concerning Dreams and Lunacy, for although
those Difficulties, if admitted, are not, as the Cartesians and Malbranchians
have surmiz'd, any valid Objections or Exceptions to general rules of certainty
of the Senses, it being very sufficient, if they are at such certain times, and
on such certain occasions true, when by particular attention they have been
found to be so, because indeed, any one instance for us justly pursued to the
Consequences we fetch from it, is of force to confirm all that we shall contend
for, yet because no room for cavil should be left; I think upon these terms it
is apparent, that as to the general properties of the Objects of Sense, they
are as faithfully represented to our Senses in our Dreams as at other times.
The Subjects of those Properties, it is true, are not in reality present, but
those Impressions which were a little before made upon the Organs hold good,
and affect the Soul when no longer diverted by impressions, which though
weaker, and therefore unable to destroy the more durable, do, nevertheless,
while an entrance is open for them, prevent the Soul's being affected with any
other. Now it is absolutely necessary that these impressions of such long
continuance made upon the sensitive part, be either made by that, of it self,
or else by Objects of the sensitive part; if by it self, and it be proved, as
it shall, extended and distinct from the thinking part by arguments undeniable
in themselves, and fetched from different instances, the Objection leaves us as
to this part of it in the same place where it found us: if by Objects of the
sensitive part, no more is required than to prove from instances more certain
and unquestionable, and indeed most certain, that all Objects of the sensitive
part must be extended, which leads us again back to our general rules. And
indeed, unless the Objection evidently carried in it such a repugnancy to our
general Rules, as that it could not be solvable upon the Suppositions made by
us in them, let it be never so difficult to be accounted for in it self, it
avails nothing against the force of those general rules: for granting it be
solvable upon those Suppositions, as to what we are concerned for in it the
possiblity of its Being so is equally consistent with our general Rules of
certainty, as they are principles from which such and such Conclusions are to
be brought; as if the Objection had been ever so easily solvable in those
Questions which may be started about it considered in it self, so that it is to
no purpose to urge, How do I know but my senses may deceive me, when I Am awake,
as well as when I Am asleep? because, although perhaps the true and real manner
of their so affecting and disposing us as we find they or their Objects, or
something like what we mean by them does, is unknown to us, yet I can assure my
self, that for ought I perceive of them (and I can judge nothing at all of them
beyond that, unless by general Rules of certainty) that we should be affected
after such a manner by them, is not only consistent with our general Rules of
certainty of the Senses, but altogether conformable to them, and more than a
probable Argument of that which we are presently to evince, that the Organs of
Sense are distinct from the thinking part no less than the Object. Indeed we
cannot say, but the Objection may prove that for such Objects to be just then
present, when as in a Dream, we really imagine them to be so, is not absolutely
necessary; but it cannot infer that Objects properly and truly such, at least
with respect to their general Properties, such as we in such circumstances take
them to be, need not at one time or other to have been really present: perhaps
too, these general properties might not then have been united as in my Dream,
suppose of a Chimaera; but one in one Object might have made deeper impressions
than any other in the same Object, and another in another, but that alters not
the case supposing, as we experience when awake, the Soul has a power of
joining and mixing these selected parts and properties. And all this, according
to the common Notion of the Origin of Dreams, which, as I have said already,
whether consonant to these or those Physical Principles or not, most certainly
suffice to account for all those difficulties which at present concern us with
relation to certainty of the Senses, and therefore the Objection grounded upon
those difficulties stands no longer in the way of our general Rules. And as for
the manner how the Impressions of Objects are so fastened upon the Organs, as
to affect them after so long a time, we are as much excused from searching into
that, as into the manner of Objects moving our Organs when we are awake. It is
enough, if by our general Rules we become sure that at both times they truly
act so upon us. And indeed since only Bodies have obtained those general
Qualities which the Soul perceives herself affected with, as from those Bodies;
and since, as we shall prove hereafter, the Soul herself is a Being unextended,
it cannot be, that the Soul should be so affected, as to the Perception of
those general Qualities, unless by such Beings as have only obtained them, and
those are Bodies: I say, as to the Perception of those general Qualities, as
Color and Dimension in general, not the particular dispositions or sorts of
them, as whether the Object wherein I am sure is Color and Dimension in
general be Red or Green, etc. Crooked or Straight. For here, though not often,
we sometimes may err, as in the particular Colors of a Prism or the figure of
a stick half under Water. Wherein yet we may know by the Rules of certainty
already laid down, that there really is Color and Dimension in general, and
that therefore their Subjects are Beings truly and properly extended: so that
whether awake or asleep, those general properties of extended Beings which
affect us must be lodged in Beings truly and properly extended, which is as
much as serves for our present purpose, although even supposing the Soul to be
material, if it be one solid Piece of matter, it cannot be affected, as by
properties of extended Beings, unless by the application of a Being truly
extended to its own Superficies; or if it consists of many parts of matter,
either each part (whether it be moved or not moved) must be endowed with the
power of perceiving such properties, or only certain of them: if each part, the
same application either of some other part of it, which in respect of the
perceiving part, is no more than its Object; or of some extended Being distinct
from all parts of the Soul is still necessary to affect in such a manner
because no part of matter can be affected with such Qualities as are proper to
Matter, but by receiving the Impressions of them from some other portion of
Matter. And this must be, even supposing such Matter to perceive by a
perceptive Quality unknown to us, for if it be a perceptive Quality at all, it
must be such an one as we make the Soul to have, supposing it immaterial, and
consequently subject to the same Laws as are proper to the other. Nor shall we,
I hope, need to say any more as to this Objection in our Examination of the
other Senses. To proceed then, as the Soul cannot by her intuitive Faculty
alone, so perceive these Objects of Sight, as she finds she does perceive
unalterable by and independent on her Faculties; so cannot the immediate
application of the Object to her Faculties effect those Perceptions without the
commerce of extended Organs: and here we have two things to prove, That the
Soul cannot perceive those general properties of extended Beings distinct from
her self, but by the intervention of extended Instruments united to her by the
most intimate Union, that an unextended and extended Being are capable of, and
that these Objects are by no means so united: from whence it plainly follows,
that there are other extended Instruments by intervention, of which the Soul
perceives those general properties, and these we shall prove to be the Senses.
Now the most intimate Union that can be between unextended and extended Beings
is of Composition; for that which is extended, allotting it never so many
occult properties, cannot be unextended while it is extended; and the most
intimate Union of Composition is, when one of the Beings united cannot be
affected, but the other must be affected also; supposing the Beings united to
be considered as passive which we have already shown the Soul, when she
perceives the general properties of Objects, as in the Objects must be, and
therefore whatever is united to her by a most intimate Union of Composition, if
such an Union, as I understand, be a most intimate, must with her be passive
too. And indeed those things which cannot have one Being in common, can be no
nearer united than necessarily to affect or be affected in common; since
whatsoever is not essentially united to any thing else, must be essentially
distinct from it, and whatsoever cannot be conceived without its Extension, as
all extended Beings (whether in that Extension consists their Essence or not)
must be essentially distinct from whatsoever cannot be conceived with
Extension, which we have promised already to prove hereafter of the Soul; and
whatsoever is essentially distinct from any thing else, can obtain no nearer an
alliance than that of acting and suffering with it: So as that in the latter
case, the one cannot be affected but the other must be affected also, unless
when one is passive, the other may be active: but that cannot be, for in order
to this, they must be so far disunited as that one, viz. the extended Being
must, in cases of Sensation already specified, affect the other by an
extrinsecal Impression, or such an Impression as must imply, that that which
impresses is no more united to that which is impressed upon, than the Object of
Sense is to the perceptive Faculty of the Soul, and that is not at all, for the
properties of Dimension and Complexion in those Objects could not be perceived,
as in a distinct and separate State from that which perceives them, in which
yet, for reasons lately alleged, they cannot but be, unless they were at least
so far divided from it, as that it should not be united to their Superficies,
which it is impossible for it to be, while it plainly perceives that
Superficies to be extra se, and withal, that it cannot be tied nearer to any
Superficies, with the Perception of which it is as distinctly affected, as with
that of an Object, than at most, barely to be surrounded by it, which is far
from any Union of Composition. Not yet can the application of the Object's
Superficies to the perceptive Faculty, without the intervention of extended
Organs united to the perceptive Faculty by the most intimate Union of
Composition, produce such a Perception, because the utmost that the Imagination
of her self can effect, is, as was observed before, to feign Objects real and
present; nor can the Superficies of the Object, by approaching only, dispose
that Faculty which is not else disposed to take any notice of it; for unless
that Object can so affect the perceptive Faculty, as to procure in it that real
Perception of it self, which the Faculty is no more than able to feign, it is
approach conduces not at all to the begetting such a Perception: and thus much
it is certain it cannot, unless there be, at least, in this extended Object, a
power of exciting, which power must either subsist in it independantly of it,
or as an accident move and operate only in conjunction with its Subject: not
the first, because this power being on such conditions, an unextended Being
must beget still that Perception, either by the approach of that extended
Being, which is its Subject, or by it self: the one it is no more able to do,
than the extended Being approaching the perceptive Faculty without any such
assistant, nor yet by it self, because unless it has in it self the Notices or
Perceptions of such general properties of an extended Being, it cannot by a
mere confused and blind Solicitation cause our perceptive Faculty to
acknowledge such general Properties, which considered (as we consider it now)
in it self, it has not, and consequently cannot move us to take notice of them,
and therefore the perceptive Faculty does by other means receive those distinct
and clear Impressions of Dimension, Color, etc. than by that which has them
not in it self, nor yet effects those Impressions by the means of that which
has such properties in it self. But then, supposing it only an accident, it is
effect cannot exceed that of its Subject, viz. a bare brute extended Being; and
by the mere accession of this, which yet is all the Operation conceivable in a
bare brute extended Being, the immaterial Faculty can be no more affected, than
if the extended Being had not approached, no more being in the Faculty, as has
been proved above, than at most to feign the Object real and present; nor any
virtue in the immediate impression of the extended Being, by which alone it can
procure a Perception of its own general properties in the perceptive Faculty.
Because therefore the accession of the Object cannot produce a Perception of
its general properties in the Faculty; nor the Faculty by her-self form those
independent and distinct Perceptions which she has of Objects, some other
extended Instruments more intimately united, are requisite to the begetting
such a Perception, and these are the Organs of Sense, which are more sensibly
and closely united, than that those general properties, by which we know
Objects to be distinct from the Faculty, are so by the Faculty to be perceived
in them. And the same security we have for the rest of the Externals, Hearing,
Tasting, Smelling, and Feeling, of the last more especially, because in it we
are affected after such a manner, as to perceive those general properties
peculiar to the Sensation of this Sense, as Dimension, (which is common with
this Sense to that of Seeing) Hardness, Softness, Roughness, Smoothness, and
the like; and which are not to be found, but in a truly extended Being, as in
two distinct Superficies, that of the Organ reaching the Object, and that of
the Object pressing the Organ, an evident Demonstration upon those Principles
we have already laid down, as well of the certainty of both their Extensions,
as of their being distinct from each other. But this, with the other three
Externals, I shall leave (for brevity sake) to be examined by the Discipline of
Certainty already offered, and therefore offered in general terms; declining
particularly the discussion of the three other Senses, because all the Objects
of them are primarily Objects of the other two; and as to those general
properties which are assignable to them, as Taste in general, Sound in general,
Odor in general, fall under the same Doctrines with the former; only this may
be necessary to observe once again, that the surest means of escaping error, is
to try and judge only of those properties which the Judgment shall, by due
methods understand to be appropriated to each Sense, by that Sense. What these
methods are may easily be collected from what has been said before. As little
occasion have we also to add any thing of the Internal, Common Sense, which by
Aristotle and others is called so, because conversant about sensible Objects,
(...), Arist. de Anima li. 3. cap. 2.) not as being corporeal* as follows,
(...), (see beside the Comment of the Coimbra Doctors) by whom it is defined,
that Sense, by which we distinguish the several properties, which we acquire a
Perception of by the five Externals, and can be no other than that perceptive
or apprehensive Faculty which is to be proved immaterial, for there is no
distinguishing one thing from another, but by a clear and distinct apprehension
of each.

What we are next to prove, is the reality of extended Beings, and the
Immateriality of that Being which perceives or apprehends and judges of them.
Whenever we conceive an extended Being as able to affect us in the manner
lately mentioned, we must conceive something more than length and breadth
alone, because they cannot alone affect us with those general properties which
we perceive in Objects long and broad, for if they affect, they must really be,
and yet they cannot really exist, unless they have also Depth as well as Length
and Breadth, a proposition of it self so evident, that it admits of no further
Illustration. And indeed it is high time to desist from this Demonstration of
the Truth of the Senses, which I have not drawn out to such a length, as
believing any just Scruples are to be raised about them, but to remove those
unjust ones, which other have begot in the minds of many. In order to prove the
latter, viz. the Immateriality of the apprehensive and Judicious Part, I will
not pretend to define all the properties that may accrue to a Being extended,
and boldly to exclude Cogitation from among them, but shall make it my business
to evince from what we certainly know of an extended Being, that Cogitation
cannot appertain to it. Now thus much we plainly know of an extended Being,
that it cannot be such, unless it have three Dimensions, Length, Breadth, and
Depth; and nothing Long, Broad, and Deep can move it self, unless by virtue of
some other power lodged in it; which power, as it is to be the Inciter of its
extended Subject, cannot but be so far independent of it, as to be able to move
without it, because the motion of that is antecedent to the motion of its
Subject, and if it be so far independent, it must necessarily subsist in a
state distinct from its extended Subject, since it is a most gross absurdity to
suppose, that Faculty whereby the Being in which it rests is incited to move,
should be incapacitated to move, unless with that Being wherein it rests; and
yet if it is not, it is plain it must subsist distinctly from it, because all
properties, the foundation of whose Existence is their Subject, cannot but move
along with their Subject; for indeed, to suppose such to move without their
Subject, is to set them free either more or less from their Subject, and to
allow them to move only in proportion to the degree of such their Liberty and
Alienation. Now every act of Perception, if it proceed from any thing extended,
must be wrought by motion, for all alteration must be the effect of motion, and
whether that which properly perceives, be extended or not, the condition of it
is in some degree altered, it being conscious to it self of a different state
from what it had before: as when it has perceived a Triangular Body, or
(suppose) none before, and afterward perceives a round one. If that from
whence therefore this alteration arises is lodged in a Being extended, Motion
is lodged in it, and if Motion, it must be either that independent Power
discoursed of before, or an accident only concomitant with Extension: granting
the first, by what has been so lately offered, we prove it to be distinct from
the Being extended, and so immaterial, but if you will have it to be an
accident only Concomitant with Extension; upon this Supposition again, it
cannot move or be moved, but along with its extended Subject, and in the same
Species of Motion, that is, it can only change Site and Place, since an
extended Substance in motion differs from one at rest no more than relatively,
or with respect to something without it self. For we will suppose a Cube
divided into ten thousand Cubes, and every one of these subdivided into twice
as many more, till of one solid Cube it becomes at last a heap of Atoms; and
next let us suppose these Atoms so disposed to play amongst one another, that
each of them shall (if you please) have a quite different motion from all the
rest. What changes would ensue in this Cube of matter? None certainly
intrinsecal. But that Portion of the Cube, which before its division lay
continuous to one certain Angle of it, upon the Intersection would relinquish
the Superficies whereto it was continuous before, and apply its own naked
Superficies to another; suppose that of the Instrument, or in what part it
might not be contiguous to the Instrument, to the Superficies of any
intermediate matter whatever. The Division and Subdivision thus achieved, and
all the Particles thrown into Motion, what other alterations are like to arise?
Still none, for every of the moved Particles continues intrinsecally the same;
and the relative difference too is the same as it was in the Division, this
single circumstance excepted, that in the Division the changes of each
Particle's Site might be fewer and slower, which in the commotion they shift
oftener and quicker; so that a Body moved, and a body at rest, are materially
and intrinsecally the same; but by reason of Motion, one Body looses that
relation of Vicinity which it had to another Body, and renews it with a third.
But beside, the power of Perception must be essentially united to that of
Judgment; for as it is evident, that those Ideas of things, which the judgment
compares, are the very same with those which we receive by simple apprehension,
only more in number, and Parts so mainly constituent of every Operation of
Judgment, that there can be no such Operation effected without them, so cannot
that power, whereby single Ideas are barely contemplated, be indeed distinct
from that which contemplates them in the same manner, only in greater numbers,
and under their mutual Relations: seeing where the Operation is essentially
one, the Operant cannot be more; for although two distinct Efficients may concur
to the producing one Effect, yet that Effect must necessarily be compound, so
as that the portion of the Effect wrought by one Efficient, may be distinct
from the portion of the other Efficient, but every act of Judgment is simple,
and one portion of it, viz. that of comparison, cannot be separated from the
other of Ideas without being lost. The Unity of the Efficient therefore being
thus proved from the Unity of the Effect, all that we have to prove is, that
every act of Judgment must be truly and properly Motion; and every act that has
in it succession must be Motion, not that of Bodies out of one place or
position into another, which yet is analogous to it so far as it is successive,
but the continuation of a complex act through all its parts, or that Transition
which in every judgment we make from one simple Idea to another: and this power
of Motion, if seated in matter, must be independent of it, as acting without
it, because before it, for the other brute properties of matter are of
necessity perfectly unactive and montionless, till agitated by this power
independent of them. But there might yet another argument, as well as a further
confirmation of this be fetched a Posteriori, from the Wisdom of God, when that
and his other Perfections have been first proved from the Existence of even the
smallest Particle of matter, which according to the method we shall now pursue,
may be clearly and directly proved.

Having therefore thus demonstrated the Existence and general Properties of all
Beings immediately affecting either our sensitive or thinking Faculties, as
also the certainty of the Existence of those Faculties, and difference of their
Nature, we come next to enquire how they obtained this Existence and these
Properties; whether they gave them to themselves, or received them from some
other Cause. Most evident it is, that they exist according to a certain Line,
Succession, or Course of Moments, and that as to order of Time as they now are,
so a little before they were; which Line or Course being traced by the moments
whereof it consists to the utmost Length that our or any Multiplication of such
Moments can reach, will at last terminate in some certain Point, beyond which
Moment the Existence of such Beings is not to be referred, and in which they
first began to be. And this Beginning it is impossible they should have had
from themselves, because they could not affect till they were; and if not
affect, not effect; whence it follows, that they had some primary distinct
Cause subsisting from Eternity, not extended, because a successive Existence is
inseparable from Extension, for we can no sooner perceive an extended Being,
but we must conceive it as existing in time, because every extended Being is
apt for, or capable of being moved along the parts of a Line, the measure of
Motion, by which we thus demonstrate the Succession of its Existence.



Let (a) be the Being extended; (f) (l) a a Line along which (a) may be moved,
while (a) exists upon the space of the Line (f) (l) between (f) (h), it cannot
exist also upon the space between (i) (b). And yet seeing it is capable of
being moved along the Line (f) (l), till arrived to the space between (i) (b),
it is no less capable of existing upon the space between (i) (b), but not till
it has left off to exist upon the space between (f) (h): and yet it could not
be capable of existing upon the space between (i) (b), after it had existed
upon the space between (f) (h), unless it had existed before between (f) (h),
and so many moments of Existence after its Existence between (f) (h), as its
Motion should last through the several spaces, till it might arrive at that
between (i) (b), which Succession of Existence being traced back to the utmost
extent that any Multiplication can attain, will at last terminate in some
certain point, and therefore beyond that require a Cause which might subsist
from Eternity. Beside, without Motion, this extended Being could effect or
affect nothing; and yet this first Mover, if an extended Substance, could not
have self-motion by the Demonstrations already offered upon that Argument.

And this prime unextended Cause must be also Infinite, not only possessing
Perfections equal to those of its own Effect; but all others whatsoever, or all
Perfection possible, and that because its Existence is necessary and eternal,
for to all manner of Perfection there accrues, at least, a Possibility of
Existence. So that whatsoever Perfection is missing in the Effects of this
prime Cause, cannot but exist in the Cause it self; seeing, as we observed
before, all Perfection carries in it at least a Possibility of Existing, which
yet it could not, unless it may exist in the Prime Cause, in case it cannot in
its Effects. There is no absurdity at all in affirming, that whatsoever is a
Perfection may exist; so far from that, that it is impossible to feign any
Perfection wanting such a Possibility: but if it may neither exist in the
Effects nor prime Cause, (supposing that to be single) it is an absurdity to
say that such a Possibility is essential to all Perfection* And although in the
Effects of the prime Cause, whatsoever is possible may not be found, and indeed
cannot, for they are all notoriously limited, the Extended by their
Superficies, and the Unextended by the defect of their powers; and whatsoever
is limited either way, must be capable of Univocal Additions; and when those
are obtained, still of greater; so that something of Perfection will ever be
wanting to them: yet in the prime Cause it self, whose Existence is necessary,
all manner of Perfection must, because of its Possibility of Existence, truly
and really exist; for it could not be in its own nature apt to exist, unless it
had been so either from Eternity or from a certain Period of Time: now although
the Perfections of the Effects of the prime Cause are in their own Nature
capable of existing only within a certain Period of time; yet whatsoever
Perfection may possibly exist in the prime Cause, whose Existence is necessary,
cannot but truly and really exist in it: Now all Perfection whatsoever carries
with it such a Possibility; as for instance, the power of creating a new World
out of nothing, or a new order of Effects answerable to that already created is
such a Perfection, as may possibly be in the prime Cause of those Effects
already extant. But yet it could not possibly be in this prime Cause, unless
coeternal with it; seeing if it were temporary, it must be only the Effect of
this prime Cause, and not of the Essence of it, nor coeternal with it, unless
it necessarily existed, because all Eternals exist by necessity. Neither is
this to say, that what is most perfect, must therefore exist, because Existence
is one of the Perfections of that most Perfect, whereas indeed it is
inseparable from even the least Perfection. No, all that I contend for amounts
to no more than, That in a Being of necessary Existence, and in such an one
only, all Perfection possible must as necessarily exist. Not but from the
consideration of the nature of the Effects already in Being the Infinity of the
prime Cause, is no less conspicuous, supposing it no derogation, as indeed it
is not, from the Majesty of the prime Cause, to say, that it cannot create more
kinds of Beings than what are already created. Kinds, I say, which are these, a
Spirit and a Body; and in truth it implies a mere Contradiction, to say there
can be more Kinds of Beings than these; for whatsoever is, must either be
extended or not extended; if the former, it is a Body; if the latter, it is
either an Intelligent Spirit, or a blind, unintelligent Energy. And by these, I
mean a Spirit in general. Now more sorts of Beings than these there cannot be;
and a contradiction, I say, is the Effect of supposing there can; because
admitting a third Kind, it must be of such Beings as are neither extended nor
unextended, which it is evident cannot be any Beings at all. But of these Kinds
the Cause that first produced 'em, can, at pleasure, produce new Qualities and
Numbers, since it is perfectly, and in all respects the same that it was from
Eternity; it being impossible, but that whatsoever exists from Eternity must be
immutable, because its Existence is necessary. Nay further, all Quantities or
Numbers of Substances anew created, be they never so great, a Cause of Eternal
Subsistence can produce in one act, because it does not operate according to
the Succession of the parts of time, although to us it may seem so to do, whose
comprehension is so narrow, in comparison of it, as not to collect any manner
of Existence or Operation, but what is successive, either from the notice of
our own Existence or, Operation, or those of other Beings falling under our
observation. So soon as such Substances are created, they cannot, it is true,
exist, but according to such a Succession; but the act of Creation, as it is
the act of the Creator, is no more concerned with any order of time than the
Agent: So that if a thousand Worlds not yet created were to be created with
respect to the Creator, they must be created together with that World already
created. All which is no other than consonant to the Principles of those many
Philosophers who define Eternity a Possession at once of all Past, Present, and
to Come. To be sufficient therefore to create all Substances that can be
created without a Contradiction, and this at once, certainly appertains to no
less than a power Infinite; for although the Quantities and Numbers of the
Substances created, let them be never so great, must be Finite, yet the power
of creating as many more remains in the Creator. Nor seems it any diminution of
the Creator's Perfection, that the Quantities and Numbers of the Substances
created must be Finite; since if they might be Infinite, they might not only
rival their Cause, but oblige him to confer that upon Beings not existing from
Eternity, which only accrues to Beings existing from Eternity; for nothing can
be Infinite as to continuance, unless a necessary Existent; and nothing
Infinite on other accounts unless Infinite as to continuance, because every
thing else must be the Effect of a Being of Infinite continuance, and that
Effect must be less perfect than its Cause, as partaking, even of substantially
and essentially the same as the Cause, of but a portion of its Cause, which yet
a Temporary Being cannot of an Eternal, because whatever is Eternal in such a
Being, is in its own nature incommunicable to a Temporary Being: and yet no
Effect of an Infinite Cause can be less perfect than its Cause without being
Finite, by which it appears, that to suppose the Quantities and Numbers of the
Substances created may be Infinite, is to suppose the Cause of them may be
guilty of a most gross Absurdity and Contradiction; and not only so, but that
it may likewise be mutable, though of necessary Existence. What I have said of
Substances, holds equally of their Properties. And this argument it self might
suffice to demonstrate the Infinity of each Perfection in the Creator, which
may be found in a more imperfect degree in the things created.

The Eternity of the All perfection, and particularly of the Omnipotence of
this prime Cause being thus evinced, we are yet to reflect a little upon the
necessity of all those Possible and Eternal Perfections being united in that
one prime Cause; and here it must be remembered, that if they are not united in
the same Infinite, they must either as to one part or kind of them be Finite or
Infinite: not Infinite, for what can be a bolder contradiction, than that one
share of such Perfections should be Infinite, when there remains a great deal
of Perfection not united to it. Finite therefore. If Finite, in some measure
defective; if defective, wanting that principle, which, where ever it is found,
constitutes that Being altogether perfect, viz. a necessity of existing, the
want whereof must be therefore the foundation of Imperfection, because
Perfection is constituted of Reality, being only a Plenitude of Existence, so
as that, for instance, the Perfection of a Body is no more than the real
Existence of its Extension, and of whatever else goes to the constituting of a
Body; and the Perfection of its Extension, etc. consists in its being real or
positive, for nothing is further perfect than it is positive; nor whatever
composes the Essences of things any otherwise consummate, than as those
Constituents are true and genuine Existents. It cannot therefore exist
necessarily, and if not necessarily, not from Eternity; whence it is clear it
must be essentially united to all other possible Perfection, that is of Eternal
Existence ( Essentially, I say, because there can be no Union of Composition
between two Beings, unless each is in its own nature able to subsist by it
self.) So that all Perfection, whose Existence is from Eternity, must be
collected and essentially united in one Eternal, most Perfect Cause of all
other Beings whatsoever.

I know not whether I need particularly insist upon any further Eviction of the
Omniscience of this prime Cause, that being inclusively proved by the general
Argument so lately handled in proof of his All-perfection: but yet because this
Attribute is a proper foundation for the Demonstration of his Providence, it
may not be amiss to consider it in it self. So slight is the acquaintance we
have with Spiritual Beings of a limited nature, and much more with that of an
unlimited one, that what we learn concerning them, we acquire partly by general
Rules of Entities, partly from certain general Properties of the Spiritual
Beings themselves. That the prime Cause must in it self have Intelligent
Faculties, there needs no other Evidence than that certain Effects of it have.
That part of its Productions which is called and known to be the Rational and
Thinking, have received of it considerable Abilities in that kind. We
apprehend, we know, we think, and are admitted not only to the Contemplation of
our selves and Fellow Creatures, but even into the Sanctum Sanctorum, to the
Contemplation of the prime Cause it self: yet not without great restrictions;
it being the Prudence of the prime Cause to bestow but a scanty Portion of that
upon its Creatures, which as it would be in them the similitude of it self, so
it would tempt them to presume upon their own dignity, and consequently to be
forgetful of his. (Not to mention here the event of our first Parents Lapse.)
However such a portion of Understanding we can boast of as serves to signify
the Donour an Intelligent Being also: and as the Intelligent part of his
Creation bespeaks him Intelligent, so that with all the other parts of it
bespeak him infinitely so, because indeed they could not have been at all,
unless that which gave them their Being had thoroughly and most intimately
known the Ends and Essences of them, because a Being independent, existing from
Eternity, and therefore necessary and immutable, could not be moved to exert
the act of Creation, unless by more than a brute Principle of Motion, which
Motion must either have continued from Eternity, and so the Effects of it have
been Eternal, the Absurdity of which we have already refuted, or have been an
arbitrary or voluntary Motion arising from a Principle of Intelligence. Nor can
it be, but that these two Principles should operate for ends; seeing this
voluntary Motion could not have proceeded from the Intelligent Principle,
unless the Intelligent Principle upon notice or conception (if I may so speak)
of things, found, at least, some end to urge that voluntary Motion; so that as
every the least Effect of that Motion must have been for an end; so must it
also have issued from an Intelligent Principle in the arbitrary Mover: whence
it is evident this arbitrary Mover or Cause must have a perfect and absolute
knowledge of all its own Effects. But here I would not be understood either to
define the Intellectual Powers of the first Cause, or the Manner of their
Operations; when all I attempt, is to show, that the least Effect of the prime
Cause must flow from a voluntary Motion (to which although infinitely more
perfect, that imperfect one of our Wills is somewhat analogous) arising from an
Idea of that which is to be the Effect of that voluntary Motion, and that Idea
also infinitely more perfect than any of ours. And as this arbitrary Cause
cannot but have the most entire and absolute knowledge of all its own Effects,
so must it be no less acquainted with whatever is possible besides, because it
comprehends in it all such Possibilities; and whatsoever it so comprehends it
must it self be conscious of, seeing those Principles of Intelligence and
voluntary Motion already mentioned, cannot be, as perhaps in Inferior and
Finite Rationals, distinct from the other Faculties and Attributes, but on the
same account that such Principle are asserted at large to be in the prime
Cause, they must also be annexed to whatsoever of it is found to be of eternal
Existence; seeing whatsoever is found to be so, is alike independent of any
foreign Impulsor as the prime Cause understood at large, alike necessary and
immutable, and accordingly a Being alike Intelligent and Arbitrary.

Again, as this prime Cause is infinitely powerful and Wise, so it must be
infinitely Just and Merciful too, and that because its Effects are the Objects
of its Love, as well as the Offspring of its power, for so long as they exist,
they are certainly precious in its esteem, and not only when they were first
created, but even as long as they continue in being, it cannot but repute them
good. In truth, unless they were so, their All-wise Cause would fall under the
imputation of acting in vain, and be obliged in its own Justification to
annihilate the universal System, or at least such portions of it as were of no
value in its sight; by which Rule, as we may be assured of its general Concern
for all, so of that Concern's being proportionable to the particular value of
each Member: so that every such Member in its particular Station is consulted,
and provided for according to its Dignity, the measure whereof is best to be
learned by examining how large its capacity is of being benefited by the first
Cause, for there is nothing more certain, than that the first All-wise Cause
rather than act in vain and to no purpose, will benefit it and bless it to the
full measure of that Capacity: Yet not without conditions too, where and so far
as the Effect is qualified for entering, or has actually entered into them.
Wherefore in cases even of Degeneracy in such an Effect, the small remains of
that Perfection which it received at first from its Cause, are still valued by
its Cause, nay even when it seems good to the Cause, that its Effects should
undergo any Severities, it cannot but either compensate for them afterward,
which for the reasons already given, it is obliged to do, when conditions are
observed; or if it consigns over the violators to a perpetual punishment (not
to insist upon any other defense of its Justice therein) I know not why we may
not believe that the Effects even by the Laws of their nature, decline through
degeneracy into such a state of Misery, and acquire such a Disposition, that
upon being translated according to the ordinary course of things into a new
Station and condition, they necessarily become miserable, partly through those
Defects which they owe to themselves, and partly from impressions from without,
which could not affect them, if the nature of the Effect had undergone no
change by its Degeneracy. Lastly, Nothing is a more easy Demonstration than of
the Providence of the first Cause from the certainty of its Justice and Mercy.
Indeed it is most conspicuous in every part of its great Work, wherein the
whole contrivance appears so admirable, the subserviency of this to that so
regular, and the distribution of properties so just, that of all Miracles, the
order of Nature, which we daily behold, is certainly the greatest. Nor does
there seem to be any necessity of betaking our selves to the more simple
methods of Demonstration, when if we would never so fain, we cannot extricate
our selves from evidences of such a Providence. And when Democritus had
modeled his Atoms, and Epicurus had, as he fansied, put them in a right way to
gather into a Body, what did it avail them? They neither could be Atoms till
they were made so, nor move a point on, till the first Mover set them forward.
But then what if the Beauty, Structure, and Order which ensued, could not arise
from any such Principles, as it is plain they could not? For supposing never so
great variety in the figures of the Atoms, that one Species of Motion, viz.
Casus declivis, could not by any means beget such a multiplicity of Forms, but
only generate a solid, flinty Mass; solid and flinty, I say, because no manner
of concourse could so strongly compact the Atoms as that. Indeed it must have
fastened all of them so close together that nothing could have broken so many
free distinct Bodies off the Rock, but the Supervention of an Almighty Arm: nor
yet could each such Frustulum have been so modified and tempered as we find,
unless by the same: So that the Founders and Maintainers of these Principles,
instead of mending the matter, only made more work for themselves, and brought
their Particles so fairly together at last, that when they should have been got
asunder again, nothing but a superior Agent, being that which they made sure
of escaping, could separate them. For alas! Chance has not strength enough. If
she might bring them together, she could do no more afterward, but leave them
together. Besides, what is this Chance at last? So far from being a Cause, that
it never can be any thing but a Coincident. For granting these Atoms fell thus
together; did they chance, I beseech you, to fall together before they did fall
together? And still it is all the same thing, whether these Atoms encounter in
one kind of Motion or in many; for if in many, so as that they gather into many
distinct Bodies, each of those Bodies must be superlatively compact, seeing
that motion, which is to bring them together, will bring them as close
together, as they can be brought, when there is nothing to interpose. But what
shall at last animate some of these lumps, and temper all of them? Let the
Atomist therefore take his choice, whether he will have one great Mass, or many
little ones. But I digress too far, it being my present design not so much to
confute Error as demonstrate Truth; although indeed the latter is much at one
with the former, especially in the dispute before us. Yet the reigning
sottishness of that opinion so star'd me in the face, while I would discourse
upon the Providence of the prime Cause, that I could not handsomely forbear a
rebuke, the continuation of the Effects of the prime Cause being no better
accounted for by this barren, childish Hypothesis than their Original; for as
they could not give themselves a Being, but must necessarily have received it
from an All-perfect Cause; so (not to mention the necessity of perpetual
Creation, in order to the Subsistence of such Effects, sufficiently evinced by
others) from the nature and Attributes of this prime Cause, I think I have
clearly demonstrated, that it certainly governs and is concerned for all, even
the smallest of its Effects, and this All-perfect first Cause is GOD.

But now where appears that little half Animal the Atheist? No longer, I hope,
setting up for a Philosopher, when for ought I know, the Brutes even of the
slowest apprehension may claim Pre-eminence in the Schools before him: The
Brutes, whose every motion betrays a consciousness of a Truth, which nothing
but the darkest blindness of Soul can escape. The Brain must be clouded thick
on all sides, or so dazzling a Luster could not but strike it. Is this then the
penetrating Man? the subtle inventive, Vere adeptus? a Prodigy in good
earnest! if he could raise Effects without Causes, and begin to build his
Houses from the Tiles. But alas! there is not one Phenomenon in all nature to
be so much as plausibly interpreted, but upon the confidence of a first Cause.
Those Accounts of Meteors which we have received, are perhaps the fairest and
easiest on all hands of any other Physical Notices, whether we consult Carts,
Gassendus, Aristotle, or the Stoics, (Comets only excepted) and yet no Vapors
could be so much as exhaled, or any condensed or rarefy'd, but by the
interposition of the first Cause; for if transmutations analogous to those in
the Alembicks of our Vertuosi require such peculiar and most exquisite
Instruments; how much rather do they require an Omnipotent Author and Cause to
give an Efficacy to these Instruments? And indeed the first blunder of the
Atheistical Philosopher has ever been his mistaking Instruments for Efficient
Causes; for not discerning the difference between that which acts only
necessarily, and that which acts arbitrarily, the poor Beetles have all along
excluded a Deity by confounding the first with the latter. Yet there is the
mischief of it, these People cannot but be lost to all sound Reason and Sense,
before they straggle into such unaccountable delirious Notions; and how is it
possible to correct Error, when instead of any Candor and Judgment, you have
nothing to treat with but obstinate Conceitedness, profound Ignorance, and
desperate Indocility.

DE Cartesiana DEI Idea EPISTOLA, Ad V. Cl. D. Antonium Le Grand, Qua
respondetur ad Cap. XIV um Apologiae ejus pro Ren. Cartesio contra S. Parkerum,
Archidiaconum (tunc temporis) Cantuar.
Ornatissime Domine,
PErlecta haud ita pridem Apologia tua Sermonis nitore pariter ac moderatione
condita, imprimis studium quo incalueram Veritatis, exigere visum est, ut
instituta tua, maxim vero quae de Cartesiana Dei Idea tradideras, pro virili
refellerem; cum scilicet nihil praestet amicum aliquem male consultum Veritatis
basin primitivam demoliri ut suam substerneret, quam aperte ipsos adversarios
ariete sua conquassare. Quinimo me tandem in certamen plane arsisse fateor cum
causam Veritatis defendi non posse perspexerim quin desideratissimi Parentis
memoriam manesque simul vindicarem, quos non vindicasse Adolescentis ignavi
degenerisque sit. Itaque cum ad omnia tua respondere nondum vacet, accipe
benigno quaesumus animo quae de capite Apologiae tuae decimo quarto scribenda
habuimus, quo Cartesium tuum Divinae Substantiae Ideam obtinuisse contendis,
quae aliunde profiscisci quam ab illo cujus sit Idea nequiret. Priusquam vero
ista discutiamus, paucis investigemus oportet quid per vocem Ideam nos
intelligere debemus. Platonem in usum introduxisse constat, de quo D.
Augustinus in Octaginta Quaestionum libro -- Ideas primo appellasse Plato
perhibetur, non tamen si hoc nomen antequam ipse institueret non erat ideo, vel
res ipsae non erant quas Ideas vocavit, vel a nullo erant intellectae, sed alio
fortasse atque alio nomine ab aliis atque aliis nuncupatae sunt: Quae quidem
eminentissimi Viri conjectura verisimilior ab una part videtur, ab altera
minus. Nam Philosophorum antiquissimas familias de rebus id intellexisse quod
varias suas formas seu species habeant, quarum unaquaeque genus certum aeterna
necessitate constituat, nos neutiquam dubitemus: number vero eodem quo Platonici
modo intellexerunt, nimirum prout in Divina Intelligentia delitescunt, haud
immerito controvertamus. Neque tamen hinc ita inferendum puto quasi maxima pars
veterum Philosophorum omnesque fere quos Graecia Barbaros esse voluit, Magi,
Gymnosophistae, Druides, Deum aliquem extare inficiarentur. Atqui tanta erat de
Deo apud hos opinionum varietas and pugna, siquidem M. Tullium amimadvertisse
memini Lib. 1. de Not. Deorum, Cui vero esse (Deos) dixerunt, tanta sunt in
varietate ac dissensione constituti, ut eorum molestum sit dinumerare
sententias; ut ejusmodi species tanquam in Divina Intelligentia conversantes
apprehendisse, cum notitia quam Attributorum Divinorum habuerunt adeo
imperfecta ac dimidiata esset, non ita facile credendum sit. Quomodocunque
autem rem istam se habuisse existimemus, Platonem Terminum ipsum adinvenisse
liquet. Mentem volebant Platonici rerum esse Judicem, (ait Cicero Academ.
Quaest. lib. 1.) solam censebant idoneam cui crederetur, quia sola cerneret id
quod esset simplex, and uniusmodi and tale quale esset. Hanc illi Ideam
appellabant jam a Platone ita nominatam, nos recte speciem possumus dicere.
Sensus autem omnes hebetes and tardos esse arbitrabantur, nec percipere ullo
modo res eas quae subjectae sensibus viderentur, quae essent aut ita parvae ut
sub sensum cadere non possent, aut ita mobiles and concitatae ut nihil unquam
unum esset constans, nec idem quidem, quia continenter laberentur and fluerent
omnia. Itaque hanc omnem partem rerum opinabilem appellabant; scientiam autem
nusquam esse censebant nisi in animi motionibus atque rationibus Qua de causa
definitiones rerum probabant, and has ad omnia de quibus disceptabatur
adhibebant. In Oratore etiam in eandem sententiam haec idem; Ut igitur in
formis and figuris est aliquod perfectum and excellens, cujus ad excogitatam
speciem imitando referuntur ea quae sub oculos ipsa non cadunt, sic perfectae
Eloquentiae speciem animo videmus, effigiem auribus quaerimus. Has rerum formas
appellat Ideas, ille non intelligendi solum, sed etiam dicendi gravissimus
author and magister Plato, easque gigni negat, and ait semper esse ac ratione
and intelligentia contineri. Eademque prorsus ab ipso alibi, quin and a Suida,
Hesychio, Apuleio, Alexandro ab Alexandro, Ficino in Platonem, aliisque
testibus quam plurimis accepimus. Atqui quamvis is sit hujusce Idearum
disciplinae fructus, ut D. Augustinus neminem absque ea Philosophum esse posse
asseveraret; nihilominus proximi a Platone Philosophiae Magistri illiusque ex
part institutorum haeredes, Aristoteles and Xenocrates, hic generales Ideas in
genera ac species, ille in exemplarium disciplinam convertendo laeserunt, adeo
ut mox plurimum nativae Authoritatis amitteret. Quid quod Idearum ipse
venerabilis author de iis tam incerte and allegorice differeret? (...), (inquit
Laertius) (...). Neque vero multo post, (...) (intellige (...)): tanta siquidem
Terminorum ambiguitate gestire videbatur ut insomnium moribundi Platonis per
quod in Cygnum migrasse, Aucupesque ex arbore in arborem transvolitando
defatigare sibi visus est, enarrans Olympiodorus Simmiae Socratici
explicationem satis lepidam apposuerit, scilicet Interpretum turbam quam
Aucupes refer judicavit nunquam aliquando deprehensuram, (...). Ad haec
nonnulli forsan istam Idearum naufragii causam subnexuri sunt, Aristotelem
acerrime seipsum opposuisse; non levi profecto injuria: etsi enim Xenocraticis
Ideis hostis insensissimus esset, attamen, sive quod honorem habere
Magistro^videri voluerit cum praesertim contempsisse adeo exprobrarant illi
Xenocratici, seu quod suae Generum and Specierum Doctrinae quam expolitius
Idearum Doctrinae genus esse censebat aut inservire aut saltem satis apt
convenire perspexerit, long humanius excepisse videtur: at quamvis hanc
Aristotelis and Xenocraticorum litem multum officere contigit, optimo tamen
illius usu hominum recentiorum industria revocato and illustrato, penitus
delere nequivit. Idearum hanc definitionem D. Augustinus instituit, sunt
principales formae quadam vel rations rerum, stabiles atque incommutabiles,
quae ipsae formatae non sunt, ac per hoc aeternae and semper eodem modo sese
habentes, quo in Divina Intelligentia continentur. Cum qua and aliorum
consentiunt definitiones. Veruntamen id insuper adnotandum sit quod Platonici
de Divina ipsa Essentia esse docuerint, cujus rei cum Alcinoum qui Ideam (...)
defiinerit, Themistiumque Ideam cum Dei natura confundentem; tum Plotinum in
Libro de Pulchro, ubi de Deo disseruerit, quod sit ipsa omnium Idea
universalis; nec non Proclum, Jamblichumque autores recepimus: imo etiam ipse
Plato in Timaeo and Parmenide istue diserte tueri videtur. Has autem Ideas, si
D. Augustino credamus, anima negatur intueri posse nisi rationali ea sui part
qua excellit, id est, ipsa mente atque ratione quasi quadam facie vel oculo suo
interiore atque intelligibili.

Cum jam compendiariam hancce Idearum Historiam conscripsimus, deinde
considerandum subit quid suas esse Ideas designavit Cartesius; quem etiamsi
utpote virum definiendi peritissimum, claram and dilucidam significationem
tradere expectandum esset, nihil tamen aliud ex illo quam Platonicas allusiones
ac descriptiones percipimus, eo scilicet viri acutissimi consilio, ut cum suum
super iis Judicium obscurum and ambiguum reliquisset, exortis subinde
Objectionibus, ad sensum sibi commodissimum interpretari liceret. Quam
conjecturam ne injuria ac invidiose proferri existimares, non abs re fore
videtur, si nonnullas ex illius Idearum definitionibus colligemus, collectas
inter se comparabimus. Tertia Meditatio haec habet, Nunc autem ordo videtur
exigere ut prius omnes meas cogitationes in certa genera distribuam, and in
quibusnam ex illis Veritas aut Falsitas proprie consistat, inquiram. Quaedam ex
his tanquam rerum imagines sunt, quibus solis proprie convenit Ideae nomen, ut
cum Hominem, vel Chimaeram, vel Coelum, vel Angelum, vel Deum cogito: aliae
vero alias quasdam praeterea formas habent, ut cum volo, cum timeo, cum
affirmo, cum nego, semper quidem aliquam rem ut subjectum meae cogitationis
apprehendo; sed aliquid etiam amplius quam istius rei similitudinem cogitatione
complector, and ex his aliae voluntates sive Affectus, alia autem Iudicia
appellantur. Iam quod ad Ideas attinet, si solae in se spectentur, nec ad aliud
quid illas referam, falsae proprie esse non possunt; nam sive Capram, sive
Chimaeram imaginor, non minus verum est me unam imaginari quam alteram. Atque
paulo inferius isthaec; Quae omnia satis demonstrant me non hactenus ex certo
judicio, sed tantum ex caeco aliquo impulsu credidisse res quasdam a me
diversas existere, quae Ideas sive imagines suas per organa sensuum vel
quolibet alio pacto mihi immittant. Ecce Pictorem, and Imagines! quibus nec
Angelos ipsumque Deum accensere dubitavit. Nonne enim (teipsum appello)
tripartitam ille intellectualium operationum divisionem instituit? nonne primo
in divisione membro Ideas illas tanquam rerum imagines attribuit? nonne ipsum
imaginationis opisicium primasque simplicesque rerum repraesentationes judicium
praecedentes, easdem esse decrevit? Nunc vero Pictorem factum tandem
Philosophum audiamus. Ego passim ubique ac praecipue hoc in loco ostendo me
nomen Ideae sumere pro omni eo quod immediate a mente percipitur, adeo ut cum
volo and timeo, quia simul percipio me velle and timere, ipsa Volitio and Timor
inter Ideas a me numerentur, ususque sum hoc nomine quia jam tritum erat a
Philosophis, ad formas perceptionum Mentis Divinae significandas, quamvis
nullam in Deo Phantasiam agnoscamus. Quaecunque nunc denuo nostrae
apprehensiones simul in Ideas evaserunt, hac ipsa etiam de causa quod nullus
Phantasiae locus esse debeat, ad quam, ut Ideae proprie pertinerent, ab eximio
Philosopho, dum Pictor esse voluit, sancitum est. Cum itaque haec omnia tam
confuse and obscure Philosophus, siquid Philosophi Defensor apertius and
enodatius ellcuerit, videamus. Habes, Cartesi, (ne tantae tuae felicitati non
gratularer) eruditissimum ac perspicacissimum Apologistam qui diligentia summa
omnia Magistri sui defendat. Quomodo autem in hac re defensu^us, quomodo tanta
sua solertia illustraturus est? Per Ideam (ait) id omne intelligitur quod
alicujus perceptionis est forma, adeo ut Idea aliud non sit quam mentis
conceptus, sive res mente concepta and intellecta. Alibi vero idem ad hanc
rationem, Quandoquidem Idea sit id ipsum quod ratione evincitur, ut and alia
quae quolibet modo percipiantur. Eodem itaque denuo relabimur, altera siquidem
definitio quae quo formaretur Idea, non solum ut res perciperetur, verum etiam
ut intelligeretur, requirit, quanquam nonnihil ab illa Magistri dissideat qua
imaginatio jus Idearum obtinuerat, clarior tamen and sibi convenientior erat,
donec altera tandem superveniens subito supplantavit, quippe nunc Idea non
amplius tantum esse persistit, quicquid ratio evincat, sed and quaecuque
praeterea volueris quae quolibet modo percipiantur. Spatiosum sane exercendi
campum! Primum quippe Idea fuisse perhibetur tanquam rerum imago, deinde fit
res quaelibet quam ratione intuearis and cognoscas, denique res quaevis,
quocunque modo istam percipias. Nullane itaque de causa Theologum interrogasse
Magistrum putas, Nosti quid sit Idea, quas Latini rerum formas, Graeci (...)
vocant? vel si putas, an a vobis propulsare potestis quod ille mox objectavit,
Et tamen quid sit Idea, saepius lacessitus, aut quae and quales suae (Cartesii)
sunt, nunquam quavis descriptione explicare vellet? Quid enim faceret
Theologus? number secundum priscam vocis significationem, an secundum novam
aliquam vestram intelligeret? Atqui secundum priscam vocis significationem
intelligere certe non potuit, ni ^artesianam and Platonicam de Ideis opinionem
unam esse cognosset? quam nec esse abunde liquet, siquidem Platonicae sola
mentis attentione, vestrae and mentis attentione and quolibet alio modo
percipiantur. Quinetiam Plato, ut existunt in Divina Intelligentia contemplatus
est; Vos autem, ut vobis a rebus immittuntur, quarum sunt Ideae. Quanto igitur
illo quam hoc nomine puriores sunt, tanto quidem, quantumvis a sensibus
abhorreas, praejudiciorum quamvis tyrannidem plane extinxeris Ideae Platonicae
vestris justiores erunt ac simpliciores. Theologo igitur juxta genuinum
vocabuli sensum interpretari ne licuit; qui vero res secus interpretabuntur
quam alii solent interpretari, pro iis, ut ipse submonuisti, nunquam possumus
satis. Neque vero ille propterea disquisitionem istam intermitteret; nam quem
novum sensum veteri Termino Magister imponeret, apertissima ratione definiturum
expectarat: quocirca cum in tantum definitionum allegoricarum ac incertarum
cumulum offenderit, e quibus aliae aliis latiores, nec duae quaevis eadem vi
normaque essent, aegriuseule tulisse quid mirum? Nosti ergo, inquit, quid sit
Idea? Quoniam saepius iacessitus, quid sit Idea, nunquam dicere, aut quae and
quales tuae sunt, nunquam quavis descriptione explicare velles. Qui, tu
respondes, explicaret? revera Ideae nomen adeo simplex est, omnibusque ita
evidens, ut per alias voces magis perspicuas vix explicari posse videatur. Qui
Ver insignissime, evenit, ut postquam jam tres quatuorve vestras definitiones
in medium eduximus, Idea tandem adeo simplex conceptus sit, ut definiri non
ferat? quae res ne tibi cederet in opprobrium, aliqualem saltem hanc
definitionem exarasti; Ideae sunt formae uniuscujusque nostrarum cogitationum
cujus immediata perceptione earundem cogitationum cognitionem habemus. Ergo
nonne Idea plusquam nota recognitionis esse videtur? quippe quod Idearum munus
sit naturam genusque rerum quarum sunt Ideae exhibere, ad unum omnes
consentiunt; quin tu nudam tuarum cogitationum Identitatis notationem
distinctam rerum, de quibus cogitas, naturae and affectionum delineationem esse
contendes? Recognitio illa sane indicio sit conceptus nostros esse tales quales
sunt; non vero esse Ideas rerum quarum esse concipiuntur. Quid enim? Si
contemplando animae Ideam, Ideam istam id esse quod de illius essentia
concepisti tecum recognoscas? Ni tamen vera sit animae Idea, archetypon suum
male exhibebit, ideoque Idea esse nequibit, cujus naturam Magister statuit,
quod sit imago rei. Atqui nihilominus Apologistam male habent ista Theologi cum
Philosopho expostulantis, Tu igitur qua forma quave specie sit immensa numinis
Majestas, intelligis? Si intelligere te ais, cur figura quadam non
descripseris, aut fando explicaveris? Enimvero quis Deum (tu reponis) sub
aliqua figura aut sibi aut aliis unquam repraesentare potest? Atque profecto te
opinari quod ita repraesentari non possit, mihi omnino arridet: quodsi Magister
non minus aperte sententiam suam exposuerat, Theologo in istam ulterius
inquirere nihil opus esset. Cum vero Ideas suas tanquam imagines rerum
descripserit, cum inter has tanquam imagines rerum, Homines, Chimaerae, Coeli,
Angeli, etiam Numinis imaginem reposuerit, nos quaeso qua praerogativa
excipiemus? qua de communi Picturarum apparatu tollemus? At postea contra
quendam objectorem profitetur Renatus se per Ideam Dei nihil intelligere, nisi
quam Divinorum attributorum notitiam inter contemplandum assequamur. Ergo
quanta and cujusmodi sit ista-notitia, in sequentibus ostendemus. Interea
quaeramus quo obsecro consilio tam vehementer Theologum id in Cartesio
castigantem, quod tu in Theologo, redarguis: cui quemadmodum Cartesium omnium
Idearum dignitatem exaequare, sic tibi Theologum puram intellectionem ab
imaginatione non distinxisse minime complacuit. Si vero in eundem, in quem tuus
Cartesius, errorem devenerit Theologus, vel te neutrum horum, vel non hunc
magis quam illum corripere omnino decebat. En vero cujusmodi specimen quo
differentiam Idearum Intellectus and imaginationis aperires, ipse adduxisti!
Dum Triangulum imaginor, non tantum intelligo illam esse figuram tribus lineis
comprehensam, sed simul etiam istas tres lineas tanquam praesentes mentis acie
intueor, and illud est, quod proprie imaginari appellamus. Si vero de
Chiliogono cogitare velim, equidem been intelligo illud figuram esse mill
lateribus constantem ac intelligo Triangulum esse figuram constantem, tribus;
sed non eodem modo illa mill latera imaginor, sive tanquam praesentia
contemplor: quasi aliquis, quin Intellectus and Imaginationis Ideae long inter
se discrepent, quin illae quam hae multo magis sint perspicuae, dubitaret: quid
autem est, quod Imaginationem tam parvi ducas, quasi minus in isto actu
eliciendo quam in alio quocunque men's versaretur? quippe cum mihi, inquis,
siguram Trianguli proponam, non modo intelligo Triangulum esse figuram tribus
lineis comprehensam, sed and has tres lineas tanquam praesentes intueor. Quod
si rem sic habere tueberis, vel actus intellectionis and intuitionis in unum
confundes, cum tamen idem distinctos esse subinnuas, vel si sunt plures,
necesse est hic post illum exeratur, quemadmodum etiam Chiliogonum seu
Myriogonum apprehendi poterit, eo duntaxat apprehensionis discrimine, quod
alterum per imaginationem citius atque facilius quam alterum effingamus; cum
tres Trianguli lineae primo intuitu, anguli autem Myriogoni gradatim
perlustrentur. Quod si corpus animo conciperes, conceptique superficiei partem
unam post aliam ita distribueres ut mill angulos prae se ferret, integram tunc
ipsius Myriogoni picturam per imaginationem tibi exhibuisti. Quid vero demum
absurdi foret, siquidem actum quo apprehendamus Triangulum esse figuram tribus
lineis contentam, and actum quo quasi tribus lineis constitutam intueamur, unum
esse judicaremus? quam primum enim Triangulum talem figuram esse apprehendamus,
nobismet ut talem imaginationis opera repraesentemus. Sed de hac re plus satis;
ad summam j^m definitionem deveniamus, quae, ni falleris, Ideae tantae tuae
quanta sit summi ipsius Numinis, miraculum liquido evincat; Dei nomine
intelligo substantiam quandam infinitam independentem, sum intelligentem,
sum potentem, and a qua tum ego ipse, tum aliud omne si quid aliud extat,
quodcunque extat, est creatum. Atque sane omnia ista recte intelligis, attamen
nos s^e deludimur, cum enim effulgentissima tam immensae Ideae repraesentatione
bears, quid hoc, nisi Deum, ut vere est, rem non definiendam definire, and
cujus propterea, si vobis fidem habebimus Ideam adipisci nequimus? Nec certe
est, quod de Terminis negativis conqueratis, siquidem amplissima nostra
positiva conceptio ad rem ipsam minime quadret. Animae, si placet, jam cunctas
simul sacultates exercebo; intellectum vehementissino nisu delassabo;
voluntatem sensusque penitus submittam: at infinitum aliquod amplexu meo
suscipere prorsus negatur. Myriogoni quidem species mihi tanquam ipsius
repugnantiae. Idea suit, diuturna tamen attentaque dispectione verum and
accuratum de illo conceptum elaboravi: cum autem demens easdem rations inirem
quo cujusdam infiniti notionem nanciscerer, nullum plane initium, nullam
reperiendi spem reperire possum; quinetiam reperiendi studio meipsum fere
tandem derelinquo. Nae certo certius esse cognovi quod infinitum quoddam
existit; cum vero tantam naturam describere mihi sumam ignorantiam ipse meam in
propatulo deridendam eloco: cum infinitam, independentem esse definio, non esse
concipiendam, non comprehendendam agnosco. Annon igitur Theologus istud Quandam
summo jure reprehendit? Quid enim hoc est, quam quae fuerit (ista substantia)
te omninio nescire? At nisi obscurus esse vellet Cartesius omittere non licuit.
Cur, quaeso, non licuit? quid enim? Deum esse substantiam quandam respectu
generis, vel numerice voluit. Atqui istud tantam quidem viri imprudentiam
argueret ut nobismet nullo pacto suspicari permittamus; cum tamen adeo
supervacaneum foret si numeri notam esse designavit, ut Magistrum illum
definitorum Coryphaeum in hanc definitionem ingessisse videns etiam oculis vix
mihi persuadeam. Enimvero si unitas necessario in infinitate seu infinita
excellentia includatur, adeo ut infinitum id quod tu definire audes non nisi
unum esse possit, quid signis pluribus individualitatis opus est? Suffecerant
isthaec, Dei nomine intelligo substantiam, infinitam, independentem, etc. Ergo
tu videsis quo demum absolutissima, quam jactaras, Idea recidit. At modo mihi
tantum spatium temporis assigns quo maximam rerum officinam oculis pererrem,
nec incertiora Autoris indicia me percepturum confido quam si adesse operanti
ipse potuissem. Itaque ne tu sodes imposterum notae nescio qualis operi
impressae mentionem facias. Phidias aut Zeuxes imaginum sola excellentia
opificem indicari expectaret. Oculos animumque, venerabilis Antagonista,
circumvolve. Nil nisi venustas, ordo, utilitas ab omni part salutant. Vulgar
aliquid elige. En! terra succum gramini larga sui erogatione ministrat, gramina
vice propria alimentum bovi, bos and se and operam suam villico, villicus de
frugibus uberrimoque proventu sundi Domino, deinde uterque tantae felicitatis
largitori Deo. Unaquaeque Mundi materialis profecto omnibus caeteris inservit
Aromus, quae nisi extaret, locumque suum teneret, universa fortasse peritura
esset oeconomia. Plurimae etiam istae commotiones and translationes quae rerum
quotidie cernuntur, nisi omnipotenti intelligentissimaque providentia
regerentur, mill abhine saeculis rerum naturam in Chaos multo magis
turbulentum ac soedum resolvissent quam ex quo emerfisse perhibetur: te^uissima
quippe materiae mica siquidem se movere posset, nisi tamen ille motus artificio
Divino temperaretur, rebus anarchiam universalem inferret, ut nullus sane
dubitem quin si una Oceani gutta quae consilio Dei in superficie esse debuit,
in imo subsideret alveo, systema mundi nitidissimum penitus interiturum sit.
Imo ut pars quaeque toti, sic cuique parti reliquae omnes juvant. Haeccine ergo
parum sufficient indicia artificis artificisque infinitae excellentiae.
Obliviscere aliquantisper innatarum Idearum; prodi ex Musaeo and Thecarum
umbra, in hortis deambulato, singulum florem sensibus mentique ita elocutione
tacita praedicantem attend, Deus existit, etenim me produxit, qui idem
sapientissimus est, optimus, omniscius, me etenim quam suaveolentem, quam
formosum, quam delectabilem effinxit! Filiola mea explicuit, coloribus
depinxit, ordine disposuit, a primis usque incunabilis eduxit, teneriora
stamina mitissime fovit. Quid nunc mihi dicis, Antoni plurimum colende? Annon
ista floris plus valent quam vestra Idea? Nae Magister tuus a re sua longissime
aberravit, cum Clauderet oculos, aures obturaret, avocaret omnes sensus: quos
quidem multo potius omnes exercere debuisset; nec si duplo totidem haberet,
eorum opem in tanto negotio menti invidere, unde multo felicius atque
opportunius quam ex ista Cerae liquefafactione (scomma procul absit a verbis)
proficere licuisset.

Habes a me quid ego de vestra numinis Idea sentiam; quin and for san aliquando
quid sentiam de reliquis Apologiae tuae Theorematibus habebis, siquidem
Veritatis atque Parentis Autoritas animos addiderit, sine qua nec jam ulla
mearum virium fiducia effecisset ut in D. Antonium Le Grand insurgere auderem,
cujus and acuminis and eruditionis fama me multo facilius quam Joannis
Austriaci nomen infantes Belgicos deterruisset. Interea autem, ne plus aequo
lacessere nunc viderer, vivere recteque valere jubeo.

FINIS.
The Reader is desired to correct with his Pen the following Errata, and to
excuse any other litteral ones that may occur.
Page 2. lin. 23. for that read they. Ibid. l. 24. for it r. they. p. 5. l. 1.
dele of. p. 10. l. 2. for nor. any: Ibid. l. 19. for out of the Center r. out
the Center. Ibid. l. 26. for Central r. Center of. p. 8. l. 30. r. as fairly to
be received. p. 17. l. 29. for Troop r. Trope. p. 21. l. 16. dele Gentile. p.
22. l. 19. after Beauty r. no less. p. 23. l. 23. for all the r. all p. 24. l.
26. for than natural r. than what is natural. p. 25. l. 8. for good looks from,
etc. r. good looks from Forehead to Chin, and Ear to Ear, it is, etc. Ibid. l.
19. for whenas r. when as. p. 29. l. 19. after Ideas r. ia Logic. p. 31. l.
26. for expiate for r. expiate. p. 48. l. 3. for Irruptions r. Eruptions. p.
99. l. 35. for from r. within. p. 101. l. 13. for Qualities r. Quantities. p.
102. l. 26. for of r. if. p. 106. l. 30. for Principle r. Principles. p. 107.
l. 24. for benefited r. benefitted. p. 111. l. 33. for People r. Persons.


