A Serious EXHORTATION To an HOLY LIFE, OR Conversation.

With a clear Discovery Of

The Nature of it, what it is. The Means of attaining it. The Trials of it, how
it may be known. The Motives, or Inducements to it.


OR, A profitable Companion For

Conversion. Illumination. Confirmation. Consolation.


By Robert Purnell.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain. 1663.

An Epistle To the READER.
Reader,
COnsider, there are many ways to Damnation, and but one way to Salvation; and
that is strait, and the gate narrow; so that although the runners are many, the
obtainers are few: Now that we may so run that we may obtain, is my desire and
endeavor in this little Piece; for there is a way, if we could light on it,
which I have pointed at, how to possess what we want, how to live long in a
little time, and to have one Foot as it were in Heaven, whilst the other is
upon the Earth. This small piece is the Birth of many Prayers, and the sum and
substance of many sweet Converses, and Meditations, and the Judgment of most
precious Christians; so that this Book is of great Worth, though but of small
Price. The best and chiefest Authors that I have consulted withal in compiling
the ensuing Treatise, are the Prophets and Apostles, mentioned in the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; so that here is no loose corns to blow
off, nor misspent words that I know of. I did lately meet with a small piece
about this bigness, having the same Title Page (upon the matter) with this,
written by one Mr. Thomas Wadsworth, sometimes Preacher at Newington, near
London; in which Piece there are many choice things, but I finding it lame, or
short, as to the beginning, carrying on, and finishing the work of a Holy
Conversation; and finding the necessity of such a Piece in these loose Times,
wherein the Lords Day is profaned, his Ordinances slighted or adulterated, his
People despised, etc. I have made bold to put Pen to Paper, and so to compose
the ensuing Work, which is neither deficient in necessaries, nor abundant in
superfluities. Thou shall find it for Order, Methodical; for Matter,
Spiritual; for Brevity, Compendious; for Use, Precious; etc.

Consider, the Truth is the same in all Ages, only it shines more and more
clear from Age to Age, until that which is perfect is come: the Truth held
forth is the same, though with more of God and less of Man, such addition is no
innovation, but illustration; not a new light, but new sight. A man may not be
said to make a new World, when he makes a new discovery of the old. My Friends,
labor to keep close to God in this loose Age, spend not your precious time in
complaining on others, as most do, but rather endeavor in the use of all means
to reform your selves; lay the Foundation of Mortification deep, reserve no
lust from the stroke of Jesus Christ, let your Speech be seasoned with Grace,
take heed of neglecting or slighting any of the Ordinances of God; in order
hereunto, read seriously this small Piece, being a serious Exhortation to an
Holy Life and Conversation; and if thou will read so as to profit much by it,
consider and observe these three things.

1. Consider that Sanctification, or an holy Life, is the Echo of Election;
and Holiness the Blossom of Happiness; and Piety the inlet of Felicity; whereas
an unholy Life brings external, internal, and eternal misery upon Persons and
Nations.

2. Have no hand in any Plot, but against Hells Policy, have no design but
against Sin; learn how to act to thy God Fidelity, to thy Prince Loyalty, to
thy self Humility; so shall thou be kept from future Falls, and guarded from
present Fears; for God has either the Castle of a Providence, or the Ark of a
Promise, or the All Sufficiency of his own Grace for a retirement of his People
in the greatest Storms and Tempests.

3. Make a most strong Determination from the bottom of thy heart to embrace
and observe whatsoever thou shall find to be the will of God, though all the
world should be against thee for it; so shall all thy Duties and Services be
regulated by Precept, and winged by Promises.

Farewell.
A Serious EXHORTATION To An Holy Life And CONVERSATION.
THe Lord of Glory, who is the great Masterpiece of Speech, when he speaks
from Heaven, he makes use of three several Texts of Scripture in one breath,
Mat. 17. 5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. First,
This is my beloved Son, that Scripture you have in Psalm. 2. 7. In whom I am well
pleased, this we have in Isa 42. 1. Hear him, this we have in Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
This high and mighty one has gathered up all practical Divinity into ten
Precepts, Exodus 20. and Moses reduces them to four Heads, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And
the Prophet Micah to three, Micah 6. 8. and our Savior Christ to two, Mark 12.
29, 31. and all that we can pray for, or against, into six heads or petitions,
Matthew. 6. 9. to the 14. verse. And the Apostle Paul reduces all into one, Romans
13. 9. He that loves another has fulfilled the Law; if there be any other
Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. Now that I may manifest my love to my neighbor, I do
here present him with this little piece, which I have for my own and his sake
taken great care and pains in. I shall reduce the body of this Book to these
two great Doctrines of Grace and Works, and so shall begin,





The Papists say if we are freely justified by Grace, we need not to do any
good works; and if we cannot fall from Grace, we need not fear to commit sin:
but every true Christian will say that Faith and Works must go together in our
conversation.

Doctrine of Grace has been and still is a bone of contention: Why so? because
learning cannot reach it, natural wisdom is confounded at it, evil Angels do
not know it, most men do turn their backs upon it, being bereaved of the
knowledge of it, or else corrupted from the simplicity of it. Let the Reader
consider these Scriptures, all speaking to the same thing, Romans 4. 5. But to
him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness. Titus 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us. Romans 11. 6. And if
it be by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace;
so that the righteousness whereby we are justified before God is a perfect
righteousness, which is the righteousness of Christ alone, Heb. 1. 8 Mat. 6.
33. Romans 4. 6. So again, Psalm. 71. 15, 16, 19, 24. and Isa. 45. 24. Surely
shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength. I will, says
David, make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only. So that in this,
Justice and Mercy, as Psalm. 85. 10. both meet together. Justice in that God
will not justify a sinner without a perfect righteousness; and yet Mercy in
that he will accept such a righteousness that is neither in him, nor done by
him, but by his surety for him.

There are these eight points or heads in this Doctrine of Free Grace.













either to pervert, or to corrupt it.





Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.

Tim. 1. 9. Who has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according
to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, etc.

Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth.

Philip. 1. 29 Ephesians. 2. 8.

Romans 3. 24. and a free gift, Romans 5. 15.

Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his Blood, even the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace.

Romans 6. 23. The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
see Acts 15. 11.

Now if any shall ask why God should discover this great mystery which was kept
secret since the world began to us, who are sinners of the Gentiles, who in
time past served dumb idols, or why God should be found of them that sought him
not, or made manifest to them that asked not after him; I can give no other
answer then that, 1 Cor. 1. 29. That no flesh should glory in his presence; or
that, Mat. 11. 25, 26. Even so Father, because it seemed good in thy sight.



our selves with him, Job 22. 21.

Romans 5. 1. Romans 15. 13.

Isaiah 26. 3. And so much for the second head.

The Branch cannot bear fruit except it abide in the vine, Joh. 15. 4. so that
this Doctrine is the root and spring of all true obedience, for this Doctrine
being received and retained, works these five things in the heart and soul,
viz. Faith, Love, Fear, Willingness, and Cheerfulness, and from these as from
five springs does Gospel-obedience flow.

Romans 16. 26.

John 14. 23. If a man love me he will keep my words, Psalm 26. 3, 4. For thy
loving kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy truth.

Psalm. 119. 161. My heart does stand in awe of thy words: so Noah being warned
of God, was moved with fear, and prepared an Ark, Heb. 11. 7.

Psalm. 27. 8. When thou saidest, seek ye my face; my heart answered, Lord, thy
face will I seek.

Psalm 40. 8. Thy Law is in my heart as well as in thy book, I delight to do
thy will O God. By all which it does appear, that this Doctrine of Grace is the
root and spring of an holy Conversation, seeing in God are all our springs, and
from him are all our supplies to enable us to perform any duty, to exercise any
grace, to subdue any lust, to resist any temptation, to bear any affliction. In
a word, the Lord tells us, without him we can do nothing.

viz. the Error of the Papist, the Quaker, the Arminian, together with all the
instability, formality, legallity, that more or less is found amongst people of
all persuasions, or at least most of them springs into them at the door of the
ignorance of this precious Doctrine of Free Grace. Now for a remedy herein, let
every Christian study, pray, enquire for, and stand fast in the Free Grace of
God: see that blessed place, 1 Pet. 5. 12. Exhorting and testifying that this
is the true grace of God wherein you stand. Romans 5. 2. By whom we have access
by faith into this grace wherein we stand; so that it is most clear and plain
that their standing in this grace did fence them from all false Doctrines and
erroneous Opinions, whilst others that were ignorant of this Doctrine, remain
seeking their salvation, partly by Grace, and partly by Works, as Romans 9. 32.
Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were, by the works of
the Law; for they stumbled at the stumbling-stone, etc.

support of a soul under all trials; when all things do fail, free Grace and
love does never fail, Heb. 13. 5. compared with Joshua 1. 5. our nearest and
dearest friends may fail, our eyes may fail, our tongues may fail, our strength
may fail, our flesh and our hearts may fail, our spirits may fail; but the Lord
has promised, that he will never fail nor forsake us, Josh. 21. 45. and 1
Kings 8. 56. what shall I say more? the pure, glorious, matchless, and spotless
Righteousness of Jesus Christ is a souls righteousness and resting place: But
he that understands not this Doctrine, his life must needs be a burden to him,
he is apt to spend his days in sorrow and mourning, sighing and complaining,
in doubting and questioning; sometimes saying within himself, my confidence is
but presumption, and my enjoyments are but delusions: Whereas on the contrary,
he that understands, receives, and abides in the Doctrine of Grace, does rest
satisfied in God alone; in this rest there is tranquillity, in tranquillity
contentment, in contentment joy, in joy variety, in variety security, in
security an assured hope of eternity.

that put Cain upon murdering Abel, it was Satan that provoked David to number
the people, it was Satan that put Peter upon persuading of Christ not to
suffer, it was Satan that put treason into the heart of Judas, it was Satan
that put Ananias upon lying: Now there are no weapons but spiritual weapons
that will stead the soul in combating with the Devil, and what greater weapon
has the Lord put into our hands than this free love of Christ to us, Ephesians. 6.
13. to the 16.

caused the Church of Rome to pervert and corrupt this Doctrine? The Papist
says, if we are freely justified by Grace, we need not do any good works; and
if we cannot fall from Grace, we need not fear to commit sin. How has he
corrupted and perverted this Doctrine in the Quaker, Arminian, and Formalist?
it would be endless to reckon up his wiles herein.

etc. To do well and have well, is natural; but to believe and live well, is
supernatural: to be righteous by another righteousness, and to be saved by
another suffering; these are mysteries and paradoxes, which no natural man
perceives, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: so that as in 1 Cor. 1. 21. The world by wisdom knew not
God, but remains ignorant of the Righteousness of God, and so go about to
establish their own Righteousness, and seek salvation as it were by the works
of the Law, Romans 9. 32. not considering that it is impossible to obtain
salvation hereafter, or any firm settled peace here, if our confidence toward
God be grounded upon our own best and choicest performances; seeing there is
something polluted, and something defective; for all our duties are tainted
with disproportion to rule, and beleapor'd with spots and blots, so that it is
in vain to expect a bed of rest in the barren wilderness of our own
performances: for that bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on
it, and the covering is too narrow for one to wrap himself in it. O the spots,
the blots, the blemishes that are to be seen upon the face of our fairest
duties; so that the best of us may say with the Prophet, Isa. 64. 6. All our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags: therefore let us say no more to the works
of our own hands, Ye are our gods: for in the true God the Fatherless find
mercy, Hosea 14. 3. Therefore in vain is salvation hoped for from the Hills, or
from the multitudes of Mountains: therefore let us not be like the Spider,
spinning out a Web of his own, and so think to climb up to Heaven by a thread
spun out of our own bowels; no, no, that will not do, the Law that we have
broken must have a perfect, personal, universal, and perpetual obedience, or
else we remain under the curse, from which there is nothing that can relieve
us, but that which is answerable to the evil of sin. Now there is no
righteousness in the world that is proportionable to the evil of sin, but the
righteousness of Christ only. For,

is too short, and is called a menstruous rag, and so cannot cover us; and
menstruous, so that if it should cover us, it were but to cover filth with
filth.

Gal. 3. 21. compared with Romans 8. 3, 4.



all this were too short to purchase the pardon of one sin: if the stung
Israelites had made a medicine of all the best Herbs in the Wilderness, and a
plaster of all the sovereign ingredients in the whole world, and applied it
with Mountains of Prayers, and Seas of tears, this would not have helped them,
if withal they did not look upon the Brazen Serpent, the free grace of God in
Jesus Christ. In a word, God will have all blessings and happiness to flow from
Free Grace.



his own Grace.





Yet for all this, let men have a care that in crying down the righteousness of
works, they do not cry down the works of righteousness.

Object. If there be a reward hereafter for our Works, how can it be of Grace?

Answ. It is of Grace that the Lord does put it into our hearts to mind it.



And so much for the Doctrine of Grace: now we come to the Doctrine of Works.

Object. If our Election, Vocation, Regeneration, Justification,
Sanctification, Acceptance, and Salvation be of Grace, and only of Grace,
what need is there of so much crying up, and pressing of Works, or an Holy Life
and Conversation?

Answ. There are many strong prevailing Arguments to engage us and all people
to an Holy Life, notwithstanding all is of Grace; take these few for the whole.

Kingdom, though not the cause of reigning.







it has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8.





by the footsteps of the Saints, and so to walk, as we have Christ and his
people for an example, 1 John 2. 6. compared with Phil. 3. 17. This is the
strait gate, and the narrow way to the Kingdom, to the which that way leads
not, which sets us not upon the new and living way, the true and only way, the
safe and straight way.

appears by these Scriptures; Ephesians. 1. 4. 2. Cor. 5. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 15. Ephesians.
2. 20. The Blood of Christ does both sanctify and satisfy, both in respect of
Sanctification and Justification; so that we have still need of a serious
Exhortation to an Holy Life and Conversation.



Colos. 1. 10. 1 These. 2. 12.

Phillippians 1. 27.

Ephesians 4. 1. We read 1 These. 4. 3, 4. This is the will of God, even our
sanctification, that we abstain from fornication; that every one of us should
know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor: see 1 These. 4. 7.

viz. Now he has commanded us to endeavor to know him, believe in him, love
him, and repent of all our miscarriages against him, etc. To which he has made
many promises; but as before we shall not receive and enjoy what is promised,
unless we perform what is commanded, as does at large appear, viz.

Not knowing of God, he will not have mercy upon us, Isa. 27. 11.

Not repenting, we shall assuredly perish, Luke 13. 5.

Not being zealous for him, he will spew us out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 16.

Not being meek, we are an abomination to him, Prove. 3. 32.

Not being merciful, we shall have judgment without mercy, Jam. 2. 13.

Not believing in him, we shall all perish, John 3. 18.

Not loving him, we are and shall be accursed, 1 Cor. 16. 22.

Not eating the Flesh, and drinking the Blood of the Son of God, we have no
life in us, John 6. 53.

has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. It
has the promise of the blessings of this life, Deuteronomy. 28. 3, 4, 5, 6. Blessed
shall thou be in the City, and blessed shall thou be in the Field; blessed
shall thou be in the Basket, and blessed shall thou be in the Store* blessed
shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed shall thou be when thou go
out, etc. What shall I say more, Godliness has all the choice promises of God
annexed to it, viz. Godliness does bring true peace, quiet, and comfort to the
soul; nay, it leads a soul to have communion with God and his people; so that
Godliness here is the way to eternal glory hereafter.

viz.

He that is a servant of God will let us know it by his obedience to him, Romans
6. 16. He that is one of Christ's flock will hear and obey his voice, John 10.
27. He that has an interest in the promises, will cleanse himself from the
filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. If Christ has dyed for you, let
us see it by your living to him, 2 Cor. 5. 15. He that is Christ's will crucify
the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5. 24. Those whom Christ has
chosen to salvation, it is through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of
the Truth, 2 These. 2. 13. He that has Faith in Christ, will let it appear by
his works, Jam. 2. 18, etc.

Genesis 22. 2, 3, 4. in this Scripture we have the story of Abraham in his holy
conversation and obedience to God, in offering up his Son. Well, in fine, God
commanded him to offer up his Son; in which consider these six things.







have had more, the trial had not been so great; but he was never like to have
more, and this Son was his Isaac, a child of many prayers and of many
promises, in whom his heart delighted.

etc.

Abraham himself must do this thing: Now consider, how can we be the Children
of Abraham, except we walk in his steps? he trusted upon God, although he had
but his bare word for it, and gave God his own time to make good his own
promise; and he was ready to part with the dearest thing for God at the first
word, and he believed in Hope, against hope: O! that thou and I could do the
same.

One would think that the Love of Christ, the Promises of Christ, the Presence
of Christ, the Example of Christ, and the Recompense of Reward held forth by
Christ, should make us hold on, and hold out; but if great Love, great Mercy,
great Forbearance, great Entreaties, great Wages, will not prevail with us to
forsake our Sins, and lead an Holy Life, Oh! Lord, what will become of us; for
without holiness no man shall ever see the Lord, etc.

The second place of Scripture, is Psalm. 63. 1, 2. Oh God thou art my God,
early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee,
to see thy power, and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary: Here
you have desire upon desire, you have the very flower and vigor of his Spirit,
the strength and sinews of his Soul, the prime and top of his inflamed
affections, all strongly working after a fuller enjoyment of God, and a greater
measure of conformity to him, in a Holy Life and Conversation. Now Obedience,
Sanctification, or an Holy Conversation is necessary,

1. In respect of God. 2. In respect of our selves. 3. In respect of others.
1. It is necessary in respect of God.

Romans 6. 16. His servants ye are to whom ye obey: whether of sin unto death, or
of obedience unto life: see John 8. 34. compared with 2 Pet. 2. 19.

Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men; that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven: see 1 Pet. 2. 12. compared
with 1 These. 2. 12.

Paul, Romans 11. 36. Of him, and through him are all things, to whom be glory
for ever. Amen.

Phil. 1. 27. Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ; so 2
Cor. 9. 13. So much for the first of these, good works are necessary in respect
of God, to show our obedience, to glorify his Name, to testify our
thankfulness, and to beautify his Gospel, etc.

2. Good Works are necessary in respect of our selves.

Psalm 50. 23. To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the
salvation of God: see Psalm 107. 43. compared with 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11.

a Tree is known by its fruits; so we may know where Faith is by its works, and
where Love is by its effects, 1 John 1. 6. If we say we have fellowship with
him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth.

Psalm 37. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the land,
and verily thou shall be fed. Mat. 16. 27. He will reward every man according
to his works.

Pet. 1. 5. to the 11. verse, for if you do these things you shall never fall;
for so an entrance shall be administered unto you abundantly into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

3. Good works, or an holy Conversation, is necessary in respect of others,
Tit. 3. 8. They that have believed in Christ must be careful to maintain good
works; for these things are good and profitable to men, and that in this
fourfold respect.

Pet. 2. 17. For this is the will of God, that with well-doing they may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men. This made wicked Saul say to David, 1 Samuel 24. 17. Thou art more righteous then I, for thou have rewarded good for
evil.

John, v. 4. I rejoiced greatly, that I found of thy children walking in the
truth. It is a great encouragement to one Christian to see the forwardness of
another in the ways of well-doing: see Col. 2. 5.

Pet. 3. 1, 2. That they may be won whilst they behold your chaste conversation
coupled with fear, etc. most sure it is, that a a man does teach by his
Conversation, as well as by his Doctrine.

John 13. 15. I have done this good work to leave you an example, said our Lord
Christ: see 1 These. 1. 7. So that ye were examples to all that believe. Many
have been convinced by example to lead an holy Life, that would not by precept.
By all which we may see, that an holy Life is necessary in respect of God, our
selves, and others. Oh! that thou that read these Lines, and I that write
them, might in good earnest set about this work, that it might go well with us
and our Children, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. for this is the way to have the Lords blessing
upon us, in all that we set our hands unto, Psalm 1. 3. In this the Children of
God are manifest, and the children of the Devil; whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother. Christ
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Therefore, Be ye holy,
says the ^ext, as I am holy; for without holiness no man shall see God, Heb.
12. 14. We shall come now, having gone thus far, to give you the sum of all,
with some farther addition and confirmations to the point in hand, and enquire
into these four things about an holy Conversation.

1. The nature of it what it is. 2. The means of attaining it. 3. The trials of
it how it may be known. 4. The motives or inducements to it.
is. It is an heedful observing the word of God to be our Rule, and his glory
our aim, in all our thoughts, resolutions words, and actions, or ^ life ordered
according to the Word of God, in holiness and righteousness, Psalm. 119. 9.
Luke 1. 75.

In a word, an holy Life is the product or effect of a Work of Grace in our
hearts, whereby we are renewed in the whole man after the image of God, and are
enabled more and more to dye unto sin, and to live unto righteousness, Ephesians.
4. 14. compared with Romans 6. 4, 6. An holy Life and Conversation has two
companions, Universality and Sincerity, 1 Timothy 1. 5. Now the end of the
Commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of
faith unfeigned.

Psalm. 51. 7. when we find conscience give a comfortable testimony of the
hearts simplicity and godly sincerity in whatsoever it does.

being purged by Christ's Blood from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb.
9. 14.

in it, when it purifies the heart, Acts 15. 9. and when it does overcome the
Devil and the world, 1 John 5. 4. so that in all our walkings, be sure to have
an eye upon these three things.

Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 7, 8, 9. He did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, but not with a perfect heart.

Word of God his Rule, and so walk and act as we have Christ, the Prophets, and
Apostles for our Example, that we may go out by the footsteps of the Flock.

Cor. 10. 31. Whatsoever you do, let all be done to the glory of God, compared
with Col. 3. 17. Phil. 1. 16. and so we shall act from a right ground, by a
right rule, to a right end.

1. We should keep our hearts with Solomon's diligence, Prove. 4. 24.

2. We should keep our eyes with Jobs Covenant, Job 31. 1.

3. We should keep our Tongues with David's Bridle, Psalm. 39. 7.

4. We should keep our foot with Solomon's guard, Eccles. 5. 1.

In a word, we should not trust any member without its keeper, that so we might
carry our selves in all estates, in all conditions, under all administrations,
both to God and his People, and our relations, as becomes an obedient
Christian. Consider, we are his workmanship, let us not defile it, or deface
it; we are in his presence, let us not pollute it, by unholy and impure
actions. Consider, we are of the same household with God, he is with us in our
natural actions to preserve us, in our recreations to restrain us, in our
public actions to approve or reprove us, in our private to observe us, in our
steps to watch by us, in our watching to refresh us.









dishonor which an unholy life does cast upon God.



viz. ground this in the bottom of thine heart, that without holiness no man
shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. No unclean person shall enter into the Kingdom
of God, Rev. 21, 27. etc. Because holiness and sanctification is the way in
which the Lords people shall be saved. I do not say that this is the way by
which, but the way in which he has chosen us to salvation, says the
Scripture, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, 2
These. 2. 13.

Psalm. 119. 5. Oh! that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes, then shall
I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Jer. 10. 23. We
have need to seek to the Lord for help, for it is not in man to direct his
steps, Prove. 3. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy
paths. Prove. 16. 9. A man's heart may devise his way, but the Lord directs his
steps, without whom we can do nothing, 2 Cor. 3. 5.

Joys of Heaven, and the Eternity of both: if the love of Christ does not, or
will not constrain, if the fear of punishment will not compel, Lord what will
become of us! If great love, great mercy, great forbearance, great entreaties,
great and long waitings, great wages will not prevail with us to lead an holy
Life, I know not what will? surely we can never serve such another Master as
God is, for he does not only give us wages, but does our work for us.

viz.

In its malignity, as being



puts God upon complaining, the Spirit upon grieving, and Christ upon bleeding;
besides it opens the mouths of enemies, and grieves the people of God.

Psalm 119. 9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed
thereto according to thy word.

viz.

1. How he that has, or pretends to it, may clearly discern the truth of it.

2. How others that observe him, and behold him, may judge aright of him.

viz.

True obedience has two companions, universality and sincerity; that is, he
has a respect to all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. and does endeavor to
keep them, at least purposingly and endeavouringly: a will to obey the Lord is
all that a blessed Paul can sometimes find, Romans 7. 18. Now are there any
seeds of true life begun? is there any spark of conviction, or motion of
repentance? will thy pulse of remorse beat a little, have thou a touch of
remorse and sorrow, a spark of Contrition, a grain of Faith, a drop of
self-denial; does thy spirit long and breathe, although faintly; does thy pulse
beat, although feebly; does thy heart pant after Christ although but weakly;
do thou endeavor to receive Christ and his Free Grace, though with a shaking
hand? well, take thy Evidences from the carriage of thy spirit, neither at the
best, nor at the worst, but the middle way, which is most thy frame; for if
thou judge of thy self at the worst, thou may be discouraged; and if at the
best, thou may be deceived; for if we take a profane man at the best, and a
good man at the worst, we shall find but little difference, viz. we read of
David's murdering, we read of Joseph's swearing, Jobs cursing the day of his
birth, of Jonah vexing, Peter denying, Thomas not believing. Again, on the
contrary, we read of Pharaoh desiring the Prayer of Moses, Balaam desiring to
dye the death of the righteous, Saul condemning of himself, Ahab humbling
himself, Nineveh repenting, Felix trembling: if we now judge by these
particular actions, we should justify those whom the Lord does condemn, and
condemn those whom the Lord does justify: Therefore we are not to judge our
selves by some particular acts, but by the constant frame and bent of our
spirits. A true Christian can say, though I am not what I would be, yet I would
be what I should be; there is much blindness with our light, much enmity with
our love, much pride with our humility; so that the best Christian may say,
Lord I see, and yet am blind, I hate and yet I love, I follow and yet I fall,
I press forward, and yet I faint,

viz.

He that is a servant of God will let us know it by his obedience to him, Romans
6. 16.

He that is a servant of Christ will let us know it by his love to his people,
John 13. 35.

He that says he lives in the Spirit will let us know it by his walking in
the Spirit, Gal. 5. 25.

He that abides in the Vine, will let us see it by his fruitfulness, John 15.
5.

He that has faith will show it us by his works, Jam. 2. 18.

He that is indeed a wise man will let us see it by his good conversation,
James 3. 13.

He that has an interest in the promises will let us know it by his cleansing
himself from all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. A man must
not dance and dine with the Devil, and yet think to lie down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven; most men walk in the broad way, and
yet every one thinks to enter in at the strait gate, Mat. 7. 13. Prove. 16. 25.
It is true, the best Gold has some dross, the fairest day has its clouds, the
finest linen has its spots, and the fairest Garden has its weeds, and the
best Fields has its Tares, as well as Wheat, and the sweetest fruit some
worms; so have the most exact Christians their failings: Wherefore beware of
judging men and women according to some particular actions, but judge according
to the constant tenor of their conversation; for as we said before, if we take
a good man at the worst, and a wicked man at the best, we shall find but
little difference: therefore let us beware of condemning those whom the Lord
does justify, and of justifying those whom the Lord does condemn, for both
these are an abomination to the Lord.

viz.

1. The benefits that we shall gain by it. 2. The sad condition of all that
want it.
viz.

He has the promises of this life, and that which is to come.

He has a blessing upon his basket and store, and whatsoever he puts his hand
unto, all things work together for his good, at the present, fitting him for
salvation hereafter; yea, whatsoever losses, crosses, troubles, and trials,
persecutions, and afflictions befall him, it shall redound to the glory of God,
and his his own good; and if all this be too little, the Lord is teaching him
or her that endeavors to order their conversation aright, to take the glory of
his most Holy Name to be their aim, his Word their rule, the Spirit of Truth to
be their guide, the Angels to be their guard, and the precious Promises to be
their support, and his Sons and Daughters to be their companions here, and
company of innumerable Saints and Angels hereafter, Heb. 12. Yea the Lord shall
in the sight and hearing of all the world, call his sanctified ones, as Mat.
25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world.

Come ye, my friends, my brethren, my people, my undefiled ones.

Blessed. Here is our absolution from all sins.

Of my Father. Here is the Author from whom proceeds our blessedness.

Inherit. Here is our Faith ending in fruition, and the promises in possession.

The Kingdom. Behold our birthright according to Grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9.

Prepared. See Gods fatherly care for his chosen, John 14. 2.

From the Foundation of the world. Oh! the free and eternal love of God to poor
miserable man. In a word, there is no place so glorious by creation, so
beautiful for delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable in habitation;
there is joy without sorrow, and pleasure without pain; there is light without
darkness, mirth without sadness, health without sickness, wealth without want,
credit without disgrace, beauty without blemish, etc. all tears shall be done
away, all evils removed, all sins abolished, all wants supplied: see Rev. 22.
3. and 21. 4.

Heaven is a City, whose Maker and Builder is God, the City of the living God,
Heb. 12. 22. The Court of God and of Christ, wherein are an innumerable company
of Saints and Angels, Heb. 12. 23, 24. It is better sure to creep toward
Heaven though through the valley of tears, then to gallop toward hell upon the
mountains of pleasure.

Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see God. 1
Pet. 1. 15, 16. As he that has called us is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of conversation; because it is written, be ye holy as I am holy. Rev. 21. 27.
There shall in no wise enter into heaven any thing that defiles, nor those
that work abomination, or make a lie, etc. Well, the holy nature of God will
not permit the unclean man or woman to come into his presence; no, Psalm. 9. 17.
The wicked shall be turned into hell. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. The Lord will come in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on all them that obey not the Gospel, etc. In
the mean time whilst they remain here they are accursed in their going out,
and in their coming in, in the basket and in the store, and in every thing that
they put their hand unto, Deuteronomy. 28. Again, consider what names all those who
want this holy life and conversation are known by in the Scriptures of truth,
viz.

Sometimes they are called filthy dreamers, defiling the flesh, Ep. Jude ver.
8. raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame, ver. 13. Natural bruit
beasts made to be taken and destroyed, that shall utterly perish in their own
corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Wells without water, clouds that are carried with a
tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever, ver. 17. A
generation of vipers, Matthew. 3. 7. Ye serpents, how can ye escape the damnation
of hell, Mat. 23. 33. In a word, the Scriptures call them Lions for their
fiercenes, Bears for their cruelty, and Dragons for their hideousness, Dogs
for their filthiness, Wolves and Foxes for their subtlety; if this be not
enough, the Scriptures of truth styles them Scorpions vipers, thorns, briars,
thistles, brambles, stubble, dirt, dust, chafe, dross, smoke, scum, unclean
birds, Rev. 18. 2.

Rom 6. 16.

John 8. 44.

John 12. 31.

Cor. 4. 4.

Now lay all these things together, and consider if the joys of heaven on the
one hand, and the torments of hell on the other hand, will not prevail with us
to witness a holy life and conversation in our practice, I do not know what
will: certainly the sad condition of all that want this holy life will farther
appear by these particulars.

His or her sad condition







the King of Terrors, it has something to say to every one, and would fain be
heard; but most of the sons and daughters of men are not at leisure to hear
what he has to say; they put that off to the last year, and when that is come
to the last month of that year, and when that is come to the last week of that
month, and when that is come to the last day of that week, and when that is
come to the last hour of that day, and when that is come to the last minute of
that hour, not considering that death meets us every where, and enters in at
every door, viz. by a full meal, or an empty stomach, by much wine or want of
wine, by heat or cold, by violent motion or sitting still, by every thing in
providence, by every thing in nature, by every thing in chance? well, in comes
death and looks you grim and black in the face, then you fall into a cold sweat
over all your body, and a trembling in all your joints; the Head aketh, the
Face waxes pale, the Nose black, the Eyestrings break, the Tongue faltereth,
the Throat ratleth; then come thy friends and trouble thee as fast to have thee
put thy goods in order, some crying, some craving, some pitying, some
comforting of the sick party: If he look up, he sees Gods judgments ready to
fall upon him; if he look down, he sees Hell mouth open, ready to receive him;
if he look about him, lo a company of evil spirits ready to snatch his soul
from him; live he cannot, to dye he is afraid, and what to do he cannot tell:
whereas had he lived an holy Life and Conversation, he at the hour of death
would now comfort himself, and say as good Hezekiah does, Isa. 38. 2, 3.
Hezekiah prayed and said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which
is good in thy sight; so the Lord added to his days fifteen years. Oh! that we
were wise, that we understood this, that we would consider our latter end,
Deuteronomy. 32. 29. and great cause have we so to do, for our body is but a cottage
of clay, and that so frail, and crasie, that were it not once or twice a day
daubed over, it would fall about our ears. What are our bodies but a Magazine
and Hospital of all Diseases, and these are forerunners of Death: when
Diseases are in the House, Death is at the Threshold; when Sickness is in the
Chamber, Death is at the Window. Oh! that the Lord would teach us so to number
our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

viz. there is brought in a Bill of Endictment, never such a Bill put up
against the greatest offender in any Court of men. The Bill of Endictment it
self runs thus, viz.



his people, and opening the mouth of enemies.







will put you to pay for sin by contrition, etc.











dreamedst of, much less could repent of; ignorance will be no plea in this
Court, all our sinful thoughts, resolutions, words, and actions, together with
all our commissions and omissions, stand up and bear testimony against thee.
Oh! consider, if ever any Bill were like unto this; I could almost say to the
Reader, as Nathan to David, Thou art the man. It is true, that in Courts of
Justice, exceptions against Witnesses are sometimes allowed, but thou can
except against none here, unless it be the devil; but if thou cashire his
testimony, what can thou say against thy partners in sin, do not they know
all thy ways? what can thou say against good men, that with grief of heart
beheld thy sinful courses? what can thou say against good Angels that will
not belie thee? what can thou say against thine own conscience? what can
thou say against the true and allknowing God that cannot lie? Then hear the
sentence, Mat. 25. 41. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.

3. Let us a little consider the torments which he is like to suffer in Hell,
there shall be punishment without pity, misery without mercy, sorrow without
succor, crying without comfort, mischief without measure, torment without
ease; where the worm dies not, and the fire is never quenched; in which flame
thou shall ever be burning and never consumed, ever dying, and never dye; but
here thou shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power: and so here for want of an holy
Conversation, thou have changed Heavens felicity for Hells fury, it is better
to creep toward Heaven, though through the valley of tears, than to gallop
toward Hell upon the mountains of pleasure.

Mat. 25. 41. Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire; this eternal condition
admits of no alteration, decay, or consumption, future hopes or expectation,
waste or diminution; man's eternal condition admits of no mixture or moderation,
events or issues of Providence; man's eternal condition admits of no comparison
or revocation, there is no sounding a retreat after we are lanched into this
Ocean; millions of ages past away, yet not a minute wasted; this is utter
darkness, and blackness of darkness, weeping and gnashing of teeth, the worm
that never dies, the fire that never goes forth, etc. and all this is but the
effect and product of an unholy Conversation. I hope by this time the Reader of
these lines finds a necessity of a serious exhortation to an holy life and
conversation.

Now to avoid all these miseries, consider what is before written, and these
few things following after, and so I close up this little piece, not doubting
but by Gods blessing thou may gain much by it.

Now then if thou would avoid Hells misery, and obtain Heavens felicity,
learn these few things and put them in practice.

Solomon's diligence, Pro. 4. 24.

Jobs Covenant, Job 31. 1.

David's Bridle, Psalm. 39. 7.

Solomon's guard, Eccles. 5. 1.

That thou and I may do so, let us put on the whole Armor of God, and not
trust any member without its keeper.

Therefore seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is
near.

Cor. 10. 5.

Prove. 10. 21.





Let thy diet be moderate Dives, who fared deliciously; nor like Martha,
troubled about many dishes or varieties.





lawful, brief, seldom, and seasonable.

Prove. 4. 14.







retain the best things, not forgetting Death, Judgment, Punishment, or Glory.





These. 5. 14.

be thy rule, his glory thy aim, his Spirit thy guide, his Angels thy guard,
his Promises thy support, his People thy companions, his Ordinances thy delight.



Phil. 4. 8. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise, think on these things, so as to walk in them, or observe and do them;
so shall thou have prudence to guide thy thoughts, to order and grace thy
speech, to help thee to understand things present, to guess at things to come,
to recall matters past, to possess that you do want, to live long in a little
time, and to carry thy self in all states, in all conditions, under all
administrations, both to God and his people, and thy relations, as a righteous,
obedient Christian. It is reported of Alexanders body, that it was of such an
exact and excellent constitution, that it gave a sweet scent like a perfume; so
should a Christians conversation be a sweet smelling savor both to God and
man; so then thou shall not be afraid to dye, nor ashamed to live: Therefore
let us spend more time and pains about that which will make us live happily,
and dye comfortably, and reign with Christ eternally. We may assure our selves,
it is not the knowing man, nor the talking man, but the doing man that at last
will be found the happiest man; for if our knowledge be not turned into
practice, the more knowledge we have, the more miserable shall we be: Although
no man merits assurance by obedience, yet God usually crowns obedience with
assurance. An unholy Professor shall always want these things, viz. Comfort
and Content; Confidence and Assurance. Read and consider these Scriptures, and
I have done, leaving thee to him that never forsakes his.

The Scriptures follow, viz.

Hebrews 6. 8. But that which bears thorns, and briars, is rejected and is
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Matthew 3. 10. Now the axe is
laid to the root of the tree, therefore every tree that brings not forth good
fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. 1 Thessalonians 4. 1. Furthermore
then, we beseech you brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus; that as ye
have received of us, how ye ought to walk and to please God, so ye would abound
more and more, for this is the will of God, even your sanctification; verse 3.
That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification
and honor. Hebrews 13. 20. 21. Now the God of peace that brought again from
the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the
blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do
his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
