A TRIAL of FAITH, WHEREIN Is discovered the ground of the Faith of the
Hypocrite, which perishes, and the Faith of the Saints, which is founded upon
the everlasting Rock, so all may see what their Faith is, and what they trust
to.

Written to the intent, that every one may come to the true searcher of Faith,
that their Faith which they speak of and trust to, may be searched, and the
heart of the Pharisee ripped open and searched, and that the poor ignorant blind
Creatures may come to see and be deceived no longer in trusting to that which
perishes: Verily it is of much concernment to every one, even the soul; the
trial of your faith; written from the spirit of the Lord, and published for the
good of all, that they may come to build upon the everlasting Rock, with him
whose name according to the world is,

James Parnell.

Try your selves, prove your selves, know you not that Christ is in you,
unless you be Reprobates,

2 Cor. 13.5. LONDON, Printed in the year 1654.

The Trial of Faith.
COme try your Faith all you Professors of Godliness, of God, and of Christ,
who your Father, and Christ your Redeemer and Savior, and say you believe in
God, and you are saved through faith in Christ; come search the ground and
bottom of your faith, what it is built upon, for the faith and hope of the
Hypocrite perishes, which stands in words, and on any unsteadfast foundation.
You say you are saved by the blood of Christ, and by his stripes you are
healed, Job. 8.12
and so would make him the ground of your faith, but what are you saved from,
and what are you healed of? Search and see within: Christ came to save and
redeem sinners from their sin, and to heal them of the wound of sin, to bruise
the Serpents head, and to bind the strong man, and cast him out of his house, 1 Timothy 1.15.
to cast out the buyers and sellers out of the Temple of God, which is made a
Den of Thieves and to open the prison doors and to set at liberty the
imprisoned and to lead captivity captive, Genesis 3.15
, to throw Antichrist out of the Temple of God, who sits as God there, Mat.
21.12.
and says he is God; and he is come to rend that veil of darkness and to open
the eyes of the blind, and to unstop the deaf ears, and to make blind those
which can see, Luke 4.18.
and to deaf those which can hear, and give strength to the weak, and to make
weak those which are strong, and to feed the hungry, Isa. 42.6, 7.
and to famish that which is fed, and to make a separation betwixt the Precious
and the Vile, Luke 4.18.
betwixt the Wheat and the Tares, the Sheep and the Goats, and to purchase to
man that which man has lost, Luke 8.10.
and to this end is he come and who can witness this, can witness him, and may
claim an interest in him, and has an assurance of their salvation; Mat. 8.11.
and their faith will stand against the beast and overcome; for the Lamb shall
get the victory; but who cannot witness, this cannot witness Christ, and so are
Reprobates concerning the faith. Now here all you Drunkards are shut out, here
all you swearers are shut out, here all you proud and covetous and lustful ones
are shut out, here all you scoffers and scorners, and backbiters, and revilers,
and extortioners, and whoremongers, and envious ones, and Gamers, and sporters,
and all you self-righteous professors, who live in the fashions and customs of
the world, delighting in the pleasures and vanities of the world, having
fellowship with the world, whose conversation is amongst the Children of the
world, all in one Generation, cleansing only the outside of the Cup, and the
inside full of lust and filthiness, pride and covetousness, and all
uncleanness, whited walls and painted Sepulchers, who deceive the carnal eye
and ear, but the Lord searches the heart; here you are all shut out from the
true faith which purifieth the heart, and the Serpent is head in you, and your
strong man keeps the house, and a stronger then he is not yet come, and the
buyers and the sellers are uncast out of the Temple, and Antichrist sits in the
Kingdom and reigns as an Angel of Light, and the imprisoned lies in prison, and
the wound of sin is yet fresh, and the vail of darkness is yet spread over, and
death reigns, and Christ lies low in the manger, and the Inn is taken up with
other guests, and here you can challenge no interest in the blood of Christ,
and have nothing to do to talk of God and Christ, and have no assurance of your
salvation, and all your faith is vain, and hope vain, and the foundation
thereof is sandy, and will not stand in the day of trial, but will be as a
broken Reed to lean upon, and all your prayers, and praises, and singings, and
graces, and baptism, and Sacraments which you build your faith upon, and think
to merit withal, is all in vain, the enflaming sword is set against it? being
offered up from an unclean heart; for how can your hearts be clean while you
live in sin, for sin lodges in your heart, and while sin is there, no purity
can dwell, and nothing that is pure can come forth of an unclean vessel, and
God does not put his Treasure in an unclean vessel, and he is pure, and
receives nothing that is impure, and here all your faith is vain, and here you
destroy all your faith out of your own mouths, who say, you believe you shall
never overcome your sins so long as you are here, or be made free from sin; and
here you show your faith is not built upon Christ, who came to destroy the
works of the Devil, and to cleanse from all sin, and those whose faith was
built upon him, did witness it, and said the blood of Christ has cleansed us
from all sin, and they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the lusts
and affections thereof, which is the ground of sin, and he that believes is
born of God, and he that is born of God cannot commit sin, and no unholy nor
unclean thing must enter; so now what assurance have you of your salvation, or
what is your faith built upon, when both Christ and the Scriptures witness
against you? and faith which is not built on the Rock Christ Jesus, is vain and
perishes, and the that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is
pure: here all your faith is searched, tried and pro^ed, and is found all vain
and perishing and so is not built upon the Rock which perishes not: therefore
come down all you high-minded Pharisees, and lay away all your profession, and
throw down all your old building, and begin and lay a new foundation, for the
higher the Pharisee climbs, the greater will be his fall; and he that would be
wise, let him first become a fool, for man by his wisdom knows not God, here
the Pharisee is shut out from the knowledge of God, who stands in his own
wisdom. And all you wilful, blind, carnal, ignorant creatures, whom my soul
pittieth to see how ignorantly you are led, who pin your faith upon the sleeves
of your Forefathers, and live in lightness and wantonness, spending your youth
in vanity, in gaming, pleasures and sporting, in drunkenness, in swearing and
lying, in vain talk, and foolish jestings, in pride and lust, and filthiness,
and say you follow your Forefathers, and say, what is become of them? and say,
your pleasures is pastime and recreation, and your vain talk and foolish
jesting, is pastime and merriness, and so you pass the time away, and lay your
drinking and rioting, and feasting is good fellowship and neighborhood, and so
you cover over your sins and iniquities, but woe unto him that hides his sin,
and covers his iniquity, and all this will not profit you any thing, neither
can your Forefathers excuse you before the Lord; for in the beginning it was
so, that Evah could not justify Adam, neither could be any excuse, but rather
condemned him, because he hearkened to the voice of the woman and disobeyed the
Lord; so Adam suffered for his own sin and so did Eve for hers. And so this
will be no excuse for you, in the day of account, to say you followed your
Forefathers, and did as they did before you; but then will the Lord say,
because you followed the traditions and fashions, and customs, and inventions
of man, and have hearkened to the voice of the Serpent, and have disobeyed my
voice, and my command, and slighted my counsel, and would none of my reproof,
but cast my Law behind your backs, and trampled my mercy under foot, and have
turned my grace into wantonness, and have nourished your hearts as in a day of
slaughter, and have spent my creatures upon your lusts, and stoned, stocked,
buffeted and imprisoned, and shamefully entreated my messengers which I sent
unto you to forewarn you of your iniquity, and have killed my Son, therefore
depart ye workers of iniquity, I know you not, into everlasting torment
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; to see now how vain your hope is, and
how unsteadfast your faith is, when you have more assurance of your damnation
then your salvation; for the Lord says, no unrighteous person must enter into
his Kingdom, nor no unholy nor unclean thing. Therefore all you who desire
salvation to your souls, try and prove your faith and hope which thou do
trust to, and take heed of trusting to a broken reed, lest it deceive you.
Experience has taught you, that if a foundation of a building be decayed, and
wasted and naught, the building will fall when a storm comes: so let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall; so every one whose desire is after
righteousness, hearken to that in your conscience, which raises up desires
after righteousness, and which shows you the vainness of your lives, and checks
you when you do amiss, and troubles you, and torments you in conscience when
you have been drunk, or have done some evil act; be willing to be guided by
that, and that will lead you to repentance and a newness of life, to forsake
those things which it discovers to be contrary to the will of God: and if you
be willing to follow this, and be guided by it, you shall find a teacher
continually present, checking in the conscience for vain thoughts, and for vain
and idle, and needless words and actions, and so will crucify the lust which
is the ground of those things, and which will lead you out of the paths of
death, into the way of life, our of the traditions and customs, and fashions
and opinions of the world, into the assurance of the eternal Truth; and thou
that art willing to follow this, and be guided by this, shall need no man to
teach thee, but it will be a teacher unto thee, teaching and directing in
righteousness, purity and holiness; and if thou be diligent, keeping thy
mind within, with an ear open to the pure voice, thou shall find it present
with thee wheresoever thou art, in the fields, in thy bed, in Markets, in
company, or wheresoever thou art, when thy outward Priest or Teacher is absent,
it may be in the Alehouse, or at his pleasures and delights, or far off, it
will be present with thee, and will check thee, and condemn thee, for that
which no outward eye can see, and will cleanse thy heart from lust and deceit,
and uncleanness, and will purify thy heart, and will make it a fit Temple for
purity to dwell in, and then thy sacrifices will be pure, which comes from a
pure heart: the Lord will accept them, for Abels sacrifices he receives, but
Cains he denies; but if thou would attain to this, thou must be willing to
deny thy lusts, thy vanity, thy delights, or whatsoever has been thy life; for
he that will save his life, shall lose it, and he that will lose his life for
my sake, the same shall save it: So there is no obtaining of life but through
death, nor no obtaining the Crown, but through the Cross: so thou must deny
thy self, and take up thy Cross daily and follow Christ, if thou would be
his Disciple, and give up thy self wholly to be guided by the will of God, that
all which is contrary to the will of God may be crucified, though it be never
so near and dear to thee, and be forsaken; Lands or Livings, Wife or Children,
friends and acquaintance, or all the world, and all delights in the world; for
he that loves any thing better then me, is not worthy of me, and all things
below the Lord vanishes, but he endures for ever. So the Lord God Almighty
prosper all the tender desires which are raised up toward him, and feed the
hungry and thirsty souls, as he has promised, and raise up his own in all his,
that he alone may be glorified, praised, and honored, who is worthy, and to
whom all belongs.

And this is the desire of his soul, who is a servant of the Lord, who is
hated, reviled, and derided of the world, because he has no fellowship with
the world, nor the vanities of the world, but testifies against their ways,
fashions, traditions, customs, fellowship, words and worship, and sees them all
to be formal imitation, and the invention of man out of the Covenant of God, so
cannot but deny them; and for this cause he is hated of all, both Priest and
People, whose name according to the world is,

James Parnell. The Servant is not greater than his Master.

FINIS.

