A Particular ACCOUNT Of the Sudden and Unexpected Siege of Vienna, The
Capital City of AUSTRIA, And Residence of the Emperor of GERMANY, At present
Besieged by the Turkish Army, Consisting of a Hundred and Fifty Thousand Men,
(the 8th. of July, 1683.) under the Command of the Grand Vizier, and what
passed during the Seige, as well within the City, as without it.
THis famous City took its Name from the River Wien, which flows into the
Danube, and is the Residence of the Emperor, and Metropolis of Austria, a
Royal Fortification, Surrounded with thick Walls, Bastions, deep Ditches, and
lofty Towers, in such sort as She may well be Styled the Bulwark against the
Turks, the Key of Germany, and of the Christian World, as She made it appear in
the Year 1529. When Solomon the Magnificent, Emperor of the Turks, Sat down
before it, with Three Hundred Thousand Men, and after Six Months Furious and
unusual Attacques, was forced to withdraw, whereupon that Christian City was
delivered.

The Turkish Emperor, in this present Year, 1683, Like a Tyrant thirsting
after Christian Blood (by the Encouragement of the Rebel Count Teckley) sent
again into Hungary, Two Hundred Thousand Men, under the Conduct of the Grand
Vizier to Commence a War with the Christians, which is now carried on with
great Fury: The Turks have lately made an Incursion near Raab, in which the
Regiment of Dragoons Commanded by the Duke of Savoy, were Routed, the Duke
himself, and the Prince of Arembergh Wounded, so that they Died; Whereupon the
Imperial Infantry retreated to the Isle of Schut, and the Cavelry to Vienna,
near the Danube. After which the Grand Vizier passed the Cities of ^^^orra and
Raab, and (the 8th. of July) Beseiged the City of Vienna, with a Hundred and
Fifty Thousand Men; and ordered the Rest of the Forces, to lay waste the
Country in their March, so as utterly to extirpate Christianity. The Besiegers
immediately raised Three several Batteries before Vienna, and Fired thence into
the Town, Day and Night, with great Fury, but the brave Governor, Count
Starembergh made a Vigorous Defense, levelled the Batteries, and in many
Assaults happily repulsed the Enemy, so as there were Slain of the Turks in
these Attacques above Twenty Thousand, and of the Beseiged about Twenty Persons
killed, and some Wounded: The Turks sent several times their Proposals for a
short Respite to Bury their Dead, which was refused them, so as in the End, the
Annoyance from dead Bodies, and those they found in the Mines, that Died of the
Pestilence, Obliged them to draw some distance off from the City. In the mean
time, the Beseiged were refreshed, and Vowed to Defend it to the last drop of
Blood. All Things in the City Remained in a good Posture, and at length they
seize'd two Incendiaries, who had privately conveyed Matches of Gunpowder with
Artificial Fires into many Houses with design to Burn them, and to Fire the
Scotch Monastery and Church; but their Designs were timely Dicovered, and the
Contrivers were first Torterd, then cast alive into the Fire.

The Beseiged did then believe the Enemy had forsook the City, but they
returned and raised new Batteries, on which they mounted Six large pieces of
Ordinance and many new Mortar -- pieces, which they Discharged with greater
Vigor than before. They gave out, that the Grand Signior would come in person
before his Army, and bring extraordinary Supplies with him. Notwithstanding,
the Besieged supported themselves with great Resolution, for there came over
not long before an Engineer who brought with him a Draught of the Turkish Camp
to the Duke of Lorrain, and assured him, that the Turk wanted Provisions; and
therefore that if the Three Mines they had sprung were ineffectual, they must
speedilly raise the Siege: The Enemy blew up two of them, which were between
the Castle and Karndter Gate; One of which was countermined, and in it many of
the Turks slain: but the Second, weakened the Counters Carp, and the Turks
lodged themselves in the Ditch, but by a brisk Sally, they were beaten off
again,

The 29th. of the last Month, were slan in a general Assault more than Ten
Thousand Turks. In short, the City of Vienna would endure, with the help of
God, four or five Months longer, being so well stored with Provisions that
Governor Starembergh sent as much Bread for two Pence to the Turkish Camp as
would cost with them six Crowns: We hope by the Divine Assistance, that the
Chief Christian City will be preserved from the Cruelty of the Turkish
Emperor, and that he may languish in his Desires and return to Mahomets
Stables, and that the great God will dwell in the Garrison of Vienna,
consisting of twenty Thousand Men Effective, besides the Scholars and Young
Men, the Auxiliary Forces of Poland and those of the Empire.

Made English from the High -- Dutch.

LONDON, Printed for John Smith, 1683.


