The Last Words of William Parry a Lawyer, who SUFFERED for endeavoring to
Depose the Queens Highness, and bring in Q. Mary, and her young Son James.
XXVII. ELIZ. WHereas a Paper has been for some time handed about in
Manuscript, pretended to be the Speech of the abovesaid William Parry: This is
to inform the Public, that the said Paper is Spurious and Counterfeit; and
that the True Genuine Speech is what is here presented to the World. Mr.
Sheriff,
I Shall not trouble you with an Account of the particular Crimes for which I
am brought to this untimely End; but only in General deliver Five Principal
Causes that have, in sooth, drawn so just a Judgment upon me. First,
Disobedience to my Parents. Secondly, Ill Company. Thirdly, the leaving my
lawful Calling to engage in Affairs of State. Fourthly, Bearing false Witness:
And lastly, my Ingratitude to those that raised me.

I shall say something upon each of these by way of Warning to all People, but
especially to those who have been my Accomplices; several of whom do now hear
what I say.

First, Of my Disobedience to my Parents, who sent me to study the Law, albeit
I proved a graceless Youth, given up to all manner of Naughtiness; and in one
of my wild Frolicks ^estsoons married without their Consent or Knowledge, and
was thereupon left by them to shift in the wide World: Where I lived many Years
in the lowest Degree of Misery and Want, which when attended with Pride,
Avarice and Ambition, is the Parent of all Evil.

My Wants engaged me in ill Company, and taught me to associate with such who
were secret Enemies to the Queen's Highness; particularly one Robin Trickster a
Turn-coat Scrivener, and Master Harry Madrigall of St. John's Parish,
afterward Clerk of Her Grace's Guards. These Two, as it was generally thought,
held private Intelligence with Mary late Queen of Scots, and were entirely
devoted to Her and Her young Son James; who they affirmed had a better Title to
the Crown than Her Highness. They persuaded me that Her Highness was an Enemy
to God's Church. That Philip King of Spain, when he had reduced his Rebellious
Subjects, whom our Queen had takan into Her Protection, would lend his Troops
to be employed against Her Majesty: That Mary Queen of Scots would by the Help
of France (where She had great Power) prepare an Army to be sent to Scotland,
and from thence invade England. That the Queen's Grace should be Deposed, and
Her best Friends destroyed, especially the Lord Burleigh, the Earl of
Leicester, General for Her Highness in Holland, and Sir Francis Walsingham.
They told me, They had both worked themselves into Her Majesty's Service, and
advised me to do the same; which I accordingly did, with their Assistance, in
the way of my own Profession.

But alas! I soon neglected my Calling as a Lawyer, to engage in Affairs of
State, which was the Third Cause of my Misfortunes. Being employed to engross
an Act of Parliament against Popery, I inserted a Clause which involved the
Protestants in the same Guilt and Penalty with the Papists. Then I endeavored
to set up an Inquisition against the Calvinists, as the Duke of Alva has lately
done in Planders, which was promoted by Direction from the Queen of Scots Her
Abettors, in order to divide the Protestants among themselves.

I shall not take up your Time with recounting the several Attempts I made for
the Advancement of Popery, and of the Interests of Mary late Queen of Scots,
and Her Son James. I therefore proceed to the Fourth Cause of my Misfortunes, I
mean, the Breach of that Commandment which forbids us to bear false Witness
against our Neighbors.

Sir Nicholas Bacon, whom his Enemies allow to be the greatest Lawyer, ablest
Statesman, and truest Lover of his Prince and Country of any in his Age; Sir
Philip Sidney, that Noble Patron as well as Master of Wit and Learning; a
Personage who seems born for Courts, and the Management of the greatest
Affairs: My Lord Admiral Howard, who gave the Enemy that famous Defeat at Sea,
which they have never since been able to recover; and another Lord of the
Council, were the chief Enemies to the Queen of Scots, and had performed the
most eminent Services to the Kingdom. This my two Confederates wotted well
enough; and thereafter persuaded me to forge an Accusation against them of High
Treason. It is well known how sharp and Universal the Prosecution was, so that
if their Innocence had not appeared unblemished in every Particular, they might
probably have lost their Heads: And now my own Sufferings have brought me to a
true Sense of my Crimes, I am heartily glad that wicked Design did not succeed.

I now come to the last and greatest Cause of my present Calamity, which is, my
Ingratitude to those that raised me.

My two Companions and I, in order to pursue our Designs, began to insinute our
selves into the good liking of Sir William Cecil, L. Burleigh, who though he well
enough understood our Principles, yet observing us to be Men of some Dexterity,
and believing the solemn Protestations we made him, was prevailed with, upon
Promises of our Amendment, to pardon our past Offenses, and take us into some
Degree of Favor. We then professed the greatest Zeal for the Service of Her
Highness; but still continued our Correspondence with the Queen of Scots by the
means of a Clerk to Robin the Scrivener. At home we made our Party so strong,
that we attempted by the help of a certain Tirewoman, to bring the L. Burleigh,
the E. of Leicester, and some others into Disgrace with Her Highness, by all
the ill Offices and Representations that Calumny could suggest. Nay, we began
to hope we had made some Impression: Which fed our Vanity to such a Degree,
that I confess, I flattered my self with nothing less than immediately
succeeding Sir Tho. Bromley; semblably the Scrivener had fixed his hopes on my
L. Burleigh's Staff; and Harry Madrigall expected to come into the Place of Sir
Francis Walsington. But Her Grace immediately saw through the Design: The whole
Kingdom began to resent our Practices with the utmost Indignity: The Parliament
publicly asserted the Merit of those great Men; and we were all discarded with
the just Marks of Ignominy, to the Satisfaction of all good Subjects.

What has happened since, I need not repeat. I acknowledge my self justly
doomed to the Execution of that Sentence pronounced against me. I must now
leave you all, though notwithstanding my many Infirmities, I might by the Course
of Nature have held out Three Years longer. May Her Majesty's Grace long Live
and Reign. Amen. And I wish that every Body, but especially my Accomplices, of
whom I see several here before me, would take Warning by my Example.

When he had thus finished his Speech, he was immediately TURNED OFF, in the
Presence of above Five Hundred Spectators, both English and Scotch, who for the
Generality were very well pleased to see him make so good an EXIT.

