The FIRE's continued at OXFORD: OR, The Decree of the Convocation for burning
the Naked Gospel, considered.
In a Letter to a Person of Honor.
Honored Sir,
I Gave you in my last the state of the Controversy between the Bp. of Exeter,
and the Rector and major part of the Fellows of Exeter-Colledg at Oxford, as
well as I could collect it from the Relations I could meet with, and from their
Petition to her Majesty, before whom the Cause is depending. In the mean time,
the Gazette will inform you, The University of Oxford, in Convocation held,
Aug. 19. instant, has past their Judgment and Decree against certain
Propositions as Impious and Heretical, cited out of a certain infamous Libel --
entitled, The Naked Gospel, which (say they) impugn and destroy the chief
Mysteries of our Faith, always held and maintained in the Catholic Church, and
especially in the English. And in the Preface to their Decree, they say, it not
only denies, but exposes to scorn that very Lord Jesus Christ, who is God
blessed for ever.

Now, Sir, before I take into consideration the impious and heretical
Propositions, give me leave to give you a short Summary of the Tendency and
Design of the Book, and of the reputed Author's printing it at his own Charge,
as I am informed by some that know him, for I do not know him my self, nor ever
had any communication with him.

And first of the Author's Design in writing it. When the King had called a
Convocation to reconcile (as was hoped) to the Church of England, the several
Parties in this Kingdom, and to satisfy (if possible) the Consciences of those
who differ from it, this Author was willing to contribute to so good a Work.
But because a direct Address might appear too great a boldness (as some that
went that way afterward found) he conceived that a clear stating the first
Principles of the Gospel, would appear more suitable to so learned a Body, and
useful toward enlargement of the Mind to a comprehensive Charity. He therefore
got this Treatise printed, with design to steal a Copy of it into the Hand of
every Member of the Convocation, without publishing it to the World. No sooner
was the Impression finished, but he found the Hopes of the King, and the
Generality of good Men disappointed, by the rigor of the prevailing Party in
the Convocation; and a great Noise made about this well-design'd Book, whereof
some sew Copies had gotten abroad. The Author hereupon made some Changes in the
middle of the Book, leaving out such Passages as appeared most offensive; and
of this Impression he communicated more Copies than he had done of the former.
But now comes out a stolen Impression of the first Book, made at London, by he
knows not whom, which put it out of his power to dispose as he pleased, of a
Book that was his own.

1. By Writing, and then by Printing and Altering, wholly at his own Cost. Thus
it appears his Design was not to disturb the Peace of the Church, but to
promote it.

2. The Design and Tendency of the Book, I will presume to whisper to you, (out
of hearing of the Convocation) is such, as partly by reconciling Controversies,
partly by distinguishing necestary Articles from those that are not necessary,
and cutting off Disputes about the Modes and Niceties of things in gross
necessary; by giving such a Scheme of Christian Religion as is clear and plain
to vulgar Capacities, and apt to remove Doubts, and Fears, and Uncertainties,
and to satisfy good Peoples Minds touching their being in the true way of
Salvation, notwithstanding the many Disferences and Disputes among
conscientious Men, which they are either not able to determine, or not with
full satisfattion to themselves; to turn Men's Minds from the study of Opinions,
and Speculations, to Practical Piety, Devotion toward God and Christ, and Love
toward all Christians of all Persuasions; in the mean time making Rents and
Divisions, Heats and Animosities about Matters hardly determinable, to be
dangerous and unbecoming sincere Christians. This Book, I say, having this
Design and Tendency, were not People prejudiced against it by rash and
presumptuous Decrees and Censures, might be of as great benefit to the. World
in general, and the Christian World in special, as perhaps any Book of that
Subject that has been published these hundred Years. When you have read the
Book, I doubt not but you will be of my Mind. But for all that, I could have
wished the Author had not, by some elegant Figures of Speech, either bordered
upon Hyperbole's, or made his Mind less intelligible to common Readers, and
laid himself more open to the Cavils of his fierce Enemies, (which he did not
fear among so learned Men as our Convocation.)

For, except the manner of expression, I make no question but your own Memory
will suggest to you, that (as we say of the Holy Scriptures, they contain in
one Bundle all those excellent Precepts and Instructions, which lie dispersed,
some in one, some in another of the Philosophers) so die Naked Gospel contains
nothing but what is found by Parcels, in other eminent and allowed Authors,
whom the Oxford-Convocation dare not pass Sentence upon, though they have
appeared of late Years presumptuous enough in that kind; witness their famous
Judgment and Decree past in Convocation, July 21. 1683. declaring 27
Propositions to be False, Seditious, and Impious; and most of them to be also
Heretical and Blasphemous, infamous to Christian Religion, and destruction to
all Government in Church and State. And this at such a time, when the Court
solicited that Judgment for promoting their horrid Design of introducing
Popery and Arbitrary Government into these Kingdoms, and rooting that pestilent
Heresy of Protestantism out of all Nations; to which that Oxford-Decree was
greatly serviceable. And had the Body of the People of England been thoroughly
persuaded of the Truth, Equity, and Religion of that Decree in all the
Propositions, we could never have had the happy cause of blessing God for
delivering us from French Tyranny, and Popish Cruelty and Superstition, by the
glorious Courage and Conduct of his Highness the Prince of Orange; nor could
the Peers, and Representatives of the Nation in Convention, have sett'd the
Crown upon their most Excellent Majesty's, William and Mary; but we had in all
likelihood been for ever enslaved to a bigoted Popish King, and the Lady of
Loretto's Heirs. For it is observable, that the Vote of the Convention, which
declared K. James's Throne vacant, was grounded upon his having broken the
Contract between King and People. And that there is such a Contract, is the
Proposition condemned as impious by the same Hand which now condemned the N. G.
At this time we see that those Bishops, and others, that have thoroughly
digested the Oxford-Principles of Passive Obedience, and Non-resistanne, can
rather lose their Preferments, than swear Allegiance to our King and Queen. And
since diverse of the Clergy profess to swear to their Majesty's as King and
Queen de Facto only; Have we not reasonable grounds to suspect the
Passive-Obedience-men of the Convocation to be such? And perhaps our Author may
have somewhat more incurred their Enmity by his being (as I hear he is) a de
Jure Liege-man, and did not join his Sufferage in that Decree.

This burning Decree of the Convocation of Oxford, July 21. -- 83. brings fresh
to my Mind the most unjust Expulsion of Mr. Parkinson from that University, and
consequently from his Fellowship in Lincoln-Colledg, whereby, and from his
Pupils, he received about 120 l. per Annum; of all which he was deprived,
without any Trial, about the very time of that Convocation, and for holding (as
was pretended) some of those Propositions condemned by that Decree; and whilst
he stood indicted for the same at the Assizes of Oxford, where, and at the
King's Bench Westminster, he was forced to give attendance for about three
Years. And though he has been restored to the Liberty of the University, by the
late Vice Chancellor, now Bishop of Bristol; yet to this Day he cannot procure
restoration to his Fellowship, much less reparation of his great Damages
sustained in the space of full seven Years. How does Dr. H -- 's Conscience
suffer him to sleep while it is not done, since he was the chief Agent in that
Expulsion!

Let me enquire now how these Gentlemen-burners make good their Sentence, That
the Naked Gospel plucks up by the Roots the Primitive Doctrine once delivered
to the Saints; destroys the chief Mysteries of our Religion; and not only
denies, but exposes to scorn that very Jesus Christ our Lord, who bought us,
and who is God blessed for ever. A heavy Charge indeed, and which is to be
abominated by all Christians. But what shall we say of these Judges if they
fail in their Proofs? must they not fall under the Character of false Accusers,
and unjust Judges?

The Matters contained in the Book, from first to last, show plainly, that the
Author is neither Arian nor Socinian; for he is so far from denying even the
Eternal Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he plainly enough confesses it;
but if he both confesses it and denies it, he contradicts himself, and cannot
be said absolutely either to confess or deny it. But that he confesses it, and
denies only the necessity of understanding and believing the manner of it,
appears in diverse Passages, (which is one main distinction which the Learned
Judges ought to have considered.) As,

1. Chap. 5. page 24. Is It Edit. The same infinite, absolute, implicit Belief,
which is acknowledged due to God, is also due to Christ: Which could not be
said by one that did not believe him an Infinite God.

Again, 2. Chap. 6. page 36. Other Characters speak an unmeasurable Excellency:
but this [the only begotten Son of God] speaks an incommunicable One. And a few
Lines after he adds, That the Divinity of our Lord makes the Dignity of his
Person unintelligible, and for that very reason he is to be believed in with
utmost confidence. P. 37.

Then consider, 3. what he affirms Page 39. that our Savior in answering the
Jews, who were offended at him for having styled himself the Son of God, did
not upon so pressing occasion assert his right, but abating so much as exceeded
their comprehension -- speaks nothing of what he had been from Eternity in
himself, but what he was in relation to the World, and in comparison with other
Messengers of God to it. -- Thus did he ( like Elijah) contract himself to
their Dimensions, requiring only such a measure of Faith, as was suitable to
their Understandings and his own Designs. Here the Author, saying that our Lord
did not assert his Right, must mean his Right to that Title, which the Jews
accused him of Blasphemy for usurping, (which was, that he being a Man, made
himself God) clearly supposes him to be God. And again, in saying, he spoke
nothing of what he was from Eternity in himself: He supposes it was a Truth
beyond controversy, that he was from Eternity; and that so much the more
plainly, because it comes as part of a Discourse, which shows that our Lord did
not assert his Right.

4. What the Burners produce as Heretical in evidence of their Charge, viz.
That his Generation must needs be-so much above our Understanding, as the
Nature of God is above our own; may much more justly be produced in defense of
the Author, as a proof that he believed, our. Lord's Divinity, than be objected
as subverting the Faith of it.

Since therefore he acknowledged our. Lord's Divinity for a Truth, as we see;
the Propositions the Burners cite as denying it, must be as clear as these; or
else the Author does not contradict himself, but must be reckoned Orthodox in
the Faith. For obscure Passages ought in reason to be explicated by those that
are clear; And then the Burners fall short in proving their heinous Charge; and
all the Fault of the Author must lie in his denying it to be a matter of
necessary saving-Faith. But the great Champions of the Catholic Doctrine were
generally guilty of the same Heresy. St. Hilary wrote no less than twelve Books
concerning the Trinity, yet in the close of the 10th has these words, Non per
difficiles nos Deus ad beatam vitam questiones vocat, etc. God does not call us
to a blessed. Life by difficult. Questions, nor solicites us by a manifold kind
of Eloquence; the way of Eternity is plain and easy to us; viz. To believe that
God-raised Jesus from the Dead, and to confess him our Lord. In which words we
see, not only in the present Question concerning our Lord's. Person, but in all
others, how little of mere Belief is required to Salvation. Nor do we find the
least Hint to the contrary in the History of those Times, wherein the
Controversy raged; though they Persecuted one another, they did not Damn one
another; they contended for their Opinions, as for great Truths, wherein our
Lord's Honor was concerned, not as for Articles of Faith, whereon the
Believer's Salvation depended. Sr. Chrysostom says, All Necessaries are clear
and manifest. And Nazianzen, after thirteen Years study, calls them Fools who
too curiously enquire into the Incarnation of our Lord.

Yea, and those who were so eager for condemning the Naked Gospel to the
Flames, cannot sure but think it more dishonorable to the Savior of the
World, to believe he will damn any Man for failing of so difficult a Truth,
when he sincerely believes the clear. Gospel, than any other Error concerning
the Divinity of his Person can be.

A second Distinction which the Author might juslly have expected from such
Learned Persons, was, That the Question in debate was not concerning the
Divinity, or mere Humanity of our Lord's Person, but concerning a Nicety so
inconsiderable, that neither the Emperor nor a Council could find the
difference between the Nicene and Arian Confession. And doubtless it must be
something worse than Inadvertency that can blind any Man so far, as to disable
him from discovering, that from the beginning of the 7th Chapter to the 10th,
this Author speaks only as a Commentator upon the. Letter of the great
Emperor Constantine, wherein he equally condemns both Parties for troubling
the Peace of his Empire with such a Question, wherein it was not disputed
whether Christ were God or not, (for therein both sides agreed) but in what
manner, he was begotten, or wherein he agreed or differed from the Father.

There is a Passage which I find in the last Impression, (which perhaps is not
in many Hands, and little notice taken of it) in which the Author, by closing
that Discourse, displayeth his meaning in it, which though it be somewhat long,
I think fit to transcribe.

Page, 48, 49. [AND what is all this to BELIEVING IN CHRIST? Yea, what is it to
the PERSON of Christ? Had freedom from Persecution, suffered a Controversy to
have sprung three or four Ages before, between some that then believed Christ
to be God, and others that believed Jesus to be the Christ, but a Man born of
Men, (as we heard from Justin Martyr); the importance of such a Controversy
would have justified the Heat wherewith it should be persecuted. But here it
was quite otherwise: The Difference at first appeared very slight, and
afterward none at all: For the Confession of Arius after his condemnation was
so like the Nicene, that neither the Emperor himself, nor a Council, found any
defect in it. The angry Bishop indeed found a word wanting, but such a word as
proved too unweildy, even for those who would not dispense with it. This word
Arius omitted as no less needless than intractable: But he and his followers
acknowledged Christ to be the only begotten Son of God, begotten before all
Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God: Was not this so
believe in him? Is it not enough to believe, that as he created the World, so
he governs it? that as he promised everlasting Life to his Believers, so he
is able to perform it? that he now sees, and will hereafter reward every one
according to his Works? Does not this answer all the Designs of Faith, Love,
Thankfulness, Obedience, etc. Can none be Believers but Metaphysicians only?
Nor all they neither, but only such as fully comprehend the new-coin'd (...)
and (...), and can so nicely apply them to the Person of Christ, as to salve
all Difficulties? The Parties themselves did not think so. The leading Bishops,
in the midst of their. Heats allowed Toleration to the Dissenters, and all of
both sides during the Persecution under Julian, communicated in die same
Churches, and in all good Offices, both of Devotion toward God, and Charity
toward each other; they mutually comforted and strengthened one another in
defense of the Christian Faith: By this it appears, they did not judge one
another to be Infidels, and consequently, that the Faith to which Eternal Life
is promised, was not concerned in the Controversy.

An Evidence concurring with greater, to prove that the Creed which wears the
Name of Athanasius, was not his Issue nor Contemporary. And where is that
Church-of- England-Man, who does not so distinguish the Doctrines of that Creed
from its Censures, as to retain the former in their full import, but pull out
the String of the latter, by such an Interpretation as leaves uncancell'd our
Savior's Patent of Eternal Life to whosoever believes in him?]

These are the words of the Author, wherein he summeth up the Design of all he
had said concerning Faith toward the Person of Christ, and whereby are rendered
inexcusable any that charge him with Arianism, Socinianism, or any other hard
Character.

No! his Heresy lay not in the Book, but the Conclusion. The Conclusion was so
unlucky, as not only to contradict the Purposes, but the very Speech of those
Leaders of that Convocation. In the days of Hen. 3. the Bishops moved the
Temporal Lords to suit the Law of England to the Canon Law, by legitimating
Children born before Wedlock: The Temporal Lords answered, Nolumus L^ges
Augliae mutari, quia huc usque usu approbatae sunt. The former half of these
words, the Noble Bishop of London took for the Motto of his Standard, wherein
there was neither need nor place for the later half; and it is well known, who
with equal Wit, Wisdom, and Gratitude; threw it in his Face in that
Convocation. Could any thing more provoke such a Man's spleen, than a Discourse
so cross, both to the Determination and the Reason, as for this very Reason to
prove a Change ought to be made, because Experience had proved those Laws
unhappy in succeeding Ages, which were wisely and charitably instituted, for
that Age wherein they were first established? This was an Affront never to be
digested, but for its sake the whole Book must be condemned, and the Author
prosecuted.

From this general Apology for the Author's Innocence, I will now proceed to
take a short view of the particular Propositions, whereby the Burners prove the
equity of their Sentence and Execution.

'That Mahomet professed all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

Answ. By the first step we may see whither they are going. They quote the
Words of the Author, as the Devil did Scripture, by halves: Had they gone on,
as a Faithful Witness should do, it must plainly appear that the Author meant
not to equal Mahomet's Belief with the Christians, but to show the Design and
Success of his Pretenses: For thus he proceeds, ' Mahomet professed all the
Articles of the Christian Faith, and declared himself, not an Apostate, but
Reformer: pretending to purify it from the Corruption wherewith it had be'n
defiled, and perfect it with Additionals; he framed such a Jargon, as appeared
most serviceable to his Ends, and most suitable to his Lust. And sure their
Malice must have be'n too hard for their Memory if they had forgotten what had
be'n said, 'That the Author of the Alcoran was no other than a lewd brainsick
Scoundrel, and his Doctrines (as far as they are his) no better than
extravagant Whimsies, or lewd Panders to Lust. And again, that the Asian
Churches had their Candlestick removed by the Sword of a base Slave and his few
Followers, and by Doctrines weak as That Sword when first unsheathed, and lewd
as those Rogues that managed it. But alas! this would have spoiled the first
most Heretical and Impious Proposition, and the Author must have escaped without
that severe Character of being a Friend to Mahomet, and a Favourer of the
Alcoran, which any one will think him to be with a Witness, who shall read this
so just Decree, and never view the. Book it self: Do you not blush, Sir, at the
Ingenuity of that Person who drew out this abominable Proposition? And are you
not almost afraid, that the Learned Condemners took it upon trust, without too
laborious an Examination?

And so much for this strong, firm and laudable Foundation. Let us proceed to
the rest of the Blasphemies.

' Pref. Whether Mahomet or Christian Doctors have more corrupted the Gospel,
is not* so plain by the Light of Scripture, as it is by that of Experience,
that the later gave Occasion, Encouragement and Advantage to the former. For
when by nice and hot Disputes (especially concerning the Second and Third
Persons of the Trinity) the Minds of the whole People had bin long confounded,
and by the then late Establishment of Image Worship, the Scandal was increased,
so that to vulgar understandings the Doctrine of the Trinity appeared no less
guilty of Polytheism, than that of Image Worship did of Idolatry -- Then was
there a tempting opportunity offered to the Impostor, and he laid hold on it,
to set up himself for a Reformer of such Corruptions, as were both too gross to
be Justified, and too visible to be Denied.

Answ. The Christian Doctors had not indeed, in Mahomet's Time, so far
corrupted the Gospel as they have done since: But their then late establishment
of Image Worship, gave such scandal to the vulgar rude Arabians, that the
Idolatry which was visible therein, made them infer, that those who were so
guilty thereof, were no less guilty of Polytheism in the Doctrine of the
Trinity, which to this Day they still believe. But where does the denial of
Christ's Godhead appear in all this?

' Cap. 7. page 40. The great Question concerning the Godhead of Christ is, 1.
Impertinent to our Lord's Design. 2. Fruitless to the Contemplators own
purpose. 3. Dangerous.

Answ. The great Question was not concerning the Godhead of Christ, (for
therein both Parties agreed) but concerning the Eternity of his Godhead. They
both held he was before the World, and made the World. Judges in Criminal
Matters should not corrupt the Evidence. And whatever the Author speaks of
that Question, is by way of Gloss upon the Great Constantine's Letter, never
yet judged Heretical, (as I observed before.) Is here a Tittle of the Author's
denying the Godhead of Christ?

' Cap. 8. page 46. Two Evangelists trace our Lord's Genealogy; but as they
derive it not from his real, but supposed Father, so do they take two several
ways, not to satisfy, but to amuse us. What is this but to admonish us against
Curiosity? The Pedigree of his Flesh might easily have bin, either cleared or
unmentioned; ^ad the Evangelists bin wholly silent concerning it, We had less
wondered; but that they should profess to instruct us, yet doubly disappoint us,
first by deriving it from a wrong Father, and then by distracting us between
two ways; what is this but to verify the Propher's Description, Who shall
declare his Generation? and what does this so careful concealment of his
Generation according to his Humane Nature signify more plainly, than a warning
against searching after the Eternal Generation of his Divinity? If it were
needless (and therefore left impossible) to prove him derived from David, which
was one of his most revealed Characters; How can it be otherwise, to understand
that Generation of his, which must needs be so much the more above our
Understanding, as the Nature of God is above our own?

Answ. Matter of Fact is plain: Our Bibles show us, that the two Evangelists
derive our Lord's Pedigree from his reputed Father, and that they proceed
therein two several ways: The Inference is innocent, What does this so careful
concealment of his Generation, according to his Humane Nature, signify more
plainly, than a warning against searching after the eternal Generation of his
Divinity -- which must be so much the more above our understandings, as the
Nature of God is above our own. Here again the eternal Generation of his
Divinity is plainly supposed, so far are they from proving the denial of it.

' Page 48. And might not a Heathen at this rate justify Polytheism, provided
his Gods disagreed not amongst themselves? The Schoolmen therefore will not
stand to this State of the Question, but distinguish between Person, and
Suppositum rationale; which yet they cannot so do, as to satisfy themselves,
and therefore shelter themselves in their impregnable Fort, Mystery, and thence
thunder upon the Adversaries both of this, and of another no less beloved
Mystery: For they make this their Cock-argument for Transubstantiation; That
since the Scripture is no less express for the One than the Other, and the
Contradictions no less gross in the One than in the Other; therefore we must
embrace the One as well as the Other.

'To this Objection of the Romanists, and to others of the Vnitaries, we have
found an Answer, That we must not infer from our Own Nature to God's; for that
Ours is finite, and God's is infinite; Three Persons among us are Three Men,
because they agree in one Common Nature; but the Divine Nature is not a Common
One, but a Singular; and therefore Three Persons do not make Three Gods. If you
understand not this, you must not wonder, or at least you must not Gainsay it;
for it is a Mystery, which Reason may not pretend to fathom.

Answ. This Censurer understood well how to stop short; for had he gone one
Line further, he had discovered the Innocence of the Author's Intentions; the
Words are, Why if it be a Mystery, and must still be so, to what purpose do we
enquire into it, or dispute concerning it? which plainly show he did not intend
either to Assert or Deny either side of the Question; but set aside the whole
as not to be Understood, and therefore not to be Disputed. These Words are not
in the Author's Second Impression; so unwilling was he (it seems) to displease,
that he was at a great charge to have these and other things left out. But how
justifiable are they even in the first? for they follow Athanasius's way of
stating the Trinity, which was, That Peter, James and John are not three Men if
they be of one Mind, because then they are one in the Lord. And does it not
thence clearly follow, that a Heathen might at the same rate justify
Polytheism, provided his Gods disagreed not among themselves? But who knows not
that the Schoolmen and Moderns do generally (as the Author says) reject that
way of Arguing, as indeed introducing three Gods, one in specie, but three in
number?

' Page 51. Thus have we pointed (and only pointed) at some of the many
intangling Questions, which puzzeled, and divided the subtilest Wits of several
Ages, and were at last decided by no other Evidence, but of Imperial and Papal
Authority; sufficient to silence Disputes, but not stablish Truth. And who is
he that is not discouraged from giving a confident Assent to what is this way
obtruded upon his Belief?

Answ. This is not in the Second Impression; if it were, where is the Heresy of
it? Matter of Fact appears in the Historians; and the Inference, Who is he that
is not discouraged from giving a confident assent to what is this way obtruded
upon his Belief? What consisidering Man would not ask the fame Question?

' Cap. 9. page 53. I. There is danger of Blasphemy in Examining the Silly
Question (as he calls it) concerning the Eternity of the Godhead of Christ.

Answ. It Is called a Silly Question, in following Constantine's Letter which
calls it Silly; some of whose Words are cited immediately before -- We ought
(says he) to restrain our selves from talking, lest when we cannot sufficiently
explain the Question, or our Hearers cannot sufficiently understand our
meaning; either way the People be driven upon a necessity of Blasphemy or
Contention.

Ib. 53. 'This is a second Danger, That we have no firm ground to go upon. --

This is not in the Second Impression. But did not the Author give sufficient
Reasons for it? viz. That all are challenged by either Party with equal
assurance. Scriptures, Antiquity, and Councils too, as the Emperors chanced to
influence them. Does not Bishop Tailor say as much? Liberty of Proph.

' Page 54. The only advantage of the Catholics is long Possession, and that
after Sentence -- They have indeed so handled matters, as to hide much, and
varnish all; yet even so we may pick out enough to justify an Appeal, by
observing how that Possession was first obtained, then continued, and at last
settled -- The Sentence which first determined the Controversy [in the Council
of Nice] was not by the merit of the Cause, but Interest of the Parties.

Answ. This also is not in the Second Impression. And why, if the Sentence
which first determined the Controversy [in the Council of Nice] was, by the
Merit of the Cause, and not by the Interest of the Parties: Why did the
Catholics in after-Ages, and at this Day, impose another sense upon the Nicene
Sentence, than what was manifestly their meaning? What is this, but to make a
Nose of Wax of that Council, as the Papists do of Scripture?

' Page 56. This long and mischievous Controversy was at last settled by
Theodosius; who having received his Instructions and Baptism from a
Consubstantialist, required all his Subjects to conform to that Religion, which
Peter the Prince of the Apostles from the beginning had delivered to the
Romans, and which at that time Damasus Bishop of Rome, and Peter Bishop of
Alexandria held; and that Church only should be esteemed Catholic which
worshipped the Divine Trinity with equal Honor; and those which held the other
should be called Heretics, made Infamous, and Punished.

'This therefore we may call settling the Controversy; because thenceforth all
succeeding Emperors, and Bishops wrote after this Copy, and both the Parties
have ever worn these Titles, which the Emperor by his Imperial Power, as the
unquestionable Fountain of Honor, was pleased to bestow upon them. -- Behold
now the Ground upon which one of our Fundamental Articles of Faith is built;
behold the Justice of that Plea, which from such a possession would prescribe
to our Belief.

Answ. This is not in the Second Impression. As it is in the First, the
Historian that affirms it, is to answer for it, and not our Author. As for
those words -- Behold now the Ground upon which one of our Fundamental Articles
of Faith is built; behold the Justice of that Plea, which from such a
possession would prescribe to our Belief. I know not what that Author would say
to it; but I say, that the Catholics do, by receding from the Sense of those
Ages in that Article, acknowledge it to be weakly grounded.

' Page 57. of the Interpolated Edition. What more ridiculously silly than to
build so weighty a Doctrine upon Implicit Faith in two Bishops, partial to
their own Sees, whereof the One gave it Birth, and the Other Maintenance? and
what more odious than to prosecute as Heretics and Malefactors, all such as
should refuse to be so grossly imposed upon?

Answ. This is plainly to be understood of the Doctrine controverted in those
Times, as imposed on us as necessary to Salvation, to be believed in a modern
and unintelligible Sense, though in old equivocal Terms.

Page 57. of the first Edition. Certainly 'whosoever shall carefully observe
how the now established Doctrine was from first to last advanced by gross
partiality of the most guilty kind, and at last imposed by a Novice Emperor,
upon Implicit Faith of two Bishops, of whose Sees, the one brought it into the
World, and the other maintained it, and a new coined Tradition lately obtruded
by the guiltier of those Sees, but unpleaded, because, unheard of in those
former, long and miserable times, which it might, and ought to have delivered
from the Convulsions they suffered: Whoever, I say, shall Carefully observe
this, and withal what foul Tricks the Church of Rome used in the West, and with
what ill Success in the East, whose Churches did at last more Universally
embrace Arius's Opinion, than at first they condemned it; may be tempted to
number the Athanasian among the Roman Doctrines, and cannot but think it fairly
dealt with, if (its boasted Possession pardoned) it be left upon the same level
with the Arian, equally unworthy not only of our Faith, but of our Study.

Answ. The same Answer I gave to the former will serve to this: Is it not equal
that those Doctrines, whether Arian or Athanasian, that consist of infinite
Subtilities and Niceties, which the common Christians never could nor can
understand, which have been conceived, brought forth and nursed in such a way
of Policy, Ambition, and Persecution, as Histories inform us: Is it not equal
they should be left upon the same Level, equally unworthy, not only of the
Faith, but also of the Study of those that heartily believe whatsoever they
find in Holy Scriptures? plain Things in the plain Sense, and obscure Texts in
the best Sense they can, in consonancy to plain and clear Ones.

' Page 57. If further we consider (what the Historian expressly declares) that
at the rise of this Controversy, most of the Bishops understood not it is
meaning, we cannot think it necessary to Salvation, that every private
Christian should believe that as an Article of Faith, which the best Ages of
the Church thought no worth knowing -- [ This upon second thoughts is thus
expressed in a 2d Edition. An Opinion which so many wise and good Men as lived
within 300 Years after Christ, were so far from believing matter of Faith, that
they did not receive it as matter of Certainty, nor perhaps of Credibility.
page 59.]

'The Athanasians abhor Polytheism, no less than do the Arians. If their
Positions seem to infer it, they deny the consequence; if this contradict the
Rules of reasoning, they avow it; for they allow Reason no hearing in Mysteries
of Faith: if this make them Heretics, it is not in Religion, but in Logic.

'On the other side the Arians profess to believe of Christ whatever himself,
or his Apostles have spoken; and where one expression in Scripture seems to
contradict another, they take such a Course to reconcile them, as the Laws and
Customs of all the World direct. It is very frequent for Rhethorick to exceed,
but never to diminish the Grammatical Character of a Person, whose honor the
Writer professes to advance: and upon this account they think it more
reasonable, that those Expressions which exalt our Savior's Person to an
Equality with the Father, should stoop to those which speak him Inferior; than
that those which speak him Inferior should be strained up to those which speak
him Equal. And however this is the safer Way; since it will lead us to such a
Belief, as will suffice for that end, for whose sake alone Belief it self is
required. page 59. of the Interpolated Edition.

' To this Question, Whether any promise of God does necessarily import a
restitution of the same numerical matter?

' He answers, That the Words of St. Paul; Thou fool, that which thou sowest,
etc. plainly deny the Resurrection of the same numerical particles.

' To another Question, Whether it be more honorable to God, and more
serviceable to the design of the Gospel, that we believe the Contrary?

' He answers, That it is the same, as to ask, Whether it be more honorable to
salve all his Perfections, or to robb one that we may clothe the other.

Answ. To this and the other two following Paragraphs, I answer, That they
relate to the Differences of those Times, wherein the hot Bishops on both sides
eagerly contended with one another, to the unspeakable Detriment of the Church,
and Disturbance of the Empire: But wise and stayed Men, such as the Emperor
Constantine, and those Bishops that were his Counselors, had such an esteem of
those Controversies as our Author.

But, 2. as to our Times, and the Question about the Athanasian Creed, I see
not but that they who hold it so stiffly, and persecute their Brethren on that
score, have no mind to remove Occasions of Difference and Separation, but to
continue them; which one may be tempted to believe they would not do, but for
the sake of, some secular and base Interest. See more in the Judgment of one of
our most eminent Bishops summing up that Letter of Constantine which this
Author pressed. Infra p. 14.

This Persecution of the Author of the Naked Gospel, and the manner of it, is
so threatening, both to those of the National Church, and the Dissenters from
her, that a fiercer Persecution may reasonably be expected than any we have
seen in the late Reigns. The Example is clear in those that being of the Church
have any thing to lose pertaining to it: And for Dissenters, the Burners, and
other their Brethren, do well know that none of 'em can give assent to the
Athanasian Creed, except some Presbyterians; and non-assent let us loose all the
Penal Laws, hungry Chancellors, peevish or bigoted Justices, and rascally
Informers against them. Is this the Temper that was promised? If it should come
to this, How much worse would the Protestant National Church of England deal
with her Children, than the Papal Church of Rome? This prohibits 'em to read
the Bible, and so prevents the occasion of questioning her Doctrines: but that
gives us the Scripture to read, but will persecute us if we believe not, and
profess more than, or contrary to what is therein contained; contrary to the
common Principle of Protestants, and most expressly of this Church her self in
her Sixth Article, which says. 'The Holy Scripture contains all things
neeessary to salvation, so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor can be
proved thereby, is not to be required of any one to to believed as an Article
of Faith, or of necessity to Salvation. If they do not mean by [proved thereby]
proved to the satisfaction of every sober Man, the Church of Rome will prove
all her Articles in the same way and manner.

Thus, Sir, I take the freedom of telling you my thoughts upon this occasion;
but now I must return and ask you, whether the Learned Assembly of Burners have
proved that the Naked Gospel does not only deny the Godhead of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but ostentui habet (as their Phrase is) expose him to scorn, or make a
show of him? Do all their Exscriptions prove any part of their horrid Charge?

As for his denying the resurrection of the same numerical Particles, you know,
that since the newer Philosophy got Credit, that Doctrine is often taught in
our Pulpits, and I am informed even at St Mary's in Oxford too, besides in
diverse learned Men's Writings. Good God! when shall the Spirit of Persecution be
cast out! when will Christians learn to be just as Men, not to say loving and
tenderhearted as Brethren! They boast of the truth of their Faith, but it is
not such as works by Love. What is it to honor Christ in their Words, and
dishonor him in their Lives? Fourteen Hundred Years experience has taught the
World, that Men contend for Opinions and Speculations in Religion, for the
gratification of their Pride, Covetousness, Revenge, and the like worldly
Interests.

Though my Letter has been so long, I Will venture still to entertain you, Sir,
with something considerable about Dr. Bury, the supposed Author of the Naked
Gospel, of which I am credibly informed. To have a Book condemned long after
'twas printed, nay, when its Author and his College were struggling against
heavy Oppression in their Rights and Privileges, will put the World upon
enquiring into the Reasons and Motives of such an Action, as well as the Life
and Conduct of the Author. The Rector of Exeter College then (having done what
lay in his Power for his King) was expelled from his Fellowship, for refusing
to submit to the Visitors in 1648, and the only Person who had courage to read
the Prayers of his then distressed Mother the Church of England in the College,
when extempore Ones were in fashion; for which he was led, by a Fileof
Musketeers, to the next Port, turned out, and forbid entrance again upon pain
of Death; and he never after ran counter to so good a beginning. Would not one
think, Sir, this sufficient to procure him the respect and veneration of those
who are his worst Enemies? Had any of them fallen into Circumstances less
troublesome, what outcries, I sancy, would there have been! what writing of
Letters! what trumpeting of Praises! what noise of Loyalty and past Sufferings!
not a Figure in Rhetoric but must have been drawn dry by one Wit or other; and
had that failed, the World must have been hectored into a good Opinion. After
he was made Rector, he never did any thing that looked as if he had forgot his
first Loyal Principles, but led a quiet, sober, and unblameable Life; given
very much to good Works, as may be proved by his Buildings in the College; his
large Contributions to the Company for Relief of Clergy-mens Widows and Orphan;
besides other less visible Instances, not fit to be mentioned while he is alive:
All which none indeed can deny that will not basely wrong him. He was so strict
an observer of what he thought the Will of his Founder, that he would have
declared his own Son's Fellowship void, (staying some time longer beyond Sea
than his Father thought allowable) if not prevented by the Fellows of his
College. He wrote a Book called The Constant Communicant, dedicated to, and
approved of by his Grace the present Archbishop of Canterbury, wherein he
pleads the Authority of the Church as an Obligation so to be. Thus far he is
come, without the least: suspicion of want of Zeal for the Church, on of Heresy.

But we will not secure him for the future; for the last Public Act that was at
Oxford, he expelled one of the Terrae Filius's for being very abusive to Dr.
Wallis, and refussing to desist when commanded. This mightily displeased the
Junior Masters, and he now finds they have not forgot him. In October last he
joins with the Senior Fellows to expel another of their Degree, (Mr. Colmer).
Fellow of his own College, for Fornication; which though it has occasioned him
and his College all their Troubles, yet let us by no means say it made the
Naked Gospel Heretical and Impious. But pursue Matter of Fact about the Manner
of the Decree. After the Bishop of E. had visited E. College, contrary to their
Statutes and Protestation, the major part of the Fellows suspended for not
betraying their Privileges: One of them Excommunitated for the heinous Crime
of reading Prayers after that Suspension; the Rector himself expelled for
Contumacy, etc. and excommunciated for not yielding up his Lodgings (as you
have been informed.) While they were seeking redress from her Majesty and Privy
Council, a Petition against the Naked Gospel subscribed by Thirty or Forty of
the Masters, was publicly and rudely presented to Dr. M. Pro-Vice-Chancellor,
to be read in Congregation: but he refused, and gave it to the Vice Chancellor.
Now, pray, Sir, please to observe, that this was an irregular way of
proceeding; for the Vice Chancellor only ought to take notice of Matters of
that Nature, and Petitions are not to be tendered by great Numbers. However he
gave way so far, as to call a meeting of the Heads of Houses, where the
Business met with some opposition, it being freely said, that it was not fit
they should be made Tools for the Bishop of E -- or some such thing; yet 'twas
then referred to the two Professors, Dr. Jane (who drew up the famous Decree of
1683) and Dr. Hall, barely to draw Propositions out of the Book: the latter
declined it, and the former is said to have done it as in the Decree. In the
mean time her Majesty in Council is most graciously pleased to order the Lord
Bishop of Exeter should put in an Answer to the Rector and Fellows Petition,
and to declare a Day should be appointed for hearing. May we not think this
hastened the Decree? -- But now the Masters seeing nothing done upon the former
Petition, lay hold of a time when a Convocation was called, upon another
Occasion, to deliver another Petition, in a yet more tumultuous manner, and
with many more Hands, to the Vice Chancellor as he came out; who took it amiss,
and reproved them, saying, He did not like that way of proceeding; yet it came
at last to what the World sees. I shall not tell you, Sir, what manner of Men
promoted it, you easily by this time guess; and though the University seem to
be very sensible of the Figure they make in the World, and the Deference paid
their Opinion: yet knowing that one of the Professors refused to be engaged,
and hearing that several Heads of Houses, and others were absent when the
Decree past; considering also the Time and Manner of it, and the ill Fate of
the now exploded Decree in 1683, That the N. G. (supposing Dr. B. the Author)
ought not to prejudice him in his just Rights, (which seems chiefly designed)
and especially his College, who are nothing concerned: that it is now no Secret
who are the Engines and Movers of all this, that his worst Enemies live not far
from a place where the Prayer has not been used for his Majesty's success in
Ireland, (but just on Fast-days when it cannot be helped) no, nor that in time
of War and Tumults; that considering the Time when some things happened, one
may wish there was not some further use intended to be made of them, than the
ruining a Rector, and major part of a College; (who are notoriously known to be
as firm and hearty for the present. Government as any in the three Kingdoms);
that the University are not the proper Judges of Heresy; that they have no
Statute (as I can hear of) for burning of Books: That the Author is abused in
the Quotations; that he is only guilty of a large, generous, and extensive
Charity, neither Socinian nor Arian.

And last of all, considering that several Persons, of a Character above any of
the worthy Condemners, and no ways inferior to the best of them (if not
exceeding) in Learning and Wisdom, have declared, that upon reading the Book
they could not see any Heresy in it: I say, Sir, when one seriously reflects,
and without prejudice, on all these things, one may ver well afford to wish the
Decree just as much Success, as its Authors have shown Justice.

And here it may not be amiss, Sir, to oblige you with what has been said by
an excellent Prelate of our own Church; who has also summed up that celebrated
Epistle of the Great and Wise Constantine: which will be so entire a
Vindication of the Author of the Naked Gospel, that nothing can be so much as
whispered against him; and which Persons of free and generous Minds may be apt
to oppose to the Sentiments of the University however considerable. 'There are
some wise Persons (says this great Man, speaking of the first Council of Nice)
that think the Church had been more happy, if she had not been in some sense
constrained to alter the Simplicity of her Faith, and make it more curious and
articulate, so much that he had need be a subtle Man to understand the words
of the New Determinations. (And a little after.) Now then they that lived in
that Age, that understood the Men, that saw how quiet the Church was before
this stir, how miserably rent now; what little benefit from the Question, what
Schism about it, gave other Censures of the Business than we since have done,
who only look on the Article as determined with Truth and Approbation of the
Church generally since that Time. Socrat. lib. 1. c. 2. But the Epistle of
Constantine to Alexander and Arius, tells the Truth, and chides them both for
commenting the Question, Alexander for broaching it, Arius for taking it up;
and although this be true that it had been better for the Church it never had
begun; yet being begun, What is to be done in it? Of this also in that
admirable Epistle, we have the Emperor's Judgment, (I suppose not without the
advice and privity of Hosius Bishop of Corduba, whom the Emperor loved and
trusted much, and employed in the delivery of the Letters).

' First he calls it a certain vain piece of a Question, ill begun, and more
unadvisedly published; a Question which no Law, nor Ecclesiastical Canon
defines; a fruitless Contention, the product of iile Brains, a Matter so nice,
so obscure, so Intricate, that it was neither to be explicated by the Clergy,
nor understood by the People. A Dispute of words, a Doctrine inexplicable, but
most dangerous when taught, lest it introduce Discord or Blasphemy: And
therefore the Objecter was rash, and the Answerer unadvised; for it concerned
not the Substance of Faith, or the Worship of God, or any chief Command of
Scripture; and therefore why should it be the Matter of Discord? For though the
Matter be grave, yet because neither Necessary nor Explicable, the Contention
is trifling and toyish: and therefore as the Philosophers of the same Sect,
though differing in the Explication of an Opinion, have yet more love for the
Unity of the Profession, than disagreement for the difference of Opinion. So
should Christians, believing in the same God, retaining the same Faith, having
the same Hopes, opposed by the same Enemies, not fall at variance upon such
Disputes; considering our Understandings are not all alike; and therefore
neither can our Opinions in such mysterious Articles. So that the Matter being
of no great Importance, but vain, and a Toy in respect of the excellent
blessings of Peace and Charity, it were good that Alexander and Arius should
leave contending, keep their Opinions to themselves, ask each other
forgiveness, and give mutual Toleration.

This is the substance of Constantine's Letter, and it contains in it much
Reason, if he did not undervalue the Question; but it seems it was not then
thought a Question of Faith, but of Nicety of Dispute: They both did believe
one God, and the Holy Trinity, etc. But for the Article it self, the Letter
declares what Opinion he had of that; and this Letter was by Socrates called, A
Wonderful Exhortation, full of Grace and sober Counsels; and such as Hosius
himself who was the Messenger, pressed with all earnestness, with all the Skill
and Authority he had. Thus far that Great and Learned Bishop, Lib. Prophes.
Sect. 2.

And now let all those who are discreet and reasonable, condemn that truly
great Emperor, our own Worthy Prelate, and the ingenuous and charitable Author
of the Naked Gospel.

I am afraid I have drawn out this Account to a greater length than that the
reading of it may suit your little Leisure, but I doubt not your Pardon to,

S^R Your --
Aug. 30. 1690.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Reader is desired to take notice, that if the Sayings of the Fathers, and
other eminent Persons, were to be quoted for that purpose, for which some of
them are already mentioned, they alone would fill a Volume, and perhaps as
useful an One as any yet extant: But we shall only trouble him with one very
remarkable saying of Tertullian, Lib. de Velaud. Virg.

' Regula quidem fidei, etc. This Symbol (speaking of the Apostles Creed) is
the One Sufficient, Unalterable and Unchangeable Rule of Faith, that admits no
Increase or Decrease; but if the Integrity and Unity of this be preserved, in
all other things Men may take liberty of enlarging their Knowledge and
Prophesyings, according as they are assisted by the Grace of God.

And with one Passage out of the Naked Gospel, first Edition, page 73. line 23.
'The Author of the Gospel is a Person, not only Great, but Infinite; and no
less so in Power than Faithfulness, so that there is no place for mistrust.
Though this has not been mentiou'd in the, Letter, yet is it as plain as can be
possible, and may be sound in all the Editions of the Book, and which ought
sure to be acknowledged by the Judicious, Impartial, and Learned Condemners.

Farewell.
FINIS.

