More than Conqueror.

A SERMON Preached on the MARTYRDOM OF King Charles the I.

Jan. 30. at CHRIST-CHURCH, Dublin, Before his Excellency: ARTHUR Earl of
ESSEX, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of the Kingdom of IRELAND.

By B. P. D. D.

Published by Command.

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KINGS Most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be Sold by Joseph Wild in Castle-street, 1673.

TO THE Right Honorable and Excellent, ELIZABETH COUNTESS of ESSEX, etc.
MADAM,
WEre not my obedience to your Ladyships Commands, much greater than any
ambition of being in Print, I should not have troubled your Ladyship, or the
world, with so mean an Offering and performance; for which I should, according
to Custom, have made some solemn Apology, but that your Ladyships Name and
Patronage will be its best Vindication: a Favor, which as it transcends all
that my merit or abilities in this kind can pretend to, so I cannot but be the
more sensible of it, for having given me the honor (though unexpected) of
paying my poor little loyal humble Mite to the never dying memory of the Best
of KINGS; and thereby of publicly acknowledging likewise those Obligations,
and particularly the happiness of attending his Excellency and your Ladyship,
since my coming to this place, which subscribes me in all gratitude and zeal

Your Ladyships most devoted humble Servant and Orator, B. PARRY.

ROMANS VIII. xxxvii. Nay, in all these things, we are more than Conquerours,
through Him that loved Us.


THese words are the Christians Victory, the Believers Conquest, his Trials,
and his Triumphs, his Outward Cross, and his Inward Grace, his Temptations, and
his Glory. Can there be any thing more bitter than Persecution and Famine,
nakedness and distress, or more terrible and amazing than Peril, and the Sword.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life; and yet a
good man will not stick to part with that too, when it shall please God to call
for it, that he may hasten to his presence, and be partaker of his Glory.

St. Paul had run through a whole stage of miseries, every Sermon he Preached,
was turned into an Indictment against him, and afforded his malicious
Persecutors, fresh argument and matter to torment him with; he Travailed
through as many misfortunes, as Countries, and found every place beset with
Thieves and Murderers to dispatch him, no where safe almost, but in Prison,
fain to be guarded from one death to another, from the fury of the Jews, to
the Roman Tribunal, and make his appeal from the rage of Zealots for Sanctuary
to Nero. Shipwrack't by the Waves in one place, and the madness of the People
in another, no where safe from Storms and Dangers, but made a Sufferer in every
Element. Such was the condition of this Great Saint, who filled every place
with his Name and Memory, the wonders of his Faith and Courage, under all his
Pressures and Afflictions.

And yet it was no more, than what might justly be expected from those mighty
graces of the Spirit that strengthened and adorned his Soul, that the World
might see our Blessed Lord (when he ascended up on high, and led Captivity
Captive) took not away his Miracles and Graces, but left his Apostles to
continue and enlarge the wonders he has done, to Propagate his Truth, and
Instruct us for Heaven, That as many as through them should believe in his
name, might have power also to become the Sons of God, Heirs of the promise,
and joint Heirs with Christ, and more than Conquerours through him that loved
them.

In which words (not to insist on that obvious Doctrine which springs from
them, That crosses and afflictions are the usual lot and portion of the
Righteous, and that all who live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution) I shall consider these Two particulars. 1. The power and
excellency of Gods grace, goodness, and love, manifested in the faith,
patience, and perseverance of his servants; their invincible courage and
resolution in all their highest dangers and temptations; and the infallible
testimony and assurance he has thereby given the World, of the Divinity of his
Truth and Gospel.

2. The happy fruits, the victorious consequences and effects of this spiritual
warfare, with the rewards and triumphs that attend it, in making us more than
Conquerours, doubling and advancing our glory; heightning and augmenting our
felicity and honor in this life, and that which is to come.

I begin with the First, the excellency and power of Gods grace, goodness, and
love, manifested in the faith, patience, and perseverance of his servants;
their invincible courage and resolution in their highest dangers and
temptations; and the infallible testimony and assurance he has thereby given
the world of the Divinity of his Truth and Gospel.

How poor and perishing a thing man is once left unto himself, without
assistance from above, the whole Creation (which groans and travails to be
delivered from the burden of our corruptions) sufficiently declares; the very
sense and consideration of it extorted sighs from the soberest and wisest
heathens; and they have filled their Books with remonstrances and complaints of
the frailty and folly of their natures; the jarrs and discord of their own
frames being greater than the wars of Elements; and more destructive to the
Universe: the Contemplation of it turned one Philosopher into an universal
mourner, making his whole life one constant and continued Epitaph, weeping out
his eyes and time at the misery and infirmities of mankind; and though they
endeavored with all the arguments of reason and wit to prescribe a remedy for
their misfortunes, yet they were too hard for themselves, and found, That the
strictest Philosophy, the severest Discipline, and the highest Morality could
never perfectly reform or refine the man, so blind is every man, and the very
best of men, without the aids and illuminatious of a divine light from above.
Brag not then of thy intellectualls, or thy parts; thy activity, or thy skill;
thy old maxims, or thy new discoveries; thy fortunate reaches, or thy subtilest
enclosure; Let thy Ancestors be dwarfs and pigmies to thy vaster improvements;
and the Anakims but shrubs and mushromes to thy mighty productions; Let thy
Cedar plantations outdo their quickset, and let them be but brambles to thy
olive tree, and its fertile issues; Let the old Theater and its pomp; the lofty
Platonic, and the wandering Peripatetick bow down to our new Academies and
Models, and exploded atoms be brought back with new pomp and splendor, to
adorn the world, and make up its beauty. What are our Virtuoso-triumphs, or
their richest accomplishments and improvements without sublimer perfections in
grace and virtue, but a golden dream, or glorious apparition; an elaborate
shadow, or a studied delusion, and (which is far worse) our damnation too.
Nothing can truly cheer the soul, or enliven the mind; advance our prospect or
our progress; give life or Sunshine to our hopes and desires; and enrich the
heart with a solid, ravishing, and unchangeable contentment and delight, above
toys and trifles; storms or misfortunes, but divine love, and a victorious
faith; a firm piety, and a constant devotion: these are the miracles of the
world, the joy and glory of mankind, without which we had been still in
darkness and the shadow of death, heirs of sin, and slaves to the Devil.

And therefore it is indeed a higher act of omnipotence and love to restore the
soul than the body; to redeem from hell than the grave; to rouz the sinner than
Lazarus from his tomb: a greater miracle of goodness and power to be renewed
for Heaven, than awakened from our dust; it cost more to ransom us from our
selves and the Devil, and renew the divine image, than to make us live, or form
us out of earth and nothing. But thus did God unlock his treasury, and display
the riches of his grace, to let us fee, That as nothing is too great for his
power: so nothing should be too dear for his love; astonishing the heavens, and
amazing the earth, and making the powers of hell shake at the wonders of our
Redemption, whilst the Angels sing, and the Seraphims renew their flames and
brightness at our Conversion and glory, as if they themselves were made happier
thereby.

Stand still ye Righteous and behold the salvation of the Lord; the wonders and
rewards of his Servants Piety through the World. The 11 chapter to the Hebrews
is a Catalogue of all the Worthies that lived and dyed in Faith, and the
beginning of the next, is a Trumpet to Rouse us up to the same glory. Enoch
walked with God, the only solitary Saint of his time that conversed with
Heaven by the purities of a transcendent Devotion, the first Hermit that went
out of the way the common ordinary road of the World to walk with God, and
because there was no fit company for him on Earth (the World not being worthy
of him) God was pleased to translate him up alive to himself, that we might see
what are the fruits of a Holy life, the rewards of Piety, and the raptures of
Divine love. Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness, and when they who regarded
not his Doctrine were buried with their Sins and Riots in silence together; God
provided him a Sanctuary to preserve his name and virtue, and perpetuate his
Memorial with his Church for ever.

Abraham's Faith renewed his years, and made him fruitful in his posterity as
well as his Graces, he became the founder of Monarchies and Kingdoms; but his
noblest title of Honor was his being Father of the faithful, that was indeed a
blessing which Crowns and Scepters could not give, he believed and it was
imputed to him for Righteousness, and that was Throne and Glory enough; He
staggered not at the promise, and that established him for ever; he enjoyed his
Maker here on earth, and conversed so familiarly with heaven before he came
there, that his very bosom has been reckoned a place of Paradise ever since.
Such is the privilege and happiness of the just who lives by Faith, he cannot
dye even when he is breathless, for his life is hid with Christ in God, and
being dead unto the world, he is alive unto God, and speaks eternity in his
graces, he lives here by faith, a life of secret and invisiible joys; for, the
life of nature is but a sleep, and that of sense a Dream; but that of grace is
truly Vital, made up of the choicest Spirits, and a never-dying composure. This
is the life of a true Christian, and the greatest glory of heaven upon earth,
when we become conformable to the Death of Christ, Death has no more dominion
over us; but we can triumphantly, with our Apostle in another place, cry out, O
Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? A heart replenisht
with divine grace, is not easily frightened with stripes and imprisonment,
hardship and want, peril or the sword, or whatever else may scare a mere animal
or Coward, but prepares to meet his God, in what way soever he shall be pleased
to call him.

It Is true, it is no mean talent, no small gift to bear our afflictions with a
cheerful and pious submission to God's will. It is not for every palate to
endure the bitterness of this Cup but his, that with David, has tasted how
good the Lord is, and that the end and fruits of his Cross are deliciousness
and peace. Storms and thunders are the trials of a Christian; he that can
endure these, and not be shaken or overthrown at Root, is sit for Paradise and
the regions of peace. To follow Christ for the loaves and miracles, in time of
prosperity and triumph, is no news: they that crucified him did so; but to keep
him company in the desert, or more formidable Garden, and not shrink at the
approach of Lanthorn and Soldiers; the Traitor and the Trainband, a
midnight-terrour, or an open distress. To fall when we are in our Spring, and
be sacrificed in the pride and strength of nature; to submit to flames and
Axes, and be tormented at every Tirants pleasure, to take up our heaviest
cross, and thus dye for the name of Christ, is a temper as Rare as it is Happy,
the results of an invincible Piety and Faith, the highest strength and glory of
a Christian.

And therefore Secondly, It is a mighty proof and argument of the Divinity of
the Gospel; That the Doctrine of the Cross should find so many worshipers and
followers; That men should at first be converted only to afflictions, and made
Regenerate that they might suffer, grow in love with their persecutions, and
rejoice in nothing more than imitating the example of their Holy Lord.

It Is true we read of some Heathens, That bragged of their Valor and Courage in
the midst of their misfortunes; that they had acquired a temper of being above
storms, and could defy lightning and thunder by Laurels of their own making:
and though nothing be more noble to Conquer our passions, and be armed against
the Casualties and Calamities of this World. Yet examples in this kind are very
rare, few or none amongst them have ever done it, for even the prowdest
Stoics, and they that spoke biggest of themselves and virtue, were Cowards to
their own Rules, and fainted under the flourish of their fine discourses; and
whatever their seeming bravery might be; yet their hopes were vanishing and
shallow, neither satisfactory to the Soul, nor durable in themselves; and
though some of them are said to have endured death, rather than violate or
falsify their word and trust, they are to be commended for so doing, and it is
no error or mistake to say, that God might Crown them with more strength than
ordinary, as well to justify a good cause, as for the encouragement even of
moral virtue in this life: but yet these instances, and whatever else can be
produced in this kind, are nothing to the List of diviner Heroes in the Church,
the multitude of victorious Sufferers of every Age and Sex, who cannot possibly
be thought owners of such strength of body and mind, as to endure the torments
to which they were exposed, without a secret arm, an invisible power, and a
mighty irresistible grace subduing all before it.

And if it shall be further urged, that even amongst Christians, as Sectaries
and others (if they may be called Christians that are out of the Church) there
are some so stout, that no penalties almost can force them to recant or
renounce their errors, and return to their wits and duty again: we must say
first, That they are few for the number, and much fewer for their worth.
Secondly, That the obstinacy of bad men in a bad cause, as it does not justify
their crimes, so neither does it disparage the piety and virtue of good men in
a good; for, a notorious Malefactor is not less a Criminal for being obstinate
and unrelenting, and therefore it does not at all disparage or evacuate the
power of Gods grace, that even wicked and carnal men may seem to have a share
sometimes of the same fortitude and courage, for hypocrisy is no stranger in
the World. The best things have their Counterfeits, and it is the Devils
constant work, and choicest masterpiece, to imitate as much as he can, the
gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, and Transform himself into an Angel of light
to delude the World; but as no man in his wits will say, there is no such
thing as Truth, because some have writ Fables and Romances; so neither can we
deny the mighty operations of Gods Holy Spirit in his Church and Servants,
because there are so many liars, and pretenders to the same Spirit: since we
have a sure rule left us, by which we are to walk our selves, and judge of
others.

In a word if it be true, That it is the cause alone which makes a Martyr, than
they who have no other certificate from Heaven, but that which is common to
Brutes also; are not Saints and Conquerours but Cheats and Deceivers, and they
are Children in grace as well as knowledge, that will be thus baffled and
trepanned from their Holy faith, by such Tricks and Impostures. There is no man
living without his Cross in this World one way or other; but he that bears it
piously and bravely and endures to the end, he shall be saved, and he that
suffers for Righteousness sake is blessed for ever. What man is he that would
see good days in spite of all his Enemies and Oppressors, keep thy Soul from
evil, and thou shall be happy in the midst of thy Troubles, and what ever the
World may rob thee of; yet Heaven is thy portion, and its refreshments thy
comfort and reward, no adversity can deprive thee of that, since the more thou
art afflicted, the greater is thy Crown; and therefore no good Christian will
murmur or repine at the various methods of Gods providence in this World, that
thus exercises the faith and patience of his Servants, that their joys and
his glory may be the greater. For what ever the frailty of our natures, and the
weakness of flesh and blood may be, he that sincerely makes God his hope, shall
not want a deliverance from, or Consolation in his distress, which they that
carnally and Sceptically deride, are not worthy to receive, which brings me to
the next particular. The happy fruits, the victorious consequences and effects
of this spiritual warfare, with the rewards and triumphs that attend it, in
making us more than Conquerours, Crowning us with peace, and strength, and joy
in the Holy Ghost in this life, and eternal glory in the next.

When God told St. Paul, That his grace was sufficient for him, he triumphantly
declares, He could do all things through Christ that strengthened him; for
having made it his constant exercize and study, to have always a conscience
void of offense; he feared not the face of man, but thirsted to behold that of
Gods, and could with more zeal and pleasure lay down his life, than other men
could preserve theirs; so vast, so admirable a change can the Spirit of God
make in the soul of man, with such glory display his Omnipotence in our
weakness, His Majesty in our infirmities, and make humane misery and distress,
a Theme and Theater to display the strength and riches of his power and love.

Our Blessed Lord could have armed his Apostles, with a word to have crush't
the Earth to nothing, given them legions of Angels to prepare their way and
gather Captives; or with storms and lightning have blasted the World into
submission and Homage, and made Kingdoms tremble and bow down before them. But
he took another course, which though not so outwardly pompous, or seemingly
powerful and prevailing; was yet more wonderfully and unexpectedly glorious and
successful; making weak things to confound the mighty, and foolish things to
confute the wise, and Babes and Children to disarm Caesar's and their legions,
baffle their strength and their Philosophy together: and by humility and
patience, faith and perseverance, gain more Triumphs then by Arms and Banners,
teaching us thereby neither to trust in, nor make use of an arm of flesh in His
service, that His Gospel was not to be propagated by violence and blood, force
or murder, Treason or Compulsion, but the nobler Warfare of Obedience and
Peace. Vindicating also his Providence by bringing good out of evil, defeating
the malice of his Enemies, and the arts of the Devil; making good the Truth of
his promises in the faith and courage of his Saints and Martyrs, that his Holy
Spirit was indeed the Comforter, the Lord and giver of life, both in the Trial
and the exaltation, the exercise and establishment of their hopes and graces,
not only in supporting and sustaining their infirmities; but by inspiring them
above all the horrors of Mortality; rejoicing that they were counted worthy to
suffer for his name sake.

An honor greater (I may say) then that of Angels, who live, but not by dying,
are Ministers of his will, but not Martyrs for it; They stand before the
Throne, but their voice is not heard from under the Altar, they afford not
their Maker cause or occasion to display such variety of wonders. And therefore
for man, frail man dust and ashes not to fear death, is more wonderful and
glorious than to be above it, and to expire for Gods Truth more noble than
their immortality.

Wherefore our Holy Lord has pronounced a double blessedness to them that
suffer for Righteousness sake, the honor and the reward of persecution; Their
Memory shall be sacred and their name precious, their sufferings eternized, and
their very dust immortal, and the Kingdom of Heaven being their assured
portion, they shall at the Resurrection of the just, exchange their Purple for
a Robe of light, and their Crimson dye for a Crown of Glory, and shine for
ever, as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.

And truly were it not for this, what would the life of a Christian be, but a
miserable and empty nothing? the punishment and derision of mankind? why did
David complain that he was become a scorn to all that were round about him, he
might have turned scorner himself, and instead of being the Royal Prophet, have
been a Tyrant, or an Atheist, as proud and imperious, as the greatest Pagan or
Barbarian Monarch. For a Prince to wish himself a doorkeeper in the house of
God, and be content to leave his Throne and Kingdom flowing with milk and honey
for a new Jerusalem, was a pleasant Paradox for the Carnal and the profane to
droll at; And that the Apostles and their successive Martyrs should endure the
scoffs, miseries and torments of vulgar rage and madness, for an invisible
Kingdom, had they not the strongest convictions for proof and the highest
consolations for support, might well be looked upon as the highest degree of
folly in the world. And so no question it appears to those that are yet
strangers to their graces, and have not yet felt the least spark of that Divine
fire, which warmed them into flames and rapture; They that will not believe,
shall never find nor know what the joys and breathings of the Spirit are, how
secret and irresistible its strength, how sweet its influence, how ravishing
its charms, how powerful and divine its motions and its light.

Let the Infidels wit then grow big with his own folly, and strain hard to make
his nonsense fashionable and taking, let the Atheist and the profane sit as
dictator in his Chair, and be the founder of a new Academy, wherein to
Apostatize or Blaspheme, shall be no more a sin but an improvement. Let the
Temporizer and the Coward, the worldly mind and the false heart, follow the
fortune and flatter the sins of Tyrants; be Disciples of a prevailing faction,
and Canonize the crimes of prosperous impiety, count Treason no sin, nor
inconstancy a shame, laugh at sacrilege, and fast with the Pharisee, only to
whet their stomachs and be the more devouring, anoint their forehead with
perjury, and make long prayers even to a desolation. Let the levelling of
Churches be the Zealots pride, and the pulling down of Crowns and Scepters the
Saints privilege, let the vicious and the vile thrive and flourish for the
time, grow rich and secure in all their worldly ends and enjoyments; yet after
all there is God that judges the Earth, and who besides his vengeance
hereafter, can curse the wicked in their Graves, when they seem to have escaped
his anger, pursue their Carkases and Ruins, and make their very death but the
beginning of a worse destruction, plague their posterity, and bring them also
to an account for their predecessors crimes. Blood has a crying and a peircing
voice; it awakens the Dead and makes them speak, nay, it reaches Heaven and
will not let God alone, till he descend and revenge its cause, it was David's
fright and his prayer, That God would preserve him from blood guiltyness, if he
prayed so for himself, what must they do that murderd David. If the blood of
Gods private Saints and Servants cry from under the Altar, That of his Anointed
will pierce through sure? and when the sin seems spent or forgotten; yet the
punishment is not, that may last and pass from one generation to another, and
even in this life as well as the next, God will make it appear, that sooner or
later, he will bring iniquity to remembrance, and avenge the blood of his
Saints, and plague a guilty land with astonishment and horror.

And therefore it is the special duty and design of our present meeting this
day, to silence, if we can, the voice of innocent and Royal blood, by a
repentance loud as our sins, and also to reverence and renew the memory of a
Prince, sacred for his Government and his graces, bury him afresh who can never
dye; and whilst his murderers (barbarous after death) denied him the Obsequies
of a King, we will be his yearly mourners, and interr him afresh with a more
illustrious sorrow.

And truly no Age or People almost since the Creation, stand more in need both
of the preaching and the practice of true repentance and obedience, than the
sinful Kingdoms in which we live; for none have so degenerated from the honor
and beauty of Christianity: none have so affronted its Holy Author, and
disgraced his Gospel, despised his Word, or perverted it more. For that very
course and method which God at first appointed, and still continues to the
world to cure its confusions, creating Magistrates to keep the Peace, and
sending Kings as his own Vicegerents to heal our disorders, and strengthening
the Blessing by commanding every soul, to submit to their authority and power,
that so we might the better learn to fear and obey him. We have employed to a
quite contrary design, and as if we had never heard or learnt any such Lesson,
by a new Divinity, will neither fear God, nor honor the King; for Monarchy,
they say, is an arbitrary Government, not fit for Saints, that would rule all
as Kings themselves.

Such is the end and fruit of all popular Tumults, preached up under color of
Religion and Reformation; no noise louder, no quarrel finds more Seconds, than
that of Religion, every man turns zealot in such a cause, wherein he hopes his
own Diana shall be uppermost, and his fortune advanced by usurping his
Neighbors Vineyard for his inheritance; and accordingly they made it their
business to cry out on the Magistrate, that they might get proselytes for a
faction, and exclaim against the Church, to gain Disciples for a Reformation.
Endeavoring to find fault, first with their Prince, and then as handsomely
transferr it on his evil Counselors, out of their loyal and abundant affection
abusing him doubly. First in his person, than in his choice, committing a
double error, first in making themselves, both parties, Judges and
Executioners, and secondly, In taking a wrong course, by making Rebellion a way
to Reformation, Disobedience a remedy for pretended inconvenience, and redress
at most but small faults, by committing much more great and horrid: an Artifice
so profoundly politic and Divine, that by it no person or calling ever can or
shall be secure.

But Pride and Ambition scorn all bounds of Justice or Duty, The new, the best
and surest way to subvert the Crown, was by taking away its Supporters; And
therefore those two great Heroes and Champions of Church and State, the noble
Strafford (from whom the Reformation of this Church and Kingdom, derives the
best part of its strength and beauty;) and the pious Laud who thought nothing
too great for God and the King, were by a new found ordinance, thought the
fittest Sacrifice to prepare and lay the Scene of a deeper and more fatal
Tragedy. Princes seldom fall alone, Crowns and Miters like Twins cannot well be
parted; so great a Majesty and virtue could not go of a cheap and single
Sacrifice, but like a mighty Earthquake carry open ruin with it. And though
his Murderers like themselves denied him the Funerals of a King, they provided
him a more solemn and illustrious attendance, sending some that could not
follow him to the Grave, to keep him Company in it, mingle ruins, and Crown
his Triumphs with fresh Purple, out of their own veins. And among the rest of
those noble and Heroic persons that bled for their Prince and Country, let His
Name flourish and be Honorable in this Kingdom also, from whom (by His
Majesty's goodness) we now derive and enjoy a Governor, under whose Pious
influence and Prudent care, we may (by Gods blessing) reap as much good, as the
Church has glory by his Fathers sufferings.

And it is but a poor excuse, and worse amends after all, to tell us they never
intended so fatal a change, for had they not taken away his power, he had never
lost his life. But where did we ever yet see Tumults guided by discretion, or a
Riotous multitude observe any bounds? Never was any Kingdom thus mended, that
was not also subverted, and made a Sacrifice in its own flames: Rebellion
having once got ground and footing, knows no limits but its own Ruin, and as
it began with the Devil first, so it seldom stops till it come to Hell. And
therefore it is compared in Scripture to Witchcraft and Idolatry, because it is
the proper work of the Devil, and renders us like him. For Subjects to dethrone
and murder their Prince, and with unheard of impudence pretending to Piety and
Justice, condemn him who is the life of the law, and the faiths Defendor; is
such a piece of Religion, as the Devil never yet durst preach to Infidels and
Pagans, it is a Prodigy in nature against the common notions of mankind, worse
than Brutes, for they stand in awe of their King, not more for the strength of
his limbs than the Majesty of his temper: and does Religion (think you) command
that which is detestable to every nature under the Sun? Christianity sure has
not made Kings more weak and despicable, nor was it planted to dethrone, but
establish them better.

God never made Rebellion a grace, it is not to be found in the Catalogue of his
gifts and blessings, his Gospel gives no such Commission, nor is violence and
blood any part of its Doctrine or Discipline; The Sons of Belial are no fit
penmen for the spirit, nor does a Drum or Trumpet-lecturer become the Pulpit.
What should I now lead you to the Apostles and the Martyrs Tombs, where nothing
but peace and innocence are asleep; you shall read or hear of no Treason in
their Epitaphs, nothing to sully the brightness and memory of their Loyalty and
Religion, they never wronged Caesar when alive, and their deaths proclaimed
them his best friends.

Whence then came the noise and tumult in our ears? Where did we learn the
religious mutiny of schism and sedition, of pulling down Kings to enlarge the
Dominions of the Church, of crushing magistracy to nothing, that we might exalt
nothing; of depopulating the world, that the Saints might inherit the earth; of
taking away all Government, that we might have the more liberty to undo one
another; of crying out against Popery, that we might have no Religion; of
chasing out Superstition, that we might not serve God at all? They that thought
it idolatry to bow at the Name of Jesus, thought it none to overthrow all for
it, and make every place feel the mockery and abuse, the severe and lofty
rebukes of zealous rage and profaneness.

Kings were wont to be looked upon with more veneration and respect; and
whatsoever account we now-a-dayes make of them, yet God is so careful of their
welfare and honor, that he has strictly charged us not to touch or affront
them; their Names, as well as their Persons and Calling are sacred, I said ye
are Gods, and if so, the very thought of abusing them, is Sacrilege as well as
Treason; if they are tender to him as the apple of his eye, they may well
become precious in the sight of ours. God made man after his own image, but
Kings have it in a double manner: First, as men; and then, as Kings: by the
one, they represent his Being; by the other, his Authority. God made man to
rule inferior creatures, but Kings to govern men, and be a more immediate copy
of his power and glory.

And truly our late martyred Sovereign was such an one, the brightest
Resemblance and representative of his God every way, that was upon the earth;
One, that was above others, not more in place, than goodness and virtue; not
more Sacred and Illustrious for his Majesty, than his Graces; Crowned with as
much goodness as power, the Kingdom and the Churches glory; So eminently
Learned and Religious from his Youth, that he was thought fittest to be the
Churches Angel, before he became its nursing Father; and more than Bishop, when
he was not yet the Faiths Defender. And when he came to govern both Church and
State, did he change his temper with his fortune? Was he less good by being a
King? No, he was the Saint and Seraphim of the Throne, his presence was a
Sanctuary, and every place looked like a Temple, whilst he was there. He never
thought himself greater, than when he was upon his knees; nor brighter, than in
the cloud and incense of his prayers, throwing his Crown (with the Elders in
the Revelation) at his feet that gave it, and then mingling himself with those
Blessed Spirits in adoration and praises.

But besides his Piety, in which he has outdone all the Zealots of his Age, he
had all the virtues of Prince or Man; there were many Kings in his time, but
none so much after Gods own heart, he was the true Majesty of his Age. Others
might have larger Kingdoms, but none so great, so good a Soul. Let some brag of
their mines and treasures, and that their Dominions run parallel with the Sun,
his graces have outdone the one, and outshined the other. Let others boast of
their arms and banners, and that that Lilly which exceeded Solomon in glory, is
a part of their Coat, the Royal and Religious candor and integrity of his
soul, makes that look pale and fading to his purer virtue. So great a lover of
peace, and his peoples welfare, that he sent above thirty Messages for peace,
and ten of them in one year, in which he has clearly expressed, how great and
gracious a Soul he had, how good a Prince, how excellent a Christian.

Had Plato been alive, he might have seen his wish, a Prince and a Philosopher
together; the Throne turned into an Academy of Piety and Learning; the Muses
and the Graces keeping their Court in him; admirably skilled in all Arts and
Sciences, but in Divinity a Prince and Professor; and his rare works show it
accordingly: such mixtures of Elegancy and Religion flowing in every line, that
it is hard to say which were greater, his piety or his parts; his reason or his
faith, his Rhetoric or his Prayers; the strains of his Fancy, or the Raptures
of his pious soul; the depth of his judgment, or the humility of his mind; the
excellence of the Prince, or the Divinity of the Saint. Every thing conspired
to make him great and happy, but his graceless and irreligious subjects: Never
had people a better King, never had Prince a more ungrateful people.

And shall not his Fall awaken us, and the voice of his Blood, send us for
shelter to his, which speaks better things than that of Abels: Can so great a
judgment be silenc't, but by as high and loud a repentance; a public united
sorrow, and an universal remorse. Let Turks and Arabians, thieves and murderers
make no conscience of their Actions. Let the mad and frantic Sectary rave and
be deaf, to the voice of sober reason and Religion: but let all that call on
the Name of Christ, detest and depart from so great iniquity, and abhor the
prodigious Villainy of those monsters, that shed the Righteous and the Royal
blood: and whilst we are ashamed of them and our selves, let us prize the
memory of his graces, pay him Homage in the Grave, and give him that tribute of
Honor and obedience we denied him alive.

Yes Great Prince we will reverence thy Memory, and thy Righteousness shall not
be forgotten, thy Sacrifice shall not want Tears, nor thy Martyrdom a Trophy,
raised by our sighs; but much more lasting and eternal, we will bury thee
afresh who can never dye; nor shall oblivion sit upon thy Tomb whilst every
loyal heart shall be thy Monument, and every Eye thy mourner, every year shall
be the Resurrection of thy virtues, and our shame, thy goodness and our
ingratitude, thy glorious piety, and our infamous disloyalty. Thy Relicts shall
be sacred, and thy name precious, thy suffering Canonized, and thy death
immortal, the perfume of thy graces, and the fame of thy remains, the voice of
thy perfections and never dying piety shall be its own Chronicle and speaker;
Thou have conquered thine Enemies, and art entered into thy glory, Triumph't
over death, and art sat down in greater Majesty, and in a better Kingdom; and
what have we to do, but to imitate his piety and goodness, and make the virtues
of his life our example.

For though his Royal Successor was graciously pleased to set out an Act of
Pardon and Oblivion; yet that alone will not serve the turn or acquit us of our
guilt; but we must have Gods pardon as well as the Kings, if we would be
secure, if we would divert Gods judgments for the future, and appear with
confidence and comfort before his Tribunal hereafter.

But alas! how can we expect Gods pardon, when instead of Repenting, we are
ready to repeat our sins, and renew those fatal crimes that destroyed us,
willing and forward to warm our hands with new fires, grow bright once more in
Temple flames, and consume the Church with fresh combustions. If this be not
so, why then is there the noise and bleating of Jeroboam's calves in every
corner, wildfire-doctrine and religious nonsense, Scripture perverted to
edification, the Faith pretended against the Decalogue, and the Gospel made use
of against the Creed. When there is so much Atheism and profaneness on one hand,
and schism and sedition on the other, and so great and general a neglect of God
in us all, can we think our selves safe without sincere repentance and
reformation of our sins; or that we stand so secure, as not to fall again? God
can reach us with a secret arrow from Heaven, or meet us with an open calamity
and judgment in our faces, he can blast our pride and confidence in a moment,
consume our strength and beauty in a trice. We have had for many years such a
Vicissitude of mercies and judgments, as no Age or Kingdom can parallel, and
unless we have a mind to be rooted out for ever, from being a people professing
his Name, let us make such timely suitable returns and acknowledgements, as may
evidence our sense and care; our wisdom, and repentance; our gratitude and
obedience under all his dispensations. Let the mutability and misfortunes of
this world, fix and settle us the more on him, that seeing the uncertainty and
inconstancy of all earthly things here below, we may seriously look up, and
wisely prepare for that glory which is above the stroke of change or death,
that so having fought the good fight, and finished our course with joy, we may
have our warfare crowned with immortality, and honor, and eternal life among
the Saints in light.

FINIS.

