A Collection Of the Several WRITINGS Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord,
through that Meek, Patient and Suffering SERVANT of GOD, James Parnel; Who
(though a Young Man) bore a Faithful Testimony for God, and Dyed a Prisoner
under the Hands of a Persecuting Generation, in Colchester Castle, in the Year
1656.

In the sight of the Unwise they seemed to Dye; and their Departure is taken
for Misery, and their going from us to be utter Destruction; but they are in
Peace: For, though they be Punished in the Sight of Men, yet is their Hope full
of Immortality; and having been a little Chastized, they shall be greatly
Rewarded; for, God proved them, and found them worthy for himself,

Wisd. 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. and 5. 4. Being Dead, yet speaks,

Hebr. 11. 4. Published in the Year 1675.

Stephen Crisp HIS TESTIMONY Concerning James Parnel
IT was the Care of the Holy Men of Old, To keep in Remembrance the Words and
Works which sprang from the blessed Power of God, and therefore did record the
Words of many Prophecies, and the Histories of many Battles and Wars, in which
the Arm of God was manifest; and whenever God Crowned any with Worthiness and
Honor, as his Witnesses of his Word and Power, this was commonly added unto
the Renown of their Noble Acts and Faithful Testimonies, That their Name and
Manner of Life was committed unto the Generations that followed after; insomuch
as one said, The Righteous should be had in Everlasting Remembrance; and
another said, The Name of the Righteous was Precious; and many other such like
Sayings are there in the Holy Scripture: Christ said to her that anointed him
with the Box of Ointment, Wherever the Gospel should be preached, this Charity
and Love of hers, bestowed on him, should be spoaken of. And if ever any Age
had Cause to prize and keep in Remembrance the Words and Sayings, Great
Deliverances and Spiritual Battles, and Mighty and Noble Acts of God, wrought
by the Finger of his Power, sure this Age has C^use to be diligent in
gathering up and keeping in Remembrance the Mig^ty Works of Wonder, which our
God has wrought in our Day, in which he has brought forth Life, Peace, Rest
and Joy to a ^emnant by a Way which the Wise and Prudent of this World were not
nor are not yet aware of* but Babes have been his Messengers, and Children have
been his Ministers, who in Innocence have received the Revelation of his holy
Spirit, by which the Deep Things both of his Law and of his Glorious Gospel of
Life and Salvation were revealed. And among these Babes, who thus came to
receive the Knowledge of the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, by the Working of
his divine Power, was this Noble Child, JAMES PARNEL, who was a Vessel of
Honor indeed, and Mighty in the Power and Spirit of Immanuel, breaking down
and laying desolate many mighty and strong Holds, and Towers of Defense, in the
which the old Deceiver had fortified himself and his Children. Much might be
spoaken of this Man, and a large Testimony does live in my Heart to his blessed
Life, and to the Power and Wisdom that abounded in him, but I do not intend at
this time to write much about him, but to give the Reader a brief Account of my
Certain Knowledge, which I had of Him, and his Life, and Labors, and End.

As to his Country and Manner of Life, and how he was about the Age of Fifteen
or Sixteen Years brought to the Knowledge of God, and to the Working of his
Power in him, and how he obeyed the same in many Travails and Trials, until he
came to be about Eighteen Years of Age* all this, I say, it being spoaken to in
another place, and before my particular Acquaintance with him, I shall pass
over, and only speak of things within the Compass of my own Knowledge.

When he was about Eighteen Years of Age, the Lord (who had heard the Cry of
his own Seed) put it into the Heart of this Young Man to come in^o Essex, and
to preach the Word of Life, and to proclaim the Acceptable Year of the Lord
there, where it might indeed well have been said, Behold, the Fields are White
unto Harvest; For, very many were there in that County, who were both weary and
heavy laden with their Sins, and were as weary with running to and f^o, to seek
a Way out of them; and having travailed all Mountains, and all Hills and High
Things, that could be travailed and tried; and found no Deliverance; and some
sat down concluding, If there was a Way, God would manifest it; others
concluded, There was no Way, but we must dye in this Wilderness, and never see
the Bread of Life; some oaths set their Wits on work, to find out and invent
New VVayes and Manners of Worshipping, but all was in vain; and great was the
Darkness and Sorrow of those days, which some can yet well remember; and when
all Hearts were ready to faint, and all Hope was almost at an end with some,
and when others had built their Tower of Profession so high, that they
conce^ted it did touch the Heavens it self; then, I say, then did the Lord send
this his F^ithful Messenger, endued with Power from on High, to preach the
Acceptable Year of God, and the Day of Vengeance, to comfort them that mourned:
His Coming was in the fore-end of the Year 1655. Where He preached the Gospel
in many parts of that County, as, Felsted, Stebben, Witham, Coxal, Halsted, and
many other places, where many hungry Souls had gladly received the Word of
God, and it being mixed with Faith in the Hearts of them who heard it, it
became Effectual to the saving the Souls of many: And after he had passed up
and down many Parts of that County, and planted di^ers good Meetings, and
confirmed them that had believed; he at length, about the middle of the Summer,
the same Year, came to Colchester, upon the seventh day of the week, and on the
day following preached the Gospel unto many Thousands of people, first in his
Lodging; then in a Steeple-house there, after the Sermon; then in a Great
Meeting, appointed on purpose; and after that disputed with the Town-Lecturer
and another Priest in the French-School, all in One Day: in all which the
Wisdom, Power and Patience of Christ appeared very Gloriously, to the
Convincing of my self and many more, who were Witnesses of that day's Work: So
he spent that week in Preaching, Pray^ng, Exhorting and Admonishing, turning
the Minds of all sorts of Professors to the Light of Jesus, which did search
their Hearts, and show their Thoughts, that they might believe therein, and s^
might become Children of the Light; and many did Believe, and found it so; and
others were Hardened, and Rebelled against the Appearance of Truth, and became
Enemies, with whom he Disputed daily in great Soundness, and in the Evidence
and Demonstration of the Spirit, by which also many were reached, and convinced
of the Truth, and the Mouths of G^insayers stopped; which made many gnash their
Teeth on him; and some undertook to club out the Priests and Professors
Arguments by beating this dear Lamb with Fists and Staves, who took all
patiently; as particularly, one who struck him with a great Staff as he came
out of one of the Steeple Houses, called Nicholas, and said, There, Take that
for Jesus Christ's sake;To which he returned this Answer, Friend, I do Receive
it for JESUS CHRIST' s sake:

And many other intolerable Affronts were offered him, in all which his Spirit
was not seen to be raised in Heat or Anger; but was a Pattern of Patience and
Meekness: And having labored in that great Town about Ten Days, it lay upon
him to go back to Cogshall (to a Meeting holden as a Fast, of which read more
in that part of his Writings, called, The Fruits of a Fast) from whence he was
committed to Colchester Castle, and from thence had up to Chelsford Assizes in
Irons, and again thither re-committed, where he remained until he offered up
his Life for his Testimony. He lived in that Castle about Ten or Eleven
Months, in great Self-denial and Carefulness, being truly watchful over the
Flock of God both in Essex and in Cambridgeshire, Huntingtonshire and the Isle
of Ely, and elsewhere, where he had travaled, and turned many to God, and wrote
many blessed and heavenly Epistles, both to particular Persons, and to the
Churches in general, which were so many, that we have no certain Account of
them, nor cannot place them in order as we would, if all could be collected
together; but those Books and Papers, which could be found, are here composed
for the View of those who desire to taste the first Fruits of this Tender
Plant; who in the Days of his Youth laid down his Life for his blessed
Testimony: Many Things he suffered in that Prison, which is other-where in this
Book to be found. And as he lay in Prison, he labored for the building up of
them that were Convinced; and he saw the Desire of his Soul concerning many, in
whom he saw the Seed which he had sown Multiply and Grow, to his Refreshment.
And at last, having passed through many Trials and Exercises, both Inward and
Outward and fulfilled his Testimony in Patience, Courage and Faithfulness, and
been a Comfort to us who had believed, He at length laid down his Head in Rest
and Peace, stretching forth Himself, saying, Here I Dye Innocently: And after
his Departure he was buried in the Castle Yard, where other Prisoners use to be
buried, because the Cruel Jailer would not deliver his Body without Fees. And
though he be, as to the Outward, taken away, his Life does remain, and his
Testimony does yet live in the Hearts of many, and will live through
Generations to come; and happy and blessed are and shall all they be, who are
Partakers thereof, and are Faithful therein, they shall be also Partakers of
that Crown Immortal with which He is Crowned.

Thus, honest Reader, have I given thee a brief Account of this dear Plant of
God, and of his blessed Fruit, some whereof thou may find in this following
Book; which, if read in Sincerity and in Uprightness of Heart, will tend to thy
Benefit, and will give thee Cause, with me and many more, to bless the Lord on
his Behalf, who is the Wellspring of Life, from whom all Good Gifts come, and
to whom all Glory and Honor does belong, now, henceforth and forever, Amen.

Stephen Crisp.

Samuel Cater's TESTIMONY Concerning James Parnel
COncerning our Dear Friend and Brother, James Parnel, I have this Testimony to
bear for him, in a true Remembrance of him, as being Turned unto the Truth of
God by him; through Obedience unto which Heavenly Light and Truth of God
within, which he turned me unto, I have found and do enjoy Peace with God; so
that although the Dark World and Envious Priests and Professors Raged against
him, Imprisoned him and Persecuted him unto Death, and made Lies of him when he
was dead, speaking Evil of him, accounting of him a Deceiver when he was alive,
I do say, He was unto Me a True Minister and Messenger, sent of God, who
brought Tidings of the Way of Life and Salvation unto me, and many more in
these Parts of the Nation, whom, I know, have the same Testimony to bear for
this Innocent Man; For God has made us Seals of his Minist^y, through a
blessed Experience of the Work of Regeneration, brought to pass by this
Heavenly Light and Everlasting Truth, unto the which he turned our Minds. And
this I can say also, As the Lord was pleased to call him into his Blessed Work,
so he furnished him with Virtues suitable for the same, according to the Work of
the Day in which he brought him forth; and did mightily appear for him and with
him, in giving of him Courage, and Wisdom, and Power, whereby he was Prepared
and Fitted for every Service and Exercise y^ the Lord called him unto; which
Service he faithfully performed of a Ready Mind, and with a Willing Heart, not
neglecting: Nor did he refuse to appear in any Service, in which his Testimony
was concerned, which God had called him to bear, although it were to the
Ieopardy of his Life, which many times he did, both in Going to Steeple Houses
and amongst the Rude Scholars in Cambridge, both in Disputing with them, and
Declaring the Truth.

And after he went from Us, he was moved of the Lord to go into Essex, where he
was gladly received by the Honest-hearted, which wanted the Knowledge of the
Lord and his Ways, which he declared unto them; and many there were that
Received him, and Believed in the Truth which he declared? But the Envious
Professors ro^e up against him, in Cain's Murdering Spirit, and cast him into
Prison, and there kept him in Hard Bonds until Death, at whose Doors, Hearts
and Consciences the Guilt of this Innocent Man's Blood lies, which all their
Outward Washings, nor Carnal Ordinances, nor Outside Performances, neither
could nor can purge away; but the Judgments of the Lord have been, and yet will
be executed upon all that have had a Hand, or have taken a Part with them in
shedding of Innocent Blood, which the Lord will not acquit.

And now, as to the Person, Virtues and Parts of this our Dear Friend, it is
something upon me to give some Account of, as having a Certain Knowledge of
him, not only because I was turned unto Truth by him, but my Heart loved him,
which Love constrained me, as often as I could, to be with him; so that what
Service he had in these Parts, in Meetings of Friends, or amongst Professors,
or with Priests, I was frequently with him; whereby I was both Eye and Ear
Witness of the Mighty Power and Wisdom of God, that attended him, by the which
He was prepared for every Work and Service which he was called unto, and which
he performed to the Honor of God and Comfort of his People, and to the
Confounding of those that Opposed the Truth. He was but Young in Years, and of
a Little Stature; for the which he was by Brutish, Envious, Persecuting Priests
and Professors Mocked, and by them in a scornful Mind called, The QVAKING BOY:
but in him was seen the Mighty Power of God. When any of them that were climed
up so high in their Imaginations, and strengthened themselves in their
Self-righteousness, and came forth in the Strength of the power of Darkness to
Oppose the Truth of God, which he bore Testimony unto, with him did then appear
the Name and Power of the Living God, which was with the little Stripling,
David, in which Name and Power he many times stopped the Mouths of Gainsayers;
and by the Wisdom of God that was with him, he caught the Wise and Crafty in
their own Snares, and Confounded them in the sight of all that had an Eye to
see, and so brought shame upon them; whereby the Saying is fulfilled, That by
Weak things the Lord would confound the Mighty, and things that are Despised
has God chosen; yea, and things that are not, to bring to nothing things that
are.

He had also a good Gift to declare the Truth, and was full of Zeal and
Heavenly Courage, in the which he performed the same, for the informing of the
Minds of those that wanted the Knowledge of the Lord; also, to Mark Out and
Make Manifest the Deceivers, which People were to turn from. His Exhortation
was unto Us, that were turned unto the Truth, To Walk in it, and to Watch unto
it, and to Keep Low in God's Holy Fear, and to Deny our selves, and Take Up the
Daily Cross to our own Wills, and to be Faithful in that Little Appearance of
Light and Truth which we had already received; always declaring unto us, That
if we were Faithful in that, the Lord would make known more unto us; whose
words many of us are now Living Witnesses of the fulfilling of; Blessed be the
Name of the Lord forever and for evermore, says my Soul.

Also, He was a Good Example and a Pattern in his Life and Conversation unto
us, by the which he preached Truth unto us, as well as by his Words; for He
himself lived according to what he taught us; for, he was adorned with Gravity,
and walked before us in Humility; yea, he had a Blameless Conversation, and was
unspotted from the World; so that his Presence, as well as his Words, was a
Strengthening and a Comfort to the Upright and Honest-hearted; but he was an Awe
and a Dread to the Careless and Disobedient, which made a Profession of the
Truth, but did not walk Answerably thereunto, who he always told should be
clothed with Rags, which could not cover them, and their SHAME should appear,
and they left Naked; for, the Light and Day of the Lord was come, that would
make all manifest, and strip off all False Coverings, so that a Profession,
although it were of the Truth it self, would no longer do, nor cover, without
the Life and Power be known and witnessed, which does not only Discover Sin and
Evil, but also Overcomes it, Removes it and Takes it away: The Truth of this
Doctrine, which he preached unto us, there are many of us, by the good Hand and
Power of the Lord have and do see the Fulfilling of this Honest-hearted Young
Man's Testimony, both on them that received the Truth, which he preached, into
an Honest and Good Heart; and also, upon the Careless and Disobedient: so that
I shall and do conclude in this Testimony concerning Him, That He was a
Faithful Servant and Messenger, sent by God to Declare the Way of Life unto
them that wanted the Knowledge of it, and to Reprove Sin, and to Make Manifest
Deceivers, and to Testify against them, which may be seen and felt, to the
better Satisfaction of them that never saw his Face, in reading over his own
Books and Epistles, which were written by his Own Hand, which all that read
with an Honest Heart and in a Serious Mind, I doubt not but will say with me,
Surely the Mighty Power and Wisdom of the Lord was with him of a Truth.

Samuel Cater.

Thomas Bayles HIS TESTIMONY Concerning James Parnel
THis Blessed Man, the Writer of these following Books, was made a Partaker of
that Faith and Patience through which the Righteous in all Ages obtained the
Crown of Life, and Victory over all their Enemies; and had a share in his Day
and Time (as always they had in this World) of the Sufferings of Christ in him.

He was sent into this County with the Testimony of God in his Heart and Mouth,
and therefore was Bold in the Name of the Lord to cry REPENTANCE in the Ears of
the Sons of Men; and as He said, so lived he, as many in this Town and Place
are living Witnesses of, who have true Cause to bless and praise the Name of
the Lord, and do, for that He and other of his Brethren were sent among^^ us.

He was of a sweet Savor of Christ to the Almighty God (through his
Faithfulness to him who sent him hither) in them who received his Testimony,
though many there were that hardened their Hearts against the Lord, of which
Number were many of the Rulers, Priests and Professors of that Time, who,
notwitstanding they cried, Reformation, the Ordinances of Christ Jesus,
Christian-Duties, and the like, yet manifested themselves of that Stock and
Generation which always slew the Righteous: and the Lord God soon stretched
forth his Righteous Hand of Judgment upon some, as Warnings unto others, whom
he spared from that swift Stroke, that they might Repent (as some did) and seek
his Face, who is the Light of the World, God blessed for evermore.

He was as a Youth, and mean in h^s Outward Presence and Appearance; but God
has chosen the Foolish Things of this World to confound the Wise: And so high
was the spirit of the Professors (and the Profane encouraged thereby) that
with whom among such was his Name used, but in a way of Derision and Scorn?
terming him, The Railing Fellow in the Castle; He owneth himself to be Christ
Jesus; A Wandering Star, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness forever.
But since it came to Light, and the Wandering Stars seen, and their Blackness
of Darkness felt, who durst not stand by their Ordinances, Duties nor
Christianity, but in Obscure Holes, Secret Places and Vaults; which shows them
of a low, dark, earthly, wandering spirit, who know not the Spirit of Life from
God, nor the Stability thereof, to set them above the Fear of Man, where they
lie in great Captivity.

The Lord has put it into my Heart (in the blessed Remembrance of his Innocent
Life) to bear my Testimony upon this Occasion, and thus to appear in the
Memorial of him: And I am assured in my Spirit, That although the Lord suffered
him to be cruelly kept in Bonds until Death, and to be hated and persecuted
beyond what we had known before amongst us, yet it was for his Righteous Life
sake (as from his Enemies) and testifying against the gross Hypocrisy of that
Day.

And this I have to say concerning him, and it (...) in many, and shall not
dye, That he was an Innocent, Man, and lived in the Testimony and Fea^ of God;
that he sought nothing here for himself, but alone labored and travi^ed that
People might be brought into the Knowledge and Love of God; and had he bin
otherwise spirited, he should have had Acceptance with many of h^s Enemies, I
believe: And as he was an Innocent Man, so he lived Innocently toward all men,
and so he dyed Innocently, as himself estified a small time before his
departure, Here I Dye Innocently: And as several (who were with him) were
Eyewitnesses of the some, and is entered into the Bosom of the Eternal Rest
with God forever.

His Testimony was, That God was Light, and that Christ, who proceeded and came
from God, did enlighten every Man that comes into the World, that all Men
through him might believe; which Testimony of Truth bearing, although it was
rejected by many, and the heavenly Light of the Lord too mean an Appearance for
the aspired Minds of those Days ^o submit unto, yet accepted of was it by
some, who by it soon were taught to take the Yoke of Christ upon them, and to
receive his holy F^ar into their Hearts, and were blessed of the Lord,
prospered and increased, although therefore persecuted and reviled by the
Ungodly Generation, who turn away their Eyes from the Reproof of Instruction,
because of the Reproof thereof, and preserved through many grievous Trials and
Tribulations (through their faithful Obedience in the Light) Valiant for the
Truth upon the Earth: so what Acceptance ever had the Righteous in this World,
by the men and spirit thereof, is apparent by Scripture and Historical Account,
and our Experience does confirm the same, viz. Persecution and Cruelty, Prisons
and stinking Holes, Banishments and Death, Destroying of the Goods and Estates
of the Innocent (and what do I behold at this day!) I never saw or read of a
Lamb worrying a Dog, nor an Innocent Sheep to tear or devour a Wolf: What
Christianity or Holiness is that which hurts and destroys, and thinks
thereby of doing God good Service? Surely it is not to be found in all God's
Holy Mountain, says the Lord. And so, The Name of the Righteous is had in
Everlasting Remembrance, and his Memorial shall shine forever and ever.

In true Faith and Assurance (as a Brotherly-Testimony to my deceased Friend's
Innocence) is this written, that it may be known from one who was acquainted
with his Life and Death in this Town, that the Lord was with him in his Life
and Death, that those who are yet in being, that had a Hand in his S^fferings,
or consented, may Repent: Repent unfeignedly, and seek the Lord while He is to
be found; for, if thou art found out by Him to be a Blood-guilty Man, and
know not his Hysop in thy Day of Visitation to have purged thee, know thou,
that the Lord God will give thee Blood double to drink in his Day of Judgment,
with Horror and Destruction for evermore.

^olchester, the 7th of the 7th Month, 1671. Thomas Bayles.

A TESTIMONY Concerning the Sufferings and Death OF James Parnel
I Having a Knowledge of J. P. the Author of these Books, and being an
Eyewitness of part of his great Sufferings, he under-went for the Testimony of
the Blessed Truth, which he sealed with his Blood, being persecuted by a
Professing Generation, who, though they made great Pretense to Christianity,
yet they were upon Trial found to be such who were born of the Flesh, who
always persecuted them that were born after the Spirit; and were like the
Professing Jews, who reckoned they were of the Stock of Abraham, and that he
was their Father, when they were of their Father the Devil, doing his Works,
Persecuting the Innocent. And that the Remembrance of the Great Suffering of
this our Dear Friend and Brother JAMES PARNEL may not be extinguished, I shall
insert a full Relation of his Imprisonment and Death, as follows.

The said JAMES PARNEL being moved of the Lord to go to a Steeple-House at
Coggshall, the Priests and the People having appointed a Fast (as they said)
against Error, the 12th Day of the 5th Month, in the Year One Thousand Six
Hundred and Fifty Five; after the Priest had Ended, James spoke a few Words to
them; so passing forth of the Steeple-House, one called Justice WAKERING
followed him, and clapped him on the back, and said, He Arrested Him, although he
showed no Writ; and by the means of diverse Priests he was (by Dionysius
Wakering, Herbert Pelham, Thomas Cook and William Harlakenden) committed to
Colchester-Castle, and there kept close up, and none of his Friends suffered to
come near him; and from thence, at the Assizes, was carried to Chelmsford,
where they kept him on the Chain Day and Night; but when he appeared at the
Bar, the Chain was taken off, only had Irons on his Hands, where Judge Hill
urged the Jury to find him guilty, declaring what he could against the Prisoner
to them, and would not suffer him to speak to the Jury to clear himself; so the
Judge fined him Forty Pounds, and to be committed Close Prisoner till Payment;
and gave Charge to the Jailer, Not to let any Giddy-Headed People (as he called
them) come at him; so the Jailer denied his Friends to come to him, to Relieve
him, and would not let them in; but such as came to Abuse, Scorn and Beat him,
they let in to him; and the Goaler's Wife did set her Man to Beat him, who
threatened to Knock him down, and make him shake his Heels; and she her self did
Beat him several times, and swore, She would have his Blood: And sometimes they
would not let him have any Victuals brought to him; other times, they would set
Prisoners to take away such Victuals as was brought to him; and would not let
him have a Trundle-Bed, which his Friends would have brought him to lie on; but
forced him to lie on the Stones, which in a wet season would run down with
Water; and when he was in a (Room for which he paid Four Pence a Night) he was
threatened if he did but walk to and fro in it: Then they put him in the Hole in
the Wall, which is very high from the Ground, and where the Ladder was too
short by Six Foot; and when his Friends would have given him a Cord and a
Basket, to have taken up his Victuals in, they would not let them (though they
much desired it) but he must either come up and down by a Rope (or else Famish
in the Hole) which he did a long time: But after a long Suffering in this Hole,
where there was naught but Misery, as to the Outward Man, it being no Place
either for Air or Smoke (and James being much benumbed in his Naturals) as he
was climbing up the Ladder, with his Victuals in one Hand, and coming to the
top of the Ladder, catching at the Rope with his other Hand, missed the Rope,
and fell from a very great Height down upon Stones, by which Fall he was
exceedingly Wounded in the Head and Arms, and his Body much Bruised, and taken
up for Dead: Then they put him in a little low Hole, called the Oven (which
place was so Little, that some Bakers Ovens have been seen Bigger then it,
though not so high) without the least Air, Hole or Window for Smoke; neither
would they suffer him to have a little Charcole brought in to prevent the
Smoke: And after he was a little Recovered, they would not suffer him to take a
little Air, which was but once desired by him, feeling himself spent much for
want of Breath: And although some did offer their Bond of Forty Pounds, to a
Justice (so called) and another to lie Body for Body, that James might have but
Liberty to come to their House while he was well, and to be returned again when
he should be Recovered, and that if he Dyed, they should have his Body; but
they would not, their Wills being unalterably set in Cruelty against him: And
it was desired, That he might but walk in the Yard? but it was said, He should
not have so much Liberty as to walk to the Castle Door; which was strictly
executed; for, the Door being open, he did but walk forth into a Close Stinking
Yard before the Door, and the Jailer came in great Rage, and locked up the Hole
where he lay, and shut him out in the Yard all Night, being in the Coldest Time
of all Winter. And seeing that their Rage did more and more increase, and there
was an Addition to his Sufferings daily, and seeing there was no way to
satisfy their Malice, but his Blood, and seeing his Life could not in all
likelihood be continued long in that Place and Condition he was in, there was
no little Labor and Means used to lay it before the Highest in Authority, yea,
more concerning that Man (that his Life might have been saved, and they kept
from Innocent Blood) then ever was concerning any (if not all) that ever were
Imprisoned of our Friends for some Years before; but no Mercy could be found
amongst them; and though they were told of his Wounds, Weakness and Ill Usage,
yet would not believe it, till he was Dead; and then some, who were his
Persecutors, used their Wits to cover his Sufferings from being known, and
would cast it upon himself.

At his Departure there were present with him, Ann Langley and Thomas
Shortland, who related his last words as follows, viz. HERE I DYE INNOCENTLY;
and further said, NOW I MUST GO; and turned his Head to Thomas, and said, THIS
DEATH I MUST DYE; and further said, THOMAS, I HAVE SEEN GREAT THINGS; and bad
him, That he should not hold him, but let him go; and said it over again, WILL
YOU HOLD ME? then said Ann, Dear Heart, we will not hold thee; and then he
said, NOW I GO; and stretched out himself, and fell into a sweet Sleep, and
slept about an Hour (as he often had said, that ONE HOUR's SLEEP WOULD CURE HIM
OF ALL) and so drew Breath no more.

This is the Substance of a Relation given (of his Sufferings and Death
heretofore printed) in a Book entitled, The Lamb's Defense against Lies,
published soon after James Parnel departed.

Thus did this Valiant Soldier in the Lamb's War Conquer through Sufferings,
and has laid down his Head in Peace forever.

London, the 29th Day of the 6th Month, 1675. Written by a Lover of the
Faithful Followers of CHRIST JESUS, ELLIS HOOKS.

A TABLE OF THE Principal Heads Contained in this Book.
I. A Trial of Faith; wherein is discovered the Ground of the Faith of the
Hypocrites, which perishes; and the Faith of the Saints, which is founded upon
the Everlasting Rock, page 1. II. Christ Exalted into his Throne, and the
Scripture owned in its Place. 11. III. The Trumpet of the Lord Blown; or, a
Blast against Pride and Oppression, and the Defiled Liberty which stands in the
Flesh, 28. To the Libertine, whose Liberty stands in the Flesh, 41. To all
Scoffers, Scorners, Reproachers and Revilers of the Children, Servants and
Messengers of God, 49.
IV. A Shield of the Truth; or, the Truth of God cleared from Scandals and
Reproaches, cast upon it by Scandalous and Reproachful Tongues, which the Devil
in all Ages did make use of, whereby he Blasphemed the Truth of God, striving
to present it Odious to the Eyes and Ears for all People, that so he might
uphold his own Kingdom. page 55. Concerning the Name Quakers, 58. We are
Accused to be False Prophets, False Teachers and Deceivers, etc. ibid. We are
Accused to deny the Scriptures, 68. We are Accused to deny the Baptism, 67. We
are Accused to deny the Supper of the Lord, 68. We are Accused to deny all
Prayer, 70. We are Accused to be destructive to the Ministry, 72. We are
Accused to deny all Magistracy and Government, 81. We are Accused to be
destructive to all Superiority and Honor, Breeding and Manners, etc. 85. We
are Accused to say, That we are Perfect, without Sin, 97. We are Accused to
deny Christ come in the Flesh, 104. We are Accused that we Judge People, 105.
We are Accused to deny the Church, 107. We are Accused to deny the Sabbath,
108. We are Accused, That we Justify our selves, and Condemn all others, 109.
We are Accused to be one with the Ranters, 111. We are Accused, That the Ground
of our Religion is Popery, page 113. A few words to all you Heads, Rulers and
Magistrates, of what Degree soever, 115. To all who are convinced by the Light
of God in your Consciences, 118.
V. The Watcher; or, The Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, striking
at the Feet of the Image, whose Head is Gold, and Breast of Silver, and Thighs
of Brass, and Legs of Iron, and Feet part Iron and part Clay, 121. A Relation
of several Passages that James Parnel had with the People called Baptists in
several Meetings, with the Occasion of the First Meeting, 180. A Copy of some
Queries, which were sent to the Baptized People in Fenstanton, 188. The
Occasion of another Meeting between the People called Baptists, and the People
called Quakers, 196. Another Meeting between the People called Baptists, and
the People called Quakers, 208. The Excommunication of Ezekiel Cater and Samuel
Cater, out of the Baptists Society; with their Answer thereunto, 225. A Word to
all who are still in their own Formings, Self actings and Imitatings, 230.
VI. The Fruits of a Fast, appointed by the Churches gathered against Christ
and his Kingdom, who go about to mock God with their Outside Worship, and
Appointed Fasts, and Days of Voluntary Humiliation; or, a Declaration of the
Persecution of a Messenger of the Lord, by a People who go under the Name of
Independents in Essex, who have set themselves in the Enmity of their Spirits
to oppose the Truth of God, calling it a Lie, and Persecuting his Messengers as
Deceivers and Wanderers, wherein their Persecuting Spirits are made manifest,
and them to be in Cain's Generation, and Strangers to the Spirit of Christ,
which were persecuted, and so are none of his. And also, of the Unjust Dealings
of Judge Hill, who sat upon Life and Death at the Assizes at Chelmsford, 229.
A Reply to his Mittimus, 250. A Copy of some Queries, that were sent to the
Justices, so called, 266. The Copy of a Note, that was written against the
Idol's Temple, 271. Several Queries, that were sent to four of the Chief
Priests in Essex, 274. The Copy of a Letter writ to Judge Hill after the
Assize, 282. A few Words unto you, who call your selves Gathered Churches, and
go under the Name of Independents in Essex, 286. A few Words to Friends in
Essex, 291.
VII. Goliah's Head cut off with his own Sword; in a Combat betwixt Little
David, the Young Stripling, who stands in the Power and Strength of his God;
and Great Coliah, the Proud Boaster: In a Reply to a Book set forth by an
unnamed Author, under Pretense of an Answer to Thirty Six Queries propounded by
J. Parnel: And also, an Answer to several Counter-Queries, propounded by the
same Unnamed Author, page 295. VIII. A Warning of all People, 426. IX. An
Epistle to Friends in London, 433. X. An Epistle to Friends in Essex, 438. XI.
Another Epistle to Friends, 445. XII. An Epistle to all Friends, 453. XIII.
Some Queries sent to the Masters of the Colleges in Cambridge, 457. XIV. To
all Judges, Justices, Rulers and Officers, 463. XV. To all Magistrates, Rulers
and Officers, who call Men to Swear, and Imprison them if they will not, 470.
A TRIAL Of Faith:
Wherein is discovered the Ground of Faith of the Hypocrites, which Perishes;
and the FAITH of the SAINTS, which is Founded upon the Everlasting Rock.

So all may see what their FAITH is, and what they Trust to.

COme. try your Faith, all you Professors of Godliness, of God, and of Christ;
who say, God is your Father, and Christ is your Redeemer; and say, You Believe
in God, and you are saved through Faith in Christ: Come, search the Ground and
Bottom of your Faith, what it is built upon; for the Faith and Hope of the
Hypocrite perishes, which stands in words, and on any Unstedfast Foundation.
Job 8. 13.
You say, You are Saved by the Blood of Christ, and by his Stripes you are
Healed; and so would make him the Ground of your Faith: But what are you saved
from? and what are you healed of? Search and see within: Christ came to save
and redeem Sinners from their Sin, and to heal them of the Wound of Sin; to
bruise the Serpent's Head; and to bind the Strong Man, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
and cast him out of his House; to cast out the Buyers and Sellers out of the
Temple of God, Mat. 21. 12.
which is made a Den of Thieves; and to open the Prison Doors, and to set at
Liberty the Imprisoned, Genesis 3. 15.
and to lead Captivity Captive; to throw Antichrist out of the Temple of God,
who sits as God there, and says, He is God; and he is come to rend that Vail
of Darkness, and to open the Eyes of the Blind, and to unstop the Deaf Ears,
and to make Blind those that can see, and to make Deaf those which can hear;
Luke 4. 18.
and give Strength to the Weak, and to make Weak those that are Strong; and to
Feed the Hungry, Isa. 42. 6, 7.
and to Famish that which is Fed; and to make a separation betwixt the Precious
and the Vile, betwixt the Wheat and the Tares, the Sheep and the Goats, Luke 4.
18.
and to purchase to man that which man has lost; and to this end is he come:
and who can witness this, Luke 8. 10.
can witness him, and may claim an Interest in him, and have an Assurance of
their Salvation; and their Faith will stand against the Beast, Mat. 8. 21.
and overcome; for the Lamb shall get the Victory: But who cannot witness this,
cannot witness Christ, and so are Reprobates concerning the Faith. Now here all
you Drunkards are shut out; here all you Swearers are shut out; here all you
Proud, and Covetous, and Lustful Ones are shut out; here all you Scoffers, and
Scorners, and Back-biters, and Bevilers, and Extortioners, and Whoremongers,
and Envious Ones, and Gamers, and Sporters, and all you Self-righteous
Professors, who live in the Fashions and Customs of the World, delighting in
the Pleasures and Vanities of the World, having Fellowship with the World,
whose Conversation is amongst the Children of the World, all in one Generation,
cleansing only the Outside of the Cup, and the Inside full of Lust and
Filthiness, Pride and Covetousness, and all Uncleanness, Whited Walls and
Painted Sepulchers, who deceive the Carnal Eye and Ear; but the Lord searches
the Heart: Here you are all shut out from the true Faith, which purifieth the
Heart; and the Serpent is Head in you; and your Strong Man keeps the House, and
a stronger than he is not yet come; and the Buyers and the Sellers are uncast
out of the Temple; and Antichrist sits in the Kingdom, and raigns, as an Angel
of Light; and the Imprisoned lies in Prison; and the Wound of Sin is yet fresh;
and the Vail of Darkness is yet spread over; and Death raigns; and Christ lies
low in the Manger, and the Inn is taken up with other Guests: and here you can
challenge no Interest in the Blood of Christ, and have nothing to do to Talk of
God and Christ, and have no Assurance of your Salvation; and all your Faith is
vain, and Hope vain, and the Foundation thereof is Sandy, and will not stand in
the Day of Trial, but will be as a broken Reed to to lean upon; and all your
Prayers, and Praises, and Singings, and Graces, and Baptism, and Sacraments,
which you build your Faith upon, and think to Merit withal, are all in vain,
and the Enflaming Sword is set against it, being offered up from an Unclean
Heart: For how can your Hearts be clean while you live in sin? for sin lodges
in your hearts; and while sin is there, no purity can dwell, and nothing that
is pure can come forth of an unclean Vessel; and God does not put his Treasure
in an unclean Vessel; and he is Pure, and receives nothing that is Impure: and
here all your Faith is vain; and here you destroy all your Faith out of your
own mouths, who say, You believe you shall never overcome your Sins so long as
you are here, or be made free from Sins: And here you show, your Faith is not
built upon Christ, who came to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to cleanse
from all sin; and those whose Faith was built upon him, did witness it, and
said, The Blood of Christ has cleansed us from all sin; and they that are
Christ's, have Crucified the Flesh, with the Lusts and Affections thereof,
which is the Ground of Sin; and he that Believes is born of God; and he that
is born of God cannot commit sin; and no Unholy nor Unclean thing must enter.
So now, What Assurance have you of your Salvation, or what is your Faith built
upon, when both Christ and the Scriptures witness against you? And Faith, which
is not built on the Rock, Christ Jesus, is vain, and perishes. And he that
has this Hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is Pure: Here all your
Faith is searched, tried and proved, and is found all vain and perishing; and
so is not built upon the Rock which Perishes not.

Therefore come down all you High-minded Pharisees, and lay away all your
Profession, and throw down all your old Building, and begin, and lay a new
Foundation; for, the higher the Pharisee climbs, the greater will be his Fall;
and he that will be Wise let him first become a Fool: For, man by his Wisdom
knows not God: Here the Pharisee is shut out from the Knowldge of God, who
stands in his own wisdom.

And all you Wilful Blind, Carnal, Ignorant Creatures, whom my Soul pittieth to
see how ignorantly you are led, who pin your Faith upon the Sleeves of your
Forefathers, and live in Lightness and Wantonness, spending your Youth in
Vanity, in Gaming, Pleasures, and Sporting, in Drunkenness, in Swearing, and
Lying, in Vain Talk and Foolish Jestings, in Pride, and Lust and Filthiness;
and say, You follow your Forefathers; and say, What is become of them? and
say, Your Pleasures is Pastime, and Recreation; and your Vain Talk and Foolish
Jesting is Pastime and Merriness; and so you pass the Time away, and say, Your
Drinking, and Rioting, and Feasting, is Good-Fellowship and Neighborhood; and
so you cover over your Sins and Iniquities: but Woe unto him that hides his Sin,
and covers his Iniquity; and all this will not profit you any thing; neither
can your Forefathers excuse you before the Lord: for in the beginning it was
so, that Eve could not Justify Adam, neither could be any Excuse, but rather
Condemned him, because he hearkened to the to the Voice of the Woman, and
Disobeyed the Lord; so Adam suffered for his own Sin, and so did Eve for here is.
And so this will be no Excuse for you in the Day of Account, to say, You
followed your Forefathers, and did as they did before you: But then will the
Lord say, Because you followed the Traditions and Fashions, and Customs and
Inventions of Man, and have hearkened to the Voice of the Serpent, and have
Disobeyed my Voice, and my Command, and Slighted my Counsel, and would none of
my Reproof; but cast my Law behind your Backs, and trampled my Mercy under
Foot, and have turned my Grace into Wantonness, and have nourished your Hearts
as in a Day of Slaughter, and have spent my Creatures upon your Lusts, and
Stoned, Stocked, Buffeted, and Imprisoned and Shamefully entreated my
Messengers, which I sent unto you to Forewarn you of your Iniquity, and have
killed my Son; therefore depart, ye Workers of Iniquity, I know ye not; into
Everlasting Torment, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. To see now how vain
your Hope is, and how unstedfast your Faith is, when you have more Assurance of
your Damnation, than your Salvation: for the Lord says, No Unrighteous Person
must enter into his Kingdom; nor no Unholy, nor Unclean thing.

Therefore all you, who desire Salvation to your Souls, Try and Prove your
Faith and Hope, which you do trust to; and take heed of trusting to a broken
Reed, lest it deceive you: Experience has taught you, That if a Foundation of
a Building be decayed, and wasted, and naught, the Building will Fall when a
Storm comes: so let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he falls. So
every one, whose desire is after Righteousness, hearken to that in your
Consciences, which raises up Desires after Righteousness, and which shows
you the Vainness of your Lives, and checks you when you do amiss, and troubles
you and torments you in Conscience when you have been Drunk, or have done some
Evil Act; be willing to be guided by that, and that will lead you to
Repentance, and Newness of Life, to forsake those things which it discovers to
be contrary to the will of God: and if you be willing to follow this, and be
guided by it, you shall find a Teacher continually present, checking in the
Conscience for vain Thoughts, and for Vain, and Idle, and Needless Words and
Actions, and so will Crucify the Lust, which is the Ground of those things,
and which will lead you out of the Paths of Death, into the Way of Life; out
of the Traditions, and Customs, and Fashions and Opinions of the World, into
the Assurance of the Eternal Truth: And thou that art willing to follow this,
and be guided by this, shall need no man to teach thee; but it will be a
Teacher unto thee, Teaching and Directing in Righteousness, Purity and
Holiness; and if thou art Dilligent, keeping thy Mind within, with an Ear open
to the pure Voice, thou shall find it present with thee wheresoever thou art,
in the Fields, in thy Bed, in Markets, in Company, or wheresoever thou art,
when thy Outward Priest or Teacher is absent, it may be in the Alehouse, or at
his Pleasures and Delights, or far off, it will be present with thee, and will
Check thee and Condemn thee for that which no Outward Eye can See, and will
cleanse thy Heart from Lust, and Deceit, and Uncleanness; and will purify thy
Heart, and will make it a fit Temple for Purity to dwell in; and then thy
Sacrifices will be Pure, which come from a Pure Heart, the Lord will accept
them; for, Abel's Sacrifices he receives, but Cain's he denies: but if thou
would attain to this, thou must be willing to deny thy Lusts, thy Vanity,
thy Delights, or whatsoever has been thy Life; For, He that will save his
Life, shall lose it; and he that will lose his Life for my sake, the same shall
save it. So there is no obtaining of Life, but through Death; nor no obtaining
the Crown, but through the Cross: So thou must deny thy self, and take up thy
daily Cross, and follow Christ, if thou would be his Disciple, and give up
thy Self wholly to be guided by the Will of God, that all which is contrary to
the Will of God may be Crucified (though it be never so near and dear to thee)
and be forsaken; Lands or Living, Wife or Children, Friends and Acquaintance,
or all the World, and all Delights in the World: For he that loves any thing
better then Me, is not worthy of Me: And all things below the Lord Vanishes;
but He Endures forever.

So the Lord God Almighty prosper all the Tender Desires which are raised up
toward him, and feed the Hungry and Thirsty Souls, as he has promised, and
raise up his own in all his, that he alone may be Glorified, Praised, and
Honored, who is Worthy, and to whom all belongs.

And this is the Desire of his Soul, who is a Servant of the Lord; who is
Hated, Reviled and Derided of the World, because he has no Fellowship with the
World, nor the Vanities of the World; but testifies against their Ways,
Fashions, Traditions, Customs, Fellowship, Words and Worship; and sees them
all to be Formal Imitation, and the Invention of Man, out of the Covenant of
God, so cannot but deny them; and for this Cause he is Hated of all, both
Priest and People: Whose Name according to the World is,

JAMES PARNELL.

The Servant is not Greater then his Master. Try your selves, prove your
selves; know ye not that Christ is in you, unless you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.
5.
Christ Exalted Into His THRONE, And the SCRIPTURE Owned in its Place.
THis then is the Message that we have received of the Father, That God is
Light, and in him is no Darkness at all: if we walk in Darkness, and say, we
have fellowship with him, we lie, and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the
Light, as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one with another, and the
Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7. And
this is the Word which was in the beginning, by which all things were made; and
in him was Life, and his Life was the Light of men, John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. By
which Light all the holy Men of God, in the days of old, were inspired: By
which Light Moses saw the things that were done in the beginning, and wrote of
them: Which Word was a Lamp unto David's Feet, and a Light unto his Paths,
Psalm. 119. 105. Which Light dwelt in the Prophets and holy Men, by which they
saw the Day of Christ, and wrote of him, Isa. 49. 6. and 60. 19, and spoke as
they were moved by it; and by it saw the Deceit, Iniquities and Transgressions
of Israel; and declared against it, both in Priest, People, and Rulers;
speaking the Word of the Lord faithfully, whether they would hear, or forbear,
Ezekiel. 2. Mic. 3. Isa. 56. And this Word came unto the Prophets, which was as a
Fire and a Hammer in their Bones, Jer. 20. 9. and 23. 29. Which Word in due
time became Flesh, and dwelt among the Apostles, and they saw the Glory thereof
as of the Only Begotten Son of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, John 1. 14.
whom John bears witness of, to be the Light of the World, who does enlighten
every one that comes into the World, John 1. To which Light Paul was sent to
turn the minds of the Heathen, Acts 26. 17, 18. Which Light is the Condemnation
of the World, who love Darkness rather then Light, because their deeds are
Evil; and he that hates it, has it, though he will not bring his deeds to it,
by it to be proved; therefore his Condemnation it is, John 3. 19, 20, 21.

And there is a time, Light shines in Darkness, and Darkness comprehends it
not, John 1. 5. and this is the Cause why many stumble at it, and are offended
in it.

And there is a time Light shines out of darkness, and darkness flees away, and
then is witnessed the perfect Day, where the Children of the Day do walk, Isa.
42. 16. Mat. 4. 16. Ephesians. 5. 8. Which Light is the true Tryer of spirits, and
gives the discerning of spirits, and discovers the works of darkness, and
manifests the deeds of darkness; and by it the Secrets of the heart are seen,
and hidden things searched out; and by it all things are manifest; and
whatsoever makes manifest is Light, Heb. 4. 12. Ephesians. 5. 13. all which the
natural man knows not, and therefore cannot receive the things of God, but by
this Light is seen and judged; for by this Light the Spiritual Man is able to
discern and judge the natural man, but he himself is judged of no man, 1 Cor.
2. 14, 15. For this is the Judge of the World, and by this the Prince of the
Air is judged, wheresoever he rules, John 16. 11. and therefore at it rages,
and stirs up his Servants to persecute it, where it is manifest: and so it
is a Stumbling Stone and a Rock of Offense to the Children of the World, in
whom the Prince of this World lodges, Rom 9. 33.

And of this Word the Apostle Paul bears witness, to be quick and powerful,
and sharp- then a two-edged Sword, to the dividing assunder betwixt the Marrow
and the Bones, Heb. 4. 12. to which Word the Apostle directed the minds of
people within them, from looking without for to find it without, Rom, 10. And
from this same Word the Apostles spoke forth the Scripture; which Word was
their Guide, and Rule, and Teacher all along from the beginning; by which both
the Apostles, and Prophets, and the holy Men were acted, moved, and carried
forth in the Power of it, to declare that which by it they were taught, 1 John.
1. 2. Pet. 1. 21.

And this is the free Grace of God, which brings Salvation, and has appeared
to all men, Tit. 2. 11, 12. which is their Condemnation who do despite unto it,
Heb. 10. 29. but this was the Saints Teacher, by which they were taught to deny
all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live Godlily, Righteously and Soberly
in this present evil World.

And this is the Anointing, which teaches all things freely, which is Truth,
and no Lie, and leads into all Truth: and he that knows this, needs no man to
teach him; but is come to the end of man's teaching, 1 John 2. 27. unto which
the Prophet was come, and therefore called freely, Come, buy Wine and Milk
without Money or Price; Why spend ye your Money for that which is not Bread, or
your Labor for that which profitteth not? Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. And from this the
Apostle spoke freely, nor coveting any man's Silver or Gold; but as they freely
had received, freely they gave, Acts 20. 33. And whosoever speaks from this,
speaks freely, and its Ministry leads to the end of Teaching; and here let all
flesh keep silence before the Lord, Zach. 2. 13.

And let all Hirelings, and greedy Shepherds, stop their mouths, who cry Peace
Peace to them that put into their mouths, but if not, they even prepare War
against them, and such like the Prophet in the Light saw, and by it testified
against them, Mich. 3. 5. And all this the Scripture bears testimony of, which
was spoken from the Light, but is not the Light, nor the Word, nor the Life,
nor the Judge, nor the Rule, nor the Guide, nor the Tryer of spirits; for all
this belongs to Christ, who is the Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the
heart, Heb. 4. 1, 2. who is the Light, John 8. 12. who is the Word, John 1. 14.
who is the Life, John 14. 6. who blamed the Pharisees that thought in the
Scriptures to find eternal Life, but would not come unto him that they might
have Life, John 5. 39, 40. who is the Anointing, who is the Guide and Teacher,
and the Rule, 1. John 2. 27. who when we are going to the right hand or to the
left, cries, This is the Way walk in it, Isa. 30. 21. Of which the Scripture is
a true Declaration spoken from this Word of Truth, of which Light every one
has a measure, which unto them is the free Gift of God to profit withal,
which Light in the Conscience reproves for sin and iniquity, and manifests the
deceit of the heart, and checks the Creature when it swears, or lies, or does
amiss, telling it, that it should not do so; and calls for Repentance and
Amendment of Life, and leads unto the same as it is owned and followed; and as
many as receive it, receive power to become the Sons of God, Joh. 8. 12. and 1.
12. Romans 2. 4. But he that does evil hates the Light, and will not bring his
deeds to it, by it to be proved, and to him it is condemnation; but he that
loves the Light brings his deeds to the Light, that it may manifest them
whether they be wrought in God, John 3. 20, 21. But of this Light you People
and Teachers of the World are ignorant, and so are doting upon the Scripture
without, with your dark minds there, with the blind Pharisees, seeking for Life
where it is not to be found, but will not come to Christ the Light, that you
might have Life; but would cast him out of his Throne, and exalt Scriptures
above him, calling them the Judge, and the Light, and the Word, and the Life,
and the Rule, and the Guide; and thus with your dark minds you would take the
Authority from Christ and would give it unto the dead Letter, which is but a
Declaration of these things; And thus your Leaders cause you to err, Isa. 3.
12. for their own ends, and of the Scripture they make an Idol, to get money,
by adding their own Meanings, Interpretations, and Constructions upon them,
which are all the Conceivings and Imaginations of their own hearts, by which
they lead you in Blindness, ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth in your hearts; but are looking without, doting without
in the Letter, acting and imitating out of the Light for Life, and so in
darkness, doing your own works, which are not required at your hands, but are
for Condemnation by the Light; And so in vain are you worshipping a God, whom
ye know not, crying up his Ordinances, and crying up his Commands, and crying
up the Scripture, exalting it in the Place of Christ, and thus coming near him
with your lips, and your hearts far from him; still living in the corrupt
sinful nature, ignorant of the free Grace of God, which should lead you to
repentance and amendment of life, Ephesians. 2. 5. 8. And because we do witness
this Mystery, which has been hid from Ages and Generations, now made manifest
in us, which is, Christ within the Hope of Glory, Col. 1. 26, 27. who is the
Light of the World, who does enlighten every one that comes into the World,
who is the true Shepherd, John 10. and the true Teacher, no more to be removed
into a Corner, Isa. 30. 20. who is the Anointing, who teaches all things, and
is the End of man's teaching: therefore your Ministry of the Letter, who make a
Trade and a Gain of the Letter, by idolizing it, and setting it up in the room
of Christ, by taking the Authority from Christ, and applying it to the Letter,
that your minds, who are taught by them, may the more be drawn without, to look
at it, and Idolize it, expecting Life and Salvation by it, and no hope without
it, that they may the longer make Merchandise of you, and still uphold their
Trade, and Gain by it, do now see that this our doctrine of Christ to be all in
all, and that without him we can do nothing, John 15. 5. but that by him we can
do all things without the help of Scripture, or any thing else without, Phil.
4. 13. and that there is no other name under Heaven by which we can be saved,
but that he is able to save to the utmost all that shall come unto God by him,
Heb. 7. 25. and that he is the Word, and the Scripture is not; and that he is
the Light, and the Scripture is not; and that he is the Rule and Guide, and
Teache^, and Judge, and the Scripture is not; but a Declaration of him to be
so: and that the Scripture all along witnesses with our Doctrine to be one
with it, and theirs to be another Doctrine, which the Scripture will not
maintain, but the Scripture is against, and is only brought in for Lucres sake
to satisfy their own carnal ends, that they may bear rule by their Means, as
the false Prophets did before them, Jer. 5. 30, 31.

And this Light all along makes them manifort in all their Colors and false
Covers, so that they cannot hide themselves from being Deceivers, and also this
they do know, that if every one come to know and find a Teacher within them,
which does teach them the will of God, and does enable them for to obey it, so
that they need no man to teach them; then indeed they will no longer spend
their Money upon them for that which is not Bread, nor their Labor for that
which profitteth not, and will be a Prey unto them no longer: So not only their
Craft, and Trade, and Idol will fail them; but also, their great Gain and
Riches will be taken from them, and all their Honor, and Fame and Dignity will
come to naught: Therefore they in their hot Rage, and Fierceness, and Enmity of
their Spirits, do set themselves to oppose this Light, wheresoever it is made
manifest; and persecuting the Publishers of this Doctrine, railing against them
as Deceivers, and Seducers and Bringers in of false Lights, and such as deny
the Scripture, and would rob it of its Authority, and give it to a Light within
them (which the Priests call, natural Light) and insufficient to lead to
Salvation without the help of Scripture, and other outward Helps; and so would
set the Scripture above the Light of Christ; saying among themselves, If we let
go the Authority of Scripture, then all is gone; (that is to say) Take away our
Idol, then take away our Maintenance, then down with our Ministry. So here is
clear the Foundation they stand upon, and this is the cause why they call the
Scripture their Foundation; and so all this Authority, which they put upon the
Scripture, they take from Christ, who alone is the Foundation of the Faithful,
of whom the Scripture is a Declaration: and so we do own it by the same which
gave it forth, which unto us does open it and reveal it, and manifests them
to be out of the Life of it, and so by the Life thereof are judged and
condemned, as before is proved. And though they call it the Word, yet in the
same it does witness against them, and witness Christ to be the Word before the
Scripture was written, John 1. And though they call the Scripture the Light,
yet in the same it does witness against them, and witness Christ to be the
Light before the Scripture was written, and is able to save to the utmost all
that shall come unto God by him; and they that climb up any other Way, the same
are Thieves and Robbers, John 10. 1. And therefore is not a Natural
Insufficient Light, as they that know not him do report of him, and therefore
show themselves to be as ignorant as the Pharisees, who only supposed him to
the Son of Joseph, yet wondered at his Power, and the Works that were done by
him; as these do now wonder at the Prosperity of this Ministration of Light,
and to see how it prevails upon the Hearts of the people, so that they know not
what to think of it; they are not able to encounter with it, but that they see
it strikes so much at their Diana, and lies so hard at their Foundation, so
that it makes their Building Totter, therefore the Rulers, Priests and
Pharisees take Counsel together, saying one to another, If we let this People
alone, all men will go after them, and they will draw away whole Nations;
therefore they take the same course, as ever the false Prophets did, joining
together with the Earthly Powers to make War with the Lamb, Persecuting,
Stocking, Whipping, Imprisoning and shamefully entreating his Messengers, whom
the Lamb sent forth to bear Testimony of this Light in peoples Consciences
(where we have a Witness both in them that believe, and in them that perish)
and also, striving all the ways they can, by their Evil Incensing, Lying,
Railings, and false Accusings and Reporting to defame this Light, and leaven
your minds against it (that if it were possible) to put it out, that still they
might uphold their Father's kingdom of darkness, and bear rule by their Means
over the Blind, carrying captive the minds of people: But who is able to make
War with the Lamb, or who shall withstand the Day of his Coming? Saul, Saul, it
is hard for thee to kick against the Pricks: And though they call the Scripture
their Rule and Guide, yet in this it witnesses against them, to be in Cain's
way, and Balaam's way, and in the GainSaying of Core, and so have not God, Jude
11. 2 John 9. but are found to be the Generation who are born after the Flesh
persecuting them that are born after the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. And though they
call the Scripture their Rule and Guide, yet they receive not Power from it to
enable them to walk according to it; but are altogether erring from it, in any
thing that crosses Self: but as many as receive the Light, receive Power to
follow it, and come out of the corrupt sinful nature, which they live in who
know not the Light, John 1. 12. and here the Light is above the Scripture. And
though they say, the Scripture is the Judge and Tryer of Spirits, yet in the
same it witnesses against them, to be Liars, and bears witness of Christ to be
the Judge, and Tryer, and Searcher of the Heart, and Discerner of the Thoughts,
Heb. 4. 12. Romans 1. 16. 1 Pet. 4. 5. and that whatsoever makes manifest is
Light, Ephesians. 5. 13. therefore that which makes manifest false spirits is the
Light, and not the Letter, which Light manifested and discovered false spirits
before the Scripture was written: And also, though they say, the Scripture is
the Judge and Tryer of Spirits, yet by the Scripture they cannot discern or
judge of Spirits, else, what makes all this difference in Judgment amongst them
who profess to try Spirits by the Scripture, and profess it to be their Rule,
and ground their Judgments upon it, yet are so confused in the same, and never
a one knows which is the Truth, when as the Way is but One? So that it follows,
that they have nothing but the Scripture without, and are still without, in
Darkness and Confusion, as all those appear to be who call the Scripture their
Rule, and Guide, and Judge, and Tryer of Spirits, and yet know not the Truth;
but are jangling, and rangling, and arguing, and disputing, and contending
about the Scripture, every one with a several Judgment upon it: surely this
Distraction is not in Scripture; for it was spoken from One, and all agrees in
one; therefore you that so profess the Scripture, see if you can find it out by
the Scripture, and see where you are; but they that are in the Light have
fellowship one with another, 1 John 1. 7. and are of one heart, and one Soul,
Acts 4. 32. and all agree in one, and are Epistles wrote in one another heart,
2. Cor. 3. 2. and by the Light they try and discern false spirits, and in it
are able to judge them, and open the Scriptures without wresting adding or
diminishing, and by it do know, they are of God, because they love one another
with the same love with which Christ loved them, 1 John 4. it is not such love
which is to day, and to morrow cross the will, and it is turned into wrath and
anger; nay that love stands in the corrupt will, but this love stands in the
bond of peace which does endure; and here again the light is above the
Scripture; and though they say the light must be received from the Scripture,
yet in this the Scripture does witness against them, and bears witness of
Christ to be the light of the World, and does enlighten every one that comes
into the World.

And they that could never read letter of the book have this light, which is
sufficient to teach them and lead them into all Truth, after they come to the
knowledge of it, and from this light the Scripture was spoken, 2 Pet. 1. 21.
and without this light none can read the Scripture with understanding; and here
the light is before the Scripture, and out of it all the Children of Darkness
are shut with their busy minds and vain contending spirits: and though they
say, they must receive life and salvation from the Scripture, yet in this the
Scripture witnesses against them, and testifies of Christ to be the alone
Fountain of Life and Salvation, and that there is no other name under Heaven by
which we can be saved, Psalm. 30. 9. and 144. 10. And that the Pharisees had the
Scripture, yet had not the Light, neither could see that he was the Christ,
though the Scripture bare testimony of him, or either would come unto him for
Life and Salvation, but trusted in the Scripture, thinking there to find
eternal Life, and therein found it not, John 5. 39, 40. As all you are now who
are seeking the living among the dead, and here again the light is above the
Scripture, which light is within us the hope of glory. Col. 1. 26, 27. and
those that cannot witness this are in the reprobation, though they have the
Scripture without, 1 Cor. 13. 5. and from it we receive life and salvation, and
from no other, and this alone is our Guide, Teacher, Judge, and Lawgiver, if
we never see letter, Luke 1. 79. John 6. 45. Isa. 33. and this alone is the
Ground and Foundation of our Faith and Hope, by which we are made able to cry
Abba Father, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Romans 8. 15. And here it is not self that judges or
condemns, but Christ that lives in us, Gal. 2. 20. and it is not self that
justifies us, but Christ that lives in us; and here Christ is exalted into his
Throne, and the Scripture owned in its place, without contempt or
undervaluting. And they are found the Ministers of Antichrist, who would cast
Christ out of his Throne, and take the Scripture out of its place to exalt
above him, applying to it that Authority which alone belongs unto him, for
their own by secret selfends; so that in that they apply such Authority to the
Scripture, they in the same Rob Christ of it, and undervalue him, as the
Pharisees did, who thought in the Scriptures to find Eternal Life, but would
not come to Christ that they might have Life; in whose steps ye and your
Teachers are now found, professing Christ in words, but in Life denying him,
and therefore must be judged and condemned by him, as they were. And if you
Priests do allege, there is a false Light, as well as a True Light; I Answer,
That is it in you, which blinds your Minds so that you cannot receive this
Gospel, but from you it is hid, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. And therefore you bring another
Gospel, calling the four Books Mattew, Mark, Luke, and John, the Gospel; in
which, these four Books will Witness against you, and bear Witness of Christ to
be the Gospel, which is the Power of God unto Salvation; who is the Lamb of
God, slain from the Foundation of the World, who came to take away the Sins of
the World; and blessed are they that are not offended in him; John 1. 26. and
verse. 13. Luke 7. 23. And also, that is a false Light in you, which leads you
into the Form or Resemblance, or outward Show of Holiness, but denies the Life
and Power, 2 Timothy 3. 5. and to profess the Scripture to be your Rule, but in
Life and Practice deny it; and to be short, leads into a Profession without
Possession; but that which leads into the Life and Power is no false Light; for
it leads into the Possession, before the Profession, and so the Profession is
from the Possession; but your Profession is from another Possession, and so
Boast in another line, by which you beguile both your selves, and others; and
therefore in that you go about to Arm your selves with the Scripture, to oppose
the Light, by exalting it above the Light, thinking thereby to debase the
Light, and so to keep Peoples Minds from the Light, that they may still remain
in Darkness and Blindness under you; You do but in the same bring a Weapon to
cut off your own heads, and raise a War to destroy your selves, and increase
more light to the people, and manifest your selves odious, and to be the Blind
Guides of the Nation; who are to be denied and turned away from by us, 2 John
verse. 9, 10.
as Deceivers, and to be held as accursed, who bring another Doctrine in
oposition to the True Doctrine which is held forth in the Scripture; for the
Scripture and the Light agree in one, from both which you are shut, with
jangling contentious spirits, by which you would wrest the Scripture out of its
place, to clash against its Original, thereby to uphold your Father
Antichrist's Kingdom, and therein do the more Manifest your selves to be the
Ministers of Antichrist, who under Profession of the True Christ do oppose him,
and make War with him, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. but your Weapons are weak, as is
daily made manifest.

James Parnell.

THE TRUMPET Of the Lord BLOWN OR, A Blast against PRIDE and OPPRESSION; and
the Defiled Liberty, which stands in the FLESH.
WOE unto you that are called, Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen, and
Gentlewomen, in respect to your Persons, who are exalted in the Earth, who are
proud, and high, and lofty; who are called of men Master, and Sir, and Mistress
and Madam, in respect to your Persons, because of your gay Clothing, because of
your much Earth, which by Fraud, Deceit and Oppression you have gotten
together: You are exalted above your Fellow Creatures, and grind the faces of
the Poor, and they are as Slaves under you, and must labor and toil under
you, and you must live at ease, sporting in day time, and spending your time in
Pleasures, and Chambring, and Wontonness, according to your lustful minds, 2
Pet. 2. 12. 13.
in Hauking and Hunting, and Bowling, and Carding, and Dicing, in all manner of
Music, Pleasure and Delights, in Eating and Drinking and Sleeping; and you
must have your Wine and Ale, and all your Dainty Dishes, and all manner of
Delights and Novelties; and so ye feed the lust, eating and drinking, and
rising up to play, which is Idolatry; 1 Cor. 107.
and you have your fine Attire, and all manner of New Fashings, Silk and
Vilvet, and Purple, Gold and Silver; and you have your Waiting-Men, and
Wating-Maids under you, to Wait upon you, and your Coaches to ride; and your
high and lofty Horses are like your selves, according to your lofty minds; and
you sit at ease, Dives-like, Devouring the Creation, and spending it upon your
Lusts, and with it committing Fornication, into it your hearts being adultred
from God, who created you; and your Fellow Creatures must labor like slaves
under you, and work for all this; when you are at your Pleasures, they must be
at work and labor; and must hunger, and thirst, and labor when you are
eating, and drinking and sleeping; and here, like Dives, you sit at ease, and
poor Lazarus lies starving without: and here you are Lords over your Fellow
Creatures, and they must bow and crouch to you, Luke 16. 19, 20, 21.
or else they must be hated, and punished, and put out from your presence, and
be scoffed, and scorned, and reproached: and you will be called Masters, and
think Scorn that a Poor Man should stand with his Hat on before you; and so set
up partiality, which the Law of God condemns, upholding that which Christ in
his Doctrine forbids; who says, Be not ye called Masters; and so by that which
you do prosess, Mat 23. 8.
you are condemned: And you think Scorn in particular, to be Thou Would of your
Fellow Creatures, which is the Scripture Language to one; but you will Thou God
and Christ, and yet you will not be Thou Would; and here you exalt your selves
above God, and lord over your Fellow Creatures: but though you be exalted as
high as the Heavens, and set your Nests amongst the Stars, Obed. 3. 4.
and lay up Treasures for many years, thence will the Lord fetch you down, and
cast you into Hell, the Pit, as he did Lucifer, Dives, Isa. 14. 13, 14, 15.
and Hamon, and Pharaoh, and Herod, and the rest of your Forefathers, who
would have been exalted above the Creator, as you would; for, it is Lucifer who
is Head, and is exalted in you above all that is called God (opposing God) 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4.
who is Godd over you, whom you serve and worship, for whom the Pit is
prepared. To the Light in all your Consciences I speak, which is Honest of God,
and Impartial, which will let you see you are guilty, and condemn you; but you
think to have the Pleasure and Delights of this World, to be at Ease and Peace
here, and to have an Inheritance in the Kingdom of God too: and you have Covers
for all this; you say, Your Pleasures is Pastime, and Recreation; and your fine
Clothes, and gay Attire, is Comeliness and Decency; and your dainty Dishes, and
Banqueting, Novelties and Attendance, you say, you are able to maintain it,
and it belongs to your Places; and so you have Covers for all: But Woe unto you
that hide your Sins, and cover your Iniquities, who cover with a Covering, but
not with the Lord; but all your Covers are found too narrow before the Lord
Christ, Prove. 28. 13.
who will lay all your Hypocrisy and Deceit before you, and your Lies and vain
Actions, Isa. 30. 1.
and you shall be rewarded accordingly, and shall have your Portion in the Lake
that burns, which is prepared for you Earthworms, whose Pleasure is in the
Earth; but you think to be Saved, and so make Christ and his Apostles Liars,
who said, None could obtain two Kingdoms; and no such must enter, who have
their Portions and Delight in the Earth: Jam. 5. 1, 5.
and you make a Profession of Godliness with your Prayers, Praises, Graces, and
Singing, and formal imaginary Worship; and have a Chaplain or Priest to preach
to you one day in a Week, and all the Week after doing as you do, and spending
their time as you do, in Eating, and Drinking, and rising up to Play; and live
in Pride and Covetousness, and are called of men, Master; and you have a Place
for him to preach to you in, either in your Houses, or hard by, so have all
things at ease, and all this for your Money; but the Pearl you want, which is
not to be purchased with money, where lies the inestimable Treasures: and you
say, He is a Minister of Christ; and he says, You are Christians; whenas you
all are Heathens, both Priest and People, living without God in the World, and
so the Blind leads the Blind into the Ditch; and so you lead your lives, and
spend your time here, and think to be Saved hereafter; no, no, Woe, and Woe is
coming upon you all who are Proud; you must all give an Account before the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth, who is Terrible to the Wicked; and behold, the Day of
the Lord comes, which will burn as an Oven, Mal. 4. 1. Gal. 6. 6, 7, 8.
and all that are Proud, and all that do Wickedly shall be as Stubble: And such
as you sow, such must you reap; he that sows to the Flesh, of the Flesh must
reap Corruption: The Lord abhors all your Profession, and your Hypocrisy; it
is not Profession that he seeks for, it is Practice; it is not the Sayer, but
the Doer that shall inherit; your Forefathers said, but did not, so do you;
But it is not all that says, Mat. 7. 21. Isa 7. 21.
Lord, Lord, that shall inherit, but he that does the Will of my Father: What
is the Chaff to the Wheat? the Lord looks for Fruits; you profess him in Words,
but your Works are the Works of the Devil; and so are of this Sort, who come
near him with their Lips, but their Hearts are far from him, in your Gay
Attire, in your New Fashions, in your Varieties, in your Dainty Dishes, in your
Gaming, and Pleasures and Sporting, in your Wealth and earthly riches, in your
lofty Houses, in your curious Buildings, in your fine Music, in your earthly
Honor, which are all the Fruits of the Devil; and here Outwardly you profess
the Lord with your Tongues, but serve the Devil with your Hearts and Actions,
who is the King of Pride; James 5. 6.
and here you are in the Broad and Easy Way, in the first Nature, which is in
the Fall, separated from God, whose Kingdom is of this World, Strangers to the
Life of God, and are at enmity, slaying and crucifying the Just and Innocent,
and so are no Christians, but Heathens, both Priest and People And the Lord
abhors all Sacrificers from Cain, which is the first Nature, wherein you live,
drove out from God into the Earth, your lives preach you forth; so all your
Graces before and after Meat, and your Prayers, and your Praises, and Singing,
and formal Worships, and Traditions the Lord abhors; for they are offered up in
the first Nature, a Sacrifice of the Earth, Genesis 4. 3, 5.
and savours of the Earth, and is not a Sweet Smell unto him, and therefore he
has no respect to it, Isa. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Prove. 15. 8.
his Soul loathes it; away with it, and they that offer it, for it is Enmity
with him; The Prayers and Sacrifices of the Wicked are Abominable: all Prayers
or Sacrifices offered up from Cain, Dives or Hamon, or any in that Nature, are
Abominable to the Lord, and he will not accept them; for, to them he has no
Respect. Therefore all you high and lofty Ones, Hamon-like, be ye silent, and
let your Mouths be stopped, all you who act in Unrighteousness; away with all
your Profession, and now Repent, and Tremble before the Lord, ye Children of
the Devil: come down all you high and lofty Ones, Howl and Mourn in Sackcloth
and Ashes; for the Lord is coming to burn you up as Stubble before him; For,
you are the Fruitless Trees that cumber the Ground, who are for the Fire; Mat.
27. 19.
fair and flourishing with Leaves you are covered, but by Christ, the Light, ye
are searched, and no Fruit is found on you, therefore from him you are cursed;
for, Fruit he is come to seek for; therefore profess him no longer in words,
but now Repent, and return from all your Unrighteousness; for, know you not,
that no unrighteous Person shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
no vain Person nor Drunkards, Swearers, no Liar, no Proud, no Covetous Ones,
none who delight in Gaming or Pleasures, Sporting in the day time and Rioting,
Chambering and Wantonness, nor no unholy nor unclean thing must enter; for, all
unrighteous Persons must be cast into the Lake, which burns with Fire and
Brimstone forever. Now read your selves, and your Portions, all you high and
lofty Ones; for, thither you must go, and there you must lie for evermore (the
Lord of Hosts has spoken it) with Dives and Hamon, and all the high and lofty
Ones, who must be cast in thither: for you are too high, fine and lofty to
enter in at the straight Gate, Ester 3.
as Dives was, and Hamon was; nay, you are Enemies and Persecutors of all those
who enter in at the straight Gate, as Hamon and Dives, and the High Priests,
Pharisees and Rulers were, and all the high ones, because they do not feed you
with your earthly Honor, and respect no Person, but equalize all flesh; as the
Lord does, so do his People: Acts 10. 34, 35.
But you proud ones think scorn to be compared, or to be equalized with your
Fellow Creatures, as Dives and Hamon did; but all you proud ones, remember your
Father Dives his End; for, thither you must go, into the Everlasting Burnings,
as he did, whose Belly was his Godd, Luke 16. 19 and Phil. 3. 9.
as yours is, whose End is Destruction, who mind earthly things, and then it
will be too late for you to Repent; and then when it is too late, then you will
wish, you had been as Lazarus was, so that at the End you might have enjoyed
the Happiness that Lazarus did; though now you are exalted above your
Fellow Creatures, living in Pride, Ezekiel. 6, 14.
Idleness, and Fullness of Bread, which were the Sins of Sodom; but in this Day
you shall be brought down, and all you Workers of Iniquity, Young and Old, Rich
and Poor, Lord and Lady, and Beggars shall be all turned into Hell, without
Respect of Persons: Isaiah 24. 2. Hebr. 10. 3, 33.
then shall it be with the Mistress, so with the Maid; as with the Servant, so
with the Master; and as with the People, so with the Priest: Hebr. 11. 36, 37,
38.
and all the Righteous Simple Ones, which you despise and scoff at, who are now
to you Gazing-Stocks, and Reproaches, and Pilgrims in the World, because their
Kingdom is not of this World, then shall that be exalted, and received into Joy
eternal; Luke 16. 22, 23.
then shall you see a Separation betwixt the Humble and the Proud, as there was
betwixt Dives and Lazarus; the Humble, and Lowly, and Despised Ones shall be
exalted; and you high lofty Ones, who are Despisers, and Crucifiers of the
Just, shall be abased, and cast into Hell; then Lord and Lady, Master and
Mistress, and all your Earthly Honor, shall be laid into the Fire; then all
your Worldly Wealth, Riches, and Earthly Inheritance and Heirships will be
gone, wherewith you ruled as Lords in the Earth; then you shall find, that all
your Gay Clothing and Rich Attire was for Pride, and not for Decency, and that
many of your Fellow Creatures wanted that for to cover their Nakedness, which
you spent upon your Lusts; then you shall be rewarded for grinding the Faces of
the Poor, for your Oppressions, and for Rackings, and Taxings, and your heavy
Burdens, wherewith you oppress your Fellow Creatures: For, you are the high
Oaks and the tall Cedars, that oppress the little Scrubs, under whom the
Creation groans, both Man and Beast; Isa. 2. 12, 13, etc.
but then you will be brought low, then all your Pleasures and Wantonness,
Hauking, and Hunting, and Bowling, and Carding, and Dicing, and all your Music
shall be turned into Weeping and Howling with Dives; Lazarus had none of this,
but Dives had; but now Lazarus has Joy eternal, and Dives Woe and Misery
everlasting; and then all your dainty Dishes, and Novelties, and Varieties,
which have fed your Lusts, shall be turned into Fire and Brimstone, and the
Spoil of the Creatures shall witness agaisnt you; and then you shall be stripped
off of all your Silks, and Velvet, and Purple, and Gold, and all your gay
Attire, wherewith you decked and adorned your earthly Bodies, to make your
selves seem Glorious in the Eyes of others, for the Honor and Esteem of the
World; but then you will be as Naked as the Beggar, then you shall have no
Waiting-Men, nor Waiting-Maids, nor Coaches, nor high and lofty Horses, nor
curious Buildings, or great Houses, no more then the Beggar; then all your
Bowing and Crouching, and all your Heathenish Breeding shall be laid aside;
then all your Priests and false Prophets, Ezekiel. 22. 28. Jer. 13. 1. Mich. 3. 5.
which you extol now so high, because they daub you up, and cry, Peace to you,
healing you up in Deceit, because you put into their Mouths, shall stand you
in no stead, but shall be Tormented with you Hypocrites in the Lake; and all
your Covers will not serve, wherewith you hide your Sin, and cover over your
Deceits, in saying, Your Pleasures, and Vain Talk, and Foolish Jesting, and
Tales and Stories, is Pastime and Recreation; then you would be glad of one
Hour, if you could get to repent in, as Dives would, but then it will be too
late; for your Portion you enjoy in the Earth, whose kingdom is of this World:
but the Son of Man in it had scarce where to lay his Head, and his Servants no
certain Dwellingplace; for their Kingdom was not of this World: such you call,
Wanderers and Vagabonds, who have your great Houses, and strong Towers in the
Earth; but all cannot hide from the Presence of the Lord, who will call you in
Judgment, and reward you according to your deeds; when his own he does exalt
into the Kingdom which for them he has prepared, Luke 9. 5, 58. ^ Cor. 1. 11.
Psalm. 145 13.
which is an Everlasting Kingdom; from which the Earthworms are shut out, who
say, The Earth is mine: Therefore now, before it be too late, consider of it,
and let Dives and Hamon, and the rest of the Proud Ones be a Warning to you,
and now repent, while it is called to day; now you have been told, now you are
left without Excuse before the just impartial Judge; now prize your time, all
who desire Mercy at the Hand of God, and Pardon for your Iniquities: for this
is the Day of your Visitation, Luke 16. 13.
wherein the Lord is handing forth his Mercy; and if you will not believe this,
you would not believe Dives, if he should rise from the Dead.

To the Light in all your Consciences I speak, which comes from Jesus Christ,
the Light of the World, John 1. 9.
who does enlighten every one that comes into the World; which Light is his
Witness in the Conscience, against all Deceit, Ungodliness and Unrighteousness
of men; which Light in all your Consciences is my Witness, to the which I am
made manifest; which if you love it, and to it hearken, it will let you see
your selves, and the state and condition wherein you live, and the filthy
unclean Image of the Devil, which you bear, and your leprous spotted
Consciences, because of the Lust wherein you are drowned: and the same Light,
loving it, and following it, which checks and convinces in the Conscience for
that which is Evil, and of the least contrary to the Will of God; it will lead
you to Repentance, and humble your hearts, and bring you down to know the Fear
of the Lord, whose Power will rend your habitations, wherein you have dwelt
secure in your Sins: and this Light (loving it) will be your Teacher, and will
let you see the Creation, and the Goodness thereof, and will teach you how to
use it, and order it in its place, out of the Lust, to the Glory of God, and
how to do good with it, so that there be no Want in the Creation, nor Cry of
Oppression; but the Hungry will be fed, and the Naked clothed, and the
Oppressed set free; and here is the Blessing restored to the Creation: but
while these things are under, and you live in the Lusts with your abundance,
nourishing your hearts as in a day of Slaughter, the Curse is upon you, and War
abundance: and you are the Adulterers and Adultresses, whose hearts are
adulterated from God, committing Fornication with the Creation; and the Grace
of God (which should guide you out of the Lust and Ungodliness of the World)
Tit. 211. 12.
you turn into Wantonness: James 4.
and your Teachers (who cause you to err by their Sorcery and Enchantments; and
James, James 5.
the Son of Thunder, uttered forth his Voice against such; Is^^iah 3.
and thus says the Lord, Because the Daughters of Sion are Haughty, and walk
with stretched-out Necks and wanton Eyes, walking and mincing as they go,
making a tinkling with their Feet; therefore the Lord will smite with the Scab
the Crown of the Head of the Daughters of Sion: In that day the Lord will take
away all the Bravery of their tinkling Ornaments of their Feet, and their
Cauls, and round Attire, like the Moon, and the Chains, and the Bracelets, and
the Head-bands, and Tablets, and the Earrings, and the Nose-jewels, the
changable Suits of Apparel, and the Mantles, and the Wimples, and the
Crisping-pins, and the Glasses, and the fine Linen, and the Hoods, and the
Vails: and it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet Smell, there shall be a
Stink; and instead of well-set Hair, Baldness; and instead of a Stomacher, a
girding with Sackcloth; and Burning instead of Beauty. Now all you high and
lofty Daughters of England, who are sporting your selves in the day time, and
Scorning and Disdaining your Fellow Creatures, read your selves, and your
Portions; Howl and Lament, for a Day of Vengeance, of Rending, of Burning, of
Famine is coming upon you; for the Land mourns because of Pride.

James Parnell.

To the LIBERTINE, whose Liberty stands in the Flesh.
WOE unto thee, who art at Ease in the Flesh, devouring the Creation, and
spending it upon thy Lusts, whose heart is run from God a Whoring after other
Lovers, committing Fornication with the Creation, nourishing thy heart, Ezekiel.
23. 30. Psalm. 10. 39. James 5. 5.
as in a day of Slaughter, satisfying thy Lusts in whatsoever thy heart runs
after, and so art at ease in the Flesh, and feel no Sorrow nor Grief; but
the Harlot is exalted in thy Bosom above all that is called God, Rev. 18. 7.
and thou have cast his Law behind thy back, Hebr. 10. 29.
living without the Fear of God, and walking despightfully against the Spirit
of Grace; Mal. 2. 17.
saying within thy self, He that does Evil is Good in the sight of God; and
where is the God of Judgment? Can we do any thing without God? Is it not by his
Power we do all things? And can we do any thing contrary to his Will? Yea, thou
shall find, that all thou do is contrary to his Will; and thou shall find him
a God of Judgment; for thy Sins have separated thy Soul from God, Isaiah 52. 2.
and long (in his Love and Mercy to thy Soul) has he forborne thee, and has
not cut thee off from off the face of the Earth; but has still spared thee,
and waited to be gracious, though thy heart has been wholly gone from him, and
never regarded to do that which is pleasing in his sight, but instead of
serving him thou have served thy own lusts, with his good Creatures to which
thou have had no right, and he to thee has been a merciful God; but will not
the Lord visit for these things? yea, he will not always strive with man, and
though thou takes thy pleasure now, remember thou must come to Judgment, And
lo, says the Lord, I come quickly, Genesis 6. 3. Eccle. 11. 9. Rev. 22. 12 Gal.
6. 8.
and my reward is with me, to give unto every one according to his deeds. And
they that sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: And then thou
shall find, that power thou have had, and instead of using it to the Honor
and Glory of God, thou have hid thy Talent in the Earth, and lived wantonly
upon the Earth, serving thy own will, dishonouring the Holy Lord of Glory and
Righteousness; and then in the day of thy Judgment, thou shall confess that the
Lord has visited thee time after time, and called thee time after time,
handing forth his Mercy to thee; when thou hearkened, the Lord was with thee;
when thou walked in his fear, he was not far from thee; but thou have hearkened
to the voice of the Serpent and false Prophet, which has drawn thy heart from
God, into the visible things of the Creation, which pass away, and has
promised thee Liberty and Peace in the same, and it being pleasing to thy
lustful earthly mind, thou art become one with the Harlot, which lies in thy
Bosom: and thus thou have accepted the gift with which the Old Serpent tempted
Christ, Mat. 4. 8, 9.
and so art become a Servant of the Devil, of whom thou art brought in bondage
of him, being evermore; and while thou art promising to thy self Liberty, 2
Pet. 2. 19, 20, 21.
thou thy self art a Servant unto corruption; and thus thy Lusts have separated
betwixt God and thy Soul, and art become the Image of the Devil, yielding thy
Members servants to uncleanness; and thus thou sets up a rest in the Devils
Kingdom, wherein thou sports thy self, and art at liberty, eating and drinking
in merriness; so if there were sorrow only in this World, 1 Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 15.
18, 19.
thou art of all men most happy; then our Fathers that are fallen asleep in
Christ are perished, and we are of all men most miserable, if there be joy only
in this World; but out of the Liberty of the Children of God thou art found,
and by them seen to be in the fall, wallowing in the mire and lust, and so art
unredeemed, living under the Curse; for this is the redemption from death to
life, Romans 8.
and thou live after the flesh, and are dead, the carnal mind ruling which
is death, and is at enmity with God, for it is not subject to the will of God,
and so long as this has dominion over thee, thou can not obey God; for he
that lives in the flesh, cannot please God, but if through the Spirit thou
mortify the deeds of the flesh thou shall live; Romans 8. 1.
and here is the Liberty of the Children of God, Who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit: but their Liberty is not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit;
for by the Law of the Spirit of the Life they are set free from the Law of Sin
and Death: and from Christ, their Redeemer, they have received Power to become
the Sons of God, John 1. 12.
and in the same have dominion over the World, Flesh, Self, and the Devil,
Death, and Hell; and this comes through the Cross, by which they are crucified
to the World, and the World to them; Gal. 6. 14.
and here is the Liberty of the Children of God, who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit; which Liberty no vulterous Eye can see, nor venomous
Beast shall know, nor the rebellious disobedient One: Therefore do not deceive
thy self in saying, thou art a Christian, and believe in Christ, and art a
Child of God; for, They that are Christ's, Gal. 5 2. Romans 6. 16.
have crucified the Flesh; and to whom thou yieldest thy Members Servants to
obey, his Servant thou art.

To the Light of God in thy Conscience I speak, which if thou love it, and unto
it hearken, and bring thy deeds unto it, to be tried by it, it will witness
(for God and his Children) against thee, to be a Child of the Devil, and his
works thou do, and thy Faith to be feigned, like the Hypocrite, and does not
purify thy hearts, and so is no more then the wickedest that is; for all say,
that Christ dyed for them; but all cannot witness it: John 3 9.
For he that believes is born of God; and he that is born of God does not
commit sin.

And this Light, loving it, will let thee see how thy Heart is turned from God,
and that thou have more delight in the things that perish, than in the Fear of
the living God, which keeps the heart clean, Prove. 9. 13.
and is the beginning of the pure Wisdom and Righteousness; and if thou
honestly communest with it, it will let thee see thy secret Actions, and all
thy hidden deeds done in darkness, that thou may come to Judgment and
Condemnation for all these things; and except thou be born again, and become as
a little Child, thou art no Child of God, neither can enter the Kingdom of
God; but art without, in the world's nature, in the state of Condemnation, in
whom the Son of Perdition rules above all that is called God, sitting in the
Temple of God, as God, and says, He is God; and here he opposes God in his
Kingdom, and says that is lawful, and for it pleads that which God says is
unlawful, and forbids: And he tells the Creature, and makes it believe, it
cannot keep God's Commandments, and that it has not power to do that which God
commands it, or to depart from Evil; and that none live but they sin; and
Christ has satisfied for all sin, though they sin daily; that man may use the
Creatures as he pleases, seeing they were made for Man's Use: and the Spirit
of God says, He that says he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments,
is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him: And as many as receive him, to them he
gives Power to become the Sons of God: Romans 2. 8. 1 John 3. 8, 9, 10.
And the Law of the Spirit of Life makes them free from the Law of Sin and
Death: He that commits Sin is of the Devil, and never knew God; and by this are
the Children of God, and the Children of the Devil made manifest: And he that
abides in him, sins not: And he that lives after the Flesh cannot please
God; Romans 8. 8.
for without Holiness none shall see the Lord. And thus the Devil, the old
Serpent (who was a Liar from the beginning) opposes God in his Kingdom,
daubing the Creature up in that which is Evil, making it a Habitation in his
kingdom, while it live upon the Earth, and then must take part with him in the
Lake that is prepared for the Devil and his Servants, who does not dare to call
God a Hard Master, as if he would lay a Tax upon the Creature which it is not
able to perform; and thus he deceives the Creature, and draws out of the
Commands of God, and out of the Fear of God, which preserves from Evil; and so
he draws into Carelessness and Slothfulness, and begets a liberty therein; and
because of those things comes the Wrath of God upon the Children of
Disobedience, Col. 3. 5, 6.
as it was in the beginning, when God said, That in the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely dye the Death: Genesis 3.
and the Serpent said, You shall not surely dye; for God does know, that in the
day you eat thereof, you shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. And thus he
deceived them, and drew them out of the Commands of God, and out of the Fear of
God, into the Disobedience, and so came the Curse of God upon them, by
hearkening to him, and entering into his Temptations, and then they found God
Just and True, and the Devil a Liar, whom they had believed; now read thy self.
To the Light of Christ in thy Conscience I speak, which searches the Heart,
and knows the secret Thoughts and Intents of the Heart, which will witness me,
and condemn thee who walk contrary unto it: Be not Deceived, God is not
Mocked; Gal. 6. 7.
such as thou sowest, such must thou reap; for God is a Just God, and will nto
acquit the Wicked: For thou art found a Slothful Servant, who have hid thy
Talent in the Earth; and think not that thou shall receive the Reward of the
Righteous and Faithful; for, if the Righteous scarcely be saved, what will
become of the Wicked and Ungodly? 1 Pet. 4. 18.
Therefore Repent, while its called to day, harden not thy heart, lest the
Judgments of God come upon thee at unawares, and sweep thee away, and give thee
thy Portion among the Slothful Hypocrites and Unbelievers: For, by the Light of
God thou arr seen and found in the Sins of Sodom, and the Plagues of Sodom are
coming upon thee; therefore be afflicted and mourn, and let thy Laughter be
turned into Mourning, and thy Joy into Heaviness; James 4. 9.
for to Judgment thou must come, and thy Liberty.

To the Light of Christ in thy Conscience I am made manifest, which (if thou
love it) will let thee see thy self, and tender thy Conscience, and will lead
thee into the Fear of God, following of it, and will humble thee, and bring
down thy high and lofty Looks, and bring thee under Judgment and Condemnation
for thy Stiff neckedness, Disobedience and Rebellion against the Son of
Righteousness, here will be thy Condemnation; out of thy own mouth will the
Lord judge thee in Righteousness by the Light in thy Conscience, which he has
enlightened thee withal, which now thou kickest against, which will thy Torment
be.

This is a Warning from the Lord unto thee, and now thou art left without
Excuse, in the Presence of the living God, by the Light of God; this is the day
of thy Visitation, and the day of thy Judgment draws nigh, 1 These. 5. 2, 3.
now thou have time, prize it: For the Day of the Lord will come as a Thief in
the Night, to all the Children of Darkness, as it was to the Sodomites: and
verily I say unto thee, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in
the Day of Judgment, then for thee, if thou do not Repent, who have tasted of
the Love and Mercy of God, and have trampled it under foot, and have rebelled
against the Spirit of Grace.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord, as a Warning to all who are in the
Fleshly Liberty; by a Witness of the True Liberty of the Children of God
through Death, which Liberty stands not in Time, nor in any thing in Time; for
all things in Time perish with Time, but this remains when Time shall be no
more; and his is Pure, Unspotted of the World. J. P.

ALL you that Scoff, and Scorn, and Reproach, and Revile at the Children,
Servants and Messengers of the Most High God, whom you nickname QUAKERS; and
under the same Name Persecute them, as a People not worthy to live, and have no
Ground for it, neither know any Evil by them, but all along their Lives and
Conversations condemn yours, and therefore you Hate them, Revile them, and
Reproach them in whom the Power of the Living God is made manifest, the same
which ever was, Eccles. 12. 3^
Which Shakes the Earth, and makes the Strong Man to bow himself, and the
Keepers of the House to Tremble: And the same Power which all the Children of
God in all Ages witnessed, and passed through, which then by the same
Generation Suffered, both by Magistrates, Professors, Priests and People, who
were and are Strangers to the Life of God, and his Power; and therefore
Reproached, Scoffed, and Scorned it, as you now do; but it is that the
Scripture might be fulfilled upon you, 2 Timothy 3. 3^
Who are Despisers of those that do Good.

Isaac (the Seed of the Promise) Trembled, Genesis 27. 33. who was Mocked by
Ishmael, the Son of the Bondwoman, who was cast out as the same Seed; and now
by you Ishmaelites, who are the Children of the Bond. Woman, who are cast out,
and are found without, Mocking and Scoffing the Righteous Seed, Genesis 21, 9, 10.
Gal. 4. 30.

And Moses (a Servant of God) Quaked and Trembled; who counted it greater
Riches to suffer Affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures
of Sin for a Season, Heb. 12. 21. Heb. 11. 26. and this you now call Madness
and Folly, who know not that Godliness is great Gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6.

And David (who was a King) Quaked and Trembled, and Roared, and Watered his
Couch with Tears, Psalm. 69. 12. Psalm. 22. 14. Psalm. 38. Psalm. 6. 6. And
Drunkards made a Song on Him; And some shut out their Tongues, and wagged their
Heads, and gaped upon him with their Mouths, Psalm. 64. and Psalm. 122. 7. and
this you sing in your Steeple Houses like Hypocrites without knowledge, Psalm,
35. 16. and yet scoff and scorn and reproach those in whom the same Power is
made manifest, and yet you will say, as he said, you are not puffed in mind, nor
have no scornful eye, etc. but he spoke the Truth, and you lie, Psalm. 131. 1.
and thus you deceive your souls, and loves to have it so; your Leaders cause
you to err, Isa. 9. 16. and Job a Servant of the Lord quaked, who by the same
Generation was laughed to scorn, Job 4. 14. Job 12. 14. and Jeremiah, a Prophet
of the Lord quaked, who was then persecuted by the same generation, Jer. 23. 9.
and Daniel a Prophet of the Lord trembled, who was cast into the Lions Den,
because he would not deny his God, Dan. 10. 11. Dan. 6. 16. but by his power he
was preserved, as we are now from those Lions Whelps who would us devour; and
Habbakkuk a Prophet of the Lord, his Belly Trembled, and his Lips Quivered,
Hab. 3. 16.

And Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ fell down and trembled, Acts 9. 4, 5, 6.
who was reviled, reproached, and persecuted even to death, who was one that
hazarded his life for the Name of Jesus, Acts 6. 26. and said, all the day long
were they killed, and accounted as sheep to the slaughter, Romans 8. 36. now
these were all Quakers, who then suffered with patience by the same Generation:
now read what Generation you are of; for they that were after the flesh always
persecuted them that were after the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. there was always a
generation by which the righteous ever suffered since Cain, the firstborn upon
earth, in whose way you are found, who envy, who are in the wrath, Jude 10. you
kill the just, and he lies slain in the streets, Jam. 5. 5, 6. at whose hands
his blood shall be required, Mat. 23. 35. and the Son of man was to eat his
bread with quaking and drink his water with trembling, Ezekiel, 12. 10. out of
which life you are found, who are at ease in the flesh, feeding without the
fear of God, spending the Creatures upon your lusts, 1 Cor. 10. 7. Jam. 5.
scoffing and scorning them who are not one with you in the same liberty, but
fears before the Throne of God, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Romans 13. 14. 1 Cor. 10. 31. and
thus you err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, Mat. 22. 29.
therefore behold, ye Dispisers and Wonderers, and perish, I will work a work in
your days, which though you see it, you shall not believe it, Acts 13. 41. Is
it not apparent before your eyes, the wicked man returns from his wickedness,
and the ungodly from his ungodliness, and the drunkard from his drunkenness,
and the profane one from his profaneness, and now seeks after God, and fears
his powerful name; and this you see and cannot believe, but despise, scoff and
scorn the Power by which this Work is done; for it is no new thing but the same
which was and is; you are in the same adulterous Generation, which cannot see
the Signs which follow the Truth, Mat. 16. 3, 4. from whom the Gospel is hid,
whose eye is Darkened with the Godd of the world, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. and so speaks
evil of the things you know not, Jude 11. putting Darkness for Light, and Light
for Darkness, Evil for Good, and Good for Evil, Isa. 5. 20. you are the
Scoffers that the Apostle foretold of to be in the last times, Jude, 18. who
are Despisers of those that are good, Incontinent, Fierce, Traitor, Heady,
High-minded, Lovers of Pleasures more then Lovers of God, having a Form of
Godliness, but deny the Life and Power, 2 Timothy 3. 3, 4, 5. and here you are
both Priests, people and professors, who are Scoffing and Scorning, Slandring
Reproaching, Reviling, and Persecuting the Righteous Innocent Servants and
Messengers of the Most High God, who is uttering forth his Voice through them
in Power, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men, who will you call
to Judgment, and convince you of all your ungodly Deeds, and all your hard
Speeches, which you have wrongfully spoken against him and his Power, and will
reward you accordingly, Jude 14. 15. Romans 22. 21.

Therefore to that which is of God in all your Consciences I speak, which is my
Witness against your Ungodly Lives; which turning your minds to it, and unto it
taking heed, will let you see, you speak Evil of the things you know not,
loving Darkness rather then Light, because your deeds are Evil, John 3. 19.

Therefore Fear and Dread the Lord God, and Repent; and take heed of Mocking,
lest your Bonds be made strong, Isa. 28. 22. for God will not be Mocked; such
as you Sow, such must you Reap, Gal. 67. Therefore fear before the Lord, and
try all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. And despise
nothing before you know it, lest you speak Evil of Gods Elect; for it is a
fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God, Hebr. 10. 31.

Therefore take this for a Warning as from the Mouth of the Lord; for no
Ignorance is to be pleaded before the Throne of God.

This was given forth in Vindication of the Power of God, which is now
manifesting in his Sons and Daughters, lest the Simple (who are not yet
acquainted with it) should stumble at the Name.

By a Friend of the Truth, and a Lover of these People, which you who are out
of the Truth scornfully call Quakers; but the Scorners God will judge, and the
Righteous God will bless, who work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling;
for, says the Lord, To such a one will I look, that is of a Humble and
Contrite Spirit, and Trembles at my Word, Prove. 16. 29. Phil. 2. 12. Isa. 66.
1, 2.

JAMES PARNELL.

A SHIELD OF THE TRUTH Or the Truth of God cleared from Scandals and
Reproaches, Cast upon it by Scandalous and Reproachful Tongues, Hebr. 10 33.
which the Devil in all Ages did make use of, Psalm. 102. 6.
whereby he Blasphemed the Truth of God, 1 Cor. 3. 13.
striving to present it Odious in the Eyes the Ears of all People, Rev. 9.
that so he might uphold his own kingdom: Rev. 12.
But the Day has made him manifest, and the Lord is come, and is coming to
make War with him, and bind him, and cast him into the Bottomless Pit, and all
who bears his Image, and under his Dominion is.
To the READER.
REader, to thee (whosoever thou art) I shall clear my Conscience, and to all
people: To the Light of God in all your Consciences I speak, Jer 31. 37, 38,
39, 40. 1 Pet. 2. 25. Rev. 14. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 15. ^9.
which is one in all, in the behalf of a despised People with men, yet not with
God, who are scat^red abroad, in several Countries, yet one in the Lord, whom
the Lord has chosen out of the Generation of the Children of this World, out
of all Sects, Forms and Opinions, into the Light of Life to bear his Image, and
so to bear his Cross; and because they have not the same Image with the
Children of this World, but are chosen out from amongst them, their Fellowship,
their Kindred and Acquaintance, and Breeding, 2 Cor 6. 14. 1 Pet. 4. 8. 2 Cor.
4. 4. Ez^k. 2. 2.
Manners, Customs, Fashions, Words, Ways and Worships; for Light can have no
Fellowship with Darkness; and so the Devil who goes about like a Roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour, who is the Godd of the World, who rules in the
Children of Disobedience, has stirred up all who bear his Image, who under his
Dominion are to persecute, slander, revile and reproach all who bear the Image
of God Rev 13, 14, 15.
(who testifies against him and all who bear his Image) so as he has done in
all Ages, from the beginning, so it is now, that he may uphold his Image, and
his Kingdom; so the Beast is making war with the Lamb, and now is the war
begun, but the Lamb shall get the victory, praises, praises to our God forever.
And so for the Turths sake, and the good of all tender Consciences, I shall
clear my conscience, in the clearing of the Truth from the Scandalls, Revel.
10. 2 Pet. 2. 14.
false Accusations, and Reports which are cast upon it by the Priests and
people who bear the Image of the Beast, left any who are unsettled and
ungrounded in the Truth, should by giving ear to those false Reports, and
Scandals, and Accusations, turn from the Light, and so lose their
Convincement, and get up into hardness of heart, and lose their part in the
promised Land; for there are a company of Priests, in all parts of the Nation
where the Truth comes, who are the Devils greatest Agents, who are daily
plotting and inventing, and seeking every way, to blot the Image of God of the
Nation, by Writings, by Printings, by Petitioning to Rulers and Magistrates,
with all the false aspersions and scandals they can get together, to present
the Truth of God odious to all people; and likewise in their Pulpits do the
same, as it was in the time of Christ and his Apostles: but we have but one
Ruler and Governor to Petition to, Mat. 16. 21. Chap. 29. Acts 4. Acts 5. Isa.
33. 22 Romans 8. 31. 33, to 37. Isa. 54. 81.
and rely upon, from whom we have our Image, even God over all, who knows
the hearts of all, who is our Witness, and our Justification, then who art thou
that condemnest or layest any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? but he has
promised, No weapon formed against him shall prosper; for his work he will
carry on by his own unlimitted power, in despite of the Beast and his Image.

And so Reader, I charge thee and all people in the presence of the Lord,
before whom you must come to Judgment, to take heed of speaking evil of that
you know not, lest you speak evil of Gods Elect; for it is a fearful thing to
enter into the hands of the Living God; Heb. 10. 31. 32. Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43.
for if those be cursed that do not receive the Messengers of Jesus Christ,
how much more them that revile them, and persecute them? He that has an ear to
hear, let him hear; for in as much as thou do it to one of his, thou do
to him.

J. P.

A Shield of the Truth, etc.
1. COncerning the Name QUAKERS, by which the World scornfully calls us.

As for the Quaking and Trembling caused by the unresistable power of the Lord,
Iown, which the holy men of God witnessed before us in all Ages. Genesis 27. 33.
Heb. 12. 21. Jer. 23. 9. Hab. 3. 16. Dan. 10. 7.
Isaac the seed of the Promise trembled: Moses the Servant of God Quaked and
Trembled: Jeremiah the Prophet of the Lord, his Bones shook: Habakkuk his Belly
Trembled, and Lips Quivered: when Daniel heard the voice, he fell down and
Trembled: and David the King was as if his Bones were out of Joint; Acts 9. 6.
Psalm. 22. 15. Job. 4. 14. Ezekiel. 12. 18. Prove. 19. 29. Prove. 3. 33, 34. Phil. 2.
12.
and the Rest of the holy Men of God Quaked and Trembled, and so it was no new
thing, but that which was from the beginning, which all the holy Men of God
witnessed, though new to the World, who live in Darkness. And for this cause
are we scornfully called Quakers; but the Scorners God will judge, and the
Righteous God Will Bless, who work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

2. We are accused, to be the false Prophets, and false Teachers, and Deceivers
that are foretold of in the Scriptures, to come in the last times: But says
Jesus Christ, You may Know them by their Fruits, and so we desire to be Judged
according to our Fruits.

Jesus Christ said, Mat. 7. 15, 19, 17, 18,
Beware of false Prophets, that appear to you in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly
are Ravening Wolves; you shall know them by their Fruits: Do men gather Grapes
of Thorns, and Figs of Thistles? A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit,
nor a Corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit.

Pride is a Fruit of the corrupt Tree, now see whether we or your Teachers be
guilty of this? who go in double Cuffs, and Bott-hose-tops, with great store of
Points and Ribbands, which are of no use, but for the satisfying of the Proud
mind, and also following the new Fashions and Inventions of the World, they
and their Wives and Children, decking and adorning themselves according to
their Proud minds, to make the Creature seem something in its own eyes, 1 Pet.
3. 3.
and in the eyes of others; and those are the outward signs of Pride, which
lodges in their hearts; And they are called of men Masters, and have the
chiefest places in the Assemblies, uppermost Rooms at Feasts, Mat. 23. 5. 6, 7.
and love Greetings in the Markets, such Christ declared against. See whether
these be outward signs of Pride, yea or nay. But you will say, that one may
have as Proud a heart in plain Apparel. I answer, But where pride is, it will
vent forth it self, either less or more, according to the outward ability of
the Creature; but it shows it self the most in Apparel; but the Light of God
makes manifest the Heart, where lies the Root.

Covetousness is a Fruit of the corrupt Tree; see whether your Teachers be
covetous, yea or nay, who have some Fifty, some Sixty, some and Hundred or two
Hundred Pounds in the Year, more or less, as they can get it; and some have
Money for Smoke passing up the Chimnies, and for Pigs, Geese, Eggs and
Chickens, and many other such like things, which are too tedious to reckon; but
your Hirelings will reckon them when they come to take them, to seek for their
Gain from their Quarter: Isa. 56. 11.
and this Gain they make of the Letter, which was spoken forth freely by the
true Prophets and Apostles of God: Acts 20. 23.
Where the greatest Benefices are, 2 Cor. 12. 14.
there will they be; so are like the false Prophets which Ezekiel declared
against, Who seek for the Fleece, and regard not the Flock. Now see whether
your Teachers be Covetous, or we, who have left our Countries, our Lands, and
Livings, and Possessions, and have forsaken all, and have not where to lay our
Heads, but as the Lord provideth for us; neither covet any man's Silver nor
Gold, Gifts or Rewards; for, freely we have received, freely we give; for we
come not to seek yours, but you, God is our Witness, and our Justification;
then who art thou that condemnest?

Drunkenness is a Fruit of the Corrupt Tree; now see whether we, or your
Teachers, are guilty of this; he that has an Eye to see, let him see.

Envy is a Fruit of the Corrupt Tree; now see whether your Teachers be guilty
of this, who sue men at Law for their own Estates, and earthly things, and
trifles, though they be of their own Flock; or we, who sue no man at the Law,
but are sued by them, because we cannot maintain them in their Pride and
Idleness by the Sweat of our Brows, contrary to the Scripture, which says, He
that will not Work, let him not Eat; Mat. 5. 4.
and if they did administer to us spiritual things, 2. These. 3. 10.
they should reap our carnal. Now see if these be not the Ravening Wolves in
Sheep's Clothing; for, so long as we put into their Mouths they cried, Peace,
Peace, and told us we were Christians, when we were Heathens, and knew not God;
Mich. 3. 5.
so sewed Pillows under our Arm-holes; and appeared to us in Sheeps Clothing;
but now we that are redeemed into the Flock of Christ, by Christ our eyes are
opened, and now we see that we profited nothing by them, but were deceived by
them, so we cannot put into their Mouths, nor Maintain them any longer in
their Deceipts, Ezekiel. 13. 18, 19.
but testify against them; and so they Sue us at the Law, and hale us before
Magistrates, and take Tribble Damage, and appear Ravening Wolves, and would
destroy us and our Families, and would live upon our Estates by Compulsion, and
an outward Law; and some of us they cause to be put in Prison, and call us
Heretics, Deluders, and Deceivers, false Prophets, and yet could live on our
Estates, and covet our Silver and Gold, and Estates, and by your Law and
Justices Warrants strain upon them, and so seek ours, and would destroy us;
like the false Prophets which Hosea declared against, Hos. 6. 9
who as a company of Robbers wait for a man, 2 Pet. 2. 3
so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent; and also the false
Teachers, which Peter foretold of, who through covetousness, with feigned words
make merchandise of the People, or we, who are made merchandise of, though we
take none of their stolen Wares, and make merchandise of none, God is our
Witness. And see if these be not the false Teachers which Paul foretold of to
come in the last times, Covetous, Proud, Boasters, Blasphemers, Disobedient,
Unthankful, Unholy, without Natural Affection, Truce Breakers, False-accusers,
Incontinent, Fierce, Despisers of those that are good, Traitors, Heady,
High-minded, Lovers of Pleasures more then Lovers of God, having a Form of
Godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away. For of this sort
are they that creep into Houses, who lead silly women captive, full of sin and
corruption, and diverse lusts ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge
of the Truth: Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do they withstand
the Truth: Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, 2 Timothy 1. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Now see if your Teachers be not Lovers of their own selves, who seek for the
Fleece, and regard not the Flock; but feed with the Fat, and clothe with the
Wool, and live by the Sweat of others Brows, living at Ease, devouring the
Creation, and spending it upon their Lusts, they, Ezekiel. 34.
and their Wives and Children, nourishing their Hearts as in a day of
Slaughter; and of changable Minds, according to the Government of Man, James 5.
that they may save and shelter themselves under the Power and Will of Man, as
the false Prophets did, by which they stood, and were upheld; and the same that
Prayed for the King and Realm, the same Pray now for the Lord Protector, and
the State of England.

Now see whether these be false Prophets, or we, who have forsaken our outward
Livings, and Estates, and Countries, and Acquaintance, and come into Strange
Countries, and lite among Dogs, and Wolves, and Heathens, as Christ says, Mat.
10. 16, 17.
he sends us forth as Sheep among Wolves, which are of the Priests Flock; and
suffers our Bodies to be Stocked, Stoned, Reproached, Reviled, Imprisoned and
shamefully Entreated, and love not our Lives unto Death for Christ's sake; he
is our Witness and only Protector, in whose Power we stand and are upheld,
contrary to the Will of Man.

And see whether we or your Teachers are Covetous, as it is before proved; and
Proud, as it is before proved: And see if they be not Boasters, who boast that
they are the Ministers of Christ, and sent of God, when as they are come but
from Oxford and Cambridge, approved by the Will of Man: And boast of Gifts, and
sell them for Money; when the Scripture says, Acts 8. 20.
The Gift of God is not to be bought with Money: And they boast, they are the
mediate Means ordained by God; when as they are ordained by their Parents, or
some other; and their Means are Mediate, Gal. 1. 16.
and the Apostles Immediate; John 15 6,
and the Way is but One, says Christ; he that has an Ear to hear, let him
hear. And see if they be not Blasphemers, who say, They are the Ministers of
Christ, and some of them Drunkards, some Proud, some Covetous, and are Evil
Examples to all that follow them, contrato Christ, or his Apostles, who said,
Walk as you have us for Examples; 1 Timothy 2. 3.
and here they abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 3.
and so have not God, as in 2 John 9. And this is Blasphemy, to say, They are
the Mouth of the Lord; and are the Mouth of the Devil, teaching Lies and
Blasphemies; telling the People that are of their Flock, They are Christians,
and of the Flock of Christ; when as they are all manuer of unrighteous Persons,
who live without God in the World: and tell them, Their Children are the Flock
of Christ, when they are sprinkled on the Face with a little Water; when as
they grow up in all manner of Ungodliness, without the Fear of God, or the
Knowledge of God; and they are Heathen, that know not God; and this is
Blasphemy, to say, Christ is the Head of Heathens, for he is the Head of his
Flock: And they tell People, that a House of Lime and Stone is the Church, Jer.
10. 15.
whenas the Church is the Body of Christ, Col. 1. 11.
and this is Blasphemy: Verse. 24.
Now see whether we or your Teachers, be more like Deceivers, Liars and
Blasphemers, and let every one's Life preach him forth, and judge him: and see
if they be not Lovers of Pleasures more then Lovers of God, who delight in
Music, in Bowling, in Carding, and Dicing, and Hawking, and Hunting, and all
manner of Pleasures and Delights. Now see whether they or we be like the
Apostles, who never used any such thing, but all their Delight was in the Work
of Christ; but They that are of the Flesh, mind the things of the Flesh; Phil.
1. 18.
and they that are of the Spirit, Romans 8. 5.
the things of the Spirit. Now see if they have not a Form of Godliness, but
deny the Power and Life which the Apostles lived in; therefore from such turn
away; And if you find that our Lives be contrary to what we profess, from us
turn away also. But of this sort are they who creep into Houses, and lead silly
People captive: Now see if they do not creep into Steeple Houses, and say,
that is the Place, and no where else, and lead silly People captive, laden with
Sins and diverse lusts, ever learning, and never coming to the Knowledge of the
Truth: Some learn thirty, some fifty, some sixty years, and above, and still
full Sin, and as dark and blind and ignorant of the Things of God as ever: And
they will teach, You shall never be made free from Sin, so long as you are upon
the Earth; and hereby they set up their Rest in the Devil's Kingdom.

And if you do allege, We creep into Houses; I answer, The Apostle witnessed
the same where he said, Acts 20. 20.
I have taught you publicly from House to House; And our Meetings are public
to any who will come amongst us, sometimes in no House, but in the Fields or
Commons, as the Apostles witnessed, Mat. 18. 20.
and we find the Lord amongst us, Mat. 18. 20.
being gathered in his Name, according to his Promise: Now see by their Fruits,
if your Teachers be not the Deceivers, which are foretold of in the Scriptures,
who as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do they withstand the Truth by
all the Ways they can, as it is before proved; for Jannes and Jambres were the
Magicians of Egypt, Exodus 7. 11, 12.
that imitated Moses; so those University Men by their Magic Arts, Inventions
and Imaginations, and studying old Authors, have gotten the Form of the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles Words, to trade with, but deny the Life and
Power, and so are Traitors to Christ, who are Men of corrupt Minds, and
Reprobates concerning the Faith; but they shall proceed no further; for their
Folly shall be made manifest to all Men: Now he that desi^^s to see, may see,
and let all who are wise hearted judge.

But if you do allege, They have been long, and have reigned long, and we are
new come up, and it is a New Way; and we come to breed Divisions and Dissension.

I answer, The more is their Shame; and by that the more they are seen to be
those that run and the Lord never sent them, therefore they profit not the
People at all, who have reigned so long, and wrought no better Reformation in
the Land, Jer. 23. 31.
but it flows as much in Iniquity and all manner of Ungodliness as ever, and
the People that are taught by them, as ignorant and as dark to the Things of
God as ever; and here they would keep them by an outward Power, but the Day
has made them manifest, and the Scripture fulfilled, which the Apostle spoak
of, who said, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
It was the last Times then; 1 John 2. 20.
and since they have continued, you may know them by their Fruits; they profess
Christ in Words, but in Life deny him; and the Mystery of Iniquity has reigned
a long time, Tit. 1. 16.
and there has been a time of cruel Darkness, Rev. 13. 3, 4.
and all the World has wondered after, Verse. 12.
and worshipped the Beast and his Image, and he has reigned, and by him the
false Prophet has reigned, which has deceived the Nations; but now Light is
risen out of Darkness, Rev. 16. 20.
and shines forth now in these Joel 2. 28, 29.
latter Days in the Sons and Daughters of Men, according to the Promise of
God, whereby the Wiles of Satan are made manifest to the Glory of God.

And now is the Separation, the Sheep from the Goats, the Wheat from the Tares,
and Christ is come to set at Variance, Father against Son, and Son against
Father, and Wife against the Man, and the Man against the Wife, Mat. 10. 3.
and to turn the World upside down; and this is the Cause why the World rages,
And this is the Condemnation of the World, Acts 17. 6.
Light is come into the World, John 3. 19.
and they love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil: and so
to those, who are in Darkness, it is new; but we witness it is no new Way, but
the same which was, is, and is to be forever; and the same Signs follow, but
the adulterous Generation cannot see it, but they that believe shall see and be
healed: And though the Beast and false Prophet, and those that bear the Mark of
the Beast, do now make War with the Lamb and the Saints, for to uphold their
Kingdom; yet the Lamb, the King of the Saints shall overcome, Phil. 2. 10.
and to him the Nations shall bow; Rev. 19. 20.
and the Beast and false Prophet, Isa. 30. 33.
and all that bear the Mark of the Beast, into the Lake for them prepared of
old, shall go; and for this End we are come out of our Countries, and outward
Habitations and Possessions, to preach to every Conscience the Eternal Truth as
it is in Jesus, the Everlasting Gospel; as we have received it freely, freely
we give, and as we preach the Gospel, we live of the Gospel; and this is our
End and no other End, God is our Witness.

We are accused to deny the Scripture, which is false; for we witness the Life
thereof, and by the same do we witness the Scriptures to be Truth, and
serviceable in its Place, and was written for our Admonition, upon whom the
Ends of the World is come; and to us it is given to know, but to the World in
Parables; and he that would go about to unfold the Parables to the dark Minds,
by the Serpentine Wit and Imagination, 1 Cor. 10. 11
he must be kept out of the Scripture; Luke 8. 10.
and he who takes the Scriptures, and makes a Trade of them, professing to
interpret them, and so gets a Living by them, which was spoaken forth freely,
he is a Deceiver, and must be shut out of the Scripture: and who reads or takes
the Scripture to talk or discourse of, and is ignorant of the Life, must be
kept out of the Scripture; for all those run in with their Serpentine Wit and
Imaginations, wresting them for their own Ends, adding and diminishing, to
their own Destruction, and so he must be shut out of the Scripture; for hence
arise all these Sects and Opinions in the World, running into the Scripture
with their Wit, Imaginations and dark Minds, one imagining one Way, and another
another Way, and one of this Opinion, and another of that Opinion; but Opinion
is no Assurance, but is fallible, and every one out of the Way, because they
want the Life, which is the Mystery; and this is the Difference between all
Sects and Opinions and the Infallible Truth; and so they come not in by the
Door, but are climbing up another Way, and so are shut out of the Kingdom; but
the same which gave them forth, the same can open them, and to it they are no
Mystery nor Parable, nor need any Meaning; For they are of no private
Interpretation, nor came not in the old Time by the Will of Man, Joh. 10. 1.
but Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; neither can
the Will of Men open them, but the same which spoke them forth, the same can
open them, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
and spoke them forth freely: So let him that has a Dream; tell a Dream, and
he that has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully.

What is the Chaff to the Wheat, says the Lord? So he that has the Letter,
let him speak the Letler, and he that has the Life, let him speak the Life:
What is the Husk to the Kernel? And what should Swine do with Pearls, Jer. 23.
28.
whose Life is Husks, John 1. 1.
and there they feed? He that can receive, let him; the same which gave it
forth, the same can open it: And he who says, The Letter is the Word, is a
Deceiver, and errs, not knowing the Scripture; for the Scripture says, that In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was God; and the Word of the Lord came
to the Prophets, Jer. 1. 1.
and they spoke from the Word of the Lord; Jer. 2. 1.
and the Word became Flesh, and dwelt among the Apostles, and they saw the
Glory thereof, as the Glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth; and the Word is quick and Powerful, Jer. 1. 4, 8.
sharper then a two-edged Sword, and the Word is Immortal; Ezekiel 1. 3.
and this the Apostles, in whom the Word dwelt, John 1. 14.
bare witness of, and have left it upon record; Rev. 19. 13.
and we witness the same, the Word is the same, Heb. 4. 12, 13.
which was, is, and is to be forever: and who puts the Letter for the Word
is blind, and puts the Shadow for the Substance, and must be shut out of the
Scripture; and he who says, The Letter is the Light, is in Darkness, and errs,
not knowing the Scripture, which declares of the Light, which John came to
bear Witness of, who was not the Light, but testified of the Light, which was
the true Light which enlightneth every one that comes into the World; John 1.
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him
not, nor knows him not; and he came unto his own, and his own received him not;
but as many as received him, to them he gives Power to become the Sons of God;
and this we witness, and by the same Light do we discern and testify against
him to be in Darkness and Blindness, and is a Deceiver, who puts the Letter for
the Light, and so draws Peoples Minds off from the Light within them, to the
Letter without them, seeking the Living among the Dead, thinking to find Life
in the Letter without them, as the Pharisees did, and will not come unto
Christ, John 5. 39, 40.
that they might have Life; and also they must be shut out of the Scripture, as
the Pharisees were: And he also that says, The Letter is the Rule and Guide of
the People of God, is without, feeding upon the Husk, and is ignorant of the
true Light, Luke 1. 73. and 19. 15.
which was before the Letter was, John 16. 13.
which all the Children of God were and are guided by, Romans 8. 14.
and spoak and speaks the Letter from which was before the Letter was; and with
this the Letter witnesses: and who is guided by this cannot walk contrary to
the Letter, nor deny it; but they know how to use it in its Place, and see in
what Condition it was spoaken, and it witnesses with them both in Words and
Actions; John 7. 15.
and they that have this, have and need the Mystery within, though they cannot
read the Letter without, nor ever learned, as it was with Christ, which
confounded the Scribes and Pharisees; Mat. 11. 15.
and they who are never so learned without, Mat. 13. 11.
and can read and understand all Tongues and Languages without, and do not read
the Scripture within, only feed upon the Husks, and are ignorant of the Life,
which is the Mystery which is hid from the Wise and Prudent, and revealed unto
the Ignorant, as it was from the Scribes, John 7. 48, 49.
and Pharisees, and High Priests, and was revealed to those whom they counted
Ignorant, and Cursed, and knew not the Law.

And they who take the Letter to be their Rule cannot walk according to it,
because they are ignorant of the Light, which opens and leads into the Life,
which they who spoke them forth lived in; but Drunkards, and Swearers, and
Proud, and Wanton, and Covetous Lustful, Envious Ones, and all Manner of
Unrighteous Persons will take the Letter to talk of, and say, it is their Rule
and Guide, but are out of the Life thereof, and so by it are condemned; Luke
15. 15, 16.
and those are the Swine that are feeding upon the Husk without, and have
gotten the Form, but are out of the Life and Power, and put the Shadow for the
Substance, and so live in Darkness, and knows not whether he goes: but they
that read with the single Eymay understand; for the Scripture is within, and
was read within, before it was read without. Now Silence all the Study and
Wisdom of Man.

We are accused to Deny the Baptism.

The Baptism we own, which is the Baptism of Christ with the Holy Ghost and
with Fire; but we deny all other; for there is but one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, Mat. 3. 11.
one God and Father of all; and they who would have one Baptism outward, Ephesians.
4, 5, 6.
and another Inward, would have two Baptisms, when the Scripture says, the
Baptism is but One; and whosoever have the Baptism Outward, are the same they
were before; but the Baptism of Christ makes a New Creature, and this I
witness; for I received Water upon my Face, Romans 6. 3.
as my Parents told me, which they called Baptism: but I grew up a Heathen, as
all other Children do, and no New Creature, though my Parents were counted
Believers among the World and their Priests; 1 Cor. 12. 13.
but now I witness the Baptism of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
by One Spirit into One Body; and now I witness a New Creature; old things are
past away, and all things become New: And now I see the other to be formal
Imitation, and the Invention of Man, and so a mere Delusion; and all are
Heathens, Mat. 15. 4.
and no Christians, who cannot witness this Baptism, who can witness this
denies all other; for the Scripture says, The Baptism is but One; and who can
witness this are Believers, but who cannot witness this are no Believers; and
so it is that Water or no Water avails nothing, but a New Creature; for all
by Nature are the Children of Wrath, and except they be born again, they cannot
enter; and as for the Baptism of Water, which the Apostles used, it being a
Figure for its Time, the Power went along with it, and the Disciples received
the Holy Ghost when they were Baptized; but none can witness this, who set
themselves of acting or imitating the Apostles, and so take it up by Imitation,
and their Ground is the Letter, and are not guided to it by the same Spirit
which guided the Apostles; and so they are the same after Water, as before; and
so now Water (or no Water) avails any Thing, but a New Creature; for Water
was but for its time, though many in Darkness have now got the Form and are
groping in it for Life, but want the Life and Power, and so from such turn away.

We are accused to deny the Supper of the Lord.

The Supper of the Lord we own, John 6. 54, 55, 56, 57.
which is the Body and Blood of Christ, Acts 4. 32.
which the Saints feed upon; 1 Cor. 10. 16.
and this is Eternal Food and Life: And here they all feed upon one, and are of
one Heart and Mind; and here is pure and Eternal Union and Communion; and this
is not Carnal, but Spiritual; for Saints are Spiritual, and their Communion is
Spiritual and Eternal; and this we witness, who are of one Heart and one Mind,
who are in the New Covenant, and herein we discern the Lord's Body: and here
all Drunkards are shut out, and all Liars, Adulterers, Proud, Covetous, Lustful
and Envious Ones, and all Back-biters, Revilers, Extortioners, and all
Deceitful and Unrighteous Persons are shut out of the New Covenant, 1 Cor. 6.
9, 10.
and are without, feeding upon the Husk and Shadow, which is Carnal; for the
Bread which the World breaks is Carnal and Natural, and only feeds the Outward
Carnal Body, and goes into the Belly, and so passes out into the Dangil; and
so likewise the Cup which they drink, and so the Communion and Fellowship of
the World passes away; but this is no Nourishment to the Soul, but still the
Soul lies in Death; and here is no Communion, but Natural, Outward and Carnal,
of several Minds and Hearts, full of Filthiness and Uncleanness, which is the
Table of Devils, eating and drinking their own Damnation, not discerning the
Lord's Body, 1 Cor. 10. 21.
which is Spiritual, which the Natural Man discerns not: And here stands the
Worlds Communion and Fellowship, 1 Cor. 11. 29.
which is Carnal; and cross but their Carnal Wills, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
and it is turned into Envy; and for Earthly Trifles, they will go to Law, and
Cozen, and Cheat, and Defraud one another for Earthly Trifles, and like People,
like Priest; but if they lie in wait for Revenge of one another, then they will
not take their Sacrament, 1 John 3. 17.
as they call it: And here the Devil has as great Hold; for he that envies is
a Murderer; and here is the Difference betwixt the Worlds Communion and the
Saints Communion, Life and Death: Romans 8. 6.
For to be Carnally-minded is Death, but to be Spiritually-minded is Life: And
here they are without, feeding upon the Husk and Shadow without, and would
destroy the Life and Substance, where it appears, both Priest, People and
Rulers; and so have a Form of Godliness, and deny the Life and Power, from such
turn away; for it is a mere Delusion to take the Shadow for the Substance. 2 Timothy 3 5.


We are accused to deny all Prayer.

The Prayers of the Wicked we deny, Prove. 15. 8.
and God denies; Genesis 4. 3, 4, 5.
for they are abominable: for Cain the wicked one, who was out of the Commands
of God, 1 Pet. 3. 12.
who was the first Birth, he offered up a Sacrifice of the Earth, Jam. 5. 5. 16.
but God had no Respect to it; but Abel, Prove. 15. 28. 29.
the second Birth, who was the Righteous, his Sacrifice God had Respect to; so
the Prayers of the Faithful and Righteous God does accept, and they avail, and
what comes from his own, Exo. 40. 12, 13.
which is the second Birth: his own is pure, and what comes from it is pure;
Luke 1. 3.
and God who is pure, does receive that which is pure; Hab. 1. 13.
but he receives nothing which is polluted or unclean; Mat. 12. 34.
for he is of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity; Job 14. 4.
for his Sacrifice must be without Spot or Blemish: Genesis 3. 15.
and that which comes from an unclean Heart is spotted, 2 Samuel 2. 22
and defiled, and unclean; for nothing that is pure can come forth of an
unclean Vessel: But who can witness the second Birth, and that the Seed of the
Woman has bruised the Serpents Head, which is the first Promise, and Faith
which purifieth the Heart, then that which comes out is pure, proceeding from a
pure single Heart; and this Prayer God receives, and he has Respect to it, and
this we own and witness, and this comes from the second Birth, which is pure;
for the first Birth is unclean, and out of the Command of God, in the Fall, in
the Wrath, in the Peevishness, and Perverseness, and Frowardness, Cain-like, and
the Seed of the Serpent is first in every one, and rules the Head; but the
Promise is, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head: So you who
are not come to this, are still in the Fall, and are not come to the first
Promise, so all your self-acting and imitating, thinking to merit with your
Prayers and Praises, Singings, and Duties, and Worships, and Traditions, which
are all in vain; and you are sacrificing to an unknown God, John 4. 22.
a Sacrifice of the Earth from the first Nature, which God has no Respect to;
and the flaming Sword is set against that, 1 Samuel 5. 22.
to keep from the Tree of Life; for both Drunkards, Isa. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
and Swearers, Liars, Proud, Covetous, and all Manner of Unrighteous Persons
are offering up Sacrifices, and are in their Formal Worships and Duties,
thinking that is sufficient to pacify for their Sins, and yet do not repent:
But says the Lord, Prove. 23. 16.
Bring no more vain oblations; Jer. 29. 12, 13.
away with your New Moons and Sabbaths, they are Abomination, and my Soul
loathes them: Mat 6. 21.
When you spread forth your Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you, Romans 8. 26.
yea, when you make many Prayers, I will not hearken; your Hands are full of
Blood, wash you, make you clean, put away the Evil of your Doings from before
mine Eyes; cease to do Evil, learn to do well. So it is the Heart that the Lord
requires, and where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be also: And says
the Apostle, We know not how to pray as we ought, but as the Spirit makes
Intercession with Sighs and Groans; and this is more acceptable to God from an
honest single Heart, then the Long Prayer of the Pharisees.

We are accused to be destructive to the Ministry.

The true Ministry of Christ we own and witness, and the Ministers and
Messengers of Christ we own and witness; but those who have gotten the Letter
and Form to trade with, which was spoken forth freely, and deny the Life and
Power, those we deny and their Ministry; And all those who go to get human
Learning, and are certain Years, as it were serving Apprentiship, pretending to
study Divinity, and when their time is expired, they go amongst ignorant, blind
People, and get a certain Place, and a certain Wage, and so sell that which
they studied and got into the Brain, and those which receive it, Mich. 3. 10.
get it into the Brain; and so they live upon Dust, which is the Serpents Meat,
feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, both Priest and People, death feeding
death, and with the Notion begets into the Notion, and feeding the Carnal Mind
with the Carnal Letter; and this is the Cause why Drunkards, Swearers, Liars,
Proud, Covetous, Envious, Wrathful and Contentious Ones, and all Unrighteous
Persons, have gotten the Letter to talk of, or discourse of, though in the
Alehouse or Tipling-house; but this Ministry works no Reformation, only has
the Form, and leads into the Form, and denies the Life and Power, which is
neither to be bought nor sold for Money; so from such we turn away, who come by
the Will of Man, and approved by the Will of Man, and are upheld by the Will of
Man, and not by the Will of God; and their Call and Ministry we deny, which is
mediate, and formal Imitation and the Invention of Man, and so a mere Delusion.
And this is the Cause why the Land so overflows with Iniquity and all Manner of
Ungodliness, Jer. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32.
and no better Reformation wrought amongst them; their Ministry is so dark, and
dead and cold, and yet the Land full of Teachers, and yet the People lost for
want of Teaching; Isa. 35. 2.
and so they spend their Money for that which is not Bread, and their Labor
for that which profits not.

But who can witness an Immediate Call by God, Mar. 16. 25.
from their outward Callings and Countries, Amos 3. 7, 8.
Lands, Livings and Possessions, Amos. 7. 14, 15.
into several Countries to preach the free Gospel, as they have received it,
Gal. 1. 11, 12.
by the immediate Inspiration of the Spirit, and speak it forth as they are
moved by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 1. 17, 18, 19, etc.
and as the Spirit gives them Utterance, freely, as they have received it
freely; by which Ministry many are convinced, Chap. 2.
and as they abide in it, 2 Pet. 1. 21.
are converted, Acts ^. 4. etc.
as many in the Nation can witness, to the Honor and Glory of God, who are now
New Creatures; and this Call we own and witness, and this Ministry we own and
witness, which is Immediate, and stands in the Will of God; and such covetno
Man's Silver nor Gold, neither could be hired to certain Place, but travail
from Place to Place, and have no certain dwelling Place; and such are the true
Ministers of Jesus Christ, who make the Gospel free and without Charge: Acts
20. 33.
And this we own and witness; 2 These. 9. as in Acts. 6.
and for the Testimony of this true Ministry, some of us are Imprisoned, some
Stoned, some Stocked, whipped and shamefully entreated, as Vagabonds, and
Deluders, and Wanderers, and Raisers of Sedition, Acts 24. 5, 6.
and Pestilent Fellows, and esteemed not worthy to live in the Nation, Acts 21.
22.
both by Priest, and People, and Rulers, Witness the Town of Cambridge, the
Wellhead.
who are out of the Commands of God, and are Vagabonds and Fugitives from God,
who go in the Way of Cain to envy and murder the Innocent: And because we
declare against all who come not in by the Door, but seek to climb up another
Way, by their Study, Inventions and Serpentine Wisdom and Knowledge, and so are
Thieves and Robbers; and those are they which are now to set up and extolled in
England, John 10. 1.
with great Augmentations and Benefices, by the Arm and Will of Flesh; now
Heads of England, and such Ministers and their Ministry we deny; for the Hand
of the Lord is against them: But this which we own is no new Call, nor no new
Ministry, but the same which was with the Prophets and Apostles, and all whom
God sent, witnessed; and here is the Difference of the Ministers of the World,
and the Ministers of Christ; the one comes by the Will of Man, the other by the
Will of God; and the one is upheld by the Will of man, the other by the Will of
God, contrary to the Will of Man; and the one of the Letter, the other of the
Spirit; and the one has the Form and Shadow, and the other the Life and
Substance; and the Effects and Fruits of their Ministry make them manifest; 2 Timothy 3. 5
but from such turn away, who have the Form, but not the Life and Power; for
they are mere Deceivers and Witches, bewitch People from the Truth, holding
forth the Shadow instead of the Substance; and what is the Shadow to the
Substance? Or, what is the Chaff to the Wheat? He that has an Ear to hear, let
him hear and understand.

We are accused to deny all Magistracy and Government.

I answer, This is false; for we own it in its Place; 1 John 3. 4.
for whilst there is Transgression, there must be a Law; and while the Devil
has Power over Man, there will be Transgression: so the Law was added because
of Transgression, Gal. 3. 29.
and the Devil was the Cause of it; so there must be a Law without, to keep
those who are without the Fear of God in Subjection, else they would destroy
one another, and Cain would destroy Abel; 1 Pet. 2. 14.
for this is the Devil's Work; and so for this End was the Law given forth, to
curb Evildoers, and to preserve and encourage them that do well: And it was
according to that in the Conscience, Just, Holy, and Good, according to the
Will of God, and serviceable in its Place. And true Government, according to
the Law of God, Romans 7. 12.
is serviceable in its Place: Romans 4. 15.
And all Magistrates who fear God, and hate Covetousness, Rom 8. 1.
and are guided by the Light of God in the Conscience, Gal. 5. 23.
and execute the Law in its Place, Romans 8. 8.
without Partiality and Respect of Persons, 2 Samuel 23. 3.
and such are serviceable in their Place; Prove. 28. 15, 16.
and this we own, and honor, and are subject to for Conscience sake: Prove. 2.
28.
but the Righteous are from under the outward Law; Prove. 29. 10.
for they are a Law unto themselves; Isa. 14. 15.
neither is there need of any Law amongst them, James 2. 9.
Who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for against such there is
no Law: But they that walk after the Flesh, cannot please God; neither know,
how to rule or govern, who cannot witness their own Wills subjected by the Law
of God in the Heart, but are guided by their own Wills, and stand in their own
Wills; and such wink at Deceit, and rule with Partiality and Respect of
Persons, and so transgress the Law of God, which respects no man's Person; and
also give forth Laws in their own Wills, which take hold of the Righteous, Hos.
14. 8.
persecute the Righteous, and countenance and encourage the Heathen, who know
not God; so Cain slayes Abel within them, and they suffer Cain to slay Abel
without them* and the Wicked and Ungodly have more Liberty in the Nation then
the Righteous; and so the Land abounds with Iniquity, Oppression and Treachery,
because such corrupt Magistrates wink at Deceits for Carnal Ends, and uphold
Iniquity and Oppression, and tread Truth under foot; and this is the Cause why
the Land so abounds with all Manner of Ungodliness, and Deceit, Falsehood,
Tyranny, Oppression, and Persecution, and yet full of Magistrates and Officers:
And corrupt Magistrates put corrupt Magistrates in Office; and so they bear
with, and wink at one another, and feed and nourish up Deceit amongst them,
unless they cross one another's Will, and then they are as much in Deceit on
the other side, seeking and perverting the Law for Revenge; and such as these
uphold these corrupt Ministers and false Prophets, which the Nation swarms of;
Hest. 3.
and they can have a Law to maintain their Deceit, Dan. 1. 3.
and uphold them in Oppression; Isa. 23.
and so the Beast upholds the false Prophet, Isa. 5. 27. 29.
and they combine together against the simple, Psalm. 82. 1, 3.
and so the Law is made a stalking-horse to deceive the simple; and they will
pervert and wrest the Law out of its Place, and act contrary to their own Law
against the Righteous: And such Magistrates and such Government we honor not,
but deny and testify against it, as the Prophets of God always did; for by
such Magistrates and Government did the Righteous ever suffer; and for the same
Testimony of a pure Conscience, I have, and do suffer by such corrupt
Magistrates, and hundreds more in the Nation, who are redeemed out of
Transgression, who walk not after the Flesh, Zeph. 3. 3.
but after the Spirit: And Haman, Hos. 4. 18.
who stood in the corrupt Will, would have destroyed Mordecai, because he
crossed his Will, and could not bow to him; and also Pharaoh, and
Nebuchadonozer, and Herod, Mar. 6. 17, etc.
who beheaded John, Hest. 3. 8.
who stood in their own Wills; but the Hands of the Lord they did not escape.
And so corrupt Magistrates say, We deny all Magistracy and Government, as Haman
did; but Christ comes to fulfill and end all outward Laws and Government of Man,
and he himself will reign; for as Truth and Righteousness grows, the Law is
fulfilled; and passes away, and the Lion and the Lamb lie down together; and
this is the Cause why corrupt Magistrates beat down the Truth as much as they
can, and so to uphold themselves; but God will deliver his own, and Pharaoh
will he plague and confound: But such Magistrates as are guided by the Light of
God in the Conscience, and rule and govern by it, without Partiality or Respect
of Persons, in Singleness of Heart, discharging their Consciences before the
Lord, and executing the Law in its Place, Romans 13. 3, 4.
such Magistrates and such Government we own and honor in our Hearts; for such
are a Terror to Evildoers, and for the Praise and Encouragement of those that
do well; and such bear not the Sword in vain, but stand in the Will of God,
which is a Cross to their own Wills, and rule for God, and not for themselves;
and this Government is of God, and not of Man, nor after the Will of Man;
neither takes hold of any tender Conscience, nor oppresses it, but stands in
the Place where it is set; and some such Magistrates there have been in the
Northern Parts of this Nation, who witness the Law of God set up in their
Hearts, and feared God, and hated Covetousness and testified against those who
did not; and so corrupt Magistrates sought to put them out: So let all who are
single-hearted judge, who are destructive to true Magistracy and Government.

We are accused to be destructive to all Superiority and Honor, Breeding and
Manners, because we cannot put off our Hats, not follow the Fashions of the
World, nor respect any Persons; but speak the plain Word THOU to any one, Rich
or Poor.

In the Beginning, when God made Man, Genesis 1. 26, 27, 28.
he made him to be Lord over all Creatures, but not Man to be Lord over Man,
yet he was to be Servant of God; and when he had disobeyed the Command of God,
God spoak to Adam, and Adam spoak to him, and God Thou Would Adam, and Adam Thou Would
him; and here was the plain Language betwixt God and Adam. And when God
appeared to Moses in the Bush, God Thou Would Moses, and Moses Thou Would him; and this
was the plain Language which ever pass^d betwixt God and his People in all
Ages: Exodus 4. 10, 11, 12, 13.
And thou that disdainest to be Thou Would, Acts 9. 5, 6.
would exalt thy self above God, who Thou'st God in thy formal Prayers, and
scorns to take it thy self; therefore thou must come down as Lucifer did: But
it is Lucifer in thee that is exalted, who must not be honored, but must be
cast down into the Pit; and it is he who is Head in Man, who would be honored,
2 These. 2. 4.
and would be superior, and would be above God, and calls this Manners and
Breeding, to bow to him and honor him; and he has invented Ways, whereby he
is honored and exalted and worshipped; and he calls this Manners and Breeding,
and who can honor him the most, and exalt him the highest, those, he says,
are the best bred, and of the best Breeding, and those he calls Noblemen and
Gentlemen; and the other he calls Yeomen, and common People, and Inferiors,
though they all honor him, but they observe it not so much as the other; but
their Minds are more set upon the Earth and Earthly Things, to get Wealth and
Riches, and those he calls, Provident Careful People; but he that seeks
Preferment in the World, and would be exalted and set up, seeks to get his
Breeding in as excellent Manner as he can, Obad. 3. 4.
that so he may get in Favor with Lucifer that sits in the Courts and high
Palaces; and so long as he pleases Lucifer, he will set him up; but both he and
Lucifer must be cast down into the Pit together: And here is the Ground of the
Worlds Superiority, Nobility, Gentility, Honor, Breeding and Manners; and here
they Lord over one another by their corrupt Wills; and here is the Ground of
all Tyranny and Oppression, Jam. 4. 1, 2, 3.
Rackings and Taxings, and Wars, and Imprisonments, and Envy, and Murder, and
the Persecutions of the Righteous; all arise from proud Lucifer, the Lust in
Man, who would be honored; and all this is in the Fall, and under the Curse:
But Mordecai could not bow to him in Haman; and therefore he sought to destroy
him, and informed the King against him, and all the Jews in the Nation, and
said, They were a scattered People, and their Laws were diverse from all People,
neither did they observe the Law of the King; Est. 6. 1, 2.
then he set up a pair of Gallows for Mordecai; but Haman was hanged on his own
Gallows, and is cast down to nothing, and Mordecai is exalted in his stead: So
there is a Time that Mordecai is despised, and Haman exalted; and there is a
Time that Haman is cast down, and Mordecai exalted: Genesis 25. 2.
And there is a Time that Esau reigns over Jacob; Exodus 11. 9.
and there is a Time that the Elder serves the Younger: And there is a Time
that Pharaoh rules and oppresses the Israelites; but there is a Time of
Israel's Deliverance, and Pharaoh drowned in the Sea? 2 These. 2. 4.
So there is a Time that Antichrist sits in the Temple of God, Rev. 19.
as God, and says he is God, and Christ lies low in the Manger; but there is
a Time that he must be cast into the Pit, and Christ alone exalted. He that can
receive it let him. But in all Ages the Children of God could not bow to
Lucifer, nor his Image; and this was the Cause why Shadrach, Dan. 16.
Meshach and Abednego were cast into the fiery Furnace; and this was the Cause
why Daniel was cast into the Lions Den, but by the Hand of his God, whom he
alone worshipped and honored, he was delivered and exalted, and his
Adversaries cast down in his Place: And this was the Cause why the Prophets
were always persecuted and imprisoned, Acts 7. 6.
and the Apostles, who came to turn the World upside down: And this is the
Cause, why the Ministers and Messengers of Jesus Christ are imprisoned, 2 Cor.
5. 16, 17.
stoned, stocked, whipped, and shamefully entreated, whom the Lord is pleased
immediately to call from their outward Callings and Countries, and sends them
abroad into several Countries to preach his Name, no more after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit; and who knows him, must know him no more after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit; and those come to turn the World upside down, Gal. 6. 14.
being crucified to the World, and the World to them; and these cannot honor
Lucifer, nor bow to Lucifer, nor worship his Image, though there was a Time
when they did; but that was done in Egypt, when they knew not God; but now
Lucifer and his Image is cast down, and Christ alone exalted, and the pure and
perfect Law is witnessed, Col. 1. 18.
which respects no Man's Person, Rev. 19.
but God alone honored and exalted; and this we witness; Rev. 19.
for amongst us there are no Superiors after the Flesh, but Christ is the Head;
and amongst those who were redeemed out of the World, there were no Superiors,
but only Christ the Head, and all the rest Fellow Servants; and he that would
be the greatest, should be the least; 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13.
and he that respects Persons, commits Sin: Acts 4. 32.
And the Angel would not suffer John to bow to him, but said, Romans 6. 4, 5.
he was his Fellow Servants; and this we witness, who are redeemed out of the
Kingdom of the Devil, from amongst the Children of this World, into the Kingdom
of the Son, who are crucified to the World, and the World to us, by the
spiritual Cross of Christ, in which we joy and glory, amongst whom there is no
Partiality, nor Respect of Persons, but all in Union in one, though Ten
Thousand; and here God alone is King, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Acts 4. 32. Romans 6. 4,
5.
and he alone is honored, exalted and worshipped, no more after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit; for we have no other God in whom our Hearts delight: And here
proud Lucifer and his Image is cast out; and here all his Honor is thrown
down, and his Breeding, and Manners, and Fashions, and Customs, and Words, and
Ways, and Worships, which are after the Flesh, and not after the Spirit,
whereby he sets up himself, and causes his Image to be worshipped; and this is
the Cause he rages in his Kingdom, wheresoever we come, and says, We are
destructive to all Superioriry, and Magistracy; and Ministry, and Honor,
Breeding, and Manners, and turn the World upside down; for he knows where
Christ comes, Rev. 19.
he comes to take his Kingdom from him, and cast him down into the Pit, and
there he must be tormented quick, and all who bear his Image or his Mark; and
these are some of his Marks, which he calls Nobility, Gentility* Honor,
Breeding, Manners and Civility.

But true Nobility we own: the Seed of God is Noble, wheresoever it is born up,
and who can witness to the Head of the Serpent bruised, and the Seed of God
born up to reign and rule; there is true Nobility; there is true Gentility, no
more after the Flesh, hut after the Spirit; and this is to be honored; for
Honor is due to this, both in Magistrate or Minister, Fisherman or Ploughman,
Romans 13. 7.
Herdsman or Shepherd, wheresoever it rules without Respect of Persons; and
here, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor; and this is no more after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit: And here all the true Prophets of God were
Noblemen and Gentlemen, sprung of the Noble Seed, 1 King. 19. 19.
though of the Nobles and great Ones of the Earth they were disdained, Amos 7.
14, 15.
and reproached, because according to the World they were of low Degree, some
of them Ploughmen, some Herdsmen, Deuteronomy. 32. 3. Deuteronomy. 37. 5.
some Shepherds; and therefore they persecuted them and destroyed them, yet
they were Gentile and bore all. Christ was Noble, sprang of the Noble Seed,
though of the great Ones and Nobles of the Earth he was disdained, reproached
and scorned to be the King of the Jews, because according to the World he was
of low Degree, and supposed to be a Carpenter's Son; so they spit upon him, and
disdained him, and crucified him, yet he was gentile and bore all. The Apostles
were Noble, Mat. 13. 55, 56, 57.
sprung of the Noble Seed, though of the Nobles and great Ones of the Earth
they were despised and disdained, and reproached, because according to the
World they were of Low Degree, some of them Fishermen, and the like, and came
to turn the World upside down; so they were despised, persecuted and killed,
yet they were gentile, and bore all: But those were all Noble, sprung of the
Noble Seed, and so are all now who are of the same Seed; and those were all
gentile, sprung of the gentile Seed, and those have the Nature, but not the
Name; and to those belongs the true Honor, not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit; for they denied the Honor of the World; and therefore Christ said, I
receive not Honor from Men; Act. 7.
and said to his Apostles, Be ye not called Masters, Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10, 11.
neither call any Man Master upon the Earth; and though the Princes of this
World exercise Do^inion o^e over another, yet it shall not be so amongst you;
but he that would be the greatest amongst you, let him be your Servant; and
said he, How can ye believe which receive Honor one of another, and seek not
the Honor that comes from God only? John 5. 44.
And here the true Honor is no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: And
here you who are giving and receiving outside earthly Honor, you are in the
Unbelief, out of the Doctrine of Christ, cringing and bowing, and honoring and
exalting the Devil, and worshipping the Beast and his Image, which all the
World wonders after and worships, Rev. 13.

And as for Manners, and Breeding, Courtesy and Civility, Learn to do as you
would have all to do unto you, and speak every one Truth to his Neighbor: Mat.
7. 12.
And let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, Ezekiel. 8. 16.
but such as is good for the Use of Edifying; for evil Communication corrupts
good Manners; but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay, for whatsoever is
more is Evil: And breed your Children so, and here is good Manners and
Breeding, Courtesy and Civility; and who are of the right Noble Seed have
these Manners and this Breeding; Mat. 5. 37.
but the Nobles and Great Ones of the Earth want these Manners and this
Breeding, and both Priest and People of all Sorts, according to the World: And
here is the Ground of all true Nobility, Gentility, Majesty, Honor, Breeding,
Manners, Courtesy and Civility, no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit;
for the Natural Man minds Natural Things, and the Spiritual Man Spiritual
Things; but the Natural Man receives not the Things of God; and this we own and
witness: And the Time is coming, and now is, that before this Seed every Knee
shall bow, and every Tongue confess, and the Kings and Nobles of the Earth
shall be bound in Chains and Fetters of Iron: Romans 8. 5.
And here is also the Ground of the Nobility, Gentility, Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.
Superiority, Honor, Breeding and Manners of the World, Psalm. 148. 9.
which is after the Flesh, but not after the Spirit, sprung from proud Lucifer,
the Lust that reigns in man, and is not Yea and Nay, but calls it Manners to
say Nay, and take it, or do it; and so they have the Name, but not the Nature;
and so are Bastards, and no Sons, who are not sprung from the Noble Gentile
Seed; and to those Honor is not due, neither can we bow unto them; for if we
should, we should set the Devil in the room of God, and give unto him that
which is due to God, which when we were in Blindness through Ignorance we did,
Rev. 13.
and so worshipped the Beast and his Image, Rev. 14. 5.
which all the World worships and wonders after. For they that are Proud and
Lofty which is the Image of the Devil; for the Devil is the Father of Pride*
and in gay Attire, those the World worships, and wonders after, and extols, and
exalts into High Places: But since the Lord has opened our Eyes, Rev. 18. 6.
this we cannot do, but testify against it wheresoever we come, both in Words
and Actions; and so we are destructive to the World's Superiority, Nobility,
Gentility, Honor, Breeding and Manners, which is after the Flesh, and not
after the Spirit; therefore the Devil hates us in the Nobles and Great Ones of
the World; Mat. 22. 21.
but we give unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and unto God that which
is Gods, but we cannot give unto Caesar that which is God's, but Fear to whom
Fear, Honor to whom Honor is due: He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear,
and understand; For, says the Lord, If I be a Master, where is my Fear? If I
be a Father, where is my Honor? Mal 1. 6. ^^

And now something concerning the Partiality that is among the Children of this
World in their Breeding and Manners.

First, Concerning the Word Thou or Thee, which all those which are their
Priests and Teachers know, that Thou is the proper Word to one particular
Person, and is so all along the Scriptures throughout to any one, without
Respect of Persons; yea, to God himself: And the Word You is the proper Word to
more then one, but not to one; and so it is all along the Scriptures through
out. As for Example; at all Times when the Apostles spoke to Christ, they used
the Word Thou or Thee, unto him, and when he spoak to more then one of them, he
used the Word You or Ye; but if he spoak but to one, he used the Word Thou or
Thee, as in Mat. 16. 14, 15, 16, 17. verses: And also Paul Thou Would King Agrippa,
and King Agrippa Thou Would him, as in Acts 26. ver. 27, 28. and so all along the
Scripture: And so it is plain, that now it is an invention of Proud Lucifer in
man to exalt himself, as it will plainly appear; for amongst the Great and Rich
Ones of the Earth, they will either Thou or You one another, if they be equal
in Degree, as they call it; but if a man of low Degree in the Earth come to
speak to any of them, then he must You the Rich Man, but the Rich Man will Thou
him; nay, you shall find it so betwixt Priest and People; If a poor laboring
Man come before one that you call a Minister, though he be one of his Hearers,
and one who helps to maintain him, Mat. 20. 25. Prove. 22. 7. 1 Cor. 9. 19.
according to his Ability, yet he must You the Priest, and the Priest Thou him:
And here the Heathen Lord over one another by their corrupt Wills; but this is
contrary to the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, who made themselves Servants
to all; and yet those will call themselves the Ministers of Christ: And the
Word Minister signifies a Servant, and they are Masters; and so they have
gotten the Name, but not the Nature, and so are Bastards, and no Heirs, who are
not sprung from the Gentile Seed, and yet they are hired as Servants of Men,
and yet bear Rule by their Means, Je. 5. 30, 31.
as Masters over those that maintain them: so that he that has an Eye to see,
let him see the Deceits of the professed Ministers of England.

And now, as concerning the Putting off of the Hat, which is another Invention
of proud Lucifer, whereby he is honored and worshipped, and exalted in man:
but the Scripture does not speak of any such Fashion used in any Age; but man
has found out many Inventions, since the Scripture was recorded: and now it is
so, that it is a Fashion throughout the Land, whereby one man is exalted above
another; for if a poor man come before a Rich Man, it may be the Rich Man will
move his Hat, that is called Courtesy and Humility; but the Poor Man must
stand with his Hat off before him, Prove. 1. 23. Prove. 16. 4.
and that is called Honor and Manners, and due Respect unto him; but if the
Rich man do bid him put it on, it is counted a great Courtesy, and he gets
Honor to himself there, to be counted a Courteous man. But this Difference or
Respect of Persons, was never ordained by God, but by the Devil, whereby he
exalts himself in Man; but James the Apostle of Jesus Christ, witnessed against
it, as in James 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and so on, Acts 10. 3, 3.
and said, He that respects Persons commits Sin, for there is no Respect of
Persons with God: and therefore says James, Houle ye Rich men: and here your
professed Ministers abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, and so have not God,
but the Devil; and his Ministers they are whom they exalt. 2 Jou^ 5.
And now you shall see the Partiality of the Names in this your Breeding and
Manners.

First, from a Poor man to a Rich man, it is called Honor, and due Respect,
and Manners; from a Rich man to a Poor man, it is called Courtesy and
Humility; but amongst the Rich and Nobles of the Earth it is called Court-like
Breeding; but of those of the lower degree, it is called Country-Breeding, and
amongst the lower sort of the World it is called Neighborhood and civil
Respect one to another: and so the Devil has covers for all his Deceit; Isa.
30. 1.
and so he is honored and exalted both in Court and Country, but the highest
in the Court, and therefore they have the highest Title: But We unto them that
hide their Sins, and cover with a Covering, and not of the Spirit of the Lord.
But this is the Riches of the World, Luke 16. 19. 20.
and the Devil that makes so many Degrees, as between Dives and Lazarus, Acts
17. 23.
and Haman and Mordecai; for the Lord has made all the Nations of the Earth of
one Mold and one Blood; But we who are redeemed out of his Kingdom, he calls us
Clowns and Fools; and says our Religion is built upon such small and frivolous
things, and stumble at Strawes, and leap over Blocks; this says his Wisdom;
but it is even Death to him to bear these Strawes, especially where he is the
highest exalted; for it pulls down all his Honor; and therefore do Rich men and
great ones of the Earth, and Rulers, and Priests, and Pharisees, persecute and
oppress us, and draw us before Judgment-Seats, James 2. 6. Esth. 3.
and would root us out of the Nation, as Haman would have done by Mordecai and
the rest of the scattered Jews, because they cannot bear those Straws: but I
say, whatsoever it is that comes to be forbidden in the Conscience, it becomes
a Weight and a Burden, though it be never so small a thing in the eye of a
Pharisee: So let none despise the Day of small things. Ezekiel. 4. 10.
But some will call it Stubbornness, Obstinacy, Pride, and Presumption; but the
same Nature would have called it so in Mordecai, who could not bow to Haman, as
the rest did that sat by; and so let every one take heed of speaking Evil of
that you know not, least you call Good, Evil; and Evil, Good; for the Woe is
pronounced against such; but they that were after the Flesh, always, in all
Ages, persecuted them that were after the Spirit; 2 Pet. 2. 12.
And so it is, not many Mighty, nor many Noble, Jude 10.
nor many Wise after the Flesh are called, but God has chosen the Foolish
things of this World to confound the Wise, and the Weak to confound those that
are Mighty, that no Flesh should glory in his Presence 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 29.

We are accused that we say, We are perfect without Sin.

I answer; Man was perfect without Sin before the Fall, or else he could not
have been the Image of God; for God is pure and perfect, and he made Man after
his own Image, Genesis 1. 27.
pure and perfect, without Sin; Genesis 5. 24.
but when he sinned, he defaced his Image, and lost his pure Estate, and was
drove out of Paradise, and became the Image of the Devil, for Sin is the Image
of the Devil; and here all Sin is in the Fall, and who are in the Fall are in
the Devil's Kingdom, which is impure, and imperfect, and unclean; but God
promised, the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head; Genesis 3. 15.
and Christ the Seed, said, he was come to preach Deliverance to the Captive,
Luke 4. 18.
and to heal the brokenhearted, and to seek that which was lost, Mat. 10. 11.
and to bring again that which was driven away; and this was his Work to
redeem to Man that which Man had lost. Now consider what Man has lost; and I
shall leave this as Querie with all both Priests and People, who deny
Perfection from Sin here, Whether Christ is but a part of Redeemer, or a
perfect and full Redeemer; and which is the Place betwixt Heaven and Earth,
where man shall be made free or cleansed from Sin, if not upon the Earth?
Seeing that no unholy, nor unclean thing can enter the Kingdom of God? Rev. 21.
27.
But who can witness this, have passed through; 1 Cor. 15. 5.
Death, and that have none who plead for Sin, neither can they witness Christ
come: But for some Simple ones sake I shall speak more clearly of this; for it
is a great Delusion of the Devil, to keep People in Sin, to tell them, they
shall never be made free from Sin so long as they are upon the Earth, and bring
this Scripture to maintain it, He that says, he has no Sin, deceives
himself, and is a Liar; but he tells them, Christ dyed for all, and if they can
but lay hold on him by Faith, he will not impute their Sins unto them, though
they sin daily; for the Righteous man sins seven times a Day, and all the Holy
men of God sinned; and so he takes Scripture to maintain his Kingdom, and this
he delivers by the Mouth of his Ministers, which he sends abroad to deceive the
Nations, leading People in Blindness, full of Sin and Corruption, ever
learning, and never come to the Knowledge of the Truth, nor never shall do for
them; and here he carries them on an easy delightsom way to the Flesh; but the
End is Death; and so heals them up in their Sins with a feigned formed Faith
which perishes; John 8. 13.
and here they settle upon the Lees, and set up a Rest in the Devil's Kingdom,
which is Sin; and here many are merely blinded and hardened, and all Tenderness
of Conscience is done away: But you shall find that he that sooths you up in
this Faith, is the gratest Enemy of your Souls; and whosoever witnesses Christ
their Redeemer, shall witness that he is come to destroy the works of the
Devil, which is Sin, and to redeem out of the Fall, out of Sin, and out of the
Devil's Kingdom which is Sin, and all Sin in the Devil's Kingdom which is in
the Fall; but for this End Christ is manifest to destroy the Works of the Devil
and to redeem out of the Fall; out of the Devil's Kingdom into his own Kingdom,
Rev. 21. 27.
and no unclean thing can enter therein, Romans 6. 6.
but none can witness this Redemption but through the Death, and through the
Cross which Paul rejoiced in, by which he was crucified to the World, and the
World to him, and had put off the Body of Sin, and was made free from the Law
of Sin, which once warred against his Mind, which once he complained of, Which
Scripture the Unlearned, which are Strangers from his Conditions, who read them
with the carnal Eye, now pervert, and Wrest to their own Destruction; 1 Cor. 4.
15.
and this we witness who through the Lamb, our Savior, do reign above the
World, Death, Hell, and the Devil; but none can witness this, whose Eye is
outward, looking at a Redeemer afar off, and still live in Sin; but who cannot
witness this Redemption here, must never witness it; for, as the Tree falls, so
it lies: and Sin is the Mark of the Beast; and who lives in Sin, has the Mark
of the Beast, and bears his Image; and it is written, that the Beast and false
Prophets and all that have his Mark and Image, 1 John 1. 8.
must be cast into the Lake that burns, Romans 3. 23.
and must drink of the Wine of the Wrath of the Almighty, poured out without
Mixture.

But as for that Scripture that says, If we say we have no Sin, we deceive our
selves, and the Truth is not in us: All have sinned and fallen from the Lord;
and he that has Sin, and says, he has no Sin, deceives himself, and is a
Liar; but if he confess and forsake his Sin, God is faithful and just to
forgive him his sin, and to cleanse him from all Unrighteousness: and this John
witnessed; 1 John 1. 5.
and he that can witness this, is no Liar if he say, he is cleansed from all
Unrighteousness, but witnesses forth the Truth and a perfect Redemption; and
the same John said, 1 John 3.
He that is born of God, sins not neither can he sin; because his Seed
remains in him; and he that sins is of the Devil, and never knew God: By this
are the Children of God, and the Children of the Devil made manifest; This John
witnessed; he was no Liar, neither did deceive himself, but spoak the Truth.
And the same John said, 1 John 5. 6, 7.
God is Light, and in him is no Darkness, at all: If we say, we have Fellowship
with God, and walk in Darkness, we Lie, and do not the Truth; but if we walk in
the Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Christ
cleanses us from all Sin: This John witnessed; he was no Liar, neither did
deceive himself. 1 John 3. 3.
And this John said, Act. 15. 9.
He that has Hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure; and Faith in
God purifieth the Heart: Now try your Faith and Hope, who plead for Sin; for
Sin lodges in the Heart, and while there is Sin the Heart is unclean; now here
you may see, all your Faith is vain, and your Hope, which does not purify the
Heart; and so it is feigned Hypocrites Faith, and not Faith in God, and so
perishes. And who can witness Christ dyed for them, have passed through Death:
for none can live with him, but those that dye with him: and this is the true
Baptism, to be baptized into his Death by one Spirit into one Body? and how can
they that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? and who can witness this,
has Faith in him, which purifieth the Heart, and removes Mountains; and the
pure in Heart sees God: And this the Apostle witnessed, and that he was made
free from Sin, and more then Conqueror, through Faith in Christ Jesus; he was
no Liar, and said, that Christ was come to redeem unto himself a pure Church,
not having Spot or Wrinkle: and though once they were Sinners, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
like the World; but they were washed and cleansed by the Blood of the Lord
Jesus, Ethes. 4. 22, 23, 24.
and the Spirit of our God; Col. 3. 9, 10.
and had put off the Old man, and put on the New, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness; but this you are Strangers from who plead for
Sin, and are such as call your selves a Church and are not, but the Synagogue
of Satan, Rev. 3. 9.
in whom the Prince of Darkness reigns, which rules in the Children of
Disobedience. Ephesians. 2. 2.
And as for that, which blind People call Scripture, who says, The Righteous
Man that is, sins seven times a Day: There is no such Scripture; for it is
false: But though the Righteous fall, he rises again by Repentance; and this
the holy men of God wituessed: and though David through Lust disobeyed the
Lord, and forgot his God; yet he rose again by Repentance, Psalm. 101.
and after witnessed that he walked in the midst of his House in the Pureness
of his Spirit: and though Peter sinned through Weakness; yet he rose again by
Repentance, and afterward exhorted the Church, to be holy as God is holy; but
this you cannot witness, who plead for Sin, and are not yet come to Repentance,
but deny Christ daily, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16.
and are convinced, but do not repent: but they who dwell in the Righteousness
of Christ, sin not; for they, that are alive in Righteousness, Romans 6. 18, 20.
are dead to Sin; and they that live in Sin, are dead to Righteousness; but how
can they that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? And this is the Devil
which pleads for Sin, the Enemy of the Soul; for by Sin did he obtain his
Kingdom, and so his Kingdom stands in Sin; and your Teachers, which tell you,
you can never get out of Sin, nor be cleansed from Sin here, ERR, not knowing
the Scripture, Mat. 22. 29.
nor the Power of God; but deny the End of Christ's coming, and bring another
Doctrine, which they have from their Father the Devil; and so are the
Deceivers, which Paul speaks of, who creep into Steeple Houses, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7.
and lead silly People captive, 2 John 10.
full of Sin and Corruption, ever learning and never come to the Knowledge of
the Truth, Ezekiel. 22. 28.
and so are not to be received, Jer. 14. 13, 14.
but held as accursed; for they daub you up with untempered Mortar, Ezekiel. 13.
18.
seeing Vanity, and divining Lies, who say, the Lord says, when he never spoak
to them; they have healed the Hurt of the People slightly, and have sewed
Pillows under their Armeholes, crying Peace, when there is no Peace, because
they put into their Mouths, and they are not ashamed, neither do they blush;
therefore they shall fall amongst them that fall, in the Day that I visit them,
says the Lord: And these are your Teachers that make your Habitation in your
Sin, Isa. 9. 16.
while you are upon the Earth, and so your Leaders cause you to err; but when
the Day of Account comes, wherein the Books must be opened, and every one
judged out of the Books according to their Works, by him who sits upon the
white Throne, and all must be cast into the Lake that burns, but those whose
Names are written in the Book of Life; then you will find those the utter
Enemies of your Souls, who persuade your Hearts in Sins; and he that has no
Sin, will be in the best Condition: and here all your feigned, formed Faith is
unbottomed, and all your Priests found Liars, Deceivers, and Antichrists, in
whom the false Prophet rules, which deceives the Nations, who must be cast
also into the Lake that burns, Rev. 19. 20.
and there tormented for ever, and all that uphold him.

We are accused to deny Christ come in the Flesh.

We witness the same Christ which ever was, now manifested in the Flesh, Romans
8. 3.
and is appeared in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, John 1. 14.
to condemn Sin in the Flesh; which is the Word, 2 Cor. 5. 16.
which became Flesh, and dwelt amongst the Apostles; This Christ we witness, no
more after the Flesh; but after the Spirit: and before We knew him after the
Spirit, we had no Profit by him, but were in the State of Reprobation; and so
are all now who profess him in Words and know nothing of him but by the Letter
without them: 1 Cor. 2. 2.
And such deny Christ come in the Flesh, Romans 6. 6. 7.
who plead for Sin, who live in Sin, 1 Cor. 12. 13.
and do not witness him come; Gal. 6. 14.
but those who are crucified with him, do live with him, and he in them; Gal.
5. 24.
and none are Christians, of the Flock of Christ, but who are baptized into his
Death, by one Spirit into one Body; and he that can witness this, is crucified
to the World, and the World to him: But who talk of Christ, to be their
Savior, and are still alive in the World's Nature, must first witness him a
Condemner; for, his first Appearance is with Sword, and breaks the Peace, and
makes the War, and ends the War, and makes the Peace, and this Peace endures
for ever; and so he is a Condemner, before he is a Savior; Luke 11. 21.
and he is a Peace-braker, before he is a Peacemaker: But who are at Peace in
their Sin, the Serpent is Head, and the strong man keeps the House, and Christ
they do not witness come in the Flesh; but who endure the War, shall enjoy this
Peace; and he that can witness Christ his Savior, can witness this: but
Silence all Flesh before the Lord; and let him that names the Name of God,
depart from Iniquity: for he that says, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments, 1 John 2. 4.
is a Liar; For, says Christ, why call ye me Lord, and do not the things which
I say? And none can call Jesus Lord, but by the holy Ghost: so it is plain, you
know not God, who cannot keep his Commands; then how can you believe in him
whom you do not know?

We are accused that we judge People.

It is written, 1 Cor. 6. 2.
The Saints shall judge the World: and for Judgment I am come into the World,
John 9. 39.
says Christ, that those which see not, might see, and that they which see,
might be made blind: and where Christ rules in his Saints he judges the World,
as Paul witnessed, Gal. 6. 20.
It is no more I, but Christ in me; and he is come to reprove the World of Sin,
of Righteousness, John 16. 8, 11.
and of Judgment: of Judgment, because the Prince of the Air is judged, who
rules in the Children of this World; and they cannot bear the righteous
Judgment of Christ, but kick against it, and call him Devil; and so they kick
against the Prick, which will the more torment them: And this is the Spirit of
Truth which came into the World, Acts 1. 5.
which the World cannot receive, because he testifies of it that the Deeds
thereof are evil; Joh. 14. 17.
and this is the Condemnation of the World, Light is come into the World, John
7. 7.
and Men love Darkness rather then Light, John 3. 19, 20.
because their Deeds are evil; and every one that does Evil, hates the Light,
and will not come into the Light, least it should reprove them: yet they will
say, Christ is meek, Love, and lowly: It is so, but not to Ungodliness: but he
is meek to the meek, and lowly to the lowly, and Love to the Seed of God; and
his Saints are meek and lowly, and bear all, both Scandals, Reproaches,
Persecutions, and Imprisonments; but to the Seed of the Serpent Christ is
Judgment, and Woe and a Sword to that which is for the Sword; and a Condemner to
the Wicked, and our God is a consuming Fire, and terrible to the Wicked, to
consume the Proud and Haughty in their Imaginations: and here Christ is a Lion,
Rev. 19. 15.
and he is a Lamb; he is a Condemner, and he is a Savior: Rev. 5. 5.
he that can receive him, let him: Hos. 5. 14.
the Hungry and Thirsty he feeds with living Food; but the Fat he feeds with
Judgment; and that which would not bear his Judgment, must never know his
Peace, but is for Judgment, and cries out as the Devil did, Mat. 8. 29.
who said, he was come to torment them before the time; Jer. 6. 14.
but the Teachers of the World have deceived the People long, crying Peace to
them, because they put into their Mouths, and healing them up in their Sin,
with a feigned formed Faith which works no Reformation; so sewing Pillows under
their Armeholes: and here the Devil has reigned in Peace, Ezekiel. 13. 18.
and now Christ is come with the Sword, to break his Peace, with Plague and
Judgment, and now he rages, and stands up for his Life, in all both Priest and
People; Rev. 12.
and now the Beast makes War with the Lamb, but it is hard for him to kick
against the Prick; for he must be bound and cast into the Pit, and there be
tormented quick, and the false Prophet, and all who bear his Image.

We are accused to deny the Church.

I answer; 1 These. 1. 1.
The true Church which is in God, we own and witness through Death; but the
Worlds Church we deny; for the true Church is the Body of Christ, made of tried
Stones, elect and precious, washed and cleansed by his Blood and Spirit, that
he might present it a glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle: but this is
not a House of Lime and dead Stones, nor the People that meet in it; for all
manner of Unrighteous Persons meet there, which is the Synagogue of Satan, and
a Cage of unclean Birds, and like People like Priest; but who comes to be
elected into the Church of Christ, which is spiritual, denies the World's
Church, which is carnal; and the World's Teacher, who is carnal, selling the
carnal for carnal Money and Earth; for Christ himself is the Teacher of his
Church, Isa. 54. 13.
who feeds it with living eternal Food freely, John 14. 26.
and it needs no other Teacher; Ephesians. 4. 4.
and this Church we own and witness; but all other Churches we deny; 1 Cor. 8.
10.
for the Church is but one: and the Temple of God we own, which is at new
Jerusalem, Acts 7.
the City of the living God; but all other Idols Temples we deny, which is the
Invention and Imaginations of Man* and though God commanded Solomon to build
him a Temple, nevertheless God that made the World, dwells not in Temples made
with Hands; and when Christ the Substance came, he prophesied against it; and
also Stephen was stoned to Death when he prophesied against it: and this we
witness whose Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, who are now stoned and
persecuted by such as know not the living God, but worship Idols; 1 Cor. 6. 19.
because we speak against their Idols Temple, which God never commanded to be
built, but was set up by the imagining, Idolizing Papists, and upheld by the
blind Protestant, so called; and so they cast out the Papists, and uphold their
Idols; and so the Inchanters, Diviners, and Sorcerers of England, lead silly
People in Blindness to worship Idols, telling them, they are the Houses and
Temples of God, which is a meeer Delusion.

We are accused to deny the Sabbath.

The Sabbath of the Saints we own, which is not for a Day, Heb. 14. 10.
but Everlasting; and who dwells in Christ witnesses this Sabbath, which is
the Substance, and the Shadow without is vanished; for says Paul, let no man
condemn you in respect of Meats and Drinks, Col. 2. 16.
or of an Holy Day, or of new Moons, or of the Sabbath-Dayes, which are but
Shadows of things to come: And so the World has the Shadow, and the Saints the
Substance; and you who have the Shadow, persecute them who have the Substance,
as the Scribes, and Pharisees, and High Priests did, who had and upheld the
Types and Figures of Christ, and persecuted him who was the Substance; so they
that are alter the Flesh, persecuted them that are aftor the Spirit* But your
Sabbath is a Shadow of Nothing; for the Jews Sabbath in the time of the Law,
was upon the seventh Day, which was the last Day of the Week, but yours is the
first Day of the Week, for which you have no Scripture; Gal. 4. 29.
and they were not to do their own Ways, Genesis 2. 3.
nor their own Pleasure, nor speak their own Words upon the Sabbath Day; Isa.
58. 13.
and here you transgress in the Figure, and walk in your own Ways, and speak
your own Words, and do your own Pleasures, both of that Day, and every Day.

We are accused that we justify our selves, and condemn all others.

I answer; When we were our selves without the Spirit of God, and had a Form
and Profession of the Saints Condition, which we did not possess, we sought to
justify our selves in our Profession, and earthly Wisdom, and to exalt our
selves, and be something in the Eyes of others; and here we were Pharisee, and
yet feigned Publicans, saying, we were sinful, but thought higher of our
selves then others, though we were in the same Nature; and here our
Justification was of our selves, and not of Christ; and here all you Pharisees,
and feigned Publicans, both Priests and Professors, who are in your earthly
Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 20. 1 Cor. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21.
feeding upon the Letter: but as the Light of Christ arose in us, all our
earthly Wisdom wherein we were exalted, became Foolishness, and Self was judged
and denied, and all that which was of Self, both Wisdom and Righteousness,
wherewith we covered over our filthy, lustful, unclean Hearts, and so were as
painted Sepulchers; and here are all Professors at this Day, Mat. 23. 27.
who are feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, and are from under the Cross of
Christ: but all would not hide from the Light of God; but as it arose it
searched through all, and laid open all, and all our Covers became rotten, and
fell from us; and so it will be with all Professors, as the Light of Christ
does arise, and the Book of Conscience is laid open; for no Flesh must glory in
his Presence: But, now we have nothing but what we have received of the Father
through Death, 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31.
and Christ is made over unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption; and though we glory, we glory in the Lord; for we have nothing in
our selves to glory of; and the Saints thought it no Presumption to call
themselves the Sons of God, and said, they were of God, and all the whole World
lie in Wickedness; and here the same Spirit would have accused them; 1 John 3.
7. and 5. 19.
yet they were no Pharisees: and Christ thought it no Robbery to be equal with
God; yet he was no Pharisee, though of the Pharisees he was judged a
Blasphemer: and as he is, so are we, say the Saints; yet they were no
Pharisees: and so, who are made the Sons of God, it is no Self-justification to
witness it forth; Rom, 8. 16 21. Phil. 2. 6. John 10. 3. 1 John 4. 17. John 14.
6.
neither those who are made free from Sin, to witness it forth, as the Apostles
did; and to witness forth the Life and Power of Truth, and deny them that have
gotten the Form, Notion, or Profession: And here Christ is the Witness and the
Justification; for the Way is but one, and the Truth is but one; and they who
dwell in the Truth, witness one with another; for the Light, of God owns its
own, wheresoever it is; for God cannot deny himself: but they that are not with
us, are against us, and out of the Truth, in the State of Condemnation; for all
who are out of the Truth, are under the Curse in the Fall; and this Truth we
witness, Mat. 12. 11. 1 John 5. 19.
by the Spirit of the living God, through Death, the same Truth as ever was;
and there is that in every Conscience, shall bear us Witness, yea in the
Heathen, and condemn them that hate it, Jer. 3. 19, 20.

We are accused to be one with the Ranters.

I answer, it is false; for we abhor their Principles in our Hearts, Gal. 5.
13. James 1. 27.
and deny any Liberty to the Flesh, or any light, or loose, or vain
Conversation, which they live in, or any thing which is impure or unclean; for
our Principles are pure and clean, and are at Enmity with any thing that is
impure or unclean; for Purity and Impurity cannot agree together: and it is our
desire to keep our sel^es unspotted of the World; for that which is unclean,
defiles, and from that we are separated, who are the Sons and Daughters of the
living God: 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18.
But some of them have tasted of the Love of God, and Grace of God, and have
had Appearances of God; but by harkening to the Voice of the Serpent, and
giving way to the Lust, have turned with the Dog to the Vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 22.
Heb. 6. 6. Romans 1. 26.
and the Grace of God into Wantenness, casting his pure Law behind their Backs,
and walking despightfully against the Spirit of Grace, and have crucified
afresh the Lord of Life, and put him to open Shame; therefore has the Lord
given them up to their own Hearts-Lusts, and vile Affections, and their
Consciences are seared as with an hot Iron; for it is written, It is impossible
that those who were once enlightened, Heb. 6. 4, 5.
and have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy
Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to
come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again to Repentance: but they have
deceived many with their alluring Speeches, and have caused the Truth of God to
be evil spoaken of, by their pernicious, lascivious ways; but Woe, Woe be to
them, for double shall be their Reward: But God is our Witness, Mat. 8. 7. Romans
8. 1.
we deny and abhor all things which are filthy or unclean; and though all the
World condemn, it is without; For there is no Condemnation to those who are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not aefter the Flesh, but after the Spirit: And it is my
tender desire toward all tender Consciences, that they may take heed of giving
any Liberty to the Flesh, lest they loose the Tenderness of Conscience, Gal. 5.
13, 1^, 16. Heb. 1. 13
and harden it by Lust and Uncleanness; for nothing but Purity will the Lord
receive, for he is of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity.

We are accused that the Ground of our Religion is Popery.

The Ground of the Religion made manifest to us, is God himself; for God is the
Fountain of all Truth; and Truth is Religion, and Religion is Truth; and this
Truth we witness made manifest by God, the Life of Truth; and here is the
Religion which we witness forth; John 16. 13 James 1. 27.
and here is the Ground witnessed forth from the Ground; and this Religion is
pure, unspotted, and springs from the Light, which is pure, wherein there is no
Deceit, neither can be; for it discovers all Deceit, and leads out of it, both
within and without; Mat. 12. 28.
but Deceit discovers not Deceit; for Satan divided against himself cannot
stand; b^t all Sects and Opinions arise out of Darkness, and the End is
Confusion: and so as Darkness, is opposite to Light, and Death to Life, so are
all Sects and Opinions against the true Religion; and all will side together
against the Truth, though they be opposite one to another in Judgment, as
Pilate and Herod did against Christ, Acts 4. 25. 26, 27.
and the Scribes and Pharisees, and high Priests, and Saducees, and rude
Multitude: So it is now, both Papist and Protestant, as they call them, and all
other Sects and Opinions, which arise out of the Fall; for though they differ
in Judgment, yet they spring from one Root, and no Difference in Life; but the
Light strikes at the Root, which is Darkness, and lays open the hidden things
done in Darkness: so Darkness cannot endure the Light, ^^3. 19.
and this is the Condemnation of the World, who love Darkness rather then
Light, because their Deeds are evil. And this is the Cause why our Religion is
spoaken against more then any Profession besides; all Drunkards, Swearers,
Liars, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Thieves, Murderers, Proud, Covetous, Lustful
ones, and all Unrighteous Persons, will speak against it, and call it,
Delusion, and Heresy, and Witchery, and all manner of Evil, which the Devil
can invent; and those stand up for the Priests, and persecute the Truth, as it
was in the time of Christ, and his Apostles times: and this will all Pharisees
and Professors do, Mat. 26. Acts 17. 4.
as they ever did; for they can wink at one another, and bear with one another
in Deceit; but Truth cannot at all bear with Deceit, because there is perfect
Enmity, as there was ever in all Ages, and it is no new thing. And here all
your Sects and Opinions are shut out of the Light, and are in Darkness; and so
is Confusion, both Popery, and all other: But the Truth is but one, and who
dwells in the Truth, 1 These. 5. 5.
dwells in the Light, and are the Children of the Light; Acts 4. 32. 2 Cor. 5. 2.
and there is no Confusion, but all of one Heart, and one Mind, Epistles
written in one another Hearts, and there is that in every Conscience which
shall witness, it be the everlasting Truth which ever was, is, and is to be for
ever, John 3. 20.
both in them that believe, and in them that perish, though to the Condemnation
of them that hate it; And this I witness by the infallible Spirit of the Lord,
which cannot lie.

And now I have discharged my Conscience before all People, in the behalf of
the Truth of God; not that I would have any to speak well of it, but from the
Ground of it; for the Love and the Hatred of the Unrighteous, Gal. 1. 10.
is all one to me: but for some Simple ones sake I have laid open my self, and
freely discharged my Conscience, and I doubt not that my Labor is in vain; 2
Cor. 6. 8.
but whosoever owns the Truth of God, must own it through good Report and evil
Report, Luke. 6. 22.
and must be content to loose their good Name in the World, as both Christ and
his Servants did; and the Servant must not be greater then his Lord.

And now a few words to all you Heads and Rulers and Magistrates, in what
Degree soever, who have the Power in your own Hands, who by your Power
persecute and imprison the Servants and Messengers of Jesus Christ, as
Deluders, and Deceivers, Witches and Vagabonds, and have no Ground for it, but
only by Hearsay, and the evil Thoughts and Imaginations of your own Hearts,
and because they cannot please nor satisfy your corrupt, proud Wills, which is
your Law, by which you persecute them, not weighing nor searching the Ground of
things: You are they in whom the Beast reigns, and his Image you bear which
upholds the false Prophet, and Tyrannize over the Nations by his corupt Will,
and cause them to bow to, and worship his Image; and you oppress and persecute
those who cannot: Rev. 13. Rev. 1. 4, 9, 10. Mat. 23. 30, 31, etc,
You must drink of the Wine of the Wrath of the Almighty, poured out without
mixture; for in the bloody Generation you are found, filling up the measure of
your Fathers Wrath, upon whom must come all the righteous Blood, shed from
righteous Abel, until now; and this I say in the Presence of the living God, by
the Spirit of the living God, that all you who have had a hand in persecuting
of them, Guilt shall follow you in the Conscience, until you come to Judgment:
And therefore I charge you all by the Lord, to take heed of meddling about
Religion, or to lay your Law upon any tender Conscience; but see that your Law
be according to that in the Conscience, which is pure and perfect; and meddle
with such Affairs as you are set about; and rather give Liberty to Religion,
then take it away; as you own the Grace of God you will, and see that you
discharge your Consciences there, lest that, while you are persecuting the
Truth, you neglect that which you are set about, for you will both persecute
them, your selves, John 7. 51.
and suffer the Bruits to stone, strike and buffet them, which is all contrary
to your own Law: Neither when they are brought before you, can they have the
Liberty of the Law, to clear such Accusations as are laid against them; but you
will hear the Accusers, but not the Accused (and this is contrary to the
Heathenish Law) and are more unjust then the very Heathen, who said, Does our
Law judge any one before it hear him? And so for Shame profess no more Love to
Christ in this Nature, who execute your Law upon his Servants, upon such a
fallible Ground which no Judge ought to do by the Law of God, especially about
Religion; but to search out the Ground of the Matter on both side, before he
judge: but this he cannot do about Religion, except he have the Spirit of the
Lord; therefore take heed of meddling about spiritual Matters, lest through
Ignorance you call Christ Beelzebub, and persecute him as a Blasphemer and
Deceiver, as many of you have done, which is written in the Book of Conscience,
and there you shall read it to your Sorrow.

And all you blind People, who persecute, rail, and revile, and reproach the
Truth of God, and have no Ground for it, but by hearsay, and the evil Thoughts
and Imaginations of your own Hearts, Acts 19. 33.
one imagining one Thing, and another another Thing, as the Multitude which
gathered together against Paul, one crying one Thing, and another another
Thing, and the most Part knew not wherefore they came together; and so it is
the same amongst you; but it is good for you to know certainly what you speak
against before you speak, lest you speak Evil of that you know not, calling
Good Evil, and Evil Good, putting Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness,
against whom the Woe from the Lord is pronounced, and it is written in the Book
of Conscience, and there you shall read it with weeping Tears; Jud. 10. Isa. 5.
^0. Isa. 4. 15. Romans 2. 5.
therefore take heed of treasuring up Wrath against the day of Wrath; and
remember you are warned.

And now something to all you tenderhearted Ones, who are convinced by the
Light of God in your Consciences, which tenders your Consciences for whose
sakes I have laid open my self freely; and so I desire that you may mind that
Light of God, to which I speak, which is my Witness, which has convinced you,
that it may be your Guide, which will lead you to Conversion into the Life, to
witness with me against the World, Heb. 12.
that my Labor may not be in vain: and look not out at Scandals, false
Accusations or Reports for this is the Reward that the Righteous have received
of the World; and Christ our Lord and Captain showed the Example, as it is
written, They who will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer Persecution, and
they that depart from Iniquity make themselves a Prey, but that which cannot
bear those things is not of God; but turn your Ear inward, to that Measure of
Light in you, which is without Guile, that is gentle, Jam. 5. 10.
that can bear all, as it did both in the Prophets and Apostles, and all the
holy Men of God; This led them through good Report and evil Report, through
Persecution, and through Death; and this is the Way to Life, 1 Pet. 4. 2.
and who enters must enter this Way; and here is the Trial of Faith, and the
Trial of Faith is more precious then Gold: So fear not, but be willing to give
up, and to part with all, though it be never so near and dear; yea, though it
be thy Bosom-Friend and Darling; For he that loves any Thing better then me,
Mat. 10. 37. Heb. 11. 2, 26.
is not worthy of me, says the precious Pearl. And he that will not forsake
all and follow me, is not worthy of me. Moses thought it greater Riches to
suffer affliction with the People of God then to enjoy the Pleasures of
Pharoah's Court for a Season: For the Pleasures of this World, and the
Afflictions of this World endure but a Time, and pass away: For all things
visible pass away, but the Joy of the Righteous endures for ever; but if our
Hopes were only in this World, we were of all Men most miserable; but he that
endures to the End shall have a Crown of Glory, Romans 8. 18. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
Rev. 2. 10. Luke 12. 32. Rev. 19. 1, 2. Mat. 20, 2.
as Paul witnessed: So, Fear not little Flock, but be faithful, valiant and
bold, for it is your Father's Will to give you the Kingdom; and a hundred fold
shall you receive, of what you loose, whether Lands or Livings, Wife or
Children, or whatsoever it is, the Promise is to the Faithful; and your Joy and
Advancement shall be in the Destruction of your Enemies, when the Lord does
make your Enemies your Footstool; but this is witnessed through the War, and he
that endures to the End of the War shall witness this: And this in my Measure I
witness, and out of tender Love from my Soul to your Souls do I declare it, and
desire that you may all endure to witness with me; for Love is Charity, and the
Light leads through all: And so I rest in my Habitation, known to all who can
read me in Spirit.

J. P.

Farewell.
THE WATCHER: OR THE Stone cut out of the Mountain Without Hands, Striking at
the Feet of the IMAGE, Whose Head is Gold, and Breast of Silver, and Thighs of
Brass, and Legs of Iron, and Feet part Iron and part Clay, Dan. 2. 31, 32, 33,
34, 35.

Written by a Friend to all tenderhearted Ones, who hunger and thirst after
God, who are groping and seeking in Forms for Life, to the directing of their
Minds, where and how to find the true Light, which leads into the true Life and
Power of Godliness, the End of all Forms, where I rest with all who in Spirit
read me, who am known to them w^^ are without, by the Name, James Parnell,

Reprinted for the Service of Truth.

This is a Discovery of the Ground and End of all Forms, Professions, Sects and
Opinions, and also how they now are made as Friends, and join Hand in Hand
against the Substance the Life and Power of God, which is now made manifest in
his Sons and Daughters (according to his Promise, as has been plainly manifest
in several Meetings betwixt the People called Quakers, and the People called
Baptists, which is here described.

And also a Description of the true Church, and the Gathering thereof by the
Power and Spirit of our God, which is now made manifest in these latter days,
which so gloriously does shine forth in the Earth; so that all who have Desires
to find the Way of Truth, need no longer walk in Darkness, and seek the Living
amongst the Dead, where it is not to be found; for now Light is come into the
World, and they that love and follow the Light, shall not walk in Darkness, but
shall have the Light of Life; but such as do Evil, hate the Light, and will not
come unto the Light, that the Light may reprove them; and this is the
Condemnation of the World, who love Darkness rather then Light, because their
Deeds are Evil, Joh. 8. 12. Joh. 3. 19, 20, 21.

TO THE READER.
THOU that happens to be the Reader of this Book, know this, that my Mind and
Intent in the publishing thereof, was in Relation to the Simple-hearted, who
hunger and thirst after Grace and Godliness, to the directing and turning their
Minds from the Darkness to the true Light of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
which is not of the World, but comprehends the World, and makes manifest the
many Ways of the World, and the Snares, Baits, Traps and Nets that therein are
laid, by him who is the God of the World, even the Prince of Darkness, who
rules in all the Children of Disobedience; now whatsoever makes manifest,
Ephesians. 2. 2.
is Light, the which Light will discover unto them whose Minds are turned to
it, the Wiles and Subtilties of Satan; and so the Simple will come to learn
Wisdom, and thereby be preserved from the subtle devouring Serpent, and
therein the Creature will come to see wherein consists its Safety and
Preservation; and so Israel's Tent comes to be found: For I in the Light,
standing above the World, comprehending the many Ways that are in the World,
and the Destructions therein, with the many Forms, Judgments and Opinions, one
clashing against another, with their Janglings and Disputes, with their Earthly
Wisdom, which is at Enmity with God, and about those things which they are
Strangers to the Life and Power thereof, contending for that which fades and
vanishes away, pulling down one Judgment, and setting up another, pulling down
one Form and setting up another and thus are building Babel, ^ Cor. 1. 19.
and so are confounded with this Confusion by him who confounds the Wisdom of
the Wise, and brings to naught the Counsel of the Prudent: And so I seeing many
poor Creatures in this Distraction, tossed about with every Wind of Doctrine,
and sucking at the Husk for Life, and so get into the Comprehension, a great
deal of light, airy, notional Knowledge, which is all but a^ Chaff, which the
Wind will scatter in the Day of the Lord, and so it will stand in no stead when
the Lord comes to plead with all flesh; for nothing will stand in the Day of
Trial, but what comes through Death; thus I see many a poor Creature lost and
tossed in this wide Wilderness, even this dark World, being Carried Captive by
the Prince of the Air, not knowing the true Light to be its Guide into the Way
of Truth, which is the Way of Life and Peace: Now in the Light, which was
before the World was, I do comprehend the World, and the Ground and End of all
Forms, Sects and Opinions: And so for some Simple Ones Sakes, and the
Tenderhearted, have I here laid them Open, and withal, directing the Mind how
and where to find the true Light, by which these Things are seen, and read, and
understood; and as it is loved and followed, the Mind will be brought into the
Life and Power, out of these fading empty Shadows unto the Possession of the
Substance, even the Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, the End of all
Forms, Shadows and Imaginations; and thus does the Stone which the Builders
rejected, become the Head of the Corner; and thus the Creature is turned from
the Power of Satan unto God

J. P.

THE WATCHER, Striking at the Feet of the IMAGE, etc.
IN the Days of old, the Holy Men of God (who were endued with the Spirit of
God) did as they were acted and guided, moved and commanded by the Power and
Spirit of God, which dwelt in them; and here was their RULE: And also the
Serpent, as an Angel of Light, he acted and worked in his Instruments by the
Power of Darkness, in Opposition to the Spirit of God, the Enmity being placed
betwixt the two Seeds; and the more gloriously the true Light appeared in any
Age, Satan also reformed himself, and appeared accordingly in the Shape, and
Form, and Likeness thereof, as it is now to this Day, but his was always but
the Form and Likeness of the thing, but not the Thing it self: His is the false
Light, the other, the true Light; and so the true Light all along discovered
him, and made him manifest to those in whom it ruled: But thus by his Subtilty
and Deceit, he has ever deceived the World, and blinded the World, so that he
might keep his Kingdom, who is the God of the World: as for Example; Moses, a
Servant and Messenger of the most high God, to whom God had revealed and made
known himself, when he and Aaron were sent unto Pharaoh, to require him to let
Israel ge free, for a Sign unto him, they cast down their Rod, and it became a
Serpent; and the Magicians of Egypt they were brought, Exo. 10. 11, 12.
and by their Sorceries and Enchantments they cast down their Rods, and they
became Serpents, and thereby Pharaoh's Heart was hardened, and they would not
obey, nor believe; And thus the Devil imitated and opposed the Truth, but
Aaron's Rods swallowed up their Rods; so that it was manifest, that He that was
with them, was Greater then he that was in the World.

And also, when Israel had sinned against God, and done that which is Evil in
the Sight of God, the Lord God sent forth his Prophets and Messengers to
declare the Word of the Lord amongst them, against Sin and Evil, Jer. 20. 9.
Pride, Deceit and Oppression, and all Ungodliness, Iniquities, Disobedience
and Rebellion; and they had Visions and Revelations; and the Word of God dwelt
in them, by which they were led, Jer. 23.
guided and acted: And Satan, he also wrought in his Instruments with a Spirit
of Delusion; and he sent forth his Prophets with their Visions and lying
Divinations, and false Dream; and they cried Peace, where the true Prophets
cried Woe; Jer. 5. 30, 31.
and the People hearkened unto them, and set them up; and the Prophets
prophesied falsely, and the Priests bore Rule by their means, and the People
loved to have it so: But What will you do in the End thereof? says the Lord,
by the mouth of his Prophet Jeremiah, who declared against it freely, and said,
It was an horrible filthy Thing; and he was persecuted: And the true Prophets,
who dwelt in the Light and in the Power of God, they saw them to be such as
run, Jer. 23. 21, 22, 32. ver. 30.
and the Lord never sent them, and therefore they profited not the People at
all; and they stole the Word from their Neighbor, and they spoak a Divination
of their own Brain, Jer. 14. 9.
and not from the Mouth of the Lord, and say, the Lord said, when he never
spoak to them; and they were light and vain, and daubed the People up with
untempered Mortar, and sewed Pillows under their Arm-holes, Ezekiel. 22. 28.
and healed the People slightly, crying Peace, Peace, where there was no Peace;
Ezekiel. 13. 18.
but they turned them not from their Evil Ways, nor from their Evil-doings, and
the Lord was against them: Jer. 20. 9. Jer. 23.
And the true Prophets of God (who dwelt in the Light) they saw them, and
plainly and freely declared against them then, whether they would hear or
forbear; and told them, They built up Sion with Blood, and Jerusalem with
Iniquity, and the Heads judged for Rewards, Mich. 3.
and the Priests preached for Hire, and the Prophets divined for Money, and
yet, said the Prophet, will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord
amongst us, as that none Evil can come upon us? And they saw them to be such as
sought for the Fleeces, and regarde^^ ot the Flock; Ezekiel. 34.
but fed with the Fat, and clothed with the Wool, and made a Prey upon the
Sheep; but the Prophets of the Lord did not spare them, but freely and
publicly declared against them; and they were persecuted, and imprisoned and
destroyed by those who upheld and sided with the false Prophets, Priests,
Hirelings and Deceivers: And they had then a Way of Worship unto God, with
their New Moons, with their Sabbaths, with their calling of Assemblies, and
Prayers, and Sacrifices and Burnt-Offerings, which were once prescribed by God
unto Israel; but when their Hearts were gone from him, so that they walked not
u^rightly before the Lord, then said he, Who has (...) these things at your
hands to tread my Cou^^? (...) were vain (...); I^cense is an (...) the
NewMo^ns and Sabbaths, (...) I cannot away with: It is Iniquity, even the (...)
and your app^in^^ (...) spread forth your Ha^^s, I wi^^ (...) Eyes; when you
make many Prayers, I will not hearken: your Hand are full of Blood; wish you,
make you clean, ecase to do Evil, learn to do Well; seek Judgment, relieve the
Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow, Isa. ^^ and says the
Lord, Is it such a Fast that I have chosen, a Day for a man to afflict his
Soul, to hang down the H^ad like a B^lr^sh, and to spread Sackcloth and ^shes
under him; will thou call this a Fast and an acceptable Day to the Lord? is not
this the Fast which I have chosen, to break the Bands of Wicked^ess to (...)
the heavy Burdens, and to let the Oppresse^ (...) that you break every Yoke? Is
it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are
cast out to thy House, when thou see the Naked, that thou cover him, and that
thou hide not thy self from thine own Flesh? Isa. 8. 5, 6, 7. but this they did
not do, therefore said the Lord, these People draw near me with their Mouths,
and honor me with their Lips, Isa. 13. 26.
but their Hearts are far from me; and thus the Devil deceived them, and
blinded their Eyes in that Age, with a Profession and Form of Worship, but
their Hearts he kept to himself; and this the Prophets saw in the ^ight, and
testified and declared against it, and left it behind them upon record: and
when the time came that Christ was born, the Pharisees, and Scribes, and chief
Priests had the Letter, the Writings of Moses and the Prophets, and they could
tell by them, where Christ should be born; and when Herod had assembled them
together, he demanded of them, where Christ should be born, they said, in
Bethlehem of Judah; Mat. 2.
for thus it is written by the Prophets, etc. so the Priests and Pharisees then
were the Keepers of the Letter, and they had the Types and the Shadows, and
Figures of Christ, the Substance, and there they had a Life, and thought in
them to find Eternal Life; but would not come unto Christ that they might have
Life, but despised him; and would not believe on him, because he came not in
the Wisdom, John. 5. 19, 40.
nor in the Pomp, nor Glory of the World, but testified against it: and they
were gotten up into Moses's Chair, but not into Moses's Life; for they tythed
M^nt, and Anis, and Cumin, but omitted the weightier things of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, which they ought to have done, and not to have left
the other undone: for that was a time when Tithes were due; Mat. 23. 2. ver. 23.
for the Aaronical and Levitical Priesthood, to which Tithes did belong, was
not yet changed until Christ was offered up; and they were fair-sayers, who
said and did not; and the Hypocrites, who were hopt above the Light, and so
were the Blind Leaders of the blind, with their fair sayings, and therefore
said Christ, beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees; and they turned People from
the Light, Mat. 25. 14. Mat. 16. 6. Mat. 23. 13.
and denied the Light, and so shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and
would neither enter in themselves, nor suffer others that would; but had gotten
a Wisdom and Righteousness of their own, which blinded their Eyes, and covered
their Sins, so that they could not see their Sins, nor him that was the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, therefore did he pronounce so many Woes against them,
and called them whited Walls and painted Sephulchres, who washed the outside,
but were the Generation of Vipers and Serpents within: and thus Christ, who was
the Light, searched them, and judged them who appeared fair on the Outside, but
within full of Uncleanness; but they could not hide themselves from the Light,
therefore they joined against it, and the Saducees, and the Pharisees, chief
Priests and Scribes, and the Herodians, and Pilate, and Herod, and the rude
Multitude, all joined together against the Life; Mat. 16. 1.
and they consulted against him, and took Counsel against him, how they might
destroy him, and the Pharisees came to tempt him, and in snare him with
Questions, that they might get some what against him to bring him under their
Law; but he foresaw their deceitful Hearts, their Plots, and confounded their
Intentions, and brought to naught their Counsel; John 11. 47. 48. Mat. 26. 59.
then they said, If we let this man alone, all men will go after him, and so
they sought false Witnesses and took Counsel against him, and crucified him,
and let Barrabas go free; and thus the Devil blinded their Eyes (in that Age)
with a strickt Profession, and their own Righteousness and Wisdom, so that they
could not see the Light and the Life, but persecuted it, and sought the Living
in the dead Letter; but if they had known him, they would not have Crucified
the Lord of Glory: yet they were wise in their own Eyes, and despised those
that followed him, John 7. 48, 49.
and said, none of the Rulers believed on him, but an ignorant People that knew
not the Law, that were accursed, because they were the Publicans and Sinners;
and they themselves were the greatest Sinners, but they healed themselves up
with their own Wisdom and Righteousness; and therefore said Christ, Mat. 9. 11,
12. Mat. 21. 31. Mat. 11. 5.
they that are whole need no Physician, but they that are sick; therefore he
said, Publicans and Harlots should enter the Kingdom before them; but the
Blind, the Deaf, the Lame, the Dumb, and the Leopardies came unto him, and
believed on him, and were healed, and the poor received the Gospel; but the
Priests, and Professors, or the Pharisees, and Scribes, and Elders, and Rulers,
could not believe on him, that he was the Messiah, but looked for another; and
these were the most zealous in their Profession, and builded the Tombs of the
Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of the Righteous, Mat. 23. 29, 30.
and said, If they had been in the Day ^ their Fathers, they would not have
been Partakers wi^ them in the Blood of the Prophets; and yet those were the
chief Persecutors of Christ, the Substance of those things which they upheld in
the Law and the Prophets; therefore they were Witnesses against themselves, and
filled up the Measure of their Fathers Wrath; and those professed Abraham, and
said, John 8. 39. Ver. 44. Mat. 23. 33. Mark 15. 15.
Abraham was their Father, and yet denied Christ, whom Abraham foretold of; but
Christ told them, they were of their Father the Devil, and his Works they did
and would do; and thus he judged them for all their Zeal and Profession, and
said, how could they escape the Damnation of Hell? Then after he was sacrificed
up, he appeared unto his Apostles, and sent them to preach the Gospel to every
Creature; and here they did not run because the Prophets run, nor take up a
Command without them in the Prophets Writings to do a thing, because the
Prophets were commanded to do it, but they were also acted and guided by the
same Spirit and Word of Truth which dwelt in them, John 14. 16, 17. John 16. 7,
8.
which Christ before he was offered up, had promised, that he would send the
Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, which the World could not receive, which
should lead them into all Truth, and should reprove the World of Sin, of
Righteousness, and of Judgment; and then after they had received the Holy
Ghost, they went abroad preaching Christ, and showing thereby the fulfilling
the Law and the Prophets, Acts 2. Acts 4.
which figured sorth and prophesied of Christ; and this they declared in their
Temples and in their Synagogues, and they haled them out of the Temple, and out
of their Synagogues, and brought them before Governors, Rulers, and
Magistrates, and the chief Priests, and their Kindred; and the chiefest
Professors (which were the Pharisees) were the head-Actors therein; but never
the less they went on boldly, being filled with the Power of the Holy Ghost,
without the Fear of Man, obeying God rather then Man: so they were not subject
to the Authority of Man in that respect; but they were subject unto the Law of
Man so far as it was subject to the Law of God: and so they went on preaching
Christ; and many believed and were baptized, and received the Holy Ghost and
were converted, and it was so that the multitude that believed was of one Heart
and of one Mind; and they were so far of one being exalted over another, or
seeking themselves, that not any of them said, that ought of the things which
he possessed was his Own, Acts 4. 32.
and the Works of God went on in much Power, the Ministers being acted and
guided by the Holy Ghost: And also Stephen, a man full of Faith and the Holy
Ghost, he declared against the Temple, which God had once commanded to be
built, and said, Solomon built him an House, yet nevertheless, Acts 7.
God that made the World and all things therein, dwells not in Temples made
with Hands, as says the Prophet, Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my Foot
stool, and where is the House that ye will build me? and where is the Place of
my Rest? has not mine Hand made all things? and he judged them and said, Ye
Stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in Hearts and Ears, ye do always resist the
Holy Ghost; as did your Fathers, so do ye; and they gnashed upon him with their
Teeth, and fell upon him and stoned him: And when Saul was converted and became
Paul, his Message was for to turn Peoples minds from the Darkness to the Light;
and then (says Paul) when it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, Acts 26. 17,
18.
that I might preach him amongst the Heathen, immediately, I conferred not with
Flesh and Blood; and here was Paul's call to the Ministry, and they were made
manifest to every Man's Conscience, Gal. 1. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 4. 2. 2 Cor. 2. 15.
Acts 17. 22, etc.
and were a sweet Savor unto God, both in them that believed, and them that
perished: And Paul declared against the Temple, and told them that worshipped
there, they were too superstitious; and he went into their Synagogues on
Sabbath Days and reasoned with them; and they persecuted him, and haled him
before Rulers and there complained of him to be one that profaned the Temple,
Acts 24. Acts 22. 22. Ephesians. 5. 8.
and a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazareans, and a pestilent Fellow, and a
Raiser of Sedition; and many cried out, away with such a Fellow, he is not
worthy to live: and thus they suffered by the zealous Professors in those
Days; but they whose minds were turned to the Light, they were translated out
of Darkness into the Light, and became the Children of Light, 1 Cor. 12. 13. 1
John 3. 14. Col. 3. 9, 10. Romans 6. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11.
and were baptized by one Spirit into one Body, and had passed from Death unto
Life, and had put off the Old Man, and put on the New, the old Man being
crucified with Christ; though some of them were Drunkards, some Swearers, some
Proud, some Covetous, Idolaters, Adulterers, yet then they were cleansed, and
washed, and sanctified, and justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God: and here was the Church which witnessed the Spiritual
Baptism, into the Spiritual Body, of which Christ is Head; and they being
thereby set free from Sin, their Union and Communion was here; 1 Cor. 10. 16. 2
Cor. 5 17. 1 Cor. 12. 27. John 2. 27. 1 Cor. 1. 18.
and the Bread which the Saints brake was the Communion of the Body of Christ,
and the Cup which they drank was the Communion of the Blood of Christ; and they
were in Christ new Creatures, all Members of one Body, and needed not that any
man should teach them, because the Anointing was in them; and to them the Cross
was the Power of God unto Salvation, though to the Greeks Foolishness, and to
the Jews a Stumbling Block; and in this Cross Paul rejoiced, Gal. 6. 14.
by which he was Crucified to to the World and the World to him, and they were
not conformed unto the World, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.
but transformed by the Renewing of their Minds, and had one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, one Way, one Teacher, one Life, and one Shepherd, and one Priest
over the Household of God, Phil. 3. 2^.
and one God and Father of all, being united by one Spirit into the bond of
Peace, and their Conversation was in Heaven; and there were the Christians: And
though there was a time that when Christ was preached after the Flesh, Phil. 1.
16, 17, 18.
some preached Christ through Envy and Strife, and Contention, to add
Affliction to Paul's Bonds; yet in all this he rejoiced that the Name of Christ
was spread abroad; for there were many that believed not, that that was the
Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, and was crucified, as Paul himself had not,
and as there are many such to this Day, and so it rejoiced him that the Name of
Christ was spread abroad; but after his Name was spread abroad, and many
believed that that was the Christ, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
then the Apostle declared against such who had the Form, but denied the Life
and Power, and said, from such turn away; for as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so do they withstand the Truth, being men of corrupt minds, and
reprobates concerning the Faith; and said the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. 2 Cor.
5. 16.
we preach Christ crucified unto the Jews a Stumbling block, and the Greeks
Foolishness, but unto them which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the
Power of God, and the Wisdom of God; and said the Apostle, hence know me no man
after the Flesh; and though we have known Christ after the Flesh, hence know we
him no more; but he that is in Christ is a (...) Creature, old things are
passed away, and all things become new; and they that are Christ's have
crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts; and the Apostl^ preached
Christ within the Hope of Glory; Gal. 4. 24. Col. 26. 27.
the Mystery which had been hid from Ages and Generations, and they that could
not witness Christ in them, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 John 5. 10. John 5. 25. 1 John 3.
5. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1 John 4. 11. Chap. 5. 19.
were Reprobates: And here it was not sufficient for them to say, they believed
Christ dyed for them; but he that believes has the Witness within himself,
and he that believes is passed from Death unto Life, and he that believes is
born of God; and he that is born of God does not commit Sin: and those were
they who were made Partakers of Christ's divine Nature; therefore says John,
As he is so are we in this Present World; and we are of God, and the whole
World lies in Wickedness; and they that are of God hear us; and they that are
not with us, are against us. And then the Apostle Paul he spoak of false
Apostles that were gotten transforming themselves as the Apostles of Christ,
and, No marvel, says he, for Satan himself is transformed as an Angel of
Light, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15.
therefore it is no great thing also if his Ministers be transformed as the
Ministers of Christ, whose End shall be according to their Works: and the
Apostle Peter he fore told of such who through Covetousness, with feigned Words
should make Merchandise of the People; and Jude he spoak of such who go on in
the Way of Cain, and after the Error of Balaam for Gifts and Rewards; and says
John, 2 Pet. 2. 8. Jud. 11. ^ John 2. 10. 19.
it is the last Time, and as ye have heard that Antichrists shall come, even
now are there many A^tichrists, whereby we know that it is the last Times;
(...) went from us, but they were not of us. Now the false Apostles were such,
as under a Pretense or Profession of true Apostles, deceived the ignorant, and
brought in Heresies; and so Antichrist is one (that under the Profession of
Christ) opposes Christ, and draws from him in the Life, though under a
Profession of his Name, and of Faith in him; and thus Antichrist got up, 3
These. 3. 4.
even that Man of Sin, that is exalted in Man above all that is called God,
sitting in the Temple of God as God, and says, he is God: and thus he deceived
them in that Age, as an Angel of Light, in a Form and Likeness of Christ; but a
false Christ, who bewitched them from the Truth with a Form and Profession: and
thus Antichrist has reigned by the Power of Darkness, ever since the Apostles
Days, over the World under a Gospel-Profession: yet I say not but that the
Lord has had a remnant in all Ages to himself, who were zealous and faithful
in what they knew; but here has been a Long time of cruel Darkness and
Ignorance, and the Lord has been a long Time as a Stranger in the Earth, and
they that were accounted to believe on God or Christ, looked at him as a God a
far off in the Heavens, without, far off, they know not where; yet they that
said they believed that that was the Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, and that he
dyed for their Sins, and rose again, and was sitting at the right Hand of God,
etc. (as that which they call their Creed) so then they were baptized with
Water, and called ^^^istians, whenas before they were called Heathen, and did
not believe that that was the Christ that suffered at Jerusalem; but now called
Christians and Believers, though they were nothing changed from the Heathenish
Nature; and this was at the first coming in of the Profession of Christian
Faith and Religion into England; and those had the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, which are called Scripture, and so were the Keepers of the Letters;
and that they took to be their Rule to walk by, as they do now, but knew not
THAT which gave it forth, to lead them unto the Life; but had the Letter and
the Form, but could not walk according to it, being led and guided by a
contrary Principle to that which gave it forth; so they gave their own Meanings
and Imaginations upon it; so then all that were called Christ's, were of the
Christian Church and Faith, and so were counted Believers: Then they sprinkled
the Children of those Believers, and by that were they entertained into their
Church and Faith; and thus came up Infants Baptism, for which there is no
Scripture nor Example, either from Christ or his Apostles, and yet they call
this an Ordinance of Christ, and thus they begin to add their own Traditions
and Imaginations; Ephesians. 23. 14.
and all are by Nature the Children of Wrath, and a little Water on their Faces
does not change them from that, but they grew up in all manner of
Unrighteousness, as Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Covetousness, Adultery,
Idolatry, Pride, Wantonness; Envy, Murder, Deceit, Fraud and Maliciousness, the
which were ca^ out of the Apostles Church, and they were washed from such
things, and sanctified and regenerate into the New Covenant, and reckoned such
to be without, as now England's Church is upheld by: Then they had their two
Sacraments (as they call them) for which Word they have no Scripture; and
Infants Baptism is one, and that which they call the Supper of the Lord, is
another; and they had the carnal Bread and Wine, as the Priests and People have
now, and they give it to natural, carnal Men and Women; and the Apostle says,
he that eats and drinks this unworthily, eats and drinks his own Damnation, not
discerning the Lord's Body: 1 Cor. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
And the natural man receives not the things of God, because they are
spiritually discerned: and the Bread which the Saints break is the Communion of
the Body of Christ, and the Cup which the Saints drink, is the Communion of the
Blood of Christ; and here is the Communion of the Saints, and the Supper of the
Lord, to which, he that has not on a Wedding Garment, is not admitted; but
England's Priests know not what a Wedding Garment is: And thus they planted
their Church in England, and other places; and then Bishops were set up, and
Archbishops (for which Name there is no Scripture) and Deans, and Priests, and
Deacons, and Popes, and one ruled over another; and the Popes bore rule like
Kings; but they found never a Pope in the Scripture; and the Bishops they bore
Rule by their Means; and the Priests preached for (...), and the People loved
to have it so; and thus Antichrist set up his Kingdom, under a Profession of
the Gospel; and then Tithes came up for to maintain the Priests, contrary to
any Rule in the Gospel: and then Universities were set up for to make Ministers
or Priests (as they call them) for the which they have no Rule in the
Scripture: and thus they were set up by the Will and Tradition of Man, as they
are still upheld, as the false Prophets always were; and then they had their
long Robes, like the Pharisees; but not like the Apostles; for from them they
have no such Example; then they set up these Idols Temples, which the Blind and
Ignorant now call Churches, or the Houses of God, for the which they have no
Example from the Gospel Ministers, for, God never commanded these to be built:
and though S^lomon built him one Temple; yet nevertheless when the Substance
came, he prophesied of its Downfall and Destruction; and Stephen witnessed
against it, Mat. 24.
and was stoned to Death by those that upheld it; and Paul witnessed against it
and was persecuted by those that upheld it; as many of the Servants and
Messengers of God are now persecuted in these Idols Temples, and haled out and
abused, and stoned and imprisoned by those that uphold them now, though these
were never ordained by God: and then they got up into their Pulpits, the
chiefest places in the Synagogues (as they are now) and called of Men Master
and Doctor, and had the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and Greetings in the Markets
(as it is now) and then they stole the Apostles Words, as the false Prophets
stole the Word from their Neighbor, so did [and do] those; and put them into
^hapter and Verse* and took a Verse, and studied from it a (...) own Brain, and
added to it, but not from the Mouth of the Lord; and so do the Priests, now;
but they run like the false Prophets, and the Lord never sent them, therefore
they profit not the People at all; and then with feigned or studied words,
through Covetousness, they made Merchandise of the People, as they do now, and
so made a Prey upon the Sheep, as they do now, and began to seek about for
great Livings, and Fat Benefices, and left a lesser and ran to a bigger; so
there was their Beloved which they sought for, as the false Prophets, which
sought for the Fleece and regarded not the Flock; but sed with the Fat, and
clothed with the Wool, and made a Prey upon the Sheep (as they do now) and
cried Peace to those that put into their Mouths, and called them beloved
Brethren, and Christians; but they that did not put into their Mouths, they
prepared War against them, and brought a Law upon them, and haled them before
Courts and Benches, as they do now; and thus they sought their Gain from their
Quarter, and ruled them with Rigor; so that until within these late years, the
Priests reigned like Lords over the People, contrary to the Practice of the
Ministers of the Gospel, who made themselves Servants to all: 1 Cor. 9. 19.
And though they did ordain Bishops, they did not ordain that they should live
of others Estates, or take the Tenths of the Increase of others Labors, and
live like Lords over the People; but said, ^ Tim. 3.
a Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife, vigilant, sober, and of
good Behavior, given to Hospitality, apt to Teach, not given to Wine, no
Striker, not greedy of filthy Lucre; but patient, not a Brawler, not Covetous
one that rules well his own House, not a Novice, lest being lifted up with
Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil: now try your Priest and
Teachers by this Rule: But they stood not to this who were ordained by the Pope
or by the Will of Man; but were lifted up with Pride and Covetousness, and
greedy of Filthy Lucre, as they are now, and so came into the Condemnation of
the Devil, as they do now: And thus your Priests old Fathers planted their
Church, and so set every thing in Form and Tradition, according to their own
Imaginations; and here is the Ground and Foundation of the Faith and Church of
England so called; and here are the old Fathers, and the old Authors that your
Priests have so much talked of, and prated of their ancient Fathers, even the
Popes and the Bishops: and though now in words they deny the Pope and the
Papists, and the Bishops, and differ something from the Pope in Judgment; yet
are in the same Forms, Customs, and Traditions, and are upheld by the same Laws
as they were when they were in the Popes and Bishops Loins; and thus Antichrist
has long deceived the Nations, and ruled by the Power of Darkness, under a
Notion or Profession of the Gospel and Faith of Christ; and one Generation has
gone, and another come, and have not known the Lord that bought them, but by
the hearing of the Ear: and as those that saw him, knew him in whom he dwelt,
bore Testimony and declared of him; so the Priests could tell the People from
the Records of the Holy Men of God what God is, and what Christ is, and what
Faith is, and how Christ dyed for their Sins and rose again, and that Christ is
a Savior and a Redeemer; and what the Apostles spoak and writ unto the Church
freely, they get and speak unto the World for Gain and Lucre, and so cast the
Childrens Bread unto Dogs, and so feed and puff up the dark Minds of Men with
airy Knowledge, what they have gotten into their Brains from other Men's Words,
and their own Imaginations, and so made and make the People believe, that they
are the Means ordained by God: Now many may see by this what Liars they are,
and how they came up, and were ordained, and whose Rule, Practice or Example
they follow in this they do, Look into their own Records, which they call the
Book of Martyrs.
and they will be found the Ministers of Antichrist, and such as have long
shut up, and do shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and would neither
enter in themselves, nor suffer others that would; but so long as they had
Power, would bind all unto themselves, and those that had any Appearance of
Light, so that they came to see their Deceit, and separate from them, they
would scarce suffer them to live amongst them; but praised be the Almighty, who
has so weakened their Hands, and shattered their Foundation, and caused his
Light so to shine out of Darkness, to cause them to be so manifest, so that all
People who love Light better then Darkness, may now see how ignorantly and
blindly you have been led, as Strangers from the Father of Light, after the
vain Traditions, Customs, Forms, Ordinances and Imaginations of Man, with a
vain Profession and feigned Faith, which you have gotten into the Notion, but
still in your Sins and Iniquities, alive in the first Nature, under Death's
Dominion, still Strangers from the God of Life; and from Christ, the Savior
and Redeemer of his People from their Sins; and thus you lie under the Power of
Darkness and Delusion of Antichrist, both Priests and People; Hosea 4. 9. Isa.
9. 10.
for like People, like Priest, and so says the Prophet, and your Leaders cause
you to err by their Lies and by their Lightness; and though you be full of
Teachers, yet you are lost for Want of true Knowledge, and are still led
Captive in your Sins and Iniquities, after those who have gotten the Form, but
deny the Life and Power, ever learning, and never come to the Knowledge of the
Truth in your selves, only differing from the Heathen in Name and Profession,
Judgment or Opinion, but still alive in the same Nature, in the Fall under the
Curse, the Children of Disobedience, in whom does rule the Prince of Darkness;
and you must have a Law without to keep you in Awe and Fear of the same, as
they have whom you account Heathen; but the Righteous need no Law, for because
of Transgression the Law was added; and you are fi^hting, killing and devouring
one another, as they do whom you account Heathen; and you are Drunkards, and
Swearers, and Liars, Gal. 3. 19.
as they are, and Scoffers, and Scorners, and Revilers, and Back-biters, and
Whoremongers, and Adulterers, and Proud, and Covetous Idolaters, and
high-minded Oppressors, as they are, both Priest and People; and you are
Idolaters, as they are, eating and drinking, and rising up to play; and you are
Envious and Malicious, suing and rending, and tea^ing one another at the Law,
both Priest and People, pulling down others to set up your selves; and you are
dissembling, and cozenning, and cheating, and defrauding one another of the
Earth, which is none of your own; and you are Persecutors, and Stoners, and
Strikers of the Innocent Children, and Servants, and Messengers of God; and
what Sin is there among those whom you account Heathen, that is not amongst
you, and does abound; yea, those whom you account Heathen, may condemn you in
much of their Practice. Oh! be ashamed and blush you Priests and Teachers of
England, to see your Ministry and the Fruits of your Ministry, so laid open
before you: and thus you are those who come near the Lord with your Lips and
Mouths, but your Hearts are far from him, Mat. 5. 9.
in the Earth, or else you would walk more uprightly: But says the Lord, In
vain do you worship me, teaching for Doctrine the Commmandments of Men; but I
know some Pharisees and Priests will be ready to say, We are not Drunkards, nor
Swearers, nor such like; but I say unto you, You are Hypocrites, and your
Hearts are full of Deceit, Envy, Wrath, and Bitterness, Covetousness, Pride and
Earthly-Mindedness, and self-Love, and self-Wisdom, and Persecutors, and the
greatest Oppressors of the Truth, and Publicans, and Harlots shall enter the
Kingdom before you: Jesus Christ, the Light, marked out your Forefathers, and
found them to be such, though they were more strict and zealous then this
Generation; and by the same Light you are so^nd in their Steps, and those
Things both Christ and his Apostles judged to be without, and condemned them
out of the New Covenant; for there no unrighteous Person can dwell, and there
all Wars are ended, Mat. 20. 21. Isa. 54. 13, 14 Romans 8. 1.
and the Swords beat into pruning H^oks, and Guns into Plow-shares, and there
is no Oppression nor self exalting, but he that would be the greatest, must be
the least, and in Righteousness are they established, and they are far from
Oppression, and the Lord alone is their Teacher; and there is no need of an
outward Law; For to them there is no Condemnation, who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit; and there is no Respect of Persons, but all
Members of one Body, of which Christ is Head, serving one another in Love: and
here is the New Covenant, and the Children of the New Covenant, who are washed
and made clean by the Blood of the New Covenant, but you are Aliens and
Strangers from this Covenant, who are in your Notions and Professions;
therefore all you ignorant People who are led by these deceitful Priests and
Pharisees, and disd^in to be wiser then your Fore Fathers, now see who are your
Forefathers, and the Original of your Priests, and who is your Example; for
you are out of the Life and Practice of the Apostles and the Children of Light,
and by their Life are judged and condemned; for they were mortified to that
Life which you live in; neither did the Ministers of the Gospel Baptize Infants
with Water; neither did they Teach for Hire, or stand up in the chiefest Place
in the Assembly; neither were they called of Men Master; neither had they the
long Gowns; neither did they Respect any Place more then another to teach or
preach in, except for Convenience; for they taught in dwelling-Houses, Acts 20.
17, 18, 20.
and by the River sides, or in any open Place; neither did they give to the
World David's Conditions to be sung in ^ Meter, neither did they give to
natural Men and Women Bread and Wine, which you call a SACRAMENT; neither did
they use to Church Women, as you call it, and take Money for it; neither did
they take a Text of other Men's Words, and speak from it a Divination of their
own Brain; 2 Pet. 1. 21.
neither did they study what or how to preach, but spoak as they were moved by
the holy Ghost; neither did they teach People, The Letter was the Word, or,
That the Letter was the Light, but they bore witness of God to be the Word, and
christ to be the Light; John 1.
neither did they teach People That they could never be free from Si^ while
they were upon the Earth; but they preached Jesus Christ the Lamb of God, who
came to take away the Sins of the World, and to redeem his People from their
Sin, and to set them in the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, that he might
redeem unto himself a pure Church, not having Spot or Wrincle, or any such
Thing; Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.
neither did they teach People, That a House of Li^e and Stone was the Church,
or the House of God; neither were they set up or upheld by a Law of Man, Gal. 1.
or came by the Will of Man, or stood in the Will of Man, but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, and from him they received their Message and
Command; neither were they brought up in Human Learning, at an University (as
it is called) to learn Arts and Sciences, and take Degrees, from Sir to
Batchellor, and from Batchellor to Master of Arts, from Master to Batchellor of
Divinity, from Batchellor of Divinity to Doctor of Divinity, and had so many
several Gowns; but the Pharisees loved these Things, but the Ministers of
Christ were not such, but most of them were ignorant, and unlearned in that
Wisdom and Learning; Mat. 13. 11.
but unto them it was given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom, but it was
hid from the World and the wise Ones thereof; and now the wise Ones of the
World say, That is the Means ordained of God, to come to the Knowledge of the
Truth; and that is the Original, to wit human Learning, and deny all Revelation
or immediate Inspiration, and say, it is ceased; for all which they have no
Scripture. Proof, for the Apostles never taught this Doctrine, nor prescribed
this Way; therefore your Teachers are such as bring another Doctrine, and climb
up another Way, who are not to be received, but shut out for Thieves and
Robbers, John 13, ^,
who shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and will neither enter in
themselves nor suffer others that would; and the Ministers of the Gospel never
preached up Hebrew and Greek to be the Original, John 11.
but they preached the Word to be the Original; neither took Tithes; nor ever
had a set Maintenance, or so much a Year, namely, forty, fifty, or sixty, or a
hundred or two hundred Pounds a Year, more or less, to abide in one Place,
neither sued any at the Law for any such Thing, but all their Care was to make
the Gospel free, and without Charge; neither did they take of those that did
not own them, as denied them, 1 Cor. 9. 18.
but shoke off the Dust of their Feet, and so left them; neither had they an
Hourglass to limit themselves by, or had a Clark to say Amen: But your Priests
will tell you, Now the Gospel is published, and the Churches are gathered and
planted. Oh! with Shame might they speak it: what Churches have they gathered?
here I have before laid down their Church, the Ground thereof, the Gathering
thereof, and the Planting thereof, and what they are, and also the Gathering of
the Apostles Church, and the Planting thereof; so that here you may see the
Difference betwixt the one and the other, the one a Form and Tradition and
Profession, the other the Life and Power and Substance; and here also you may
see what England's Church, which England's Priests have planted, now differs
from the Heathen; and now set Drunkards aside, set Swearers aside, set Liars
aside, set Proud Ones aside, set Covetous Ones aside, set Railers aside, set
Murderers aside, and Whoremongers aside, ses Wild Ones, Profane Ones and
Wanton ones aside, set Quarrellers, and Fighters aside, and Hypocrites,
Dissemblers, and Persecutors aside, and Back-biters, Extortioners, and Lustful
ones (and such like) aside, and then see where England's Church is, which your
Priests have made you believe they have planted; and let them eat no where but
of their own Vineyard, and it will make them go about to plant a better
Vineyard, or else to cast off their long Gowns, and fall to dig with a Spade;
for some of them have sometimes brought that Place of Scripture to uphold their
forty, or fifty, or an hundred or two hundred by the Year, where the Apostle
says, Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? 1 Cor. 19.
7.
Now according to this the Vineyard must be planted first, before they can eat
of the Fruit thereof, and set those aside that I mentioned, as aforesaid; for
the Apostles cast out such Weeds and wild Plants out of their Vineyard, and
then see where their Vineyard is which they have planted, and let them only eat
of the Fruit thereof, and not rob others Vineyards, and this is but Equity
according to Scriptures Example; but they are such Greedy Dogs as the Prophet
Isaiah declared against in his Time, Isa. 56.
and such ravening Wolves and Foxes, as they live all upon the Spoil, and the
Fruits of others Labors; and those that hunt them out of their Vineyards, and
Barns, Flocks, and Herds; then they have a Law, even to devour them and their
whole Estates, and this is far from Gospel Ministers; Mat. 7. 15
nay, Jesus Christ, the Light, saw their Forefathers, and marked them out to
be the Ravening Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, as these do now appear to any, but
those that love to have it so; for so long as you put into their Mouths, they
cry Peace, Peace, and speak you fair, and call you Christians and Beloved; but
put not into their Mouths, then they even prepare War, then they have Law for
you to take treble Damage from you, and so fulfill the Apostles Words: Oh what
a horrible filthy Thing is here committed in the Land? 2 Pet. 2. 3.
Are not they plain Ravening Wolves, that would devour both Body and Soul?

Now you People of England, consider where you are, and whom you follow, and
whither you are going, and see now who are your forefathers, and see now how
you have walked by Tradition and Form, and have been blinded by a vain
Profession and outside-Worship, and so have taken Anti christ for Christ, and
the Ministers of Antichrist for the Ministers of Christ, and have p^^ Darkness
for Light, and Light for Darkness; and your Fear toward God has been taught
by the Precepts of Men; Isa. 29. 13.
and they have taught for Doctrine the Traditions of Men, as I have before
proved, how many things they have led you in by Tradition, without any
Scripture-Proofs, though to you they have been Oracles of God; but now they are
searched by the Light, they are made manifest to be vain Heathenish Traditions:
and thus the blind have led the blind along, and many of them into the Ditch;
but yet I say not but the Lord has had his People in all Ages, those who were
zealous, and faithful, and true-in what they knew; but I know the Priests have
been long utter Enemies to God and his Truth, and the Tares have long covered
the Wheat, and in the time of Ignorance God winked, but now the Light shines
out of Darkness, and now is the Separation and gathering the Sheep from the
Goats, the Wheat from the Tares, and to convince the World of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment, because the Prince of the Air is judged; and
now the Lord does require all every where to repent; and they that love the
Light, will bring their Deeds to the Light, that the Light may prove them,
whether they be wrought in God; and it is not to say, You will follow your
Forefathers, and go on the old Way; for such are they that hate the Light, and
despise it, and love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil,
and so having drunk old Wine do not straightway desire new; Jeh. 3. 19, 20.
for they say, the old is better, and those are they that cry up the old Way,
and cry, away with new Ways and new Lights; And this is the Condemnation of
the World, Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather then
Light, because their Deeds are Evil: Light is new to them who have always been
in Darkness, and Truth is new to them who have always lived in Deceit; but the
Light is the same as ever it was, for it is unchangeable, and the Truth is the
same,

So People take heed of Obstinacy and wilful Blindness, and love not to be
deceived; for now the Light plainly and clearly shines; and here your old Way
is plainly laid open, what it is, and from whence it is, and also your Priests;
and though they be more refined within these late Years then they were before,
it is, because the Light is more broaken forth within these late Years, so that
many are come to see their Deceit, and declare against them, and now they are
but the more subtiler and closer Deceivers, Satan transformed into another
Shape more like the Light; but still they have not parted with their great
Benefices, and Augmentations, or Tithes, nor the chiefest Place of the
Assembly, nor their long Gowns, though they are almost ashamed of their Color,
nor to be called of Men Master, nor from seeking their Gain from their Quarter,
nor from making a Trade of other Men's Words, nor from their lying Divinations,
and saying, The Lord says, when he never spoak to them, nor from stealing the
Word into their Mouth, and saying, Hear the Word of the Lord, when they never
heard his Voice; neither turn the Wicked Ones from their Wickedness, nor the
Proud Ones from their Pride, nor the Ungodly from their Ungodliness, nor the
Profane from their Profaneness, but are still profane themselves, and still
proud and covetous, and still shelter themselves under the Powers of the Earth,
as their forefathers the false Prophets always did, and still run when the
Lord never sends them, but ordained and set up, and upheld by the Will of Man,
therefore they profit not the People at all; but only have gotten a higher
Notion to feed the Notionists withal, and so make more Pharisees, Hypocrites
and Whited Walls; and they are more whited over themselves to deceive the
World, but the pure Light is so broaken forth, that they cannot hide
themselves, and many see the Deceit of the Priests, and their Folly is a
manifesting even to all, so that none need to be deceived by them, but the
wilful, obstinate and blind, who love to have it so, who love Darkness rather
then Light, which is their Condemnation, the Light which reproves them for
their Evil Deeds, and therefore they hate it; for every one that does Evil
hates the Light, and this is his Condemnation; and no Ignorance here is to be
pleaded; and these are they that uphold the Priests and the Pharisees; but all
who have Desires to see, may see: And now here are the Priests or the Ministers
(so called) of England laid open, with the Church of England, with their Form,
Profession and outside Worship, with their Ground, and Original, and sandy
Foundation, and to be within, differing from the Heathen but in Name, and Form,
and Profession; therefore down it must, though the Powers of the Earth have
long upheld them, more then any other Sect; so that they have continued so
long, as they do not a little boast of, and thereby say, They are of God; but
let the Magistrate look to his Office, and let the Minister alone with his
Office, and then you shall see the professed Ministers of England, to be the
weakest of all Sects and Forms; but Anti christ has had his limited Time to
reign over the Earth, but now the King of Righteousness is risen with a Sword
in his Hand, and by his mighty Arm he will overturn, Psalm. 149. 8.
overturn all, until it come into his Hand, whose own it is, and he will bind
the Kings in Chains, and the Nobles in Fetters of Iron, and he will break the
Powers of the Earth asunder, Rev. 19. 20.
and all who oppose him; and the Beast and false Prophet shall be taken, and
all that receive his Mark, and worship his Image, into the Lake shall go small
and great, and there to lie for evermore; and this is the Stone which the
Builders have rejected, Mat. 21. 42. 44.
which now is become the Head of the Corner, and whosoever falls upon it, shall
be broaken; but on whomsoever it falls, it will grind them to Powder; and this
is the Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, which strikes at the Feet
of the Image: And here is a Blow to the Foundation of the Priests and Church of
England.

Therefore now all People who are captivated under the Priests, turn your Minds
within to the Light of the Lord Jesus, which reproves you in secret, when you
tell a Lie, or use any Deceit, which shows you your Evil Deeds, and that your
Hearts are not right toward God for all your Duties, and Worship, and
Profession, and that which calls for Uprightness of Heart, and an holy Life,
and Change, and Reformation, and a Newness of Life, hearken unto this, it is
the free Grace of God unto your Souls, and teaches freely, and by this you
will come to profit; 1 Timothy 6. 6. Isa. 59. 1, 32.
for it teaches Godliness, and Godliness is great Gain, so that you will not
need to spend your Money for that which is not Bread, nor your Labor for that
which profits not, nor to be led Captive by your blind Guides, ever learning,
and never come to the Knowledge of the Truth, but still in Blindness and
Darkness; for you have a Teacher within, which is a more sure Word of Prophecy,
2 Pet. 1. 21.
to the which you do well to take heed unto, as to a Light shining in a dark
Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts; this is the
Measure of the Grace of God, even the free Gift of God, which God has given
you to profit withal, which will accuse you or excuse you before the Throne of
God, to which I now leave you, having dischargd my Conscience concerning you,
and so I proceed to the rest of Forms.

Now within these late Years the Light of Christ beginning to stir in Peoples
Hearts, so that many come to see themselves in much Darkness and Ignorance of
these things which they read of in the Scripture, and also the Corruption of
the Priests and Teachers, and what Reprobates they were concerning the Faith,
and that they profited not the People at all; but they had heard them so long,
and still blind and ignorant, so that many come to see their Folly, yet their
Minds not being directed to the Light, which showed them this, and should have
led them out of this Condition, upon which they should have waited for
Direction to have found the Way of Truth, but they run without to the Letter in
their own Wills and Wisdom, and so would find out a Way by their own Wisdom and
Imagination, and so went out to search the Scripture, but with a wrong Eye,
giving their own Meanings and Interpretations upon the Scripture, and one
cries, This is my opinion, and another cries, This is my Opinion, and another
cries, This is my Judgment; and thus they are confounded and divided into their
several Judgments and Opinions yet all still in one Life and one Nature, but
only con^ounded and divided in their Judgments of what the Prophets meant, and
Christ meant, and what the Apostles meant; but it is as a Book sealed, both to
the learned and unlearned, and none is found worthy but the Lamb to open the
Seals, Isa. 29. 11.
who is the Light, wherein lies the Ministry; so this is the Cause why they
whose Minds are from the Light, are so divided and scattered in their Judgments
and Opinions, and one sets up a Form in his Imagination, and another sets up a
Form in his Imagination; and one runs abroad into the World with his Wisdom,
and he will go preach up his Form and Judgment to be the Truth; and another he
will cry down that Form for Delusion, and preach up his Form for a Truth; and
so many Deceivers and false Spirits are entered into the World, and one cries,
Lo here is Christ, if you can believe and be baptized, you shall be saved; So
they that can say that is the Way, and that they believe Christ dyed for them,
then they must be dipped in the Water, and that they call baptizing of them,
and then they are of their Church, and then they call themselves Saints, though
they are still in the old Nature, and so in the Fall, and in their Sins and
Corruptions; and it is not the washing away the Filth of the Flesh that does
change them, but because they are come out from the Priests, and turned into
another Judgment and Profession, they think themselves Saints; and they read
the Scripture of laying on the Apostles Hands, Acts 19. 6
and then the Disciples received the Holy Ghost; and so those Formalists and
self-Actors lay on their Hands; but there wants the Holy Ghost; and thus they
act, and form, and imitate and make the Form or Likeness of a Church; and they
read of washing the Feet in the Figure, and so they dote upon the Letter, and
wash one another Feet; and they read of delivering up to Satan, one for
Fornication, John. 13. 5. 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2 3, 4, 5.
for the Destruction of the Flesh in the Name and Power of our Lord Jesus
Christ; for in the Spirit Paul discerned it, for says he, Though absent in
Body, yet present in Spirit, I have judged already, as though I were present,
concerning him that has done this Deed; and so those Formalists and Imitators,
if any differ from them in Judgment, they will also deliver him up to Satan, as
they imagine, taking the Apostles Words, though they cannot tax him for any
Thing, but his Judgment differing from them; but they want the Power; and here
they are the Magicians, like Jannes and Jambres, opposing the Truth, and those
are they that are called Baptists; and another Form, they are more spiritual in
their Judgment, and they hold a spiritual Baptism, and not a Water Baptism, and
as many as hold with them, are of their Church and Faith; and thus they are
divided into several Forms and Churches, and so have several Names, and there
are several Judgments of one Thing, under one Name; and here is the Confusion
of Babylon, with their several Sects, Judgments and Opinions, and every one are
professing the Name of the Lord, and stealing the Words of the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles, and saying, The Lord says, when he never spoak to them; and
here is the Difference from another, only in Profession, Judgment or Opinion;
but still in Babylon and Babylon's Fashions, Customs, and Traditions and
Fellowship, Manners and Breeding, which is all Heathenish and at Enmity with
God, being in the Fall, and thus they stand in the first Nature, in Pride, in
Covetousness, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Fleshliness and Lustfulness, and Idle
Words, Vain Talking, Foolish Jesting and Evil Communication, and to be short,
still alive in the World's Nature, Strangers to the Holy God, and so under
Death's Dominion* and here I comprehend all Forms, Sects, Judgments and
Opinions by the Light which slayes Death, and takes away its Dominion unto its
self, to whom it belongs, and does see them and judge them to be out of the
Light, in Darkness, and so in Confusion; one clashing against another with
their Judgments and Opinions, and here are the Disputes of this World, and the
one cries, Lo here is Christ in this Form; and another cries, Lo here is Christ
in this Form, and none else, whenas Christ is within his Saints; and there is a
false Christ, which they have set up in their Imaginations; and here are the
False Prophets and False Christ's that are gone out into the World, who have
deceived many.

And here is the Ground of Forms, a setting up a Likeness of a Thing, a Figure
or Image of a Thing, but not the Thing it self; Rev. 13.
and here is the Beast, and the Image of the Beast, which all the World
worships, and wonders after, even Satan, as an Angel of Light, in his several
Shapes, Forms and Likenesses, to deceive the Simple; and here is the Form
without the Life and Power; and here is the Building upon a sandy Foundation,
which all must come down, who hear the Words, Luke 6. 49.
and talk of the Word and are Sayers of the Words; and here is him that says,
Mat. 19. 20.
he has kept the Commandments and Ordinances, and yet his Heart from God after
other Lovers, who is searched and found out by Christ the Light; and here is
the Spiritual Babel with its Foundation, and Babel's Building, and Babel's
Builders; and here is the Image, whose Head is Gold, whose Breast is Silver,
and Thighs of Brass, Dan. 2.
and Legs of Iron, and Feet part Iron and part Clay; but now is he come and
made manifest, who strikes at Feet of Image, who is called the Stone cut out of
Mountain without Hands, even Jesus Christ the Son of God, now after all this
Profession of his Name and of Faith in him; but now he finds none in the Earth,
who has revealed himself in the poor despised ones of the World, and those who
have been counted the blind and igrant; and as you have read, the Poor receive
the Gospel; the World was made by him, but the World knew him not; he came unto
his own, and his own received him not; John 1.
but as many as receive him, to them he gives Power to become the Sons of God,
to whom that Promise is fulfilled, which was promised in the Days of old, by
the Father, That in the last Days, Acts 2. 16, 17, 18, 19.
he would pour forth his Spirit upon all Flesh, and his Sons and Daughters
should prophecy, and the Young Men see Visions; and if you will receive it,
this is the Elias which was for to come in the Spirit, as he came in the Flesh,
even the Life and Power of what has been so long professed, which the Lord
has now manifested in his Servants and Handmaids, whom he has now sent forth
abroad freely to call into the Supper of the Lord, even the Marriage of the
Lamb, and to preach his Name, no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit,
Mat. 22. 2, 3.
and to preach him within, the Hope of Glory, the Ministry that has been hid
from Ages and Generations; and they that will be his Disciples, must deny
themselves, and take up his Cross, and follow him, through evil Report, and
good Report, through Persecution, and through Death; and who are faithful until
Death, must receive a Crown of Life, and reign with him for evermore in his
Kingdom, of which there is no End, neither Beginning, over which he is made
Heir and King, blessed be Jehovah; sing Halelujah to his Name, all ye that know
him.

And now, that his Name is spreading abroad, and his Message declaring by the
Mouth of his faithful Messengers; those who have long talked of his Name, and
so long professed his Name, know him not, neither believe on him, but are found
Hypocrites, and Dissemblers, and blind Leaders of the blind, whited Walls, and
painted Sepulchers, but within full of Uncleanness, Hypocrisy, and Deceit,
even the Generation of Vipers and Serpents, and those will not receive the
Message, but make light of it, and say, they believe on a Christ at Jerusalem,
and now in the Heavens far off, they know not where; and they cry, he has done
all for us, and has satisfied for our Sins, and they shall not be imputed to
us, say they; and they cry out, this is a new Light, and a strange Light, and
we know not whence it is; but they say, they will keep to the Old Rule, the
Scriptures (which they call the Word of God, and the Old Way) though they be
mere Strangers to the Life of the Scriptures; Joh. 9. 39.
but it is that the Scripture might be fulfilled upon them, as Christ says,
For Judgment am I come into the World, that they which see not might see, and
that they which see might be made blind; as their Forefathers professed
Abraham and Moses, and said, We know that God spoke unto Moses, but as for this
Fellow, we know not whence he is, John 9. 29. and they said, God was their
Father, but Jesus Christ answered them, and said, If ye were Abraham' s
Children, ye would do the Works of Abraham; John 8.
and he also said, If God were your Father, then would you love me; for I
proceeded forth, and came from him; but says he, ye are of your Father the
Devil, and his Works you do, and will do: And thus are the Pharisaical
Professors of these Times, marked out to be in the Steps of their Forefathers;
for this is the same Christ that suffered at Jerusalem; but they are blind, and
cannot see, neither (indeed) do believe the Scripture, nor walk according to
it, but are in the old and broad Way of the World, wherein their Forefathers
walked, and led many to Destruction; but if these did believe the Scripture,
they would believe on this Light, which is come into the World, which the
Scripture bears Testimony of, even the Spirit of Truth, which the World cannot
receive; and some of them scoff, and scorn, and revile, reproach, and slander,
and rail at the Messengers of Truth, and some strike them, and stone them, and
buffet them, and stock them, and whip them, and imprison them, and
despightfully use them, yet they are made able through the Power of him that
has sent them, for to go on in Boldness, but those Persecutors are not found
worthy; Mat. 22. 4, 5, 6.
Therefore the Lord will send forth his Armies, and destroy these Murderers,
and burn up their City; and these are they that have professed to be his near
Kindred, Friends and Acquaintance, but now are found Strangers, who prophesied
in his Name, and in his Name done many woundrous Works, and yet they must
depart for Workers of Iniquity, he knows them not: Now read your selves you
Wicked Ones, you Murderers, you Rude Multitude, you Priests, you Pharisees and
Professors, you Formalists, Self-Actors and Imitators; for now all join Hand in
Hand, and Gog and Magog join in Battle against the Lamb, and Pilate and Herod
are made Friends; and you chief Priests and Pharisees, who are the Professors
of these Times, and you Rulers, and you rude and brutish ones, and you
Formalists and Sectaries now at the coming of Christ in the Spirit, even the
Substance of what you have long talked of, all joined together in one, who
formerly have been at great Division and Wars among your selves, but now you
are made Friends, and muster up all your Strength against the Substance, even
Jesus Christ, whom you (as your Forefathers did) call a Blasphemer, a Seducer,
a Deceiver, and a Devil; and now the rude Multitude they stand up for their
Priests, and they fall upon the Messengers of Christ when they come into their
Synagogues, and they hale them out of their Synagogues, and strike them, and
buffe^ them, and despightfully use them, and stone them, as their Forefathers
ever did; and the Priests they seek to Rulers and Magistrates, and hale them
before them, and they persecute them, and imprison them, as their Forefathers
ever did; and the Pharisees and ancient hypocritical rotten Professors, they
side with the Priests, and go about railing and evil speaking of the Truth,
learning and incensing Peoples Minds against it, with their Lies, and Slanders,
and Reproaches, to present it odious to all People; and also fawning, and
crouching, and seeking to Magistrates, to act in their Wills, and persecute, as
their Forefathers always did against the same Seed, and likewise, the
Formalists and Sectaries do the same; and thus they that were after the Flesh
always persecuted them that were after the Spirit; and yet these are ready to
cry out, What Hard-hearted Jews were those that crucified Christ, and
persecuted his Apostles; and if they had been in those days, they would not
have been Partakers with them in the Blood of Christ and his Apostles: Whenas
they are now found the same Generation of Persecutors, persecuting the
Righteous Seed, and so they fill up the Measure of their Fathers Wrath, that
upon them might come all the Righteous Bloodshed from Righteous Abel until now.

And now the Priests and the Baptists can agree, and they join together; and
the Priests call them, Honest Men; and the Baptists call them, Gentlemen of
Divinity: And the Baptists and Independents, they join together; and the
Independents and the Presbyterians they join together; all against the Life and
Power, which the Lord has now manifested in his Sons and Daughters, and has
sent them to declare and lay open their Hypocrisy and Deceit, which they have
long covered with a Gospel-like Profession; but now all their Coverings are
found too Narrow before the Light, which is come now into the World, to
convince and reprove them of their Sin, of their Righteousness and of their
Judgment; and therefore, now they have enough to do to join together with all
their Strength and Wisdom, to put out this Light, and so they endeavor to sow
their Tares in Peoples Hearts, and all the Ways they can invent to destroy the
Work which now is begun; and as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do they
withstand the Truth, according to the Prophecy of the Apostle, Being men of
Corrupt Minds, and Reprobates concerning the Faith; which I have much
experienced in several Meetings, which I have had with the Teachers of the
Baptized People, which shall follow in order afterward.

But the more they strive in their Wills and Wisdoms, the more does the Work of
the Lord Prosper, and go on, and flourish by his Mighty Power and Outstretched
Arm; and their Shame, and Folly, and Down-fal the more appears; and when they
have done all they can, they shall be glad to lay down their Cronws; and bow
unto this Truth, which they now so oppose; and every Tongue shall confess it,
though to their Condemnation, who do now oppose and gainsay it: Woe unto such;
they shall perish in the Gainsaying of Core. And the Time shall come, that
when the Master of the House shall have shut the Door, Luke 13. 25.
they shall knock, and shall strive to enter, and shall not be able, all who
now oppose and reject the Counsel of the Lord, and will not hearken now they
are called.

And thus the LORD will exalt his SON in his Saints, when his ENEMIES shall be
his Footstool, and be made to bow before him.

And thus do all Sects, Judgments and Opinions join in one against the Life and
Substance, they being all sprung from one Root, so make up all one Image, whose
Head is Gold, Breast of Silver, whose Thighs are Brass, and Legs of Iron, and
Feet Part of Iron and Part of Clay; and the Stone cut out of the Mountain
without Hands, which strikes at the Feet of the Image.

Now, the Head of the Image, which is of Gold, and those that have had a Light
shining into them, and have had a Sight of many things, and have seen the
Emptiness of many Forms, and have gotten the Thing in their Comprehension, and
have a Notion above others of much of that which is now witnessed and possessed
in Life by the Faithful, and there have been exalted, and gotten up a Life
therein, and a False Rest, but have lost the Light which once shined into them,
by catching the Thing in their Comprehension, and so got it in the Notion, but
did not obey nor suffer the Death of the Cross. And the Breast of the Image,
which is of Silver, and the Thighs of Brass, are the rest of the Sects, and
Opinions, and Forms, and Likenesses, which are more Glorious one then another;
for, as I said before, Satan can imitate every Appearance of the true Light, in
his Forms, Shapes and Likenesses; and the more Glorious the Light appears in
any Creature, so does he refine himself, and appear more Glorious to deceive
the Simple: so that many (by the Light of God st^rring in them) have come to
see the Deceit and Emptiness in one Form, and how they have been deceived
therein, then presently the Deceit appears in another more Glorious Shape or
Form, and calls that the Truth; and the Creature still looking without, from
the Light within, it is ensnared there again, still painted with the
Scripture-words, and then the Creature thinks its a Saint in that Form, whenas
its but a Painted Sepulcher, still in the Old Nature, and under the Power of
the same Deceit; but the Cross tryes all; for, there all Forms and Professions
miss and come short; so that many a Creature has passed through many Forms,
and has thought it self a Saint in every Form; but coming, yea, but to see the
Cross, which they are to take up before they can be the Disciples of Christ,
and there have stumbled, and cried out, It is Hard and Straight, and go away
sorrowful, I know this is witnessed and answered in many Consciences; for, here
every Man's Faith and Works come to the Trial; and so to some the Preaching of
the Cross is Foolishness, and to some a Stumbling Block, but unto them that
believe and take it up, it is witnessed the Power of God unto Salvation; and
such rejoice in it with Paul, who are crucified to the World, and the World to
them, upon whom the Ends of World are come: But it would be an easy thing to
the Flesh, if that was all, to turn out of one Profession into another, and out
of one Form and Judgment into another; 1 Cor. 10. 11.
but the Way to Life is through Death.

And the Legs of the Image, which are of Iron, is the Beast, or the Power of
the Beast, upon which these stand, where lies their Strength. And the Feet of
the Image, which is part of Iron and part of Clay, are the Priests and
Pharisees, joined to the Powers of the Earth, which upholds them; for, but for
that, as I said before, they are the weakest of all Forms, and so they are the
Part of Clay, and the Power that upholds them, is that part of Iron, which is
the strongest of the Metals: And the Watcher, or the Stone cut out of the
Mountain without Hands, which strikes at the Feet of the Image, is the King of
Righteousness, even he that rides upon the White Horse, Rev. 19. 11, 12, 13,
etc.
out of whose Mouth goes a sharp Sword, whose Name is called the Word of God,
who comes to strike at the Powers of the Earth, even the Kings of the Earth,
who have given their Power unto the Beast, Rev. 17. 12, 13, 14.
and join in War against the Lamb: but the Lamb shall Overcome; and he will
overturn all, until it come into his Hand whose own it is: And the Beast and
the False Prophet, that has thus deceived the Nations, Rev. 19. 20. and 21. 1.
and all that receive the Mark of the Beast, and worship his Image, shall be
taken and cast into the Lake that burns forever, which was of Old prepared
for them; and he will create new Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness, where there shall not be War any more; but he shall reign in
Peace with his Saints for evermore. Oh! blessed are all they that fight in this
Banner, and here lay down their Lives, they shall take them up again with an
Everlasting Crown, and reign for evermore, singing Hallelujah to their King; to
whom be all Praise, Honor, Power, Dominion and Thanks for evermore, Amen. And
thus shall this Great Image be broaken to pieces by the Stone cut out of the
Mountain without Hands, which will become a heavy Mountain, even a burden some
Stone to all Nations; but upon this Mountain shall the True Church stand, Mat.
5. 14.
as a City set on a Hill, that cannot be hid. And thus I have laid down the
Ground and End of all Sects, Forms and Professions, with a Blow to this Great
Image, with a Weapon, which is not Carnal, but Spiritual; he that can receive
it, let him.

And now concerning the CHURCH, which is now gathering and redeeming, not by
the Will of man, nor by the Wisdom of many, but by the Will and Power, and
Spirit of God, which according unto his Promise he has poured down upon his
Sons and Daughters now in these latter days, by which we are carried abroad in
the Power of the Almighty, now to declare abroad his Powerful Truth, which the
Lord has decreed shall prevail upon the hearts of the People, which is
Glad-tidings of great Joy unto them that receive it; but unto the Stubborn, and
Stiff-necked, and Rebellious, Tidings of Woe and Misery: And though the
Messengers of the Gospel are by some rejected, reviled, reproached, scoffed and
scorned, stocked, stoned and imprisoned, and despightfully used, slandered and
abused; yet nevertheless, blessed be the Name of the Lord, there are some found
worthy, and do receive with much Joy the Messengers of the Gospel; Romans 10. 15.
so that they know how Beautiful are the Feet of those that bring Glad-tidings,
to the reviving the just Witness for God, and raising up to Life the Dead, and
so the Living comes to Know and Praise the Lord; and so the Just comes to
reign, and the Wicked comes to be judged, and the Mind comes to be turned from
the Darkness to the Light, to which we do preach in every Creature, and to the
same are made manifest, and known to them who do like to retain it in their
Minds, and from whence we come, and the Testimony which we do declare; but they
that do not receive it, to them we are not known, and therefore are by them
esteemed as Deceivers and Deluders, Vagabonds and Wanderers, and the like: yet
at all this we do not Wonder; for we read, The Servant is not greater then his
Lord; for, if they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much more
those of his Household? and if they had known him, they would not have crucified
the Lord of Glory: Mat. 10. 24, 25.
Yet nevertheless, we have a Witness in every Conscience, both in them that
believe, and in them that perish, unto which we do clear our Consciences, and
leave all without Excuse by the same, which will answer for us in the Mighty
Day, though to the Condemnation of those that hate it, wherein we have our
great Joy above all our Sufferings; but as many as receive this, to them he
gives Power to become the Sons of God; and those are they, who are led and
guided by the One Spirit of which the World cannot receive, even the Comforter,
of whom you have heard should come, by which they are separated out of the
World, and redeemed out of the Rudiments and Pollutions thereof, their
Fashions, their Customs, their Words, their Ways, their Manners, their
Breeding, their Fellowship, Love and Friendship, their Honor and Glory, and
their Worship, and so are become Strangers to the World, and so are hated of
the World, because they are not of the World; and the Enmity stands betwixt the
two Seeds: but while they were of the World, the World loved them; but now they
are gathered out of the World, and separated from the World, and testify
against the World both in Words and Actions, therefore the Enmity is raised in
the World, against the Righteous Seed; and those are they upon whom the Ends of
the World are come, to whom it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom,
though to the World in Parables; and those are they that are come with a Mighty
Arm and Power, to trun the World up-side down, whom the Lord has gathered, and
is a gathering out of the World by his own Spirit of Truth and Love, to walk in
the Way of Truth, even the Way of Holiness, John 4. 23, 24.
where the Ransomed of the Lord do walk, and serve and worship him in Spirit
and in Truth, and such is the Father seeking to worship him, in whom he is, in
doing his own Work, even to destroy the Old Creation, and create New Heavens
and New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness; and those are they that are the
New Creatures, in whom this New Work is witnessed, in whom the Father has
manifested his Son, that in the Likeness of sinful Flesh he might condemn Sin
in the Flesh, and to bind the Strong Man, and cast him out of his House, and
spoil his Goods, and so to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to cut down the
Man of Sin, even that Son of Perdition, who is exalted above all that is called
GOD, sitting in the Temple of God as God, and says, He is God; this is he by
whom the World is deceived, who is the God of the World, even the Prince of
Darkness, who rules in all the Children of Disobedience; and so says John in
the Light, The whole World lies in Wickedness; and unto this does Christ come
with a Sword, for to make War with him, and to take and bind him, and cast him
into utter Darkness, and so to take his Kingdom from him, and to rule himself
in Righteousness.

And this is the King of the SAINTS, who is now come to redeem unto himself a
Pure People, and to wash them and cleanse them from their Sias by his BLOOD,
and so to wash away all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit; and this is the
Baptism by which they are received into his Church and Faith; and here is the
Effect of his BLOOD wrought in MAN; and thus he does and will manifest his
Mighty Power, to purify, and cleanse, and make Man a fit Temple for himself to
dwell in: And thus is GOD with us, manifested in Flesh, and thus are the Saints
Bodies made the TEMPLES of the HOLY GHOST; and thus is the Word of Life and
Reconciliation witnessed, to the raising up the Soul to Life, and reconciling
the Soul to GOD; and those are they that are begotten and born again of the
Immortal Word, which dwells and abides forever; and here is the Household of
God, the Household of Faith, and the Household of Love, 1 John 1. 1.
who speak the things which they have heard, and seen, and tasted of the good
Word of Life, which was in the beginning; and those are the Children of Light
who are gathered out of the dark Forms, Judgments and Opinions, into the Life
and Power of Godliness, to walk in the Light of Life, wherein they are gathered
and united by the One Spirit of Love and Life, into One Body, of which Christ
is Head: and here is the true Church, which the Lord is a gathering, and
washing, and cleansing, and purifying by his Spirit, that he may redeem unto
himself a pure Church, Ephesians. 5. 27.
not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing, whose Insides are washed and
made clean through the Word, Joh. 15. 3.
by which they are reconciled into the Love and Union which springs from the
Life of God; and here is the Vine and the Branches; and here is the Communion
of the Church, all feeding upon One Bread, all drinking upon One Cup; this is
Christ, the Life of the Saints: and as many as are baptized into this Church,
partake of this Communion; and those are they which have denied themselves, and
have born the Cross of Christ, by which they are crucified to the World, and
the World to them, who are gathered into one Covenant of Life, where all are
Fellow Servants under one MASTER; who serve one another in Love and Meekness:
And here is the true Humility in the Heart wrought; and here is the true
Washing of Feet without Hypocrisy, which some are imitating without for LIFE,
but fall short; for, the Heart the Lord requires.

And thus is the Church of Christ gathered by one Spirit, and by the same
circumcised and baptized into one Light, and Life, and Power, where all dwell
as MEMBERS of One BODY, of which CHRIST is the HEAD. And here is the Blessed
Union and Communion in One; and here God is worshipped in Spirit and in Truth;
and as CHRIST is spiritual, so is his BODY, and so are his Ordinances: And here
are the true Christians, not those that only have the Notion of those things,
but they that witness and possess this in Life; and they that believe, have the
witness within themselves; and they that believe have passed from Death unto
Life; and the Life which they now live in, is by Faith in the Son of God, which
Faith is without Respect of Persons, who are the New Creatures, who are IN
Christ Jesus, to whom there is no Condemnation, who walk not after the FLESH,
but after the for, against such there is no LAW; for they are translated out of
that NATURE for which the LAW was added; Gal. 5. 23.
and are set free by the Law of the Spirit of Life, and are made Partakers of
the Divine Nature of Christ, by which they are made Christians; Romans 8. 2. 1
John 4. 17.
and therefore says John, As he is, so are we in this present World: and such
now witness the Effect of the Blood of Christ wrought within them, and the End
of his Coming, and the Benefit of his Death, who are Dead with him, and risen
through the Death of the Cross; and these are they that have escaped the
Pollutions of the World, through the Knowledge of the Son of God within them,
Christ within, the Hope of Glory, or else no Hope of Glory; 2 Cor. 13. 15. John
17. 23.
for, they that cannot witness him so, are in the Reprobation, so says the
Apostle; and here is the Son in the Saints, and the Father in the Son; and thus
are all made perfect in One: And here is the True Church, where there is but
One Teacher, One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One Light, One Life, and One
Way, One Shepherd and One Sheepfold, and One Priest over the Household of God,
and One Hope, and One Language, One Family, and One God and Father of all: And
they that cannot witness this, are Strangers to Christ, and Strangers to his
Cross, and Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel.

And this is the Work which the Lord has now begun, and is carrying on by a
Strong Arm and Mighty Power, to redeem unto himself a pure Church; and Blessed
are they that hearken unto his Voice: Here all you Formalists, Imitators and
Self-actors are shut out; here all you Proud Ones are shut out; here all you
Lustful Ones, Fleshly Ones, and Carnal Ones are shut out; and all you that are
conformed like unto the World in their Fashions, in their Customs, in their
Words, in their Ways, in their Worships and Traditions, in their Love and in
their Fellowship, who are seeking the Glory, and Honor, and Riches of this
World; you are the Children of this World, under the Dominion of the God of the
World, whose Kingdom is of this World: Here all you are shut out, who live at
Ease, in your Pleasures, and live wantonly upon the Earth, in the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life; you are the Children of
Babylon, James. 5. 5, 6.
you kill the Just, and he lies slain in the Streets; but here you all are shut
out of the New Covenant of Life in the Dark World, under Death's Dominion, of
what Profession and Judgment soever; Aliens and Strangers to the Covenant of
Promise; for, they that are not with us, are against us; and our Union and
Society is in the Light of Life: But you must all suffer the Death of the Cross
to the Life which you now live in, Mat. 12. 30.
before you can witness this Redemption; for those that live with Christ, are
crucified with him; therefore so it is, they that will take up Life, must first
lay down Life; for, the Way to Life, is through Death: Therefore you must be
stripped of all your Old Covers, naked and bare, that your Deceit and Shame may
appear, which you have so long covered with your own Righteousness, but now you
must suffer the Shame of the Cross, if you would have part in Christ, and all
your old Wisdom, Knowledge and Notions, which you have gotten into your
Comprehensions, by your Conceivings of the Scripture-Letter, wherein has been
your Life, and Pride, and Exaltation, must all come to the Death of the Cross,
that no Flesh should Glory in his Presence; but I say unto all you Professors,
Formalists, Notionists and Disputers, and Wise Ones of this World, If you will
not take up and embrace this Cross, Publicans and Harlots shall enter the
Kingdom before you; Therefore, not many Mighty, nor many Noble, nor many Wise
after the Flesh are called; 1 Cor. 25. 26. to the end.
but he has chosen the Foolish Things of this World to confound the Wise, and
the Weak to confound those that are Mighty, that no FLESH should Glory in his
PRESENCE; but CHRIST is made over unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption, that they which Glory, might Glory in the Lord. And this I
witness in my Measure, the things which I have seen, and heard, and felt, and
tasted of the good Word of Life, which was in the Beginning, the same do I
declare, and am known and read by the Children of Light.

And now I shall proceed to several Passages that I have had with the People
called Baptists, in several Meetings, that their Deceit and Delusion may be
laid open to the Simple-hearted.

Upon the Thirtieth of the First Month, called March, in the Year 1655. I was
at one Ashen's House in Fenstanton, in Huntingtonshire, where I was freely
declaring the Truth of God to the People that came there together that Day, as
I was taught and moved by the Spirit of Truth, by which the Holy Men of God
spoak forth the Scripture, as they were moved; and there came several of the
People, called Baptists, into the Room amongst us, amongst whom was one of
their Teachers, called, Richard Elligood, who after a while stood up in his
Will and Wisdom to accuse me, and said, That I had said, That God did not
respect any Forms, and yet (says he) you use the Form, and so use that which
God has no Respect to; But his first words were, Sir, (if you please) I will
speak something to what you have said: To which I made Answer, Here needs no
Complements: And then he runs on, as afore^ said; to which Accusation I
replied, was False; and bad him prove what Form I used: And he said, The
Letter: And I replied, He that takes the Letter to talk of without the Life and
Power, such sets up a Form, and makes a Form: But this would not satisfy his
filthy Wisdom, which darkened his Understanding; but because I spoak words
which are mentioned in the Scripture, by the same Spirit that spoak forth the
Scripture, by which I challenge the Scripture, from him and all such who have
gotten it to talk of, but denies the Life, and are Strangers to the Life and
Power; therefore with his contrary Spirit tasked me with a Form, which by his
Logic and deceitful Art would have proved, but could not, but his Deceit was
laid open to the People, and many declared against him; for a Form is this, as
I said before, the Likeness of a Thing, but not the Thing it self, as they have
the Likeness of a Church, which they have imagined from the Letter, with their
Elders, Pastors and Teachers, but not the Church it self; and so they imitate
the Scriptures, but live not in the Life of them that spoak forth the
Scriptures, neither are acted and guided by the same Spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures, and so want the Life and Power, and those are the Formalists that
make Forms and Likenesses, to deceive the simple, as the Devil has the Form of
an Angel of Light, but not the Life and Power, who appears to rule in those
Formalists and Self-Actors, but the Day does make him manifest, and therefore
he rages; and then this Elligood denied that I had the same Spirit that gave
forth the Scripture, and he said, The Spirit might be tried by the Letter; for
he said, Many false Spirits are entered into the World; and I asked him, By
what did the Apostle know that false Spirits were gone out into the World? and
he replied and said, By the Spirit of God; then I replied and said, If by the
Spirit of God the Apostle knew that there were many false Spirits gone out into
the World, then by the Spirit of God be tried FALSE SPIRITS, and knew False
Spirits from the TRUE; and here his Deceit was laid open to the People, and he
judged out of his own Mouth to be a Liar, and to be guided by a false Spirit,
who would try the Living by the Dead; and again he said, that one Spirit could
not try another; for by that Judgment the Evil Spirit might try the Good
Spirits; to which I replied, By the Spirit of God all other Spirits are tried,
and also, that by the Light Darkness is discovered, but Darkness cannot
comprehend the Light, neither discover the Light; and here again his Blindness,
and Ignorance, and Deceit was much discovered to the People, although he fed
himself, and would have shuffled it off by his Consequences and filthy Logic,
but it the more laid open his Deceit; and presently the said Elligood was found
with another Lie in his Mouth; for he said, that I said the Thing should be
proved by every Man's Spirit, which was a very Lie; for I said, that the
Baptism of the Spirit was the Substance of the outward Baptism, the which he
denied, and bid me prove it, and I said, I spoak to the Witness in every Man's
Conscience, which his dark Mind could not comprehend, but with his dark Mind
wrested my Words, and therefore said, that I said, it was witnessed by every
Man's Spirit, but his Spirit was a lying Spirit, there tried and made manifest
to the People, and his Blasphemy against the Spirit of God, in calling Truth
Error, and Error Truth, and putting Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness,
Isa. 5. 20.
because the God of the World has blinded his Eye; and many witnessed against
him, for his filthy Spirit was odious to many of the Hearers; then afterward he
again said, that I was a Deceiver, and his Proof was, that I was not obedient
to the Command of Christ, to be baptized; and I told him, I was baptized; but
he said, with Water? and he said, that was a Command of Christ to be baptized
with Water, and I bid him show me that Scripture, but he could not, but brought
a Scripture in the Acts, where the Apostle commanded some to be baptized; Acts
10. 47, 48.
and this by his filthy Logic and Consequences he would have made a Command of
Christ, but he could not deceive the Light which did him try, and make him
manifest to the Shame of his Prosession, but he could not bring one Scripture
to prove it to be a Command of Christ, to baptize with Water; and then he
shuffled to that Scripture where the Apostle said, Be ye Followers of us, even
as we are Followers of Christ; and then he said, Christ was baptized, but he
confessed, it was to fulfill all Righteousness; and I said, he was also
circumcised; and he said, that was not for Example, then not the Baptism; for
both were to fulfill all Righteousness, to which End, he, the Substance came;
but Christ himself baptized not with Water, neither do they read that the
Apostles were baptized with Water; then who is their Example? and how do they
follow the Apostles in that, seeing they are baptized, and the Apostles were
not? then he fled from that being there routed, and said, They might be
Disciples before they could take up the CROSS of Christ, and I replied with
Christ's Words, That they might take up his Cross before they could be his
Disciples, which he denied, and said, That Wicked Men upon that Account might
take up the Cross of Christ, and that Christ required Wicked Men to take up his
Cross; and I said, it was so, he did require them so to do; for by taking up
his Cross, they come to deny their Wickedness; for they that bear his CROSS,
live not in Wickedness; but this Elligood said, That Wicked Men could not take
up his CROSS; for he said, Reproaches and outward Sufferings were the CROSS of
Christ (for his Name's sake) but this was not the Cross by which Paul was
crucified to the World, and the World to him; and says Paul (where he was
speaking concerning Wickedness and Unrighteous Ones, to the Corinthians) Such
were some of you, but you are now cleansed, etc. And here Wicked Ones and
Unrighteous Ones took up his CROSS, which to them was the Power of GOD unto
Salvation, though to the GREEKS Foolishness, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11.
and to the JEWS a stumbling^ Block, amongst whom this ELLIGOOD is found, who
is a Stranger to the CROSS OF CHRIST, who says, REPROACHES and Outward
SUFFERINGS are the CROSS OF CHRIST, whenas the CROSS OF CHRIST makes DISCIPLES,
and they must be DISCIPLES before they can suffer REPROACHES or PERSECUTION for
the NAME OF CHRIST, and must depart from Iniquity, before they be a Prey to the
World for CHRIST's sake; for the World loves its own, and they that take up
the CROSS, do depart from Iniquity, which is before Reproaches or Persecution
is suffered for the Name of CHRIST: And here ELLIGOOD is found the Liar, who
said, Wicked Men were not called to take up the Cross of CHRIST, whenas all are
wicked before they take up this Cross; and here ELLIGOOD is found to be no
Disciple of Christ, who is such a Stranger to the Cross of Christ, who is a
Liar, and so are not the Disciples of Christ; for the Liar is of the Devil, and
therefore is ELLIGOOD.

Then I knowing him to be one of the Baptists Teachers, I took out some
Queries, which not long before I had sent them, but no Answer to them had I
received, and I would have read them openly that the People might have heard,
and also he that was one of their Teachers; but as I was reading, he not having
Power over his own Will could not bridle his Tongue, but disorderly run into
many Words, so that the People could not understand; and I spoak to him for
it, and he said, He had not Time to stay, and further said, That he was not of
the Society of these Baptists at Fnestanton, and yet he came with them and from
them; and then I replied, That be owned them to be the Church of God, and this
he did, and then if he was not of their Society, he was shut out of the Church;
and then he would have shuffled off with his Consequences, and said, he dwelt
for off, and then I replied with the Apostles Words, Though absent in Body, yet
present in Spirit; Acts 4. 32.
and the Multitude that believed were of one Heart and Mind, and here was the
Society of the Saints, and he being out of this Society, is shut out of the
Church; and then he would have made it stood by his Logic, which only is to
make a false Thing seem true; but it the more laid open his deceitful Heart and
Shame to the Hearers, who severally witnessed against him, to speak nothing but
Deceit; and then says he, you call the Apostles Words Deceit, because he had
often stolen the Apostles Words, to make his DECEIT seem TRUTH, by covering it
with the APOSTLES Words, and this is a more subtle Deceit; and then in his Will
he called me Deceiver, the which he was to prove, and all the People was
silent, and there he uttered several Lies, and laid open himself to be the
Deceiver, as I had told him in going about to prove me a Deceiver, he would the
more lay open his own Deceit, and prove himself to be the Deceiver; and the
People did plainly see it so, and witnessed with me against him; for he did so
utter forth his Folly and Deceit, that he made himself odious to many that were
there; and at last he shuffled away, under Pretense he had far to go; but the
Judgments of God he cannot escape; for his Damnation slumbreth not, who is an
Opposer of the Truth of God.

Then there was one Philips, an Old Man of the Baptized Party in another Room,
who in Scorn and Wrath stood up and said, They knew the first Principle of
Religion before I was born, because one of my Queries to them was, What is the
first Principle of Religion? So I replied to the Old Man, if they knew it, they
should have answered; and then presently, as he was running on in many Words,
he swore, as he lived and breathed, and Christ says, Swear not at all; Mat. 5.
34.
and here he was found not come to the first Principle of Religion, but out of
the Doctrine of Christ, and so has not God; so I told him of his Swearing, and
he would have shuffled it off, but he could not; and I told him, He that seems
to be Religious, 2 John 9.
and bridleth not his Tongue, his Religion is vain, and therefore he might own
his Religion to be vain, who could not bridle his Tongue; and then in his Will
he shuffled off, and said, He would not confess his Sin to me, for I could not
forgive Sin, Jam. 1. 26.
in Scorn he spoak; then I said, Woe unto him that hides his Sin, and covers his
Iniquity, but he shuffled away in much Confusion of Face, as they will all
appear as by the Light they come to be searched and tried, their Coverings will
be found too narrow, and their Nakedness will appear to their great Shame and
Confusion of Face, and they will be made to bow to the Truth, and lay down
their Crowns at the Feet of Jesus; for he is risen and reigns in his Saints, to
whom the Nations must bow, and every Tongue confess to their Condemnation who
do oppose him; but here now by the single Eye you may see the Emptiness of
these Forms, and what a blind Hypocrisy this is of them, to wash the Outside,
but leave the Inside full of Uncleanness, and so the Inside defiles the Outside.

A Copy of the Queries which were sent to the Baptized People in Fenstanton,
with some more added for them, or any whom they do concern, toanswer.
Several Queries to you who are called Baptists, by your Teachers to be
answered.

Query I. WHat is the first Principle of Religion, and whether to it you be
come, yea or nay?

2, What is the Bridle of the Tongue, and whether to it you be come, yea or nay?

3. What is the Church in God, and whether to it you become, yea or nay?

4. What is the Order in the Church, and whether to it you be come, yea or nay?

5. What is the Baptism into the Church, and whether to it you be come, yea or
nay?

6. Whether you will own the Baptism of the Spirit, or the Baptism of Water,
and which you will deny, seeing the Scripture says, The Baptism is but One?
Ephesians. 4. 5.

7. And where Christ ever commanded Water Baptism?

8. Why did the Apostles baptize with Water? and why do you baptize with Water?
and where, and when, and by what were you commanded? and where was any of the
twelve Apostles baptized with Water?

9. And whether you do it because the Apostles did it, yea or nay?

10. What is the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and whether to it you are
come, yea or nay?

11. Whether your Faith purifies your Hearts, yea or nay?

12. And whether you commit Sin, yea or nay?

13. How would you know there is a Christ, but by the Scripture? and how do you
witness the Scripture is Truth?

14. And what is the Ground of your Faith?

15. What is the Redemption, and whether to it you are come, yea or nay?

16. What is the Communion of the Saints; and wherein it stands; and whether to
it you be come, yea or nay?

17. And whether you that break Bread, do discern the Lord's Body, yea or nay?

18. What was their Rule and Guide that spoak forth the Scripture?

19. Whether you have the same insallible Spirit that gave forth the Scripture?

20. Whether is the Scripture your Rule and Guide, or the Spirit that gave it
forth?

21. Whether they that are guided by the Spirit that gave it forth, live not in
the Life thereof, yea or nay?

22. Whether the Life of the Scriptures be perfect yea or nay?

23. And whether you are (or think to be) made perfect while you are upon the
Earth, yea or nay? Or where do you think to be made perfect, if not upon the
Earth?

24. And what is the Life and Power of Godliness; and whether in it you dwell,
who have a Form, yea or nay?

25. Whether you are washed and cleansed by the Blood of the Lord Jesus, and
the Spirit of our God, as the true Church was, yea or nay?

26. Whether you have put off the Old Man, and put on the New, as the true
Church did, yea or nay? and what is the New Man?

27. And whether you have put off the Image of the Earthly, and put on the
Image of the Heavenly? and how are they known the one from the other?

28. Whether you are not conformed like unto the World, so long as you follow
their Customs and Fashions?

29. Whether you are come that you need no Man to teach you, as the true Church
was, yea or nay?

30. What is the Cross whereby Paul was crucified; and whether to it you be
come, yea or nay?

31. What is the Watcher that strikes at the Feet of the Image; and whether to
it you be come, yea or nay?

32. What is the Word? and what is the Death that has passed over all Men,
even over those who had not sinned after the Similitude of Adam's
Transgression? and whether this Death you ever passed?

33. Whether you have passed from Death to Life, yea or nay?

34. Where, and when, and how received you the Command and Power to deliver any
Saul up to Satan? and where is that Satan you deliver it up to?

35. What is the Tree of Life? and what is the Tree of Knowledge? and whether
upon it you do not feed? and what is the flaming Sword that is set to keep from
the Tree of Life? and whether it ye ever passed, yea or way?

36. What is the Beast that all the World wonders after and worships? and what
is the Worship of the Beast? and whether any worships the only true God, but
the true Church? and what is the Worship in this Church?

37. What are you Ministers of? and what do you minister unto? and what is the
End of your Ministry?

38. And by what do you try the Spirits? and by what did the Prophets and
Apostles try the Spirits? and whether yours is the same Try^r of Spirits as
theirs was, yea or nay?

39. What is the Faith of the Saint? and what is the Faith of the Hypocrite?
and how are they known the one from the other?

40. How and by what were you called to the Ministry which you profess?

41. What is the Gospel which you profess? and what is the Light of the Gospel
which the Infidel cannot see? and what is an Infidel? and what is the Eye which
the God of the World blinds in the Infidel?

42. What is the State and Condition of the Jew inwardly, whose Praise is not
of Man, but of God? and wherein does he differ from the Jew outwardly?

43. What is the New Covenant? and where any in the New Covenant paid Tithes?
and why do you cry against the Priests, and their Tithe, and their Worship, and
yet uphold them by paying them Tithes, and helping to maintain their Places of
Worship? and whether this be not Babel, Yea or Nay?

These Things I donot ask because I know them not, but that the Truth may be
manifest, and the Deceit laid open; therefore answer by plain Scripture, or
else all ye Formalists, Imitators and Selfactors, bow unto the Truth, and be
silent, and let your Mouths be stopped, and thereby confess and yield your
selves in an Error, and to have gotten the Form without the Life and Power,
that the simple may no longer be deceived by you, taking the Shadow for the
Substance.

Read this openly in your Church, that all may hear and answer for themselves;
from him who by one of you was called a Deceiver, yet true, who according to
the World am called, James Parnel.

A Copy of most of these Queries was sent to the chief Teacher of the Baptized
People in Festanton and after a certain Time, these Words they sent me back
again, as follows:

A few Words to him that says, that according to the World he is called James
Parnel.
WE have received your Paper, and according to your Desire, read it in the
Congregation, unto which you desire our Answer by plain Scripture; to which we
reply, That when you make good your Affirmation, that you are no Deceiver, but
True, by plain Scripture, then shall we return you a further Answer to your
Queries,

From them who desire to serve the Lord Jesus Christ, John Den, Edmund Male.


Then after I had received this Libel, I returned them this Answer at the
Bottom of their own Paper.

Answer, THis is plain Scripture, Though as a Deceiver, yet true; and if my
Life and Conversation does not prove the same, and make good my Affirmation,
then in your Answer to my Queries you might have taxed me, and proved to the
contrary: But this of you is but a plain Shuffle to blind the World, and shun
the Shame, and still to blind the People, who are enslaved under your Deceit;
but this will the more manifest your Ignorance.

Then not long after they returned me this Answer, as follows.

IT is not plain Scripture, Though as a Deceiver, yet True; As Deceivers, yet
True, is plain Scripture; the greatest Deceiver in the World might as well have
brought it to prove himself no Deceiver, but true as well as you. For your
Conversation, we know it not; we have naught to say to that: but this we know,
that Wolves may come in Sheep's Clothing; and this does appear in you, in
drawing People from the Truth, as namely, from Water Baptism, which is a
Command of the Lord unto Believers. As for your saying, We might have taxed you
in our Answer to your Queries: We think you might plainly see your Folly in
this: You affirmed nothing in them as your Judgment; how should we then tax
you, and prove the contrary? And again, We made no Promise to Answer, and
therefore you might have spared your Daring and False Words, to say, The People
are Enslaved under our Deceit: And therefore, until you have made good what you
have taken in hand by plain Scripture, by the Fruit of your Lips, by bringing
the Doctrine of Christ, and owning his Commandments, we say, until then, we are
exhorted, To let you alone: Let them alone; they be blind Leaders of the Blind:
you having been so plainly manifest unto us.

Rep. Here all People, who with a single Eye read, may see the Deceit of this
People; for I spoak but of one, and therefore in that Respect it is plain
Scripture, though as a Deceiver, yet True: But these are they, who, if they
could, would make a Man an Offender for a Word. Isa. 29. 21.
My Conversation they cannot touch, and yet are not ashamed to say, The
greatest Deceiver might as well have brought this Scripture, as I; and this is
the Blindness of their Minds: And also say (because I deny Water Baptism to be
an Ordinance, or a Command of Christ) that I am a Wolf in Sheep's Clothing,
which they do affirm to be a Command, but cannot prove it; and so are such as
use their Tongues, and say, The Lord says, when he never spoak to them: But
surely, a Wolf in Sheep's Clothing is to be known by the Life and Practice,
but in this they are blind, and cannot discern, and so themselves are the Blind
Leaders of the Blind; but I shall not let you alone, but make you manifest unto
the World; neither did Christ let them alone, but pronounced Woes, and declared
against them: And here I am sure you might see your Folly, who say I have been
so manifest unto you; and said, You know not my Conversation, What a Confusion
is this? But it is your Mother's Language. And also in expecting me to affirm
my Judgment upon my own Queries; then what need I send them to you to Answer,
if I Answer them my self? And here I am sure you might see your own Folly; for
it is here plainly laid open; so that all who are led by you, are plainly seen
to be enslaved under your Deceit: And these words shall stand for Truth against
you, which you call false, who are the Blind, and so put Evil for Good, and
Good for Evil: And the Doctrine of Christ I have brought, and his Commandments
I do own from and against you, who are the Busy Bodies and Self-Actors, who
have naught to do with him, nor his Commands. Therefore, Silence Deceivers; for
here I have made good what I have taken in hand, which witnessed, shall be in
your Condemnation.

The Occasion of another Meeting betwixt the People called Baptists, and the
People called Quakers.
SEveral times when I have come to the Town of Cambridge, I have heard a Rumor
of a Boasting and Daring, that sprung from the People called Baptists, behind
my Back, concerning a Dispute with me; yet I had received nothing from them,
neither by Word nor Writing, to be certain of their Minds; therefore I being in
the Town, sent them Word, That I heard a Voice of such a thing, but knew not
the Certainty; therefore to let me know their Minds in Writing, if they
intended such a Thing. So then one Hind, a Tanner in Cambridge, sent me this
Note, as follows, which Joseph Doughty had sent unto him.

The NOTE.
Brother Hind,
AS touching a Discourse with James Parnel, I shall be willing to do God and
Men Service in it, to my Power given to me.

First, Provided that it be somewhat public; the Questions in Controversy may
be stated in Writing.

II. That the Questions may be such as may be Resolved and Answered according
to Scripture.

III. That the Questions agreed upon, may be delivered into the Disputants
Hands Three Days before the Day of Dispute.

IV. That to avoid Confusion in Multitude of Words, a short Form of Argument
shall be used on both Parts.

V. That some shall be chosen on both Sides, to see Order on both Sides
observed in Discourse; and competent Judges also appointed.

VI. That Censorious Rash Terms of Judging shall not be used.

VII. That the Disputants shall declare before the People their Intent in
Dispute.

April, this 17th, 1655. John Doughty.


My Reply to this was as follows, as not being willing to come under their
Snares.

Reply, THis is not to me, but betwixt Brother and Brother; so, if you two
Brothers are agreed concerning this your Intent toward me, let me know your
Mind in Writing now, while I am in the Town; for, while I was abroad, there was
a Voice of such a thing, as from you; but to me you did not declare your Minds,
neither in Word nor Writing; therefore now I am in the Town, let me know your
Minds in Writing, that there may be no Boasting nor Daring in Secret; for,
Truth is bold, and seeks no Covers. This from me to you I send, and do require
your Answer, who am called

James Parnel.


This was writ on the Backside of their Note, and sent back to Hind, who forth
with flew into a great Rage against the Messenger in the Street; and said, That
I ^yed in saying, That the Note was not to me; which any one who can read, may
plainly see it so, and him to be the Liar for the Lake, and his seeming
Religion to be Vain, who is still in old Cain's Nature, in Wrath and
Bitterness, without a Bridle to the Tongue.

Then the next Morning I received this from them, as follows.

JAmes Parnel, This is to thee; my Intent toward thee is this; If thou art
minded to dispute with me, appoint Time and Place public, and if the Lord
will, I will dispute with thee.

And so on with his Proviso's, as aforesaid.

Then my Reply was as follows.

TO thee, Joseph Doughty, I do reply; That thou must understand the Occasion of
the Dispute to be sprung from thee or thy Party, as I did declare on the
Backside of thy other Paper; so if thou, or any of you, that made your Boasts
or Darings behind my Back, or have any thing against me or the Truth, which I
bear Testimony unto, or the Way which I walk in, I am ready now at all times,
through the Power of God, to stand up for and defend the same, against thee, or
any other who shall Object against, Oppose or Gainsay it, be it in the Towns
Hall, or as public as you will: And what I have at any time declared against
you People, or your Profession, I shall be ready to maintain and justify, by
such Weapons as I have, which are not Carnal, but Spiritual: and here is Time
and Place from me declared. But to the End of all Disputes and Arguments I am
come; for, before they were I am, and in the Light do them comprehend and judge
to be out o^ the Light, in Babylon, and the Disputer and Arguer of (...) World.
But still I say, Against such I stand a Witness for the Truth, which I have
received of God, and by his Power am carried abroad, to declare and preach
abroad, to the directing and turning People's Minds to the true Light of the
Lord Jesus, and there to come into the Love and Unity, where live the Children
of Light, the End of all Disputes and Arguments; and this I am ready to Defend
and Seal with my Blood: But I say, My Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual.
And as for these Provisoes of thine, they are rather for me to lay upon thee,
according to Equity; for I am the Defender: But these things of thee I do not
require, neither Three Days beforehand; but am ready at any time to stand to
what I have here declared.

And as for Confusion in Multitude of Words; which is thy fourth Proviso.

Reply, Look thou to that on thy Part, and if thou can tax me, thou may.

And as for Order in the Discourse, for which thou would have some chosen,
which is thy fifth Proviso.

Reply, Look thou to that on thy Part; for, my God is a God of Order; and if
thou can tax me thou may, and let that stand against me: But if there be
Men of Power to keep the People of the World in Order, I am not against it.

And as for Competent Judges, which thou would have appointed.

Reply, Is the Scripture thy Rule, and not thy Judge, but thou must flee from
that to the Judgment of Man, which is changeable; or else, how come Disputes
and Controversies? But to that Judgment I shall not stand; the Spiritual Man
shall be the Competent Judge, and the Scripture shall witness.

And as for Censorious Rash Terms of Judging; which is thy sixth Proviso.

Reply, Look thou to that on thy Part; and if my Judgment thou can find
contrary to Scripture, thou may by Scripture disprove it: But what is that,
that would not be judged?

And as for Declaring before the People the Intent and Purpose in Disputing;
which is thy seventh Proviso.

Reply, If thou, who are the Disputant amongst the People, have any thing to
say unto the People, thou may declare thy Mind according to the Freedom of
thy Mind, I shall not bind thee, neither shall I by thee be bound; but as the
Lord puts into my Mouth, I shall declare unto the People what is my Mind and
Intent, as his Spirit guides me; so that for that I take no Thought.

So here I have declared my Mind in Reply unto thy Writing, where thou may
understand my Mind, if thou have an Ear to hear, and an Understanding open: And
if this does not satisfy thee, and the rest of you; yet nevertheless, cease
your Boasting and Daring behind the Back for the time to come; and let this
Witness for me to any Honest Heart, whether it be not Fair and Equal. And so I
rest in the Unchangeable,

James Parnel.


So, it seems this pleased them; and so it was concluded to be of the Twentieth
Day, called Friday, of the Second Month, called April: So when the Hour came
which was appointed, we were disappointed of the Meeting Place which the
Baptists had provided; for, they sent me word, they had provided a Place, but
when we came to meet, it could not be had, and so we were disappointed: Then we
were in this Hind's House, and the Woman of the House much Fumed and Raged at
us all the while we were in the House, which manifested what Spirit she was of,
and that Water had availed her nothing; for she was nothing departed from the
Old Nature: So then they would have had us to have met in the Yard, but there
could be no Order for Multitude of Rude People and Brutish Scholars, which
were as untamed brute Beasts, like the Beasts of Ephesus, which Paul fought
with after the manner of Men; 1 Cor. 15. 32.
so I passed to a Friend's House hard by, and there continued declaring the
Truth, as I was moved, to the People, and there the idle Drones followed, even
Babylon's Children, with their Turbulent, Vain, Contending Spirits, Opposing
and Gainsaying the Truth, like Jannes and Jambres, their Forefathers, who
must perish in the Gainsaying of Core. So then word came, That the Baptists
were in the Shire-House, in the Castle-Yard, and had sent for me: and so I went
up thither; and when I came there, the Jailer discharged me for staying there,
and said, I caused Tumults, though I had not spoaken any thing to the People
whereby to cause a Tumult; but the Generation of this World was always
Tumultuous, both about Christ and his Apostles, though they were known to be
innocent and harmless, offering Violence to none; yet it was so with them then,
and it is so now with the same Seed, where it is born up to Rule, because it is
not of the World, but hated of the World; for the Enmity lodges in the World:
The World is the Sea, with its tumultuous gathering together of the Raging
Roaring Waves, casting up Mire and Dirt, foaming out its own Shame; and though
an innocent Person travail here, he must such Distractions expect, and tumults
of Raging Waves about him, casting up such as they have; but he that made the
Bounds of the Sea, can and does deliver his out of the Compass of its Bounds,
and then it cannot pass its Bounds; for, its Bounds it keeps: here is a Parable
hid from the Wisdom of the World; but the same which gave it forth, the same
will open it to the Unlearned.

Then after the Jailer had spoak to me, they made some way for me to come up to
the Baptists, who were there sitting upon the Bench like Judges; this Doughty
and one Rix a Brewer, an old Pharisee in Cambridge; the one, a Baptist; and the
other of the Independent Sect, so called; but two great Enemies one against
another, in Opposition against each Sect, yet these two were joined together as
Friends against me; and thus sat Pilate and Herod together, like Judges,
against the Innocent: So when I was gotten amongst the People, I would not
meddle until the Jailer had given Freedom for me to stay there, as he had
before discharged me; so, after a while, he gave leave, so that we would be
short: Then this Doughty, the Baptist, so called, stood up, and put off his Hat
to the People, after the Manner of the Heathen, with a Complement, pleading of
the Shortness of the Time, and so begun with a Question; so I said, His
Question might stand, and as he had Liberty to speak to the People, so would I;
and then he would have hindered me, contrary to what was before agreed upon
betwixt us by the Passages aforesaid; so I got Liberty to speak something to
the People, and declared what I was made a Minister of, according to the Will
of God; and then I took out a Paper, and read unto the People the Occasion of
my coming thither to meet the Baptists that day, and by the Conclusions therein
I was to have Liberty to speak my Mind as well as he, and he was to accuse me
before the People, or the Truth which I bore Testimony unto; but he broak his
first Agreement, and flew to Question; so then, to satisfy the Simple-Hearted,
I gave this Answer to the Un^erstanding of the Simple.

First, the Baptist's Question:

Qu. The Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, which are called Scripture,
whether are they the Words and Sayings of the Most High God? yea or nay.

Answ. The Word of God, which is God, which dwelt in the Prophets and Apostles,
from it they spoak forth the things which are recorded in Scripture. But this
would not satisfy the Baptists, but cried out, No Answer; and Doughty stood
up, and put off his Hat, and beckened to the Young Priests and Scholars, and
said, Judge, ye Gentlemen of Divinity: And there was one Anger, a Drunken
Priest, sided with the Baptists. Now, let all see, how contrary to their own
Principles they acted; but some of the Scholars had so much Understanding, as
to receive it for an Answer; but the Drunkards sided with the Baptists, and the
Ruder Sort, who could not understand, though there were many simple Hearts,
that with this Answer were satisfied; but the Wise must be catched in their own
Craftiness: And several times I repeated this Answer over to the People, but
the Baptist and his Party could not receive it, because it was in the Cross to
their Wisdom; But there was that which I spoak to which could and did receive
it: Then Jos. Doughty the Baptist, and Henry Rix, the old Pharisee, joined
together, and with one Consent said, I durst not Answer it; and thus the
Unclean Spirits joined together, and made Lies their Refuge: And after that I
was repeating my Answer over to the People, Doughty stood up, and said, I spoak
I knew not what; and then I taxed him with a Lie; and then he said, It was not
to his Question: but I bad him prove that I spoak I knew not what; but he could
not, but shuffled off, and said, I would flee from his Question, and there he
stood: Then the Jailer called to depart; and Doughty stood up, and spoak to the
Jailer, Not to suffer Me to stay after Him, lest I should seduce the People;
there I stood up, and challenged him to prove me a Seducer to the People; but
he had nothing to say for that, but manifested himself to be a Seducer, and a
Slanderer, and a Reproacher of the Truth of God, and so must take part with his
Forefathers of the Wrath of God: Then I openly spoak to the People, That if any
there could tax me, or lay any thing to my Charge, I was there to Answer; but
none did or could there accuse me: So then I passed into the Castle-yard, then
the wild brutish Scholars, who had plotted together (as I was after informed)
to abuse me, and they flocked together about me like the Wild Beasts of the
Forest, and there I was tossed as amongst the Raging Waves of the Sea, to and
fro, and at last was hurried into a House, where I got shut of those
Caterpillars, which the Nation swarms with: But the Baptized Party passed away
without Disturbance; so it appears, The World loves its own.

Oh Cambridge! Is this the Fruit of thy Ministry, which thou have so long
professed, which has been so long preached in thee? Is this thy Divinity? And
are these thy Preachers of Divinity? Nay, they are now found out (by the Light
of God) to be the Diviners and Sorcerers, Witches and Magicians, that are only
Opposers and Gainsayers of the Truth, who must perish in the Gainsaying of
Core; they are known by their Fruits, and the Fruits of their Ministry; and thy
Wellhead of Divinity is now found the Wellhead of Sorcery, Witchcraft and
Spiritual Whoredom, and all Abomination and Uncleanness; the Day does declare
it; and one Fountain cannot bring forth both Bitter Water and Fresh. Jam. 3. 11.
Oh! Antichrist has reigned long over poor, enslaved, captivated Souls; but
now, Israel's Redeemer has appeared, and the Sun of Righteousness is risen
with Healing in his Wings, Mal. 4. 2.
and Antichrist's Kingdom is come and coming to an End, and Christ himself will
reign and rule in Truth and in Righteousness in his Ransomed Ones; and this is
the Mighty King, and Redeemer of Israel out of Captivity, into a Land of Peace,
and Love, and Unity, where the Ransomed Ones do dwell, with their Captain and
their King, who does deliver his own Lambs out of the Mouths of Raging Wolves
and Dogs; Praises, Praises Everlasting, Eternal, to the Everlasting God of Life
forever: Mat. 10 16.
And thus we are sent as Sheep amongst Wolves; but in the Power of the Almighty
we are sent forth, and the Arm of the Almighty is with us, and does deliver us
from being a Prey to the Lyon's Whelps, which would us devour; and blessed are
all they that receive our Testimony, it is Peace and Salvation to their Souls.
Now, where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Where is the Disputer of this World? Has not God made Foolish the Wisdom of
this World, and has chosen the Foolish Things to confound the Wise, and the
Weak to confound those that are Mighty, that no Flesh should Glory in his
Presence?

Unto this Doughty I sent several of these Queries, which are before mentioned,
but I received no Answer.

Another Meeting betwixt the People called Baptists, and the People called
Quakers.
UPon the fourth Day of third Month, called May, we were several of the Lord's
People met together, in a Friend's Oarchard at Litleport, in the Isle of Ele,
and there came in Three of the Teachers of the Baptized People, the chief of
them was one John Ray of Wickombruck in Suffolk; and he came (as he said) with
a Message, and that was, To Excommunicate two Persons that were there, namely,
Samuel Cater and Ezekiel Cater had formerly been Elders amongst them) out of
their Society, whenas they were come out of their Society before, and owned the
Substance, and denied their Form and Shadow, without their casting out; but
thou Ray to uphold-thy Form, did there disorderly run into Words in thy own
Will, and then wentst away, and would not stay to prove what thou had done,
but said, Thou wast to be at the Steeple-house shortly; so as I was moved, I
spoak unto the People there present; and after a while, when I had spoken what
was given me of the Lord to speak, I passed into the Town, and there I hearing
how the Baptist was railing on the Truth in the Steeple-house, I passed to the
Steeple-house with some Friends that had formerly been of their Society; and
when I came there I found thee John Ray set up in the Seat of the Pharisee, the
chiefest Place in the Assembly, speaking a Divination of thy own Brain, and not
from the Mouth of the Lord, as thou confessedst openly amongst the People, that
none in these Days had any open Vision, or heard God speak immediately; and
here thou wast an open Liar amongst the People; but here thou barredst thy self
from the same Spirit that spoak in the Prophets and Apostles, and therefore art
a Deceiver; for he that has not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9.
is none of his; and so thou measuredst others by thy self; but I and Hundreds
more of the Children of Light, do witness thee to be a Liar and Deceiver in
these Days, who comes not in the Name of the Lord, but in thy own Name,
therefore the World receives thee; but here out of thy own Mouth thou art
judged and condemned out of the New Covenant; for there God himself is Teacher;
and thou that never heardst him speak immediately, and yet come to preach his
Word, Joh. 6. 45.
Thou art a Stranger unto God, and a Blind Guide, a Deceiver, and a false
Prophet, who runs and the Lord never sent thee, therefore thou profits not the
People at all, but art a Thief and steals the Words of the Prophets, Christ and
his Apostl^s, and adds a Divination of thy own Brain, and so feeds the People
with Notions and airy Knowledge, Mat. 2^. 24.
and casting the Childrens Bread unto Dogs, but the greater is thy
Condemnation, who for a Pretense makes long Prayers, and wrests and perverts
the Scripture to thy own Destruction, but think ^ot that thou shall be heard
for thy much Babbling; for the Hand of the Lord is against thee.

And there in the Seat of the Pharisee thou Ray had taken a Text of the
Apostles Words, and added thy own Meanings, Uses, Applications and Divinations,
thou Merchant of Babylon and Diviner, where have thou any such Example from the
Prophets or Apostles? 2 Pet. 1. 21. Acts 2. 4. Acts 4. 8.
They spoak from the Mouth of the Lord, and as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, and as the Spirit gave them Utterance, and they spoak with Power and
Authority, and not as the Scribes, but thou do speak in the Wisdom of the
World, like as the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Priests, amongst whom I number
thee; and here thou art shut from the Apostles and their Practice, with thy
Carnal Meanings, Uses, Applications and Divinations; and this was thy TEXT,
which thou had stolen out of the Apostles Writings, which were writ unto the
Church, and thou applyedst them unto the World, and said, Text. 2 Pet. 20*
21, 22.
For if after they have escaeped the Pollutions of the World through the
Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein and overcome, the latter End is worse then the Beginning, etc. And from
this thou raisedst thy Uses, Applications and dark Meanings, whenas neither
thou nor any there which belonged to thee, or owned thee, that had ever escaped
the Pollutions of the World, or ever had come to the Knowledge of Christ, but
are still in Darkness and Blindness, in their Sins and Corruptions, in
Covetousness, in Pride and Wantonness, in Lightness, in Wrath, and in Anger,
and Maliciousness, in Backbiting, in Slandering, and false Accusing, in
Railing and Cursed Speaking, in Lying, and Blaspheming, only it may be have
passed through the Water; But it is not the washing away the Filth of the
Flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
But here both thou and they are still, and these are the Pollutions of the
World; but they that know and witness Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, witness
the washing away those Sins and Pollutions; and thus thou wrests and perverts
the Scripture to thy own Destruction; and then thou wentst on dreaming and
flattering and daubing up the People with untempered Mortar, saying, The Lord
says, when he never spoake to thee; and then thou runst on railing behind the
Back of People that was not there, as thou often said, thou spoak it of none
there; and thus thou utteredst forth thy Folly, and it is like thou might
belie those whom thou spoakest of; for I heard thee utter forth many open Lies;
and then thou runnedst on to thy Water Baptism, to maintain it an Ordinance of
Christ, and thou broughtst this Scripture in the 6 th of the Romans, which the
Apostle spoak to the Church, Know you not that so many of you as were baptized
into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death; Romans 6. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 17.
Thou blind Hypocrite, was this Water Baptism? They that are in Christ are New
Creatures, and so are not those who are baptized with Water, but they are in
the same Nature as they were before; and thou may read in Corinthians the
twelft, what Baptism that was he spoak of there; for says he, By one Spirit
are we all baptized into one Body, etc. And they that are thus baptized, are
baptized into Christ; but as I said before, It is not the washing away of the
Filth of the Flesh; and here is thy Folly and Ignorance laid open, who art so
blind as to bring this Scripture to prove Water Baptism to be an Ordinance of
Christ; and again it says, They were baptized into his Death; and in the same
Chapter it says, They that are dead are freed from Sin, and this thou
denyedst, that any could be set free from Sin so long as they are upon the
Earth; and thus thou deniest Jesus Christ and his Ordinances, who came to take
away Sin, and to cleanse his People from their Sin; but praised be the Lord, we
do witness a Freedom from Sin by Jesus Christ, who is the Lamb of God, who came
to take away the Sin of the World, and to redeem his People from their Sins,
and to redeem unto himself a pure Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any
such Thing, and says he, John 8. 36. 1 John 3. 1.
If the Son has set you free, then are you free indeed; and here is the
Liberty of the Sons of God, and now are we the Sons of God; and now they that
witness this, and confess it, such blind Hypocrites as thou call them
Blasphemers, and so deny Christ come in the Flesh, and so are of Antichrist:
And one while thou affirmedst in thy Pulpet, that they that pressed and led
People into Holiness, were no Deceivers, but they that led them into Sin and
Evil were Deceivers, and then afterward toldst the People, they never could be
free from Sin, so long as they are upon the Earth; and thus thou would settle
them upon the Lees, and deny Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, who comes to
cleanse from all Sin; and thus art thou judged out of thy own Mouth for a
Deceiver.

And thou also broughtst this Scripture to maintain Water Baptism, where the
Apostle said, Gal. 3. 27.
For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Now
let any, whose Understandings are enlightened by the Light of Christ, read this
Scripture, and see if this mention Water Baptism, and if any by Water Baptism
do now put on Christ, and by the Light judge thee to be a Liar, and a Deceiver,
and a Perverter of the Scripture to thy own Destruction, and all who believe
thee, except you repent. And then thou runedst on to prove the Letter to be the
Word, by (...) or despising those that say that God is the Word, and that there
is no written Word, when the Letter says it self, that the Word is God; and
then thou broughtst this Scripture to prove the Letter to be the Word, in 1
Pet. 1. 23. Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by
the Word of God, which lives and abides forever; for all Flesh is Grass, and
the Glory of Man as the Flower of Grass, the Grass withers, and the flower
fades away, but the Word of the Lord endures forever: And this is the Word
which by the Gospel is preached unto you; here thou dark Sot, thy Blindness and
Ignorance is more laid open; is the Letter immortal, or any written Word
immortal, or lives or abides forever? or are any born again, but of God? and
is not he that same immortal Word which the Scripture often bears Testimony
unto, John 15. 3.
and also in this Place; and Christ, the Lamb of God is the Everlasting Gospel,
who preached the Word, and his Apostles were made clean through the Word which
he preached unto them; but this was not the dead Letter, in the which thou
would find Life, John 5. 39.
and so art seeking the living amongst the dead, like the blind Pharisees, who
thought in the Scripture to find Eternal Life, but would not come unto Christ
that they might have Life; and here thou art in their Steps, though thou made
light of this Scripture, and said, That some added Ye to it, and said, Ye
search the Scripture, for in them ye think to have Eternal Life, they are they
that testify of me but ye will not come unto me, that ye might have Life; this
was spoaken by Christ unto the Pharisees, who could not believe that he was the
Christ, but thought in the Scriptures to find Eternal Life, but would not come
unto Christ that they might have Life, and therefore he bid them search the
Scripture, for there the Prophets had prophesied of him, and thereby they might
know that he was the Christ, if they had searched with the single Eye;
therefore without Ye, I say unto thee, search the Scriptures, for they are they
that bear Testimony of Christ to be the Word, and all that do search the
Scripture with a single Eye, will find Christ to be the Word, and will believe
it, Joh. 1. 24.
and not be so blind as to put the Letter for the Word, as thou do, who
broughtst another Scripture with thy dark Mind, where the Apostle says, Ye
have a more sure Word of Prophecy, the which ye do well to take heed unto, as
to a Light shining in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise
in your Hearts, 2. Pet. 1. 19.

Here thou still the more manifests thy Blindness, who puts Darkness for Light,
and Light for Darkness, and so art under the Woe from the Lord, who puts the
Letter for the Light, how does the Letter shine? and what dark Place does in
shine in as a Light? here the ignorant may see thy Folly; and thus thou art a
Stranger to the Light of Christ; which dwelt in the Children of God; Romans 10.
6, 7, 8.
and the Word is nigh in the Heart and in the Mouth, to which thou show thy
self a Stranger, who draws Peoples Minds from this Word in their Hearts, to the
Letter without, putting that for the Word, and so art a blind Guide and a
Deceiver, who cries, Lo, here without in the Letter, when the Apostle says, Go
not forth, the Word is nigh in the Heart: And thus thou opposest the Apostle,
and drawest from his Doctrine, and bring another Doctrine, and so art not to
be received, but held as Accursed, as thou art, by the Children of Light; 2
John 10.
and sometimes thou calledst the Letter the Word, and sometimes a Story; and
here was thy Confusion: And then thou runndst on with thy fauning dissembling
Speeches, making a Show oftentimes to the People of speaking more of a Matter,
but for wearying their Patience: Oh, blush and be ashamed of thy Doctrine! now
thou make it appear what filthy Stuff it is, that art afraid it should weary
Peoples Patience to hear it; if it was of God, it would not be wearisom to any
Thing of God to hear it; but it was not of God, therefore I am sure it was
wearysom and burdensome to the Spirit of God; and here thou art shut out with
thy frothy Stuff and vain Complements, to be a Deceiver: And then thou said,
If you please I will speak more, and thus thou markest out thy self for a
Man-Pleaser; and the Apostle said, If yet I pleased Men, I should not be a
Servant of Christ. Now read thy self where thou art, ^ Gal. 1. 10.
who art yet a Man-pleaser, who comes with such enticing Words of Men's Wisdom,
so that the Preaching of the CROSS to thee is Foolishness, and the Prophets who
had the Spirit of the LORD, and the WORD of the Lord, they spoak, whether they
would hear or forbear; and here thou art shut out, both from the Spirit of God,
and the Word of God, which is one, who art a Man Pleaser; and if not a Servant
of Christ, then a Servant of the Devil; and so I mark thee out, that all may
know thee, and no longer be deceived by thee with the Shadow instead of the
Substance, with thy enticing Words of Men's Wisdom: And thou told'st the
People, Thou spoakest to the Reason of Man; whenas all Men in the Fall, their
Reason is corrupted, and the Natural Man receives not the Things of God; 2 Cor.
2. 14. Jer. 10. 14.
for, Man by Nature is worse then a Beast; and there art thou, who art
preaching to the Corrupt Reason of Man in the Fall, to judge of thy Corrupt
stuff; for, I know there were none there that owned thee, but such like: But
the Message of Paul was, Acts 26. 18.
To Turn Peoples Minds from Darkness to Light; but thou strivest to draw
People's Minds from the Light Within, to the Dead Letter without them, telling
them, that was the Light, and that was the Word; and so thou bewitchest them
with thy Lying Divinations, and bad them search that, and read often that, and
cleave unto that: But I say, they that read that, and not by the Light within
them, read a Parable; and it is unto them as a sealed Book, though they may, by
their Carnal Wisdom, add their own Meanings; but that must be shut out of the
Scripture; for, 2 Pet. 3. 16.
such are unlearned, and unfruitful in the Word, and so wrest the Scripture to
their own Destruction: But by this know, That I go not about to draw men from
reading the Scripture, so that they read with this Single Eye, the Light, which
gave it forth, so shall they that read understand; but to thee, this is a
Mystery, and therefore thou went about to deny Christ in Man and God in Man,
by way of Derision to those that witnessed forth Christ Within, God Within: And
thou said, That he meant, he was in them, by his words; and thou brought
this Scripture, If you abide in me, and my Words abide in you, ye shall ask
what ye will, and it shall be done unto you: In this Place (thou Serpent) he
meant as he spoak; but Paul witnessed Christ Within, and said, They that could
not witness Christ Within, were Reprobates; and so art thou, who denyest Christ
come In the Flesh: 2 Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 2. 20. Col. 1. 26, 27.
And Paul preached Christ Within, the Hope of Glory, the Mystery which had been
hid, and so it seems is still from thee; therefore to thee this preaching is
Foolishness, and as Fancies and Whimsies; but unto us that are saved, Christ,
the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God; by which thy Folly and thy Ignorance
of Christ is here made manifest, and that thou never escaped'st the Pollutions
of the World by the Knowledge of Christ, who denies him as he is known to all
who have escaped the Pollutions of the World by the Knowledge of him; and they
that thus know him not, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
are in the Reprobation: And here art thou a Minister of Antichrist, who
denyest Christ come in the Flesh. And then thou went on with thy Deluding
Spirit, pressing the Wicked to pray; yea, there were many there present of the
People of the World, besides thy own Company, whom both thou and thy Company
count as Heathen, yet thou did press them much to pray, and to take unto them
Words and pray; whenas the Scripture says, Prove. 15. 8.
The Prayers of the Wicked are abominable; and thus thou did that which was
abominable in the Sight of God, in praying thy self, and teaching the Wicked to
pray, and to steal other Men's Words, and pray; for, neither you nor they have
any Words, but what you steal out of the Scripture: for, thou have shut thy
self from that by which the Apostles preached, therefore thou thus runnest into
Confusion.

And thou toldst the People of Deceivers, and nominated them to be such as
denied Baptism, and Ordinances of Christ, and the Scripture, and the
Resurrection of the Dead, and Eternal Judgment: So when thou had done thy
Divination and thy formal Prayer, I stood up, and claimed the Order of the True
Church, 1 Cor. 13. 30, 31.
That all might speak one by one, and if any thing was revealed to him that
stands by, let the first hold his Peace: And then, like Cain, thy Countenance
fell, thou being struck with Guilt in thy Conscience, and fear surprised the
Heart of the Hypocrite: and thou wast shuffling away, but I bad thee stand;
for, said I, thou art a Deceiver, as I shall prove thee one before all the
People; therefore stand to maintain what thou have said: But said I unto the
People, The Prophets and Apostles, and the Holy Men of God, who spoak forth the
Scriptures, they spoak from the Infallible Spirit of God, as they were acted,
guided and moved thereby; but all who come with their Words, and pretending to
preach, and not from the same Infallible Spirit, such are Deceivers, of which
this man is one, who stands here in the S^at of the Pharisee, and he being
smitten with Guilt, fetled to be gone, and several would have stopped him; but
he said, He would be gone, unless they kept him in by Violence: And I said unto
the People, Know this, that these things wherewith he marks out Deceivers, I
own, so that I am none of those; for, the Scripture I own, and the True Baptism
of Christ I own, and the Resurrection from the Dead I own, and Eternal Judgment
upon the Wicked I own, so that I am none of those which he marked out; but this
Man is a Deceiver, and so I shall prove him, if he will stay: But thou, Ray,
wast ashamed of thy Ministry, and durst not stand to what thou had said, but
plainly, like a Hireling, fled from thy Stage, and left thy Flock, like a
Cowardly Serpent; I never knew Baptist so routed out of a Pulpit: But the
Independents joined with him, and the Priests rude Multitude stood up for him,
and several would have been persecuting of me, but by the Power of God I was
preserved and kept from the Hands of such Unreasonable Men, But thus did all
Sects ever join against the One Single Truth; but it is but that the Scripture
should be fulfilled, That Gog and Magog should join in Battle against the Lamb;
but the Lamb shall overcome; and they shall lay down their Crowns before him;
and his Enemies shall become his Foot stol; and he will tread them in the
Wine Press alone; without the City. Therefore Tremble all you Formalists,
Imitators and Self Actors, who have gotten a Form, but deny the Life and Power,
even Jesus Christ, whom you have crucified, which you shall be made to confess
with Weeping Tears, where your Eyes behold him whom you have pierced.

So after I had dassed out of the Steeple-House, when the Baptist was put to
the rout, I stood upon a Grave in the Grave-yard, and there I called to the
People, If any of them had any thing to Object against me, I was there to
maintain and stand up for the Truth, to the which I had openly born Testimony
in their Town; but none would come to my Face. And there was one Captain Cole
there present, who had been counted an Independent Teacher, until his Flock
forsook him, and owned the Truth; and he had railed against the Truth behind my
Back, but he would not come then, and ^peak to my Face; and since he has
imprisoned one of his Neighbor's Sons, for obeying the Command of God, and
coming to his House for a Sig^. So I spoak the Truth unto the People, and
proved this Ray openly to be a Deceiver among them; and judged him out of his
own Mouth; and so cleared my Conscience, to the People, and so I came away with
my Friends in Peace, having cleared and discharged my Conscience unto them, by
which they are eternally left without Excuse, whether they would hear or
forbear, their Blood will be upon their own Heads; and so I leave them.

Now, upon the Day following, it happened, that a Friend of mine did speak with
this Ray, who unto him did falsely affirm, that I said, I was the Head of the
True Church, whenas I never spoak any such a thing; therefore I hearing of a
Meeting of the Baptists that day, and that this Ray was there, I and several of
my Friends went unto this Meeting; and when I came at the House, the Door was
open, and I went in amongst them, and this Ray was speaking unto the People;
and when he saw me, he stopped his speaking, and shut his Book, before I opened
my Mouth to speak, and bad me Be gone out of the House: And I said, Is thy
Spirit limited? Is thy Spirit bound? And he bad me Be gone; and said, Why did I
Disturb them? And I asked him, How did I disturb you? Was not I silent until
thou spoak'st to me? But Guilt tormenting him within, he could not forbear me,
but called for the Man of the House to command me out several times; but he was
not amongst them, as they said, so this Ray was much vexed, and in much Wrath;
and one of their Elders, named, John Tabram of Wickin, stood up, and pushed me
with his Hand upon my Breast several times in much Wrath, to have me out of the
House, and I did not resist him; and he said, If I would not go out, they would
send for the Officers. Now, let all People see what Weapons they make use of,
when one comes soberly and civily without any Violence amongst them, and
presently to be in such Disorder, and Confusion, and Rage, as they were, and
threatening to send for the Officers, whenas there was no Violence offered by
us: But here you might see what these People would do, if they had a Law to
guard them, as the Priests have: Then there was one Man, that had been hearing
of them, and he spoak, and said to this Ray, You say, They are Deceivers; and
they say, You are Deceivers; now I would have you dispute it, that those that
are ignorant might know which are the Deceivers: But Ray slighted him, and
said, Who art you? I know you not; and would by no Means have his Deeds brought
to the Light to be tried, but gets amongst the Blind, where he cannot be seen.
So then they brought the Woman of the House to me, and she ba^^^^e Go out of
her House, which I did not resist; and so I called to Ray, and told him, He was
ashamed of his Doctrine, and so I shook off the Dust of my Feet for a Witness
against them, and so left them; and then they shut their Door.

But, Poor People! I do pity you, to see how ignorantly and blindly you are
led by the Deceitfulness of Satan, to think that you are the Church of Christ
and none else; whenas your Teachers dare not stand to maintain their Doctrine,
but flee away when they should come to the Proof, and call for Officers when
one comes in amongst you without any Carnal Weapon* is this the Doctrine of
Christ, which you talk so much of, or of Antichrist? Surely if I had been a
Deceiver, and he a Minister of Christ, then I could not have stopped his Mouth,
but he would have stopped mine; for, the Ministers of Christ are able to stop
the Mouths of Gainsayers; but his Mouth was stopped, yea, when he was busy
at that he calls preaching too; but my Mouth he could not stop: And he was
found the Deceiver, whom Truth put to Silence, who was ashamed of his Doctrine.

Oh People! take heed how you reject so Great Salvation; for, this is the Day
of your Visitation: Now you are warned by one, who amongst you is counted a
Deceiver, yet True, witnessed in all your Consciences, by that which will
either Accuse you or Excuse you before the Throne of God, who am known to all
the Children of Light.

The Excommunication of Ezekiel Cater and Samuel Cater out of the Baptists
Society, by John Ray; with their Answer thereunto.
WE two, namely Ezekiel Cater and Samuel Cater, being met together amongst our
Friends, upon the 4th day of the 3d Month, waiting upon the Lord, there came
three of the Teachers of the Baptized People, among whom was one John Ray, a
chief Teacher, who came, and said, He had a Message to deliver; but his Message
was denied; but he said, He would speak; and so disorderly ran into many words
to this Effect.

There being a General Meeting at Cambridge this Week, Excomm. John Ray.
where the Church of Christ was met together; and there it was agreed upon by
the Elders, That Samuel Cater and Ezekiel Cater, who were formerly Elders of
the Church of Christ in this Town, namely Littleport; and being they have
departed from the sweet Fellowship of the Church of Christ, etc. and after so
many Admonitions would not be reconciled, should be delivered unto Satan, I was
there appointed to be the Messenger: And so he ran on with his Excommunication,
according to their Form, with their stolen Words.

Reply, Now, for the Truth's sake, for which thou, John Ray, have cast us out
of your Society, we shall hereby clear our selves from what is or may be cast
upon us in this Matter, by thee, John Ray, and the rest of thy Society, whom we
know to be most bitter Slanderers of the Truth.

This we deny, that ever we were Elders in the Church of Christ; you made us
Elders in your Church, who call your selves Jews, and are not, but the
Synagogue of Satan, out of which you have cast us, but not before we forsaked
you: We, by the Light of Jesus Christ, through the Love of God, seeing both you
and we setting ourselves of Acting and Imitating the Apostles in our Wills,
with a blind Zeal for Life, but Strangers to the Life and Power, neither could
witness the same Infallible Spirit as they had, as you know we all confessed;
and therefore we had nothing but what we got into our Brains of their Words,
and so got a Notion, with adding to our own Imaginations of them, and wresting
the same with our Fallible Spirits; for, we durst not say, It was Infallible,
as you also confessed your selves, then it must needs be fallible; for there
are but two kinds of Spirits, and if not the Infallible, then the Fallible; and
though we did the very same things, and spoak the same words, and not from the
same Spirit, it was all false, and as nothing, as they that swore, God lived,
swore falsely; for, They that have not the Spirit of Christ are none of his; and
his Spirit is Infallible in the least measure: And thus you are shut out in all
that you can do of your selves, with your formed Ordinances. And this we know,
We were also Strangers to the Cross of Christ, and the Light and Life, and
Power of Christ, which the Apostles lived in; and also the One Baptism of
Christ, without which none can be his Disciple; so we were only Jews outwardly,
washing the Outside, but within as foul as ever, as you also are; yet we say
not, but we had a Zeal in the same, though not according to Knowledge: But now
the True Light is sprung in, through the Mighty Love of God toward us, so that
we see the Weakness of our own Actings, and Formings in our own Wills for Li^e,
and now are made willing, through the Power of God, to lay down our Crowns at
the Feet of Jesus, and to wait in what he has given us of his Light; and we
have tasted of his powerful Word, through his gracious Love toward us, and now
we have a Witness within our selves; whenas before we knew it not, but murdered
it, as you also do; and for this you have cast us out of your Society, but not
for Fornication, as he was in that place of Scripture which you imitate, 1 Cor.
5.
nor for making Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience; for we witness an
Increase of both; but the Discerning and Power is wanting in you, and so you
know not what you do: but know this, We are not fallen to a looser Life, but to
a more stricter severe Life, for to serve the Lord Jesus Christ: But remember
this, That if they that believed your Form to be the Truth, could but patter
over a few words of Faith, and call it Theirs; and then, according to your
Form, they were put into the Water, and taken out again, and then received into
your Church and Communion, though no change of Life or Nature; and this must
needs be the Synagogue of Satan: And this I Samuel Cater can witness; for so I
have Baptized, and ye allowed of it; but now my Eye is opened I do see it, and
do testify against it, That all I did so by, I deceived them, though then I
confess it was Ignorance, and so was yours, but now you might see if you would;
therefore it shall no more be called Ignorance, but Wilful Blindness. But I
know you will allege, You teach Godliness and Holiness: But I answer; You run,
and the Lord never sen^ you, as we also did, therefore you profit not the
People at all; and if you had not the Words of Godliness, 1 Cor. 11. 14, 15.
and the Form, then the Ministers of Antichrist would not be like the Ministers
of Christ; but you are: But I say, Your Lives come short of what you profess;
for, in them there is no Change, but they that are Earthly-Minded and Covetous,
are so still; and your Lives are in Pride, Ambition and Arrogance, puffed up
with your Vain Knowledge and with Respect of Persons, and so are out of the
Faith of Christ, and in Wrath and Anger, and Envy, and Bitterness, and in
Lying, and Slandering, and Backbiting, and Lust, and Fleshliness, we formerly
being in the same Society do witness it now our Eyes are open, out of which
Society you have cast us; and praised be the Lord that we have escaped the
Snares of Darkness, by the bright Shining of his Light into our dark Hearts, to
the which Light do we speak in you all, by it to read your selves, and judge
your selves; for by it are you seen and judged to be in Darkness and in
Confusion, out of the Faith and Society of the Saints; but these things do we
not speak out of Envy or Revenge, but for the clearing of the Truth and our
Consciences from your Slanderous Tongues, and to lay open your Deceit and Way
of Delusion to the Simple, that they may escape the Delusion which we were
ensnared in, and that so you may proceed no further with it, that your Folly
might be manifest unto all, as theirs was who withstood Moses.

Ezekiel Cater, Samuel Cater,
A Copy of the most of the Queries aforesaid were given to this Ray, but no
Answer did he return.



A Word to all who are still in your own Forming, Self-Actings and Imitatings.
YOU are acting in that Nature which is at Enmity with God, Romans 8. 7.
which is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be: So all your Formings
and Actings are in vain; for, they are not from Life, but from Death for Life,
but Life comes from Death; for, in the Destruction of Death Life is obtained.
Therefore to the Light of the Lord Jesus in all your Consciences take heed,
which is the Witness for God, to which I speak in you all, which witnesses for
God against the Secrets of your Hearts, which reproves you in secret for your
secret Actions and Deeds of Darkness; and it will search you through, and let
you see what you can witness of the Work of God in your Hearts, for all this
your long and great Profession, and esteeming your selves of the Church and
Faith of Christ, and Saints in Christ: So if you can witness yet the
Earthquakes, and that the Earth is yet removed out of its Place, and Mountains
removed by the Eye of Faith, and if the Vail of Darkness be yet rent.

Is not the first Man yet standing, and the first Image, and the Serpent's
Head: For, while you are Strangers to the Light and your Minds are from the
Light, you are wandered and strayed in the Paths of Darkness, and so are the
Children of Darkness, in whom the Prince of Darkness rules, even the Serpent,
who is Head in Man; Genesis 3. 15.
but the Promise is, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head: But
you are acting in your own Wills and Wisdom; the Serpent is your Head; and you
are not yet come to witness the first Promise fulfilled, but are still in the
Fall, under the Power of Darkness, in the Disobedience, and Strangers unto the
Cross, and so have no Part in Christ in that Nature: For, none come to have a
Right in Christ, but through the Cross, for, As many as are baptized into
Christ, are baptized into his Death; and they that are Dead with him, do Live
with him; and they that are Dead, are freeed from Sin; and they that are in
Christ, are New Creatures, old things are passed away, and all things become
new: But they that are not in Christ, are still in old Adam, and so in the
Fall, under the Curse, and under Death's Dominion, drove out from the Presence
of God into the Earth; and Death reigns over all, Romans 5. 14.
from Adam until Moses, of what Profession soever.

Therefore, now read your selves by the Light which comes from Jesus Christ,
and shines into your dark Hearts, and searches the Heart and tries the
Reins, and makes manifest the Secrets; to which Light I am made manifest, and
by it witnessed in you all, and unto it I do direct your Minds, for the turning
of your Minds from the Darkness to the Light, all you that have a Desire to
find the Way of Truth, in what Form soever, that thereby you may come to see
how you have been wandered and scattered in the many ways of Darkness, in the
Land of Darkness, in this cloudy and dark day, as Sheep without a Shepherd,
being carried about after the Voice of Strangers, from the Shepherd of your
Souls: Therefore hearken no more without, to those that cry, Lo here, or Lo
there is Christ; and so draws your Minds without, to seek for a Christ without,
and a Redemption and a Sanctification without, and a Righteousness without, and
a God without; but turn your Minds within; for it is to be found within, if
ever you find it: For, there is no Way to come unto the true Knowledge of the
Truth, or of God, or of Christ, but by that of God within; For what is to be
known of God is manifest within; and the same which descended, the same does
ascend: And so the Way to God is to be found within, by the Light which
ma^nifests Death, and slayes Death. Do not you read the Parable of the Woman,
that had l^st the Piece of Silver, Luke 15. 8, 9.
and could not find it until she had turned into the House, and lighted the
Candle, and swept the House, and then she found that which she had lost, and
rejoiced with her Neighbors. Now, the Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord,
and his Life was the Light of Men; Prove. 20. 7. John 1. 4.
so turn in your Minds to the Light of the Lord Jesus, which if you love it, to
bring your Deeds to it, it will let you see the Deeds of Darkness, and the
Paths of Death, and it will also search your Hearts, and make manifest your
inward Parts, and let you see what you have lost; and as you love this Light,
and like to retain it in your Minds, and by it to be guided, it will lead you
out of all the crooked and froward Ways of Darkness into the Light of Life,
and so to come to find and know the Voice of the true Shepherd, who is come to
seek out and gather all his scattered Sheep out from amongst the Mountains and
Valleys, and the many Ways and crooked Paths, wherein they have been
scattered and strayed in the Land of Darkness, Jer. 23. 3.
and to gather them together into one Flock, into one Way, into one Sheepfold,
and he alone will be their Shepherd; and this you shall come to witness; as you
love this Light, and follow it, it will lead you out of your many Forms, and
many Ways, into one Way; out of your own Wisdom and Imaginations, wherein you
have been building Babel; and this will strip you of all your own
Righteousness, wherewith you have covered over your deceitful Hearts, and it
will lay your Deceits before you, and bring you to Judgment; and if you love
this Light, and follow i^, and be willing to wait upon it, out of your own
Wills, and Wisdom, and Imaginations, and Carnal Thoughts, Reasonings, and
Consutations, and self-Acting and Imitating; it will lead you to know the Voice
of the true Shepherd within you from the Voice of the Stranger, and so to know
the precious from the vile; he who says, John 10.
I am the Light, he says, I am the good Shepherd, who will bring you to know
the Way and the Door into the Sheepfold, if you do not run out in your own
Wills, and seek to climb up another Way; for the Way is but one, and he that
says, I am the Light, says, I am the Way, and I am the Door into the
Sheepfold; so if you turn from the Light and stumble at the Light, you stumble
at all, and so fall; but if you love the Light, and be willing to follow the
Light, 2 Cor. 6. 8.
it will lead you through all; and to deny your selves, and to take up his
Cross unto your selves and to pass through good Report and evil Report, through
Persecution and through Death, and the Way will not be grievous, but joyous;
and so you will come into the Way, and in at the Door unto the Sheepfold, and
so into the Fellowship, and into the Life, and into the Power, and into the
Faith of the Saints, where all live in Union in one, united by one into one
Body, the End of all Jarring and Jangling, Divisions and Disputes; therefore
said the Apostle Where is the Wise? where is the Disputer of this World? 1 Cor.
1. 20.
has not God made foolish the Wisdom of this World: Therefore I do call you to
come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, and touch no unclean Thing, and
I will receive you, says the Lord, and I will be unto you a Father, and ye
shall be my Sons and Daughters: Now you are called, and this is the Day of your
Visitation; for now Light is come into the World, and if you like to retain it
in your Minds, happy are you; but if not, by it you are left without Excuse, 2
Cor. 6. 17, 18.
and it will judge you at the last Day; For he that loves the Light, shall not
walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; but he that does Evil hates
the Light, which is his Condemnation. Joh. 8. 12.
Now the Way is plain to all simple Ones, who have a Desire to find it
declared by a Friend and VVitness to the Eternal Truth, who am called,

J. P.

THE Fruits of a Fast, Appointed by The Churches gathered against Christ and
his Kingdom, who go about to mock God with their Outside Worship, and Appointed
Fasts, and Days of Voluntary HUMILIATION. Or, A Declaration of the Persecution
of a Messenger of the Lord, by a People who go under the Name of Independents,
in Essex, who have set themselves in the Enmity of their Spirits to oppose the
Truth of God, calling it a Lie, and persecuting his Messengers as Deceivers and
Wanderers; wherein their Persecuting Spirits are made manifest, and them to be
in Cain's Generation, and Strangers to the Spirit of Christ, which never
presecuted, and so are none of his, Romans 8. 9. And also, Of the Unjust Dealings
of Judge Hills, who sat upon Life and Death at the last Assizes at Chansford,
which began upon the Eleventh Day of the Sixth Month. And also, Several
Queries; that were sent to the Priests and Magistrates, which may be
serviceable for them or any other to Answer, whom they do concern.

By a Witness and Sufferer in Outward Bonds, for the Unchangeable Truth of God,
by Cain's Generation, who am known to them (in Colchester Castle) by the Name
JAMES PARNEL.

Printed in the Year 1675.

THE Fruits of a Fast, Appointed by the Churches gathered against Christ and
his Kingdom, etc.
FIrst, I shall give unto the Reader a Declaration of the Work of God in my
Soul, and the Conversion of my Heart from Darkness unto his mavelous Light,
and from the Power of Satan unto God, and out of the Path of Death into the
Path of Life, where I now walk in the Light of my God, with the Ransomed of the
Lord, who are availing toward the Holy City; and also, the Cause of my coming
forth into the World to declare the Truth, for which I now suffer Bonds by the
Persecuting Generation, wherein I once lived a Child of Wrath (as all are by
Nature) and then I was loved of the World, while I followed the Vain Courses
and Ways of the World, where by Nature I was led in Imitation of others, being
in that Nature which is prone unto the same, the time I was sent unto the
Schools of Humane Learning, for to learn the Humane Wisdom, for which End the
Schools are profitable; but for the attaining of Heavenly Wisdom and Knowledge,
they are as far unprofitable; and many Books that are there read, are much for
the Corrupting of Youth, and nourishing of the Wild Profane Nature, which then
ruled in me; and I was as Wild as others, during the time I followed the
School; and after I was taken from the School, I still continued in the same
Nature, growing and increasing in Sin and Iniquity, following the vain Courses
of the Wicked World, and also was trained up in the Customary Way of the
Worship of the World, which is held in the Idols Temple, every First Day of the
Week, but no Conversion there was wrought, but all still continued in the old
Nature, both Priest and People, Young and Old; and as was the People, so was
the Priest, all walking in Darkness and Blindness, by Form, Custom and
Tradition, but ignorant of the pure Light, which is the Guide and Teacher of
the Faithful, which oftentimes did reprove in Secret, when I was alone; but
then I knew not what it was; but oftentimes it did strike me into a
Consideration of my Ways and Doings, and set Life and Death before me, so that
I have sometimes promised within my self, never to do the like again; but the
Promise being in the Will made, it did not stand; but when the Temptations
came, the Careless Mind got out again, and led me still to delight my Heart in
the Vanity which my Eye did see, and my Ear did hear, which all passed away
with the using thereof, and left me to the Judgment which was due unto me for
my Iniquity, which did follow me time after time, calling me to Repentance; and
the more I did incline my Mind, and draw nigh to it, it also did draw nigh to
me; and so the Goodness of God led me to Repentance, and the Grace of God
wrought in my Heart a Reformation, and so I was found of him when I sought not;
and thus he both wrought the Will and the Deed of his own good Pleasure, and
plucked me as a Brand out of the Fire, to make me a Vessel of Honor to his
Name: all Living Eternal Praises be to his Name forever; my Soul shall Praise
and Magnify his Name forever. For I may well say with Paul, of Sinners I was
chief; for according to my Years, I was as perfect in Sin and Iniquity as any
in the Town where I lived, yea, and exceeded many in the same; so that there
was as little Hopes of my Conversion, as any in the Town; and yet, though it is
a Place of many People, I was the first in all that Town which the Lord was
pleased to make known his Power in, and turn my Heart toward him, and truly to
seek him; so that I became a Wonder to the World, and an Astonishment to the
Heathen round about: but they were such Enemies to Goodness, and so given up to
Idolatry, that as much as before they had loved me in my Vain Conversation, so
much the more they hated me in my Conversion; yea, and they o^ my Family came
to ensnare me, Psalm. ^. ^.
and lay wait for me to entrap me; but when they could not prevail, they stood
afar off me, and Reproached me with Lies, and proved my Greatest Enemies; yea,
and my Relations became my Adversaries, and labored to destroy what God had
begun in me, because that thereby I came under the Reproach and Shame of the
World, because I could not conform to the World in their invented Fashions,
Customs and Traditions, and their Words, Ways, Fellowship and Worship; but was
made subject to the Law of God; and could not Respect Persons, neither in Word
nor Deed, then the Beast, which rules in Proud Flesh, was disturbed, who before
ruled in Peace, Rev. 13. 38.
while he was worshipped; but when I came to see proud Lucifer, the Lust in
Man, to be the Beast, which all the World worships and wonders after, but those
whose Names are written in the Book of Life; therefore I could no longer follow
the World in Blindness; for by the Power of God my* Eye was opened, so that I
did behold their Idolatry, and therefore I could no longer be conformable to
them, so that their Rage and Persecution arose against me, and I became a Mock
in the Streets; yea, and I was accounted as one not worthy to live amongst
them: yea, and they said, He that killed me, would do God Service: But he that
had called me out from amongst them, unto himself, that I might no longer
follow the Vain Courses of the World, nor set my Delight on things below, but
that I might serve him in Newness of ^ife, that in me his Workmanship might
appear, to the Confounding ^^f the Heathen, who know him not; He by his ^^^wer
kept me, and gave me Strength to bear his Cross, and despise the Shame; so that
neither Foul Words nor Fair Words could cause me to Deny what God by his Grace
had wrought in my Heart; but by his Power he carried me above the Raging Waves
of the tempestuous Sea; so that I knew, that he that was in me, was greater
then he that is in the World; yea, and out of my Kindred and Acquaintance I
came, and became a Stranger to them that loved not the Truth: Yea, and
presently I came to see the Priests of the World by their Fruits, and the
Fruits of their Ministry, which was cursed from God, and therefore profited not
the People at all. But when the Lord by his Power had changed and converted my
Heart unto himself, the Priests became mine Enemies, and said, I was deluded;
whenas before, when I lived in the vain Conversation of the World, they took no
Notice of me, either to Reprove me or Instruct me, but as they went on in a
customary way, for Gain and Lucre, speaking against Sin in the general, but not
reproving it in particular, but were as deep in it in their Lives as others:
and so what they preached down with their Tongues, they upheld in their Lives,
and countenanced in their Conversations; and so from them I turned, whom I saw
had gotten a Form, but denied the Life and Power: and I sought for a People,
with whom I might have Union; and there was a People with whom I found Union, a
few Miles from the Town where I lived, whom the Lord was a gathering out of the
dark World, to sit down together, and wait upon his Name; but we were the
Objects and Reproach of the Country, and were accounted as the Off-scourings of
the World: but in all this we saw the Scriptures fulfilled, and that we might
thus suffer if we would live Godly in Christ Jesus: (...)
and here was our Confidence and Strength, which carried us above our
Sufferings, as knowing it was for the Name of Jesus. And thus I continued a
certain time, counting it greater Riches to suffer Affliction with the People
of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season: and about this time I
was about Fifteen Years of Age. And afterward I was called forth to visit some
Friends in the North Part of England, with whom I had Union in Spirit before I
saw their Faces: And afterward I returned back to my outward Dewlling Place,
and remained in my outward Calling: And the Lord all this time still more and
more perfecting and increasing his Work in my Heart, which by his Power he had
begun in me, and by his pure Power bringing forth his Truth in me, and making
known his Will unto me, until by his Power He opened my Mouth to declare his
Truth in the World; and still I continued in my outward Calling, and also in
the Work of the Lord, as not being called far from my Dewlling Place. And when
I was betwixt Seventeen and Eighteen Years of Age, I was moved in my Spirit to
go to a Place about Fifteen Miles from my outward Dewlling Place (southward)
amongst a People, to whom the Lord was making known his Truth, not knowing when
I went out of going farther then that Place; but when I was there, I was moved
of the Lord to come on the Cambridge; and in Obedience unto the Lord I came to
see what he had to do for me, not knowing one Foot of the Way, but as I was
directed, neither knowing when I came there where to be received; but had heard
before of Two of my Friends, that were there Whipped, caused by the Mayor that
then was, only for declaring the Truth as they past through the Town, against
the Deceit thereof; neither did I know but it might be my Portion also when I
came there; but without conferring with Flesh and Blood, I passed on my
Journey; and he that called me forth, went along with me, and did direct me:
And when I came there, I found those that were worthy, that received me; and
also, I found a Friend, whom the Corrupt Rulers had put in Prison for the same
Testimony which I also was sent to declare: and before I had continued there
the space of Fourteen Nights William Pickering, the Mayor of Cambridge,
committed me to Prison for publishing two Papers, the one against the
Corruption of the Magistrates, and the other against the Corruption of the
Priests, at the time of their Commencement, as they call it; and there they
kept me in Prison the space of two Sessions, and tossed me from Prison to
Dungeon, and had nothing to lay against me, whereby to prove the Breach of any
Law; but when I came to the last Sessions, they called a Jury to prove the
Papers to be Scandalous and Seditious Papers; and they were nigh Two Hours
about them, but could not prove it, but came and said, That they found nothing,
but that the Papers were mine; which I had before owned in the open Court, and
there was my Name to them to testify the same: And so they were crossed in
their Intentions, and their Plots came to naught. Then they committed me back
to Prison again, and after the space of Three Days they sent me away with a
Pass, under the Name of a Rogue, yet durst not give me the Law which belongs to
Rogues; but had me away with Clubs and Staves; and I could not see the Pass
until I was Three Miles out of the Town, where I lodged that Night; and the
next day there came a Justice of Peace from Cambridge, who knowing me to be
Innocent of what was laid to my Charge, so he witnessed the Pass to be false,
and took it back to Cambridge, and so I was set free.

And not long after I went of Cambridge again, and went abroad, preaching and
declaring the Truth freely in the Countries about, and many I found that
received the Truth gladly, but more Enemies; yet nevertheless, Truth spread and
conquered over its Enemies; and there I continued laboring in the Work of the
Lord about the Space of half a Year in the Countries about Cambridge; and from
thence I was moved of the Lord to come into Essex, where I heard of a People
that was se^king the Lord; and when I came there, I found those that were
worthy, who received the Truth gladly; and there I continued, freely declaring
and preaching the Truth from Place to Place, sometimes in the Synagogues, and
was haled out by the Priests Party, that the Scripture might be fulfilled upon
that Generation; yet nevertheless, I continued in constant Preaching of the
Word to the Consciences of the People, freely and publicly in several Plains
of the Country, notwithstanding much Opposition both of Priests, People and
Professors, and much did the Truth prevail in the Hearts of the People, to the
Glory of God the Father of Truth, which did make glad the Hearts of many, who
have long expected this Day to appear; but the false Prophet began to utter
forth his Lies and Blasphemies against the Truth; and the Beast (by whose Power
the false Prophet stands), began to rage and persecute; and the Ministers of
Antichrist stood up for their Kingdom, crying against Truth, striving to
present it odiou^ in the Ears of the People; but when I came to their Faces,
they fled like Hirelings, and left their Flock behind, so that the Truth much
prevailed, notwithstanding their railing and raging, so that they begun to
appoint Meetings, purposely to set themselves against the Truth, to present it
to the People, as Error and Heresy; so that if by any Means they could by
their evil incensing and leavening of the Minds of the People, turn away their
Minds from harkening to the Truth; and on the other Side, they had the Earthly
Powers to uphold them and strengthen them against whomsoever should come to
gainsay them, and to lay their Law upon them; so I hearing of a public Meeting
that was appointed by the Priests and Professors of these Times, to be at a
Town, called Great Coggashall, upon the 12th Day of the 5th Month, called
July, as was declared in public by the Priest of the said Town, to Fast and
Pray against the Errors (as they said) of the People called Quakers, and also
their Intent was to ensuare me, and to bring my Body into Bonds, if that I came
amongst them for to defend the Truth, which afterward appeared; and although I
did see their Intent toward me, I was made willing not only to be bound, but
also to suffer for the P^re Eternal Truth, which I am made a Witness of; so I
being pressed in my Spirit for to go amongst them and in Obedience to the same
I went, and there was one Priest Willis, an Independent Teacher, who was set up
in the Seat of the Pharisee, the chiefest Place of the Assembly, there speaking
a Divination of his own Brain, and not from the Mouth of the Lord; and
therefore knew not how to divide the Word aright, but cried against false
Prophets and Deceivers, and he himself one of them; and when the Pri^st had
done, I spoak unto the People in Vindication of the Truth of God, which the
Priest had before reproached, reviled and blasphemed; but the Priests and the
Rulers interrupted me, and (...) into many Words, which bred much Disorder and
Confusion; and then another of the Priests got up into the Pulpit, and they bid
me put of my Hat, and stand with my Hat off the Time the Priest was praying,
which Worship I denied, and therefore could not be conformable to it, and so I
said, Before I should be subject to their Wills, I would pass out of the
Meeting Place, and so I did, and many People came out after me; for I intended
to declare the Truth in the Town, being I could not have Liberty in the public
Place: And as I was passing on the Way quietly toward my Friends House, he
that is called Justice Wakering came rushing behind me amongst the People, and
suddenly smote me with his Hand upon my Back, and said, He arested me in the
Name of the Lord Protector, and so I turned me about, and looked upon him (but
knew not that he was a Magistrate) so I asked him, Where was his Writ? and he
said, He had one, but none he showed me; then they hurried me into an House,
and there some Friends engaged that I should be forthcoming when their Worship
was done; and so I went unto my Friends House, and there spoak the Word of the
Lord unto the People that there came together, and was also ready when their
Worship was done, according to my Friends Engagement: And when I came before
them, there were four Men called Justices, and six or seven Priests; yea, there
were nigh nine or ten Priests that Day, that were gathered together against the
Truth; and when I was come before them, he that is called Justice W^^ering,
came and plucked my Hat off my Head, and threw it away; then they fell to
question me of many Things, to which I made answer, and many frivolous
Questions they asked me, whereby to ensnare me, which was neither just nor
honest for Men of their Profession to do; so when they had satisfied their
Wills in examining of me, they caused a Mittimus to be made, and committed me
to the Common Goal at Colchester: And there were several of the chief Priests
in Essex, that were Actors in this Persecution; Priest Willis, who is a Teacher
of an Independent Company at Brantry; and Priest Sammes, a Teacher of an
Indep^ndent Company at ^reat Coggashal; and Priest Spa^row, a Teacher of an
Independent Company ar Halstead; and Priest Stellum, a Teacher of an
Independent Company at Tarling, yet are all Parish Priests, and are maintained
by those that ^re not of their Church, and those were the Head-Actors in this
Persecution; yea, and Priest Stellum speak to the Rulers in the public Place,
thereby to stir up their Spirits to persecute; and this was plotted amongst the
Priests and their gathered Churches, Mat. 7. 15, 16.
to appoint Meetings, thereby to ensnare the Innocent, and raise Persecution
against the Truth; yea, and two of the Men called Justices, who were my chief
Persecutors, are Members of the Independent Church; and thus the Churches
gather themselves against Christ and his Kingdom; and now the Ravening Wolves
in Sheeps Clothing do appear, yea, their Fruits make them manifest, and those
are they who call themselves Jews, and are not, but the Synagogue of Satan; and
those are the Builders, who have and do reject the Corner Stone, which is now
become the Head of the Corner, and over their Heads is set, and Woe unto them on
whom it lights. And after I was sent to Prison, there I was kept close, and
could not have my Friends and Acquaintance to come to see me with Peace and
Freedom; and so when I was there, I wrote an Answer to the Mittimus, whereby I
was falsely accused and imprisoned, and sent to the Men that committed me, for
to clear my Conscience unto them, and lay the Injustice and Cruelty before
them, and leave them without Excuse in the Presence of the Almighty: And so
when the Time came that I was to go to the Assize, they put me on a Chain
amongst Felons and Murderers, and joined me to one suspected for Murder; and
thus I was numbered amongst Transgressors, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled; and thus six of us were hooked together upon a Chain, so that we
could not go into a Bed; for four of us remained upon the Chain Day and Night;
and thus I was led 18 Miles through the Country for a gazing-Stock unto the
World; but Truth was preached in all this, and prevailed on the Hearts of the
People, so that I could rejoice in all, and triumph over mine Enemies: So when
we were at the Assize-Town, which is called Chansford, the Judge came in upon
the seventh Day of the Week; and upon the second Day of the next Week I was
brought into the Court before Judge Hills, who sat upon Life and Death, and
there I stood for a gazing-Stock while, and then the Judge commanded them to
take me away, and did not say any thing to me; for then I was singled from the
rest, only had Irons upon one of my Hands; then upon the next Day Morning the
Jailer sent his Man to take off my other Irons, and so in the afternoon I was
had before the Judge without any Irons, and the Jailer took off my Hat, and
cast it upon the Floor* and then the Clerk read a long Indictment full of
Falsehoods, and asked me if I was guilty, and I told him, I denied all Guilt,
and called for my Accusers, and the Judge said, I might see my Accusers, and
told me, I might say Guilty or not Guilty, and I told him, I was not Guilty, so
called twelve Men to try me, and the Foreman was a Drunkard; and they bid me
object against any of them, and I told them, I owned none out of the Doctrine
of Christ, and all that swore were out of the Doctrine of Christ, and they had
all sworn before my Face, and therefore I openly denied by them to be tried;
yet nevertheless they went on with their Work; and Priest Willis was called,
and he swore against me, and swore falsely too; and the two Men called Justices
swore against me, and swore falsely too; and one of the Justices Men (so called)
and another Man swore against me, and swore falsely too* yet all these false
Witnesses were heard to the full what they would say aginst me, and thus the
Leader of the People caused them to err; for if the Teacher be a Swearer and a
false Swearer, what may the People be? for Christ says, Mat. 5. 35, 36, 37.
Jam. 5. 1. 2 John 9.
Swear not at all, but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay, for whatsoever
is more is Evil; and the Apostle says, In all Things my Brethren swear not at
all, etc. and he that abides, not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God; and
thus, like People, like Priest, all live without God in the World. And when
their false Witnesses had spoaken what they could against me, they brought in
the Letter which I had sent to the Men called Justices, in Reply to their
Mittimus, and it was openly read in the COURT, and I owned, it; for my Name was
to it, and the reading of it was much Satisfaction to many that understood it,
and they also brought another Paper that I writ against the Idol's Temple and
the Deceiver therein, both which shall follow in Order afterward; and then
when they were both read, Judge ^ills took them both, and repeated over unto
the Jury all that he could gather by wrong Interpretation and Construction
against me, whereby to incense the Jury against me, and told them, If they did
not find me Guilty, the Sin would lie upon their Heads, and he as it were
passed the Sentence upon me before the Jury went forth, yea, and told them what
they should do, whenas they had sworn before to speak the Truth, and nothing
but the Truth; and I had charged them to take heed what they did, for I told
them, None could judge betwixt Truth and Heresy, but by the Spirit of the
Lord; but when I would have spoken something to the Jury before they went
forth, the Judge interrupted me, and would not suffer me (though one of the
Jury desired it) neither would he suffer that the Jury should have the Papers
that were brought in against me, though I required it; but sought all that he
could against me, true or false, although I had sent him a true Declaration of
the Grounds of my Imprisonment, with Hands of four Witnesses to it, neither
would he suffer that to be read: And that which I would have spoaken unto the
Jury was, to clear it unto them, that it was no scandalous nor reproachful
Words, to call a corrupt Magistrate, a corrupt Magistrate; and to call an
Unjust Judge and Lawyer, an Unjust Judge and Lawyer; or a Persecutor, a
Persecutor; or a Deceiver, a Deceiver; all which was brought against me, and
called Railing and Scandalous; for by that Account they might have taxed all
the Prophets for Railing and Scandaling; for they open and often declared
against the Corruption of the Priests and Rulers, Isa 56. 11. Ezekiel. 34. John
10. Luke 13. 14, 15. Luke 13. 31, 32. Joh. 3. 14.
as you may read in many Places in the Prophets Records; Isa^ah called the
Priests Greedy Dumb Dogs; and the Prophets called them Idol-Shepherds, and the
like; and Christ called them Hirelings and the Rulers Hypocrites, and Herod a
Fox; read Ma^thew 23. and see if you may not as well call that Railing; and yet
in all this they did not rail nor scandalize any, but gave to every Nature its
Name and due Reproof, whether they would hear or forbear; But this is the
Condemnation of the World, Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness
rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil.

So, when the Jury came in, to bring in their Evidence, they could charge me
with nothing; but the Paper I had writ in Reply to my Mittimus, after I was
imprisoned; which Paper I had before owned in the open Court, with my Name to
it: But the Indictment they could not charge me with; for it tended to a Riot,
which I was far from, or any that owned me: But the Judge and the Clark both
dishonestly strove to draw Words out of the Fore man of the Jury, which the
rest did not consent to, neither could he speak their Minds; but others of the
Jury were fain to speak themselves, but nothing was cleared against me: Then
the Jailer was commanded to take me away; and when I was gone forth of the
Court, they sent for me again; and the Judge imposed two Fines upon me, to the
Value of about Forty Pounds; the one he said, was for the Contempt of the
Magistracy; the other, for the Contempt of the Ministry; for he said, The Lord
PROTECTOR had charged him, to see to punish such Persons as should Contemn
either Magistracy or Ministry. But what a Ministry is this, that stands in need
of an outward Magistracy, to uphold it against a People that come with nothing
but Spiritual. Weapons, to defend themselves against Spiritual Wickedness,
which now sits in high Places: But this Ministry is contrary to the Ministry of
Christ, whose Weapons are not Carnal, 1 Cor. 10. 4.
but Spiritual. And also, several of mine Accusers stood upon the Bench, hard
by the Judge, several time Whispering him in the Ear, and leavening and
incensing his Mind against me; and I reproved one of them in the open Court for
so doing, and yet these things were suffered. And also the Judge gave Charge
unto the Jailer, To let no Giddy-headed People come to me (as he called them)
which I never desired that any such should come; but thereby they take Occasion
to keep my Friends from me, accounting them Giddy-headed People: But they are
not Giddy-headed People, that own sound Doctrine; but they are Giddy-headed
People, that cannot endure sound Doctrine, but have itching Ears, carried about
with Reports and Hear-says, to speak Evil of the things they know not. But
thus, without all Honesty they acted in the Enmity of their Minds against me;
yet in all I was made to rejoice; for, I see their Deceit was manifest to the
People, and the Truth owned in many Hearts, so that my Sufferings were not
grievous unto me, but joyous. But as the Judge's Dealings were Rigorous and
Unjust toward me, it was so much the more on the contrary to Barrabas; for
there were three or four arraigned for Suspicion of Murder, and others for
Felony, yet he did deliver them, and there was not one that Dyed or was
Branded, neither which I did desire; but only this I do declare, to show how
the World loves its own, and how the same Spirit now rules in both Priest,
People and Rulers, that ruled amongst the Jews, who esteemed Barrabas above
Christ, and numbered him amongst Transgressors: And so, in all this the
Scripture is fulfilled, and the Day further appears to the Glory of God, the
Father of Truth, who will exalt his Truth by his own Power over the Heads of
all its Enemies. So then they brought me back to Prison again, where I still
remain in the Peace and Freedom of my Spirit, which none can take away, though
in the Hands of mine Enemies.

Yet this* I know, That the Invisible God in working in Secret by his Power,
and with a Strong Arm, carrying on this great Work, which he has begun in the
Earth; yea, and he will bring down and overturn all, until it come into his
Hand whose own it is, and he will exalt his Kingdom in the Hearts of his
People, and his Son shall rule over the Earth; yea, and all his Enemies shall be
his Footstool, and shall bow unto him, and be glad to lay down their Crowns
before him, and acknowledge his Power; yea, and he will dash all the Forms, and
false Likenesses and Images, which are set up by Man, in his Imaginations (
calling them Churches) and he will d^^h them, and the Powers of the Earth in
pieces one against another, like a Potter's Vessel; though now they set at
naught the Cornerstone, yet then by it shall they be grownd to Powder: For,
our God is a Consuming Fire; and who is able to stand in the Day of his W^ath?
Therefore it is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God: Then
Woe to all his Enemies, or be that lifts up his Hand against his Maker, to
Contrary what he has decreed.

Here follows a REPLY to my MITTIMUS, which was adjudged a Contempt of the
Magistracy.
WHereas I, who am of the World called James Parnel, am committed as Prisoner,
to be kept in the Common Goal, by a Mittimus sealed and signed by you four Men,
who are called Justie^s of the Peace, who write your selves Herbert Pellham,
Thomas Cook, Dyonisius Wakering, William Harlackinden; wherein I find several
Lies, Slanders and False Accusations cast upon me: therefore, for the Truth's
sake, and for the Satisfaction of the Simple, I shall Reply to the same, and
clear the Truth, and return the Venom upon your Venomous Spirits, from whence
it comes, that you may be convinced of your Evil, and cease Fighting against
Christ and his Kingdom.

First Your Own, as follows.
WHerereas it duly appears unto Us, by Our own View, and also by the
Examination of James Parnel, who says, He was born at Retford, in the County
of Nottingham, Labourer, That He, the said James Parnel, with very many other
Persons of his gathering together, did this Day in a Riotous Manner enter into
the Parish Church at Great Coggashall, aforesaid; and there being a great
Number of Christians met in the said Church, to hold and keep a Day of public
Humiliation and Seeking of God; and being in order thereunto then exercised in
the Divine Worship and Service of God Almighty, He, the said James, did then
and there stand up, and told the Minister, He Blasphemed, and spoak Falsely; and
used many other reproachful Words against the said Minister: And afterward he
departed the said Church, and went into the common Highway, in the said Town
of Great Coggashall, with a great Number of Persons, his Followers, who kept
there Unlawfully together; and some of them gave out Menacing and Threatening
Speeches, tending to the Breach of the Peace, and against the Law. And also,
the said James cannot give us a very good Account where he was last settled, or
of his Life and Conversation; but does further appear to us to be an Idle
Disorderly Person. These are therefore in the Name of his Highness, the Lord
Protector, to will and require you, To convey forthwith the said James Parnel
unto the Common Goal for this County, there to remain until the next General
Jail-delivery, to be holden for this County, and until thence delivered by due
Course of Law, unless he, the said James, shall come before us, or any two of
us, or two some other Justices of the Peace for this County, and shall find
very Able and Sufficient Sureties to be bound with him by Recognizance for his
personal Appearance at the said next Jail-delivery, there to Answer what shall
be then objected against him, and not to depart thence without License of the
Court, and in the mean time to be of good Behavior; and thereof fail not at
your Peril. Dated at Coggashall aforesaid, the Twelfth Day of July, 1655. The
Keeper of the said Common Goal is hereby required to receive and keep the said
James, if he shall be brought unto him.

Herbert Pellham, Thomas Cook, Dyonysius Wakering, William Harlackinden.


A Reply to the aforesaid Mittimus.
1. Accusation.
WHereas I am hereby accused, That I ( who am of the World called JAMES PARNEL)
with very many other Persons, of my gathering together, did this day in a
Riotous Manner, enter the Parish Church of Great Coggashall, aforesaid.

Reply, Are you not ashamed, who profess your selves Ministers of Law, Justice
and Peace, to begin with Lies, and make them your Refuge against the Innocent,
tending to the Disturbance of the Peace of the Faithful, whom you both ought
and would Encourage and Countenance, if you were faithful Ministers of Peace
and Justice, standing in the pure Counsel of God, Ruling for God, and not for
your selves, in all things discharging your Consciences unto God, without
Partiality or Respect of Persons, as faithful Ministers of Law and Justice: But
contrary unto this you have acted in your corrupt Wills, turning your Swords
against the Messengers of the Most High, and wilfully resisting the Truth of
God, making Lies your Refuge, as here does plainly appear. For, upon the day
aforesaid, I was at a Friend's House in Great Coggashall, where several Friends
and Neighbors were come to see me, and there sat peaceably together, waiting
upon the Lord, and I having heard of a public Meeting at the Steeple-House in
the said Town, of the Priests and Professors of these Times, as it was openly
published by Priest Sammes, and the Priest of the said Town, in the said
Steeple-house, upon the First Day last past, to that End, as I heard, and since
did understand, for to Fast and Pray against, and lay open the Errors (as they
said) of the People called Quakers, for the Returning of them who owned them,
and the Establishing and Strengthening those against them that did not own them
(to wit) the People called Quakers; so I being pressed in my Spirit for to go
amongst them, in the Behalf and Defense of the Truth of God, brought forth in
these People, whom the World scornfully calls Quakers, I also being made a
Minister of the same Eternal Truth, through the Power of God, by which I am
made able, and carried on to declare it openly and publicly, to the
Confounding of the Heathen, and the reviving of the Witness for God in the
Conscience, and also to suffer for the same, which I did believe the Priests
did much Blaspheme and Reproach, striving to present it Odious to the People;
so, in Obedience to the Lord I went out from amongst my Friends, not telling
one of them whither I was a going (as many can witness) and one Friend followed
me to the Door, and perceiving something of my Going, he asked me, If he might
go with me? and I bad him, Use his Freedom to come after, but I desired to go
alone; and so I went on the Way single: And when I came at the Steeple-house
Door, which you Persecutors call a Church, and also account your selves another
Church; and thus you set up Churches in your Imaginations, yet are Strangers to
the True Church, which are no Persecutors; but when I came there, there were
several Boys and Children that would have flocked in after me, and I bad them
go in before me, rather then to go in Disorderly, whereby to occasion any
Disturbance; and so I went in very Orderly, and stood very Orderly, not
speaking one Word until their Priest had done, and was coming out of his Seat,
as many can witness, though the Priest had been openly Reviling and Reproaching
the People of God in particular, whom he scornfully called Quakers. Therefore,
let all People, whose Understandings are enlightened, judge in what Riotous
Manner I entered the place which you call a Church, and bear witness against
you, who are not ashamed to make Lies your Refuge against the Innocent: and
also, what are the Weapons which you make use of, who call your selves
Christians, but make Lies your Refuge; and cover your Actions with Deceit? But
was this the Practice and Nature of Christ? For, a Christian is Christ-like;
and let all that profess Christ walk as he walked. But these are the Fruits of
your public Humiliation, who go about to mock God; but your End shall be
according to your Works.

2. Accusation.
And whereas you say, Being in order thereunto, then exercised in the Divine
Worship of God Almighty, He (the said James) did then and there stand up, and
told the Minister, He Blasphemed, and spoak Falsely; and used many other
Reproachful Words against the said Minister.

Reply, Until him (called Minister) had done the Divinatlon of his own Brain,
from whence you derive your Divine Worship, and was coming out of his Seat, I
did not speak one Word unto him, as Hundreds can witness; and the first words
that I spoak, were not as you accuse me, but this I said, This is the Order of
the True Church, that all may speak one by one; ^ Cor. 14. 92, 30, 31.
and if any thing be revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his
Peace: Then I spoak on in the Behalf of those People called Quakers, whom the
Priest had before often and openly reviled; but so soon as I had spoak a few
words, the Priest and several others disorderly ran into many words, and so
interrupted me in speaking, that it bred much Confusion: Then the Priest asked
me, What I would Object against him? I told him, In that he Reviled the People
called Quakers; and said, they were built upon a Sandy Foundation, and so
called them Shakers, and the like: But I told him, I would prove their
Foundation not to be Sandy, and him to be the False Prophet: And so I declared
of the Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, which strikes at the Feet
of the Image, whose Head is Gold, and Breast of Silver, and Thighs of Brass,
and Legs of Iron, and Feet part Iron and part Clay; and this Stone is become a
great Mountain, upon which the Church is built, as a City set on a Hill cannot
be hid; And this is the Foundation of the People that are called Quakers, not
all that are called Quakers, but the Real People, whom the World scornfully
calls Quakers: And this is become a Stumbling-Stone, and a Rock of Offense to
the Nations; and so it seems it is unto you, because you are the Worshippers of
the great Image, which you call the Divine Worship of your God: but God
Almighty you know not; for he abhors all the Sacrifices of Cain, and his
Generation, which was ever the Persecuting Generation, upon which must come all
the Righteous Bloodshed from Righteous Abel until now. Therefore, Mat. 33. 32,
33.
Woe unto you, ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers; How can ye escape the
Damnation of Hell? And now you fill up the Measure of your Fathers Wrath. Ye
Stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, Act. 5. 7, 51.
ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as did your Fathers, so do ye. But think
not that you shall be heard for your much Babbling, who for a Pretense make long
Prayers; but ye shall receive the greater Damnation. And the Lord will make
your Diviners Mad, who have spoak a Divination from their own Brain, Isa. 44.
25. Jer. 14. 14.
and not from the Mouth of the Lord; but cried, Peace, Peace, where there is no
Peace, because ye put into their Mouths, and so heal you slightly; daubing you
up with Untempered Mortar; but you shall all fall amongst them that fall in the
Day that I visit you, says the Lord, ye Murderers and Crucifiers of the Just.

So when I had cleared the Foundation of the People called Quakers, as
aforesaid, some of you accused me, That I owned no Church: And I said, It was
False: Then some of you asked me, What Church I owned? And I answered, The
Church in God; and more words I spoak about the Church: Then Willis, the
Diviner, stood up in his Will, and said, I spoak nothing but Nonsense: And I
bad him, Name one Word that was Nonsense, that I had spoaken: And he said, To
say, the Church in God: Then I took out my Bible, and read unto him the first
Chapter of the Thessalonians, and the first Verse, where the Apostle writes to
the Church of the Thessalonians, which is IN God the Father: Then Paleness
struck the Face of the Diviner, neither would any of his Fellows stand up to
justify what he had taken in hand; and this was it wherein I said he
Blasphemed, to say the Church in God was Nonsense, Then there was one Priest
Stellum, a Magician of Egypt, who stood up in the Enmity of his Spirit, and
accused me with several Lies and Slanders, which hardened Pharoah's Heart, so
that you Corrupt Rulers would not suffer me to clear my self from what he had
accused me withal: But the Magician got up into the Seat of Divination, and was
going to his Abomination, and then the Rulers called to me, to put off my Hat;
then I bad you call to the Priest, to put off his Cap,

And thus may all see the Blindness and Ignorance of Priests and People, who
are offended at a Hat, and not at a Cap: And this is as the Vain Traditions of
the Pharisees, who observed the Washing of Pots and Cups, and such like things,
making clean the Outside; which Scripture Priest Willis (who said, the Church
in God was Nonsense) brought in reference to the People called Quakers, because
they do not put off their Hats, in Respect [or Worshipping] of Men's Persons:
But let any, who has Understanding, consider which is more Traditional, for a
man to keep his Hat on his Head, for which End it is made, as also his Shoe for
his Foot, his Glove for his Hand, or the putting off these things in
observation or Custom, and Reverencing men's Persons, for all which there is No
Scripture, therefore a Vain Tradition of Man; and thus they teach for Doctrine
the Traditions of Man: Therefore, in vain do you worship God, ^at. 15. 7, 8, 9.
who come near him with your Lips, and with your Mouths; but your Hearts are
far from him, in the Unbelief, John 5. 44.
seeking Honor one of another, and observing Vain Traditions and Customs, as
did your Forefathers, whom Christ pronounced Woe against, who were his
Persecutors, and in whose Steps ye are found; and therefore read your Portion.
And thus, while you are crying against the Scribes and Pharisees, for observing
vain Traditions and Customs, and their Strictness in their Observations, and
yet Persecutors of the Just, you also are found the same, who are set up in the
Chiefest Place of the Assembly, as they were; and called of Men Master, as they
were; stand praying in the Synagogues, Mat. 23.
as they did; preaching for Doctrine the Traditions of Men, as they did; and
are strict in your Observations, and calling of Assemblies, and in your set
Times of Worship, and appointed Fasts, and Days of Humiliation, and yet are
Persecutors of the Just, as they were; yea, in the very Height of your Worship
the Bitterness of your Spirits appeared: But is this such a Fast as God has
chosen? Nay; It is Abomination; his Soul loathes it: And he will judge the Cause
of the Innocent upon you Hypocrites, and be avenged of you his Adversaries, and
give you your Portion with Unbelievers in the Lake that burns, prepared of old
for Cain's Generation, in which you are found, by the Eternal Light of God,
which cannot Lie, which will rise up in Judgment against you at the Last Day,
though now you stumble at it, and are offended at it; yet then shall you behold
him whom you have pierced, though with Lamentation and Sorrow of Mind, when
there is none to deliver you from the Wrath of the Almighty; and this is
answered and witnessed in your Consciences.

Then the Occasion of my passing out of the Steeple-house, was this; When I
could not have Liberty to speak in the Vindication of the Truth against
Gainsayers, ye would have had me to have stood with my Hat off the Time the
Priest was Praying, which Worship I denied, and therefore could not be
Conformable to it; and so I said, Before I would stay to fulfill your Wills, I
would pass out of the Steeple-House: And many came out after me, but not of my
calling, and many that I knew not, and yet you are not ashamed to say My
Followers.

And again, That I went into the Common high Way, and there kept with the
People unlawfully together, as you affirm, is a very abominable Lie, especially
for Men of your Profession to tell, which many can witness against; for I was
passing on the Way quietly without Disturbance toward my Friends House from
whence I came, not purposing to stop until I came there; but that he that
writes himself Dyonisius Wakering came hurrying in amongst the People, and
clapped me on the Back, and said, He rested me in the Name of the Protector,
and there stopped me; and the first Words that I spoak, were, Where is thy
Writ? And so the People gathered about, and thronged much; but that any gave
out menacing and threatening Speeches, I cannot say, neither whom they were
spoaken against; but any that own me, it is well known, they are not Men of
such boistrous Spirits, but rather are made willing to be rev^led, then to
revile; for from me no other Example they have, as Hundreds will acknowledge:
But Wakering, if he was true to that of God in his Conscience, he would confess
how I labored in his Presence to still the People, when he had violently laid
Hands on me, and given the Occasion; and so let all take Notice, that there was
no Disorder nor Disturbance until the Magistrate came and laid violent Hands on
me, tending to the Breach of the Peace, and against the Law; and this is the
Fruits of your Hypocritical ^ast and voluntary Humiliation.

3. Accusation.
And also you accuse me, That I could give no good Account of my last
Settlement, or of my Life and Conversation.

Reply, As for my Life and Conversation* let it preach forth it self, and them
that can accuse me, let them; and as for my Settlement it is in the Lord, where
I have found an Habitation, and so am no Vagabond or Wanderer, though I
challenge no Propriety in the Earth, because my Kingdom is not of this World,
though you accuse me that I appear unto you to be an idle disorderly Person,
and before you set me down James Parnel Labourer, and thus you utter forth your
Folly with your changeable Minds; but I am a Labourer in the Gospel of God, in
which Work none can tax me with Idleness, since I came into these Parts, but if
I had been more idle in the same, ye would have been more pleased; for it is my
great Labor and Diligence in this Work of the free Gospel, and the Prosperity
thereof, in the overturning and laying open the Deceits of deceiving and
deceived Men, that torments you, who are the Shelterers of the false Prophet,
whom you carry in your Bosom, because he cries Peace unto you, when the Lord
cries Woe; yet nevertheless, it is but for a Time; for the Hand of the Almighty
is against you, and who shall deliver you?

And when you have laid all these Lies, Slanders and false Accusations upon my
Back, you commit me to the Common Goal for this County, as you say, in the Name
of his Highness, the Lord Protector; and so you make his Name a Cover for your
Lies, and a Protector of Persecution and Oppression: But according to his own
Declaration, he took not upon him that Place and Title for that End, but by
your Proceedings in his Name it does so appear, or else the Messengers and
Servants of Jesus Christ would not be so persecuted, and cast into Prisons, and
Dungeons, and Holes, in his Name, as they are: But what a Liberty of Conscience
is this? and how will this stand in the Presence of the Almighty God, who will
judge him that judges, as well as him that is judged?

That all Sects, Forms, Judgments and Opinions should be at Liberty, and be
protected therein, and the dear Children of God persecuted, and imprisoned, and
shamefully entreated as they are and all this done in the Name of the Lord
Protector of England: Therefore in the Day of the Lord's Vengeance, he will be
avenged of all his Adversaries from the least to the greatest, and who shall
escape his Hand in the Day that he will deliver his own, and advance them above
all their Enemies, though here you his Enemies have cast me, you say, Until I
shall be delivered by due Course of Law.

Reply, What Law or Justice can I expect from such Unjust Lawyers and Judges as
you are? For you that cast me in contrary and without Law; it is likely you will
proceed contrary and without Law; for your own Law will bear Witness, and
testify against you to your Shame and Confusion of Face, though to this Libel
you have set your Hands and Seals, who write your selves, Herbert Pellham,
Thomas Cook, Dyonisius Wakering, William Harlackinden.

Here let your Hands bear Witness and testify against you for Enemies and
Persecutors of the Just, who bind heavy Burdens, and lay them upon the
Oppressed, but will not touch them with one of you Fingers, but the greater
will be your Condemnation, when there is none to deliver you from the Hand of
the Almighty, neither Rocks nor Mountains to shelter you, but the Refuge of
Lies shall be done away; therefore while you have Time prize it, and bring your
Deeds to the Light, and own your Condemnation by the Light, that your Souls may
be saved; now you are warned, and the Messenger of the Lord discharged, by whom
you are warned, and the Truth cleared from your Lies and false Accusations,
which in the Enmity of your Spirits you have cast upon it: And so in the
Liberty and Peace I rest and stand, wherein Christ has set ^e free, which none
can take away, who am a Sufferer in outward Bonds for the Testimony of a pure
Conscience, at Colchester-Castle* who am known to you my Persecutors by the
Name,

J. Parnel.

Here follows a Copy of some QUERIES, that were sent with the foregoing
Letter, to the Justices, so called.
Several Queries to all you Magistrates and Officers, and Proud and Lofty Ones,
who Rage, Persecute and Despise Men because they cannot put off their Hats to
you; and call it, A Contemning of Authority, and Mis-behaviour, and yet say,
you are Christian-Magistrates, and profess the Scriptures to be your Rule: Now,
try your selves, and prove your Practice by the Scripture, and by it Answer
these Queries.

Query 1. WHat Rule have you in the Scripture for the putting off the Hat?

2. What is that in Man, that would be honored with the putting off the Hat,
or bowing the Knee?

3. Why is it called Courtesy to put off the Hat to the Poor; and Honor, and
Manners, and Due Respect to put off the Hat to the Rich?

4. Whether is this Respect of Persons, because of Advantage? yea or nay: or
what makes this Difference?

5. Where is your Example for this amongst all the Christians under the Gospel,
as you profess?

6. And what is that in Man that so swells, and causes such Wrath and Rage to
appear against another, for not putting off the Hat, if the putting off the Hat
or bowing the Knee be such a small Matter, as some acconnt it?

7. Whether is that right Authority or Justice in man, that commands his
Fellow Creature to put off the Hat before him, and so to stand until he suffer
him to put it on; and if he does not so stand, then to fall into Wrath and
Rage, and say, He Contemns Authority? yea or nay.

8. Where is there any Law that commands a man to put off his Hat to one man
more then another?

9. And if there was a Law that did so command, whether he that obeyes the Law
of God, James 2. 9.
that commands No Respect of Persons, and disobeys the other Law, do Contemn
Authority? yea or nay.

10. Esther 3.
Whether was that Authority in Haman to be obeyed (who was a Chief Ruler) and
would have had Mordecai to have bowed unto him?

11. And what was that in Haman that made him full of Wrath, so that he would
have destroyed Mordecai, and all the Jews in the Nation, because Mordecai could
not bow unto him; and what Difference is there betwixt Haman and you in this
Matter, who now are full of Wrath and Rage, and imprison those that cannot put
off their Hats to you?

12. And whether was that Mis^behaviour, or a Contemning of Authority in
Mordecai, in not obeying the Kings Command to bow unto Haman, as you say it is
in not putting off the Hat, or bowing to you now; and wherein do you see any
Difference betwixt these men now, and Mordecai in that Matter, seeing they
suffer Imprisonment before they can do it?

13. And what Lordship and Authority was that, Mat. 20. 25.
which they that were accounted to rule over the Gentiles, did exercise upon
them, which Christ declared against to his Disciples, and wherein do you differ
from them in that Matter?

14. And what Honor was that which the Pharisees received one of another,
John* 54. 4.
for which Cause Christ judged them to be in the Unbelief, and whether you be
not guilty of the same? yea or nay.

15. And what is the Honor which comes from God* which Christ there spoak of;
and whether it stands in the putting off a Hat? yea or nay.

16. What is the Beast, Rev. 13. 3, 8.
which all the World worships and wonders after? and what is the Worship of
that Beast, and his Image? and whether the Power and Authority of that Beast is
to be obeyed? yea or nay.

17. How is Justice to be honored?

18. And whether a Man may not put off his Hat to a Magistrate, and yet envy
him, and hate him in his heart? And whether many in these days do not so? And
whether this be the Honor that a Magistrate ought to seek for? yea or nay.

19. And whether a Man may not honor Justice and Equity in is heart without
putting off a Hat to a Magistrate? and he that so does, Whether is he fit to be
called a Magistrate, that calls such a one A Contemner of Authority, and
commits him to Prison for Mis-behaviour? And whether this be Justice or Equity?
yea or nay.

20. And you that plead this Scripture, Be subject to every Ordinance of Man
for the Lord's sake; Whether is it for the Lord's sake, that a Man would have
his Fellow Creature to stand with his Hat off before him, or for his Selfs
sake; and whether then it is to be obeyed? yea or nay.

21. And he that for the Lord's sake, and for Conscience sake, cannot so rob
God of his Glory and Honor, as to bow to or worship any Creature, but God
alone, who is the Creator; Whether ought he to be imprisoned for Mis-behaviour,
or a Contemner of Authority? yea or nay, according to the Law of Equity: And
whether this is to be called Liberty of Conscience, according to the Law of
England? yea or nay.

Now, all you that profess your selves Christians, and the Scripture to be your
Rule; take the Scripture, and prove your Practice by the Scripture amongst all
the Christians; or else, let the Life and Practice of the True Christians judge
you and condemn you; and own your selves to be in Proud Haman's Nature, and so
liable to Haman's Judgment: And hence forward look to your Office, to Rule for
God, and not for your selves, and then you will not stand upon such frivolous
things; for, it is a frivolous thing to look for the putting off the Hat, and
is no Part of True Nobility or Christianity.

Given forth for the Clearing of the Truth, to which the Nations must bow.

James Parnel.

Here follows a Copy of a Note that was written against the Idol's Temple,
which was judged a Contempt of the Ministry.
THis is the Idols-Temple, where the Worship of the Beast is upheld, down with
it, down with it, 1 Cor. 8. 10. Rev. 13. 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 12. God that made the
World and all Things therein, dwells not in Temples made with Hands, Acts 7.
47, 48, 49. Acts 17. 11. Neither is he worshipped in Idols Temples made with
Men's Hands, Acts 17. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must
worship him in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father is seeking such to worship
him, John 23. 24. All the World wonders after and worships the Beast, but those
who have their Names written in the Book of Life, Rev. 13. 3, 4, 8. And they
that worship the Beast, receive his Mark in their Foreheads, Rev. 13. 16. As
sprinkling Infants, and worshipping the Works of their own Hands, Isa. 2. 8.
And following the Imaginations of their own Hearts; such must drink of the Wine
of the Wrath of the Almighty, poured out without Mixture, Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11,
12.

This Idols Temple that is made with Hands, is a Place for Night-Birds and
Scrich-Owls to meet each one with his Mate, Jer. 34. 13, 14, 15. To the
Dishonor of the only true God, that dwells in Temples made without Hands, at
New Jerusalem, where the Tabernacle of God is with Men, Rev. 21. 3. Drunkards
and Swearers, Revilers, and Scoffers, and Scorners, Proud and Wanton Ones,
Hypocrites and Dissemblers, Envious Haters, Backbiters, Persecutors, Lustful
Covetous Ones, and Earthworms, meet here; the Fearful and Unbelieving,
Peevish, Perverse, Contentious Ones meet in these Idols Temples, to satisfy
their Lusts: And says the Lord, these People draw near me with their Mouths,
and honor me with their Lips, but their Hearts are far from me; but in vain do
they worship me, teaching for Doctrine the Traditions of Men, Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9.
But know you not that no Unrighteous Person shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. But must be cut down, and cast into the Lake that burns, Rev.
21. 8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, such as you sow, such must you reap,
Gal. 6. 7. And to whom you yield your Members Servants to obey, his Servants
you are, Romans 6. 16. For he that commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin, and so is
of the Devil, Joh. 8. 34. 1. Joh. 3.

This is a Deceiver that stands up here every first Day of the Week to deceive
the People; he is Proud and Covetous, and speaks a Divination of his own
Brain, but not from the Mouth of the Lord, and so makes the People light and
vain, Jer. 14. 14. But the Lord is against him, hold him not up; for he ran and
the Lord never sent him, therefore he profits not the People at all, Jer. 3. 1,
2, 3. But has stolen the Letter, which is Carnal, with it to feed the Carnal,
for Carnal Ends and Lucre, and so has a Form, but denies the Life and Power,
and therefore from him turn away, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Therefore spend not your Money
for that which is not Bread, nor your Labor for that which profits not, Isa.
55. 1, 2. For all the Children of the Lord are and shall be taught of the Lord,
and in Righteousness shall they be established, and they shall be far from
Oppression, Jer. 31. 34. Isa. 54. 13. 1 John 2. 27.

He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says, and be
deceived no longer.

J. P.

Here follow several Queries that were sent to four of the chief Priests in
Essex, with some more added, which may be serviceable for them, or any other,
to answer, whom they do concern.
SEveral Queries unto Priest Sammes, Priest Sparrow, Priest Willi, and Priest
Stellum, and your gathered Churches, by you to be answered according to
Scripture, which you profess to be your Rule.

Query 1. How and by what were you called to the Ministry which you profess?

2. What is the Gospel which you pretend to preach? and how did you receive it?
and whether your Gospel be free, and without Charge, as the Apostles was, yea
or nay?

3. What do you minister from? and what do you minister to in the Natural Man?
and what is the End of your Ministry?

4. What Rule have you in the Scripture to take a Text of the Apostles Words,
and speak from it what you have studied, with your Uses, Points, Trials, and
Motives, and Applications?

5. Whether do you speak by the same infallible Spirit, as they did that spoak
forth the Scripture, yea or nay?

6. And whether he that has the same infallible Spirit need study how or what
to preach?

7. And whether it is not as lawful now for Fishermen, Plowmen, or Herdsmen to
preach, if they be called to it, and fitted for it, by the same Power and
Spirit as they were in the days of old? and whether Christ is not the same
Yesterday, to Day and orever, according to Scripture?

8. And whether any now ought to teach and preach in the Name of Jesus, but who
are called to it and fitted for it the same Way as the holy Men of God were,
spoken of in Scripture?

9. Whether do you own immediate Revelation now, yea or nay?

10. What is a Minister of Christ? and what is a Minister of Antichrist? and
do you distinguish the one from the other?

11. What Scripture have you to give unto the World David's Condition to be
sung in a Meeter?

12. What Rule have you in the Scripture to abide in a certain Place, and to
agree with the People for so much a Year ^or preaching, as forty, sixty, or an
hundred or two hundred Pound, as you can get it?

13. How and by what are you gathered and united, who call your selves a Church?

14. And what is the Church in God? and whether to it you be come, yea or nay?

15. What is the Baptism into the Church? and whether to it you be come, yea or
nay?

16. And what Scripture have you to sprinkle Children with Water? and to what
End do you do it?

17. Whether you be of one Heart and Mind, as the true Church was, yea or nay?

18. Whether you have passed from Death to Life, yea or nay?

19. What is the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ? and whether to it you be come,
yea or nay?

20. Whether he that believes is not born of God? and whether he that is born
of God does not commit Sin, yea or nay?

21. Why do not you maintain your Teacher, but let him rob the World instead
of robbing other Churches, and so is chargeable unto the World?

22. Whether do you own and hold up the first Priesthood, that took Tithes, or
second Priesthood that took no Tithes? and which do you deny, seeing you pay
Tithes, and you Teachers take Tithes, yea or nay?

25. Why do you own and hold up such that are ^alled of Men Master, and have
the chiefest Place in the Assembly, and stand praying in the Synagogue, and
love Greetings in the Markets, which Christ himself cried Woe against?

24. How is Christ the Light of the World? and how does he enlighten every one
that comes into the World, if it be not in the Conscience? and whether that
Light which comes from him be Natural, yea or nay?

25. How is the Light the Condemnation of the World, if it be not in the
Conscience?

26. And how is it said, That he that does Evil hates the Light, and will not
bring his Deeds to the Light, lest the Light should reprove him, if it be not
in the Conscience? and whether that be a Natural Light which reproves for Sin,
Yea or Nay?

27. How did Paul turn Peoples Minds from Darkness to Light, if it be not in
the Conscience? and whether that Light was Natural which Paul was sent to turn
the Minds of the Gentiles unto?

28. Whether that Light which shines in Darkness be not one and the same with
that which shines out of Darkness, Yea or Nay?

29. And whether the Light of the World be not a saving Light in the least
Measure, Yea or Nay? and how can that be said to be Natural?

30. Whether the Light which John came to bear Witness of, was Natural or
Spiritual?

31. How has the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, appeared to all Men,
if it be not in the Conscience? and whether it be Natural?

32. How does it stand with the Impartial God to give to one Man a Measure of
Grace, and not to another, and yet requi^e Obedience from all?

33. Whether the sloathful Servant has not a Talent as well as the faithful,
though he hides it in the Earth? and what is that Talent?

34. What is the Account that God will require of every one in the Day of
Judgment? and how can he call all justly to an Account, and reward them
according to their Deeds, if he has not given to every one a Talent?

35. What is that which leads to Repentance? and whether that which leads to
Repentance be not in the Conscience? and whether it be Natural, Yea or Nay?

36. And where do you read in the Scripture of a Natural Light to be in the
Conscience?

37. What is the Redemption? and what is the End of Christ's Coming?

38. Whether the Redemption by Christ be not as full in every Respect, as the
Fall by Adam? and what is the Fall by Adam?

39. And whether you do not go about to make the Commands of Christ unjust, who
says, Be you perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect? and you say, It
cannot be while you are upon the Earth; then how is it your Rule?

40. Will you own a Purgatory? or where is the Place betwixt Heaven and Earth,
where Man shall be cleansed, if not upon the Earth, seeing no unclean Thing can
inherit the Kingdom of God?

41. Whether do they deny Christ come in the Flesh, that witness forth
Perfection from Sin here, or they that tell People, They can never be perfect,
or be wholely set free from Sin so long as they are upon the Earth? and whether
such be not the Ministers of Antichrist, Yea or Nay?

42. Where had you this Doctrine, to tell People, The Light in the Conscience
is Natural, and that Christ has not enlightened every one that comes into the
World?

43. And whether in this you do not bring another Doctrine, in Opposition to
the Doctrine of Christ, who says, He is the Light of the World, and does
enlighten every one that comes into the World?

44. And where had you this Doctrine, to tell People, They could never be
wholly cleansed, or be set free from Sin, so long as they are upon he Earth?

45. And whether this be not in Opposition to the Doctrine of Christ, who
says, Be ye perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect?

46. Whether God justifies any in their Sin? and whether Sanctification goes
not before Justification, Yea or Nay?

47. Whether you do not seek Justification by Works, who put one another upon
Prayer, and Duties, Observations, Ordinances, and Commands, without the Light,
in Imitation of the Letter? and whether these be not your own Works which are
done out of the Light, Yea or Nay?

48. What is your own Righteousness? and what is the Righteousness of Christ?
and how do you distinguish betwixt the one and the other?

49. And whether he that is justified by the Righteousness of Christ, does not
dwell in it, and it in him? and whether he that dwells in the Righteousness of
Christ does sin, Yea or Nay?

50. Whether any can walk according to the Scripture, but by the Light of
Christ? and whether any that are guided by the Light of Christ, do, or can act
contrary to the Scripture? and whether this Light be not a sufficient Guide, if
it be owned and followed?

51. How is the Scripture left unto the World for a Rule, who know not the
Light, seeing to them it is a Parable, and as a Book Sealed?

52. And what is the Word and whether there be any other Word of God then one?

53. What is the Death that has passed over all Men, forasmuch as all Men
have sinned? and whether this Death you ever passed, Yea or Nay?

54. What is that which is lost, which Christ comes to seek* and what is that
which was driven away, which Christ comes to bring again? and whether this is
not to be witnessed and fulfilled in Man, Yea or Nay?

55. What is the Paradise wherein Man was placed? and what was the Image of
God, wherein Man was created?

56. And how was Man a living Soul? and whether all this is not to be restord
unto Man, and fulfilled and witnessed unto Man, while he is upon the Earth, Yea
or Nay?

57. What is the Tree of Life? and what is the Tree of Knowledge? and whether
upon it you do not feed? and what is the flaming Sword that is set to keep from
the Tree of Life? and whether it you ever passed?

58. Whether the Natural Man can try and discern false Spirits by the
Scripture? and by what does the spiritual Man try and judge all Things? and
whether by the same he did not try and discern Spirits?

59. And by what did the Holy Men of God, that gave forth the Scripture try and
discern Spirits? and whether yours be the same Tryer of Spirits, as theirs was,
who say, You must try the Spirit by the Letter?

60. Whether you are not conformed like unto the World, so long as you follow
their Fashions and Customs?

61. Whether you are not partial amongst your selves so long as you respect
Persons?

These Things I do not ask as if I knew them not, but for the Satisfaction of
the Simple, and the clearing of the Truth, and Manifesting your Deceit to the
World, by which you have deceived the World, who are the Deceivers of the
World; therefore answer by plain Scripture, and your own Experience, or else
let all Flesh keep Silence before the Lord, and let Guilt stop your Mouths;
for Railing, Reproaching, and Blaspheming the Truth of God, which is made
manifest in these People, whom you scornfully call Quakers, who by you and your
Agents are persecuted: but where do you find that the Church of God was ever
Persecutors, or ever made Use of Carnal Weapons to defend them?

J. P.

Here follows a Copy of a Letter that I was moved to write to Judge Hills
after the Assize.
A Few Words unto thee that art set in the Seat to do Justice, and to bear the
Sword of Justice in thy Hand, and have turned the Edge of it against the
Righteous, and laid it upon the Innocent; and thy fair Words will not shelter
nor cover thy deceitful Actions, but thy deceitful Heart is made manifest, and
thy Hypocrisy does there appear; Sa. 5. 10.
for thou have hearkened unto the false Prophet, and by his enticing Words thou
art deceived, and so put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, Evil
for Good, and Good for Evil, and so art liable to the VVo from the Lord, and
have persecuted Christ, and set at Liberty Barrabas; yea, and I was numbered
amongst Transgressors, yet could not have the Liberty of Transgressors, as in
many Things might be nominated; but in short I shall declare it; First, That
mine Accusers should stand in the Place as Judges over me, and their
Accusations and false Witnesses to be heard to the full, and also to whisper
and buz in thy Ears in secret, what they would against me, and also that thou
that satest in the Seat as a Judge, to repeat over unto the Jury all that thou
could gather by wrong Interpretation and Construction against me, but nothing
of my Defense against my Accusations, but rather to drive out of their Minds,
by thy evil incensing, what I had before declared in my own Defense; but thou,
as it were, passedst the Sentence upon me before the Jury went forth; but thou
thoughtst thou had pannelled a Jury, wherewith thou wast pleased to try me,
according to thine own Mind and Will; for the Foreman was a Drunkard, and the
rest Swearers, out of the Doctrine of Christ; against all which I did object,
and denied by them to be tried; but it was thy Will and Pleasure so to do; and
when they come to bring in their Evidence, they had so much Understanding, that
they charged me with nothing but the Papers which I had before confessed to be
mine, and owned them, but the Indictment they would not own to be Truth against
me, though dishonestly both thou and the Clerk did draw Words out of the
Foreman of the Jury, which the rest did not consent to; and then in thy Will,
with thy fair and deceitful Speeches, thou imposedst a Fine upon me, contrary
to all Law and Equity; but where Equity is not, it cannot be expected; for
Oppression within, Oppression without; and he that cannot Witness the Sword of
Justice set up in his Heart, knows not how to handle it without; for he that
rules not by the Law of God in his Heart, rules in his own Will, and is
partial, and understands not the Things of God; but what pleases his Will,
that he cherishes; and what crosses his Will, that he would curb: and the
Will of Man is opposite to the Will of God; therefore the Cross of Christ is
of Use to them that know it, but a stumbling Block to the World; but he that
rules in his own Will is no Minister of God; he that respects Persons is not
fit to bear Rule for God; he that seeks himself is not fit to bear Rule for
God; all which appeared, and was openly manifest in thee in the open Court, as
in those Things before mentioned, and many other which are now out of Mind; but
for the clearing of my Conscience unto thee, I was moved to write, that thou
might see what thou have done, and be left without Excuse of Ignorance in the
Presence of the Almighty; for contrary to the Light of God in thy Conscience
thou have acted, by which thou stand Accu^ed in the Presence of the
Almighty, and if thy Conscience accuse thee, God is greater: But if thou had
stood in the Place where thou art set, to judge of legal Matters about natural
and temporal Things, thou had had the less to account for; but in meddling to
judge about Spiritual Matters, is Authority which the Scripture (which thou
call thy Rule* does not allow thee; for the Natural Man perceives not the
Things of God, because they are spiritually discer^ed; therefore in this the
spiritual Man judges thee, and thy Condemnation is great; therefore lay these
Things to Heart, and put them not far from thee; or to the Light of God in thy
Conscience I do speak, which eternally will witness me, and condemn thee in the
Presence of the Almighty, who have taken upon thee to judge and condemn those
whom God has justified. Therefor consider what advantageth it thee, or what
will it advantage thee, when thou come to give an Account before the Lord God
of Heaven and Earth, the Judge of all the Quick and the Dead, if thou have now
Power to keep this Body in Prison until thou have the Life of the Creature,
which I am freely made willing to give up, rather then to deny the Truth of my
God? And if I should pay one Penny for the Liberty of my Body in this Cause,
would be as much as if I paid the whole Fine, which thou have unjustly laid
upon me; for therein I should own my self a Transgressor where I am not guilty;
and also a bought Liberty is Bondage to my Spirit, but my Liberty under thy
Bonds, is Bondage to thee, which Liberty thou can not rob me of, with all
that thou can do; for it is the Free-Gift of God, which none can take away,
though thou will not allow me in thy Bonds to have the outward Liberty that
thou allowest to Thieves, and Murderers, and Fornicators, that is, to have my
Friends and Acquaintance to come to see me, wherein the very Heathen will
condemn thee, who when they had committed Paul to Prison, said, Forbid none of
his Friends and Acquaintance to come to see him, Acts 22. 24. Therefore now
read how thou exceedest the Heathen in Persecution and Injustice, though I am a
freeborn Subject in England; therefore let the Life of all the Christians
condemn thee, who never were Persecutors. And this of the Lord I was moved to
write, which is the Word of the Lord unto thee, whether thou will hear or
forbear, in the Peace of my Conscience I do rest in the Will of God; known to
thee by the Name,

James Parnel.

And now a few Words unto you, who call your selves Gathered Churches, and go
under the Name of Independents, in Essex.
YOU are gathered by the Will of Man, and are joined by the Will of Man, and so
stand in the Will of Man, and are upheld by the Will of Man, by which you are
begotten, but still alive in the World's Nature, in the World's Customs,
Fashions and Traditions, in the World's Fellowship, Words and Ways, and
Rudiments; only differing from others in Judgment, Opinion or Profession,
wherein is your Life, in high Notions, and feigned Apprehensions, and false
Applications, and glorious Expressions, and customary Duties, and vain
Traditions, which all appertain to the great Image, which all the world
worships, by which they are deceived, whose Head is Gold, and Breast of Silver,
and Thighs of Brass, and Legs of Iron, and Feet part Iron part Clay: and in the
same Nature ye are found with the world, the Day does declare it, and you to be
the Enemies and Stangers to the Light, which is not of the world, which is now
come into the world, testifying against the world, and the Deceit of the world,
and the Deceivers in the World, and the Profession of the world; And this is
the Condemnation of the world, that Light is come into the world, and men love
Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil: In which Evil you are
found, despising and setting at naught the Cornerstone, and standing in the
Enmity of your Spirits, and joining with the Powers of the Earth to persecute
the Life and Power which now is manifest in the Earth, and is come to discover
your Empty Shadows, Forms and fair Shows of Godliness, but without Life and
Power, which you have set up in your Imaginations, and thereby are deceived and
blinded, and led in Blindness, so that you cannot see the Light, nor receive
the Substance now it is come and made maniest; but stand up in your Wills and
wisdom to oppose the same, and persecute it in the Enmity of your Spirits, as
if you hoped to kill the Heir, that the Inheritance might be yours: And
therefore, Because you do despise this Day of your Visitation, and reject and
slight the Glad-tidings which now are come to them that dwell upon the Earth;
and revil^ and reproach, persecute and slander the faithful Messengers of the
Gospel, rejoicing your Hearts in their Sufferings by you and amongst you;
therefore the Lord will raise up a People out of the Dust, and gather them from
far, to bear Testimony unto his Name, and bear witness against you, yea, and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of the Son; and
you, and such as you, shall be cast out into Tophet, prepared of old for
Hypocrites and Unbelievers. Therefore now read your Portion, ye stiff-necked
and Uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, who do always resist the Holy Ghost; as
did your Fathers so do ye; but the greater will be your Condemnation, who go
about to mock God with your Will Worship, with your Calling of Assemblies, and
Solemn Meetings, with your appointed Fasts, and Days of Voluntary Humiliation,
with your Long Prayers, and Feigned Duties; all which are done out of the
Light, and so are your own Works, acted by Self, for Self: But who has required
these things at your Hands? It is all Abomination to the Lord; his Soul loathes
it: For, your Sacrifices are are as Cain's; for, you are found in Cain's
Nature, Envying and Persecuting the Righteous; yea, the Witness lies slain in
your Streets. Therefore VVo is unto you who go on in the Way of Cain; for, upon
you shall come all the Righteous Bloodshed, from Righteous Abel until now: And
your Profession stinks in the Nostrils of the Lord; for you have lifted up your
Hands against him and his Anointed, and opened your Mouths in Blasphemy and
False Reports against the Truth; yea, you are blind, and stumble at the
Noonday; you come near the Lord with your Lips, but your hearts run a Whoring
after other Lovers, and you know not the Only True God, that dwells in Temples
made without hands, whose Worship is in Spirit and in Truth; but would limit
the Unlimited under your Wills, as if he were not a God of Might, but that you
could control him with the Arm of Flesh: But, Be not deceived, God is not
mocked; such as you sow, such shall you reap; and your End shall be according
to your Works: Gal. 6. 7.
For, our God is a God of Judgment and Justice, and will avenge the Cause of
the Innocent upon you his Adversaries: Yea, and though your Teachers do cry
Peace, Peace unto you, because you put into their Mouths, and so daub you up
with Untempered Mortar, that you cannot see your VVouud, and so heal you
slightly: Yet you shall know, that our God is a God of Truth, and his Word
shall stand forever; and their Sorcery shall appear, and their Witchcraft shall
be laid open, and the Cup of Fornication (wherewith they have made drunk and
deluded the Nations) shall be taken from them, and the Cup of the Wrath of the
Almighty given them to drink their Reward: And then shall you behold the
Harlot, with whom you have committed Fornication, who now lies in your Bosoms,
Bewitching you with a Golden Cup, with whom you have defiled your Garments,
then to be cast into the Bottomless Pit, where you shall all be tormented
together, who now partake of her Pleasures: and thus shall you fall among them
that fall, in the Day that I visit you, says the Lord.

J. Parnel.

A Few Words to all my Dear Friends in and about the County of Essex.
AND all you my dear Friends, you scattered and despised Ones, in and about the
County of Essex, whom the Lord by his Powerful Word is now gathering out of
Darkness, into his Marvelous Light; out of the Kingdom of this world, into the
Kingdom of his dear Son, whom he is separating unto himself to walk before him
in Holiness, that you might know him, and he might know you in the Light of his
Countenance, whose Faces he has turned toward Sion, to seek after a Land of
Rest unto your wearied Souls, which have been tossed to and fro, from Mountain
to Hill, in this Cloudy and Dark Day, seeking Rest, but finding none: But now
is the Day of Beauty broaken forth nigh you, even in you; Yea, and Glad-tidings
is come unto your wearied Souls, by which a pure Love is begotten in you to the
Everlasting Truth, which has been freely declared amongst you by the
Messengers of the Most High, who have reached the Witness for God in your
Consciences, which does seal the same upon your Hearts, which your Teacher is,
and unto it you hearken, and are obedient: In which Light all stand still, and
behold the Work which the Lord has begun amongst you; and you shall have no
Cause of Discouragement, though the Sea does rise, and the Raging Waves do
swell, as if they would swallow all up; yet it is limited by the Unlimited, and
it shall but foam out its own Shame. And as I had a Time to preach the Truth
amongst you, to the Convincement of many; so also now I have a Time to seal the
same with Patient Suffering in the Bonds of the Gospel, that you may see, That
it is no other but what we are made able and willing to seal with patient
Suffering, yea, with our Blood, if we be called to it, as many of us have done
in this Nation, though it be called A Land of Liberty, but it is for Iniquity;
but Truth and Equity are Strangers in it, and therefore are persecuted: But you
that are found worthy to receive these Strangers, happy are you: And though the
Raging Sodomites compass you about, for to cause you to cast out these
Strangers, that they may work their Wills upon them, yet be Faithful, and fear
them not; but cast out your Darlings before them, and stand in the Faith of the
God of Truth and Equity, and you shall^ see the Sodomites struck with
Blindness, that they shall not be able to prevail against you; but when they
are weary with striving, they shall be made to sit down in Sorrow; and so shall
it be fulfilled which of old was prophesied, that No Weapon formed against the
Faithful shall prosper; but, Woe unto them that lift up their Heel against them.
Therefore I charge you all in the Name of the God of Truth, Be Faithful,
Valliant and Bold for the Truth received: and as you have received it, so walk
in it; that you may profess no more in Word, but what in Life you seal; that
the Light may be preached forth in your Lives, and shine forth in your
Conversations, to the Glory of the Father of Lights, and the Confounding of the
Heathen, who profess God in Words, but in Life deny him: And be willing that
Self shall suffer for the Truth, and not the Truth for Self (for the Truth was
ever sealed with Persecution since Gain's Generation had a Being upon the
Earth) and so own the Cross, and despise the Shame; and give up your selves to
suffer for the Truth received, all you that would follow the Lamb to the Land
of Rest, and through many Trials you will wax strong and bold, and confident in
your God; for, God is not known what a God he is, until the Time of Trial. And
all keep your Meetings in the Name and Fear of the Lord God, waiting for his
Power, in the Obedience to his Light, which in your Consciences does reprove
you when you do amiss, that in it you may wait, and watch over the Foes that
are of your own House, that you may know the Warfare begun in your Hearts
against your Spiritual Enemies; and so the God of Power manifest himself
amongst you by his Mighty Power, bringing down all that in you which opposes
him, and would not that he should reign over it, and exalt his own Seed in your
Hearts, and establish you in Righteousness, that his Image you may bear; and He
shall be your God, and Ye shall be his People.

And so, in the Unchangeable Truth, I rest, in Unity with all the Faithful, in
the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, though in Outward Bonds for your sakes.

Known to all that can read me in Spirit, JAMES PARNEL.

Goliah's Head Cut off with his OWN SVVORD In a Combat betwixt Little David,
the Young Stripling, who stands in the Power and Strength of his GOD; and great
Goliath, the Proud Boaster, who stands in his Own Strength, glorying in the Arm
of Flesh, and contemning and despising Little David, because of his Youth. In a
REPLY to a Book set forth by an Unnamed Author, under Pretense of an Answer to
Thirty Six Queries, propounded by James Parnel, whom he in Scorn calls, The
Young QVAKER. And also, an Answer to several Counter-Queries, propounded by the
same Unnamed Author, whom I understand to be one Thomas Draton, a Teacher of
the World at Abbey Rippon, in Huntingtonshire; wherein his Folly and Ignorance
is much laid open, and the Pride and Deceit of his Spirit much manifested; and
also, he that takes his Part, who writes himself W. P. who knows not the Power
of God, and therefore glories in the Length of Time, and the Multitude of
Years. But Solomon, who was a Wiser Man then Great Goliath, said, That the
Honorable Age is not that which is of Long Time, neither that which is
measured by the Number of Years; but Wisdom is the Gray Hair, and an Undefiled
Life is Old Age. And therefore, let not the Wise Man glory in his Wisdom, nor
the Strong Man glory in his Strength; for, it is Vanity.

JAMES PARNEL.

Printed in the Year 1675.

GOLIAH's HEAD Cut of with his Own Sword, etc.
The Title of the aforesaid Book.

An Answer according to Truth, that trembles not, nor quakes, nor quaileth,
given to thirty six Queries, propounded by James Parnel (commonly called the
Young Quaker) to an ancient Country Minister; with some Counter-Queries by the
said Minister, unto the said Young Quack and his Fellows.

Reply, HEre thou may be ashamed to style thy self an ancient Minister, who
manifests such an Ishmael's Spirit, who with reproachful Words make a Scoff
at the Power of Truth, Heb. 12. 21.
which the Ministers of God in all Ages witnessed, Jer. 23. 9.
which made them to quake and tremble: Job. 4. 14.
And though the Truth neither quakes nor quaileth, Ezekiel. 32. 10.
yet all that owned the Truth* owned and witnessed quaking and trembling which
Truth thou manifests thy self but a Professor of, and a Stranger to the Power,
and a Despiser thereof; and therefore, out from among the Ministers of Christ
thou art raised; and thy Answer is not according to Truth, but a Lie, as shall
further be made to appear hereafter, by him whom thou call the Young Quack;
and it seems, Fear surpriseth the Heart of the Hypocrite, so that thou art
ashamed to own thy Work with thy Name.

Priest, And whereas thou say, Courteous Reader, we are forced,
notwithstanding so many Pamphlets extant against the People called Quakers, to
give Answer to thirty six Queries of James Parnel's, the Young Quaker.

Reply, Although thou have boasted thy self an ancient Minister, and contemnest
me as a young Boy, yet here it appears, that thou art glad of others to help
thee to answer my Queries, as these Words before mentioned do testify; and yet
it is but a Pamphlet, as thou and thy Helpers do confess, that those many are
that are extant against the People called Quakers: And then thou runst on in
Way of Reproach and Scorn against me, because of my Youth; but the Wisdom of
Solomon answers you, That a poor and wise Child is better then an old foolish
King, who will no more be admonished; and therefore, when you think of your
Age, consider also your Folly, and let that stop your Mouths from professing
your selves Ancients, who manifest such a light scornful Spirit, and hate to be
reformed.

Priest, And whereas thou say, Thou doubtest not but his Queries are the
Dictates of others, deceiving and being deceived, which yet they put under the
Boy's Name, for the Credit of their Cause.

Here also, without Doubt, thy unbelieving Heart is manifested, who without
Ground measurest others according to thine own Heart, who because thou make
Use of the Dictates of others, as here does plainly appear, therefore censurest
others, which does not add Credit to thy Cause, because thou boasts of thy Age.

Priest, But according as thou believe, so be it to thee, yet nevertheless,
thou shall find, that the Truth I shall maintain against thee, who with thy
Unbelieving Heart art deceiving and being deceived; and then thou runnest on in
the Pride of thy Spirit, accusing of me to be Ignorant of the Truth of God,
because ( as thou say) of the false wording of my Queries.

Reply, But with Shame might thou speak it; for openly have thou manifested
to the Understanding Reader thy self to be a mere Stranger, both to God and his
Truth also, who would limit the Truth of God to an human Art, which many of
the Children of God had not, and therefore the Power of God was the more
manifested: And when Peter and John were brought before the learned Men, to wit
(the chief Priests and the Rulers) and they wondered at them, because they
perceived they were unlearned Men; and thus with thy Wisdom, and thy great
Learning, thou art shut out of the Truth in the natural; but by this I do not
own thy Accusation to be Truth against me; for I have a Copy of the Queries of
my own Handwriting, which was the Original of those that were sent to thee,
which will bear Testimony against thee, to be a false Accuser, and how thou thy
self have wronged them and misworded them, because they were in the Cross unto
thy Wisdom; and to maintain this, thou bring a Story in Erasmus;
nevertheless, the Story which thou bring does not at all touch me, but may
fitly be returned into thy own Bosom, where it shall l^e: Then thou and thy
Agent do beseech the Reader to read without Partiality, which if he do, he will
judge no otherwise of you, then as I have declared, but will see how you have
uttered forth your Folly, and foamed out your Shame, in going about to
contradict the truth: And at the End of this your Epistle to the Reader, I find
W. P. which I judge to be one of thy Agents to this your shameful Work, to
which thou dare not own thy Name.

My first Query.
Where, and how, and by what wast thou called to the Ministry which thou
professest?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Auswer thou go about to plead many Excuses, whereby to
flee the Answering of my Queries; saying, It is easier for him that is yet in
Darkness to propound Doubts and Queries, then for some of the Children of Light
to auswer them on a sudden. Which to prove, thou quotest Daniel; and that our
Savior ( thou say) himself refused to answer the Pharisees Interogatories,
till they had first answered his, Mat. 21. 23, 24. And albeit thou say, Thou
might put me off with Solomon's Words, Prove. 26. 4. Answer not a Fool
according to his Folly, lest thou also be like unto him.

Reply, I did not propound the Queries unto thee, as any Doubts of mine; but
that thou in thy Answer thereunto, might either prove thy Practice by the
Scriptures unto them that are in Doubt thereof, or unto them manifest thy self
to be a Deceiver; which last thou have plainly done to the least Child of
Light: and therefore it does not follow, that I am in Darkness, or that thou
art a Child of Light. Neither did thou suddenly answer the Queries, though
they concerned thy own Condition, and therefore this Place in Daniel does not
at all stand for thee; for, it was for Daniel to tell and interpret
Nebuchadnezzer's Dream; which was a hard thing for any to tell, unless it was
immediately revealed to them by God's Spirit, as it was to Daniel; but all the
Magicians and Learned Men could not find it out by their Arts: But most of
these Queries unto thee were concerning thy present Condition and Practice; and
herein thou manifestest thy self to be in Darkness, who thus wrests the
Scripture out of its Place, for thy own Ends. And also, Daniel was a Man that
Feared the Lord, Dan. 10.
and Trembled at his Power; which now thou denyest and scoffest at; and yet art
not ashamed to take Daniel's Words for a Refuge against the Light.

And as for that Scripture in Mat. 21. 23, 24. it shall be returned into thine
own Bosom; for, it is thee, and such as thee, who are set up by the Will of
Man, and Authorized by the Authority of Man, who join with the Pharisees and
Scribes of these Times, and combine together with the Earthly Powers to call us
to question, By what Authority we go abroad, preaching the Truth from Place to
Place, and Crying against Deceivers, and where we had our Commission, because
we receive it not from Man, as you do; but do witness the same Power and
Authority as the Ministers of God did in all Ages, and the same Commission;
for, they received not their Commission from Man, but were immediately called,
and immediately fitted, and sent forth into the Work of the Ministry, freely to
give, as freely they had received; and were persecuted by them that were set up
by the Will of Man, which also we do witness; and therefore the Scripture
aforementioned belongs unto thy Generation, who were ever Persecutors. And
if by propounding Queries thou judge me to be in Darkness, then much more
thou judge and condemnest thy self; for, for my Thirty Six Queries, thou have
propounded me an Hundred: And here also thou accountest me a Fool, as by the
Scripture thou quotest in Prove. 26. 4. and therein manifests thy self so much
the greater Fool, in propounding so many Queries to me, whom thou account'st a
Fool: And thus the Pride of thy Heart has deceived thee.

Pr. Answ. And whereas thou say, Thou wast Inwardly called to the Ministry,
by the Motion and Gifts of God's Spirit, long before I was born, which ( thou
say) has been God's Ordinary Way; which to prove, thou quotest Job 32. 8. 2 Chronicles. 20. 14. Amos 5. 7. 15. Mich. 3. 8.

Rep. Though it has been and is God's Ordinary Way, by his own Power and
Spirit, to call and fit his own Ministers for his own Work, as those Scriptures
aforementioned do prove; which we also do witness, and do come no other Way;
yet these Scriptures do not at all prove where, and how, and by what thou wast
called: and Jahaziel, and Amos, and Micha, which those Scriptures aforesaid
bear Testimony of, to be thus called, were men that spoak the Word of the Lord
freely, against Sin and Transgression, and False Prophets and Hirelings; and
their Lives sealed their Testimony: And these Scriptures also bear Testimony,
how, and where they were called, from their Outward Callings, to speak the Word
of the Lord; and so, from those Scriptures thou art shut, and have naught to do
to take them into thy Mouth; for, they do not prove that thou wast thus called
from thy Labor; for, thou wast brought up all thy Days in Idleness, and at a
University (as you call it) to learn Arts and Sciences, without which Those
were Called and Fitted. And for any other Call, then as the Common National
Ministers are called (who deny both Immediate Revelation and Inspiration) thou
have brought no Proof that will stand for thee, but only thy own bare Words,
wherein thy Life and Practice will condemn thee; for, it is one with the
National Priests, and thou art maintained and upheld by the same Power as the
National Teachers are, neither do go from Place to Place, reproving Sin in
the Gate, as Amos and Micha did, who were thus called; neither do speak
freely as they did, and therefore are a False Prophet, who say, The Lord
says, when he never spoak to thee; but runnest, and the Lord never sent thee;
and therefore thou profittest not the People at all, as is manifest by the
Fruits of thy Ministry, and thus thou wast a Deceiver before I was born, and
the Lord has Raised me up to Tell thee of it.

Qu. 2. Whether is thy Call and Means, which thou professest, Mediate or
Immediate?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say, It was both: For, ( say thou)
Besides the Immediate aforesaid, thou wast ordained a Minister by the
Superiors and Governors of the Church, as the Elders and Pastors of the
Churches were formerly by Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14. 23. But thou say, Thou
doubtest whether James Parnel well was called either way to be Teacher; if so,
let him prove it by an Infallible Testimony.

Rep. Those that have an Inward Call to the Ministry do not stay for an Outward
Call by Man, but go forth in Obedience to the Word of the Lord: Whosoever was
called to the Ministry of the Gospel, it was Immediately, and not Mediately;
but thine Mediately, by the Will of Man, and not Immediately, as before is
proved; and also out of thy own Mouth art made manifest: For thou say, Thou
doubtest whether I was called either way; But if thou wast Called and Guided by
the Spirit of the Lord, thou would know, without Doubts, whether I was so
called, yea or nay; for, the True Ministers were Epistles writ in one another
Hearts: And they also know the False Prophets, and the False Apostles, and the
False Ministers, and declared against them, as I do against thee; and without
doubt I do know thee to be a Deceiver by an Infallible Testimony; and those
that thou speak of in Acts 14. 23. 2 Cor. 3. 2.
whom Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15.
they did not ordain them Ministers of the Gospel, neither sent them abroad to
preach the Gospel, neither allowed them an Hundred or Two Hundred Pounds by the
Year, as thou have; but they chose out those that were strong in the Faith, and
set them to watch over the Weak: But those Churches were gathered by the Power
and Spirit of God, and were turned from Darkness to Light, and were washed,
cleansed and sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God. But out of your Church cast Drunkards, and Swearers, and Liars, and Proud,
and Covetous Ones, and Adulterous, and Idolaters, and Quarrellers, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
and Fighters, and Scoffers, and Scorners, and Backbiters, and Envious Ones,
and Profane and Wanton Ones, and the like, who are neither Washed nor
Sanctified; and then see where will be the Church of England, and the Pastors,
Teachers and Elders and all: Then you that profess your selves to be the Church
of Christ will be found the Synagogue of Statan, whose Minister thou art. And
also, Paul and Barnabas, who ordained them Elders, were Men endued with the
holy Spirit of the Lord, and were immediately called and chosen to the
Ministry, and had a Spirit of Discerning to know who were fitted for the
Eldership, and all this was done without an University, or serving Seven years
to learn Arts and Sciences, or taking Degrees, without which you can do
nothing: And also, those Superiors and Governors, have nothing but what they
have gotten by Art and Study, and reading of others Experiences; but are
ignorant of the Power of God, neither know whether there be any Holy Ghost, yea
or nay, but by the hearing of the Ear; but scoff* and scorn, and persecute
those that now do witness these things; and they themselves were also first
ordained by the Will of Man. And thus thou have but so much the more manifested
thy self of the World, in going about to prove thy self a called Minister by
the Scripture, which does altogether witness against thee.

And whereas thou would have me to prove my Call by an Infallible Testimony:
I tell thee, Without an Infallable Testimony I do not go, neither without an
Infallible Testimony do I desire to be received or owned; and to this the
Infallible Spirit of Truth bears Testimony in all the Children of Truth: And
thou that have not an Infallible Testimony, either with me or against me, are
still in Darkness, and know not the Truth, then far unfit to be a Teacher to
others.

Qu. 3. Whether thou art guided by the Same Infallible Spirit that gave forth
the Scripture?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say, That we our selves teach, That all
Men are taught and guided by that Spirit at times: And secondly, thou say,
Thou praisest God for it, thou art guided and assisted by that Spirit which is
always Infallible: And thirdly, thou say, Thou doubtest whether any of
those that are called Quakers are always guided by that Spirit.

Rep. Here all that are guided by any Measure of that Spirit may easily see the
Lies and Confusion: for thy first is a Lie, That any of us do teach, that all
Men are taught and guided by that Spirit at Times; for I deny that thou art,
who art now taken with a Lie in thy Mouth, which all that understand our
Doctrine will witness against: And 2dly, That thou art guided hy an Infallible
Spirit, is a Lie against the Holy Ghost; for no Lie comes from that Spirit: And
again thou belyest the Spirit of Truth to say, Thou art guided by it, and yet
can not give an Infallible Testimony, whether those thou call'st Quakers are
guided by an Infallible Spirit, Yea or Nay, but art in thy Doubts; but that
Spirit is without Doubts which now judges thee to be a Liar; John 8. 44.
and thy God thou praisest to be the Devil, the Father of Lies, who must both
be tormented together.

Qu. 4. Whether they that are guided by that Spirit need study how or what to
say?

Pr. Ans. And in thy Answer thou say, Timothy had that Spirit in a greater
Measure then James Parnel; yet Paul says thus unto him, as in 1 Timothy 4. 13,
14, 15, 16. And thou say, If the Apostles had been put to preach upon a short
Text or Theme, methodically, as by long Practice in the Church is expected from
you, they must often times have studied for it, as thou conceivest; though if you
were left at large, to speak as the Spirit of God moves you, and gives Matter
in, thou hopest, some of you by God's Assistance should speak as to good or
better Purpose, then any who now pretend to the Spirit's Actings.

Rep. Here thou have sufficiently manifested thy Spirit, and thy Ignorance of
the Spirit of God, to any who understand the Things of the Spirit of God; and
all these Scriptures which thou have brought concerning Timothy, does not at
all prove that he that is guided by the Spirit of God, need study how or what
to preach: But Paul exhorted Timothy to the Gift that was in him, which was
given him by, or for Prophecy; for in so doing, he should save himself, and
those that heard him, which you never do by the Fruit of your Study, but rather
destroy them, witness the Fruits of your Ministry these many Years in this
Nation, who have wrought no better Reformation among your Hearers; and also
this Scripture does not at all prove that Paul bad Timothy study old Authors,
and Heathenish Commentators, as you do; neither to Study Arts and Sciences, as
you do, who with your Philosophy and vain Deceit, Col. 2. 8.
do spoil the People; for thou have manifested thy self to be altogether
ignorant of the Spirit of God, who by thy own Conceivings judge the Spirit of
God to be insufficient to instruct and teach the Apostles what to speak at all
Times, without Study, when as Christ himself exhorts them, to take no Thought
what to speak, for it should be given them in the very same Hour; for says he,
It is not you that speak, Mat. 10. 19, 20.
but the Spirit of your father that speaks in you (which Spirit speaks not
without Method, which Spirit you Teachers of the Church of England are great
Strangers to, who think that the Spirit of God can be limited to a Text or a
Theme, as thou confessest you are; but thou Liar, where is now thy infallible
Spirit, who thus speak thy own Conceivings? And therefore be ashamed
hence-forward to pretend to an Infallible Spirit, who have here so openly
manifested thy Ignorance of it and its Movings, so that if thou wast left at
large to speak from that Spirit in thee, and wast shut out of thy Library, and
from any Text or Writing, thou would plainly manifest thy self to be one of
the dumb Dogs that could not bark, 2 Pet. 3.
which Isaiah, from the Spirit of the Lord, declared against, without Study:
For I do believe, that if thou and the rest of the National Teachers, whom thou
confessest, are tied to a Text or Theme, could tell how to please the People,
and get Gain without studying or speaking from a Text, you would for the Credit
of your Cause (as thou say) for I know nothing that ties you to it, but your
own Covetous Ends, to make a Gain of these Scriptures, and to deceive the
Ignorant with feigned Words, Isa. 5. 6.
whom Peter without Study foretold of; and therefore, thou Hypocrite, pretend
no more to an infallible Spirit, but with the rest of thy Brethren, confess
thou art void of it, as many of them have done; for in such Pretenses thou art
but the greater Deceiver, and thy Folly does the more appear.

Qu. 5. Whether is it as lawful now for Tradesmen, Shepherds or Plowmen to
preach, if they be led by the Spirit of God, as those that spoke forth the
Scripture?

Pr. Ans. And in thy Answer thou say, If this was wholly granted, James
Parnel cannot claim any Interest therein, as thou conceivest (for thou say)
he is neither Tradesman, Plowman, nor Shepherd, nor will take any Course to
maintain himself by this Labor; for he has been tried.

But herein James Parnel can plainly tell thee, thou art a Liar; for he
followed a Trade with his Father, until the Lord by his Spirit called him from
it, into his own Word; and so I obeyed the Word of the Lord, and left my Father
with his Trade, as James and John did their Father in the Ship; For he that
will not forsake Father and Mother, Lands and Livings: Wife and Children, and
all for Christ's sake, is not worthy of him; in which Work neither thou nor any
other can tax me for Idleness; but I believe my Labor and Diligence in the
same is more offensive to you Deceivers, then if I had been Idle: But he that
would call me from this Work that I am set about, into the Work of Man, I
should answer him, God must be served before Man; for if it had not been the
Will of God to call me forth into his Work, I should still have served my
Earthly Father, sooner then any other Man, notwithstanding the Evil Thoughts
and Conceivings of such like as thee, who art given up to believe Lies, and
tell Lies; but where is now thy infallible Spirit, who speak by thy own
Conceivings, and thus the Thoughts of thy Heart deceive thee: And as for my
Maintenance, I need not a Law, to compel it as thou do; neither am chargeable
to the World, as thou art, who by a Law of Man take nigh three hundred Pound
by the Year of them; therefore in this thou might have laid thy Hand upon the
Mouth; for thou and hundreds more of thy Brethren never followed any honest
Calling, whereby to get an honest Livelihood, without being chargeable to the
World, but were from your Youths brought up at Babylon's Schools, learning her
Witchcraft and Sorcery, thereby to deceive the Nations, and through
Covetousness with feigned Words make Merchandise of them, which you now spare
not.

Pr. Ans. And secondly, thou grantst, That if Men be made of God spiritual,
whether Shepherds or Plowmen first, they may teach: But thirdly, thou say,
every Man that has the Spirit in some Measure, does not attain to that Height,
Growth and Degree that they did, who gave forth the Scriptures, and therefore
may not as lawfuly nor as infallibly teach as they did; and thou say, Nor
can thou discern clearly, that the best amongst them called Quakers, have yet
reached that Degree or Dispensation of the Spirit: And after much dissembling
Speeches, thou manifests thy light and frothy Spirit, still despising me
because of my Youth, but thy Words are not worth mentioning.

And thus when thou openest thy Mouth concerning the Spirit, thou manifests thy
Folly and Ignorance of the Spirit, so that a Babe may comprehend thee, and tell
thee of thy Folly: And when thou think of thy Beard or Age (as thou say)
Confusion of Face may cover thee; For though every one that has the Spirit in
some Measure, does not attain to that Height, Growth and Degree that they did,
who gave forth the Scripture, yet it does not follow that none do attain to
that Height Growth and Degree; and they that have attained to the same Spirit
in a Measure, and by the same Spirit are moved and called forth, may as
lawfully and as infallibly teach as they did (in their Measures) for the same
Spirit is infallible in the least Measure, and its call is lawful; and thus
thou show, thou wast never called nor^led by it, who art so ignorant of it;
and as here also does further appear, in that thou confessest, Thou discernest
not the People called Quakers; and therefore are blind, and from thee the
Secrets of God are hid; and it does not follow, that they are ever the less
spiritual, but rather more (because thou can not discern them) who pretend'st
thy self a spiritual Man: And thus they are attained to that Degree, they can
discern thee to be a Blind Guide, and Deceiver of the World; and therefore is
thy spirit the more against them, for all thy Flattering and Dissembling
Speeches from thy hypocritical Heart, who bendest thy Tongue like a Bow against
them, uttering forth Lies in Hypocrisy, and with thy scornful spirit
Reproachest me with Lies: but it was thy Generation that Quaked for Fear of the
Downfall of their Kingdom, and therefore persecuted me, and imprisoned me; yet
their Fear did not overtake me; for, I was made as willing to Suffer, as they
were to Afflict, as knowing it was for his Cause, who will make you all to
Quake and Tremble who lift up your Heels against him. And as thou comparest
Cambridge to Jericho, so the Curse of Jericho shall come upon it, for its
Whoredom, and Sorceries, and Stiff-neckedness against the Lord and his
Anointed. And though thou thus Scornest me and Despisest me, because of my
Youth, yet it is because thou know not the Scripture, nor the Power of God.

Qu. 6. Whether any are the Ministers or Messengers of Christ, but those that
are guided by his Spirit, and abide in his Doctrine, as the Holy Men of God
were in Scripture, and whether the Wind does now blow where it lists?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer to the first Part, thou grantest, That none are
the True Ministers and Messengers of Christ, but those that are in some measure
guided by his Spirit, and abide in his Doctrine. But secondly ( thou say)
Men may think, that they have that Spirit, and yet be led by the Lying Spirit,
as Zedekiah, who smote Michaiah, was, 1 Kings 22. 24.

Rep. Herein thou markest out thy self for a Deceiver, who pretendest to the
Spirit, and it is the Lying Spirit, as is before proved; and so art shut ont
from the Ministers and Messengers of Christ, who art not guided by his Spirit,
and therefore abidest not in his Doctrine, as is before proved by thy Ignorance
of the True Spirit: And therefore thou, and such False Prophets as thou, thus
smite at and persecute us, that are called Quakers, because the Lord is pleased
to bestow his Spirit upon us, whereby we are able to declare your Deceit, and
manifest your Lying Spirits, who have professed your selves the Ministers of
Christ, yet Strangers to his Spirit, and Opposers of his Truth, like Jannes and
Jambres, who are Men of corrupt Minds, and Reprobates concerning the Faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8.

Pr. Answ. And to the second Part of the Query, thou say, That the Wiud
blows where it lists, if it be not stopped; yet are there many false Winds,
which blow likewise from a Deceitful Spirit; which to prove, thou quotest
Ephesians. 4. 14. That we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro with
every Wind of Doctrine; and say, Mind this, James.

Rep. This I do mind, and still see how thou markest out thy self with thy
Deceitful Spirit; for, if the Wind does blow where it lists, which thou
acknowledgest; then what is that in you professed Ministers, which goes about
to stop it with Gainsaying and Persecution, and would limit the Spirit of God
unto a Text or Theme, from which you with your deceitful spirits do raise Uses,
Points, Trials and Motives, etc. whereby many poor Creatures are tossed to and
fro, and carried about with your airy spirits, with the Slight and cunning
Craftiness of your Brains, whereby you study to deceive, as thou may read in
the latter^end of the Verse which thou have quoted, Ephesians. 4. 14, which here
shall stand against thee: And so, many are the Children which are tossed to and
fro by you, although they have both Beards and Age (as thou say) yea, some
are Thirty, some Forty, some Fifty, some Sixty, yea, Eighty, and never yet come
to the Knowledge of the Truth; and thus with Feigned Words, through
Covetousness, you make merchandise of the People, beguiling Unstable Souls: But
think not, that all you False Prophets, with the Beast that upholds you, can
stop or quench this Spirit, which now blows where it lists; for, with all
the Slight and Craftiness that you can use, you shall be made to fall before
it, and the Fruits of your Labors shall be given you.

Qu. 7. Whether thou will own Immediate Revelation now? yea or nay.

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou say, The Apostle teaches you to pray for
the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the Acknowledgment of God: Which to
prove, thou quotest Ephesians. 1. 17. but say, There are many False Lights and
Delusions of Satan, who too often transforms himself as an Angel of Light, 2
Cor. 11. 14. which ( thou say) are entertained by unwary men for the
Illuminations and Revelations of God's Spirit, as appears in Zedekiah
aforesaid; which to prove, thou quotest Ezekiel. 13. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.

Rep. Here again thou have marked out thy self, and also belyest the Apostle;
for that Scripture in Ephesians. 1. 17. only makes mention how the Apostle prayed
for the Ephesi^ns that believed; but it does not at all prove that the Apostle
taught you that are of the World to pray; For, the Prayers of the Wicked are
Abominable; and the Apostle would not teach such to pray. Prove. 15. 8.
And though in thy Answer, the substance of my Query is confessed; yet it does
not serve to prove that thou do witness it in thy self, or own it where it is
possessed; who would bar it from Youth, and limit it to Time and Age, and so
show thy Ignorance of it, and that by the False Lights and Delusions of
Satan thou art deceived, who in thee rules as an Angel of Light: And so, thou
art one of those unwary men, who take a Lying Spirit for an Infallible
Spirit, as is both here and often before proved; who art found in Zedekiah's
steps, and so art one of those False Prophets which the Prophet speaks of, who
say, The Lord says, when he never spoak to thee, as is before proved. And
how long have you professed Ministers of this Nation fed the People with
Expectations and Hopes, That you would confirm what you have spoaken unto them,
which is not yet come to pass, neither likely; and thus you have deceived them
by your Lying Divinations, for your dishonest Gain: and therefore, for this
Cause God has given you up to strong Delusions, that you should believe a Lie,
that you all might be damned who believe not the Truth now it is come unto you,
but still take Pleasure in Unrighteousness, as in those Scriptures aforesaid,
which thou have quoted against thy self, and so they shall stand.

Qu. 8. What is the Gospel which thou art a Minister of? and whether thy Gospel
be free, and without Charge?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say to the first Part, That the Gospel
which thou preachest, is the same which Christ and his Apostles taught, which (
thou say) is summarily contained in these four Verses, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13,
14. wherein the Apostle speaks of the Grace of God to be their Teacher, to deny
all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Justly and Godly in
this present World, etc. And to the second Part, thou say, The Apostles
Gospel was not every way without Charge; which to prove, thou quotest 2 Cor.
11. 8. And again, thou say, Nor has Christ, or any of his Apostles, imposed
it upon you, that the Gospel should be altogether without Charge unto them
which have it taught; which to prove, thou quotest Romans 15. 27. And again, thou
say, Nor is James Parnel's Gospel, be it Right or Wrong, without Charge: If
he does not take more then it is worth, if duly examined, it is well.

Rep. Thy Spirit is much against James Parnel, as Zedekiah's was against
Michaiah; yet here he can prove thee to be a Liar, and not only against him,
John 1. 29.
but of his Lord also; and therefore, if thou belyest the Lord, how much more
the Servant? For, Christ Jesus, the Lamb of God, was the Gospel which the
Apostles preached, which was free, and not chargeable to any, th^ugh he was and
is a Burdensome Stone to them that believe not in him; yet not Chargeable. And
therefore, thou Blasphemer, how dare thou to open thy Mouth thus against the
Lord and his Anointed, who are still in thy Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, who
art pleading for the Earth, and art a Stranger to the Free Grace of God; and
therefore, these Verses, which thou have set down, shall stand to witness
against thee, which thou say contains the Gospel which thou preachest: But
the Apostles Gospel could not be contained in Paper and Ink; for the Heavens
could not contain him; for, He ascended far above all Heavens, that he might
fill all things. And also, of thy Gospel thou make a Trade and a Gain, being
many Years at an University, as thou call it, to learn to preach it; all
which the Apostles did not: and so thou bring another Gospel, and so art not
to be Received, but held as Accursed, as thou art, who art not ashamed to
presume to say, Thy Gospel is the same with the Apostles; and thou do here
yield thy Gospel to be chargeable; but this Scripture in 2 Cor 11. 8. does not
at all prove the Apostles to be chargeable, who says, He took Wages of other
Churches to do them Service; Gal. 1* 9.
for it was but for his Necessities; and it was freely communicated to him, and
therefore no Charge: But now, you professed Ministers, instead of robbing other
Churches, you rob and oppress the World, Ruling over them by a Law, with Force
and Cruelty; for the which you have no Scripture-Rule, but amongst the False
Shepherds. But whom do you spare, whether you do them Service or nay, if you
can but get it either by Fair Means or Foul? And therefore in this thou, before
many others, might well have laid thy Hand upon thy Mouth. For, whereas the
Apostle there took some Necessaries, which were freely communicated to him by
the Churches, thou take nigh Three Hundred Pounds by the Year of the World,
by a Law of Man, and none wilt spare who come within thy Bounds, whether thou
do them Service or nay. And that Christ, or any of his Apostles, have not
imposed it upon you, that the Gospel should be altogether without Charge, it is
true; for they never entrusted you with it, though for Lucre sake you have run,
though he never sent you, and speak a Divination of your Brain, but not from
the Mouth of the Lord, and so profit not the People at all; but like Ravening
Wolves, make a Prey upon them; but your End shall be according to your Works.
But they that are entrusted with the Ministry of the Gospel, have this Charge
imposed upon them, As they have received Freely, Freely to give: The Apostle
Paul also shows the same Example, whose Care was, to make the Gospel Free,
and without Charge; and said, Woe unto him, if he preached not the Gospel; and
therefore, because he would not make the Gospel Chargeable, he took Necessaries
of some, and spared others; and this was Wisdom (which you Earthworms are void
of) and thus, he that is taught in the Word, may communicate to him that
teaches in all Good Things, and yet without Charge* he that can receive it let
him: The Workman is worthy of his Meat. And in that thou taxest James Parnel;
he has not been chargeable to thee, nor to thy Generation, neither does any of
him complain, though thou judge him according to thy own corrupt Heart; yet
the Answer of the Just Witness in my Conscience shall be for me, before the
Righteous Judge of all Hearts, when you Hirelings and False Prophets shall with
the Mountains to cover you, and the Rocks to fall upon you, and hide you from
his Presence, who will give you your Reward in the Lake that burns, with the
Beast that now upholds you in this your Wickedness.

Qu. 9. Whether thou do hold up the First Priesthood, that took Tithes; or
the second Priesthood, that took No Tithes; and which thou do deny, seeing
thou take Tithes?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou say, Melchizedeck, whose Priesthood was
the First Priesthood, took Tithes; and the Levitical Priesthood, which was the
second, and not the first, took Tithes also: so that ( thou say) there is no
Priesthood, mentioned in the Scripture, that took no Tithes. Then thou
queriest, How thou or any do deny either of those Priesthoods by taking
Tithes? which to prove, thou quotest Genesis 14. 20. Hebr. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.

Rep. Hear, thou Serpent! Although thou thus twinest about to cover and shelter
thy Deceit under other Wings, it will not at all serve to prove, that thereby
thou do not deny Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, who is the Everlasting High
Priest forever, after the Order of Melchizedeck, which is the Unchangeable
Priesthood, the End of the Changeable, which took Tithes, and so the End of
Tithes, as is proved by that Scripture which thou have quoted, Hebr. 7. and
chap. 8. 1. wherein the Apostle speaks how Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedeck
of the Spoils which he got in the War, which was a Free Gift, without either
Law or Compulsion: neither did stand for a Law or Rule to the Generations
following, until the Law was given to Israel after the Flesh, and the
Changeable Priesthood established; which, I say, was the First Priesthood, to
which Tithes were due; for it was so the Command of God, that the Tithes should
be paid unto the Changeable Priesthood; and they were to have a Storehouse,
wherein the Tithes were to be put; and the Widows, and the Fatherless, and the
Strangers were to come, and be filled within their Gates, that there should not
be a Beggar in Israel: Which Statute is now rejected by you, who now so gape
for Tithes; for ye, instead of doing this, do Grind the Faces of the Poor, and
Oppress the Widows, the Fatherless and the Strangers, if they do come within
your Bounds, and so make Beggars rather then otherwise: So that if you profess
Tithes by this Law, it will witness against you; and also, in so doing you deny
Christ Jesus come in the Flesh, who, when he was offered up, was the
Everlasting Offering, and the Everlasting High Priest over the Household of God;
and so the Fulfilling and the End of the Changeable, who took Tithes by a
Command: And so, says the Apostle, the Priesthood being Changed, there must of
Necessity be a Change of the Law; and so the Command was disannulled, and
Tithes ended; for, says the Apostle, Hebr. 8. 1. Now, of the things that we
have been speaking, this is the sum, We have such an High Priest, that is set
on the Right Hand of the Throne, etc. Now, Tithes were one thing, Here thy 6th
Query is answered.
and the Priesthood was another thing, and the Law (by which they both were
upheld) was another thing, of which the Apostle had been speaking, of which he
says, This is the Sum, Christ Jesus, the High Priest, that is set on the Right
Hand of the Throne; and so the Fulfilling and the End of these things
beforementioned, of which Tithes is one: so, by this New Covenant he has made
the First Old; now, that which decays or waxes old, is ready to vanish away:
Now, mark then, which Priesthood the Apostle here accounts first, because thou
accusest me, that I know not which was the first, and which was the last: But
by this it is proved, that you that now so gape for Tithes under the Profession
of the Gospel, are razed out from Melchizedeck, who once took Tithes, only of
the Spoil which was taken in the War, which was a Free Gift unto him (which now
you have not) and also are raized from the Changeable Priesthood, which was the
first to which Tithes were due, by a Command for its time; and also, do deny
Christ come in the Flesh, who is the End and Fulfilling of those things, which,
without Command, for Lucre sake, you now uphold and cry up; and so are found
only the Ministers of Antichrist, who Oppose the True Christ (where he is
witnessed and heldforth) yet under a Profession of his Name; therefore he will
profess unto you Workers of Iniquity that he knows you not, when you knock, and
are not able to enter.

Qu. 10. Where is thy Rule in the Scripture, for the Ministers of the Gospel to
take Tithes?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou much endeavourest to shelter and cover thy
self by the Scripture; but it will not hide thee, nor stand for thee, to prove
that the Ministers of the Gospel ever took TITHES, or that unto them Tithes
belonged, as any who reads thy Answer with Understanding, may see, and also
see thy Shufflings, who runn'st into the Old Covenant to maintain Tithes due to
the Ministers of the New Covenant, which is the End of the Old, as in my last
Reply is plainly proved, and thou out of both to be shut; and therefore thou
say, It is sufficient for thee, and other Ministers of the Gospel, that
there is no Commandment in the Gospel against the taking of Tithes, which (thou
say) we must produce, ere we can make the thing unlawful.

Rep. Now, all People may consider how they have been blinded and deceived by
you professed Ministers of the Gospel in this Nation, w^o upon such slender
Grounds as these, have and do take the Tenth of the Increase of the Fruits of
the Peoples Labors, who many of them themselves do rent and hire what they
have, whereby you have and do live at Ease, in Pride, Idleness and Fullness,
sporting in the Day time, and living in Pleasures and Wantonness upon the
Earth, contrary to any Rule or Example in the Scripture, from the Ministers of
the Gospel; and therefore this your Ground and Foundation which thou have here
laid besides the Scripture, to uphold Tithes contrary to the Scripture, will
not stand, and therefore your Building must fall; for although there were no
Command in the Gospel against the taking of Tithes, yet it does not prove, that
the Ministers of the Gospel are to take Tithes, being it was never allotted
them; but that by the Gospel Tithes are disannulled, and the Priesthood
changed, and the Law by which they both were established, is fulfilled and done
away, is clear by the Scripture, and therefore unlawful now for any to practice
without a Command from God, as before is proved in my last Reply, and thou to
be a Liar, who say, I could not prove it by clear Scripture, that Christ or
his Apostles have taken away that Maintenance; and therefore that Scripture
which thou have quoted in M^t. 23. 23. shall stand and witness against thee;
for when Christ spoak, that was before he was offered up, and then the Law of
Tithes was not yet fulfilled, and therefore not disanull'd; and therefore
strictly to be observed, until Christ, the Everlasting Sacrifice was offered
up; and then the Apostles said, The Priesthood being changed, there must of
Necessity be a Change of the Law, and so Tithes ended, as before is proved, and
therefore not for the Ministers of the Gospel to take them as their
Maintenance; and that Scripture which thou have quoted in 1 Cor. 9. shall stand
and witness against thee; for the whole Chapter does not at all prove Tithes
due to the Ministers of the Gospel, as any who read the Chapter with Honesty
will witness; for it does not at all mention Tithes, but only speaks of the
Apostles Power, that as they had planted Vineyards, so they might eat of the
Fruit thereof, and as they preached the Gospel, so they might live of the
Gospel; and this the Apostle writ to those, whom he sa^d, were the Seals of his
Ministry; but where are the Seals of your Ministry? are they not the World who
lie in Wickedness? where is the Vineyard that ye have been planting these many
Years? Is it not still full of Briars and Thorns, and Weeds, and wild Plants,
which bring forth no Fruit, but cumber the Ground? But keep in your own
Vineyards, and rob not others, and then you will not be such Thieves as you
are, but it will make you plant better, or else to fall to some other Trade;
and the Apostles Power was not of Man, nor by Man, being he was not set up by
Man; but yours is of Man, and by a Law of Man, by whom you are set up, and by
whom you stand, as here in thy Answer thou have confessed; and yet the Apostle
refused to use this Power, and yet said, Necessity was laid upon him to preach
the Gospel; but what Power do you refuse, be it right or wrong? and if that
Earthly Power should be taken from you, which you have, what would become of
your Gospel? Nay, some of you have said, that down with the Maintenance, and
down with the Ministry; and therefore forever stop thy Mouth from taking the
Apostle's Words for a Cloak for thy Covetousness, who himself cast out such
from the Ministry, 1 Timothy 3. and therefore thou knewst, that none of these
Scriptures would serve for thy Ends and therefore thou would shelter thy self
under the Powers of the Earth, by whom thou art set up, whom thou say, did
give to the Ministers of the Gospel in this Nation, and elsewhere, and to their
Successors forever, the Tenth of all their Grounds, and caused them to be
settled by a Law; and thou ask, If this was not a lawful and pious Gift, and
suitable to what was paid in the Old Testament.

Rep. This I do deny to be lawful, but altogether unlawful; for that has made
so many pretended Ministers as there are, who for Greediness of the Gain and
Pleasure, Thy 6th ^uery is answered in this Reply.
have pretended to the Things which you never had in you, neither know an^
Thing of them, but by others Declarations, which for your own Ends you have
wrested to your own Destruction and others, and so through your Philosophy and
vain Deceit have spoiled the People, and by feigned Words through Covetousness,
have made Merchandise of them, and so have deluded and led in Blindness the
People these many Years, only for your own Carnal Ends; and that this is
suitable to what was paid in the old Testament, I also do deny (and if it was,
what is that to you? that which was given in the Old Testament is disanuled by
the New, and therefore no Rule for you) and also that was given by the Lord to
the Levites, who had no other Inheritance in the Land, and the Lord gave that
which was his own, and he gave a strict Command that it should be paid, which
stood in Force so long as the Priesthood endured, as is proved by the
Scriptures, which thou thy self have quoted, which shall here stand against thy
self, Levit. 27. 30, 31, 32. and Numb. 18. 24. But the Lord did not give it
since to the professed Ministers of England; but thou say, Man gave it, and
therefore gave that which was none of their own; for it is unjust for any
Prince or Ruler, to give away the Labor or Inheritance of his Subjects unto
them that never labored for it, and unto these, who under Pretense of the
Gospel do delude and beguile the Souls of his Subjects, for their dishonest
Gain, as you professed Ministers of England do; and therefore they whose Eyes
are opened do see you, and therefore account it a Sin unto God to uphold you,
or put into your Mouths, whom the Lord is against, and therefore you even
prepare War against them; and it is neither pious nor lawful for any Prince or
Governor, to force any of his Subjects by a Law, contrary to their
Consciences: And also the Inheritance of the Levites was stated by a Law of
God, and yours by a Law of Man; and they were ordained and set up by God, but
you by Man, by whom you are upheld and maintained contrary to Scripture; so
they came by the Will of God, and you by the Will of Man; and they were
maintained by the Will of God, and you by the Will of Man; and they were of God
(as all his true Ministers are now) and you are of Man (as all the rest false
Prophets and false Ministers ever were) so that there is much Difference
betwixt you and them, and betwixt the Interest that they had in Tithes, and the
Interest that you now claim; so that they that robbed them, robbed God, as in
the Scripture which thou have quoted, Mal. 3. 8. which shall stand against
thee: And if the Ground of your Interest was well searched, it would be found,
that you have it from the Pope and his Upholders, whose Supremacy your selves
deny in Words to blind the World, but in Practice you own it, and claim it: And
again, if this which thou speak of, was given to the Ministers of the
Gospel, then you that are Hirelings and the Ministers of Antichrist, have no
Right nor Title in it; and the Ministers of the Gospel, they also do deny it,
whose Care is to make the Gospel, free, and without Charge, and therefore
cannot oppress any; neither will their Consciences serve them to take the
Increase of others Labors, by Law or Compulsion; and therefore it is most
just, that the Labourer, should in Peace enjoy the Fruits of his Labors, and
such idle Drones as you (who neither labor for God, nor for the Good of Man;
but are the Destroyers both of Body and Soul) should not eat, according to the
Apostle's Rule in 2 These. 3. 10. And thus unto it you have no legal nor civil
Claim (as thou call it) but your Birthright is as a Mess of Pottage; neither
is your Claim and Title as lawful as a Son's is to the Inheritance of his
Father (as thou say) but you climb up another Way, and so are Thieves and
Robbers, John 10. 1.

Qu 11. Whether ever the Ministers of Christ had, or stood in need of an
outw^rd Law, to compel People to maintain them, as thou, and such as thou now
have and do.

Pr. Ans. And in thy Answer thou confessest, That those tha^ are Righteous or
truly spiritual, need no such compulsive Law to force them; for they are a Law
unto themselves; but thou say, That the greatest Part of the Professors in
the visible Church, always were, and yet are Earthly-minded, and neither do
nor can rig^tly value Spirtiual and Heavenly Things.

Rep. But in all thy pretended Answer, thou do not at all resolve the
Substance of my Query, but rather in thy Silence in it, do yield thy self out
of the Practice of the Apostles; and by thy own Confession it is manifest, that
neither you professed Ministers nor your Auditors are Righteous, nor truly
Spiritual; for you stand in need of a compulsive Law to force People to
maintain you, and the People stand in need of a compulsive Law, to force them
to maintain you, which thou confessest the Righteous need not: But though you
have a compulsive Law, the Righteous will not maintain you; and thus out of thy
own Mouth thou art judged, and the rest of thy Brethren, to be the false
Prophets, who profit not the People at all: And again, thy own Confession
proves it, that the greatest Part of your Church is Earthly-minded, and no
Wonder, while the Teachers themselves are so; and thus your Church is the
Synagogue of Satan, which is built up of such Professors; and therefore blush
and be ashamed of your Ministry. Oh! what have you been doing these many Years?
who have wrought no better Reformation; and herein your show your Ministry to
be Earthly, who have no better Seals then Earthly-minded Professors, who stand
in need of a Law to compel them to maintain you; and this is as true a Saying
as any thou have in thy Book, that the greatest Part of the Professors in your
Church are Earthly-minded; but in that thou accusest the Church in the Apostles
Days to be the same, thou art a Liar and a false Accuser, neither can bring
any Proof in the Scripture to maintain what thou say but it will witness
against thee; for the Mul^itude that believed were of one Heart and one Soul,
so tha^ they sold their Possessions and laid it at the Apostles Feet, and it
was distributed to every one, according as they had need; the Ministry took
such Place in them: and whereas there were two found that were Earthly-minded,
yet there needed not a Law of Man to compel them: And the Law of Man also was
against the Apostles, as it is against these now that walk in the same Steps,
yet they do not need a Law of Man to force a Maintenance for them from Worldly
or Earthly-minded Professors, as the false Prophets and Deceivers always did,
who were always sheltered and upheld by the Will of Man, because they could
wink at their Iniquity, and cry Peace to them, as thou here do, because they
put into thy Mouth; Ezekiel. 22. 22, 28.
therefore thou flatterest them, Mat. 6. 25.
and daubest them up, but it is with untempered Mortar: Mat. 12. 11, 12, 13, 14.
But the Commission which Christ gave to his Ministers, was, Take no Thought,
but into whatsoever City or Place they entered, they were to enquire who were
worthy, and if they were not willingly received, they were to shake off the
Dust of their Feet, and so leave them; but is it not well known, that all your
Care is, to take Thought where to get a fat Living, instead of inquiring who is
worthy* and there if you have but Authority from man, you will have it, whether
they receive you, yea or nay; so with Shame might thou bring any Example from
the Apostles, or the Church in their Days, who were men that coveted no man's
Silver, nor Gold, (...) Apparel, but had forsaken all for the Gospel's sake:
And many of the Church suffered the spoiling of their Goods willingly by your
Forefathers, the Chief Priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees, who were their
Persecutors, Acts 20. 33.
as you are now of them, Heb. 10. 34.
who the Gospel do own (and your Professors also) who, as thou say do not
rightly value Spiritual Things, such as are holden forth by the true Ministers
and Messengers of God (neither can) because, by such Blind Guides as thou art,
they are kept in Blindness and Darkness, lest their Eyes should be opened, and
they come to see you, and decline from you, who were never tied to you by any
Command of God; and therefore you are glad to make use of a Law of Man,
contrary to the Practice of Christ and his Apostles.

And as for the express Provision, which the Lord made for his Ministers and
Messengers in the New Testament.

I Reply, When Christ gave them their Commission, he said also, In whatsoever
House they entered, they were to eat such as was set before them: For, says
he, the Workman is worthy of his Meat: And this is all the express Provision
that thou can find allotted to them in the New Testament; and this was
without any Law of Man too; for, there was no need of any: for, if they did not
Willingly Receive them, they were not to Eat with them, but to shake off the
Dust of their Feet against them; and that was all the Law they were to take
against such, which were Earthly-minded, and Regardless of them: But this will
not serve you, because your selves are Earthly-minded, and therefore will have
it of every one, whether they receive you, yea or nay, or else you have a Law
of Man to take Tribble Damage: And, instead of eating such as they will set
before you, you will have the Tenth Part of what they have by Compulsion, you
are such Devouring Greedy Wolves. And what was before allotted to the Priests
in the Old Testament, is before sufficiently proved to be nothing concerning
you, who profess your selves Ministers of the New Testament.

And as for those Scriptures which thou quotest in 2 Chronicles. 31. 5, 6, etc. are
also as nothing to my Query, but are before answered in my last Reply; but yet
these shall stand to witness against thee to be a Liar: For, let any who reads
these Verses see, if there the Israelites did show any Earthly-mindedness, or
stood in need of a Law to compel them, after they knew the King's Mind (as thou
accusest them) And thus, thou can find nothing, either in the Old or New
Testament, that will cover thy Deceit, but altogether witness against thee; and
therefore again thou fleest into thy old Shelter, which is the Will of Man, by
which thou art set up and upheld, therefore a False Prophet and a Deceiver, who
abidest not in the Doctrine of Christ: And it is no Pious nor Just Act for
them, as I said before, to take away the Fruits of their Subjects Labors by a
Compulsive Law, to give unto such Earth worms as thee, who care not how you get
it, so you get, as thy own Mouth confesses; for thou say, It is a
Competent, though not a Liberal Maintenance; and yet thou can take it, and
plead for it too, yea, and of Worldly-minded People, which is altogether
contrary to the Apostles Practice; and so thou fulfillest the words which
before I have spoaken of thee: And whosoever deny you of Tithes, do not
Unjustly detain them (as thou say they do) being you have no Right to them
by any Law or Command from God, or Example in the Scripture, as before is
proved; but only claim a Title by the unjust Supremacy of the Pope, by which
your Forefathers, the Persecuting Bishops, were upheld; and therefore, we,
called Quakers, do teach People them, you to deny, which is not contrary to the
Practice of Christ or his Apostles (as thou accusest us) for, says Christ,
Mat. 7. 15, 16.
Beware of False Prophets, that appear in Sheep's Clothing, but inwardly
Ravening Wolves: By their Fruits they are known, and by which sufficiently you
are here marked out; and the Apostles bid, From such turn away* as in 2 Timothy 3.
5. And again, the Apostle John forbids to receive such as abide not in the
Doctrine of Christ, or to bid them Good Speed, 2 John 9, 10. And here both
Christ and his Apostles sufficiently taught People to deny you; and here thou
art proved a Liar, who thus falsely accusest us, called Quakers, in this to act
contrary to the Practice of Christ or his Apostles: and so, here thou, and the
rest of the professed Ministers of this Nation, are sufficiently manifest, what
you are; so that all men may see your Folly and Deceit, but those who are
blind, and love to have it so; and so the Scripture is fulfilled upon you, Jer.
5. 30, 31.

Qu. 12. Whether ever the Ministers of the Gospel took any Necessaries of the
World, as thou, and such as thou, do all your Tithes and Maintenance? yea or
nay.

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou say, Yea, they have; which to prove, thou
quotest Acts 28. 1, 9. where thou say, Paul took Necessaries of the
Barbarians: yet this not serving thy turn, thou runnest to old Histories, which
thou call Ecclesiastical Records, and say, They f^r One Thousand Five
Hundred Years do testify the same: but yet doubting of this, thou say, as
thou said before, It suffices you, that there is no Law nor Command of God
to the Contrary; nor are Examples (thou say) needful for every thing, as to
prove, that Christ called any Shoemaker or Cobbler to be a Prophet.

Rep. But here again thou have marked out thy self to be a False Prophet, who
runnest, and the Lord never sent thee, and therefore thou ^eachest for Doctrine
the Traditions of Men, for the which thou have no Scripture, and therefore
runnest to Old Stories, to which I am not to give any Credit, be they never so
old, being they are not according to Scripture (and therefore not
Ecclesiastical) for, the Oldness of the thing does not make it Truth, though
you have long thereby deceived the Ignorant.

And as for that Scripture, which thou quotest in Acts 28. 1, 9. then Paul was
a Prisoner, and he and the Soldiers that kept him, and the rest of the People,
were driven there by Storm upon the Sea, so that in that Case the Barbarians
took Pity of them, and received them; but there were many besides Paul and the
Centurion, to whom Paul was committed, who were to take Care of him: and also,
that which the Barbarians did, was Freely, and that which Nature bound them to,
being they were in that Strait, which was done to many besides Paul, who were
Heathens: So that this does not at all stand for thee, who art in thy own
Country, and yet take all thy Tithes and Maintenance of the World by
Compulsion; neither will this Excuse serve to shelter you Hirelings and
Deceivers, to say, That there is no Law nor Command of God to the Contrary;
for, it is False; for, Christ commands his Ministers expressly, Freely to give,
as Freely they had received; and also charged them, Where they were not Freely
Received, to depart thence, shaking off the Dust of their Feet, as before is
proved. And also, Oppression the Law of God is against; and to take the Tenth,
or Increase of the Fruits of the Peoples Labors, is a sore and great
Oppression, which the Land groans under, and therefore a Sin; and yet the Gift
does so blind your Eyes, that you cannot see all this; but think, because there
is no Scripture for you, therefore none against you. And though there needs no
Example so prove any Shoemaker or Cobbler to be a Prophet (as thou confessest,
though in Scorn) for it is a thing that none does, who understands the
Scripture, being there is sufficient Proof, that he called other Tradesmen; yet
there is a Need, that you might find so much as a Scripture Proof or Example
for your Tithes and Maintenance (who profess it to be your Rule) being it is a
great Oppression of the Land; and yet say thou, It does suffice you, that
there is no Law or Command to the Contrary: Therefore this shows your
Avaricious Minds, who are so willing to be blind in this thing; but it will
not, neither does so easily suffice those that are oppressed by You, though You
regard it not, according to the Prophet Ezekiel's words, You seek for the
Fleece, and regard not the Flock, but make a Prey upon the Sheep; and so, with
this stop thy Mouth, and own thy self amongst the False Shepherds and
Hirelings, Eze^. 34. John 10.

Qu. 13. Whether ever they had a Set Maintenance, or so much a Year for
Preaching, as, Forty, Sixty, One Hundred, or Two Hundred Pound, as thou and
such as thou have.

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou can not bring one Scripture for thy Rule,
to prove this your common Practice; but fleest to the Re^ords, that thou say,
are to be found in several Parts of Christendom (as thou call'st it) where I do
not intend to seek for them, to see whether these things be true or no, which
thou speak of them; but, as I said before, will conclude them to be false in
this thing, being the Scripture is altogether against it, so that thou can
not find one Scripture to justify it; but say, if we say, Where do you read
of this in the Scripture? thou answerest as far off again to the same Purpose
still, without any Scripture Proof; and therefore I shall leave it for any
Understanding Reader of thy Book to judge, and see how weak you are, if you had
not a Law of Man to uphold you, who have not one Scripture that will strengthen
the Foundation of your Ministry, which is your Maintenance: Then how have you
deluded the People, to make them believe, that the Scripture is your Rule, when
it is altogether against you? Let the Honest-Hearted judge.

Qu. 14 And whether such be not the Hirelings, which care not for the Sheep?
yea or nay. And whether such be not the Greedy Dogs which the Prophet Isaiah
Freely Declared against, Isa. 56. 11. and make a Prey upon the Sheep, which
Ezekiel declared against, Ezekiel. 34. and are the Ravening Wolves which Jesus
Christ declared against, Mat. 7. 15. and are such as through Covetousness make
Merchandise of the People, which Peter, a Minister of Christ, declared against,
2 Pet. 2. 3. and such as go after the Error of Balaam, for Gifts and Rewards,
which Jude, a Servant of Jesus Christ, cried Woe against, Jude Verse. 11?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, after many Excuses, thou plainly confessest, Thou
can not justify all of your Calling, and therefore thou will answer for thy
self: And First ( thou ^^st) Thou art none of these Hirelings; for he is not an
Hireling which takes the Wages allotted to him for his W^rk; for then thou do
accuse Kings and Governors (...) be Hirelings. who take Tribute and Custom,
yea, and the Apostles, and Christ himself: which to prove, thou quotest 2 Cor.
7. 8. and Luke 8. 23. but thou confessest, That he is one that sets his Heart
upon the Wages only, and delights not in the Work, but is weary of the same,
and longs for the Shadow or Rest; which to prove, thou quotest Job 7. 1, 2, 3.

Rep. Here, thou impudent Liar, for all thy Shuffings and thy Coverings, thou
can not hide thy self, but out of thy own Mouth shall be judged, though thou
here plainly denyest thy Brethren, and think it enough to answer for thy
self, thy Cause is so bad; for, thy Wages is not allotted by God, neither have
thou any Scripture-Rule to prove them (as is before proved) and therefore it
follows, that thy Heart is set upon thy Hire, for which sake thou undertakest
that Work which thou professest; and it is for thy Hire's sake that thou art
not weary of thy Work, or else thou would not own that which is so contrary to
the Scripture: so that thou can not bring one Scripture Proof for this thy
Practice, and that it is thy Hire that thou delightest in, is sufficiently
apparent, by thy thus gaping for it, and seeking to defend it, though
altogether contrary to Scripture. And as for the Work thou and thy Brethren
profess, you are as Idle in it as you can, so that you can but hold up the
World's Custom, and blind the People, that still you may Rule over them by your
Means; and thus it may plainly be seen wherein is your Delight; and so out of
thy own Mouth judge thee to be neither Conscionable nor Faithful, who art not
ashamed thus to seek to justify thy self in thy Deceit, whenas thy own Mouth
confesses, that it is not a Liberal Maintenance, and that thou can take it,
and plead for it: and therefore this Scripture, which thou quotest in Job 7. 2.
shall stand and witness against thee, who, as a Hireling, agreest with the
People for so much a Year, and, as a Hireling, look for thy Wages at the
Year's End; but of thy Work there is no Profit to any: and so with the Shadow
thou deceivest them for Gain, which does so blind thy Eye, that thou think
all are like thee, though they take that which is Freely administered to them
for their Temporal Necessities; which is not an Agreeing with the People for so
much a Year, and to take it by a Law, whether they will agree with you, yea or
nay; which Weapons Christ or his Ministers never made use of: And therefore,
thou Liar, how dare thou to accuse Christ or his Apostles to take Wages for
their Work? Did Christ heal the Sick, or the Diseased, and the Lame, and the
Blind, or Teach the People, for Money or Wages? Oh thou Blasphemer! forever
stop thy Mouth from naming his Holy Name, who do so slander him: Well may
thou accuse and slander his Servants and Messengers, which so impudently do
it to him, who is our Lord and Master. But as for Paying Tribute to Kings and
Governors in their Places; it is allowed of by Scripture, which thine is not;
and they are set about Temporal Affairs, and are the Ordinance of God for that
Purpose, for to Govern and Protect the People in Bodily peace and Quietness;
which if they neglect, will be laid to their Charge: But thou and thy brethren
pretend to Spiritual Affairs, and therefore are to have your Rule and Example
from Christ and his Ministers, who were set about Spiritual Affairs; the which
thou can not, but would creep into any Hole, to hide thy self and thy
Brethren from the Light; but by it are You found out, and seen to be the
Deceivers, who out of the Doctrine of Christ are found, and therefore not to be
Owned nor Received.

Pr. Answ. And Secondly, thou says, Thou art no such Greedy Dog, whatsoever
Foul-mouthed Curs do Bark to the contrary; for ( thou say) thou Contentest
thy self with thy Legal Sallary, which yet ( thou say) is not contrary to
Evangelical ( wherein thou have already been proved a Liar sufficiently.)

Rep. Here thy Foul Mouth thou have opened wide, who accountest the Prophet
Isaiah a Fo^l-mouthed Cur, who this Language first did speak unto the False
Prophets, in whose St ^s thou art found, and therefore unto thee the same
Language belonged, who seek'st for thy Gain from thy Quarters, as they did: And
what has thou else manifested but Greediness of Gain all along? who rather then
thou would yield thy Error in it (though thou could not produce one
Scripture that would stand for it) yet thou runnest to Old Histories and
Records, thereby to maintain it, contrary to Scripture: Therefore with Shame
and Confusion of Face might thou say, Thou Contentest thy self with thy
Legal Sallary, who have nigh 300. Pounds by the Year, and yet thou would have
more, if thou could get it, thou art so Greedy, as may be well understood by
thy Saying; That in former Time, that the Bishops and Pastors had not only a
settled Maintenance of that Value, but of a great deal more, which is an unheard
of Thing in all the Scripture; and therefore thy own Mouth confessest what
greedy Dogs you Priests have been since your Beginning, and yet with the Deceit
of thy Heart thou would still cover; but the Day does make you manifest, to
be such who run, and the Lord never sent you, and therefore you profit not the
People at all: Therefore what is thy Teaching and Warning of the People, which
thou here boasts of, and therefore art found one of the Dreamers, and Studyers,
and Mutterers, who speak a Divination of thy own Brain, and not from the
Mouth of the Lord, and so feedest the People with Wind and Air; therefore
silence thou Deceiver, for going about to excuse thy self from t^ese things as
if thou wast more holy then thy Brethren; for in so doing, thy Lying and
Hypocrisy does but the more appear; and therefore this shall serve to prove
thee a Liar in all the rest of thy Excuses, and it is not Uncharitable nor
Censorious to tell thee so, though thou so accusest me; but a Lie ^n thy Mouth
is no Wonder.

Qu. 15. Whether ever thou labouredst with thy Hands, to make the Gospel free,
and without Charge, as Paul a Minister of the Gospel did.

Pr. Ans. And in thy Answer thou do not at all resolve my Query; but
shufflest to and fro to hide thy self, and excusest thy self by pleading Paul's
Power, in 1 Cor. 9. 6. And say, That Christ your Master did not enjoin you
so to do, which to prove, thou quotest Luke 10. 7. and Deuteronomy 25. 4. and also
pleadest that in 2 Timothy 2. 4. and also pleadest a Liberty by the Councils and
Synods in the Church in former Ages, etc.

Rep. Yet all this does not prove that ever thou labour'dst with thy Hands to
make the Gospel free and without Charge, which any who read these Scriptures
may see, and by thy Silence in the same judge thee guilty, and to be out of the
Apostles Practice; and therefore these Scriptures will witness against thee
(which thou have quoted) for thou art not as Paul and Barnabas were, neither
wast called to the Ministry as they were; neither preachest freely, as they
did; neither labourest with thy Hands, as Paul did, but only make a Trade and
a Gain of the Apostles Words for thy own Ends; and therefore what have thou to
do to mention Christ or his Ministers, who art so plainly found out of their
Practice, or to call Christ thy Master, who art thy self called Master, and so
robbest him of his Honor, and art not in his Doctrine, who says, Be not ye
called Masters) and so art none of his, and therefore have nothing to do with
that Liberty which he has given to his faithful Laborers, whom he himself
has called into his Vineyard: And as for that Scripture in Luke 10. 7. it is
not against Labor, but for Labor before thou can have thy Hire; but thou
would have it, and be maintained in Idleness by others Labors, as the
Clergymen (as thou call them) in England are, who are no Ministers of
Christ, who are called of Men Master, and so are out of his Doctrine, in the
Steps of the Pharisees, whom the Woe is unto; and therefore in this, these
Councils and Synods (as thou call them) in your Church in former Ages, have
acted contrary to Scripture, in ordaining that you should not work, and labor
with your Hands for your selves and your Families, but that you should live in
Pride and Idleness, by the Sweat of others Brows, to be maintained as you are,
which Ordinance is not of God, but of Man, by which you stand: And how have
thou before falsely accused me for not working, though I am not chargeable to
the World, and now thou art striving by Scripture, wresting and false applying,
and all the Ways thou can, for to excuse thy self from laboring with thy
Hands, as the Apostle did, though thou and thy Family are altogether chargeable
to the World; all which Scriptures shall stand against thee; for they all
maintain working before the Benefit of the Work comes to them, be it spiritual
or temporal; for the Ox treads not out the Corn without Labor: But what Corn
have you Clergymen trodden forth? and what spiritual things have you sown? and
what Gospel have you preached these many Years in England? do not the Fruits of
your Ministry condemn you and witness against you, to be such as run, and the
Lord never sent you? and so the Curse follows you, and is upon your Ministry,
and therefore profits not the People at all, but as Drones live upon the
painful Labor of others; yea, though you do not labor with your Hands, yet
who more entangle themselves in the Affairs of this World* then you that call
your selves Clergymen, both by ^aw and cunning Craft, and Deceit, and
Bargaining and Oppressing thereby to make your selves Rich with the thing of
this Life; yea, what Things is there in this Nation to get Riches by (though
never so unbeseeming Spiritual Men) but you have a Hand in it* and therefore
none of those spiritual Soldiers which Paul speaks of in 2 Timothy 2. 4.
therefore silence thou Deceiver for meddling with the Scriptures with thy
Babylonish Language (as Prohibit, Mechanic, Synod and Clergy) which are the
Words of Man's Wisdom, and contrary to the plain Language of the Scripture, out
of which thou art shut, in Babylon, where thou wast bred with thy Clergy (as
thou call them.

Qu. 16. Whether thou do not walk in the Steps of the Scribes and Pharisees,
who art called of Men Master or Doctor, and have the chiefest Seat in the
Synagogue, and uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and Greetings in the Markets,
contrary to the Practice of the Apostle, and so art under the Woe which Christ
pronounced against such, yea or nay?

Pr. Ans. And here thou would shuffle off with Questioning instead of
Answering (and say) What if Christ gave the Name of Master to Nicodemus?
John 3. 10. and Luke the Name of Doctor to Gamaliel? in Acts 5. 34. ( and thou
say) Is it then the giving or taking of these Names, which Christ
forbids, or the arrogant using of them, out of an high or pro^d Spirit that
desires to be Idolized? And thou confessest the Word Rabby signifies Doctor or
Master, which Names ( thou say) were familiarly given* both in the Old and
New Testament, which to prove thou quotest Eccles. 12. 11. Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor.
12. 28.

Rep. The 89 th and 90 th Query are answered in this Reply, and thy 92 d Query
also.
Here thy Blindness does appear, and thou will need no other Proof against thee
but thy own Words, though here thou would go about to slahder Christ and his
Apostles, whom thou art not worthy to name, neither do thou thereby answer my
Query, but would justify that which Christ cried Woe against, and therefore
a Minister of Antichrist art found, to which the Woe belongs; for that
Scripture in Joh, 3. 10. does not prove that Christ called N^codemus Master, as
thou would fain slander him; neither does that, Acts 5. 34. prove, that Luke
gave Gamaliel the Name of Doctor, but in Way of Declaration, what he was
accounted amongst the Jews, as any that read with Understanding may see; yea,
thou thy self can not deny it, but that thou would be glad of any Thing to
shelter thy Deceit; but Christ expressly forbids his to be called Master; and
therefore it is concluded, That you take these Names unto your selves from an
Arrogance and Pride of Spirit, that you might be idolized as is well known how
you swell and are puffed up in Wrath and Rage, if you be not so called by those
you account your Inferiors; or else you would not own it, being Christ has so
expressly forbidden it to his Ministers, and you professi^g your selves to be
his Ministers, and the Word Minister signifies Servant; and P^ul, who was his
Minister said, He made himself Servant unto all, but you would be Masters over
all, 2 Cor. 9. 19.
bearing Rule by your Means, though hired as Servants, yet more Unreasonable
and Unjust; for you will have it of them you do no Work for; and also
whatsoever thou say^st Doctor or Master signifies, Christ has forbidden it;
and therefore in using of it, thou art out of the Doctrine of Christ, and the
Woe is unto thee, and the more for wresting the Scripture to maintain it, and
uphold it which Christ has cried down; and it is well known by them that are
not wilfully blind, that Master or Doctor are Names that are given and taken
amongst you Clergymen (as you call your selves, as Titles of Honor, witness
your Degrees in your Nurseries of Deceit, which you call Universities as first
Bachellor, then from Bachellor to Master of Arts, and from that to Bachellor of
Divinity, and from that to Doctor of Divinity, which highest Title is given to
thee, and therefore it is no Wonder that thou so pleadest for it* but the least
Child of Light will judge these Traditions to be upheld by the Pride and
Arrogance of the Flesh, that would be idolized, but the Old Man must needs
plead for his Life; neither do these Scriptures in Ephesians. 4. 11. and 1 Cor. 12.
28. at all advantage thee; for neither Doctor nor Master is mentioned in these
Scriptures; and thus thou art ignorant of the Letter, then far unfit to be a
Teacher of others, which thou do assume to thy self by the Name of Doctor,
according to thy own Meaning.

Pr. Ans. And as for the chief Seats in the Synagogues, and uppermost Rooms as
Feasts, some ( thou say) that are Worthy, were allowed them by Christ
himself, which to prove, thou quotest Luke 14. 7, 8. etc. M^rk 5. 22. and by
Luke, Acts 13. 15. and Chap. 18. 8. 17. And as for Salutations, they are
allowed, ( thou say) as well in the Marketplaces as any where else.

Rep. This is the truest Word that thou have yet spoaken in one Respect, though
from a false Spirit; for your Heathenish Customs and Salutations are allowed of
no where by the Scripture, neither have thou brought any Proof to the contrary;
and it is also easily discerned, you rather choose them in the Markets, or in
Public, to be seen of Men, that you might be accounted Courteous, and looked
upon for your Breeding* witness your Congying and Bowing, with your Hats off in
Admiration, and Idolizing of one another Persons, wherein you exalt your
selves above the Angel, who would not suffer John to bow unto him, but said, he
was his Fellow Servants; Rev. 22. 8, 9.
therefore let this judge you, and condemn you in these Practices, which by you
are used from an ambitious and inordinate Desire of them, and therefore are the
most unworthy, as thou confessest the Scribes and Pharisees were; and therefore
art out of thy own Mouth judged, although thou would cast it upon the
Quakers, as thou call them; but we can justly clear our selves, and cast it
into thy own Bosom; for we use no such Heathenish Customs, yet we can justly
say with John, We are of God, and the whole World lies in Wickedness, which
thou accountest an exalting of our selves, 1 John 5. 19.
and in that thou belyest Christ and the Scriptures, in saying he allowed these
Things to any (which he cried down) thy Impudency does the more appear, that
thou would not stick to belly us, whom thou call Quakers; for none of these
Scriptures, which thou quotest to uphold the chiefest Seats in the Synagogue
and uppermost Rooms at Feasts, do at all concern the Matter, but only Luke 14.
7, etc. which Christ spoak as a Parable to the Pharisees, who loved the
uppermost Rooms at Feasts, which also may fitly be applied to you now, How thy
9 th Query is answered.
who take the uppermost Room, and think Scorn to take the lowest, which may
easily be discerned by you, with an Impartial Eye, or else you would not own
these Things which Christ declared against to his Ministers, Mat. 20. 25. 26,
27.
and also taught that he that would be the greatest, Jam. 12.
should be the least; and the Apostle forbids all Respect of Persons; and
Christ showed an Example of Humility to his Ministers, when he washed their
Feet, John 13.
and condemned the Pharisees, John 5. 44.
who received Honor one of another, which thou art here pleading for; then if
thou be not in their Steps, let the Understanding judge.

Qu. 17. Wh^t is the Church? and whether it be not a Delusion to the People,
and a Dishonor to Christ, to call a House of Lime and Stone, a Church?

Pr. Ans. And in thine Answer thou pleadest it a Custom in most Ages, and by a
Trope of Figure; but thou confessest the Word Church is first and properly a
Congregation of Saints, or of such as profess so to be, as in 1 Cor. 1. 2. And
in the second Place thou say, This Word is used for a Place where such a
Congregation use to assemble, which to prove, thou quotest Cor. 11. 23. and
Ver. 18. and Chap. 14* 5. 23. compared with Ver, 19. 28. Neither is this any
Delusion to the People ( thou say) nor more Dishonor to God, then to use
this Phrase, the House of God, which to prove, thou quotest Isa. 60. 7. and
Ephesians. 42. 4. Therefore here we seek a Kn^t in a Bulrush, thou say.

Rep, And thus thou Blasphemer valuest thy Blasphemy, covering it with Lies,
that thou might still keep the People in Blindness, who make such a light
small Matter of it, to put a House of Lime and Stone for the Body of Christ,
which is the Church: And thus you have long fed the People in Blindness with
your Vain Customs and Traditions; Col. 2. 24.
and they put you out of your Customs, and you are vexed and troubled, as the
Heathen was at Paul and Silas, and said, They came to turn the World up-side
down: And then, to cover your Blasphemy and Lies, Acts 17. 6.
you have Tropes and Figures, which is the Wisdom of Man to cover Lies; and
thus you Learned Ones make use of your Learning to make Lies in Hypocrisy,
contrary to the Scripture; for the Types and Figures in the Scripture figured
forth something to come: But your Steeple Houses are no Figures of Christ, nor
his Body (which is the Church) And when the Substance is come, of what Use is
the Figure? For, the Temple which God commanded Solomon to build him, which was
called the House of God (where them that feared the Lord worshipped him) was a
Figure of Christ; but when Christ the Substance came, he prophesied of its
Destruction, Mat. 24. And Steven after him declared against it; and by them
that upheld it, was stoned to Death, Acts 7. 47, 48, 49, etc. And Paul declared
against it; and by them that upheld it, was persecuted, Acts 17. 24, 25. Acts
19. 26. 2^. as we are by You now, that uphold Your Idols Temples, that figure
forth nothing but the Imaginations of Man, neither were ever commanded by God
to be built, as Solomon's Temple was, which for its Time was called, The House
of God; but the Prophet Isaiah saw the End of it, when he spoak that in Isa.
66. 1, 2. But that you should call your Popish Houses, The House of God, which
were built by the Papists, and such like, without any Command of God, thou have
no Scripture Proof to maintain it; neither are those fit Examples to bring to
prove it, as the Scholars, and the Schools, and the Jews, and their
Synagogues; What does this at all prove, that you should call Your Idols
Temples as the Body of Christ, which was made of Living Stones, Elect and
Precious? For, the Scripture all along witnesses, That the Church is the Body
of Christ, which is the Saints, as this Scripture does witness, which thou have
quoted, in 1 Cor. 1. 2. but it does not at all prove thy Lie, that the Church
is a Congregation of such as profess to be Saints; for it is more then a
Profession, though with a Profession You have long deluded the People: Yet many
there are that profess Christ in Words, Titus 1. 16.
but in Life deny him, who are no Saints, nor the Church of Christ, though thou
art Blind and see no Difference; yet according to thy own Meaning, You do not
call Your Assemblies, and the Places where your Assemblies meet, all one; for
you call your Meeting Places, Churches; and the People, a Congregation* and so,
here out of thy own Mouth thou art judged: Yet it would be as much Blasphemy,
to call your People a Church, as the Place where they meet a Church: For, it is
well known, That all manner of Unrighteous Persons meet there, as thou
confessest the greatest Part of the Professors are Earthly-minded, as in thy
Answer to my Eleventh Query; and I am sure the Chiefest of them are blind, and
led by Customs and Traditions, as thou here make it appear, who thy self have
been a Teacher so long, and now go about to justify it lawful to call a
House of Lime and Stone, a Church; which thou go about to prove by Wresting
the Scripture: But let any with a Single Eye read these Scriptures, which thou
have quoted in thy Answer, Cor. 16. 19.
concerning the Church, Col. 4. 15.
and see if they do at all mention any House to be a Church, but only the
Saints, Acts 20. 16.
whose Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; for, They commonly met in
Dwelling-houses: But You call none Churches* but yo^^ Steeple Houses, which
has been your Custom long; and it is well known, how the ignorant People, that
go to them, have long Idolized them as the H^uses of God, and looked upon them
to be far more Holy then any other Place; and have Envied, and Hated, and even
Murdered those in their Hearts, that should say to the Contrary; and You
Priests have been their great Agents in it, though you have known in your
Consciences to the contrary: Yet you know, That where the People are the most
Blind, You are the more Idolized, and set up: and it is Your greatest Grief,
where the Light appears, as is openly manifest by the Chief Priests, who now
Rage and Rail against the Light, where it appears, and Persecute them that hold
it forth, that you might, if it were possible, put it out, and still uphold
your Father's kingdom, which is in Darkness; and then you think you are safe,
and all will be yours: But your Calamity will come on a sudden, and your
Downfall is nigh at hand, 1 These. 5. 2, 3.

Qu. 18. Whether thou, and such as thou, be not the Creepers into Houses, who
would confine all to your Steeple Houses? yea or nay.

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou grantest, That Paul speaks of Seducers, that
creep into Houses, etc. as in 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. But whether this best suits with
your manner of Teaching or ours, thou say, judge ye; for, thou say, you do
not creep into the Churches, who have the DOORS set wide open, and have your
Congregations or Assemblies publicly called together by a Bell. And then thou
ventest forth a deal of frothy Stuff, and say, Why must your Houses of Lime
and Stone be called Steeple Houses, more then the Glazier's Hall or the
Bull-and-Mouth near Aldersgate, be called a Glass-house, a Chimney-house, or a
Store house, or a Stable-house? But thou ask, Where did Christ or his
Apostles reproach the Synagogues with Reproachful Names, as we do your Churches?

Rep. Here thy Malicious and Scornful Spirit is much more made manifest,
together with thy Folly and Ignorance; so that I am able to judge thee, and the
rest of the Parish-Preachers, to be those Creepers into Houses that Paul there
speaks of, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. who have led silly Women and People captive these
many Years, full of Sin, and led away with diverse Lusts, who have learned, some
Forty Years, some Fifty, some Sixty, yea, some Eighty, and yet Strangers to the
Truth, yea, as Blind and Carnal as ever they were, so that they take a House of
Lime and Stone for a Church, and a House of God, as you have taught* And ask
them, Why they call it so? and they will answer, It was called so before they
were born, and will be after they were dead. Then judge ye, whether these
Creatures be not blind and carnal, and led by your own Customs and Traditions;
and you are their Teachers, who would bear Rule in your Steeple Houses, so that
none should speak but your selves; if they do, you have a Law to lay upon them,
contrary to the Order of the True Church, as in 1 Cor. 14. 30, 31, 32. That all
might speak one by one; and if any thing be revealed to him that stands by, let
the first hold his Peace: But this is called Disorder amongst you, that call
your selves Saints, and are not, but the Synag^gue of Satan, and by thy own
Confession, are led together by a Bell, for which you have no Rule in the
Scripture; and so you lead them by Custom and Tradition: And also, thy own
words here prove what I said in my last Reply, That you do not call your
Assemblies, and the Places where your Assemblies meet, both by one; for, here
thou call the Place a Church, and the People the Congregation, as I said
before.

And thou Blind Guide, where do thou read in the Scripture of Church-Doors?
Be ashamed, and blush, thus to presume in thy Blasphemy: And therefore
howsoever thou have taken these Houses to be, wherein Deceivers creep, as
before is proved, and have taught the People so, to put them out of Jealousy
of You to be the Deceivers, does not at all excuse you from it; for the Apostle
himself taught in Private Houses, Acts 20. 20.
and Chambers, and Private Places; and therefore, by that Account thou would
tax the Apostle to be a Deceiver, if he was here, as thou do James Parnel,
and those whom thou scornfully call his Gang: But where do thou find such
a Word in the Scripture, which proceeds out of thy Malicious and Evil Heart;
but thy Reproaches unto us are Riches (and thy Shame.)

And the Reason why those Houses near Aldersgate (which thou so spittest thy
Venom at, because the People of God have used to meet there) may not be called
(as thou in Contempt do term them) as well as your Stone Houses be called
Steeple Houses, is, because they have Names fitting for them already, for to
distinguish them from other Places; and so also the word Steeple-house is the
sit Name to distinguish your Meeting Places from others; and also* to take
from them that Holy Name which only belongs to the Body of Christ; and also, to
wear out that Idolatry of the People's Minds, which they through long Custom
have born to those Idolatrous Places: Neither do we any more Reproach them in
so saying, then Christ and his Apostles did, in calling the Jews Meeting Place
Synagogues, though thou highly dishonourest Christ in calling them Churches,
which signifies his Body: Have you no other Names to bestow upon your Stone
Houses and High Places, but most blasphemously to call them by the Name of
God's and Holy Men, whom you are not worthy to name, as you call your Colleges
(which are Synagogues of Satan, and Cages of Unclean Birds) by the Name of
Immanuel, and by the Name of Christ, and Trinity, and the like: If you had
called them by the Name of Glazier's Hall, or Bull-and-Mouth, or Synagogue, and
the like, we should not gainsay it: And therefore, in this the Jews will
condemn you, who did not presume to call their Meeting-Places by such holy
Names, as you presumptuously do, which is and has been a great Provocation of
the People to Idolatry, to idolize the Places because of their Names, which
were given to them by the P^pists, who ignorantly worship Names; and you cast
out the Papists for Idolatry, and yet uphold their Idols. Therefore Woe unto you
Blind Guides, and Deluders of the People; your Wickedness is had in Remembrance
before the Lord.

Qu. 19. Whether it was the Practice of the Apostles to take a Text of the
Prophets Words, and from thence to raise Uses, Points, Trials and Motives, as
thou and such as thou do, who make a Trade of their Words?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say, That it has been the Practice of the
Church and her Teachers these many Hundred Years (for the which thou have no
Scripture Proof) And secondly, thou say, That none will deny that this is an
useful and profitable Way of Teaching (which is an abominable Lie, which I and
Hundreds more can testify against) And thirdly, thou say, It may be proved
out of the Scriptures, that all this has been done by Christ and his Apostles
(which is another Lie) and these are the Scriptures upon which thou would
ground thy Lies, in which they will witness against thee, as Luke 4. 18. and
Mat. 22. 31. Act. 8. 35. and for to maintain thy Uses, Points Trials and
Motives, thou quotest Romans 15. 4. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. John 8. 31. and 13. 35. and
Mat. 25. 34.

Rep. Oh thou Liar, thy Lies will not cover thee, nor the Scripture stand for
thee, who art found out of the Life and Practice of them that gave them forth,
who art one of the lying false Teachers, who have deluded the People these many
hundred Years, which deluded Ones are your Church, Col. 2. 8.
amongst whom you have used your Philosophy and vain Deceit, by which you have
long spoiled them, so that the greatest Part of the Professors therein are
Earthly-minded, by thy own Confession; and I am sure, that another Part are
Drunkards, and Swearers, and Adulterers, and Scoffers, and Scorners, and Proud
and Envious Ones, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
and the like; and now where are the Fruits and Profitableness of your
Teaching? Therefore for Shame stop thy Mouth for boasting of your Church and
her Teachers, and saying, None will deny the Profitableness of your Teaching;
Hos. 4, 9.
for like People, like Priest, as the Prophet said; and you are the Heaps of
Teachers that deceive the World, and draw itching Ears after you (who cannot
endure sound Doctrine) with your feigned enticing Words of Men's Wisdom: but the
Teacher of the true Church is but one, which is its Head, even Christ, who
speaks with Power and Authority (and not as you Scribes) whose Teaching is a
profitable Teaching, as is much witnessed in these latter days to your great
Shame and Grief, Mat. 7. 29.
who have been the professed Teachers of the Church of England these many
Years; neither do any of these Scriptures prove, that ever Christ or his
Apostles took a Text of Scripture, and by human Art and Study did raise Uses,
Points, Trials, and Motives, as you do, which is a commendable Teaching by the
Wiscones of the World, 1 Cor. 1. 18.
who know not the Wisdom of God; but to them the preaching of the Gross is
Foolishness, 1 Cor. 2. 4.
as was accounted amongst the Greeks, because the Apostle came not with
enticing Words of Man's Wisdom (as you do, to please Men) but in Plainness of
Speech spoak the Word of the Lord faithfully, and also said, Gal. 1. 10
If he yet sought to please Men, he should not be the Servant of Christ; but
this is all your Care, whose Trust is in Man, and not in Christ; and in all
those Scriptures, when Christ or his Apostles spoak of a Text of Scripture out
of the Old Testament, it was to show the fulfilling thereof, or to witness to
what they had said; but you will take these Scriptures for to give your Carnal
Meanings and Interpretations of them, and so from them speak a Divination of
your own Brain, for Gain and Lucre; and this is the Use you make of these
Points, as thou call them, which the Scriptures before mentioned will not at
all maintain, and yet thou can impudently quote this Scripture in Mat. 6. 25.
34. which forbids taking Thought what to eat, what to drink, and wherewithal to
be clothed, when it is so publicly known, that it is your greatest Care, and
that which thou have been here much laboring to maintain all along, to prove
it lawful for thee to take nigh Two Hundred or Three Hundred Pounds by the Year
of the World; yea, and for a Law to compel them, if they refuse to give it; and
yet thou art not ashamed to say, That thou do not go in the Way of Balaam for
Gifts and Rewards; and the chiefest Scripture which thou have here quoted, will
witness against thee, as 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. which says, The Scripture was given
by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, and I^struction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfected, thoroughly furnish^d unt^ every good Work; but thou hate to be
reproved, and call them foul-mouthed Curs, and the like, that do reprove
thee; and thou teach for Doctrine the Traditions of Men, as to call a House
of Lime and Stone a Church, and the like, as is before proved.

And how have you by all your Doctrines, Reproofs, Correction and Instruction
these many Years perfected any, when as the Professors therein are Earthly
minded (as thou say) and you that are Teachers therefore the most of all;
and most of you deny Perfection in this Life: And though thou with thy Tongue
professest it, yet in Life denyest it, which is worst of all, and so I take
thee.

Pr. Answ. And though thou have been so pleading for thy Way, yet thou say,
You would change it for a better, if any can show it you, and make your Hearers
believe, that it would be more Advantageous for them; but thou say, This
Trade of interpr^ting the Scripturs is an Old and a Good Trade, which to prove
thou quotest Job 33. 23. Psalm. 10. 2, 3. Prove. 1. 6. Acts 8. 3.

Rep. Here thou blind Guide, thy Nakedness is open to the World, and thy
Hearers may consider it, who have looked upon thee as their Teacher these many
Years; and yet thou thy self still to learn which is the best Way, whenas there
is but one true Way, then thou who art Ignorant of this true Way, Jer. 32. 39.
must needs be in a false Way; then how have thou deluded thy Hearers these
many Years, and also belyed thy self in thy Book; and if the Teacher be ever
learning, then what must the Hearers of such an one be? let the Wise-hearted
judge; and I believe and know, that your Hearers would soon believe the same,
if the Preachers of Truth might have Liberty to speak, when they come amongst
you; but if any come in that Intent, you are ready to set your People upon
them, to hale them out with Force, and also you have a Law to cast them into
Prison, as many of us do witness at this Day; and therefore thou Liar, the
Convincing of your Hearers of a better Way, is not your greatest Care, but
rather your greatest Fear, lest any should be drawn from you, and so your Trade
come to fail (as thou call it) but this I know is your greatest Care, that
any Body would show you a better Way to get Money by, and also persuade your
Hearers into it (or else thou think you are never the better) and then you
would leave interpreting the Scripture, which now thou call a Good Trade;
but thou Merchant of Babylon, where do any of these Scriptures which thou have
quoted, prove or term interpreting the Scripture, a Trade? though you Merchants
of Babylon make a Trade of it, to get Luere by, and so call it a Trade, who
think Gain is Godliness; but well may others accuse you for making a Trade and
a Gain of the Scriptures, while y^^ your selves confess it; and thus thou
wrests the Scripture for thine own Ends, and paintest thy Work with Scripture,
for to make the Ignorant believe it is grounded upon Scripture: Oh, be ashamed
to take it into thy Mouth, to make a Trade of it, which was freely spoken forth
by the Holy Men of God, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; and thou make
the People believe, it is of some private Interpretation; and so thou make
Merchandise of the People, and so out of thy own Mouth art judged to be a Liar,
who before denyedst it.

Qu. 20. Whether thou do speak as thou art moved by the Holy Ghost, as they
did who spoa^ forth the Scripture?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say, That thou have answered to this
already, that thou usually do speak at the Motion or Assistance of the Holy
Ghost, thou praisest God for it.

Rep. But thou Hypocrite, I have also in this alreadly proved thee a Liar, and
thy God to be the Father of Lies, who is the God of the blind World, 2 Co. 1.
4. 4.
in which thou art a blind Guide, and an Enemy to the Holy Ghost, where he is
witnessed to rule; and this James Parnel, and those thou call his Fellows,
can discern in thee, though thou art blind, and can not them see.

Qu. 21. What Scripture have thou for sprinkling Infants with Water on their
Faces? And whether all are Christians, and in the Faith of Christ, that are so
done by? Or what does it profit?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer the Deceit of thy Heart thou utterest, so that the
simple may easily discern thy Folly, and also see how thou and the rest of thy
Brethren have deluded and bewitched the Nation; for thou say, Thou holdst
not the Baptism of Infants absolutely necessary, but lawful only; and to prove
the Lawfulness of it, thou say, It is sufficient that thou have no Command
in the Scripture against the Sprinkling of Infants in the Face with Baptismal
Water; but thou say, Thou have the Commandment of Governors, and thou art
commanded to be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake.

Rep. Here the People now may see how they have been long deluded, for thy own
Mouth utters it; for when as many of the People of this Nation, who follow you
blind Guides, have persuaded themselves, through your evil incensing and
leavening of their Minds, to this Day, this to be absolutely necessary to
Salvation, and that their Children could not be saved, if they dyed without it:
And now thou come to the Trial, to prove it, thou confessest, It is not
necessary, but lawful only, and that is, because there is no Command of God
against it, thou say, neither a Command for it, but by Man; and thus you
have long deluded the Nations with your own Inventions, for the which you have
no Scripture; then how is it your Rule? Here you run besides your Rule,
teaching for Doctrine the Commandments and Traditions of Men, which the
Scripture is against, Here thy 53 d Query is answered.
and therefore against Infants Baptism, Mat. 15. 9. Col. 2. 22. 23. which by
thy own Confession, is but an Ordinance of Man; but God is to be obeyed rather
then Man, and you do it not for the Lord's sake, but for to please Man; for the
Lord does not require it at your Hands: And now all the ignorant People, who
have been in this bewitched by you, may see your Blindness, who have long made
them believe that it was an Ordinance of Christ, that their Children should be
sprinkled (and one of the Points of Salvation, as you call them) and now
nothing but an Ordinance of Man, which will not stand for thee neither; for in
that thou lie also, to say, It is the Commandment of thy Governors; for in
that they leave every one to the Liberty of their Consciences, and all Laws and
Ordinances afore-time to the contrary, are made by this null and void; And now,
does the Holy Ghost teach thee to lie? Oh thou Liar and Blasphemer of the Holy
Ghost, who said, That usually thou speak by the Motion of the Holy Ghost,
and now art taken in a Lie; Oh, Satan is high in thee, and thy Wickedness is
great: And which do thou call thy Baptismal Water? this also is the Deceit of
thy Heart, and that which is not of Faith is Sin, Romans 14. 23
therefore Infants Baptism; for you say, Your Faith is grounded upon Scripture,
then where is your Scripture for Infants Baptism; and thus out of the Doctrine
of Christ you are found, acting and doing your own Works: And therefore, the
rest of thy pretended Answer I shall leave to the Impartial Reader to judge of,
wherein thou have much manifested thy Ignorance and Blindness; and in vain have
thou quoted any Scripture; for if any of it would stand for Infants Baptism,
then it would be necessary, which thou confessest it is not; and therefore thou
Serpent, why wrestest thou the Scripture, thus to uphold that which is not
necessary: And whereas thou speak of the Promises made in the Seed (but that
Seed is not the Seed of the Serpent, which rules in all you Children of
Disobedience; therefore) what have thou to do with the Promises; and where do
thou prove that Infants Baptism is the Seal of the Covenant, or the Badge of
the Kingdom, as thou termest it; but thou Liar, Here thy 54 th and 55 th Query
is answered.
read what the Seal is, in Ephesians. 1. 13. and with that stop thy Mouth. And
whereas thou speak of Christ's calling little Children; what of that, Christ
baptized none; therefore silence Babbler: And how are your Children sanctified
from the Womb (as thou say John 4. 2
John was) whenas all are by Nature the Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.
and except they be born again they cannot enter; John 3. 3.
and therefore thou manifests, that your Church is made up of Unregenerate
Persons, into which, thou say, they are admitted by Water; and 20. or 30.
Years after they are thus baptized, you preach Repentance to them, and this is
the Cause why the Professors therein are Earthly-minded, as thou complainest;
and therefore no Christian Parents, but blind carnal Creatures, who think it
profits their Children to be admitted into such a Church; and as the Children
grow up, they show what Seal you have given them, which is more like the Mark
of the Beast, then the Seal of the Covenant; and therefore your Prayers, which
thou talkest of, are an Abomination, and avail not: And thus have thou foamed
our thy Shame and Folly to the Sight of all, but those who are blind, and love
to have it so; for here is one of the main Points of your Religion proved a
mere Delusion.

Qu. 22. What is the Estate and Condition of ^ Christian?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou have stolen the Apostles Words, which he
speaks concerning this Matter; and says, There are Three Ages, Steps and
Degrees of Christianity; and the first Age, Step and Degree ( thou confessest)
is In Christ, and begotten of the Father in the Hatred of Sin and Love of
Righteousness, and by him brought to the Knowledge of Redemption from all
Iniquity, and Renovation in all Righteousness.

Rep. Here thou have destroyed the whole Faith of your Visible Church; for they
generally believe, That they shall never be wholely set free from all Iniquity,
nor be perfect in Righteousness, while they are upon the Earth: And if this be
the lowest Estate of Christianity, to be In Christ, and Redeemed from all
Iniquity, and Begotten by the Father, and Renewed in all Righteousness (which
is Perfection in Righteousness) then by thy own Confession, None of them are
Christians, neither Thou, who art a Teacher of them; for, thou have been openly
found in Sin and Iniquity, as in Lying, Covetousness, Lightness, Scornfulness,
Oppression and Deceit, as before is proved.

And now thou art again found a Liar, in saying, That we know not the First
Estate of a Christian from the Last: But we are able to discern thee, yet
uncome to the First, and therefore far off the Last, although in Years an Old
Man, yet a Child can tell thee thy Confusion. Therefore stop thy Mouth, thou
Deceiver, and sit thee down and consider, how thou and thy Brethren have for
these many Years deceived this Nation; and labor thy self, and Repent in Dust
and Ashes, lest the Lord in thy Destruction make thee an Example to all thy
Brethren-Deceivers.

Qu. 23. What does the Faith, which thou professest, differ from the Faith of
the Hypocrite? and what is the Faith of the Hypocrite?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say, Thy Faith is a Trust in the Lord
Jesus, to be helped up again from the Fall, or to be saved from the Hand of
thine Enemies, or of all that hate thee, and so to be renewed through him, to
be enabled to serve him cheerfully, and without Fear, in Holiness and
Righteousness before him all the days of thy Life: And thou say, This Faith
brings forth Obedience, and purifieth the Heart, and makes you conformable
to Jesus, so that thou hopest for no Benefit by his Death unless thou dyest
with him to all known Sins; but the Faith of the Hypocrite seeks always
something by or through Christ then what it should seek (to wit) the putting
off the Old Man, and the putting on the New, which is created after God in
Righteousness and true Holiness: And herein, thou say, does thy Faith differ
from the Faith of the Hypocrite, and perhaps from James Parnel's.

Rep. Yea, it does; for my Faith is, that there is no putting off the Old Man,
and putting on the New, John 15. 5.
but by and through Christ; which is no more then what I should believe: And
thy Faith, which is contrary is the Faith of the Hypocrite, which will perish,
yea, and out of thy own Mouth I shall prove it; for, by thy own Confession thou
art still in the Fall, in saying, That thou trustest in the Lord Jesus, to be
helped up out of the Fall again: Hereby it is concluded, that thou art still in
the Fall; for, if thou wast helped already out of the Fall, then thou would
have the End of thy Hope: But, it is like, this Faith thou have professed these
many Years, and have been a Teacher so long, and yet it has not brought thee
out of the Fall; and therefore it is but a Borrowed Faith: And most of those
Expressions, thou have stolen out of Luke 1. 71, 72, 73, 74, 75. which has not
purified thy Heart from Lies and Deceit; neither art thou in Obedience or
Conformable to Jesus Christ, who abidest not in his Doctrine, but teach for
Doctrine the Traditions of Men; neither art thou dead with him unto all known
Sins; for this is one, to depart from his Doctrine, and such has not God: and
this is proved against thee in many things, as in taking thy Tithes and
Maintenance of the Peoples Labors, which many of them, it is like, do want it
themselves, which is a great Sin and Oppression: and secondly, in Sprinkling
Infants, which is a great Delusion to the People; and many other things, which
are before proved against thee, which that in thy Conscience cannot but
testify against. And thou Hypocrite, durst thou trust the Lord to save thee
from thine Enemies, and those that hate thee, and yet durst not trust him with
thy Maintenance without the Law of Man, to Compel it from the People, contrary
to their Wills: Thou Hypocrite, is not this a known Sin? The Power of Man was
all the False Prophets had to trust to, who departed from the Lord; and here
out of thy own Mouth thou art found a Liar and Deceiver, and therefore the
Hypocrite thy self, whose Trust is not only in Christ, and so thou differest
from him thou call James Parnel.

Qu. 24. Whether all that thou give Bread and Wine to, which thou call a
Sacrament, do Discern the Lord^s Body? yea or nay.

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou say, Thou hopest most of those, to whom
thou give Bread and Wine, have some Understanding of the Body and Blood of
Christ; for thou say, thou have declared the Mystery of both more distinctly
and evidently then ever thou readst in our Writings: And then by thy vain
Philosophy thou go about to justify the Word Sacrament, for the which thou
have no Scripture; and many of your Blind D^luded People do not know what it
means.

Rep. But all this is no true Ground to believe thy words to be Truth; for, thy
Hope is alread^ disproved, and found to be Deceit; and thy Lying Tongue has
been many times reproved, as before thou boastest, that thou u^ually spoakest
by the Motion of the Holy Ghost, and then wast presently found in a Lie, so
that there is no Credit to be given to thy Words, without a sufficient Proof;
for here also thou may easily be proved a Liar; for, out of thy own Mouth
both thou thy self, and thy Church, were proved to be no Christians.: Then for
your Discerning the Body of Christ, or declaring the Mystery from your own
Experiences, yea, and though thou could declare the Mystery from others
Words, who experienced it, they that hear thee could not discern it without a
Single Eye, which appears they have not, who are still Earthly-minded, by thy
own Confession: And do thou profess here now to have such a Spiritual People,
and yet durst not trust them for thy Maintenance, without a Compulsive Law?
This also manifests thy self to be Earthly-minded, and so ignorant of the
Mystery. And thus every way, thou Deceiver, thy Confusion is seen, and by the
Truth art thou overwhelmed, and catched in thy own Craftiness.

Qu. 25. And whether do thou not give Bread and Wine to Natural Men and
Women? yea or nay.

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou confessest, Thou do give to Natural Men an^
Women (and also to Spiritual Ones) as, thou say, Christ himself did to all
the Twelve Disciples, Luke 22. 14, 15. etc. whereof, thou say, Judas was one;
and the Apostle for a time, thou say, gave the same to those that professed
Repentance, Faith and new Obedience, but fell away afterward; which to prove,
thou quotest 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. 1 John 2. 19.

Rep. Here, thou Murderer of Souls, by thy own Confession thou confessest the
People to eat and drink Damnation to themselves, not discerning the Lord's
Body, which the Natural Man and Woman cannot do; and as for Spiritual Ones,
thou have none in thy Flock; for thou confessest, they are Earthly minded: And
for what Christ did, is a Mystery to thee, and that which might be done for the
fulfilling of what was before decreed, which is nothing for thee to imitate:
And did not Judas eat and drink his own Damnation? Neither does these
Scriptures prove that the Apostles did the same as thou do; for he was far
absent from them when he writ this Epistle to them, as a Warning to take heed
what they did: neither does that in John prove any thing to this Purpose; for
thine can fall no lower then they are, who are not yet Christians, neither thou
that teach them, as is before proved out of thy own Mouth. And though here
thou confessest, they are a Mixed Multitude, yet thou make no Difference when
thou take thy Tithes, neither appears it when thou give them that thou
call a Sacrament.

Qu. 26. Can any be set free from Sin so long at they are upon the Earth? and
where must they be cleansed, if not upon the Earth?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou in words confessest, That man may be Wholely
set Free, and that thou know no other Place of Purgation; and also boastest.
That thou have held forth this Doctrine long before the Quakers came, as thou
call them.

Rep. But I find, in Life thou still denyest it, neither art thou thy self come
up to it, nor any that are taught by thee; and therefore I hold thee the
greater Hypocrite and Deceiver, then if with the rest of thy Brethren thou
did in words deny it, unless in Life thou did seal it; for, Profession
without Life and Power, has ever been a Dishonor to Truth and Religion:
Therefore silence Deceit, and cause not the Truth to be blasphemed.

Qu. 27. What Scripture have thou for thy Rule, to give David's Conditions, to
be sung in a Meeter?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou can bring no Scripture Proof to maintain
what thou do; but say, All are not of the World whom we take to be of the
World (to wit) who are no Quakers, thou say. And secondly, thou say, Israel
in the general, to whom David gave his Psalms to be sung, were the greatest
part Unregenerate, and men of the World. Thirdly, thou say, He gave them in
Meeter or Measure to be sung, as the Learned in the Hebrew Tongue know well.

Rep. All are of the World that are not Christians, which neither thou nor
thine are, as before out of thy own Mouth is proved; and also, all that own not
Quaking and Trembling by the Power of God are also of the World, and know not
God; for, all the Holy Men of God, and David for one (as is before proved)
witnessed Quaking and Trembling; Ezekiel. 12. 10. Jer. 10. 25. Mat. 12. 30. Ex.
19. 16.
and the Son of Man was to eat his Bread with Quaking and drink his Water with
Trembling: And so you that despise Quaking and Trembling are Heathens, that
know not God: And also, the Way is but one; and they that are not with us are
against us: But All Israel Trembled before the Lord, who were not of the World,
as thou belyest them, who were the Lord's chosen People, in the Figure, whom he
had chosen out of the World: though when they forgot their God, they were
defiled with the World. Neither can thou bring any Scripture Proof to
maintain, that David gave forth his Prayers, his Prophecies, his Quakings, his
Roarings, his Cryings, and his Lamentations ^o be sung in a Meeter, as thou
say the Learned Ones know; but thy Learned Ones may be Liars, like Thee, and
therefore I have no Ground to believe them, seeing also that I have a Proof to
the contrary; for by your own Confession, they were turned into English Meeter
by Sternhold and Hopkinson; and therefore stop thy Mouth thou Liar.

And fourthly, Thou ask what Condition David was in, into which every Man
may not come in Time? And fifthly, thou say, Are not David' s Psalms Part of
the Holy Scriptures which are permitted to all Men, and are profitable for all
Men to read. And sixthly, thou say, The Jews did read all the Old Testament
in Public with a singing Voice, as the Learned know. And seventhly, thou
say, Did not the Lord by his Servant Moses teach all Israel a Song of his
own making? as in Deuteronomy. 31. 19, 20, 21, 22. Deuteronomy. 32. And thou say, We will
not deny but David' s Psalms may have the same Effects, even upon the Wicked,
etc. which is false, for we will deny it, for the Wicked have nothing to do
with them; for unto the Wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my
Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy Mouth; and here thy
Heart has deceived thee; neither does this prove that the World may sing
David's Conditions in a Meeter, because it is possible to come into his
Conditions, but then they must come out of the World; but I do not perceive
that you have a Desire to come into his Conditions, who deny Quaking and
Trembling, which was Part of his Conditions: But those that do come into his
Conditions, need not take his Words, to sing in a Meeter; but the same Spirit
that taught him to praise the Lord, will also teach them, which it seems you
are Strangers to, and therefore sing Lies in Hypocrisy. And as he said, He was
not puffed in Mind, nor had no scornful Eye, Psalm. 131. 1.
you also say (you are not) and as he said, He roared all the Day long, and
watered his Couch with his Tears, Psalm. 8.
you also [sing] you do so: And thus the Ignorant People are led by you, to
exercise themselves in Things that for them be too high; and you that lead
them, cause them to err; And therefore, Woe unto you blind Guides, and Deceivers
of the People: Isa. 3. 1. Isa. 24. 11.
Neither are David's Psalms, nor the rest of the Holy Scriptures, for
Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, and such like Persons, to make a Song on; for to
such they are sealed; and the same that gave them forth, the same will open
them, and they that can so read them may, and so they are profitable: And how
the Jews did read the Old Testament in public (as thou say) does not at all
prove that you should sing David's Conditions in a Meeter, who are far
Strangers to them; so here thou might have been silent from such Carnal
Reasoning; but that thou art glad of any Thing to cover thy Deceit, because the
Scriptures will not. And that Song that was given by the Lord to Moses for
Israel to sing, it was not in Meeter, neither other Men's Conditions, but it was
a Song the Lord had appointed them to sing, suitable to their Conditions, but
still this does not prove, that the Lord gave you David's Conditions to sing in
a Meeter, from your light Minds, as you do; therefore silence Deceiver, and let
the Scripture alone in its Place, and strive not to make the Lord the Author of
your Deceit: And thou say, His Prayers may teach them to pray; but he says,
The Prayers of the Wicked are Sin: And thus thou would teach them to pray by
Tradition, and not by the Spirit; for they that pray by the Spirit, need not
others Prayers to teach them, though ye that are ignorant of the Spirit have
nothing else: And thou say, His Hymns may teach them to land the Lord; but
the Prophet says, The Dead cannot praise the Lord, but the Living; and none
can praise the Lord but those that know him; but the Wicked know him not, and
therefore their Prayers and Praises is Deceit, though for a Cloak they steal
their Words that knew him; and thus thou wise Man, thy Wisdom perishes: And
thou say, His Afflictions may order, support and comfort them, when they are
in the like Conditions: I say, till then let them alone, and then you will know
how to use them; but while ye are blind, ye do abuse them, and are Ignorant of
the only Comforter and Supporter, which David witnessed in Affliction: And thou
say, His Prophesies and Promises may be the strengthening of their Faith;
Thou blind Hypocrite, what Faith have the Wicked, who know not God? while thou
thy self, that art a Teacher, have not Faith to trust him for an Earthly
Maintenance; what then has his Promises strengthened thy Faith, who have sung
them and read them these many Years? Neither are his Promises to the Wicked,
but upon Reformation; For, No Peace to the Wicked, says my God: Neither does
his Zeal to God, nor Love to Righteousness at all provoak them, as you teach
them to use them, in a Customary Way, to make a Song of them, and therefore
are not profitable to them, because they do abuse them; where thou have
sufficiently discovered thy Weakness and Ignorance in thy Opinion, with which
thou slanderest us, but it is thy own.

Qu. 28. What is the Word? And whether is it Visible to the Carnal Eye, or
Invisible? And where the Scripture speaks of any other Word of God then one?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou go about to prove the Word to be
fourfold, and condemnest me of Ignorance in it, and say, There is first an
Essential, Eternal, Powerful and Living Word, by which all Things were made,
Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3. And to prove another Word, which thou call the Ingiven and
Inspoken Word, thou quotest Jer. 2. 1. and 4. 11, 13. And to prove another Word
of the Lord, thou quotest, 2 Timothy 3. 16.

Rep. Here thy Ignorance of God is not hid, who by thy Wit and deceitful
Wisdom, would make four of one; but all these Scriptures which thou have
quoted do not prove any other then one, which Word was in the Beginning, by
which all Things were made, which thou confessest to be Eternal, Powerful and
Living; and that Word which came unto the Prophets, was as a Fire and a Hammer,
to beat the Rocks in Pieces, then was it not Powerful and Living, and one and
the same with that the Apostle speaks of, which is Q^i^k and Powerful, and
Sharper then a two-edged Sword; and this is the same Word of Life which the
Apostle spoak from and published, which was from the Beginning; and this was
the same Word which was published, which David there speaks of; and by this
Word were the Prophets all begotten and born again, and this Word is Invisible,
hid from the Carnal Eye as thou thy self confessest, though in Confusion: But
that Scripture which thou quotest in 2 Timothy 3. 16. to prove a written Word,
does not mention any such Thing; but if thou meanest, that the Scriptures are
that written Word, I answer, There are many Words in the Scripture, but the
Word is but one, of which the Scriptures bear Testimony: And thus thy Ignorance
is manifest^d, and returned into thy own Bosom.

Qu. 29. What is the End of Christ's Coming? and what is the Redemption?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou go about to prove that manifold, which is
but one, and so runnest into thy sundry Divisions in thy Imaginations; and
though thou accusest James Parnel, that he knows it not, yet he is able to
discern thy Confusion; for in one Place thou say, There is a Redemption from
all Sin, and another Redemption from all Evil (and this thou call twofold)
and thou say, There is a Redemption from the Curse of the Law, and another
Redemption from the Guilt of Sin, which also thou call twofold.

Rep. How many Redemptions would thou here make of one, thou blind Guide?
Can any be redeemed from all Sin, and not from all Evil? and from the Curse of
the Law, and not from the Guilt of Sin? And is not all this One, and by One,
and fulfilled in One? But it may easily be concluded, that thou can witness
none of this; for so long as thou art in the Fall, thou art under the Curse of
the Law and the Guilt of Sin, as before out of thy own Mouth is proved; and
they that can witness this Redemption; are Christians indeed, and cleansed from
Earthly-mindedness; all which thou nor thy Church are not, as before out of thy
own Mouth is proved; but are still in your Iniquity, upholding the Works of the
Devil, and are not saved from your Enemies, that are of your own Houses;
neither is the Righteousness of the Law fulfilled in you; neither are your
Souls delivered out of the House of Bondage; neither is Jesus your high Priest,
who set up yourselves to be Priests in his stead, holding up the Changeable
Priesthood, which took Tithes, and so deny Christ come in the Flesh, and
therefore shall be judged by him, whom thou confessest is the Judge of the
World, all which thou say is the End of Christ's Coming.

Qu. 30. Whether thou will own, that Christ has enlightened every one that
comes into the World? and whether they that know that Light, need any man to
teach them? and whether thou leadest up any under thy Ministry, that they need
not thee to teach them?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou confessest, That Christ does enlighten every
one that comes into the World, because the Apostle affirms it, John 1. 9. And
secondly, thou confessest, That they which have attained to the true Knowledge
of this Light, need not that any Man should teach them; for, they are
sufficiently taught of God, thou say, Jer. 31. 34. But thou say, Thou
denyest that we are so taught, or in such a Measure: but, thou say, till that
full Light shines in you, you may have other Helps and Teachers; which to
prove, thou quotest 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, etc.

Rep. But thou Dec^iver, thou runnest, and the Lord never sent thee, who have
been a Teacher of the People and a Professor of the Light so many Years, and
have not yet brought any of thy Hearers to the Knowledge of the Light; yea,
thou numbrest thy self amongst them whom this full Light does not yet shine,
but stand in need of other Helps and Teachers; then, thou Hypocrite and
Dissembler, How should thou teach thy Hearers the full Knowledge of the
Light (as thou say they will witness for thee) whenas thou thy self stand
in need to be taught it, by thy own Confession? Therefore it may well be
resolved, that thou know not that Christ has enlightened evey one that
comes into the World, neither would confess it, but that the Apostle
affirms it in that Scripture which thou have quoted in Joh. 1. 9. yea, that
Scripture which thou quotest in Jer. 31. 34. does witness against thee and thy
Hearers to be yet Strangers to the Promises: Therefore, thou Hypocrite, How
have thou Belyed thy own Conscience, in saying, That thou would bring them
to the Knowledge of the Light, that they should not need thee nor any man to
teach them? whenas that is it thou openly strivest against; for then, thy Diana
would bring thee in no Gain, which is thy greatest Care to uphold; and this is
witnessed in thy Conscience, for a Truth against thee: Yea, and this Scripture,
which thou quotest in 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. will witness against thee, to be a
Belyar of the Apostle; for, that speaks of the Word Within, which shines as a
Light in a Dark Place, which thou art not yet come to know, and therefore thou
denyest the Truth: But I tell thee, We are in that Measure of Light, so that we
are able to comprehend thee, and show thee thy Confusion and Deceit: Therefore
silence from bringing the Prophets or Apostles for thy Proof; for, they
testify against such as thee, who pretendest to teach others, and to be a
Guide to the Blind, a Light of them which are in Darkness, and an Instructor of
the Foolish, and art not yet taught thy self; but art dark and blind, and
ignorant of the Light, and want Instruction thy self, by thy own Confession:
Therefore, what an impudent Liar art thou, who before said, Thou usually
spoakest by the Motion of the Holy Ghost, and guided by an Infallible Spirit,
and now not come to that full Knowledge of the Light, that thou need no man
to teach thee; but the Prophets and Apostles were come to that before they were
made Teachers; and they by the Effect of their Ministry, turned many from
Darkness to Light, Acts 16. 7. Ephesians. 1. 5. 1 John 2. 22.
and brought them to the Knowledge of the Anointing, so that they needed no man
to teach them: Therefore silence, thou Deceiver; for thy Blessings are Curses,
and therefore profittest not the People at all.

Qu. 31. Whether they be not the Deceivers, that cry, Lo here, and Lo there;
that draw People to look at a Christ in a Heaven, far off, without them; or at
a Jerusalem, far off, without them; whenas, they that cannot witness Christ in
them, are Reprobates?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou confessest, That they that cannot witness
Christ in them, are in a Reprobate Condition: But thou confessest, That thou will not say, that all who speak of a Christ within them, shall be saved: Yet
thou grantest, That those Teachers, who point only at a Christ without them, or
to any other spiritual Kingdom of God then what must be within, saying, Lo here
is Christ, and Lo there is his Kingdom, may be both Deceivers and deceived
themselves for the present.

Rep. Herein thou condemnest thy Brethren to be Deceivers and deceived, who are
set up, upheld and maintained by the same Earthly Power as thou art, who are
such as cry all, Lo here, and Lo there, without, and wholely draw the People's
Minds without, from the Light within them, that should lead them to the
Knowledge of Christ and his Kingdom, incensing them that it is Natural and
Insufficient; and though thou do here profess to the contrary, yet art out of
thy own Mouth judged to be out of the State of Salvation, who only pro^essest
Christ within, yet art found as deep in Sin and Deceit, and as void of Christ
or his Light, as the rest of thy Brethren, who art doting without, as before
out of thy Mouth is sufficiently proved, and so thy self art the greatest
Deceiver, only the Serpent's Subtilty more refined; but that thou accusest us,
that we cry, Lo here among the People called Quakers, Christ alone is to be
found; thou art a Liar, and speak not from an Infallible Spirit, but from a
Lying Spirit, which many can witness against; yet they that are of God hear, as
he that can receive it, let him.

Qu. 32. Whether they be not out of the Faith of Christ, that receive Honor,
or respect Persons?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say, Men may receive Honor, and yet be in
the Faith of Christ, which to prove thou quotest Phil. 2. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 6. 16,
17. 1 Cor. 11. 1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 8. 23. and many other, which do not at all
concern the Matter of my Query; yea, thou say^st, Men may respect Persons, and
be in the Faith, which to prove thou quotest Acts 26. 25. 2 Kings 3. 14. Psalm.
15. 4. But thou confessest, It is a great Hindrance to the Faith and believing
in the true Word, for Men to seek the Honor of Men, more then the Honor that
comes from God, John 5. 44. And thou say ^t is also a Blos and Blemish to
the true Believers, to resp^^^ the Ungodly, that are great and rich in this
World, before the true Saints that are poor; yea, thou say, It is a plain
Denial of the Faith and a good Conscien^e also, to respect Persons in doing of
Justice, whether for Favor or Reward, Exodus 23. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, ^.

Rep. All these Scriptures which ^hou have here quoted, do not at all justify
the Earthly Honor which you Earthly Ones give and receive one of another;
neither were these Things written to the World, as thou make Use of them;
neither did those whom the Apostle speaks of, seek after, or receive Earthly
Honor, as you do, who are called of Men Master, who are set up in the chief
Seats of the Synagogues, and love Greetings in the Markets, and uppermost Rooms
at Feasts, and all the Earthly Honor as may be, all which Christ declared
against to the Pharisees, and judged them to be in the Unbelief, in whose Steps
ye are found, and therefore in the Unbelief also; neither does any such Earthly
Honor belong to any Virtue or Grace; Joh. 5. 4. 42, 43, 44. Acts 26. 31, 32.
Acts 24. 5. Acts 22. 22.
for Christ has declared against it; but they that honor God, them will God
honor: neither do any of these Scriptures which thou have quoted, justify the
Respect of Persons, which the Apostle declared against in James 2. neither did
Paul respect the Person of Festus, when he called him Noble Festus; for in that
he did not adore his Person, nor bow to, nor worship it: but Festus did that
which was Noble toward Paul, and judged him not worthy to suffer Bonds
according to their Law, which few of the Rule's of these Days will do, but
rather will wrest and pervert their Law to their own Wills, to persecute those
that not are in Paul's Condition, and guided by Paul's Spirit, and such they
now call Pestilent Fellows, and Raisers of Sedition, and adjudge them not
worthy to live amongst Men, though they have nothing more against them, then
the Heathen had against Paul: And notwithstanding, all this does not justify
your Adoring, Worshipping and Respecting Men's Persons, having them in
Admiration for Advantage sake, yea, though Wicked Corrupt Men, though you do
not see it, because the Gift blinds your Eye; for they that are Proud and
Persecutors, are Wicked and Corrupt, and by such you are set up, upheld and
maintained, and therefore adore and worship their Persons, having them in
Admiration because of this Advantage; but the poor Saints are both by you and
them persecuted and despised; and you join together against them, because they
cannot worship the Beast and his Image, Rev. 13. 6.
as you do; and thus out of thy own Mouth art thou judged; and that Scripture
which thou quotest in James 2. will witness against thee, and that also in
Exodus 23. For it is well-known, that you professed Ministers have been the
greatest Actors ever, in stirring up the Rulers to persecute the Innocent; yea,
any in whom the Appearance of God was manifested, in Testimony against your
deceitful Ways; and the Rulers through Favor and Respect to you, have and do
act in their corrupt Wills, contrary to all Law or Equity against such, and
have oppressed the Strangers as Vagabon^s and Idle Fellows, though the Law of
the Nation allows them Liberty, being freeborn in it, which to this Day is
witnessed in diverse Places of the Nation, which that of God in your Consciences
will also witness; and such as those deserve neither Honor nor Respect, but
must perish in their Iniquity; but in that thou accusedst us to deny deserved
Honor and Respect to be lawful, is a very Falsehood; for we honor and respect
Justice, Grace, Virtue and all Goodness in our Hearts; but you that are blind,
put Injustice for Justice, Isa. 5. 20.
and Evil for Good, and turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousnes, Jude 4.

Qu. 33. Will thou own Trembling and Quaking now; yea or nay?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou seem to own it in Words, also stealing
others Expressions out of the Scripture, to answer my Query; but thy Life does
not steal it, neither do thou own it where it is witnessed, but make a
Scoff at it, as before is proved; and thy Ignorance of the same may easily be
discerned (in thi^ thy Answer) by any who have tasted of the Power of God, who
are come to the Earth's Trembling and Quaking; and whereas thou denyest to
tremble and shake, as John Gilpin and others did, comparing them with the Man
possessed with the Unclean Spirit, in Mark 9. 20. and to be a Quaker always
thou denyest.

Rep. Thou never wast a true Quaker yet, as may easily be discerned, by this
thy Discourse of it, who judge by Reports, and comparest the Power of God
unto as Unclean Spirit, which Power made the Devils to tremble in John Gilpin,
unto which thou art not yet come, though John Gilpin from that departed, and
followed the Deceit, and so was led into deep Deceit and Imitation, and so gave
Occasion to such as thee, who wait for Occasion to blaspheme the Truth, and
speak Evil of the Things thou know nothing of, but by Reports, which if the
true Fear of God was in thy Heart placed, thou durst not do; therefore thou and
John Gilpin shall receive your Reward, where thou shall quake forever, if thou
do not speedily repent, and own the Truth which in thy Conscience is
witnessed: But those other of ours, whom thou accusest, thou do not nominate,
and therefore accusest thou know not who; but any such Foaming at the Mouth,
and the like, which thou here speak of, we do deny, and return it into thy
own Bosom, who art foaming out thy own Shame.

Qu. 34. What is the pure Religion? and whether in it thou dwell?

Priest. Answ. And in thy Answer thou have nothing to say, but what thou
stealest out of the Scripture, from their Experience who spoak it forth; and
thou quotest that in Jam. 1. 27. which says, The Pure Religion and Undefiled
before God, is this, to visit the Widows and Fatherless in their Affliction,
and to keep themselves unspotted of the World; and thou also quotest that in
Mat. 23. 33, 38, 39, 40. and say, It is to love the Lord our God with all our
Hearts, Mind and Might, and our Neighbor as our selves; and in this Religion (
thou say) thou desire to dwell, and walk, and remain forever, without
being shaken.

Rep. But thou must be much shaken before thou come into this Religion; for
thou have not yet proved that thou art yet in it; but these Scriptures which
thou have here quoted, will witness against thee to be a Stranger to it, though
it is an easy thing for to set down others Declarations, when they are be ore
thee: But how do thou keep thy self unsported of the World, whenas thou art
drowned in, and art so greedy of it, that thou carest not how thou gettest it,
so thou gettest it, as before is sufficiently proved out of thy own Mouth, and
have been all along laboring contrary to Scripture, to justify thy taking of
Gifts and Rewards of the World? And how do thou Visit the Widows and
Fatherless, unless it be for thy Tithes, or that they have, to maintain thee;
and so, rather to add Affliction upon them? or, What do thou do in this kind,
but thou have a Self e^d in it? Let that in thy Conscience judge thee. And if
thou did love the Lord God with all thy Heart, thou would not have thy
Heart so in the Earth, thus to Delude and Deceive Peoples Souls for Gain and
Lucre, and to take away the Fruits of their Labors by Compulsion (if they will
not give it thee) though thou do nothing for them, as before is proved
against thee, to thy Shame and Confusion of Face. And thus thy Heart is
adulterated from God into the Earth, and the Love of God abides not in thee, 1 John 2. 15.
who art in Love with the World. And do thou love thy Neighbor as thy self,
when for Selfs sake thou wo^ldst destroy him, both Body and Soul? And thu^ I
need no other Wea^on to cut off thy Head, then what thou thy self bring.

Qu. 35. What is the Difference betwixt the Jew Outwardly, and the Jew
Inwardly? and how shall we know the one from other?

Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say, ^he Jew Outwardly d^sires to make a
fair Show in the Flesh, or External Man, with his outward Circumcision or
Reformation, Gal. 6. 12, 13. in Voluntary Worship, and not sparing the Body,
Col. 2. 23. he observes the lesser Commands, and leaves the Greater undone,
Mat. 23. 23. and in one Point he goes beyond us ( thou say) he pays Tithes
exactly; he makes clean the Outside of the Cup and Platter, and makes all foul
within, Mat. 23. 15, 26* etc.

Rep. And so here is enough to manifest, that thou art the Man; for, here thou
have plainly read thy self, and out of thy own Mouth shall thou be judged,
without Contending or Reviling, as thou accusest us; for thou have been
striving all along hitherto to set out thy self, and make a fair Outside, like
a Reformation, though the Hypocrisy of thy Heart thou could not thereby hide
from the Light: And who are more strict in Voluntary Worship? But you can
pamper your Bodies; which shows your Zeal is not so hot ^ And instead of
observing the Lesser Commands, and leaving the Greater undone, you leave all
undone that will not stand for self; and preach up and uphold these things for
Commands, for which you have no Scripture, and so preach for Doctrine the
Commandments of men, Mat. 15. 9.
as the Outward Jew did: But if one ask you for your Proof for these things,
thou say, It suffices you that there is no Command to the Contrary; yea,
for thy Self-covetous Ends thou art not ashamed to fetch up old Commands (that
were fulfilled, and so ended) for a Cover for thy Deceit, as here also thou
would seem to do in accusing us for not paying Tithes exactly, as the
Pharisee did, which I know is the great Grief of thee and thy Brethren, because
we put not into your Mouths, and therefore ye even prepare War against us:
Mich. 3. 5.
But when the Pharisee said, He paid Tithes, they were then due; for the
Priesthood, to which Tithes belonged, was not yet fulfilled, and therefore not
changed, and therefore it was his Duty so to do: But you Priests have so
blinded the Pharisees and Professors of these Times, that they are so exact in
paying you Tithes, Ez. 22. 28.
and putting into your Mouths, because you daub them up, crying Peace to them,
though they have no Command from God for it; and you take it as exactly: but
you have but few such, that you dare trust without a Law; for (as thou say)
The greatest Part of them are Earthly-minded (like their Teachers) And how have
thou been cleansing thy Outside of the Cup, as if thou wast unblamable in this
Outward Righteousness, and so holy in thine own Eyes, that in words thou
professest Perfection, and as if thou knew the highest Estate of
Christianity, and wast in the pure Religion, without Spots, and guided by God's
Spirit, usually speaking by the Motion of the Holy Ghost, but even condemned
thy Brethren, and would not answer for them; but said, Thou wast none of
these Hirelings, nor Greedy Dogs, etc. but yet could not keep thy Tongue from
uttering forth the Foulness of thy Heart, which has overwhelmed thee all
along, and out of thy own Mouth have been proved a Liar. And thus thou art
plainly dealt with, and judged out of thy own Mouth; and the Scriptures
aforesaid, which thou have quoted, shall stand and witness against thee.

Pr. Answ. But the Jew Inwardly ( thou say) trusts in the Lord Christ, and
has no Confidence in the Flesh.

But this thou do not; for then thou would trust him for thy Maintenance,
and not stand in need of the Arm of Flesh, upon which thou relyest: Neither
d^st thou first make clean the Inside of the Cup, that the Outside may be fair
also, as thou say the Inward Jew does; but though thou have bin much
laboring with feigned words of thy own Wisdom and Self-Justification to deck
and adorn the Outside, painting it with Scripture-Words and Expressions, yet
thy Inside is so foul that it defiles the Outside also; so that it makes thee
odious to all but the Blind; and manifests thy Heart to be yet uncircumcised
from Sin, and a Stranger to the Inward Cross, by which thou art not crucified
to the World, nor the World to thee; for then it would not suffice thee to take
the Tenth Part of the Increase of the Labor of the Laborers, by the Will of
Man, without any Command from God, as thou do, living at Ease (like a Drone)
upon the same; and therefore thy Heart is far off Uprightness; all which the
Inward Jew (thou say) does witness: And thus, in a word, thou see there is
as much Difference betwixt the one and the other, as betwixt Saul and Paul, a
Perse^utor, and an Executor of Christ's Doctri^e and Way: And thus, in a word,
thou have marked out thy self, and art found out of the Way and Doctrine of
Christ, Persecuting, Despising and Gainsaying those that abide in i^: And thus
by thy Fruits art thou known, as thou say, the one may be known from the
other. And thus, Proud Goliath, thy Head is cut off with thy Own Sword.

Qu. 36. Whether they that profess themselves the Ministers of Christ, and
cannot give Account of their Ministry and Faith, but act contrary to the
Scripture, the Doctrine and Practice of the Ministers of Christ, and teach
People so, be not such as abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, but bring
another Doctrine, and so ^re the Witches, Mag^cians, Deceivers, Antichrists and
False Teachers, who are not to be received, but deny^d?

Pr Answ. And in thy Answer thou confessest, That they which are truly such in
Doctrine and Life, as this Query describes, may be truly termed spiritual
Witches and Magicians, and must be rejected as False Teachers and Antichrists.

Rep. Here thou have passed the Sentence unto thy own Condemnation; for, thou
art the Man, as sufficiently is proved, both out of thy own M^uth and the
Scriptures, which thou thy self have quoted, as aforesaid: And so, henceforward
let all People take notice, That thou Thomas Draton of King Rippon in
Huntingtonshire, art a spiritual Witch and Magician; and they are to reject
thee, as a False Teacher and an Antichrist, as here out of thy own Mouth is
plainly proved: And this Him thou call James Parnel, does testify, and deny
thee with thy Sorcery, Ribbons, Stones, Waters, Glasses, Powders, Charms and
other like Enchantments, which thou, who art given up to believe Lies,
impudently would cast upon him, and those thou call his Confederacy, who
abhor all such Abomination, and therefore return it into thy own Bosom, from
whence it comes.

Priest, And thus ( thou say) by clear Scripture and Experience, thou have
answered the bold Queries of him who is known to the World to be but a Boy or
Stripling.

Rep. As thou begann'st with a Lie in thy Mouth, so also thou endest with a
Lie; for by plain Scripture and true Experience thou have not answered these
Queries; for in many Things thou may find no Scripture at all in the least
to countenance thee, then thou pleadest old Stories and Records, and say
also, It suffices thee that there is no Scripture to the contrary; but thou
shall know, that in any Thing that thou do, in which the Scripture will not
stand for thee, it will in the same stand against thee; and also when thou
did wrest any Scripture for thy own Ends, it was made Use of to witness
against thee in the same; and how have thou answered by thy own Experience,
whenas thou stolest the Apostles Declaration, and set it down, even Word for
Word, to prove the Estate of a Christian, whenas it was proved out of thy own
Mouth, that thou art not come to witness in Possession the lowest Estate of a
Christian; and thus thou might have been ashamed to boast of thy Age, who
art found such an impudent Liar, as to say, by clear Scripture and true
Experience thou answeredst these Queries (which are not so bold as true) in
which all that are not wilfully blind will witness against thee; and thus him
thou contemnest as a Boy or Stripling, is made able to cut of thy Head with thy
own Sword; and therefore henceforward, let Shame and Confusion of Face cover
thee, for boasting of thy Age, who yet know not, That the Wisdom and Power
of the Almighty, stands not in the Number of Years, or the Arm Flesh, but the
Righteous are as bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1.

And now to thy Counter-Queries, as thou call them, which for a Complement,
thou biddest me give thee Leave to propound, but meanedst not to stay to know
whether I did so or nay.

First, Concerning Honor and Respect to be given to Men.
And to the Substance of this Query, I answer, That Christ himself cries down
all Earthly Honor and Admiration, and Respect of Man's Person, and only
attolerates the Honor that is of God, and comes from God, and belongs unto
the Seed of God, which is not known amongst you Children of this World, whose
Honor and Glory is of this World, in whom the Seed of the Serpent rules Head,
to which no Worship nor Honor is due, the which all the World wonders after,
and worship the Beast and his Image; but none of these Scriptures which thou
have quoted, do at all maintain your Heathenish Breeding, Worship, Honor
Manners and Respect, as you call it; but now he is risen and reigns, to whom
all Nations must bow, to whom alone belongs all Honor, Priase Dominion and
Thanks; therefore silence proud Flesh, that would go about to rob him, it is
you that are offended in him, and persecute him, because he cannot bow unto
you; and as for that Scripture, Honor all Men, I answer with another
Scripture, which thou have quoted, Psalm. 15. 4. In whose Eyes a vile Person is
contemned: Here all Men are not honored, but in the Lord; therefore you that
abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, must not be received not bidden God speed:
And as for that Scripture. Lev. 19. 2^. which thou quotest in thy seventh
Query, I answer with Solomon's Words, Wisdom is the gray Hair, Wis. 4. 8, 9.
and an Undefiled Life is Old Age; and this is not without Honor, though by
the World contemned.

Qu. 9. And to thy 9th Query, Whether standing bare with the Head uncovered
before the Magistrate, be not a decent Posture, since it is a Posture that the
Apostle requires in the Behalf of God, which to prove thou quotest 1 Cor. 11.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Answ. I answer, No Man must be honored in Respect to his Person; and the
Honor of Justice and Equity lies not in the putting off the Hat, or keeping
it on, but it is a Heathenish Custom, contrary to any Scripture-Rule or
Example, and therefore not a decent, but an unseemly Posture (as thou call
it) for Men so to adore one another Persons; and that Magistrate that seeks
for, or owns such a Thing, stands in his own Will, and is partial, and rules
not for God, but for himself, and such God does not style as Gods upon Eearth
(as thou say) but rather Unjust Stewards; and thou blind Guide, read in the
3d Verse of the Chapter aforesaid and see what is the Head of the Man; Jam. 1.
2.
but thy Head is the Serpent; and according to thy own Meaning, most of ye
Priests condemn your selves in this, who commonly have your Heads covered with
Caps, when you pretend to pray or prophecy.

And that Scripture, 1 Timothy 6. 11. which thou have quoted in thy 10 th Query,
and Romans 10. 10. which thou have quoted in thy 11 th Query, was not spoken to
the World who accounts Man in gay Clothing, and a Gold Ring, as a Superior,
and a Man in vile and poor Raiment as an Inferior, and accordingly pre^ers
them and respects them, contrary to Scripture, and you Leaders cause them to
err; threfore wrest not the Scripture for your own Ends, lest it turn to your
own Destruction, 2 Per. 3. 16.

Qu. 12. Whether the Pronoun of the second Person singular, may not out of the
Hebrew and Greek be as w^ll redered You as Thou, especially, since in the
plural Nu^^hr it is always rendered Ye, and not Thee; and the Dutch Tongue,
whence we borrow much of our L^ngu^ge has You?

Answ. Here thou Son of Babylon, who art with thy Carnal Reason in thy
Languages confused, who stumbl^st at the plain Language ( Thou) what is that in
thee that cannot bear the Word Thou, which is the single proper Language to a
single Person, as well as You, which thou confessest is a borrowed Language;
and thus the Hebrews, and the Grecians, and the Romans, and the Dutch will
condemn you, who are content with their Natural Language.

Qu. 13. Whether it has not been ever accounted Rude and Rustical in this
Nation, for Inferior Men to speak unto others their Superiors by the Word (
Thou) and not You, and also to stand with their Hats on, unless Leave were
given them so to do.

Answ. Thou blind Sot, thou have laid thy self naked to the World (with thy
Rude and Rustical Query) it was never accounted so but by Dives's Nature, which
is swelled with Pride and Arrogance; yea, that which would be above God, which
must come down into the Pit: Is not God the Superior of all? then why do you
give unto him that Rude and Rustical Language? (as thou call it) here thou
manifests thy self amongst the Heathen, who know not God, who exercise Lordship
and Authority one of another; and so you rule in your own Wills, Mat. 20. 25.
and would not suffer your Fellow Creatures to put their Hats on their Heads,
but as you give them Leave, and so are out of the Doctrine of Christ, with your
Rude and Rustical Spirits: And was not ( THOU) the Language betwixt God and
Adam, Genesis 3. 11, 12. Exodus 10. 11, 12.
and betwixt God and Moses, and so all along the Scripture to one particular
Person; then whether or nay is thine a Rustical Proud Spirit, that can not
receive the Language thou give unto God: And thus thou have sufficiently
foamed out thy Shame; and I am sure now thou speak not by the Motion of the
Holy Ghost.

Qu. 14. Whether ever Christ or his Apostles taught us to alter or violate the
Civil Speeches and Customs of the Nation where we live, by which our Reverence
to others is expressed, and accordingly expected, if not commanded also? And
thou quotest 1 Cor. 10. 32.

Answ. Christ is not your Teacher; for, out of his Doctrine ye are found, in
the Pride of your Hearts, contemning his Speech and Language, and are not
contented with your natural Language, but borrow of others; in which Custom we
are not to follow you, out of the Language of the Scripture: and so here, by
thy Query, you express no Reverence of God, because to him you use the Word [
Thou] which you do account an Uucivil Speech. Therefore now see what is that
which takes Offense at that which God accepts; it must needs be of Proud
Lucifer: and that same took Offense at the Apostle, who said, Give No Offense;
yet the Truth is a Stumbling Stone and a Rock of Offense: Therefore now see how
thou stumblest at the Noonday, Isa. 59. 10.

Thy next is concerning Salutations at your Meetings with others, or Departings
from others.
Unto which I Answer, That your Heathenish Customs, Traditions and Salutations
I do deny, and know them to be contrary to Scripture; for, says it, Let him
that names the Name of God depart from Iniquity: Therefore, you that are in
Iniquity do take his Name in Vain, and make a Custom and Byword of it amonngst
your selves, when you meet with or depart from one another; and so your
Children learn it at you, and by Imitation use his Name before they do know
whether there be a God or nay.

And to that in Ruth 2. 4. and to that in Psalm* 129. 8. which thou have quoted
in thy Fifteenth and Sixteenth Query, I Answer; They that there named the Name
of the Lord, knew him; and that in the Psalm will witness against You, that You
have nothing to do to name his Name, nor to have such words spoaken to you, who
know him not: And read what God says to the Wicked in Psalm. 16. And why call
ye me Lord, and do not the things which I say? But the Salutations of the
Saints Iown, who are not by Custom lead, Luke 6. 46.

Qu. 17. And to Mat. 10. 12. and Luke 10. 5. which here thou have quoted, I
answer, That you are no Ministers nor Messengers of Christ, who are found out
of his Doctrine, therefore Peace is not given you to speak; but, as False
Prophets, you speak it to that which is for Death, because that puts into your
Mouths; Mic. 3. 5.
and even prepare War against those that do witness the Son of Peace.

Thy next is concerning Meat, Drink and Apparel.
And to thy first Query of that I Answer; All the Creatures of God are Good in
their Places, and all things for the use of Man, who dwells in the Moderation;
but cursed to you, who live under the Curse, in the Lust, under whom the
Creation groans, who know not the pure Wisdom, that made all things, to teach
you how to use all things to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
and therefore are out of the Right. And thy 23d and 24th Query is here
answered: But you are they whose Kingdom stands in Meats, and Drinks, and
Apparel, who are taking thought what to eat, what to drink, and where-withal to
be clothed, Matthew 6. 15.

Qu. 22. And to this Query, Where has God enjoined men to drink Water in any
Part of his Word?

I Answer. Thou may be ashamed to boast of thy Age, who ask such a
Childish Query: I might as well ask thee, Where God enjoined men to drink Beer?
For, Water is the Original of all Drinks; for, in the Days of Old, Water was
the Common Drink: Have thou not read of Jacob's Well, where Christ drank? then
Who art thou, that despisest Water? It is a Sign thou servest the Lust. But if
any drink Water, who know the Goodness of it, what is that to thee? Who enjoins
thee to drink Water?

And in thy Twenty Fifth Query thou answerest thy self.

Qu. 26. And this Query is, Whether one may not Satisfy the Flesh, even in
Over-fasting and Over-watching the Body? Which to prove thou quotest Col. 2. 23.

Answ. But I perceive thou will have a Care of that, who have been pleading so
much for the Body, which is the most thou mindest; thy Zeal is not so hot: But
they that dwell in the Power of God are free from this, and yet know how to
keep under the Body, and not satisfying the Lust; But you that know not the
Creator, trust in the Creature.

Qu. 27. And here thou ask, Whether are not the Saints to sanctify their
Meats and Drinks by Prayer and Thanksgiving, before and after they eat and
drink? Which to prove, thou quotest 1 Timothy 4. 5. and Romans 14. 16.

Answ. To the Pure all things are pure; but thy Prayers are Abomination, who
art in the Lust. But which of these Scriptures maintains your Custom after
Meat? But the Saints receive nothing of God, Tit. 1. 15. Mal. 1. 2.
but with Thanksgiving and Glory to God; but your Blessings are cursed. And
here is thy Twenty Eighth Query answered also.

Qu. 29. Whether the Apostle's Interdiction be absolutely against all
Ornaments, or Comparatively only? And thou have quoted a Scripture in 1 Pet. 3.
3, 4. which answers thee, where thou may read what Ornaments he approves
of; and here thy Thirty, Thirty One, and Thirty Two Query is answered.

Answ. But Moderation in every thing Iown; but what is waste is for the Lust,
both in Kings, Princes and Great Personages (as thou call them) but with us
there is no Respect of Persons, neither taking thought what to eat, what to
drink, or wherewithal to be clothed, as the Children of this World do, amongst
whom thou art found; but our Kingdom is not of this World: And Israel after the
Flesh was a Figure of Israel after the Spirit; therefore now read their
Adorning, if thou can; and remember, No Creature was made for the Lust,
though Lustful Men Abuse them.

Thy next is concerning Pride.
And thy first Question of this is, Whether Pride does lie in Apparel (though
there may be much Wastefulness, Vanity and Ostentation committed therein) or
inwardly, in the Heart and Mind of the Poor, as well as of the Rich? and thou
quotest Mark. 7. 21, 22, 23.

Answ. The Scripture which thou have quoted, does answer thy Question, where
Pride lies; but Apparel is a dead Thing, and no Pride in it, but the Vanity
and Wastefulness (which thou confessest is committed therein) figures forth the
Pride of the Heart; and where Riches are, this is shown (therefore you Priests
look at home, and judge your selves) though Poor and Rich be both in one Nature
before the Regeneration, Ephesians. 2. 3.

Qu. 34. Whether one of the greatest Things that puffs up the Hearts of Men, be
not knowledge? whether it be true or false, and imagined only? and thou quotest
1 Cor. 8. 1, 2.

Answ. You that are Carnal and Fleshly, are puffed up with your Fleshly
Notional Knowledge, and in that you steal from others Experiences; but the true
Knowledge of the Spirit puffs not up, but judges down that which would be
exalted; but this unto thee is a Mystery, because thy Knowledge has blinded
thy Eye, who art confused in thy Imaginations; so read thy self in the
Scripture aforesaid, which thou have quoted.

Qu. 35. Whether another Thing that exalts a Man in Pride, and makes him
despise his Brethren (and perhaps, those that are better then himself) be not a
Conceited and Self-chosen Holiness, seeing such a Proud Saint is brought in
Isa. 65. 5. which Thing also ( thou say) is verefied in the Pharisee and the
Publican? Luke 18. 15.

Answ. Thou have here answered thy self, with these Scriptures, wherein thou
may read thy self who think thy self more holy then thy Brethren, and
would only answer for thy self, and not for thy Brethren, though thou art
found in the same Practices; but thou blind Pharisee, he was not a Saint, which
was spoken of in Isa. 65. 5. but he was a Saint, which said, We are of God, and
the whole World lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. And here also thy 36
Question is answered, with the Scripture which thou have quoted, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
who art a false Teacher, doting about Questions.

Qu. 37. And here thou ask whether a Young Man be not the pro^est of all
other, to be thus seduced and puffed up? and thou quotest 1 Timothy 3. 6.

Answ. Thy Spite is much against Youth; but him thou shootest at, thou can
not hit, because thou art blind, and can not divide the Word aright; but thou
may plainly have read thy self in that Chapter aforesaid, and find, that
thou art the Novice, who know not the Truth, but despisest the Young Man
because of his Youth, which is contrary to Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 12.

And thy next is to maintain Swearing.
Qu. 38. And thy first Query of this is, Wheth^r it be lawful now, in the New
Testament to take an Oath before lawful Authority, to put an End to
Controversies? and thou quotest Heb. 6. 16.

Answ. This which thou go about now to uphold, manifests thee an Enemy to
Christ and his Doctrine, who says, Swear not at all; for (says he) it has
been said in the Old Time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform
unto the Lord thine Oath; but I say unto you, Swear not all; but let your Yea
be Yea, and your Nay be Nay; for what is more, is Evil: Now here he does not
only forbid false Swearing, but also all Swearing, Mat. 5. 33, 34, etc. and
also the Apostle James does the same, in Jam. 5. 12. both which Scriptures thou
have quoted in the 39th Query; and so here out of the Doctrine of Christ, again
thou art found in the Evil; and all you that cannot believe one another without
Swearing, and so are more then Yea and Nay and what is more is Evil (says
Christ) now read your Condemnation: And as for that in Heb. 6. there the
Apostle was speaking by Way of Comparison, how the Lord made a Covenant, and
confirmed it with an Oath, which is Christ Jesus, the Everlasting Oath, who
says, Swear not at all; and the Apostle brought a Comparison from Men in
Strife and Controversy; but this does not at all maintain Swearing now; for
Strife and Controversy is out of the Doctrine of Christ, and such run into the
Swearing, and into the Evil, amongst whom thou art found upholding the Evil,
and opposing Christ's Doctrine, and so art found in the Condemnation of the
Devil, Jam. 5. 12. This was not the Saints Practice; for in the New Covenant,
neither Strife nor Swearer is; and thus you Leaders cause Men to err, by
upholding that which Christ is against; and here thy 39th Q^ry is answered.

Qu. 40. Here thou ask, Whether Paul himself did not swear in these Words, 2
Cor. 11. 10. (as the Truth of Christ is in me, etc.)

Answ. Oh thou Enemy of Truth, that would here scandal and accuse Paul for
Swearing, that so thou might uphold Swearing* but by what does he here
swear? this is plain Language.

And thy next is concerning Outward Material Churches, and the public
Exercises therein.
Most of these Queries are answered in my Reply to thy Answer to my 17th Query,
wherein I have declared why I object against your Steeple Houses, which thou
call Churches.

Qu. 44. Here thou ask if such Meetings may not be mixed Assemblies, of
Learned and Unlearned, of Believers and Unbeliers? and thou quotest 1 Cor. 14.
23.

Answ. But the Unbelievers are not owned by the Believers, though they come
amongst the Believers, as in 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. then the Ministers
are far off, being maintained by Unbelievers, as thou art; for though thou
confessest the greatest Part are Earthly-minded and Worldly-minded, thou yet
art maintained by them, and I am sure, they that come into the true Faith,
which purifieth the Heart, come out from amongst you, so that you are not much
mixed; for you are all one Nature, like Priest, like People.

And in thy 47 th and 48th Query, thou ask, ^f Christ and his Apostles did
not frequent the Synagogues?

Answ. Yea, they did, and so do we your Idol-Temples; but therein the Jews will
condemn you, who suffered them to speak, as in that Scripture which thou have
quoted in Acts 13. 14, 15. which shall stand and witness against you, who will
not suffer us to speak in your Steeple houses, but suffer your Flocks to hale
us forth, and fall upon us like Wolves, and your Magistrates to hale us to
Prison; therefore read your Condemnation, you Persecutors: And thy 49th Query
is answered already with the other aforesaid.

Qu. 50. Here thou ask, If the Prophet did not complain to God against the
Prophaners and Destroyers of the Synagogues, in Psalm. 74 4, 5, 6, 7.

Answ. The Scripture which thou have quoted does answer thee, but it does not
uphold your Idols Temples, who worship you know not what, wherein you teach for
Doctrine the Traditions of Men, and there are found in the Steps of the
Pharisees, offering up your Abominations, as Christ marked you out in Mat. 6.
5. where he meant as he spoak, and all you do there is for self, and not for
God; for he says, In vain do you worship him, Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9. And here thy
51st Query is answered; but take Notice, your Steeple Houses are not the Houses
of God, as before is proved.

Qu. 52. Is it unlawful to call, either Baptism, or the Supper of the Lord, a
Sacrament or oblieging Mystery* since that Name imports no more, and you cannot
deny but that both these are mystical Things, and ablieging Mysteries, to the
washing away of Sin, and the following of Christ into his Life and Death?

Answ. Is thy Baptism now become an oblieging Mystery to the washing away of
Sin, which in thy Answer to my 21st Query, thou said, was not absolutely
necessary, but lawful only? can it wash away Sin, and yet not be necessary? but
this is all thou know of that Mystery that washes away Sin, or Desire after
it; for where Sin is washed away, this Confusion stays not behind. Yea, I do
deny that there is any Thing in your spri^kling Infants, or your Bread and Wine
(which does profit) as is manifest by these that receive them of you, who never
yet were washed from their Sins and Pollutions, or ever tasted of the Death of
the Cross; but the Baptism I own, and the Supper of the Lord I own; but the
Word Sacrament I deny, for the which you have no Scripture, whatsoever thou
say it does import.

And thy 53d, 5^th and 55th Queries are answered in my Reply to thy Answer to
my 21st Query, and thy 56th and 57th Queries are answered in my Reply to thy
Answer to my 25th Query.

Qu. 58. Who is there among you who are called Quakers, or the other Sectarians
your Forefathers, that has rightly declared the Mystery of Christ's Body and
Blood in your Dissentings from us? since none of you have declared this
according to our Lord's Intent? Joh. 6. 33.

Answ. As for Sectarians (as thou call them) they are in your Generation;
and art not thou ashamed to call them our Forefathers, whenas they now join
with you against us, yea, and in this very Thing, wherein they are blind as you
are? but the Mystery we know, and have declared to the Comfort of many a
restless Soul, who never could find true Comfort in your dark and dead Forms,
as Thousands in the Nation will witness; and this we have declared according to
our Lord's intent; therefore thou Liar and Slanderer, stop thy Mouth, and take
not his Name in vain; and that Scripture in John 6. 33. which hou have quoted,
will witness against thee, in that thou would uphold; and thy 59th Query is
answered with thy 6th and 57th.

And thy next is concerning the present Ministers and Teachers, and their
Maintenance.
Qu. 60. Were there no Ministers in this Nation, that held forth the Truth
amongst us, till you and your Associates rose up, since we have our Lord's
Promise, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church, and Behold I
am with you to the End of the World?

Qu. 61. What is become then of all your Forefathers, their and ours, who dyed
since the Apostles Days, till your rising up with a pretended Spirit?

Answ. Thou Carnal One, have thou nothing to do, but to raise the Dead to
dispute about? But to answer a Fool, I say, They are gone, as the Just and
Righteous Judge has disposed; but now he calls all every were to Repent, his
Trumpets are sounding a Warning; and there were none that preached for Hire
that held forth Truth in the Life and Power of it, but made a Trade and a Gain
of the Letter, from it speaking a Divination of their own Brain, as you do now;
and those were your Forefathers: But if you had the Lord's Promise, That the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against you, for the Lord will be with you;
then what need you a Law of Man to set you up, uphold you and maintain you?
Therefore it follows, the Lord is against you, and his Promises do not belong
unto you, who dare not trust him, and therefore are but Pretenders: and this
the Spirit of Truth in us can tell you.

Qu. 62. If there were some taught of God before you were called, why are they
not owned by any of your?

Answ. Thou art not one that art so taught; for thou art found out of his
Doctrine, therefore with that stop thy Mouth, and do not belie us; for, who
receive and obey the Truth we do own, whatsoever they have been. And here also
thy Sixty Third and Sixty Fourth Query is answered.

And thy Sixty Fifth, Sixty Sixth and Sixty Seventh Query is answered in my
Reply to thy Answer to my Nineth and Tenth Query.

Qu. 68. Is the Teaching-Priesthood to cease, till the Spiritual Melchizedeck
comes unto us, to bless us after the Slaughter of all our Enemies, with the
Heavenly Bread and Wine, Genesis 14. 18, 19. Hebr. 2. 1, 2, 3. that you say the
Priesthood of Aaron, wi^h the Law annexed of Tithes, is ceased under the Gospel?

Answ. Yea, so it is ceased; and those Scriptures do not prove to the contrary;
but that is Hebr. 7. does affirm it, as is before proved: But in that you
uphold it, in taking Tithes, you deny the Spiritual Melchizedeck; and if that
be the Teaching-Priesthood, which thou meanest, it is already ceased to many,
who are come to see the End of it; but the Gift blinds your Eyes, and therefore
you still uphold it; and lead the Blind into the Ditch; and so the Woe is to
you, and not the Blessing: and this Scripture in Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, etc. does
not at all maintain you. And here also thy Sixty Nineth Query is answered.

And thy Seventy, Seventy One, Seventy Two and Seventy Three Queries are
answered in my Reply to thy Answer to my Fourteenth Query.

Qu. 74. Did ever the Church of Rome cast greater Reproaches upon the
Protestant-Ministers, then you do? and are you not Jesuited by some of her
Emissaries, that you would have them all, one with another, rooted out at once;
yea, can the Devil himself desire more in this kind?

Answ. I see no Difference in the Ground betwixt the Church of Rome and You;
for they are Bloody Persecutors, and upheld by a Persecuting Law, and so are
you (who call your selves Protestants) and therefore no Reproaches to call you
Persecutors, Hirelings, False Teachers and Greedy Dogs, as the Prophets of old
called your Forefathers, in whose Steps you are found, as is before proved:
But howsoever thou with thy Lying Spirit termest us of the Jesuits, both thou
and thy Brethren have bin in this sufficiently proved Liars. Therefore by the
Sword of the Lord you must all be rooted out, Zach. 13. 7.
yea, you must all fall together; Ezekiel. 21. 9, 10, 11.
he will make a Grievous Slaughter from the Least to the Greatest; for his Hand
is stretched out against you, and therefore your Father the Devil bestirs
himself amongst you, to stand up for his Kingdom: And where did ever the Church
of Rome persecute any, sparing the Life, more then you do? Therefore let Guilt
strike you, and put not the Devil so far from you, whenas he fights for you:
But Carnal Weapons we shall not use against your to root you out; 2 Cor 10. 4,
5.
but our Weapons are Spiritual, and Mighty through God, to the pulling down of
Strong Holds: Therefore Tremble, all ye Enemies of God.

Thy next is concerning the Inward Light.
Qu 75. Is there not a False Light, as well as a True Light? And thou quotest 2 Corinthians. 11. 13, 14.

Answ. Thou have answered thy self with this Scripture; and I have already
proved, that this False Light rules in thee as an Angel of Light, who art a
Minister of Antichrist, transforming thy self as a Minister of Christ, but out
of their Life and Practice art found, and therefore guided by a False Light,
which is an Evil Eye and Dangerous Darkness, so that thou can accuse others,
but can not see the Falsness and Deceit of thy own heart, but think that
thou speak by the Motion of the Holy Ghost, whenas therein thou have
sufficiently been proved a Liar; and thus Satan rules in thee, and makes thee
believe he is God, 2 These. 2. 4. And here is thy Seventy Sixth Query answered
also. And that Scripture which thou quotest in Mat. 6. 23. shall stand and
witness against thee.

Qu. 77. Are we not therefore to try men's pretended Light by the Law and Word
of God? And thou quotest Isa. 8. 20.

Answ. You neither know the Law nor Word of God, and therefore rely upon the
Law and Word of Man, contrary to the Law and Word of God, and yet pretendest to
the Light, and the Law, and the Word of God, and so by it art tried, and found
to be a Deceiver, who put the Letter for the Word, and the Letter for the
Law, both which are within; but according to thy own Meaning, thou art out of
the Light, who attestest many things contrary to the Law and Testimony, as
before is proved.

Qu. 78. What may men think of your pretended Light, who hate so many of your
Brethren in the Ministry of England? And thou quotest 1 John 2. 9.

Answ. The Thoughts of Man are Vain; and would thou have the Light tried by
that? here thou errest from the Law and from the Testimony, and so confirmest
my former Answer: Therefore cease thy False Accusing from the Evil Thoughts of
thy Heart; for none of my Brethren in the Ministry of God do I hate: But I deny
that thy Brethren are mine; for, you are sprung of another Seed, and so are
become another Generation, in which the Righteous Blood has been shed, and
therefore Murderers; unto whom belongs this in 1 John 2. 9. and Chap. 3. 15.
where you may read your selves.

Qu. 79. Is there not another Light to go before the Light of Christ, seeing
the Wise Men, that came from the East, were guided unto Christ by a Star?
Matthew. Chap. 2.

Answ. Thy Ignorance of Christ and his Light thou have here manifested, and so
confirmest my Reply to thy Answer to my Thirtieth Query, that would not have
confessed, that Christ does enlighten every one that comes into the World, had
not John so plainly affirmed it in Joh. 1. and that thou never yet saw his
Star, who think that it is not his Light: Therefore thou that would set up
another ^ight before the Light of Christ, art a Deceiver, and a bringer in of
False Lights.

Qu. 86. Is not the sure Prophetical Word a Light, that shines in a dark
Corner, till the true Daylight arises in your Hearts? 2 Pet. 1. 10.

Ans. But it is the Light of Christ that leads unto Christ, the Perfect Day;
which Light shines in Darkness, and Darkness comprehends it not; and therefore
thou look without, for another Light, before the Light of Christ, John 1. 5.

Qu. 81. Whether the Life of Christ be not the True Light, that men are to wait
for, and wherein the true Children of Light are to walk? And thou quotest John
1. 4. and Ephesians. 5. 9.

Answ. Thou have here answered thy self; for his Life is the Light of Men,
which they must wait to know within them, to guide them; and thou that would
set up another Light, before this Light, art a Deceiver: And this is the Light
which now is come into the World, John 3. 19. 20.
testifying against the World, and manifesting you to be the Deceivers of the
World, who have long set up False Lights to draw from this True Light the Minds
of People. Therefore, now you can no longer hide your selves from this True
Light, you stand up to Oppose it where it is set up; and some call it a Natural
Light, and an, Insufficient Light; but it is your Condemnation.

Thy next is concerning Prophets and Prophetesses.
Qu. 82. Whether some men may not be acted with a Spirit of Fals^o^d and
Delusion, even then when they think they prophecy by the Spirit of God, as
Zezekiah was? 1 King. 22.

Answ. This is already a^swered in my Reply to thy Answer to my Sixth Query;
and thou in diverse places to be thus acted.

Qu. 83. Whether the Lord did ever send forth Boys or Striplings to be his
Prophets and public Teachers; seeing John the Baptist, who was born to be a
Prophet of the Most High, and was filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers
Womb, was not sent forth to preach and prophecy till he was 30. Years old?
Luke 1. 15.

Answ. How often have I made thy Folly and Ignorance in this to appear? and
that thou might be ashamed to Boast of thy Age, who so often have erred, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God, who would limit it to Time and
Age, in which I have before sufficiently answered thee. And now, I say, The
Lord sent forth Jeremiah when he was but a Child; Jer. 1. 6, 7.
and Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings the Lord has perfected his
Praise: Psalm. 8. 2.
Therefore henceforward stop thy Mouth from despising any because of their
Youth; Mat. 21.
but know this, That whomsoever God calls to his Ministry, he by his Power and
Wisdom does fit them for the same; and contrary to the Reason of Man does the
Lord work: Therefore, it thou wast not blind, thou would not so much look at
the Creature, but at the Power of God in the Creature: But, Mat. 1. 25.
as it is written, He has hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and
revealed them unto Babes. And here thy Eighty Fourth Query is also answered.

Qu. 85. Whether Lord will break his own Orders and Commands, expressly set down
in his Word, where he says (as you already heard) by Paul? 1 Timothy 3. 6.

Answ. And unto this I have already answered as to thy Thirty Seventh Query:
Therefore thou Blasphemer, stop thy Mouth, and be ashamed thus to accuse the
Lord, because he is pleased to make his Power known in Babes and Youth; for,
Timothy, To whom Paul writes this Epistle, was himself but a Youth, as Paul
wr^tes, 1 Timothy 4. 11, 12. and there read thy Reb^ke.

Qu. 6. Where did Christ or his Apostles send forth Women to be public
Prophetesses, as you have done many, and some of them not long since In^amous
for Lewdness of Life?

Answ. Oh thou Impudent One! How do thou provoak the Lord to Indignation
against thee, that dare lay any such thing to the Charge of God's Elect? Oh
thou Liar! Whom do thou accuse of Lewdness? We abhor thy words; for all
Lewdness and Profaneness we testify against, wheresoever it does appear, or any
thing contrary to the Pure Divine Light, which now is thy Conscience, and many
other Consciences, does bear witness for us, against thee, who ar^ given up to
believe Lies, and report them: Therefore read thy Portion in Rev. 21. 8. and
read an Answer to thy Query in Joel 2. 28. where the Lord says, Romans 16. 1, 2,
3, 4.
the Sons and Daughters shall prophecy: And none other do we own, but who
immediately are carried forth by the Spirit of the Lord, without the Commission
of Man; therefore thou falsely accusest us, who say, we send ^orth any.

Qu. 87. If you be extraordinary Prophets Immediately Inspired, as many of you
pretend to be, where are the Miracles which such inspired Men wrought in Times
past?

Answ. But that we are so inspired, thou do not believe (as may easily be
discerned by thy querying) and therefore unto thee no Sign shall be given, who
art in the Adulterous Generation, who cannot see the Signs that follow the
Truth, Mat. 16. 4.

Qu. 88. What have you fore^told by way of Prediction, which has accordingly
come to pass, as the Prophets, Apostles and Inspired Men were wont to do?

Answ. If thou can tax us to the contrary, thou may; we bear not witness
of our selves; but he that believes has the witness within himself.

And as for thy Eighty Nineth, Ninetieth, Ninety One and Ninety Two Queries,
they are answered in my Reply to thy Answer to my Sixtee Qnth uery. And thy
Ninety Third Query is answered in my Answer to thy Query concerning Salutations.

Qu. 94. Whether is a Multitude of Disciples and Followers a sure Sign that his
Doctrine is from Heaven, who is followed; seeing the Way is broad that leads to
Destruction, and many there be that find it? And thou quotest Mat. 7. 13. and 2
Pet. 2. 22.

Answ. Many are called, but few chosen; and many for a time followed Christ, so
that a Ruler said, If we let this Fellow alone, all men will go after him; John
11. 48.
which is the Cry of you and your Rulers now against the Messengers of Truth:
Mat. 7. 14.
And have thou never read of the Multitudes that followed Christ, but few there
be that enter, because strait is the Gate: But divide England into Parts, and
see if the greatest Number belong not unto you, who are in the broad Way; your
lives preach you forth: Therefore now thou should have first asked thy self
this Query, and said, Is it I? and so have laid thy Hand upon thy Mouth,

Qu. 95. Seeing this Age is Earthly minded, and willing to serve God with that
which costs them nothing, contrary to the Pious and Nob^e Spirit of David, 2 Samuel 24. 24. is it any great Wonder that your Doctrine against Tithes should
find so many willing, yea, greedy Entertainers of it, as it has done since it
was first broached?

Answ. The more is your Shame, who are Teachers in this Age, that are so
Earthly-minded, who have so long taken their Money for that which is not Bread,
Isa. 55. 2.
and their Labor for that which profitteth not: Jer. 23. 21, 22, 23.
Do You not herein manifest your selves to be such as run, and the Lord never
sent You, and therefore You profit not the People at all, but they are still
Earthly-minded? How have You then sown Spiritual Things? But I shall prove that
the Earthly minded Ones still stick unto you; for you have a Law, made by the
Will of Man, so that if they refuse to pay You, and forsake You, then by it You
cast them into Prison, and by Your Law take Tribble Damage; and this they
know, and therefore consult with their Earthly Minds, that it is better to pay
the Lesser then the Greater, though the Lesser is a greater Oppression: and
thus many deny the Truth, though* they are convinced in their Consciences
thereof: Therefore that which leads any from You, to take up this Cross, to own
the Truth, and deny You of Tithes, the same crucifies the Earthly Mind, and
leads to suffer for Conscience. And the Noble Spirit of David condemns You; for
whereas he refused upon Gift, You take upon Gift; Now there is much Difftrence
betwixt serving God and your Bellies.
and if They will not give it You, You will take it by Force; therefore this
Scripture affords Witnesses against You: But hereby thou confessest, our
Doctrine costs them nothing; then how said thou before, That James Parnel 's
Gospel was not without Charge? and thus out of thy own Mouth thou art proved a
Liar.

Qu. 96. Did ever Christ or the Apostles disturb the Priests and Ministers of
those Times, while they were teaching the People, as many of you and yours have
done?

Answ. Both the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles declared against the
Deceivers, False Prophets, False Priests and Hirelings; and the Apostles were
haled out of the Synagogues and out of the Temple, as Christ told them, John
16. 2. as we by the same Spirit do now against You, whom we find in the same
Steps; and here thou art answered, if this be it thou call Disturbance: But
it is because You would bear rule by Your Means, and suffer nothing to be
published that is against You, or strikes at Your Diana.

Qu. 97. Does the Gospel ordinarily call any man from his outward Calling,
whereby he should maintain himself and his Family? And thou quotest 1 Cor. 7.
20. Ephesians. 4. 28.

Answ. Yea, it does; and the Scripture holds forth the same, that they were
ordinarily called from their Outward Callings, to preach the Gospel to every
Creature: Neither does either of these Scriptures, which thou have quoted,
prove to the contrary. And how many Scriptures did thou quote in thy Answer
to my Fifteenth Query, to prove that the Ministers of the Gospel might forbear
Wo^king, and not to entangle themselves with the Affairs of this Life, yet in
all could not prove thy self a Minister of the Gospel? and now thou questionest
the Truth of the Scripture, because neither thou nor thy Brethren were called
according to Scripture: But whomsoever the Lord calls unto his Work, he does
take Care both for him and his Family; but You, that are not called by him,
dare not trust him without a Law of Man.

And in thy Ninety Eighth and Ninety Nineth Query, thou seem to accuse us
with some that turned from the Truth, and yielded to the Deceit of their
Hearts, and so gave Occasion to such as thee, who wait for Occasion to
Blaspheme the Truth; but is is no new thing, but the same which the Scripture
declares of in diverse places: therefore says Christ, Offenses must come, but
Woe unto them by whom they do come: For, there were then many such as thee in
that Age, who (as thou do) waited for Occasion to blaspheme the Truth: But if
thou had been then, how would thou have accused Christ, who had but Twelve
Apostles, and one of them betrayed him, and then hanged himself; and another
denied him? Therefore let this stop thy Mouth for speaking Evil of the things
thou know not. And as for Spencer and Gilpin, whom thou here nominatest; the
Truth is sufficiently clea^ed of them in other Books; and the Priests have
owned them, as they did Judas, which is the Name of all that turn from the
TRUTH, after they have received it.

Qu. 100. Have so many fallen into Distraction or Madness in any Sect or under
any Doctrine, as there has done amongst your Hearers, especially where the
Number of Disciples was no more?

Answ. Look at Home, and answer thy self, witness your UNIVERSITIES, as you
call them; for it is the Fruit of Your Studies, who would find out that by Your
Wit and Wisdom which the Lord has hid from You: And all that You cannot settle
in Security and Blindness, You lead them into Madness, Confusion and
Distraction, if they do not in time forsake you, as many will witness at this
day, That they are led by You into such a Wilderness, that they know not which
way to get out, neither do You know how to direct them; for You are in
Confusion your selves, and so the Blind leads the Blind into the Ditch:
Therefore this might have stopped thy Mouth from Falsely Accusing us. But I
remember, TRUTH was ever accounted MADNESS and FOLLY by the Blind World, who
know not that Godliness is Great Gain. And in thy Ninety Fourth Query thou wast
Questioning the Truth of our Doctrine because of the Multitude of Disciples,
and now by the Fewness; and thus thou Contradictest thy self.

And then, after much of thy Filthy Stuff, which all along thou have vented
forth of thy old Bottle against us (which upon thee I have returned again, from
whence it came) thou seem to accuse our Book, but do not show wherein, and
therefore I pass it by, as knowing thy Lying Spirit: And then thou stealest the
Apostle's Words for a Cloak for the Deceit of thy Heart, 2 Corinthians. 13. 7, 8,
9. which the Apostle spoak from a True and Upright Heart, but thou from a False
Deceitful Heart, as all along has been sufficiently proved, and thy Prayers to
be Abomination, and that thou have nothing to do to name the Name of God in thy
Mouth, who art a Worker of Iniquity and a Stranger unto God, who art found out
of his Doctrine; and therefore with this Scripture I shall mark thee, 2 John 9.
10. that all may know thee, and turn away theit Ears from thee, who art not to
be received, but denied; and therefore, whosoever receives thee or thy
Doctrine, the same departs from the Doctrine of Christ: And therefore, let
this be a Caveat to all People, to whom it shall come, and look upon thee to be
as Anathema Maranatha, (...) Cor. 16. 22.

Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord (through a Friend to all Souls,
witnessed in all Consciences by the Eternal Light of God, by which I am known
and received) in the Behalf of Israel, against the Armies of the Aliens, who
muster up themselves against the Lord and his Authority; by a Friend to the
Commonwealth of Israel, who is known to the World by the Name JAMES PARNEL.
Who is a Sufferer in Outward Bonds for the Testimony of the Everlasting Truth,
in Colchester-Castle, 1655.
A WARNING FOR All People.
ALL People Repent, and turn to the Lord from the Evil of your Doings; for the
Day of the Lord is at Hand, wherein the Lord will judge the World, and give to
every one according to their Deeds, whether they be Good or Evil; yea, He is
coming with Ten thousand of his Angels, to be avenged of the Heathen, Jude 14.
15.
and them that know him not: Now all that live in Sin and Filthiness, it
appears you know him not; for if you did, you durst not live in your Lusts,
heaping up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, wherein the Lord will appear as a
Consuming Fire against all Ungodliness, Romans 1. 18.

God is against you dissembling Professors, who adorn the Outside, serve God in
Notions, Words, and o^tside Forms, but the Heart is not upright with God, you
are in the Earth, in your Covetousness which is Idolatry; and the Lord abhors
the outside Worship, when the Heartis not answerable, and calls such Whited
Walls, and Painted Sepulchers, Hypocrites Serpents, Generation of Vipers, and
the Woe is to such, how can you escape the Damnation of Hell? Mat. 23.

God is against you Proud Lustful Ones, who make it your greatest Care to deck
your selves in proud Attire, inventing new Ways and Fashions to make your
selves glorious in the Sight of Men, that they may worship you and honor you,
but consider not that you are but Dust, and God will lay your Honor in the
^ust, for he is risen, to whom all Worship and Honor is due; and he will bring
down your Haughtiness and your Pride, and will exalt the Humble and Meek, Ez.
34. 16.
and will seek that which was lost, but will destroy the Fat with Judgment.

Repent ye Lofty Ones, and turn to the Lord, and humble your selves before him,
that you may be hid in the Day of his fierce Wrath, lest he take you away, and
there be none to deliver; for the Day of the Lord will burn as an Oven, and
they that are proud* and they that do wickedly, will be as Stubble, and it will
leave them neither Root nor Branch, Mal. 4. 1.

God is against you, Drunkards, who make it your Trade to pour in strong Drink,
abusing the Creature which God has given to be used moderately, for the
Health, and not for the Lust, therein you show your selves worse then Beasts;
you should be reasonable Creatures, but your Horses may teach you, who will not
drink but when they are dry, nor more then satisfies their Thirst; Woe unto you
that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of Strength to mingle strong Drink; Isa.
5. 22.
Woe unto you that rise up early that you may follow strong Drink, Isa. 5. 11.
and continue until Night, till you be enflamed; The Woe is upon you that put
the Cup to your Neighbors Mouth, to make him drink, that his Nakedness may
appear, and shameful Spewing cover him, and this is your Glory, which is your
Shame, and you tell it to others; you show your selves to be of the Generation
of Ham, Genesis 2. 23.
the Father of Canaan, who was accursed for such Practices, and the Curse is
upon you while you live here; therefore repent, and live no longer in these
Abominations and Filthiness, your Healths are Abomination unto the Lord, you
are ignorant of his saving Health; the Wants of the Poor cry out against your
wilful Practices, which are your Condemnation.

God is against your Swearers, who make it your Practice to take the Name of
God in vain, and live in open Breach of God's Commandments, who are not ashamed
to profane the Name of God in open Streets and Houses where you come; yea,
Jer. 23. 10.
Because of this the Land mourns; Repent, repent; the Curse is toward you
Profane Ones, you that regard not the Commands of Christ, who says, Mat. 5.
34. to 37*
Swear not at all, but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay; for whatsoever
is more comes of Evil: How will you stand before him at the Day of Judgment,
whom you now openly contemn; Oh Repen^ betimes, the Day is at Hand when it will
be too late, wherein you will wish you had never been born,

God is against you Liars, who make a Trade and Gain of Lying and Dissembling,
for Earthly Profit, to make your selves rich, and to cover over your Deceit
with Lying and Dissembling; and so your Houses are full of Deceit, Jer. 5. 26,
27*
and you sell your Birth right for a Mess of Pottage, as Esau did, who was
hated of God; and here you live in the F^ll, cursed from God, in the First
Nature, in Lying, and Cheating, and dissembling, striving to ensnare and
oppress one another in Bargaining by your Lying and Dissembling; Rev. 2. 12.
but the Invisible God, Romans 2. 6.
who knows the Secrets of your Hearts, whom you think not of, is coming to
reward every one of you according to his ^eeds, every one shall be judged out
of his own Mouth, and God ^ound a Just God; therefore repent, while it is
called to Day, and to the Light of God in your Consciences turn your Minds, by
it to be guided, and it will lead your Hearts out of the Earth and Earthly
Things, from coveting the Earth, and will lead you to deal Justly and Honestly
in Singleness of Heart to speak the Truth one to another, and to let your Yea
be Yea, and your Nay Nay, and to do as you would be done by; and this is honest
and godly according to the Light of God in every Man's Conscience: Now prize
your Time while you have it; 1. These. 5. 2.
for the Day of the Lord is as a Thief in the Night to all the Children of
Darkness; to the Light of God in all your Consciences I speak, which if you
love, Joh. 3. 19, 20.
it will be your Teacher, but your Condemnation it is if you act contrary to
it; Prove. 21. 8.
for he that loves and makes a Lie, is for the Lake that burns.

God is against you Scorners, who take Delight in scorning your Brethren, you
show your Folly to all Men, you that sit in the Seat of the scornful, you that
raise false Reports against the simple, and tell them to make your selves and
your Companions to laugh, Luke 6. 25.
your Laughter shall be turned into Mourning; yea, Isa. 28. 22.
Woe to them that laugh now, for they shall mourn; ye forget your selves what
you are, Prove. 1. 22.
take heed be not Mockers, lest your Bands be made strong, and when you cry,
there be none to deliver* Repent, How long will you Scorners take delight in
Scorning and Fools hate Knowledge? Cease from Sports and Pastimes ye wanton
Ones, making your selves merry in your Sin, your idle talking and foolish
Jesting, your unclean filthy Words are Abomination to the Lord; 1 Cor. 10. 6.
and every idle Word must be accounted f^r, Col 3. 6.
your Revelling, and Rioting, Carding and Dicing, Prove. 16. 4.
and all your invented Sports, sitting down to eat and drink, and rising up to
play, which is Idolatry, and the Wrath of God is against such Practices; 1 Cor.
10. 7.
for Man was not made to fulfill his own Lusts, Col. 3. 6.
but to serve the Living God, Prove. 16. 4.
who made all Things for himself, and the Wicked for the Day of Judgment.
Repent and take Heed, and search the Scriptures, and see if the Saints used any
such Practices, or spent their Time after that Manner, but had the Flesh
crucified with the Affections and Lusts thereof; Gal. 5. 24.
for he who lives after the Flesh, cannot please God, Romans 8.
for God is of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity, and nothing that defiles
must enter into his Kingdom, Hab. 1. 13.
Rev. 21. 27.

God is against you blind Guides, you Priests of England, who are the Teachers
and Leaders of this People, who live in this Filthiness and ungodly Practices,
without the Fear of God, going on in the Way of the Heathen, who know not God,
and yet you profess your selves the Ministers of Christ, and work no better
Reformation in them, yet are maintained by them, and are their Leaders and
Examples in all this Filthiness, flattering of them, and leading them in
Blindness, Crying Peace to them, because they put into your Mouths, and so
daub them with Untempered Mortar, telling them, they are Christianso and of the
Flock of Christ; and so through Covetousness, Mich. 3. 5.
with feigned Words make Merchand^ze of them; Ez. 22. 28.
but your Judgment of a long Time lingereth not, 2 Pet. 2. 3.
nor your Damnation slumbereth not All you blind Guides, who lead the People in
Blindness, in their Sins and Corruptions, every one their Hearts adulterated
from God, committing Fornication with other Lovers; and this you see and do not
regard, but seek for the Fleece, and feed with the Fat, and cloth with the
Wool, Ezekiel. 34.
and make a Prey on the Sheep, Jer. 3. 32.
and cause them to err by your Lies and Lightness, Ier. 6. 15.
and call your selves the Ministers of Christ, and are not ashamed, neither do
you blush; Therefore you shall fall amongst them that fall, in the Day that I
visit you, says the Lord.

JAMES PARNEL.

To My Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters, In the CITY of LONDON.
TO ye Translated Ones my Love from the Life does flow; You that are translated
and renewed in Heart and Mind; You that are separated and redeemed from amongst
the Children of this World, and the Polutions and Anominations that they live
in; in whom the Works of the New Creation, wherein dwells Righteousness, is
established; who are Beautified Within, who are Adorned Within, who are Comely
Within, who are Purified and Cleansed Within by the Precious Blood of the Lamb,
with whom You are crucified, who are in him, who have put on the Wedding
Garment, and are admitted to the Table of the Lord, and are Partakers of the
Holy Union.

Oh ye Blessed of the Lord, ye B^bes and Children of the Most High, who
dwe^^eth in Purity and reigns in Majesty, who ^ath established and set up his
Throne in Your Hearts; in You is my Joy and great Delight; y^a, I remember You
when ye were tender, and springing up, but by Waiting upon the Lord You ^ave
renewed Your Strength, and the more is my Joy made full in You, and Ye are made
Precious in my Sight, Ye that are inward Jews, of the Heart-Circumcision,
redeemed from Kindreds, Tongues, Languages and People, who are come to the
Heavenly Jerusalem, there to worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, whom he
has chosen to bear his Holy Image, which has been so much defaced in the
World, and In You to exalt and glorify his Name of Holiness amongst the
Heathen, and them that know him not, now in this Day, wherein he is visiting
the Earth with Judgment, and with Mercy, and with a Mighty Power, to call to an
Account the Inhabitants of the Earth: And blessed are You that have hearkened
unto his Voice; Ye shall sing and rejoice when others shall weep, and mourn,
and howl: Though amongst them your Portions are Scoffings, Scornings, Mocking,
Deridings, Back-bitings, Revilings, Persecutions, Stripes, Imprisonments, yet
have You learned to account these as Riches, who know the Comforter within You
and Your Redeemer to live with You; I do rejoice in all these things, being now
made Partaker of them, I am not unknown unto You; my Voice Ye know of Old. O
how do I long to see Your Faces, but in that I am straightened for a time! My Life
is bound up in many of Your Hearts, which makes me I cannot forget You; my
Spirit cannot be separated from You, though my Body is kept in Strait Bonds;
but the Straitness will be broaken, when he has perfected his Praise in them,
who is my only Keeper and Supporter.

O ye Simple Doves, who sit without Guile in Your Mouths! O how I am ravished
with the Love of You, when I behold You in Spirit! You that have given up unto
the Death, to the Famine, to the Sword and to the Fire, and have patiently
submitted unto the Father's Will, and willingly sacrificed up your Darling;
Your Faith is unto You imputed for Righteousness: and the God whom You have
trusted and believed in, will make You rich in him, and give You Substance
incorruptible, and an Inheritance that never fades; in measure You can set to
Your Seals of what is written unto You.

But some have hearkened unto the Evil Spirit, which has brought Evil-Tidings
of the Good Land; and such have turned Back into Egypt, and joined with the
Magicians thereof to harden Pharaoh's Heart against the Innocent, and filled
the Mouths of the Heathen with Blasphemous Speeches: But let them go on; He
that is filthy, let him be filthy still; for, he comes quickly whose Reward is
with him, to give unto them according to their Doings: But all things work
together for the Good of You who stand in the Faith, who are not moved with the
Winds that blow, nor the Storms that come against You, who eye the Hand of
Providence in all these things, which brings Good out of Evil to You wards,
who abide in the Truth, and stray not.

So, as You have tasted, felt, known and experienced of Him, so trust Ye in
Him, and remain in Your sure Confidence, which is begotten in You by his Word;
and be Ye as Lights in the dark World both by Word and by Conversation, that in
all things Ye may be approved by the Father's in Your Consciences, as Faithful
and Obedient Children, every one in Your Calling, wherein you are called, that
the Price thereof You may obtain in the End of Your Race. O lift up your Heads,
and look up to the Father, and see how he has tendered You, and how his Love
has been tendered toward You all along, who has not left You without
Instructors and Nursing-Fathers, who have watched over You with tender Care: In
much Love and Tenderness am I drawn forth toward You little ones, which
springs from the Root of the Vine, because you bear my Father's Image. Long
have I waited to write to You, and lately I had an Opening of You, which caused
me to visit You with this Epistle; for, Ye have been oftentimes in my
Remembrances though I could not write; and now You must read me in that Love
which Tongue cannot express, and in that Epistle which is written in Your
Hearts without either Paper or Ink, by the Immortal Word of Life, and there my
Name You will know.

So, the Lord God Almighty, the Keeper of Israel, over shadow you, and in his
Holy Presence keep You Pure and Innocent, that You may pour forth his Praise in
the Earth, and shine as the Sons and Daughters of Sion; into whose blessed
Protection I You commit, and do lie down with You, who am a Sufferer in Outward
Bonds by the Will of Man for the Innocent Seed's sake, but at Liberty with the
Faithful, who am called

Written from Colchester-Castle, the 12th of the 11th Month. JAMES PARNEL.

TO FRIENDS IN Essex.
FRIENDS,
TO that of God in all your Consciences I do speak, which there does witness
for God, which is according to the Mind of God, bearing Witness against what is
contrary to the Mind of God, and approving of what is according to the Mind of
God, which in your Hearts is placed to be your Teacher, to teach you to do the
Will of God, and how to walk up to the Mind of God, and to distinguish betwixt
Truth and Error, and betwixt the Precious and the Vile, and betwixt him that
serves the Lord and him that serves him not; which Light enlightens your
Undestandings, and lets you see the Land of Darkness, where the House of
Bondage is, where the Righteous Seed lies oppressed, and where the Man of Sin
does rule, and Death has Dominion; which Light is your Guide out of the House
of Bondage, and out of the Land of Darkness, and out of Death's Dominion, and
slayes the Man of Sin, and separates you from the Children of Darkness, and out
from among them leads you, to seek after another Kingdom, where all Things are
added, wherein is witnessed the perfect Day, where Sorrow and Sighing flees
away; but then out of your selves you must come, your own Wisdom and Reason for
to deny, and whatsoever springs from self, which is at Enmity with the Light,
and opposes, argues and contends against the Light, which by the Light is
condemned; but if you hearken unto self, then you stumble in the Way, and many
Stumbling Blocks lie before you and Tho^n^ and Briars catch hold of you, and in
the Mire your Feet do stick, and there you toil and moyl in Thraldom, and many
Hardships and Impossibilities do appear before you, and Doubts, and Fears, and
Questionings, and Murmurings, Repinings and Unbelief rise in you, and many
Temptations b^take you so^etimes to return back and dye in Egypt, sometimes
after the Delights and Fleshpots of Egypt, sometimes that God has utterly
forsaken you, sometimes to question the very Truth of God, and ready to call it
a Lie; and here is the wavering and unstable Mind, all which arises ou^ of
Darkness, where self stands, all which comes by harkening unto self: Therefore
unto the Light ( the Messenger of God) keep your Minds, which brings the
Message of Peace, and glad-Tidings of Salvation, unto which keep close, and own
it lone to be your Teacher Guide and Counselor, in all the Way you are to
pass, and in all Things that you are to do, standing in the Denial of self,
with all its Ends, and own the Light, which leads into Singleness to God, out
of Ends; and all Stumbling Blocks it will remove, and through the Briars and
Thorns it will you lead, and in the Mire you shall not stick, but the crooked
Way shall be made straight, and the rough and hard Way plain and easy; for in
the Light is none Occasion of stumbling, but keeps your Feet from erring and
straying and your Tongues from Evil speaking, as you hearken unto this, which
when you are going to the right Hand, or to the left, cries, This is the Way,
walk in it: This is the Word in you from whence comes Faith, which makes all
Things easy and possible; but without Faith it is impossible to please God;
and Faith is the Gift of God, and so is this Word of Truth, from whence Faith
springs, which judges down all Murmurings, Doubtings and Repinings, and all
Carelessness, Lightness, Lustings and Earthliness, and condemns the Ground from
whence all these Things do spring: And here the Ministration of Condemnation is
witnessed, which in its Time is glorious, through which comes the Ministration
of Peace, which does the other exceed; but take Heed of getting these Things in
the Comprehension to talk of; but let the Time of Silence and Patience have its
Work, in which wait for the fulfilling of these Things, that within you may
read them, and the Life it self may show forth it self, which dothadorn and
honor the Truth, and so you become the Vessels of Honor; but out of
Faithfulness this is not witnessed; For it is the Willing and Obedient that
shall eat the Good of the Land.

Therefore Friends, see how you stand in Faithfulness to what in your Measures
is made known unto you; for Faithfulness is of great value, and Faithfulness is
as well in secret as in public, knowing that all Things are public unto God,
who will j^dge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ; therefore he that is
faithful over a little, is approved of God, and shall be made Ruler over much;
but he that is ^sloathful is cast out, and from him taken that which he has:
These Things you have read without, but now learn within, and read your selves,
and you need not be Deceived; for by the Light your Hearts are searched, and by
it all Things are made manifest by which you are either approved or disapproved
unto God in all your Words and Actions; therefore by this set a Watch over all
your Thoughts Words and Actions* that the Righteous judge may be set up in your
Hearts, which judges down Deceit and iniquity, and establishes Righteousness
in the Earth, and Truth and Equity in the inward Parts, and cleanses the Heart
from Evil, that this alone may guide you and act you forth in all your^ Ways
and Doings; and then self has no Part, but all Things are done in the Cross
unto sel^, in Singleness unto God, and he alone is glorified and the Fear and
Awe is placed, and the Tongue is brid^^d, and the Will curbed, and the Heart
cleansed, and kept clean; for it is that which goes out that d^fileth:
Therefore I say unto you all, Watch, that the Pure may exercise your Minds,
which is the Cross to the Carnal, which crucifies the Carnal, and mortifies the
Deeds of the Flesh, and establishes Purity in the Heart, and brings forth the
Fruits of the Spirit; which is Love in a pure Life, that here you may come to
live, and walk, and grow together in Unity in your Measures; for that which
separates from the Unity is self, which causes Love to wax cold, but in the
Love of God abiding, self is denied; for where self is owned, the Love of God
is denied: So here is the Enemy of your own House, that you are to war against,
and in the Light (which discovers self) is your Power and Strength; and as you
receive the Light, you receive Power to deny self in its Appearances, which
Power reconciles your Hearts together, and works you into perfect Friendship
and Unity, which stands not in the Will, but in the pure Nature, which is the
Cross to Will, which Nature the World cannot bear, which Nature breaks the
World's Fellowship, Love and Friendship, all which stands in their corrupt
Wills, wherein stands all their Customs, Fashions and Traditions, and all their
Worship and Profession, out of which also arises Persecution against you who
dwell in the pure Nature, and the single pure Language, which their corrupt
Wills cannot bear nor savor; but look not out at what they can do unto you,
knowing that the uttermost is but to take the Life of the Body; but eye the
Lord your God in it, and count it your Riches that you are found worthy to
suffer for Righteousness sake; for through many Trials and Tribulations you
come forth pure unto the Lord, and strong in the Faith.

So the Lord God of Power be with you, and by his mighty Power keep you low,
and watchful in your Conditions, that your Eternal Good you may mind above all
Things under the Sun, that every one in the Truth received you may walk and
grow, daily dying unto the Things that perish, that in the Life of God you may
come to dwell, out of the Creatures, and then the true Use of them will be
given you, and the pure Wisdom, as it was in the Beginning, when Man was in the
Right to the Creatures, and here Paradise will be found; but he that believes
makes not have, but by patient continuing in well-doing, you will reap if you
faint not, wherein I bid you you Farewell.

Dear Friends, It was the Love of God in me, which run forth to the Seed in
you, which constrained me to write unto you, and visit you with this Epistle,
now my bodily Presence is by the corrupt Will of Man barred from you, yet my
Spirit does not cease in your Behalf, that the Lord by his Power (by which he
has awakened you out of Sleep, and caused his Witness to answer to his Truth)
would bless and prosper this his happy Work in your Hearts, to the bringing
forth his precious Seed to rule and have Dominion, that so his glorious Light
may shine forth in your Conversations, and his Beauty appear in your Image,
that the Heathen may be ashamed, and ^ear before the Lord your God: And here my
Friends is my Comfort in the midst of Bonds; yea, if this Body was to be
sacrificed up, it would not abate my Joy that I have in you, in whom the Work
of God prospers: Therefore I do charge you all in the Presence of the living
God, whom ye do profess, in his Fear to abide diligent and circumspect, that
you grieve not the Spirit of God, nor cause his Holy Name to be blasphemed,
lest you add Affliction to the Bonds of the Gospel.

From Colchester Castle in the 9th Month, 1655. This from a Friend, who is
known in Spirit, who for the Innocent Seeds sake suffers the Bonds of the
Gospel. JAMES PARNEL.

Another Epistle to Friends.
FRIENDS,
TO the ^ight of Christ Jesus in You all bring Your Deeds, by it to be tried
and proved; which Light in You all is the Heart^Seacher and Tryer, which as you
take heed unto, it will not let you be idle, or sloathful, or careless, nor let
You set l^ in a Formal Way or Carnal Security; but will let you see the Ground
and End of all Your Actions and Actings; and will prove and try Your Hearts,
and let You see how Your Hearts stand toward God, and what therein is Head and
Ruler; so that none of You may be acted by a False Spirit, which begets into a
False Liberty, out of the Cross; but that your own Wisdom and Reason (which
argues against the Light for a Liberty out of the Cross) may all come unto the
Death of the Cross, to be mortified; for all that in You which would not be
tried by the Light, springs from the Enmity against the Light, and is for
Condemnation by the Light, to which Light in You all I speak, which is the
Cross to Your Wills, that by it You may try all Your Ways and Actions.

For, all You that are Bowing, and Crouching, and Uncovering to the Creature;
You are still in the Old Nature, where old things are not past away, but are
still following the Customs of the dark World, worshipping the Beast which all
the World wonders after and worships; for, that i^ the Beast, even proud
Lucifer, the Lust in Man, which would be honored, and bowed to, and exalted,
which* so swells in Wrath, and Rage, and Persecution against those that cannot
worship bow to nor honor it, to which No Worship nor Honor is due; for* Dust
is the Serpent^s Meat: And from this Beast in Man did this Persecution ever
arise against this Righteous Seed, which could not honor nor worship him, as
you may read ( Rev 1^.) All the World wonders after the Beast, but those whose
Names are written in the Book of Life; and those were and are persecuted by the
Beast, and co^ld not nor cannot scarce buy or sell. And that in You which
honors and worships the Beast, or proud Nature in Man, is that which would not
bear or suffer the Rage or Persecution of the Beast, but would serve two
Masters; and so, while you are seeking to please the one, you displease the
other, and so beguile your own Souls, and are a S^are to others; and this Heart
is not right unto God: bring your Ends (in so doing) to the Light, and you
shall see it so, which ^ight will not deceive you, but undeceive you, as you
take heed unto it, and are willing to be led by it, which will lead you into
the True Worship of the Only True God, whose Worship is in Spirit and in Truth:
And by this Light you will see, that to Him alone All Honor, Glory, Worship,
Dominion and Thanks belongs: And Him that Honors God, him will God Honor: But
this Honor is not of Man; for, says he, I receive not Honor of Man. And here
all Men are honored in the Lord; but out of the Lord none are honored: And
they that are Proud, and High, and Lofty, are out of the Lord; for that is one
of the seven Abominations. And here, by the Light, all Respect of Persons is
condemned, and the Lord honored in all, and all in him; which Light condemns
the Language of Babylon, and begets into the plain single Language, which the
Beast-like Nature cannot ^ear nor savor; But if you seek to please Men, you
are not the Servants of Christ, Gal. 1. 10.

And all you that still follow the Fashions of the World (wherein is Excess)
either in Meat, Drink or Apparel; you are still alive in the World's Nature,
being conformed like unto the World, and are not obedient unto the Light which
convinces you of the Vanities of the World, and the Fashions thereof,
therefore by the Light in your selves, which condemns all that in you which
would be exalted and esteemed in the World, which would be like the World, and
have the Praise of the World, which is to be condemned with the World by the
Light which is not of the World: And so Pride comes to be rooted out of the
Heart, and You crucified to the World, by the Light, which let you see the
Vanity of the World, and the Fashions thereof, which ^ass away, which are not
to be Touched, Tasted nor Ha^d^ed.

And all the Customary Words of the World, which are by the Light condemned,
which by the Light are seen to be invented from that Nature which knows not
God, whereby God is dishonored who calls to all who will follow him, To come
out from amongst them, and be you separate, and touch no Unclean thing, and I
will receive you, says the Lord. Therefore touch not their Customs, but keep
out of their Fashions and Traditions; for they are all Unclean; and own the
Cr^ss, and despise the Shame; and follow the Light out or Babylon, and it will
lead you into the pure Religion, which is unspotted of the World; and so will
crucify you to the World, and the World to you: But that in you that pleads
that Scripture, Custom to whom Custom, that is it which is willing to remain
blind in Custom to save its Life, which by the Light is declared and condemned
with the World, which would keep in Friendship with the World, and in the Love
of the World, all which is at Enmity with the Light, and is for Condemnation by
the Light.

Therefore, to the Light turn your Minds, that by it you may judge all such
Carnal Ends and Reasonings, which would uphold these Carnal Customs, contrary
to the Light, which gave forth the Scripture, by which you may see what Custom
the Apostle there spoke of in Romans 13. 7. as you may read in Matthew. 9. 9. how
he sat at the Rec^it of ^ustom; but this does not at all uphold the Customs of
the Heathen, that are Vain.

Therefore to the Light take heed, that it may be your Teacher and Counselor,
that from it alone you may Act and Speak, and so will you find the Witness
within your selves for what you Act and Do.

And all you that still pay the Priests Tithes and Offerings, and are convinced
of the Deceit of the Priests,; you do deny Jesus Christ, the Son of God come in
the Flesh, who is the Everlasting High Priest, the End of Tithes and Offerings
according to the Law; and do uphold Babel and the Merchants of Babylon, and are
throwing down with the one Hand, and building up with another; who cry against
the Priests in words, as to be proud and covetous, and yet put into their
Mouths for a Peace sake with them; and so, while you put into their Mouths,
you Uphold them; for their Maintenance Upholds their Ministry: And here you
flee the Cross, and are Men pleasers, because you would not suffer for the
Truth you profess, and therefore are denied by them that dwell in the Truth.

But you that for Conscience cannot pay the Priests Tithes, keep to that of God
which convinces you in your Consciences, and it will carry you out to suffer
for Conscience sake; and so you will have your Peace with God in your
Consciences, though by Men persecuted. Or if you be called to Answer at their
high Courts or Benches, keeping to the Principle of God in your Consciences,
you may appear before their Highest Judges; and cast Slavish Fear aside, and
stand in the Fear and Counsel of God, and to their Faces Answer for the Truth
in Boldness against their Deceit, and let the Truth confound them. And give up
your Bodies freely to suffer for the Truth of Jesus, that the Heathen may know,
That the Truth is in You. And deny all those that receive Fees or Gifts in
their Heads, and keep to the Counselor within: If any Man wants Wisdom, let
him ask it of God, where you need not go out to Man.

And all you that give Money to Repair the Idols Temples, and are convinced in
your Consciences of the Idolatrous Worship that is therein upheld, you are
guilty with the Idolatrous Worshippers, who do uphold their Idolatrous Places,
and so uphold their Idolatrous Worship; and here you cannot wash your Hands of
their Idolatry, but are defiled with them so long as you Uphold their
Idolatrous Places. Therefore to the Light bring all your Deeds* that by it all
such Actions and Practices may be condemned, and you separated from the
Idolatrous Generation; and keep clean from its Polutions: and suffer willingly
the Spoiling of your Goods for the Name of Jesus.

And if you be called before Magistrates to take an Oath, keep to that which
condemns all Oaths, which says, Swear not at all, but testify the Truth from
your Consciences in the face of all men; and so you abide in the Doctrine of
Christ, and out of the Condemnation; for, They that Swear, fall into
Condemnation, says the Apostle James, Chap. 5. 11. And though in the Time of
the Law and the Prophets on Oath for Confirmation among men then was the End of
all Strife; but Christ Jesus, the Oath of God, the Fulfilling and End of the
Law and the Prophets, says, Swear not at all, but let your Yea be Yea, and
Nay, Nay; for, what is more, is Evil: And such as stumbles at this Language,
accounts the Cross Foolishness, and is for Death by the Cross, And if you be
crucified with Christ, you shall reign with him.

And so, to the Light in you all I leave you, by it to be directed how to walk
up to the Mind of God, and own the Truth before all men, every one of you
faithful in your Measures, there to grow out of the World, and the Deceit of
the World, to be kept clean from the World, in the Fear of the Lord, using the
World as if you used it not, and then are you my Friends, and of my Kindred.

And this I was moved to give forth, for the Directing of your Minds, lest any
of you should be choked with the World's Spirit, which I see working amongst
you, which would keep Peace and Friendship with the World; that by the Light of
Christ Jesus (where with you are all enlightened) you may search out this
Worldly Spirit, which is in you, working against the Light, that by the Light
it may be rooted out; for, of a Truth, you cannot serve them both; but while
you are seeking to please the one, you displease the other: Therefore keep to
that which separates from the World; for, if God be on your side, who can be
against you? In which Confidence I rest, in Unity with the Faithful, in whom is
my Joy and Comfort in the midst of Bonds.

Written from Colchester. Castle, in the 9th Month, 1655. JAMES PARNEL.

AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS.
ALL ye Friends of the Light, though we, who are your Ministers and Messengers
o^ Light, are in Prisons, Holes and Dungeons cast, and kept by the devilish
corrupted will of man, and suffered by God, the Father of Light, for the
Fulfilling of the Scriptures upon that G^neration which was prophesied of by
the Ministers and Messengers or Light in the days of old, who suffered in the
like nature, by the same Generation, for the same Testimony; and though yet the
Lord suffers the same Generation to act in their Nature against us, and fill up
their Measure of Wrath, it is for the Manifestation of his Truth, and Exalting
of his Name of Power; and through all this are we known and made manifest unto
You, who be in the Light; and the Heathen do come to know and confess, That he
is Greater that is with us, then all they that rise up against us; and in all
this do we Rejoice, and through our Sufferings are Crowned, and do get Victory
over the world without as within: And though we are here kept the Lord's
appointed Time, yet (Friends) eye the Lord in all these things, and look not
out at Man, or what Man can do, either for or against, but eye God in all his
Works, and in all his Instruments, and there will be no Cause of
Discouragement; for, the discouragements, and fears, doubts and questioning
spring from the Carnal, and know not the Eternal: But an Eternal Witness we
have in all your Consciences, which by the Word of Power is awakened in you, by
which we are known, by which we are owned, by which we are witnessed and
received into your Hearts, wherein our Unity stands with you who are faithful
unto it, by which we are remembered unto you though far Absent in Body: And this
Witness we have in the World, though they do not receive it, nor like to retain
it in their minds, therefore they do not receive us, but as the witness lies
slain in them, therefore do they strive to slay us: and this is their
Condemnation, which will witness unto God against them out of their own
Mouths: And thus we are a sweet Savor unto God both in you that Believe, and
in them that Perish. Therefore, you that do believe, unto this Witness ^ake
heed, and mind its Answer in Your C^nsciences, that it may Your Consciences
exercise in Unity unto God, that You in the Sense of it may be kept, to be
taught and guided by it into the Cross to Your Wills, that the Will of God may
guide You, and not Your own; that so the Living Witness may be born up in You,
to live, and rejoice, and be your Head, and that which has been Your Head may
be bruised; and so, Friends, your Hearts come to be established and confirmed
in the unchangeable Truth, unto which You are called, that You might be the
Children of Truth, to bear the Image of the Father of Truth. So, all who own
this Voice, unto the Witness in your Consciences and your Minds keep close,
that upon the living Substance you may feed at the Table of the Lord, and there
partake of the Union and Communion of Saints, every one in your measure
dwelling, the things come to be cleared up unto you, and the Shadow vanished.

Keep at Home every oen in Your Tents, and let the Candle stand upon the
Candle-Stick, that the whole House may be enlightened, lest the Thief get in at
a secret Corner, and trouble you, and rob you, and cast a Vail over your Light.

So, while you have the Light, abide in it, and in it you will see more Light;
and sweep clean within, and search every Corner, and suffer not an Enemy in the
House, and let not any evil thing remain in your Light; Cast out that which
has been in the Bosom; and let the Lamb be there, who says, He that loves any
thing better then me, is not worthy of me: So, unto the Light bring all; for,
Woe unto him that hides from the Light, the Day will make him manifest.

Oh wrest not above the Life; feed not upon any below the same; follow the
Light, which leads your Minds unto the Son; for, in him is Peace, yea, True
Peace, which cannot be broaken; yea, He is the Bond of Peace: If you abide in
him, he will abide in You, and You shall bring forth Fruit plentifully, and he
will refresh You with the Heavenly Dew, and Ye shall ^lourish as in a Summer's
Day, yea, as Plants of Righteousness; but the Spring comes first. Oh, how
Pleasant and Beautiful is the Spring in a Barren Field, where Barronness and
Deadness flee away; as the Spring comes on, the Winter casts her Coat, and
Summer nigh: Oh, wait for to see and read these things within. You, that have
been as Barron, and Dead, and Dry, without Sap, unto You the Sun of
Righteousness is risen with healing in his Wings, and does begin to over-shadow
You, and shine into Your Coasts: For this is the Day wherein the Lord is come
to visit You, yea, to You that have long sat in Darkness, now Light is sprung
up. Oh mind the secret Springs and the Tender Plants.

Now, You are called to dress the Garden; let not the Weeds and Wild Plants
remain: Peevishness is a Weed, Anger is a Weed, Hasti^ess is a Weed, Self-Love
is a Weed, Self-Will is a Weed, Secret Envy and Malice are Weeds, Pride is a
Wild Plant, Covetousness is a Wild Plant, Lightness is a Wild Plant, Vanity is
a Wild Plant, Self-Knowledge is a Wild Plant, and Lust is the Root of all, and
these things have a Room in your Garden, and have been tall and strong, and
Innocence, Truth and Equity have been left, and have been deep in the Earth,
and could not be found until the Sun of Righ^eousness arose, and searched and
sought out that which was lost, and brought again that which was driven away.
Therefore stand not idle, but come into the Vineyard, and work; Your Work shall
be to Watch, and keep out the Fowls of the Air, and the Unclean Beasts, and
the* Wild Bears, and the Subtle Foxes; and he that is the Husbandman will
pluck up the Wild Plants and Weeds, and make Defense about the Vines, and he
will tell you what to do, and he will be nigh you, who is the Father of the
Vineyard: Now, read within, or else you stumble; and what is not clear to You,
wait for the fulfilling; He that believes, makes not haste. But You that are
covered with Leaves, the Son will search You; You must come to the Fall of the
Leaf, and to a Time of Deadness and Winter, before the Life appears, and living
Springs be opened; Your Garments You must cast off, and then the Son will
cloth You, but not before You are naked, no, not so much as an Apron of
Fig Leaves must You have to cover Your Nakedness; for, Shame must come upon all
Flesh, and the Harlot must be laid bare, and no Eye shall pity him.

SOME QUERIES Sent to the Masters of the Colleges IN CAMBRIDGE, TO Answer in
Plainness of Speech, in WRITING.
Query I. WHether Hebrew, Greek and Latin be the Original of Tongu^s* yea or
nay; and whether* that (...) the Original to open the Scriptures? yea or nay,

Qu. II. Whether there was not an Original that gave forth the Scriptures,
before Tongues were? yea or nay.

Qu. III. And what was the Original, before many Tongues were? and what was the
Tongue?

Qu. IV. Whether any be made Minister of the Lord Jesus Christ by the Will of
Man? yea or nay.

Qu. V. And whether any in the Time of the Apostles, or the Prophets of God, or
Jesus Christ, did ever serve a Set Time; for many Years, to learn Natural
Tongues, and give So much for their Learning, and then afterward sent forth to
preach, and to have so much for their Preaching? Whether such be not made
Ministers by the Will of Man? yea or nay; seeing there arises so much
Persecution by the means of these Men in this Generation, Hailing out of the
Synagogues; Stocking, Whipping, Stoning, Striking and Imprisoning, which are
the Fruits of all such as are born after the Flesh, contrary to Christ's
Doctrine, who says, Love your Enemies; Are they Enemies? Love them?

Qu. VI. And where did God command that which you call an Ordinance, as to
Sprinkle Infants? show a plain Scripture for it.

Qu. VII. Is the Priesthood changed which received Tithes, according to the
Law, which had a Command to take Tithes? and is the Law changed by which the
Priesthood was made? and is the Command dissanulled by which the Priesthood
took Tithes? yea or nay.

Qu. VIII. Did Abraham ever pay Tithes to Melchizedeck but once? yea or nay:
and was it out of his Substance, or out of the Spoils? and if out of the Spoil
which he had got with the Sword, and that only once, and no more, what Ground
is that for this Generation of Priests (so called) to take Tithes Yearly of the
Labors of the People?

Qu. IX. Did ever any of the Apostles take Tithes; or any of the Believers in
Christ Jesus pay Tithes? show it out of their Declaration.

Qu. X. And is not this a False Doctrine of them which have come from the
Colleges, that have told the People, The Bible is the WORD; whenas it
witnesses to the Contrary, and declares, that God is the Word? John 1. 1.

Qu. XI. And is not this a False Doctrine of them that have told the People,
the Letter has been the Light; whenas the Letter says, Christ is the Light?

Qu. XII. And is not this a False Doctrine of them that have told the People of
a Sacrament, which there is no Scripture for? And have told the People, The
Steeple-house has been the Church; whenas the Scripture says, The Church is
in God, 1 These. 1. 1. And is not this contrary to the Scripture?

Qu. XIII. Have you that Spirit that was before Scripture was given forth,
which gave them forth? yea or nay.

Qu. XIV. Have you heard God's Voice immediately from Heaven and Earth? yea or
nay.

Q^. XV. Do you own Trembling inward and Trembling outward? yea or nay.

Qu. XVI. Is that Witchcraft and the Spirit of it, that scoffs and scorns at
them that do Tremble? And is not that the Power of God that makes the Devils to
Tremble? yea or nay; and shakes down that which must be shaken, and removes
that which must be removed; is this the Power of God? yea or nay.

Qu. XVII. And whether ever any th^^ did Tremble at the Word of God, and
witnessed the shaking of those things that must be shaken, and the removing of
th^se things which must be removed, did Scoff and Scorn at any? yea or nay.

Qu. XVIII. And whether such as do Scoff and Scorn, Beat and Imprison, and Hale
out of the Synagogues such as Trembled at the Word of the Lord, be not out of
Christ's Doctrine, who says, Love your Enemies? yea or nay.

Qu. XIX. And whether such as have the Chief Seats in the Synagogues, and stand
Praying there, and are called of Men Masters, which Christ cried Woe against,
Mat. 23. whether he justifies such now, and sends forth such now, which he once
cried Woe against? yea or nay.

Qu. XX. And whether such as bear Rule by their Means, and seek for their Gain
from their Quarters, and seek for the Fleece, and cloathe with the Wool, and
make a Prey upon the People, and are Hirelings, which the true Prophets of the
Lord were sent to cry against; whether such be approved of the Lord now, and
justified and set up now, which he sent his Prophets to witness and cry
against, and disproved, as in Jer. 5. 30, 31. Isa. 56. 10, 11. Ezekiel. 34. Mic. 3.

Qu. XXI. And whether such as go in Cain's Way and Balaam's Way, which the Lord
sent his Apopostles to cry against, which were disapproved of him; whether such
be approved of God now, which were disproved and cried against then, which go
in Cain's Way, and Balaam's Way, as it is manifest? For they that do not give
them Maintenance, they sue them at the Law, or cast them into Prison, as is
witnessed in many Places in this Nation.

Qu. XXII. What is the First Principle of the Pure Religion?

Qu. XXIII. Does Christ Enlighten every one that comes into the World? yea or
nay.

JAMES PARNEL.

To you who be called JUDGES, JUSTICES, RULERS ant OFFICERS.
WHO Fine and Imprison Men, because they cannot put off their Hats to you, and
call it a Contemning Authority, and Mis-behaviour, and Evil Deportment, and yet
say, The Scripture is your Rule, and profess your selves Christians, and to
believe on Jesus Christ: Now by the Scripture try your selves and your
Practice, and let the Li^e thereof judge you; where do you ever read that
Pharaoh King of Egypt, who oppressed the Children of Israel, and knew not the
Lord, did command Moses or Aaron to put off their Hats, or Fine or Imprison
them if they would not, or told them they Contemned Authority, or called it
Mis-behaviour or Evil Deportment, as you do; or ever Darius, or Nebuchadnezzar,
or Belthaser, or any of the Heathen^sh King^^^ Princes, Rulers, Judges or
Governors in the Time of the Law or Gospel, command such a Thing? Where did
ever Herod, who beheaded John, or Pilate, or Festus, or King Agrippa, command
any such Thing? Now if you cannot find one Example amongst all these Heathen,
for this your Practice, let the Lise and Practice of the Heathen judge you and
condemn you; for you are not fit to be reckoned or numbered amongst the
Christian Kings, Judges, Rulers and Governors, as Joseph, who was made Ruler
over Egypt, or Moses, who was Judge over all Israel, or Joshua, or Je^htah, who
was Chief Judge, or David, or Solomon; nay, they were Men fearing God, and
hating Covetousness, and far from Oppression: Therefore now behold your selves,
and be ashamed of your Pride and Arrogance: and though there was a Time that
Pharaoh in his Will oppressed the Children of Israel, yet there came a Time
that he felt the Hand of the almighty God, and thereby was Israel delivered,
and he drowned in the Sea: And though Nebuchadnezzar made an Image, and would
have all to bow unto it, or else be cast into the fiery Furnace, yet there came
a Time that he lost his Kingdom: And though there was a Time that Haman was
accepted, and Mordecai despised, and Haman made a pair of Gallows for Mordecai,
because he could not bow unto him, yet there came a Time that Haman was hanged
on his own Gallows, and Mordecai exalted in his stead: Now read your selves and
your Portions; for in Haman's Nature your are found Lording over your Fellow.
Creatures by your corrupt Wills, as it does appear by your Sternness and
Cruelty in Fining of them, and Imprisoning of them that cannot bow unto you,
nor put off their Hats unto you; might not Haman upon the same Account have
taxed Mordecai for contemning Authority, and for Evil Deportment, as well as
you, seeing it was a Decree of the King? And might not Nebuchadnezzar have so
accused Sahdrach, Meshach and Abednego, seeing it was a Command of the King?
And might not the Priests, Captain, and the Rulers have done the same to John
and Peter upon the same Account, as you now do? But whether was it by the
Authority of God, or their own Wills, that they commanded these Things? and
thereby try your selves, and see what you would do if you had a Law to show for
what you do, as they had, seeing you act thus without Law; and have no Law to
show for it, though you do it in the Name of the Lord Protector of England, and
so make him the Protector of Tyranny and Oppression and Cruelty, as ever was
heard of in any Age, which is contrary to his own Proclamations; and I do
believe he would be ashamed to own his Name to such Practices; for if he
should, he makes his own Promises Vows, and Proclamations of none Effect: And
this the Lord God of Heaven and Earth has suffered long, but his Sword is
drawn and furbished, to cut you down all you high Oaks and tall Cedars, who
oppress the little Shrubs, and him too whom you call Lord Protector, if he wink
at, and suffer such Things to be done in his Name, contrary to the Name which
he has taken upon him; and you shall know, that there is another Lord
Protector, to whom all Glory Honor, Dominion and Thanks belong, whose dreadful
Hand you shall feel, whom your Tongues shall confess to be Just, though with
weeping and wailing and gnashing of Teeth, because you have robbed him of his
Glory and Honor, and taken it unto your selves: And though in the Old Covenant
they bowed to one another, yet when Christ, the New Covenant came, who is the
End of the Old, he spoke unto his Disciples, and said, The Heathen exercise
Dominion and Lordship one over another, but it shall not be so amongst you, but
he that will be the greatest shall be the least, Mark 10. 42.
for one is your Master. Now here is the New Covenant, out of which you are
found, amongst the Heathen, Lording over your Fellow Creatures by your corrupt
Wills; and yet you dare take upon you the Name of Justice, and the Name of
Christians, whenas again Christ said unto your Forefathers, How can you
believe that receive Honor one of another: John 5. 44.
Here you are found in the same Generation, in the Unbelief, out of the Faith,
and so No Christians; for Christ says, I receive not Honor of Man, but you
do, Ver. 41.
and Imprison Men, and persecute them if they do not give it you, and so are
not like Christ, therefore no Christians, but Heathens; for Christians are like
Christ, being made Partakers of his own Divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1. 4.
and let all that profess Christ walk as he walked; bu^ this you do not:
Therefore be ashamed of your Profession, who so exceed the Heathen in
Presumption, seeking Honor to your selves, by Tyranny and Persecution, Rev. 13.
Exercising the Power of the Beast, which all the World wonders after and
worships, but those who have their Names written in the Book of Life, whom you
persecute, because they cannot bow to now worship the Image of the Beast, which
you uphold; and so you fulfill the Prophecy of John, where it is said, The Kings
of the Earth shall give their Power unto the Beast, and they shall make War
with the Lamb: Rev. 19.
So you, as Kings on the Earth, over your Fellow Creatures, rule by the Power
and Authority of the Beast, and make War with the Lamb, to exalt your selves in
his Throne; but the Lamb shall overcome, and the Beast and the false Prophet
that had deceived the Nations; and all that bear his Mark, Rev. 17.
and worship his Image, into the Lake shall be cast, even Tophet which was
prepared of Old for the Kings of the Earth: But here is the Patience of the
Saints; here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of
Jesus, which is without Respect of Persons; but tremble you Careless Ones, that
are at Ease, your Plagues shall come upon you in one Day, when you are not
aware, who are killing and persecuting the Just and Innocent, under Pretense of
Contemning Authority, because they cannot worship the Image of the Beast; and
thus you rule by the Power and Authority of the Beast, winking at Vice, Deceit
and Iniquity, strengthening the Hands of the Evildoers, and persecute the
Righteous, and tread Truth under Foot; and thus you bear the Sword in vain: And
here is the Abomination that stands in the Holy Place, where it ougth not,
Injustice set in Justice's Place; for I, deny any Thing to be Justice, or done
by the Authority of God, but what is according to the Law of God, which
respects no Man's Person, but convinces them to be Transgressors that do; and
Justice says, I receive not Honor of Men: Now here you have gotten the Name,
but want the Nature, and so know not the Honor that belongs to Justice, but
threaten, persecute and imprison Men, that come before you, and do not honor
you with Cap and Knee, before they receive Justice from you; and how can they
honor Justice before they see it? but instead of doing them Justice, you do
them Injustice, and exercise the Power of the Beast upon them; but will not the
Lord be avenged on such a People as this? yea, He is coming with Ten Thousand
of his Angels to render Vengeance upon the Head of the Wicked and Disobedient;
For Truth and Justice now is risen and arising, and it is you that are not
subject thereunto, but stand in your own Wills to oppose it, and are setting up
and exalting your selves, even into the Throne of God; but remember Lucifer,
for it is he that is exalted in you; and though you be exalted as high as the
Heavens, and set your Nests among the Stars, thence will the Lord fetch you
down, and cast you into Hell, as he did Lucifer, Dives and Haman, and the rest
of your Forefathers, ye proud Ones: Therefore Repent, and let the Oppressed go
free, lest the Lord shorten your Days, and cut you off amongst the Wicked with
the Blast of his Mouth; for now you are warned in your Life Time, and left
without Excuse, by a Servant and Messenger of the Lord, whom he has sent to
give Warning before his Judgment.

JAMES PARNEL.
He that seeks himself and his own Honor, shall not prosper, though he rule in
his Will for a Time; but him that honors God, him will God honor.
To all You Magistrates, Rulers AND OFFICERS, Who Call Men to SWEAR, and
Imprison them if they will not.
You are the Oppressors of Tender Consciences, and do not allow Liberty of
Conscience, and so break Your own; and also You have a Law against Swearers,
and yet by Your Law seek to compel men to swear: Oh! blush, and be ashamed of
your Profession, who thus Unjustly act: How dare You call Christ Your Lord and
Master, and do not the things that he says? for, he commands, Swear not at
all, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by the Head, because you cannot make
one Hair white or black, nor by any other thing; but let your Yea be Yea, and
Nay, Nay; for what is more, is Evil: And so here You run from the Doctrine of
Christ, and hinder others, who both swear your selves, and would compel others,
by Fining of them and Imprisoning of them; and thus You run into the Evil, and
would have all with You in the Snares of the Devil: And now, if you do run unto
the Scripture to maintain Swearing, and say, They swore in the Time of the Law:
I Answer, Christ Jesus, who is the End of the Law, faith, Swear not at all; and
if you do allege, That Moses, a Servant of God, swore; I Answer, But Christ
Jesus, the Son of God, says, Swear not at all; hear him: And if you do
allege, That David, a Man of God, swore; I Answer, But this is the Son of God,
and David called him Lord, who says, Swear not at all; him You are to hear:
And if You do allege, That Saul swore in the War; I Answer, He, who comes to
End all War and Controversy, who brings Peace and Good Will toward Men, he
says, Swear not at all, who is the Son of God; hear him: And if You do
allege, They swore in the Time of the Prophets; I Answer, Christ Jesus, the
Fulfilling and End of the Prophets, says, Swear not at all: And if You do
allege, That they Swore in the Old Covenant; I Answer, Christ Jesus, the New
and Everlasting Covenant, says, Swear not at all; but let your Yea be Yea, and
Nay be Nay; for what is more; and here You are shut out of the New Covenant, in
the Evil, and so in the Kingdom of the Devil; for, in the New Covenant no
Swearer can come: And if you do allege that Scripture where the Apostle said,
An Oath for Confirmation amongst Men, to them it was the End of all Strife; I
Answer, He brought this as a Comparison confirming the Covenant that God had
made, and confirmed it with an Oath; but the Apostle brought it not to maintain
Swearing or Oaths; but he spoak it concerning Jesus Christ, the Oath of God,
which is the End of all Oaths, Controversy and Strife, who says, Swear not
at all: And in the Old Covenant they did use Oaths for the End of Strife and
Controversy, and to Confirm things amongst them; so the Apostle brought that
then as a Comparison; but Jesus Christ, the New Covenant, which was confirmed
by an Oath, and now is the End of all Oaths, and Controversies and Strife, who
now says, Swear not at all: The Apostle he declared against Strife and
Controversy, and he declared against Swearing; for, the Apostle James says,
Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not at all; neither by Heaven, neither by
the Earth, nor any other Oath; but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay,
lest you fall into Condemnation: And here You are in the Condemnation, and out
of the New Covenant, and draw from the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostle, who
are in the Oaths and Swearing, and compel others to swear* Therefore the
greater will be Your Condemnation. And if You do allege that Scripture, where
the Apostle said, Be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake; I
Answer, Obey God rather then Man for the Lord's sake, who says, Swear not at
all; and Why call you him Lord, and do not the things which he says?
Therefore, away with Your Profession of Christ, and of Faith in him, and are so
Faithless as to depart from his Doctrine, and compel others to follow You;
hence You are found Traitors to him, and Hypocrites, whom the Lord will judge,
with your Hypocritical Feigned Faith, who cannot believe one another without
Swearing, and so think all like your selves; but as many as believed, were of
one Heart and Soul, which was the End of all Strife and Controversy; and they
made No Swearing amongst them, who were in the Faith.

Therefore, all You Magistrates, Rulers and officers, who are Swearing, and
Compelling men to Swear, now read your selves by the Light of Christ, which
searches Your Consciences, and with it judge your selves; and Fear the Lord
God, and Tremble before him, who do so oppose his Commands, and do Despite
against the Spirit of Grace; for, no Ignorance in this thing can you plead:
For, it is plain by the Light of God in your Consciences, that you do Evil;
therefore I charge You in the Presence of the Living God, To take heed of
Oppressing any Tender Consciences, or Forcing any Tender Consciences, or Fining
them, or Imprisoning them for Obeying God rather then Your Wills; for, if you
do, to be sure the Plagues and Woes of God shall come upon you, and great shall
be your Condemnation.

And if you ask, How shall you do to End Controversy, and to Confirm a Truth?

I Answer, They that for Conscience sake dare not Swear, they for Conscience
sake dare not Lie, but speak the Truth so far as they do know, without
Hypocrisy; for, that that judges Swearing, that also judges Lying, Hypocrise
and Deceit; and so by one Truth its confirmed: And as for those that are
without the Fear of God, who scruple not at Swearing, they scruple not at
Lying; for they that will tell a Lie in such a Case, will also Swear and Lie:
Therefore, whom you find thus Deceitful, you may also exercise the Law upon
them as upon False Swearers, without Winking at them; and that will bring them
into Awe and Fear of the Law, though they be out of the Fear of God; and for
this End was the outward Law ordained: And thus you will be a Terror to the
Evildoers, and a Praise to them that do Well; for, if all did Well, what needs
there a Law? And so, as you stand here in all things which belong to your
Places, discharging your Consciences in Equity and Justice, without Partiality,
and then will you do that which is wholesome and good in the Sight of God, and he
will bless your Proceedings; and thus you will be worthy of double Honor, not
with the Flattering Titles of Men, or Respect to your Persons, in Admiration,
because of Advantage; but you will witness the True Nobility, and deny all
Flattery or Deceit, but your Honor will be of God; for, Them that Honor God,
them will God Honor; if you stand, I say, in that Counsel of God, out of your
own Wills, Ruling for God, and not for your selves, but for the Punishing of
the Wicked, and the cleansing the Land of Evil doers, that God may be Honored
by your Faith, and Faithful, and Just and Equal Proceedings. And so, I rest a
Friend to the Tender Consciences, and am subject to all Wholesome and Good Laws
and Ordinances of Man for the Lord's sake, and do honor all such Magistrates
in my Heart, who observe this Government without Flattery or Hypocrisy; but I
find some so worthy in the Nation, in whom there is no Hatred, and the Unjust
strive to put them out, and so the ^and must needs abound with Corruption and
Evil, Deceit and Hypocrisy, and all Ungodliness, as it does, seeing these that
are in Offices, who ought to suppress those things, do countenance those
things, and lay their Law upon the Innocent and Righteous; and so, as much as
in them lies, to exalt Iniquity, and beat down and tread Truth under Foot: But
the God of Truth is arisen with a Mighty and a Strong Arm, which they are not
able to overcome; but the more they stir, the more it conquers, who is come
with a Fan in his Hand, and will thoroughly purge his Floor, and gather his
Wheat into his Garner, and burn up the Chaff with Unquenchable Fire; and thus
will he sweep away the Seed of Evildoers, and Refuge of them with the Beesom
of Destruction; and so will he cleanse the Land of Evildoers, and make all you
Careless Ones, that are at Ease in your Lusts, all you Corrupt Unjust Judges,
Rulers and Officer, who are Partial in your Judgments, and receive Gifts in
your Hands, and regard not the Cause of the Just; your Calamity is coming on,
and your Destruction is nigh at hand; and God is a Just God, and will not
acquit the Wicked.

Now you are Warned, and a Servant of the Lord Discharged, by whom you are
Warned, whom he has sent to sound his Trumpet in England, which goes before
his Judgments, who am known to the World

James Parnel.

THE END.

