The Faithful and Diligent Christian described and exemplified.

OR, A SERMON (With some Additions,) Preached at the Funeral of the Lady
ELIZABETH BROOK, the Relict of Sir Robert Brook Knight. of Cockfield-Hall in
Yoxford, Suffolk.

Who departed this Life July 22. And was interred in the Parish Church of
Yoxford, July 26. 1683. And in the 82d Year of her Age.

To which is annexed (including the Character then given of Her) an Account of
the Life and Death of that Eminent LADY.

With an APPENDIX, containing some Observations, Experiences, and Rules for
Practice, found written with her Ladiship's own Hand.

By NATH. PARKHVRST, M. A. Vicar of Yoxford, and Chaplain to her Ladyship.

Prove. 31.29. Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

London, Printed for Samuel Sprint at the Bell in Little-Britain, and John
Harding at the Bible and Anchor in Newport Street near Leicester-Fields. 1684.

To the much honored, Truly Virtuous and Religious, Mrs. MARY BROOK.
MADAM,
THE shortness of the Time which was allowed me for the delivering of the
Sermon preached at the Funeral of your Excellent Mother, would not permit that
fuller Account of Her which I now humbly offer to you, (with that Sermon
enlarged.)

Notwithstanding which Additions, I am sensible there remains much unsaid equal
to the things I have remarked, though assisted by some very consideble
Memorials sent to me by a most worthy Friend to your Family, who has been
acquainted with her four and forty Years, and passed many of them in her House.

But there being a necessity of omitting some things, unless I would have
exceeded the usual Bounds of such Narratives: I only beg your Pardon if I have
not made the best choice among those Treasures of Excellencies and Christian
Accomplishments that were found in Her.

These which I have collected, I hope may be useful to them who have any
Inclination to Piety, as serving to excite to a great degree of Holiness: This
being the natural Tendency of great Examples recorded, even to move others to
Imitation.

Which Effect I am much assured it will produce in your Self; and You of all
others are most obliged to endeavor it, having been constantly conversant with
the Pattern, when living.

It is a great Honor to have descended from such a Parent; but it will be much
more to tread with that Exactness in her Steps, that all that behold your
Conversation, may see Her living in You.

It was Her earnest desire you might survive, and God has fulfilled it. She
has left You in her Province, clothed with her Mantle. And may a double
Portion of her Spirit rest upon You! that You may honor God, as She did. And
that You may enjoy a long and prosperous Life here; and then ascend to Heaven,
and partake together with Her in equal Glory, is the earnest Prayer of,

Madam, Your much obliged, and most humble Servant, NATH. PARKHURST.

ERRATA.
PAge 17. line 17. for and his, read and in his. P. 19. l. 11. f. is before us,
r. is set before us. P. 56. in the Margin, f. Sussex, r. Suffolk. P. 106. l. 9,
10. f. Heaven makes, r. it makes. P. 108. l. 10. f. rational, r. notional. P.
114. l. 1. f. the End, r. his End. P. 151. l. ult. f. in the State, r. in this
State. Some few other lesser Mistakes of a Letter or two in a word, may be
easily taken notice of, and mended in the reading.

A SERMON PREACHED At the FUNERAL of the Lady Elizabeth Brook etc.
1 COR. XV. 58. Therefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your
Labor is not in vain in the Lord.


THE Gospel of our Blessed Savior has many Excellencies in it, inviting us to
accept, and obey it. For,

First, The matter of it is Grace, in the most kind and condescending Offers
thereof; And Holiness, described in the exactest Rules for the management of
our Hearts, and Lives; no Ethics being comparable to the Precepts of it.

Secondly, The Author of it, is, The Prince of Peace, and King of Kings, The
Eternal Son of God, The Brightness of his Father's Glory, and express Image of
has Person.

Thirdly, The end of it, is, The most eminent Display of all the Perfections,
and Attributes of God. For,

His Power is most admirably manifested in the Miracles that have confirmed it,
and in the success of it upon the Minds of many, who have been changed by it
into the Divine Image.

His Wisdom also shines most illustriously in that Contrivance in it of the
Harmony between His offended Justice, and his Mercy, in being Just, and yet the
Justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

Moreover, his Holiness is greatly declared in it, in the satisfaction and
sufferings of his only Son.

And above all, his Mercy and Goodness is most eminently expressed in it, by his
free Acceptance of them that repent of their Sins, believe in his Son, and
sincerely obey him, (notwithstanding their many Infirmities,) entertaining them
with the greatest Kindness and Love, beyond expression, beyond conception. And,

Fourthly, As one of its most glorious Excellencies, The Encouragement to
receive, and obey it, is no less than the Promise of an unspeakable Future
Happiness in our Souls immediately after Death, and of a most glorious
Resurrection of our Bodies (in the last day) unto a Life Eternal, and
Enjoyments no less excellent, than durable.

Of which the Apostle discourses largely in this Chapter, with abundant
Demonstration of the truth of it; concluding with this practical Inference in
the Text, Therefore my Beloved, etc.

In which Words (besides many things which I omit) we have observable,

First, The Duty of Christians proposed: Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord.

Secondly, The Reward of accomplishing the Duty: Your Labor is not in vain in
the Lord.

Thirdly, The Rational Inference, or Conclusion from the certainty of the
Reward: Therefore, my Beloved, be ye steadfast, etc. forasmuch, etc.

Of which Things I shall discourse in this Method, showing,

I. It, is our Duty to be employed in the Work of the Lord.

II. That we ought to attend it with steadiness.

III. That we should be perpetually progressive in it.

IV. That the Recompense will answer the Labor; For, it shall not be in vain.

I. It is our Duty to be employed in the Work of the Lord. It is called His
Work, because it is enjoined by His Laws, encouraged by His Promises, and
performed by His Aids. For otherwise it might have been termed Our Work, it
being the whole Christian Exercise which is intended by it.

In this therefore is comprehended,

1. The Labors and Industry required of us, toward the attaining necessary,
sound, and sufficient knowledge of the Great Principles of Faith, and of the
Rules For conducting our Conversation, and the encouragements to Holiness
contained in the gracious Promises, and the Cautions against Sin, which we have
in the severe Threatenings dispersed through the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, without which Knowledge, the Heart cannot be good, nor the Life
purified, or suitable to the Christian Profession: wherefore we are directed to
search the Scriptures, S. John 5.39. To incline our Ears to Wisdom, to apply
our Hearts to Understanding, to cry after Knowledge, and lift up our Voice for
Understanding, to seek hit as Silver, and search for her as for hid Treasures;
Prove. 2.2, 3, 4.

And certainly the Wickedness of the most of Men among us, is greatly imputable
to their utter Ignorance of these things, or a very slight and inconsiderable
Knowledge of them. For Ignorance of God, Christ, and his holy Spirit, and of his
Attributes and providence, prevents all Inclination to Piety. Ignorance of the
Rules for managing our Lives, prevents all that Regularity in Conversation that
is required. Ignorance of the Promises suppresses all the Incourgement to it;
and Ignorance of the Threatenings hides all that which should move that Fear
that is necessary to engage us in it. And all this Ignorance proceeds from
Slothfulness, and Unwillingness to use Diligence in scearching and
understanding the Scriptures, in which are the Treasures of all needful
Knowledge. And therefore the first thing in this Work of the Lord enjoined us,
is an industrious Endeavor after Knowledge, by being conversant in the
Scriptures, by reading, or at least diligently hearing them.

2. There is included in it all that belongs to Repentance toward God,
consisting in a deep Sense of our many Sins against God, Christ, his Holy
Spirit, our Neighbors, and our own Souls; by which God has been dishonored,
Christ slighted, his Holy Spirit grieved, our Neighbors injured, and our own
Souls polluted, debased, and exposed to the Wrath of God: as also in confessing
them with Shame and Grief, offering the Sacrifice of a broken and contrite
Heart: and in an hatred of them all attended with sincere forsaking them,
denying Ungodlinss and worldly Lusts, and suffering no Sin to reign in our
mortal Bodies; being able to attest, that (upon making a diligent search) there
is no known Sin of Omission or Commission allowed, loved, or favored by us:
But that every such Sin is opposed by our Purposes, Prayers, and true
Endeavors.

3. To this must also be referred, all that is included in Faith. And that
comprehends a settled Belief of the Being and All-Governing Providence of God,
and of the Truth, or Divine Authority of the Scriptures; A continual depending
on the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God; and the receiving his Son Jesus
Christ in all his Offices, as a Prophet, Priest, and King; And as the Lord our
Righteousness, our Advocate with the Father, the Propitiation for our Sins, the
End of the Law for Righteousness to them that believe, and as made of God unto
us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. And this we do when
designing Salvation by Him, we search the Scriptures, considered as the Word of
Christ, with dependence on the Holy Spirit as the Spirit of the Son, that we
may understand the way of Salvation, and know the things of our Peace; and when
apprehending our Guilt and Danger by Sin, we seek the Pacification of our
Consciences, and the appeasing of God, by believing, meditating upon, and
applying his Death and Blood as a Sacrifice, and Satisfaction for Sin; and when
we commend all our Requests to God, with Dependence on his Intercession; and
when apprehending his Exaltation we become earnestly obedient to him, and
depend upon him for Grace, and Strength against all our spiritual Enemies, and
hope to receive from him the Crown of a blessed Immortality, and a miraculous
glorious Resurrection.

4. To this pertains all that the Scriptures intend by Holiness, consisting in
the Imitation of the Divine Imitable Perfection, viz. the Wisdom,
Righteousness, Purity, Faithfulness, Goodness, and Mercy of our Creator; in
cleansing our Hands, and purifying our Hearts; in sincerely attending the
Duties of both Tables of the Law, with respect to God and our Neighbor; and in
mortifying all those Lusts that war against the Soul; as the Lusts of the
Flesh, including Intemperance, and Uncleanness: The Lusts of the Eye, which are
Avarice, and Covetousness, and the Pride of Life, i.e. The ambitious pursuit of
Honor and Applause, and the affecting the Pomp and Bravery of the World: and
in filling our Minds with all the Divine Graces, and holy Affections of Fear,
Love, Trust, and Hope toward God, and of Love, Meekness, Humility, and
Kindness toward Men; And in obeying the Laws of Christ, and following his
Example, in being in a great measure holy, harmless, undefiled, and separated
from Sinners; In doing Good, reproving Sin, delighting to do our Father's Will,
and submitting to his holy Pleasure in all things, willingly drinking the Cup
he puts into our hands; and in glorifying him on Earth, that he may glorify
us in Heaven.

5. To this belongs all that the Scripture charge upon us in those full and
comprehensive Precepts, of, fearing God, departing from Evil; loving Him with
all the Heart, Mind, and Might, keeping his Charge, doing his Will, walking in
his Counsel, choosing the narrow Way, and exceeding the Righteousness of Scribes
and Pharisees; by being impartial in our Obedience, and chiefly attending the
weightier matters of the Law, and by being sincere and humble, not glorying in
our pious Seize and Actions, but rather hiding them; excepting those
things which for Example's sake must be public, and such as the concealing
them proceeds from Cowardice, and fear of Reproach.

6. There is included in it, the faithful managing of our particular Callings,
as the Magistrates being just, and ruling over Men in the Fear of God: the
Ministers Care of Souls, praying for the People, and showing them the right
way, endeavoring to turn many to Righteousness: The Peoples revering,
cheerfully attending and obeying them that watch for their Souls: The Parents
care and bringing up Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; the
Child's Obedience, the Master's Justice, and Kindness; the Servant's Diligence
and Faithfulness; and the Subjects unspotted Allegiance, and Obedience for
Conscience sake: And all other our Duties in our several Places, Stations,
Employments, and Relations.

7. There must be added, as pertaining to it, all the most serious part of the
Christian Life, employed in fervent Prayers, and Thanksgiving,
Self-Examination, serious and Divine Meditations, and solemn and fruitful
attending the Public Worship of God, consisting chiefly in the Word preached,
and in Prayer, and Sacraments.

Lastly, To this must be joined the most refined, and spiritual part of
Religion, consisting in suppressing the most inward Motions of Vanity, Pride,
Envy, Malice, Unbelief, worldly inordinate Love, carnal Affections and Desires;
in keeping the Mind (as much as may be) intent, and without Wanderings in
Prayer, and other devout Exercises of Religion, and in attending in them to
more than a natural Fervor and Devotion in the Imagination only, moved by well
composed, and fit Words, even to a Devotion consisting in the real Exercise of
Faith, Humility, holy Love and Fear, and other Graces; and in raising our Minds
above the World, and things of this Life, to the Desires, Hopes, and
Expectation of the Joys and Pleasures of Eternity; and in maintaining a real
and delightful Converse with God daily; and in a careful thankful acknowledging
Him in all the Good that befalls us: and insensibly apprehending that our
Happiness consists in the Knowledge of Him, and his Love and Favor toward us
in Christ. All this is our Duty, and included in the Work of the Lord, and we
may not willingly omit any thing of it. By which we may perceive, that though
in some respects, Christ's Yoke is easy, and his Burden light, viz. being
considered with its Reward, and the Assistances of Divine Grace, and compared
with the wicked Man's Way and End considered together; yet it is not altogether
easy, since so much is to be done. Religion and Godliness have their
Difficulties, and he must be diligent that would not fall short of the Glory of
God, since the Duties (besides that, they are great) are so numerous, as has
been now represented according to the Scriptures.

II. All this must be endeavored, and practiced with much Steadiness. Having
thus begun in the Spirit, we must not end in the Flesh. Having put our Hand to
the Plough, we may not draw it back, and make our selves unworthy of the
Kingdom of God.

Whatever may be the Rage of Satan, and whatever Objections may arise in our
own Hearts against any part of our Duty, we may not quit it. But considering
that the Eye of God is upon us, and that it is necessary to persevere to the
end; and looking at the Joy that is before us, and imploring the Aids of the
Holy Ghost, we must break those Bonds of Temptation to Sin, in sunder, and cast
away such Cords from us, and remain fixed in Piety, constant to Godliness,
unmoveably resolved to abide in it, Cleaving to God with purpose of Heart, Acts
11.23. and avoiding that Reprehension in Hos. 6.4. Your Goodness is as a
Morning Cloud, and as the early Dew it goes away.

And that we may be the more animated to Constancy in Religion and Godliness,
let us consider the many glorious Examples of this Steadiness. Noah continued
firm in his Obedience to God, in the midst of a very wicked World: Genesis 7.1.
Thee have I seen Righteous in this Generation.

Lot in the midst of the polluted Sodomites preserved himself, and mightily
regretted their Wickedness. Joseph in Pharaoh's Court, and Moses in the Court
of another of that Name: Obadiah in Ahab's, David in Readiness, Daniel, Ezra and
Nehemiah in the Courts of the Persian Emperors, remained steady in Holiness,
notwithstanding varieties of Temptations both of the alluring, and affrighting
kind.

The holy Apostles and Primtive Christians, and the Ancient and Modern Martyrs,
preserved their Integrity in the midst of violent Temptations to desert
Religion. They stood like unmovable Rocks in raging Seas, and turned back the
Force of Temptations, as they do the insulting Waves.

Wherefore let this be our firm Resolution in the Strength of God, That the
World shall never gain, nor force us to revolt from Him, and his holy Ways: but
that whatever Changes may come, we will be the same; and though the Mountains
should be removed, and the Hills carried into the midst of the Seas, we will
still keep Faith and a good Conscience, being steadfast and unmovable in the
Work of the Lord.

III. We ought not only to be steadfast, but also perpetually progressive in all
this Duty, like the shining Light, shining more and more to the perfect Day.
Our Repentance must be increased, and perfected by greater degrees of
Mortification. Our Faith must grow, aiming at the Patriarch's Degree, who was
strong in Faith, giving Glory to God; and who against Hope believed in Hope:
Romans 4.18, 20. Our Love must be more intense, our Obedience more exact, willing
and cheerful; our Charity more complete, and every Grace ascending, and
aspiring after greater Degrees, going on conquering and to conquer: which thing
is very possible, for Grace is as capable of Growth and Increase, as the Plants
in the Field, or the Cloud of an hand's breadth. It is compared to a Grain of
Mustard Seed, Which from the least of Seeds, grows up into the greatest of
Herbs; St. Mat. 13.31, 32.

We may assuredly (if we earnestly design it) mightily advance in Grace, and
become much more humble, holy, obedient, mortified, patient and heavenly, and
may add much to our present Seize, and may carry our Victories over
Temptations much further, to higher degrees of Conquest and Triumph, even on
this side Heaven. And as we may, so we ought; for this God requires of us, That
we should bring forth much Fruit; that from Babes we should advance to a more
perfect stature in Christ, and increase with all the Increases of God. And that
in proportion to our Means, Mercies, Chastisements, Experience, and Time
offered us, we should grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge and Love of God, and
Christ; to which there is no Encouragement wanting. For,

IV. The Recompense will abundantly answer the Labor, which shall not be in
vain. We shall find a sure and sufficient Reward; partly in Peace of Mind,
Serenity of Conscience, and present Joy in the Holy Ghost; and chiefly in the
future State. For,

1. Having been steadfast, and abounding in our Duty, when our Souls shall leave
these Tabernacles of Clay, (whose Foundations are in the Dust, as their first
Principle) Angels shall convey them to Heaven, and there Christ will receive
them, and God the Father will acknowledge them: and, being entered into that
blessed Place, we shall have all the Happiness our Souls are capable of in the
State of Separation from the Body.

And this is no less than an entire Deliverance from Sin, Sorrow, Fear,
Temptations, and Afflictions, with the Acquisition of perfect Grace, and
likeness to the Angels in Humility, Purity, Zeal, Reverential Fear of God,
delight in Him, and Charity one to another.

Moreover, We shall be little less than equal to them in Peace, and Joy, and
the Enjoyment of God in a Vision of Him by Intellectual Sight, far transcending
our best Knowledge of Him here by Faith. For now we see him by Faith only, in
his Works, Providence, and Word; all which amounts comparatively but to the
seeing him through a Glass darkly; but in Heaven we shall see Him face to face,
and know Him in some sort as we are known. 1 Cor. 13.12.

2. Having been steadfast, and abounding in Piety, and Holiness, we shall in the
end of the World recover our Bodies again with advantage; for they shall be
raised again in Incorruption, Glory and Power, being made Spiritual Bodies;
verse. 42, 43, 44. This Corruptible shall then put on Incorruption, and this
Mortal shall put on Immortality, and Death shall be swallowed up in Victory.

And who can express the Joy, and Pleasure that will arise from the Soul's
re-entring into the new-raised Body! As a Prince that leaves an old Palace till
it be rebuilt with much more Glory, Magnificence and Splendour, returns into it
with more Pleasure than ever he had in it before: so the Soul will rejoice much
more in its repaired Fabric, than ever before during the time of this mortal
Life; especially upon finding it purged entirely from Sin, the fretting Leprosy
in the Walls of it, which could never be cleansed, but by the breaking of it
down. And probably there will be a mighty Addition to this Pleasure, by the
Soul's sensible uniting with it, or joining to the Body, with a Perception of
doing so.

The first Union that was made between them, was (to the Soul) insensibly
performed by the mere Hand and Power of God, in the first Formation of the
Body; and so the Felicity of that Uniting was never understood. But at the
Resurrection, the Body being raised again, and most gloriously formed, and the
Soul coming down from Heaven, and knowing to what end it descends, will with a
strange Pleasure sensibly enter again into its old Habitation repaired and made
glorious.

And being raised from our Graves with this Pleasure of the Reunion of Soul and
Body, we shall be conducted to Christ's Right Hand, and hear such Words as
these spoken to us, by Him the Judge and Lord of all; Come, ye Blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World:
And, Well done good and faithful Servant, enter you into the Joy of your Lord.
When the Ungodly shall hear the Words of the Curse, (more terrible than the
Thunder on Mount Sinai) Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil, and his Angels.

And then together with all the Church of God, and the holy Angels, we shall
(Souls and Bodies united together, never more to be separated) ascend into the
highest Heaven, and enjoy, throughout an Eternity, the fullest, most refined,
and most agreeable Happiness, that our Natures are capable of; which if we can
believe, depending upon the Verity of the Scriptures, we must acknowledge our
Labor is not in vain.

And why should we make any doubt of it? Have we not all the Evidence we can
have of this matter! The Scriptures have the Attestation of multitudes of
Miracles performed, and Prophecies fulfilled. They have, the Signature of God
also upon them in the Holiness of the Matter, and the Majesty of the Style in
many places; never Book spoke like this Book.

The Matters of Faith in it are so high, the Mysteries so grave, and sublime,
the Precepts so holy and pious, the Promises so agreeable, and refreshing to
Minds that are mortified, and purged from Vice, the Threatenings so solemn,
severe, and just; the Examples so glorious, and the whole so admirable, that if
we consider it, we cannot imagine the Author to be other than God, who is most
holy, just, and good.

There being then no doubt but that the holy Scriptures will be in all Points
verified, and in particular in the Promise of future Happiness, consisting in a
glorious Resurrection, and a blessed Immortality, as the Reward of true
Holiness: Let us be persuaded to comply with God in the things he requires of
us; And let us manage our Lives according to our Christian Profession, and our
Vows in Baptism, and since.

And let us hearken no more to the Charms of Sense, the Voice of a tempting
World, and the Whispers of the Devil our great Enemy, enticing us to Sin, and
to abide in evil, and unholy Ways and Practices.

But let us deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present World, putting on the Armor of Light and
Righteousness on the Right Hand and on the Left: And let us in earnest make
Religion the great Business of our Lives, believing God's Promises, and
expecting this most glorious Reward.

But some may possible object in this manner.

We have heard the manifold Duties of Religion, and have sometimes considered
of the great Reward proposed. But we find (to our Discouragement) that Religion
is a Wisdom too high for us, and the Practice of it a Province too difficult.
It is a way too strait, and a Gate too narrow, a Yoke too pressing, a Burden
too heavy, a severe Warfare, a tedious Travel. It is impossible to comply with
it; and if we would endeavor the Practice of it, we cannot effect it. It were
more easy to us to dig in the Mines, or serve in the Galleys, then to break off
our Sins, and live a holy Life. And therefore urge us not to attempt
Impossibilities.

My Answer to this Objection is, That it is a Mistake, and that what is
required, is through Divine Assistance and Grace very possible, and certainly
practicable. The Difficulties are great, but there is a Grace given to
Believers that surmounts them all, that levels the Mountains, fills up the
Valleys, makes the crooked places straight, and the rough places even; that
opens the blind Eyes of Men's Minds, and softneth hard Hearts, and subdues
rebellious Wills, and regulates disordered Affections; that enlightens, and
enables to will and to do, and out of Weakness makes strong, and calls things
that are not, as if they were, and raises dead Souls to Life. Therefore, let it
not be said, It is impossible to be Religious. But let Men beg the Grace that
will make it possible: And never let it be said, it is impracticable, when
Multitudes (though few in Comparison of greater Multitudes) have lived in the
practice and exercise of Holiness.

A Cloud of Witnesses (as they are called, Heb. 12.1.) have gone before us in
the practice of these things, though Men of like passions with us. The
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and many others, have given us the
Pattern and Proof of all this Piety and Godliness Some of all sorts have
sincerely, effectually, and successfully engaged in it; viz. some Kings,
Princes, and Emperors, as David, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, etc. some Generals of
Armies, as Joshua, and Gideon, etc. some Officers of State, as Joseph, Obediah,
etc. some Learned, Rich and Honorable; and some Poor, Mean, Illiterate, and
Despifed Perfons: so that none of us, of what quality or condition soever, can
say, Religion and Godliness is Impracticable by Persons of our Condition and
Circumstances in the World.

Having then Patterns of Piety in all Ranks and Conditions of Men, let us set
these Examples before us, and asking Grace, and imploring Aids from God,
through the Mediator Christ Jesus, let us imitate them, and be holy, as They
were, in all manner of Conversation. And besides these Ancient Examples, we
have some in this present Age, by whom it is evident, that Godliness in the
Life, and Power, and Exactness of it, is really practicable.

We have now before us That which is sufficient utterly to silence the
Objection, I mean, The Remains and Memory of this Eminent LADY and Excellent
CHRISTIAN, whose great Piety was the Glory of this Place. And whose Recess from
amongst us, (though She died full of days) has filled many Hearts with a
passionate Grief and Sorrow.

For though all that knew her Conversation (which was like that of Hizabeth in
St. Luke 1.6. A walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord,
blameless) are mightily satisfied that her Soul rests with God in the Regions
of Light and Glory, (after which She with great, Zeal and diligence had long
aspired in a way of sincere Obedience) Yet it is grievous to be deprived of One
that was so fruitful in Age, and always rich in Good Works; and whose Prayers
doubtless were through Christ very prevailing with God. Upon which Account not
only Her Family, particular Friends, and this. Village, but the whole Church of
God sustains a great Loss in Her Remove, and especially this sinful Nation,
Considering that she prays no more for this People.

It would employ a large Volume to describe fully the eminent Qualities with
which God had endowed Her. The sum of which I shall endeavor to represent, to
this end, That God, in whom all Her fresh Springs were, and from whom she
received all, may be glorified by it; And that we all may be moved to the
Imitation of so complete a Pattern of that Sanctity that is attainable in this
present and imperfect State; having had this Testimony from all that observed
her, That she was steadfast, unmovable, and always abounding in the Work of the
Lord.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Life and Death Of the LADY Elizabeth Brook,
Including the Character given of Her in the Sermon preached at her Funeral.

THE Life and Death Of the LADY ELIZABETH BROOK.
THE Lady Elizabeth Brook was born at Wigsale in Sussex, in January, 1601; Her
Father was Thomas Culpepper of Wigsale in Sussex,Esquire, a Branch of an
ancient Family of Gentry of that Name, which was afterward in her Brother
advanced into the Rank of the Nobility, who for his great Loyalty, and eminent
Services done to the Crown, was created a Baron by Charles the First, with the
Title of, [ John Lord Culpepper of Thoresway.] Her Mother [was the Daughter of
Sir Stephen Slaney.

Thus she had the Honor of a Genteel Extraction, and a Noble Alliance; and as
her Family derived an Honor upon her, so she has reflected an additional
Glory upon her Family, by her great Virtues, having been one of the most
Accomplished Persons of the Age, whether considered as a Lady, or a Christian.

While she was in her Infancy, she lost her Mother, and in her Childhood her
Father; so that she came early under the more peculiar Care and Patronage of
God, who is in an especial manner, the Father of the Fatherless.

Her first Education was under her Grandmother by the Mother's side, the Lady
Slaney.

She had rare Endowments of Nature, an excellent Mind lodged in a fine Body,
and under a beautiful Aspect, something of which remained even in her old Age.
She had an extraordinary quickness of Apprehension, a curious Fancy, great
Solidity of Judgment, and a considerable Memory.

She was married very young to Sir Robert Brook, Knight, (descended from a
younger Brother of the Ancient and Noble Family of the Brooks, formerly Lord
Cobham,) a Person of a good Estate and Virtue, who lived with her six and
Twenty Years, and died July 10. 1646; by whom she had seven Children, three
Sons, and four Daughters, viz.

James, who died an Infant.

John, who lived Twenty six Years, and was married, but died without Issue,
Anno Dom. 1652.

Robert, who had the Honor of Knighthood conferred upon him upon the King's
Restoration; a Gentleman of fine Parts, and great Loyalty to his Prince, and
Fidelity to his Country: He was a Member of that Parliament which brought the
King from his Exile, and of the following Parliament which began May the 8th,
1661.

He died as he was traveling through France, Anno Dom. 1669, in the 33d Year
of his Age, much lamented by his Friends and Acquaintance: He was married also,
but left no Childeren.

Mary her Eldest Daughter, and the only Survivor, who inherits much of her
Grace and Virtues.

Elizabeth and Martha, Persons of great Piety, were married to Gentlemen of
fair Estates, and good Reputation, who had diverse Children, and died, the Elder
Anno Dom. 1647/8, in the 25th Year of her Age; the Younger Anno Dom. 1657,
about the 29th Year of her Age.

Anne, who died in her Childhood.

They continued the two first Years in London, as Boarders, in the House of the
Lady Weld, her Aunt: From thence they removed to Langly in Hartfordshire, a
Seat which her Husband purchased purposely for her Accommodation, that she
might be nearer, her Friends in London. And after some Years stay there, they
came to Cockfield, his Paternal Seat, and there she passed the Residue of her
Earthly Pilgrimage, excepting the two first Years of her Widowhood. In all
which places she lived a rare Example of Goodness, and left a good Name behind
her in every place, from which she departed; and especially in the last, where
she passed the most, and last, and best of her time, and from which her Soul
was translated to Heaven.

She had many Excellencies which recommended her to all that had the Happiness
to know her. But the greatest glory that shined in her, was in Religion, in
which she was not only sincere, but excelled.

To which general Head may be referred the following things, as the distinct
Flowers in that Crown of Righteousness.

She devoted her self to God and Religion very early, rising in the Morning of
her Age, to attend the Work and Service of her great Lord, Remembering her
Creator in the days of her Youth: She made haste, and delayed not to keep his
Commandments. And this she pursued with great steadiness through the course of
a long Life: So that she was not only an Aged Person, but (which is a great
Honor in the Church of God) an Old Disciple.

And having begun thus early to apply her self to Religion in the Power and
Strictness of it: Parts and Industry, and length of Time, and the use of
excellent Books, and Converse with Learned Men uniting together, rendered her
one of the most knowing Persons of her Sex, especially in Divinity, and in the
Scriptures, which made her wise unto Salvation.

And this Knowledge was not confined to the Practical, but extended also to the
Controversal, and Critical Part, even to the Difficulties concerning
Scripture-Chronology, and the Solutions of many of them.

She was able to discourse pertinently upon any of the great Heads of Theology.
She could oppose an Atheist by Arguments drawn from the Topics in Natural
Theology, and answer the Arguments of Papists, Socinians, Pelagians, etc. by
the Furniture against them in the Holy Scriptures.

I never knew any other Person that had so great a Knowledge in Divinity, who
was not skilled in the Learned Languages; so that, no Scholar could repent the
time spent in Converse with her: For she could bear such a part in Discourses
of Divinity, whether Didactical, Polemical, Casuistical, or Textual, that some
of her Chaplains have professed, they have been sometimes more, profitable and
pleasant than their own Studies, and that they themselves did learn, as well as
teach.

This perhaps may seem incredible to them that were not acquainted with her.
But something of the Wonder will be abated, by showing how she attained her
Excellent Knowledge.

She was an Indefatigable Reader of Books, of the Scriptures especially, and
various Commentators upon them, the best that our Language affords, which
perhaps are not exceeded by any other. She had turned over a Multitude, not
only of Practical Treatises, but also of Learned Books, and amongst many
others, some of those of the Ancient Philosophers, translated into English,
gathering much from those great Lights among the Heathens, so that she could
interpose wisely in a Discourse purely Philosophical.

She was also a most diligent Inquirer, and made use of all Learned Men of her
Acquaintance to increase her Knowledge, by moving Questions concerning the most
material things, as Cases of Conscience, and hard Texts of Scripture, and the
Accomplishment of the Divine Prophecies.

She generally also took Notes out of the many Books she read, that she might
with the less Labor recover the Notions again, without reading them a second
time.

And She used a mighty Industry to preserve what either instructed her Mind, or
affected her Heart in the Sermons she had heard: To these she gave great
Attention in the Assembly, and heard them repeated in her Family. After this
she would discourse of them in the Evening: And in the following Weeks, she had
them again repeated, and discoursed the matter of them to some of her Family in
her Chamber. And besides all this, she wrote the Substance of them, and then
digested many of them into Questions and Answers, or under Heads of common
Places; and then they became to her Matter for repeated Meditation. And by
these Methods she was always increasing her Knowledge, or confirming the things
that were known.

And having a great Treasure of Knowledge, she improved it (through Divine
Assistance, which she was most ready to acknowledge) into a suitable Practice,
working out her Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and was zealous of good
Works.

Her Piety was exact, putting Rules upon her self in all things; and universal,
having respect to all God's Commands, equally regarding the two Tables of the
Law. It was also constant, and affectionate; her whole Heart was given up to
it, and a holy Zeal attended it, which Zeal was guided by much Wisdom and
Prudence, the Prudence never degenerating into Craft, nothing appearing in all
her Converse contrary to Sincerity.

It was also serious, solid, and substantial, not touched with Enthusiasm; yet
she had a great regard to the Spirit of God, as speaking in the Scriptures, and
by them guiding the Understanding, and operating upon the Heart.

And as her own Practice was holy, so she endeavored also that her Family
might walk in the same Steps, providing for them the daily help of Prayer
Morning and Evening, with the reading of the Scriptures; and on the Lord's Day
the Repetition of what was preached in the Public Congregation. And for their
further Benefit, she many Years together procured a Grave Divine to perform the
Office of a Catechist in her House, who came constantly every Fortnight, and
expounded methodically the Principles of Religion, and examined the Servants,
which was formerly done by her Chaplains, till the Service of God in her
Family, and the Care of the Parish were committed to the same Person. Thus,
with Joshua, she resolved that She and her House should serve the Lord.

With her Piety and Godliness, there was joined much Christian Love, which was
universal, extending to all Mankind, never suffering her self to hate or
despise (or overlook, unless in the way of Censure for a Crime) any Person in
the World, abhorring only what was vicious and evil in them.

But this Universal Charity admitted a Difference, so as that the more
Christian and Holy any were, the more They had of Her Regard. That Image of God
that shined in a good Conversation, she could not overlook in any, though in
some respects they were less acceptable to her, valuing Grace above all the
Accomplishments of Parts, Breeding, and Accord in lesser things.

And besides that, all were dear to her, in whom appeared the Fear of God; she
had also a most peculiar value for his Ambassadors and Ministers, the Guides
of Souls, receiving them in their Ministrations, as Angels of God, fearing the
Lord, and obeying the Voice of his Servants, esteeming what they delivered, in
consent with the holy Scriptures, as his Message and Word.

She was very exact in matters of Justice, and in rendering to all their Dues,
not suffering any Blot to cleave to her Hand; and could not endure to have any
thing without a Title in Conscience, as well as in Law; and was particularly
tender in reference to Tithes, and gave away all that she held by that The
Impropriations of Blithburgh and Walderswick in Sussex,
Title, to him that took the Care of the Souls, reserving only a little Portion
yearly, for repairing the The two great Chancels of the Churches there.
Edifices.

Her Charity and Almsgiving was very great, and much admired by all that
observed it, though they knew only some part of it; Every one that needed it,
had it in proportion to their Necessities, and in the kind that was most
suitable to their particular Wants. She esteemed her self but as a Steward of
her Estate, and therefore gave away a great part of it to encourage the
Ministry, and to relieve the Indigent. She dispersed abroad and gave to the
Poor, and Her Righteousness remains for ever. She did most frequently cast her
Bread upon the Waters, and gave a Portion to seven, and to eight, and lent much
to the Lord. And this she did willingly and cheerfully, and was ready to these
good Works; so that when there was any occasion that solicited her Charity, it
was never any Question with her, whether she should give, or not give, but only
in what Proportion she should extend her Bounty. And for that she would many
times most frankly refer her self to others; saying, I will give what ever you
think is fit and meet in this Case, having in this respect an Heart as large as
the Sand on the Seashore, and a most open Hand.

And as the Poor had her Charity in abundance, so her Friends, who needed not
that kind of Bounty, were yet Witnesses of her great Liberality and Generosity,
by which she adorned Religion, and gained many to speak well of it.

Her Generosity was such, That one would have imagined there was no room for
Alms; and her Charity such, that it was wondered how she could so plentifully
entertain her Friends. But a provident Frugality and Management, with the
Divine Blessing, enabled her to both to Admiration.

And her Charity was not only extended to the Bodies of others, but she also
most readily afforded Counsel and Comfort to them that repaired to her for
Assistance in the Concerns of their Souls, though of meaner Rank and Condition
in the World. To such she would speak wisely, hear them patiently, and treat
them compassionately when under Temptations, and Disquiet of Mind. One of her
own Servants coming to her Closet upon this account, and beginning to open to
her the Grief of her Heart; She required her for that time, to forget she was a
Servant, and discoursing with her with great Tenderness and Prudence in
reference to her Temptations, dismissed her comforted, and much revived. And
very many others she received with the greatest Freedom, ministering spiritual
Comfort to them. That part of Religion which is peculiarly styled Devotion, was
the Joy of her Life, and the Delight of her Soul. A very considerable Portion
of her Time was daily employed in Prayer, searching the Scriptures, and in holy
Meditations. These things were her proper Element, and in them, she would often
profess, she found her greatest Refreshments; in these she conversed with God,
and was then least alone when most alone. For she did not merely perform these
Duties, nor generally engage in them as a Task, but observed the frame of her
Spirit in them, and commanded the Affections of her Soul to wait upon God, not
being satisfied without some Emotions of Mind suitable to these holy Exercises,
as she has often professed, and which I gathered from her complaining
sometimes of her Infirmities, and of the Difficulty of Praying aright, and of
preserving throughout that Duty a due Sense of God.

The Christian Sabbath was also her Delight, and a Day in God's Courts better
to her than a thousand elsewhere; and her Enjoyment of God in the Public
Ordinances, and Services of that Day, was to her as a little Heaven upon Earth.
And the Impressions she received by attending those holy Institutions were
such, as that she longed in the Week, for the return of the Sabbath. And great
was her Affliction when her Hearing was so impaired that she could not attend
the Public Worship of God, though few were better furnished to supply that
Want by private Exercises, and Closet- Devotions.

And having so eminently prized and improved the Lord's-Days, it pleased God on
the Evening of one of them to take her to himself, there to keep an Everlasting
Sabbath, in his most immediate and glorious Presence, in the Arms of Christ,
the Beloved of her Soul, and in the Assembly of Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, and all departed Saints.

And (which deserves Admiration) in the midst of all these Seize, Virtues
and Graces, she was greatly humble, and clothed with the Ornament of a Lowly
Spirit; and while many admired the Example she gave in the World, She
apprehended that others excelled her in Grace and Godliness, and continually
reckoned her self among the least of Saints. For notwithstanding her Quality in
the World, her exquisite Knowledge, eminent Grace, and the mighty Value her
Friends had justly for her; I could never observe (in the whole Course of
eighteen Years Converse) the least Indication of vain Glory, or self-Admiration
in her.

And her Humility was of an excellent kind, the Fruit of great Knowledge,
proceeding also from a deep Sense of the Fall, the Corruption of Man's Nature,
the Imperfection of Mortification in this present State, and the Remains of Sin
in them that are sanctified; and was nourished by a great Sight of God, and
Acquaintance with him, and frequent Self-Examinations, and by observing how Sin
mingles it self in our best Actions, and most holy Duties; and by a diligent
comparing her Self, and her Actions, with the exact Rules of the Scriptures.

Which Grace of Christian Humility was the more illustrious in her, by the
Accession of the Virtue of Courtesy, which she had in a high degree,
entertaining all Persons with Civilities proper to their several Qualities; so
that she obliged all, though she was evermore careful that nothing in
Conversation might border upon those Freedoms that dishonor God, and blemish
the Christian Profession; by this means adorning the Gospel, and showing that
Religion, though it requires great Strictness, yet it does not necessarily
introduce either Melancholy, or Moroseness. And (which is a much greater thing
than to be courteous in the highest degree) as a real Disciple of Christ, she
had learned to deny her self, and could abridge her own Right, that she might
thereby promote the Glory of God, benefit others, avoid Offense, and maintain
Love and Peace.

And which may properly be subjoyned to her Self-denial, as a Grace equal to
it, she industriously avoided Censoriousness, (disliking it in others) and
endeavored to make the best Interpretation of both Words and Actions, not
lightly speaking Evil of any, nor readily receiving an evil Report. And above
all things she abhorred to be Censorious in reference to Preachers, and
Sermons, of which she was a most candid and equal Hearer, Judicious, and
Critical enough, but not Captious in the least. If but Truth were spoken, and
Piety urged in any ordinary method, she was satisfied, so as not to find fault.
But the Sermons which she preferred, were either Discourses greatly Rational,
or such as did particularly illustrate the sense of the Scriptures, or discover
the Excellency of the Gospel; or such as displayed Christ in his Person,
Undertaking, and Offices; or such as discovered the difference between the Real
and Almost Christian; and such as did most nearly approach the Conscience, and
urge the Exacted Conversation, and the governing the Heart, Thoughts, and
inward Affections.

In all her Relations she demeaned her self as a Christian. She was a faithful,
dutiful, loving and prudent Wife; And the Heart of her Husband safely trusted
in her. She was a most affectionate, tender Wife, and watchful Mother,
restraining her Children from Evil, according to her power, and bringing them
up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, most constantly endeavoring to
inftil into their Minds the Principles of Justice, Holiness, and Charity. To
them that became her Children by marrying into her Family, she was most kind,
and treated them as her own. To her Servants and Tenants she was just and kind;
and to her Neighbors, all that they could desire.

To her particular Friends, she was endeared by her Prudence, Fidelity, and
almost Excesses of Love, and improving of Friendship to serve the great Ends of
Religion, which are the honoring of God, and the bettering one another. She
was also a Loyal Subject to her Prince, of which there is full Evidence in this
following Relation, which was communicated to me by one of her intimate Friends.

When his late Majesty was in his Enemies Hands, and they were preparing for
the horrid Murder of that Excellent Prince, she was most passionately
concerned, and being very earnestly desirous that an Hand from Heaven might
have prevented that Wickedness, kept a private Fast in her Closet on his
behalf. And when she knew that God, in just Judgment to the Nation, had
permitted Men to take away his precious Life; she resented it with the Passions
of a Mother, professing that the loss of one of her dearest Children came not
nearer to her Heart. And in a Letter to that Friend, she thus bewailed it.

O that you were with us, though but for a few days, that we might bemoan our
selves together, and this miserable Nation; upon which God pours out so great
Wrath, and yet such Spiritual Judgments are seized upon us! That many of us who
pretend the greatest Interest in Him, can see nothing but Mercies and glorious
Times: I find nothing so much moves me, as to hear Men, whom I hope I may call
pious, speak concerning the Times; my Patience is so much put to it, as Rules
of Wisdom and Policy can find no place with me. I can truly say, I dissent from
many, whom I would honor, and whose Judgments I do in many things, prefer
before my own, without any kind of Doubt, or Reluctance, admiring, and standing
amazed at their Delusions. I am now taught the great Danger of Evil Principles,
strong Engagements, Spriritual Pride, etc.

In reference to His present Majesty, her Loyalty proceeded by these steps: She
was a true Mourner under his Sufferings, Exclusion, Exile, and the
Disappointment of several Efforts that were made for his Restitution. And she
so disgusted the then usurping Powers, that she would not join in the keeping
of either the Fairing or Thanksgiving Days appointed by them in reference to
their Designs, or Successes. She rejoiced in all his Deliverances and
especially in his Miraculous and Happy Restoration. And I do verily believe
there was no Person in the three Kingdoms, that better understood than she did
the Dignity of the High Station, to which God restored Him, or that paid Him a
greater Veneration, or prayed more heartily for Him, or was more sollicitous
for His Safety, in His Person and Government.

She was also conformable to the present Establishment, in all things in which
her Obedience was required, and her Practice concerned; so that in reference to
the Church of England, she was truly Ours, and one of the greatest Ornaments of
our Communion.

The Separation (though she respected Piety in all forts of Men) was grievous
to her, and she thought it unreasonable: And this was her Judgment from the
beginning, in which she was encouraged in her early Years, by the Divines of
her Acquaintance, (some of them Nonconformists) who (when those of the (then)
Separation, attempted to insinuate their Principles into her) advised her to
neglect them, and to attend the great and substantial things of Religion, as
Faith, Godliness, Justice, and Charity.

But withal, such was her Moderation, that she earnestly desired the Success of
the Comprehension, designed by the Lord Keeper Bridgman, Sir Matthew Hale, then
Lord Chief Baron, and Dr. Wilkins, etc. And as that worthy Judge, so She,
relieved many sober Non-conformists with great Bounty, and most eanestly
desired to have seen them legally settled in a Public Ministry.

Many things more might be added to this Account of her Seize, Graces,
and Virtues, but all may be summed up in this shorter Character.

She had the Knowledge of a Divine, the Faith, Holiness, and Zeal of a
Christian, the Wisdom of the Serpent, and the Innocence of the Dove; She had
Godliness in the Power of it, and adorned it. She was serious, but not
melancholy, and cheerful without any Tincture of Vanity; very holy, and no
less humble, and thankful to God for all His Mercies, and had a mighty Sense of
her need of Christ the Mediator, depending entirely upon His Merits and
Satisfaction, renouncing all her own Works in the point of Justification.

By these things she attained a good, and (which she never sought) a great Name.

Dr. Sibs, an Eminent Divine, Master of K. Hall Cambridg, and Preacher to the
Honorable Society of Grayes-Inn, who frequented her House at Langley in
Hartfordshire, would say, that he went to other places (mostly) to satisfy
others, but thither to please himself.

Dr. Edw. Reynolds, late Lord Bishop of Norwich, having been nobly entertained
at her House, professed afterward, that the best of his Entertainment was his
Converse with so Excellent a Person.

Another (now a Dignitary of the Church of England) returned from a Visit made
to her, and said the half was not told him.

Another, a Person of Quality, and great Learning, who loved to speak much in
few Words, having observed her Gravity, Holiness, Prudence, and Freedom from
all that is little, humourous, or morose, said, she was a Woman of a Generous
Piety.

Another says of her, That she had a Greatness of Mind, rare Knowledge, a
becoming Gravity, and great Sincerity: That she was highly devout, a cheerful
Giver, patient under the Cross, and endued with all the Virtues and Graces of
those excellent Women, whose Praise is in the Scriptures, for Obedience to
their Husbands, Religious Care of their Children, Bounty to God's Ministers,
Hospitality to their Friends, Charity to the Poor, and Piety toward God. But
the Latin is more elegant, which came thus from his Ingenious Pen.

Ingenio mascula, Mente Theologa, Ore Gravis, Cord Sancta, Cultu Intensfa,
Charitate Laeta, Crucis Patiens, tota Moribus Generosa; Marito Sara, Liberis
Unice, Nepotibus Lois, Ministris Lydia, Hospitibus Martha, pauperibus Dorcas,
Anna Deo.

Such were her Qualifications, great and eminent, and so were the Providence
of God toward her; for she had great Prosperities, and interchangeably great
Afflictions. The first she entertained humbly, and the other patiently.

To her Prosperities may be referred, The great Kindness of her Husband, with a
numerous Family, and a very plentiful Estate during his Life, and a competent
Revenue afterward in her Widowhood; a fine Temperature of Body, so that she
was seldom sick, though never strong; the Continuance of her Parts, and the
Vigor of her Intellectuals, and Firmness of her Judgment, even in the last
Years of her Life; the Respects and Civilites she received from the Gentry in
her Neighborhood; the Blessing of long Life, the concluding of some unkind
Lawsuits, (which as she did not begin, so she could not prevent) and the
seeing every remaining Branch of her Family largely provided for, and in a very
good Condition, before her Death. And, which was more than all these, as the
best of her Prosperities, she enjoyed much inward Peace, which, though it had
sometimes Mixtures of Doubts and Fears, was generally firm and steady, and
sometimes advanced into Joys and great Consolation.

Her Afflictions were chiefly Widowhood, and loss of Children. The sharpest of
all her Trials was the untimely Death of her last Son, with the aggravating
Circumstances of it, being drowned, this was very surprising, invaded her like
an Inundation of Waters, threatening all the Banks both of Reason and Grace: Her
Friends feared she would not long survive it. But the Power and Presence of God
supported her, and she not only lived many Years after it, but also recovered
again in a great measure her former Cheerfulness.

Her Demeanor under this sad Providence, was Christian. She did not murmur,
though at first astonished, and after that, much deprest by it. Her Danger was,
of fainting under this correcting Hand of God, but she was upheld by him that
is able to succor them that are tempted.

She often expressed her self in Words importing that she justified God, and
acknowledged his Righteousness in it. She feared lest some might be scandalized
by it, and reflect upon Religion, and decline it, because of her deep
Affliction, and most earnestly desired that God would take care of his own
Name, and Glory. But afterward her Spirit revived, and she was comforted as
before, and rejoiced in the God of her Salvation.

The Close of her Life was a long Languishing of diverse Months, which gradually
confined her, first to her Chamber, then to her Couch, and lastly to her Bed;
attended sometimes with great Pains, under which Patience had its perfect Work.
During this Sickness, her Mind was calm, Her Conscience witnessed to her
Integrity, and she had a good hope in God, that he would crown his Grace in her
with Perseverance, and then with Glory. She was very apprehensive of her need
of Christ, adhered to him, rejoiced in him, and desired to be with Him. She
expired almost insensibly, and had at the last, an easy Passage to the
Happiness, which is the Reward of Faith and Holiness, and the free Gift of God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

She has left behind her (which are Evidences of an unusual Diligence, and an
admirable Industry) a great number of Writings under her own Hand, some of
which are these.

A considerable Body of Divinity, in a large Quarto, showing what a Christian
must believe, and practice, written Anno Dom. 1631.

Collections of Commentaries upon a great part of the Holy Scriptures, and of
the Sum of the Controversies between Us and the Papists.

A Book containing Observations, Experiences, and Rules for Practice, which
being a most lively Image of her Mind, may supply all the Defects of the
Narrative I have given of her, and is subjoyned here, in hope it may be of no
little Benefit to all pious Readers.

AN APPENDIX, Containing Some considerable OBSERVATIONS, EXPERIENCES, and RULES
for Practice: found written with her Ladiship's own Hand.
I. The World's Vanity.
ALL my Comforts below are dying Comforts; no one Creature (not all the
Creatures) that ever I enjoyed, have given my Soul Satisfaction.

II. Good Actions will bear Consideration; but evil Actions will not.
Every Act of Piety and Obedience will bear Consideration, but so will not any
sinful Action. If we consider before we attempt any sinful Action, either we
shall not commit it, or we shall do it with regret, and a Conscience half set
on fire. But if we consider before any holy Action or Duty, our considering
Thoughts will much animate us to the Service. Wherefore I conclude from hence,
that Sin shames it self, and Religion justifies it self.

III. The Worship of God is made pleasant by a Sense of his Presence in it.
God's Presence was formerly manifested by visible Signs, as the Cloud, Fire,
and Brightness. And though we cannot expect these, yet we have the same
especial Presence of God with us. And when ever by Faith we attain any lively
Apprehensions of it, How solemn, profitable, and delightful does it make the
Worship of God? with what Joy does it bring us to the Assemblies, and how
unwilling are we to be kept from them, when we have this Expectation from them?
And finding our Expectation in this answered, how devoutly do we behave our
selves in them? and how joyfully do we return home, as they that have seen God,
and conversed with Him?

IV. It is our Interest to be Religious.
It is a most experienced Truth, that we shall never be well reconciled to
Religion, and steady in Piety, until we see it is our Interest to be Religious.

V. It is difficult to pray without some wandering Thoughts in Prayer.
It is very difficult to carry Sincerity, and keep a Sense of God through every
part of Prayer, which is necessary to be endeavored, and is the Life of the
Duty. I find it hard to keep my Soul intent, for my Thoughts are slippery and
swift, and my Heart is snatched away sometimes against my Will, and before I am
aware; yea, even then sometimes, when I have made the greatest Preparation, and
have had the greatest Resolutions through Grace to avoid wandering Thoughts. My
best Prayers therefore need Christ's Incense to perfume them.

VI. A deep Sense of God in Prayer, is desirable and ravishing.
Could I understand my near approach to God in Prayer, it would exalt my Soul
above measure. And why am I not ravished with the Thoughts of being in the
Presence of God, and haing the Ear, yea, the Heart of the King of Heaven? It is
nothing but want of Faith, and the strange Power of Sense that weakens my
Spiritual Apprehensions, and keeps me from an unspeakable Delight in my
Addresses to God; What an high Privilege is this to speak to the Great JEHOVAH,
as a Child to a Father, or a Friend to a Friend? But how slow of Heart am I to
conceive the Glory and Happiness thereof? Could I but manage this great Duty as
I ought, it would be an Heaven upon Earth; It would bring God down to me, or
carry me up to Him, Why should I not be carried above the World, when I am so
near to God? Why should I not be changed into the same Image from Glory to
Glory? Why am I not even transported beyond my self?

VII. We ought to be constant in Prayer.
Inconstancy in Prayer is not only sinful, but dangerous; Omission breeds
Dislike, strengthens Corruption, discourages the Spirit, and animates the
unregenerate Part. Constancy in this Duty breeds an holy Confidence toward
God: Inconstancy breeds Strangeness. Upon an Omission I must never approach God
again, or my next Prayer must be an exercise of Repentance for my last Omission.

VIII. Sincere Prayers are never offered in vain.
Formality is apt to grow upon our secret Prayers, one of the best ways to
prevent it, is to come to God with an Expectation. This sets an Edg upon our
Spirits. I do not enough observe the Returns of Prayer, though God has said, I
shall never seek Him in vain. And when I observe, I must acknowledge I have
daily Answers of my Prayers in some kind or other. Nay, I think I may say, I
never offered a fervent Prayer to God, but I received something from Him, at
least, as to the frame of my own Spirit.

IX. Prayer promotes Piety, and Godliness, and Acquaintance with God.
It is the Christian's Duty in every thing to pray; and Holiness lies at the
bottom of this Duty. If I in every thing commit my self to God, I shall be sure
to keep his way, or my Prayer will upbraid me. This keeps me from tempting him,
and makes me careful to find a clear Call in every thing I undertake; knowing
that if I go only where I am sent, the Angel of his Presence will go before me,
and my way will be cleared of Temptations and Mischiefs: When our Call is
clear, our Way is safe. Moreover, the Practice of this leads me into much
Acquaintance with God; my very praying is an acquainting with Him. And if in
every thing I pray, I shall in every thing give Thanks; and this still brings
me into more Acquaintance with him. By this means my Life will be filled up
with a going to, and returning from God.

X. The real Christian loves Solitude.
Solitude is no Burden to a real Christian, he is least alone, when alone: His
Solitude is as busy and laborious as any part of his Life. It is impossible to
be Religious indeed, and not to love Solitude in some measure; for all Duties
of Religion cannot be performed in Public. It is also a thing as noble as it is
necessary, to love to converse with our own Thoughts. The vain Mind does not
more naturally love Company, than the Divine Mind does frequent retiring: Such
have Work to do, and Meat to eat the World know not of. Their Pleasures are
secret, and their chiefest Delight is between God and themselves. The most
pleasant part of their Life is not in, but out of the World.

XI. There is more necessary to the rendering us truly Religious, than a mere
external Revelation of Truth.
True Religion is Heaven- born: for to the perfecting of it in any Soul, not
only the outward Revelation is necessary, but also an inward Secret, and
particular Divine Impression. The savouring of Divine Things is from the Power
of the Highest over-shadowing the Mind: for till God makes this inward
Impression, Men are not able to perceive the Things of God. There must be a
Light within us as well as without us, otherwise the Gospel may be hid even
where it shines, so that whoever conclude aright, that they are under the Power
of Religion, must experience something very supernatural, something that is the
Work of God, and not of Man, something above all their own, or the Power of the
whole World.

XII. Religion in the Practice of it is most highly Rational.
Religion makes a Man live up to his Reason. So far as a Man is a Christian, so
far is Reason exalted, sits in the Throne, and governs, and commands all the
Powers of the Soul. Religion enlightens, and strengthens Reason; and Reason
helps and serves Religion. Reason is inseparable from the Soul, (we shall be
rational in Heaven) and Grace is the Recovery of right Reason.

The whole Practice of Godliness, both in Divine and Moral Duties, and the
frame of a Christian's Spirit, is but the Rational Consequence of two great
Principles, which the Christian hides, and embraces in his Heart, viz. That
there is a God, and that the Scripture is his Word. The Inferences from these
two, and the Life of a Christian are the same.

XIII. Religion in the Practice of it, is a living in, and conversing with God.
True Relion makes a Man not only live above the World, and in Converse with
his own Reason, but also to live out of himself in God, conversing much with
him. A real Christian will deny himself for God, quit all Self-interest, and
resign to him in all Points of Duty and Service. God's Glory is his End, his
Work, his Direction. He takes no Pleasure in himself, nor in any thing without
himself, further than he sees the Stamp of God upon it. He forgets himself,
and minds nothing but the Will of God, triumphs in nothing more, than in his
own Nothingness, and God's All Sufficiency and Fullness. This is having nothing,
and yet possessing all things. This is Divine Life, and the height of
Religion, to know and perceive, that not only as to our Natural Life, we depend
upon Providence, and live, and move in God: But that also as to our Spiritual
Life, we receive all of his Fullness, and are acted by a Life in and from him:
Of this I desire to be still more, and continually sensible.

XIV. Religion gives us a real Enjoyment of God.
The true Christian lives above himself, not only in a way of Self-denial, but
in the very Enjoyment of God. His Fellowship is with the Father, and with the
Son: He every where, and in every thing seeks out God, in Ordinances, Duties,
and Providence, whether prosperous, or adverse, nothing pleases unless God
may be found in it, or admitted into it. That is to him an Ordinance indeed,
wherein he meets God. That is a merciful Providence indeed in which appears
much of the Finger of God; God is nearer to the true Christian than to others,
for there is an inward feeling, an Intellectual Touch which Carnal Men have
not. And herein is the very Soul of Religion, and the Quintessence of it, that
it unites us in a nearness to God, and gives us already to enjoy him.

XV. Religion gives a Man the power of himself, who by Nature is his own worst
Enemy.
True Religion gives a Man a great Command of, and restores him to a just Power
and Dominion over himself, by subduing in him his own Will and Passions. Man in
his depraved Condition, is himself his greatest Enemy. For the Devil and World
prevail against him, not by their own Strength, but by the Treachery and
Baseness of his own Heart. The Destruction of Souls is of themselves. Ignorance
and neglect of God takes away Fear, and there is in him such an Inclination to
Sin, as leads him to a delightful Entertainment of Temptations; so that it is
not so much the Devil and the World without, as the Devil and the World within,
not the Baits of Honor; Wealth, and Pleasure without, but Ambition,
Covetousness, and Sensuality within, which prevail upon Men. Wherefore unto
purified Souls, and mortified Minds, many Temptations do in a great measure
cease to be Temptations.

XVI. Self-denial bears a great part in the practice of true Religion.
The great Property of true Religion, is, that it teaches Self-dental, which
Self-denial is indeed the Foundation of Religion, and the Sum of all the
Precepts of the Gospel. Every true Christian sincerely, though imperfectly
denies himself, and makes a Free Will Offering of himself to God, in resigning
to him his Will, And indeed we can never have Peace in Prosperity, unless our
Will as to Action, be swallowed up in the Divine Will; nor can we have
Contentment in Adversity except our Will be complying with God's Will. This is
the great Victory, to conquer our selves, and to him that thus overcomes, is
the Promise given of sitting with Christ in his Throne.

XVII. We glorify God, not by giving to him, but by receiving from him.
I know I can add nothing to God's Glory, I glorify him by receiving from him
the Impress of his Glory upon me, rather than by communicating any Glory to
him: When the frame of my Mind and Life is according to his Prescription, when
I am most like to him, when a Spirit of Holiness, and Love runs through all
my Actions, then I glorify him. God seeks his own Glory by communicating
Grace and Happiness to me, and I glorify him by desiring and endeavoring to
partake of his Grace and Happiness.

XVIII. God's Being, and Providence, and Covenant, are most agreeable things to
purified Minds.
The Notion of God is most agreeable to my Mind; I knew not how to live in the
World, if there were not a God to govern it. His Being delights me, his
Providence supports me, his Covenant and Love rejoice me: without these things,
I should not value my own Being and Life.

XIX. Peace and Hope generally attend Sincerity.
I have Peace, though not always Great Assurance; my Hopes are such as keep me
in the Way that leads to Heaven. The Word delights me; A proof of Sincerity.
God's Commands are not grievous to me; I rejoice in the Promises, his
Ordinances are to me a Spiritual Feast. The knowledge I have of God, the notice
I take of his Providence, and meditation on his Word, afford me no little
pleasure.

XX. The Method of attaining Spiritual and Great Comfort.
Could I exercise Grace with greater strength, and more fully mortify Sin!
Could I believe more steadfastly, pray more fervently, walk more evenly, and be
more spiritual, heavenly, and humble, I should have more strong and abiding
Comforts. But especially my Faith is weak, and there is nothing I am more
liable to, than to distrust God, and to be jealous of him, and not to think my
self secure without such Demonstrations of his Love as are not to be had, and
would take away Faith.

XXI. A good Name is a great Blessing, which God only can preserve to us.
A good Name ought to be valued; It is better than precious Ointment, a real
and a promised Blessing, is valuable next to Life, if not equal to it. It is an
Honor to God and our Profession. Heaven makes us capable of doing good, and
gives Strength to our Instructions and Reproofs, and without it we become
useless in the World. But it is hard to keep a Good Name, it requires much
Innocence, Prudence, and Watchfulness: And when all is done, unless God
restrain the Spirits of Men, every lying Tongue, or malicious, or unkind Spirit
may blot our Name. It is hard to preserve a good Name, considering our own
liableness to Miscarriages, and the Enmity of the World against Holiness.

XXII. The Certainty of a Future Glorious Life.
It is most certain there is a Life of Glory. Not only the Scriptures assert
it, but it is also one of the Principles of Natural Divinity. We have these
things in the Heathens Creed; That there is a God; That the Soul of Man is
Immortal, and that there will be Rewards and Punishments in a Life to come. But
notwithstanding the Certainty of it, it does too little affect my Soul; partly,
because there is some vail yet upon the great things of Heaven: And as my
Knowledge is little, so my Faith is weak.

XXIII. God must not only be known, but also acknowledged.
God may in some sort be known, and not acknowledged.The one is rational, and
the other practical. This is fruit and substance, the other leaves and shadows.
To acknowledge God, is to converse with him, to have a lively sense of his
Being, All-governing Providence, and of his Presence everywhere; to consider
his Majesty, Greatness* and Glory with due Reverence, his Wisdom with Esteem
and Admiration, his Power with Fear lest it should be improved against us, and
with Trust, Pleasure, and hope that it shall be employed for us; his Holiness
with deep Reflection on our own Sinfulness, and with desire to imitate such an
excellent Pattern.

XXIV. Death is a Christian's Passage to Heaven.
To consider Death as a Passage to Heaven, and the way to the Father, will help
a Christian cheerfully to pass through the World, and willingly to leave it.

XXV. The necessity of having the Assistance of the Holy Ghost.
I find it hard to preserve entire my Communion with the Holy Spirit, though I
perceive my dependence upon him is very great. He is the Original and Printiple
of all Spiritual Life and Motion; and without his continual breathing, I am as
a disjoynted weak Member, which has neither Consistency, nor Uniformity in its
Motions or Actions.

XXVI. Conscience must not be offended, by allowing any Sin.
I find it better to offend a World of Men, than to offend my own Conscience.
Conscience is quickly offended, but not so soon pacified. Conscience has a
good Memory, and will keep the Remembrance of Offenses along time, and give
many a secret Wound, and make Faith and Confidence in God weak, and hinder the
Vigor of Prayer, and Freedom hi our Converse with him.

XXVII. It is not good to pass immediately from much Business to Prayer.
I find it best to go from no kind of Employment that busieth my Head, and
scatters my Thoughts, immediately to Prayer, it I may avoid it.

XXXVIII. Christian Watchfulness is very necessary.
It is sadly experienced, how Freedom from the Power of Sin, may be impaired,
for want of Care and Watchfulness.

XXIX. They that know God's Law, and will consider and reflect, will discern
much Sin in themselves.
If we are not sensible of Sin in our Souls, it proceeds either from Ignorance
of what is Sin, or from not reflecting on our selves. They who know the
strictness of God's Law, and the degrees of Sin, and are Observers of
themselves, will find many workings and motions of Pride, vain Glory, Love of
the World, Selfishness, Envy, and other evil Affections, and that they cannot
keep themselves clean, without a continual Care of their Hearts.

XXX.
It is the spiritual part of Religion that is hard, the outward part is easy.

XXXI. The Remain of Sin with us, is very active.
Sin within always works, and labors to bring forth the deeds of the Flesh. It
is always either enclining to Evil, or hindering from Good, or disframing the
Soul, and making it less meet for converse with God. It deceives, seduces, and
tempts, and in some measure corrupts and pollutes all that we perform to God,
or do for him.

XXXII. Sin cannot be mortified by our own Strength.
I find an Aptness when Sin afflicts me, presently to promise to my self and
God, that I will do so no more, and do resolve by Watchfulness and Prayer to
prevent it. And this will do something for a season, till my Heat abates, and
my Sense of Sin wears off, and then my Mortification vanishes also. Therefore I
resolve never to think of mortifying Sin by my own Strength, but humbly to look
up to God for the help of his Holy Spirit.

XXXIII. There arises a great Pleasure from having resisted Temptations.
There will never be found so much Satisfaction in gratifying a Temptation, as
in a noble, generous refusing of it. The more I resist, the more I find of
Peace; and the most pleasing Temptation denied, brings with it the sweetest
Consolation.

XXXIV. It is better to prevent Sin than to admit it, and then mortify it.
If Sin enters, it must be dislodged again: And it is far easier to prevent
than to eject it. It is not easy to bring the Soul back again into the State in
which it was before it contracted Guilt.

XXXV. Anger is seldom innocent.
I have no reason to trust my Anger; it is not so just and righteous as it
sometimes seems to be. Anger is apt to blind my Mind, and then Tyrannize over
it. There is in it something of Rage and Violence: It stirs me up to act, but
takes away my Rule by which I should act. I find an Aptness to credit my
Passion, and that foments it. And when I am under the Power of Passion, I have
cause to suspect my own Apprehensions: For Passion is blind, and cannot judge;
it is furious and has no leisure to debate and consider. Giving way to it
makes me unfit to act or receive Grace.

Though Anger should serve the Interest of Religion, and so be good, yet it
being a strong and fierce Motion of the Spirit, it must be used with great
Advice and Caution.

XXXVI.
It is very hard and difficult to give God his due Glory under cross
Providence.

XXXVII. There is a Chain of Graces.
It is most certain there is a Chain of Graces inseparably linked together, and
they who have one, have all in some good measure. They who have a lively Hope,
have fervent Love to God; and they who love God, love their Neighbors; and
they who love God and their Neighbors, hate Sin; and they who hate Sin, sorrow
for it; and they who sorrow for Sin, will avoid the Occasions of it: and they
that are thus watchful, will pray fervently; and they who pray, will meditate;
and they who pray and meditate at home, will join seriously in the Public
Worship of God. Thus Graces are combined, and holy Duties linked together, and
no Grace is alone. It is not with Graces as with Gifts, to one is given this,
and to another that.

XXXVIII. To be impartial in Piety and Mortification, is very difficult.
It is a most difficult thing to withdraw Love from every Sin: To proceed a
little way in Religion is not hard: But it is really so to go to the Extent of
Mortification and Piety; something of Religion may be embraced, and our own
Hearts, Satan, and the World not offended. Some Morality and an
outside-Devotion is not tedious to Flesh and Blood, neither does it shake
Satan's Kingdom, nor trouble the most of them we converse with. But when we
come once to engage in a close walking with God, and to live by Rule in every
part of Life, resolving seriously to indulge no Sin whatever, we pull the
Kingdom of Darkness upon our Heads. Then Corruption will strive, Satan will
rage, the World will scoff, watch for our halting, and glory in our
Miscarriages; and we shall find it difficult to run against the course of
Nature, oppose Satan, and go contrary to Men: But of necessity this, all this
must be; for any Sin indulged, will divorce us from Christ.

XXXIX. To trust in God, is a Christian's necessary Duty.
I find trusting in God my most necessary Duty. My Condition is such, that I
cannot see before me: I know not what a day may bring forth. I find my self
weak and impotent, unable to do or suffer as I ought: I cannot preserve my
Soul, Life, Health, or any thing dear to me. And without trusting in God, I
cannot expect God should fulfill any Promise, it being the Condition of the
Promise.

XL. Trusting in God produces real Comfort.
I find it comfortable to trust in God; it raises my Hope, and gives me present
Rest and Quiet, and holy Contentation. Trusting in God, like many other Duties,
is my Work, and my Ways.

XLI. To trust in God is one of our most difficult Duties.
I find it difficult to trust in God at all times. When Providence cross my
Expectation, they discourage me, and prove a Temptation through my Weakness, I
have but feeble Apprehensions of the Power and Goodnese of God when I come to
make use of them for my particular Security and Benefit. I think I may say, it
is easier to obey, and act for God, than to trust in him.

XLII. Faith is the Root of other Graces.
Faith is the Principle of Spiritual Life and Motion; every true good Work and
Exercise of Grace take their Rise and Vigor from Faith. A Christian prays,
reads, and meditates, hears, hopes, loves, is zealous for God, and does good to
others; Why? because he believes. What is Repentance and godly Sorrow, but the
Soul acted by Faith upon the Belief of the Sinfulness of Sin, its Opposition
and Contradiction to God; and of the high Obligations we are under to avoid it,
and of the Misery we run into by venturing upon it, and of the Madness and
Folly of ruining our selves by it.

I find Faith most necessary, and that I cannot be without it. Where can I go,
or what can I undertake, wherein Faith will not be necessary? If I pray or
meditate, it will be a strange Exercise if Faith be wanting? If I read or hear
the Word, it will not profit me unless I mix it with Faith: would I hope in any
Promise? I must call forth my Faith: Would I be heavenly-minded? it is Faith
must raise me above the World: Would I be zealous for God? Zeal will not gather
Heat unless Faith blows the Fire: Would I have Peace and Joy? they must be had
by believing: Nay, I can do nothing in my more ordinary Affairs without Faith:
I must know and believe my Design is good, and centers in my great Design,
which is the Glory of God. And the means I employ must be known and believed to
be regular and holy, or I dare not make use of them. And then I must be able to
cast my Care upon God, and to commit the Event and Issue to him, or else my
Business becomes burdensome to me, and I have no Rest in my self.

XLIII. The Devil is a mighty, but not an invincible Enemy.
I have a powerful, subtle, watchful, and malicious Enemy to encounter with:
But he is a known Enemy, the Word has discovered him, and his Power is
limited. God has promised me Victory over him; nay, my Lord has already
conquered him. And I am not alone in this Warfare against Satan, I fight not
against him singly, there is a whole Army engaged in the Quarrel. The whole
Church prays and fights against him; the Saints collectively make War upon
him. All the Prayers of the Church go up to Heaven for my Assistance, so that I
have help against Temptation from every Corner; all strike this Dart into his
Side, Lord, lead us not into Temptation. And we all fight under our Victorious
Captain Christ Jesus. The Honor of God, and of Christ my Head, is bound up in
my Safety, and therefore I shall conquer; nay, his very Temptations shall turn
to my good. All these Considerations are my Encouragement.

XLIV. The Things which the Holy Ghost teaches.
The Holy Spirit teaches every gracious Soul to regard the Immortal Spirit
above the Body, to observe God rather than Man, and to provide for Eternity
rather than Time. And all their circumspect walking, their redeeming their
Time, their daily Devotion, their Self-denial, Conscientious Carriage, and
whatever provokes profane Mouths to reproach them, are but the necessary
Effects of these three Principles of Wisdom. And all the Wickedness of Ungodly
Men proceeds from the want of this Wisdom.

XLV. Holiness is a Privilege.
I look upon Holiness as none of the least of a Christian's Privilege. But we
are apt to consider it more as Necessary than as Glorious, as our Duty rather
than our Ornament. Acceptance with God is a Privilege! And is likeness to Him
inferior to it? Is freedom from Satan's Malice a Privilege? and is not the
destroying his Image in us the same? To be turned from Carnal to Spiritual,
from Earthly to Heavenly, from Pride to Humility, from Peevish to Kind, from
Sinners to Saints; Are not these things Privileges?

Let this Truth be entertained. And when we shall see the beauty of Holiness,
and desire it, because we love and esteem it, then God will open the Treasures
of his Grace, and give us more plentifully of the pouring forth of his Spirit.

XLVI. The necessity of having, and living by some stated Rules.
To the shaking off the Tyrannical Government of Passion, Ambition, and
Self-will; and that we may not be hurried by every Motion of our Minds, it is
necessary to have some fixed and stated Rules of Good and Evil; without this we
shall never live as becomes Reasonable Creatures. Such is our Ignorance, as we
shall not know how to govern our selves, unless we apply to some Rule for
Information. And so many and great are our Temptations, that they will prevail,
unless we keep some fixed Rule for our Actions. He that acts always according
to present Thoughts and Inclinations, shall never be able to resist the offers
of Sin when Temptations are present. Such also is our Incogitancy, and
Forgetfulness, that it is needful to fix some Rules for our Actions, to which
we bind our selves not to depart from them; for this will allarm and inlighten
Conscience, and Conscience is the surest help to Memory.

Our Inconstancy also to our selves, makes it needful to keep some Rules of
Life, that so every Thought, every Company, every Accident of Life may not
alter our Minds and Actions.

XLVII. We converse with God in his holy Ordinances, when our Minds are sutably
affected under them.
The way and means by which God conveys himself, is by the Ordinances of his
public. Worship, and private Duties of Religion. These are like the Tabernacle
and Ark of old: As they were filled and covered sometimes with the Cloud, so
these with Spiritual, and Invisible Glory. But a bare attending on these, is
not our Communion with God: Our Communion is, to have our Souls suitably
affected with the matter of them. When the Heart is hot, the Affections moving,
Grace exercised; when a Threatening awes us, a Command delights, and a Promise
enters the Ear, like good News in a perilous time; when a Discourse of Christ
inflames the Soul with Love and Desire; when a Discourse of Heaven raises the
Mind above the World; when Truths are accompanied with Light and Love, so that
the Soul cleaves to them, and hangs upon them; this is Communion with God; and
then are Ordinances and Duties filled with the Holy Spirit.

XLVIII. To govern the Tongue, is one of the difficult parts of Religion.
It Is hard to govern the Tongue aright, much of Mortification lies in the
restraining of it, much positive Sanctification in the right use of it. It
requites much Knowledge, Wisdom; Faithfulness, Courage, Watchfulness,
Deliberation, Examination of our selves, much Prayer; yea much and strong Grace
to govern it well. The right governing of it is also a glorious part of our
Christian Profession, and mightily commends it to others.

XLIX. He that governs his Tongue aright, the same is a perfect Man.
The due governing of the Tongue implies, and supposes whatever else goes to
the making up of Evangelical Perfection. Where the Tongue is governed, the
whole Life also is ordered by Rule. (And it will be found that whoever wants
Grace, fails much in this Particular, and discovers the want of it, either by
his Speech, or by his Silence.) For the same Light which directs the Government
of the Tongue, the same Arguments that move to it, and the same Power that
assists it, will enlighten us to see other Duties, move as strongly to
undertake them, and as effectually help us to perform them.

L. A due Care of our Thoughts is a great Evidence of Uprightness.
It shows that Religion has indeed possessed our Minds, when we are careful so
to mangage our Thoughts as that they be not only innocent, but most frequently
very serious, and holy.

LI. Meekness produces Peace and Joy.
The Exercise of that Meekness, which is a supernatural Grace, a Disposition
wrought in the Soul by the Holy Ghost, which aims at God, Glory, and the Honor
of Religion, makes Conscience serene and joyful. When I can reflect upon
Passions restrained, Injuries forgiven, an Enemy loved, Contentment in every
Condition, ready submission to every Providence, and much Self-denial, that God
may be pleased; how pleasantly does Conscience look upon it?

LII. Meekness gives us the possession of our selves.
Meekness gives us the entire possession of our selves, and the use of our
Faculties: But Anger and Impatience causes that we cannot enjoy our selves,
nor apply to any Affair, making every thing tedious and troublesome to us.

LIII. Meekness preserves our Peace with our Neighbors.
As Meekness procures Peace in our own Souls, so it also procures Peace and
Quiet amongst Neighbors. Few will strive with them that will not contend, and
are so far from injuring others, that they readily forgive such as injure them.

LIVE. The expectation of Death is profitable to a Christian.
The serious Expectation of Death (not forgetting Judgment) freeth us from the
afflicting discomposing Apprehensions thereof. It does the Christian great
Service, it takes off from Carnal Pleasures, Covetous Desires, and Ambitious
Pursuits, and administers to Patience and Contentment. It assists his redeeming
his Time, prompts him to settle the Affairs of his Soul, to put his Heart and
House in Order, to leave nothing to be done to morrow, that may be done to day.
It excites to frequent Examination, quickens Repentance, and suffers him not to
continue in Sin. It assists Fervency in Prayer, as it drives away Worldly
Cares, and helps against Distraction. for Death is a solemn thing, and the
thoughts of it breed a Passion in the Mind, and all soft Passions help
Devotion. It sweetens all Labor, Work, and Duty, because of the Everlasting
Rest it leads unto. It moves us to pray for others, to counsel them, and do
what we can for them. Thus Death in the Expectation of it, is a Blessing, if we
expect it as certain, and yet uncertain when it shall come; as attended with
Judgment, and as putting a full End to our Probation State. And thus Death is
ours.

LV. Formality in Holy Things must be avoided.
Every Real Christian hates to act in Divine Things out of Custom and
Formality, and the least mixture of a By-end is to him troublesome and
afflicting. His Actions are with Consideration, and good Design. He will not
only pray, but consider to whom, and why! And does it either in obedience to a
Command, or as the paying of Homage to God, or as an Instance of Trust,
Dependence, and Love, or as a Means of obtaining some Blessing, or as an
Ordinance that brings him near into the Presence of God. And when he waits upon
the Public Worship, it is that thereby he may make open Profession of Faith
and Holiness, and that he may draw nigh to God.

LVI. The Government of our Thoughts is necessary.
It is no little Self-denial to manage our Thoughts strictly, yet it is the
most reasonable part of Religion, and not properly the Height of Piety, but
the Foundation of it, without which it cannot stand. He that can blush at his
Thoughts, and endeavors to suppress them, who dares not entertain the least
Sin, no not so much as in his Imagination, looking upon God, and Conscience as
more than a thousand Witnesses: This Man is Religious indeed.

This manage of the Thoughts is of great Service to a Christian; it is a vast
Security against many Temptations. For Thoughts breed Desires, and Desires
increase into Passion, and Passions will grow strong, and being grown strong,
they abuse Reason and throw the Soul headlong, and render it exposed to diverse
Temptations.

LVII. The End of our Actions must be good.
Great Care must be had concerning the End of our Actions, for this, like the
Altar, sanctifies the Gift. A Man's End has a mighty Influence upon him; as is
the End, such is the Man: He whose End is worldly, is himself earthly: But if
God be a Man's End, it makes him God-like.

LVIII. We must beware of Spiritual Sloth.
Spiritual Sloth brings Spiritual Poverty. To have Affections in Holy Duties,
requires much force, to which Nature is averse. Corrupt Nature does not always
discover its opposition to that which is good, by passionate contradicting, but
oftentimes effectually enough by Sloth and sluggishness.

LIX. Detraction must be avoided.
We are naturally prone to speak evil of others with delight, and to aggravate
their Faults. This Sin persisted in, will shut out of Heaven, as well as Murder
or Theft: And there is a secret Plague attending it in this Life; for the way
of Divine Providence is frequently Retaliation.

LX. The Promises are full of Support and Comfort, but God must illuminate our
Minds to discern what is treasured up in them.
The Promises, which are the Covenant of Grace displayed, are most precious in
the matter of them, and most necessary and useful to the Christian's Spiritual
Life; they help and support when all other things fail. The Satisfaction they
bring, is a real true Pleasure; yet their Glory and Excellency is not to be
seen till God opens the Christian's Eyes, and gives him a new Light. There is a
Vail upon the Promises, or rather a Film upon the Eye of the Soul, and until
that is removed, the Promises are dark, and they have no Form or Comeliness in
them: And though they be great and precious in themselves, yet they cannot be
so to us, unless God and the Promise come in together. The Spirit must move
upon the face of the Waters before they become refreshing Streams to make glad
the Heart. The Christian's own Arm will not reach Comfort from them: For this,
God must be sought, and the Promise must be our Meditation.

LXI. The Holy Ghost proceeds in his Operations gradually.
The Spirit of God operates gradually: He teaches first one Truth, and then
another: He brings us first to make Conscience of a Duty, and then of the
manner of performing it. The Holy Spirit lays a Foundation in the Heart for the
whole of Religion, and then draws us on gradually to more and more.

Rules for Practice.
I. LET Love and Charity be Universal. For no pretense whatever, no not of
Religion and Zeal for God, can justify your not loving any Person in the
World. Treat all Men with Kindness, and wish them well: Do them good according
to their Necessity, and your Power and Opportunity. If Persons be above you,
express your Love to them, by paying them the Honor and Observance their Place
and Authority call for. If they are in Worldly Respects beneath you, manifest
your Love by Kindness, Affability, and vouchsafing an easy Address to you. If
they excel in Natural or Acquired Endowments of Mind, express your Love to them
by a due esteem of them. If they be rather wanting than excelling, show your
Love by pitying them, and despise not their weakness. If any be in Misery,
compassionate them, pray for them, comfort them with your Presence if you can
reach them, relieve them according to your power. If any be defamed, show your
Love, by stopping and rebuking the Defamation.

II. Be very careful not to harbor any evil Affection in your Heart against
any one whatever. For though you are far from intending any actual Mischief,
yet you tempt God to let loose your Corruption, and his Providence to permit
you an Opportunity, and so before you are aware, you may be drawn to an Act you
never thought of before. Moreover, by an evil Affection harbored in your Mind,
you will prevent the blessed Illapses of the Spirit of God, and open a wide
Door for the Devil to enter into you. And indeed an unkind disposition toward
any Man, is so much akin to Satan, that if you admit the one, you cannot
exclude the other.

III. Despise none; for Love never rides in Triumph over Inferiors.

IV. Look upon all unavoidable Temptations, as Opportunities for an high
exercise of Grace. Are you injured? be sorry for him that has done it, and
bless God for the opportunity of showing your self hereby a Christian, by
patient bearing, forgiving, doing Good against Evil, treating him with
Meekness, and breaking his Heart with Love. Every Provocation is a Price in
your Hand, get an Heart to improve it.

V. Put a due value upon your Name and Reputation: But be not over solicitous
about it, for that discovers some unmortified Lust at the bottom.

VI. Pursue Piety under the notion of an Imitation of God, and then so great a
Pleasure will result from it, that neither Men nor Devils shall be able to make
you question God's Being and Attributes: This will raise an Esteem of it, and
render it lovely, and make the several Duties of Religion more facile and
easy; and it will gradually wear out the Remains of Unbelief, and unkind
Jealousies of God.

VII. Let Humility be the constant covering of your Soul, and let Repentance
follow all your Performances: This will demonstrate your Religion is inward.
For if Religion be suffered to enter deep into the Heart, it will always find
Work for Repentance while we are in the State of Imperfection.

VIII. Love nothing above God and Christ; for to love any thing more than God
or Christ, is the way either never to enjoy it, or to be soon deprived of it,
or else to find your self deceived in it.

IX. Do nothing upon which you dare not ask God's Blessing.

X. Esteem Time as your most precious Talent, which when you bestow it upon
any, you give them more than you can understand. A joint Assistance of Men and
Angels cannot restore it to you again.

XI. Never speak of Religion for Discourse and Entertainment sake, but for the
Purposes of Piety.

XII. Upon the Lord's Day consider in private the Love of God, in the several
Instances of it, to thy Self and the World, in Creation and Redemption; the
Promises of Eternal Life, the Care of his Providence, his Mercies to Thee, thy
Friends and Family: And stay upon these Considerations till thy Heart be lifted
up in his Praise, and thou can say with David, Now will I go to God, my
exceeding Joy. Consider also your Miscarriages in the Week past, and
industriouly endeavor to prevent them in the following Week.

XIII. Be diligent in your particular Calling, in Obedience to God's Command:
For the same God who said, Be fervent in Prayer, has also said, Be not
slothful in Business. That therefore which puts a good Man upon praying in
his Closet, calls him out again, even a Submission to God the great Master of
the World, by whom we are placed in our several Stations.

XIV. Carefully avoid all those Sins which your Calling, and Diligence in it,
exposes you unto.

XV. Never let the Infirmity of thy Brother be thy Recreation. Let not that
which grieveth God, make thee merry. Let not that be thy Sport, which is
Heaven's Sorrow, and so is every thing that is evil.

XVI. Let the use of Refreshments, make you compassionate to the Poor who want
them. This will be an Evidence that they are sanctified unto you.

XVII. In the Practice of Civility, avoid the Sins of Company, mention not God
slightly, inconsiderately, or merrily.

XVIII. Censure not any Man's Actions which contradict not a plain Rule, and in
which there is use of Prudence, because much of Prudence depends upon
Circumstances of which you are ignorant. God has made you a Feoffee in Trust
of your Neighbors Name; and it is a Greatness of Mind not to speak evil of
others.

Before thy Brother's Face flatter not; behind his back be as tender of his
Reputation as of his Life.

XIX. In Civil Converse, though your Discourse be not always of Religion, yet
make it your Design thereby to recommend Religion.

XX. Let not Fretting and Discontent prey upon your Time: It makes you neglect
some present Duty: It makes you like a Ship tossed upon, the Waters, which is
moved, but brought to no place.

XXI. In endeavoring the Conversion of another, persuade him only to what is
necessary to his Salvation; make him understand that you design nothing for
your self in it, but his own Happiness. Press him to nothing that you will not
practice your self.

XXII. Be exact in your Actions, because they must stand upon Record to
Eternity.

XXIII. That you may think of God aright, you must abstract from your present
Temper, and your own Sense. For Experience tells us that if a Man be convinced
of Sin, and under Terrors, all the Art of Man cannot satisfy him, that God
intends to pardon such a Sinner as he is; because he judges of God by what he
feels. So he that perceives not the Bitterness of Sin; all Arguments can
scarcely persuade him that Sin is so great an Evil as indeed it is, or that God
will severely punish it, because he judged of God according to his present
Temper, and his own Sense of things.

XXIV. Give God the Honor of his Attributes together: You desire his Mercy,
let him have also the Honor of his Wisdom in his choosing the Channel in which
his Goodness shall run.

XXV. Never be a Spendthrift of that, of which only you can be honestly
covetous; that is, of your Time.

XXVI. Meditate much upon the Promises; for though Meditation can add nothing
to the Promises, yet it draws forth the Sweetness, and discovers the Beauty
which is in them.

XXVII. Apply the Promises frequently, tho you find not such visible Effects,
either of Grace or Comfort, issuing from them as you expect, or desire. The
Manner of fulfilling them may be various, but the Performance is most certain.
The Blessing of the Promise sometimes descends like Rain in visible Showers,
producing the sensible Effects of Joy and Peace in the Soul; and sometimes like
Dew, which falls in a silent way, without making any sensible Alteration in
the Heart: The Virtue of it is real, but withal hidden and secret.

FINIS.

