Infant Baptism JUSTIFIED BY A NEW DISCOVERY: And also, Several Scripture
Allegories adjusted upon the like Account.

By WILLIAM PARKER Clerk, Incumbent of WROTHAM In KENT.

London, Printed for the Author. 1668.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
AS necessity brought, and brings forth the investigation of all Arts,
(especially Mechanic) and perfects them; So a kind of necessity puts us upon
this attempt, which we offer unto thee in reference to Infant Baptism;
otherwise we had not put manum ad tabulant, to declare what we have offered on
Gods behalf for his allowance of the practice of Infant Baptism upon the
accounts respectively, betwixt it and Circumcision in general, and betwixt
Infant-Circumcision and Infant Baptism in special, to be considered in their
Administrations respectively.

The said necessity is, for that we have been scandalized, and impleaded at Law
for Printing (as it is fained) in a certain Book called The late Assembly of
Divines Confession of Faith examined concerning Infant Baptism.

Where there is nothing, we do appeal to all intelligent and unbyassed
bystanders to give evidence against us, if there be any thing Printed against
it in the said Book, when it is examined what we have replied to a certain
Section in their Chapter of Baptism, which they have there laid down and
declared.

Their assertion in the fourth Section of the said Chapter, is, That not only
those that do actually profess Faith in, and Obedience to Christ; but also the
Infants of one or both believing Parents, (for so they order it) are to be
Baptized.

To that aforesaid we have replied, and tell them, that the said assertion (so
disposed in order, and so magisterially laid down as it is) we say it is too far
dipped in error; the reason why we use the said express (Dipped) is, for that it is
an allusion to their own express Dipped, Sect. 3.

And truly there, their fourth assertion is Dipped in error upon a twofold
account; one the lesser, (yet an error) the other the greater, which they are
guilty of; the lesser is the point of Order and Method; For they say the
Infants of one, or both believing Parents are to be Baptized, which is a dictum
frustra, and immethodical; For if it be true, that Infants of one believing
Parent are to be Baptized, then much more of both believing Parents must be in
rationality understood to be Baptized; Therefore to lay down Infant Baptism of
believing Parents in that Order aforesaid, is immethodice dictum; For it is an
(...), against method; for if one of Believing Parents, then much more of both
ought to be Baptized.

This aforesaid we do but hint, for that it is but a Criticism from our
observation, though re vera, true, against Order and Method, as it is disposed
by them in their said assertion.

And as for their further asserting that Infants are to be Baptized, but not so
much as taking notice, and expressing in what respect Infants of believing
Parents are to be Baptized, is a great failing in defectu ex omissione, for
that there are two modes or respects to be considered in Baptizing Infants. One
is, as it is expressly commanded in Scripture to Baptize Infants. The other, as
it is not forbidden in Scripture.

Both these respects aforesaid, ought to have been considered by them and
declared, whether they do mean as it is commanded expressly in Scripture (or as
it is not expressly forbidden) to Baptize Infants.

Now for them to impose, as they do in their said assertion, a kind of
necessity of Baptizing Infants; saying, Infanss of such and such, are to be
Baptized, and not declaring in what respect they are to be Baptized, either as
commanded, or not forbidden. This may occasion much error, for that it may
make many to mistake their meaning upon the account aforesaid, in reference
unto the two said respective modes or manners of Baptizing Infants.

For who can tell, (but themselves) since they deelare it not in what of the
two modes they intend their said assertion to be taken, (viz.) that Infants are
to be Baptized

Hence we come with our Reply, and say, their said assertion is two far Dipped in
error, being too loosly and too generally laid down by them, in that they name
not the mode or manner how, or in what respect Infants are to be Baptized, for
that (as we reply) Infants are no where in express terms commanded to be
Baptized.

Yet they may (as we presently after say) be Baptized, for that Infant Baptism
is no where forbidden; and also for that their being Baptized may be to as good
purpose (as we shall by and by demonstrate) to others at present, and to
themselves afterward if occasion serve, as ever Infant-Circumcision was
administered for.

So that it appears, that what we have there replied unto their said assertion,
is, and must be comprehended in a compound discr^et axiom, which contains the
totum integrale of what we have said, constituted in two distinct modes,
manners or respects, in and upon which Infants are not to be, or may be
Baptized.

And further, we say in reference to their 5. Section, that to deny
Infant Baptism in the Countries and places where the Christian Magistrates
require and command it to be done, there to deny it (we say) is a Sin of
contumacy against those Magistrates, for that obedience to Magistrates is
absolutely commanded, Romans 13. and Infant Baptism is no where forbidden, and
for that it may be done upon so good an account, as aforesaid.

From all aforesaid, the intelligent and impartial bystander may observe
simplici and uno intuitu, that we have not Printed omnino, altogether against
Infant Baptism, but only against one mode or manner of Baptizing Infants, as
not commanded in express Scripture, but owned in the other mode as it is not
forbidden.

Hence if our accusers had had so much discretion in them, as to distinguish of
a discreet axiom, in which all that we have said in reference to Infant Baptism
is disposed and laid down as aforesaid, they would have blushed to have
impleaded us to Print, especially altogether against Infant Baptism, for that a
discreet axiom consists always of a negative and affirmative, or affirmative
and negative, wherein it is disposed, at least it always consists of two
dissentany or disagreeing parts, in which one of them only is true, the other
is not; as for instance, Nabal was a rich man, but a Fool; Abraham was a rich
Man, yet a wise Man.

Where we see in those two instances two differing parts respectively, both
parts disagreeing respectively in each, as rich, but differing in both other
parts respectively, in reference to wisdom and folly; Abraham being a rich Man,
and Wise; But Nabal a rich Man, yet a Fool; but they might have been
respectively one like the other in Riches and Wisdom, and in Riches and Folly,
for that both are contingent and not necessary axioms, because they might have
been otherwise then they are. Hence such axioms are called discreet axioms,
differing only in some Logical respects in their parts and not otherwise; and
therefore might have been agreers in their axiomatical dispositions
respectively; So might the said Assembly have declared their said assertion,
That Infants are to be Baptized in a discreet axiom; saying, Infants are to be
Baptized, yet not as commanded expressly in Holy Writ, but as not forbidden;
which if they had so disposed the said assertion, we had been ejusdem animi
with them, and not have told them that their said assertion, (or mode of so
declaring it in a discreet axom) was too far Dipped in error.

In which we declare our Reply against their assertion, saying, Infants are no
where commanded in Scripture to be Baptized, notwithstanding they may be
Baptized, because it is no where in Scripture forbidden.

This is the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth in what we
have Printed in the said Book concerning Infant Baptism.

Hence we say, that if our accusers aforesaid had had so much discretion in
them; as to have understood a discret axiom, they would not (for shame) have
impleded us at Law, for Printing against Infant Baptism.

Now if they think we impose too much ignorance upon them by our reflection
aforesaid, then it will appear, that what they have impleaded us for, was, and
is out of the malicious and self design, to wrest from us, as they have kept us
out, ever since July 1662. of our Ecelesiastical Living, the Vicarage of
Wrotham in Kent. They traducing and charging us also upon all occasions (when
we implead our defense) to have Printed against Infant Baptism; and
scandalizing us many ways besides, as not to be in Holy Orders, when we are 64
years of age, and were Incumbent in two Livings successively in Lincolnshire
long since, as it is well known; and therefore it is unlikely upon the account
aforesaid.

But the truth is, they are lost by reason of a Minister's death in
Lincolnshire with whom they were left in the time of the sad War in 1643, who
dyed a long time before we knew of it, and left his Estate to a Scotch-man his
Kinsman, who carried all the said Minister left him away into Scotland, or so
disposed of Papers otherwise, that we could never find them, or hear of them.
And upon this account, our accusers do press us to show our Orders. But whether
it be because our Accuser shows sufficiently his Disorders we say not. But that
is the one of the two impedimenta obstantia, which are prosecuted against us;
but if they charge us with one crime of immorality, injustice, or
unreasonableness committed by us in the said place, and prove it against us for
above 20 years, wherein we have lived amongst them, we will yield our cause unto
them; and as for Infant Baptism we have constantly (it is well known) practiced
it in, and at Wrotham aforesaid.

Quis nisi mentis inops contra sua practica scribit,
Certe est illius tutior unda fide?
Who but a brainsick, bereaved of's wits,
Prints, Preaches, what his practice contradicts?
His credit sure is more unstable
Than Stygian water in the Fable, We say no more.
Quicquid ex merito venit, patiamur ferendum est,
Quae venit indigne paena dolenda venit.
What is from undesert pursude as crime,
Does well deserve to be complained in Rhyme.
By WILLIAM PARKER.

Infant Baptism Justified by A NEW DISCOVERY.
Exitus acta probabit.
NOW to make way to the demonstration of the said New Discovery, in reference
to the Justification of Infant Baptism; We think it not amiss to re-mind the
Reader, that such was the Lords love of pity and compassion to the disobedient
fallen Mankind, that he was willing to restore Mankind to a new and innocent
life again; that so he might have fellowship and communion again with his God,
and enjoy the Beatifical Vision of transcendent, Bliss, and Happiness, in the
Kingdom of Heaven. John 3.16. 1 John 1.3.

Which said New Life and State, (the Introduction to the said Transcendent
Bliss) Our Savior exemplifies by a Child-like innocent life, and state;
therefore he set (upon occasion) a little Child in the midst of his Disciples;
and said, Except you be Converted, and become as a little Child, ye cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. 18.

Hence it is evident, that a Child-like Innocent life and state, is made (by Our
Savior) the Pattern and Exemplar of the said New Heavenly Life and State.

Now since Mankind was by Disobedience, (and still will be be through
Disobedience) fallen, as aforesaid, from the said Innocent Life, and must of
necessity come to it again, before he be fit to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; there must be the removing of all impediments that hinder the
attainment to Bliss; which said impediments, are the Sins and Transgressions,
which stand in opposition to Innocence, and separate betwixt Us, and Our God.
Isa. 59.1, 2.

Therefore the Lord in his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, Ordained two most
significant and fit Sacraments, to Figure forth in their Mysteries, the way and
means whereby the Transgressions and Sins may be removed, and taken away from
the depraved heart of the repenting Sinner.

Which two Sacraments are Circumcision and Baptism.

The one, (viz.) Circumcision, to cut off and destroy the gross Sins, which
must first be removed (as we are commanded, Ezekiel. 18. to cast away our gross
Sins) and then the washing away all remaining defilements in the depraved heart
of Mankind, for that no unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Rev. 21.21.27.

Hence the Lord says, 2. Cor. 6.27. Come out from among them, and touch no
unclean thing, and I will be your God; and you shall be my People: Therefore
the Lord in his like Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, brought in Baptism upon the
account aforesaid; as appears Ephesians. 5.26, 27. where it is said Christ gave
himself, that he might Sanctify and cleanse his Church, etc. by the washing of
water in and through the word, that he might present it to himself a most
Glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing; but that it
might be Holy, and without blemish.

Thus we see how and wherefore Baptism also was brought in after Circumcision,
to be administered: and these two Sacraments are so essentially relating and
depending on each other respectively; as one cannot be complete in its
operation and Mystery without the other; For if the gross Sins be not taken
away, how can remaining defilements of Sin be purged away? and if remaining
defilements be not also purged away, there can be no coming to the Innocent
life again, and so no entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, For no unclean thing
shall enter into the said Kingdom, Revel. 21. So that we see the said use, and
essential dependency as aforesaid, on each other respectively, in reference to
the same end. And Circumcision must have its first work also, upon the account
aforesaid; and therefore we must first begin with Circumcision, and we shall
lay it down as it is in its fitness for the end aforesaid.

2. The necessity of its application in its Mystery for the said end.

3. Lay down the Persons who first received Circumcision, and the Persons who
were in the first dispensation always to be Circumcised.

And lastly, offer to Consideration, whether it be not to be granted, that the
then Circumcised were then particularly and intentionally to be Baptized in
reference to the removing of all Sin? for that the natural dependency betwixt
them, as aforesaid, is so nearly and essentially annexed together, as
aforesaid; that one cannot be efficacious and useful without the other: and
that therefore none of Us can have fellowship with the Lord, without the
operation of them both respectively; and therefore it is said, that Abraham
received the Sign of Circumcision, as the Seal of the Rightousness of the Faith
he had in his Uncircumcision; whence it is evident he had the Inward and
Spiritual Circumcision, before he had the outward; and had Spiritual Baptism
also, for that he had in his Uncircumcision, says the Text, before he was
outwardly Circumcised, the Rightousness of Faith, which purifies the Heart,
Acts 1.5.

Now Faith is annexed to the Ordinance of Baptism, says OUr Savior, Matt. 28.
and Mark 16.17.

Hence Abraham recieved also (as aforesaid) Spiritual Baptism, in his
Circumcision; and therefore We believe that Spiritual Circumcision, and
Spiritual Baptism were to be received, and intended to be so together, though
but the outward Dispensation of Circumcision was appointed only at first to be
in practice: Yet that Baptism was indeed intended in its Spiritual use also,
appears by that 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. Moreover Brethren, I would not that ye should
be ignorant how that our Fathers were all under the Cloud: and all passed
through the red Sea: and were all Baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the
Sea; where it is apparent, they were all Prophetically Baptized with the
Ceremony of Baptism also, who were but practically Circumcised only, as
aforesaid.

Hence where one of the said Ordinances are outwardly by Dispensation appointed
of right, and by Gods appointment, the other also is, and must interpretatively
(as aforesaid) be understood to belong; and therefore it will infer also Infant
Baptism to be just, and reasonable upon the account of Gods appointing
Israelites Infants to be Circumcised in truth; But we leave it to be seriously
thought on, and considered, and argue it at present no farther on that account;
but pass on to set forth Circumcision, according as before hinted.

And first, unto its fitness for the end and purpose it was ordained for, which
will appear in the signification of the word it self, ( viz.) Circumcision,
which is derived from the Latin word Circumscindere, to cut about; and answers
to the Greek word (...), which the Apostle uses to express Circumcision by,
Romans 2.25. Acts 15.15. which signifies to cut about, and so to cut off; and
answers also to the Hebrew word (...) Genesis 17.10. which Arius Montanus renders,
concidit, to cut off together, which is a most apt rendering of the said word,
according to its innate signification and scope, for which it is intended, even
to figure forth in a Mystery (by being applied to and on the foreskin of the
Flesh) the cutting off the strong Lusts from the depraved heart of the
disobedient humanity, which will be no otherways destroyed, then the Sons of
Anack could be destroyed in the Land of Canaan, by cutting them off, which
were, (as a Divinely Spirited Germane says) the Figure of these strong and
powerful Lusts: which unbelieving Christians say, (because they know not, nor
make use of the Spiritual Circumcision aforesaid) can never be subdued in this
life: even as the unbelieving Israelites aforetime cried out they could never
be able to overcome those Giants, the Sons of Anack. Therefore the Lord of
necessity brought in Circumcision, to Figure forth in its Mystery the way and
means, whereby the said strong and Giant-like Lusts (so powerful through custom
and habit) should be destroyed, in order to the coming to the said Innocent
Life and State. Which said Circumcision, the Lord annexed to his Law of
Compulsion, (...), Gal. 3.24. that is, (as We believe) until Christ come to
perform his Office on those who were Disciplined under the said Law, Gal. 3.10,
13. And made fit thereby for that his Office to be performed in them by Him,
Gal. 4.45.

Now the said Circumcision was adjoined to the said Law; for that the said Law
was appointed by the Lord, to restrain the abominable nature of Sin, Romans 3.20.
and 7.1. 2. To discover also the Curse due to the Sin; from both which
discoveries, when they are set home by his Spirit on the Heart. Then there
does, and must, ( Ex vi antecedentium) arise a fear and trembling in the
Sinner, as appears by St. Paul's express, Rom 7.24. ver. 9, 10. So Acts 2.37.
and 16.29. Hebr. 12.20, 21. Upon which work, the Sinner is willing to part with
any thing, in reference to his Salvation, as Judge. 10.16. it is said upon the
like occasion, They put away their strange gods, and served the Lord.

Hence also, the Fear is said to be the beginning of wisdom, Psalm. 111.10.
Prove. 9.1. and Prove. 24.10. it is said the wise man Fears, and departs from
Evil; For then we are willing to do any thing to be saved, as aforesaid.
Therefore the Lord joined Circumcision to his Law of Compulsion, which works
the said Fear upon the Conscience aforesaid, to make the gross Sinner willing
to be Circumcised in a Mystery, that is, to have his gross Sins cut off, which
the Sinner must do, or he cannot come to the said Innocent life and state
again; to be made fit to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, upon the account
aforesaid.

Hence Joshua was commanded (before he brought the Children of Israel into
Canaan, the Tipe of the Kingdom of Heaven) to make sharp knives, and Circumcise
all the males, Josh. 5.2, 3. The Original express is, Make thee (...) cultros
petrarum, knives of stones, or rather of sharp flints, and Circumcise the
males; which knives were a fit Figure of the Circumcising knife of the Law, to
which Circumcision, was annexed for the end aforesaid.

For that the Law was by Gods Command written in Stone, which is a Tipe of the
Heart of stone; so made through custom, and obdurateness in Sin, Ezekiel. 36.26.
and 11.19. wherein the Law, when the Heart becomes a Heart of Flesh again, is
to be written.

Now that the Laws were written in Stone, it appears Deuteronomy. 10.25. Exodus 34.1.

The Persons who were first Circumcised by Gods Command, was Abraham, Genesis 17.
who received it after he believed, Romans 4.11. And therefore he was then gone
beyond Circumcisions work and scope, for which Circumcision was appointed, as
aforesaid.

Hence Abraham had then no Personal need of Circumcisions work, which was
appointed to figure forth in a Mystery, the cutting off the gross Sins, as
aforesaid: for He had attained (as it appears) to the Rightousness of Faith,
which he had in his Uncircumcision, Romans 4.10. and before his Circumcision was
received, ver. 11.

Where, by the way we may apprehend, that Abraham was then Circumcised by way
of Office only, as to be thereby a representative and document, to hold forth
what Circumcision related unto, and aimed at in the cutting off the gross Sins,
as aforesaid; in order to the coming on to the Rightousness of Faith, by all
the true Israel of God: So that hence it appears, that those may have a Divine
Ceremony applied to them who have no need of it at present themselves, nor does
personally (at present) concern themselves, as Abraham was, upon the account
aforesaid Circumcised, when he had no need to be Circumcised, in reference to
his own personal concerns.

And Christ was both Circumcised, Luke 2. and after Baptized; Mat. 3. who had
no personal need at all of either; for that He was a Lamb without spot, holy,
harmless and undefiled, separated from Sinners, Hebr. 7.26. In whose mouth was
no guile: yet was he both Circumcised, and Baptized.

Hence its most apparent, that Christ received Circumcision, and Baptism also
by way of Office only, as representative and documental to hold forth, that He
is the Minister of the Spiritual Circumcision of the Heart, according to that
of Romans 15.8. Col. 2.11. and also the true Administrator of the Spiritual
Baptism, or Washing, as the Apostle declares Him to be, Ephesians. 5.27. Coll. 2.12.

Hence it does undeniably follow, that those may receive Circumcision and
Baptism respectively, in reference to other Mysteries, then their own personal
concerns at present; for that Abraham did receive Circumcision, and Christ both
Circumcision and Baptism also, as aforesaid. And Our Savior declares Infants
to be the Patterns and Exemplars of the Innocent life and state, Matt. 18. And
therefore both Circumcision and Baptism do relate in their applicatory
Mysteries, by way of Office and document, respectively to Infants, in order to
their being the Exemplars of the Innocent life: So that Circumcision and
Baptism also, were brought in by the Lord in a Mystery, for the taking away of
all gross Sins, and all remaining defilements from repenting penitent sinners;
that so they may come thereby to the Child-like Innocent life and state again;
of which Our Savior declares Children to be the Patterns and Exemplars of, as
aforesaid. And also for that Circumcision and Baptism are so essentially
depending on each other, that the one cannot have its accomplishment without
the other respectively: yet are they as (it is confessed) declared to be set forth
in two distinct Dispensations, ( viz.) Circumcision under the Law, and in
reference thereunto: Baptism under the Gospel, and in reference thereunto. But
though they be so, as aforesaid, for distinct discoveries of their respective
uses; and how, and upon no other account they are here brought in; and how, and
wherein they became useful and serviceable, by being joined to the Law and
Gospel respectively, in their dipsensation; and are so nearly relating to, and
essentially depending on each other; that they cannot but be incomplere one
without the other, as aforesaid.

Neither can Israelites Infants be more concerned in Circumcision to be
Circumcised by way of Office and good document, than Christians Infants are
concerned in Baptism, to be Baptized in Infancy by way of Office, and good
document to others; no, not so much: for that as Infants are the Exemplars of
Innocence, which is only attained unto by a repenting Sinner, in having his
gross Sins cut off first by Circumcision in its Mystery: and then in having
all remaining defilements of Sin washed away by Baptism in its Mystery, which
is the nearest and most perspicuous purge for Innocencies introduction.

Hence Baptism ought to be (we say) looked upon to have as much power and
influence upon Christians Infants, to be administered to them in Infancy by way
of Office, (though it be not literally commanded also) as Circumcision had,
when administered to Israelites Infants, upon the account aforesaid; though it
was literally commanded, as it was then needful, so to be, for that otherwise
the Mystery begun in Infant Circumcision, by way of Office and good document
only, had not had its rise and warrant to be known to be Instituted by the Lord
for the same purpose; that the Child-like innocent life and state, should be
the end and scope of Circumcisions work in a Mystery, as aforesaid: But now
that being commanded, there needs not a new command for Christians Infants to
be Baptized; For it may be demonstrated a pari, that Infant Baptism holds forth
(undeniably) as good, yea greater usefulness to grown Christians, when its
administered to Infants by way of Office and good document, as Infant
Circumcision was, or could be; though Infant Baptism be not literally
commanded; for a Command shows only the information, and pleasure of the
Commander in his Authority, not the rationem formalem of the thing Commanded,
which is only considered in the justice and equity of the thing to be done, or
not to be done; as Infant Circumcision was commanded thereupon, to be
administered by way of Office, and good document only to others concerns, not
their own at present; for Infants were not then apprehensive and capable of any
duty in reference to their then personal Circumcision.

Hence may also Christians Infants be warrantably Baptized, by way of Office,
and good document to others; not then to their own Personal concerns: though
Infant Baptism be not commanded literally; (which indeed need not) for that the
ratio formalis of Infant Baptism, (which is its fitness, and equity to be done,
by way of Office and good document,) is in reference to others, not then their
own personal concerns, as aforesaid.

All this is offered to consideration occasionally, as it falls in
consequentially from something proceeding from Circumcisions discourse, as
aforesaid. We return to insist further on Abraham's Circumcising all his Family
by Gods Command, which were born in his Hourse, or bought with Money, Genesis
17.13, 27. Where every Male at Eight days old was to be Circumcised, ver. 12.
There is no mention made of any further iground of their being Circumcised;
than that they were of Abraham's Family.

Hence it is more then probable, upon the like account, that when Lidia appeared
to be a Believer; we presume to say, that if there were or had been an Infant,
or Infants in Lidias house at that time when Paul Baptized her and her whole
household, he had Baptized them also: otherwise he had not left Lidias House so
good a document and instruction, to mind them to go forward, and endeavor
after their Child-like innocent life.

Now give me leave to say, upon Abraham's practice in Circumcising all his
Family; as well those that were bought with his Money, as born in his house: to
offer this also to consideration, to them that do (as they ought) allow of
Infant Baptism, which scruple to Baptize any Children but Believers Children,
as they persuade themselves they are whom they Baptize.

The question is, whether upon account of Abraham's practice aforesai^, in
Circumcising all his Family, whether born in his house, or bought with his
Money; whether it be not lawful to Baptize in like manner the Children of a
Turk, or like Nation, if Christian People would take care of its education and
instruction of Baptisms work in its Mystery, as they come to riper years: For
that Abraham Circumcised all Male Children of his Family, though bought with
his Money of a stranger.

Therefore, We thought good to offer this to their Consideration, who though
they allow of Infant Baptism; yet limit and restrain it within the narrow
compass of Believing Parents, as they persuade themselves they are whom they
Baptize.

Further, as for Abraham's Circumcising his seed; We find he did it at two
several times or ages: for it it is expressly said, Genesis 17.25. first Ishmael,
Abraham's Son was 13 years of age when he was Circumcised, and that at the same
age or years the Jewish Doctors accounted them Filii praecepti; that is, fit to
be instructed and taught the Laws of their persuasions, in reference to Abram's
and Moses's instructions to the Israelites of their Children and Household, Genesis
19. Deuteronomy. 4. and 6.7.

Hence it is very consentaneous and agreeable to Piety; that at the same age
youth ought to be instructed by their Parents and Governors, even to begin to
show forth then their true Circumcising: that is, their cutting off their gross
Sins of life, which youth are growing up into, for want of Discipline and
Correction.

But too many pretending Christians in our days, do omit and neglect it;
putting it off, by using a Brutish Proverb, that a rugged Colt makes a good
Horse: as if they could tame (when they please) their bruitishly bred Children,
as their rugged Colts are tamed; whereas Heathens, (commonly so called,) could
say, that Children left some time to their Lusts, are hardly restrained, quo^e
semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem testa diu; and Divine Writ tells us,
that Youth corrupted, is not easily nor frequently reduced again; but it
becomes in little time to be like the Sons of Anack, so strong in Lusts, that
they must be cut off before they can be subdued; and therefore as Job says,
They (too often) are ready to l'e down with the Sins of their Youth, for want
of the true Circumcision, which is the spiritual Circumcision, at Ishmael's
age; to show themselves thereby of Abraham's Belief, the Father of the
Faithful, Romans 4. So that all Parents and Governors, should, when their
Children be come to be of Ishmael's age, endeavor to bring them to the
Minister of the true Circumcision, the Lord Jesus, Rom 15.8. to be Spiritually
Circumcised, in order to their Spiritual Baptism: that so thereby they may
attain to the Child-like innocent life and state; to be made capable (as Our
Savior says) to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now forasmuch as Ishmael was Circumcised, when Abraham, with all his Household
were Circumcise^; it is evident, that Ishmael was then personally a member of
the Household of Faith, no reprobate at present: therefore that which is spoken
to Abraham by the Lord, Genesis 21.11, 12. was only spoken in reference to Sarah
her words, ver. 10. and in reference to a higher Mystery, which is declared by
the Apostle more fully, Gal. 4.30. ( viz.) Cast out the Bond Woman, and her
Son, which was Ishmael; it was spoken of Ishmael's rejection by way of office,
as he was born of Hagar the Bond Woman, the representative of the Legal Seed of
Legal Servantship under the Law of Compulsion, and was not to have that
Inheritance of the Spiritual Promises; which was (...) to Sarah and her
Offspring, Genesis 17.19. Sarah which was the Free Woman, the Tipe of the new
Jerusalem, the Mother of all true Believers, Gal. 4.26. For it is said to
Abraham. Genesis 17.20. concerning Ishmael, I have blessed him, and will make him
fruitful: and will mult^ply him exceedingly; which are all signals of the Lords
good will to Ishmael: And therefore, since he was Circumcised with Abraham at
the same time, and had the said Promises made to him; surely it cannot be that
he was personally a reprobate at the time of his Birth; for that Signum must
relate to the Signatum, which was the personal interest in Abraham's Belief,
and household of Faith, by being Circumcised, and had the Promises aforesaid;
For that relata, do ex mutuo constare; that is, give respectively being, and
existency to each other: therefore (...) uno relato ponitur Correlatum; that
is, one Relat being declared, the Correlat thereof must necessarily be
inferred, because they do ex mutuo constare, that is, arise mutually, as cause
and effect out of each other: as Fatherhood arises out of Sonhood: if there
were no Son, there could be no Father: and if no Father, there could be no Son;
therefore they arise mutually out of each other: so in reference to Ishmael, as
aforesaid; since he was Circumcised, and that by Abraham upon Gods Command,
ver. 13. it must follow, that he was personally then a member of the household
of the Faith of Abraham, and no reprobate; but only by way of office was he
cast out, Genesis 21.10. and what he did, was only by way of office, as a
representative of what the earthly legal seed of the Bond Woman does to the
Seed of Faith; even as the legal Scribes and Pharisees did to Christ and his
Disciples; even reject Him and Them, and scoff at them, as it is expressed, Mat.
27.29. Acts 2.18. What will this babbler say? Acts 17.18.

Yet this legal bond offspring of the Jews aforesaid, though they did reject
the Christ of God Our Savior, did expect to be Heirs to Abraham, John 8.33.
Romans 9.8.

And so much of the first Age, or different time of Abraham's Circumcising his
Seed of one of the first Ages; or different times of Abraham's Circumcising his
Seed, as of Ishmael his Son by Hagar, and of his ingraffing by Circumcision at
present into Abraham's Family, or household of Faith; and likewise of Ishmael
his rejecton or casting out from being Heir with Sarah her Seed to the
inheritance by Faith, which was done by way of office, as he did bear the Image
and representation of the Bond Woman's Seed, which was the Seed of (...) as the
Dutch call it; that is the Law of Compulsion, that compels us to seek a freedom
by Abraham's Faith.

We come now to set forth the other age, or time of Abraham's Circumcising his
Seed, and so of all Israel after him; which was at 8 days old, Genesis 17.12. and
every Male Child only was to be Circumcised by the Lords Command at that age,
no sooner or later. 2. The Male Infant that was not then Circumcised, was to be
cut off from the Congregration of Israel, ver. 14. which was durus sermo, a
hard saying, in reference to Infants at 8. days old, if it was not intended (as
it was) by way of off^ce, and as a representative of a further and higher
Mystery than the Infant concerns at present, for that Infants then were not
capable of performing, (no not apprehensive) of any duty that related to
Circumcisions scope in its Mystery aforesaid.

Hence Infant Circumcision of the Male only. 2. At 8. days old only; and if at
that age it was not then Circumcised, it was to be cut off from the
Congregation of Israel.

Hence we see, that all the aforesaid respects to be oserved by Israelites Male
Infants, in reference to their Circumcision in Infancy, was not at present for
their own personal concerns; but in ref^rence to higher and further Mysteries
to be reprerented thereby.

(...) Male only was to be Circumcised, for that in the Male is the Manly
nature which figureth forth the strength of the humanity, which the Lord calls
for to be dedicated to Him, Psalm. 68.28 Thy God has commanded thy strength.
Therefore the Mother of King Lemuel, (i.e. cum quo est Deus, with whom is God)
said to him, Give not thy strength to Women, Prove. 31.3. and it is said, Prove.
20.29. The glory of young Men is their strength. Hence, 1 John 2.14. I write to
you young Men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you: and
you have overcome the wicked one.

Hence it was, (we believe) that after the Israelites came out of Egypt, the
straitness and bondage, (which figured out the slavery under the Sin) the Lord
commanded all the Males (from 20 years old and upward) should be numbered by
their pole, Number. 1.1, 2, 3. and no Female, nor Children were to be numbered with
them.

Also in the Five Thousand miraculously fed with 5 Loaves, and 2 Fishes, Mat.
14.22. and of those fed in like manner miraculously Matthew. 15.36, 37. no Women
or Children, (though fed with them at the same time) were numbered; whose
respective enumerations (if they had been mentioned) had greatned much the
Miracles aforesaid; (...) also it is now more than probable, that the Males at
20 years old and upward, were appointed only to be numbered, Number. 1.1, 2, 3.

For that the Males, in whom is the strength of the Humanity which God calls
for, were most fit for war, in which the Lord intended to exercise the
Israelites ( Judge. 1.2.) in a Mystery, as the said War figured forth to the
Israelites the Spiritual Warfar against Sin and Satan, Ephesians. 6.12, 13. That so
his Name might become great in Israel, Psalm. 76.1. and they renowned for it,
according to their name derived from the name Israel given to Jacob, when he
had prevailed with the Angel. Genesis 32.28.

To which War the Spiritual strength is requisite; Therefore the Apostle
exhorts the Ephesians, Chap. 6.10, 11. to be strong in the Lord; which we may
guess to be the reason that the Lord calls for the strength to be given to him,
aforesaid, Psalm. 68.28.

Now for that the weakness was figured forth in the Female; Therefore the Lord
appointed no Sacrament, or Mystery to be administered unto them, which surely
the Lord would have done, if Circumcision to Males had been a Sacrament or
Mystery for Infants personal privileges and benefits; for that there is no
respect of persons with God: and St. Paul says, Gal. 3.28. There is neither
Male nor Pemale, but all are one in Christ Jesus. Hence the weakness was also
by way of office held forth in the Female as the strength was figured forth in
the Male by way of office.

And therefore the curse is threatened to him who has a Male in his Flock, and
offers to the Lord a corrupt thing, which is (no doubt) the Female: which
figured forth the weakness, that is contradistiact to the strength.

Now the reason of the said Curse, (...) the Female (under the corrupt thing)
was, for that the weakness cannot subdue and destroy the strong Lusts; But the
manly Nature, which figureth the strength, must do that when it is Circumcised
in a Mystery; that is, has its gross Sins cut off from it; which if they be
not, then the Male or manly Nature is weak like the Women.

Hence it is said to the Israelites, when captived to their strong Lusts, How
weak is thy heart since thou do all these things, even the work of a
presumptuous whorish Woman? Ezekiel. 16.30. And it is threatened to them, ( Isai.
13.12. Nah. 3.13, 10.) who were enslaved to their Lusts, that Women, yea
Children should rule over them, because they were through vitiousness become
weak, like Women in passions, and like Children in understanding and government.

And therefore the Lord commanded the Male only to be Circumcised by the
Circumcising knife of the Law, and that in the Infancy or beginning of the
fallen Man's state and condition, before the Lusts are grown too strong in him,
like the Sons of Anack, as aforesaid.

Again, the Circumcising Male was to be on the Eighth day after his birth
precisely, no sooner, nor later; therefore a great Mystery was intended, for
that many Infants might die before the Fourth, yea, the Second day; which
Mystery is in reference to Christ himself, whose day that is, who (...) us to
the true rest, Heb. 4. and therefore his day, and it was his day wherein he was
Circumcised, Luke 2. who is called the Minister of the true Circumcision, Romans
15.8.

Hence they were Circumcised on that day, in reference to Christ, who is
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Hebr. 13.8.

Also it is said, that the Male which was not Circumcised on that day, was to
be cut off from the Congregation of the Lord.

Which figureth forth (we doubt not) but that those who were not spiritually
Circumcised from their gross Sins, upon and in Christ's day, that is, by him the
Minister of the true Circumcision, must be cut off from Christ's Spiritual
Congregation, for such cannot be capable of Baptism in its Mystery, to the
washing away all remaining defilements of Sin, after the gross Sins are out
off, as aforesaid; whereby we may have fellowship again with Christ, and no
otherwise, as appears 2 Cor. 6.15, 16. ver. 27.2 Cor. 7. and therefore Christ
was also Baptized himself (who needed it not) to figure this forth unto us
byway of office also. From all aforesaid declared, concerning Infant
Circumcising. 2. Of the Male only. 3. On the Eighth day only; and that if the
Male was not then Circumcised precisely, no sooner nor later, that Male should
be cut off from the Congregation of the Lord; which was a hard case, for that
an Infant could not then either further or hinder its Circumcising: nor is an
Infant then either apprehensive or sensible of what was then done to it, by or
in its Circumcision.

Hence the Israelites Infants were then Circumcised in reference to others (not
their own) personal concerns (at present,) and therefore they were commanded to
be Circumcised by way of office only, and good document to grown Israelites
only at present, upon the account aforesaid.

And so much for Circumcision, and Infant Circumcision.

We come now to speak of Baptism, the other necessary following Sacrament or
Mystery ordained by the Lord Jesus, to set forth what is further to be done
upon and in the true Circumcised ones, who have their gross Sins cut off by the
Ministry of the true Circumcision, Romans 5.8. and by the true Circumcising
Knife of the Law, which Joshuah in his office made use of in a Mystery, as
aforesaid.

This Baptism we are to seek for after we are Circumcised, even a through
washing away of all remaining desilements of Sin, which remain in their degrees
for some time in the Soul, after our gross Sins are Circumcised away.

And this Baptism through washing is so necessary, that without it in its order
and degrees performed, we cannot attain to the Childlike Innocent life and
state again, set forth by Our Savior, to be the next way and means of entering
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18. Therefore the Apostle exh^rts the
Corinthians that having these Promises, Romans 6.27. to purge them from all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

Hence Baptism was ordained by the Lord Jesus for the use and end aforesaid,
and must follow after Circumcisions use and work in its Mystery is done.

Hence the Israelites who came out of Egypt, (the straits and bondage under the
slavery of Sin, in a Mystery) were then Prophetically Baptized unto Moses, in
the Cloud, and in the Sea, as St. Paul says, 2. Cor. 10.1, 2.

So that the Circumcised ones who came out of Egypt, as aforesaid, were
Prophetically Baptized also unto Moses, which does clearly hint to us, that
Circumcision does reach (and interpretatively include Baptism, and Baptism also
presupposes Circumcisions work in its Mystery.

Now since Baptism is owned by us to be a Gospel Ordinance, and sure also those
who were Circumcised, were, as aforesaid, Prophetically Baptized also unto
Moses; it must be granted (observe it well) that Christ was Moses under the
dispensation of Circnmcision, for that it is said, they were Baptized unto
Moses.

Now Baptism is declared to be ( Mat. 28.) Christ's Ordinance, appointed by
Him, and performed solely by Himself, Ephesians. 5.27, 28. Hence is Christ under
the Gospel dispensation (...) to be looked upon and considered to be the true
Spiritual Administrator of Circumcision in its Mystery; and so the Apostle
calls him, Romans 15.8.

Now I say to you, that Jesus Christ was a Minister of Circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the Promises to the Fathers; and that the Gentiles
might glorify God for his mercy, ver. 9. and the Apostle declares the like,
Col. 2.11. In whom ye also were Circumcised with the Circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of
Christ.

Whence it sollows from the said expresses, 1. Cor. 10.1, 2. Romans 15.8. Col.
2.11. that Christ was Moses the true Circumcisor and Baptisor under the Law,
and also both of them under the Gospel also; And therefore they are both
respectively begun and completed in him only, and are to be looked upon as
included in each other, like Ezekiel's Wheels one within the other, Ezekiel 1.16.

Hence Baptism was brought in its office next, to be done after Circumcisions
work is performed in its office and mystery respectively.

And thence also it must follow by undeniable consequence, that if Infant
Circumcision be a good document and instruction by way of office, as aforesaid;
so is Infant Baptism also, and must be so intended by the Lord, and also
received by us; for that one essentially and reciprocally depends upon the
other. And here it must be granted, that those who were Circumcised, were
declared to be Prophetically Baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea, when they
came out of Egypt.

Now it is evident that some little ones were among them who passed through the
Sea, Exodus 10.10, 24. Hence they also were Baptized in the Cloud, and in the
Sea, for it is said They were all (without exception) B^ptised.

And by that reason, and upon the account aforesaid, in reference to the
Prophetical Mystery, Christians Infants may be Baptized also, even by way of
office, otherwise we deny grown Christians to have as good a document by Infant
Baptism, as grown Israelites had by Infaent Circumcision, upon the respective
accounts betwixt them, as aforesaid.

But this aforesaid by the way only as a preparative to our further
justification of Infant Baptism by way of New Discovery, which we doubt not but
(Christo assistente) to do, after we have set forth more distinctly what
Baptism is in its Nomination and Notation.

Baptism in its Nomination or Notation, comes from the Greek word (...) to wash
or cleanse, or dip, and answers to the Hebr. word. (...) which said word is
used Ruth 2.4. and is by Arias Montanus rendered Intinge buccellam in Accto, dip
or wash thy morsel in the vineager; which said word the Septuagint has, (...)
Baptize or wash thy morsel in the vineager.

Hence Baptism notes in its nature and signification, a washing or cleansing
with that which is most fit to cleanse, as Water is most experimentally known
to be of a mundifying and cleansing nature, Ezekiel. 16.4. 2 King. 5.10.

And therefore it is a most fit means to figure forth Baptism, our Spiritual
washing and cleansing from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1,
2.

Hence the Lord Jesus annexed to his Gospel Dispensation, (which is the
Dispensation of Faith, Mat. 28.) Baptism, for that the Belief is the purifying
Grace and means through the Word (which is indeed the Christ of God, John
1.11.) to wash away all remaining defilements of Sin, as aforesaid.

Hence it is said ( Ephesians. 5.26, 27.) Christ gave himself for his Church, that
he might sanctify and cleanse it through the Word; and it is said, John 15.3.
Now ye are clean through the Word I have spoken to you. And it is said, Acts
15.9. He purified their hearts through Faith.

Thus we have in brief offered to consideration, what Baptism in general is;
and upon what account the Lord Jesus brought it in, and also annexed it to his
Gospel Dispensation, and how it presupposes Circumcisions work, before it can
have its proper operation in its Mystery upon the same real object that
Circumcision was conversant about, which was the Male Infant to be Circumcised
only, and that on the Eighth day only; and that if it were not Circumcised in
that day, then that Male Infant was to be cut off, as aforesaid.

Hence what the Male figured forth, which was the Manly Nature, must be also
considered to be Baptized or washed, and that by Christ in his day figured
forth in the Eighth day, and if the Manly Nature be not Baptized then, by
Christ in his day, it must be cut off from Christ's Spiritual Congregation,
which is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Yet our Savior specifies and recites none of these in his commission for
Baptism by any intimation written, though they must be necessarily understood
to be Baptized also, because in the same nature wherein the work is to be (...)
(which is in Circumcision, as aforesaid) in the same it must be completed and
perfected; and therefore all aforesaid must be understood and intended to be
Baptized also upon the account aforesaid, (...) the near relating and
essentially depending of Circumcision and Baptism (upon the account aforesaid)
betwixt themselves in reference to the respective uses they are for;
respectively to the same scope and end; yet as aforesaid, Christ mentions not a
tittle to that purpose in his Ordinance of Baptism.

Hence it does inevitably follow, that the Lord Jesus does forbear to specify
that again a part post, which is so clearly expressed in the part ante, that is
expressed and appointed in Circumcision, as aforesaid.

Hence upon the like reason we may, and ought to believe, that the Lord Jesus
did intend to allow and warrant Infant Baptism by virtue of his Command for
Infant Circumcision, upon the reciprocal accounts being a like useful,
respectivelly to the same scope and end, as a foresaid.

The Lord may (we hope none will deny it) make use (when he pleases) of those
rules and maxims he has taught us to make use of upon all occasions, to
prevent multiplicities and tautologies of things, which must be understood to
relate together, as specials under one general, as every species does under one
genus, and every member relates respectively, in its communication to the
integral or whole, to make up its integral, what it is, or ought to be.

Hence genus, or the general, is quod communicate totam suam essentiam suis
speciebus, that is, the general communicates its whole essence to its specials
under it, as Animal does. (...) whole essence of vegitative and sensitive life
or virtue to Man and Bruit, alike vegitable and sensible; so do all members of
the integral or whole, communicate their essence respectively to the whole:
hence, since generals have their influences in and upon all specials and
particulars under them respectively, they need not be taught and expressed in
every special or particular under them respectively, but only in one, for that
the general is the same to every special in its communication respectively, as
it is to one; and therefore to express it more than once, is but them per idem,
and a frustra (to little purpose) qnod potest fieri per pauciora.

Now that wise Artists make use of the said rule upon due occasion, We shall
give you but one instance among man,; Ramus in his Logic, (the best, we
believe, secundum regulum, (...) and methodum, that ever (of the many that
have) appeared to us) when he has set forth argumentum as it is in its use,
(...) (...) and distributed it into its consentany and dissentany affections
resp^^^^vely, he never repeats argumentum again, neither in cause nor effect,
subject, nor adjunct, etc. though it must necessarily be understood under all
the respective heads and topics of Logic, it being the genus generalissimum
to them all respectively, yet he does not repeat it again, causa est argumentum
cujus (...) est, effectum est argumentum quod e causis existat (...); but only
says, causa est cujus (...) est, leaving out argumentum, and so out of the
rest; because it being the general, it must be understood upon the account
aforesaid, to have the same influence into all the specials under it
respectively that it has to one of them.

Now shall we believe otherwise, but that the God of all Arts and Wisdom (which
teaches others, as aforesaid, to make use of the said maxim) may and does
make use of the said rule (in his divine records, commonly called the
Scriptures) as he thinks fit to his intelligible and rational creatures for
brevities sake, when parallel respects of things (as Circumcision and Baeptism
are respectively to the same end in general, as aforesaid,) do necessarily, and
in all convenience infer the same to be alike to the respective uses, though
dissenting in themselves, as all parts and members are which relate to the
whole of which they are members.

Hence Circumcision and Baptism (the two necessary Ceremonies for the use and
uses aforesaid,) and so necessary and essentially depending on each other upon
the account aforesaid, Circumcision being the principium, the other finis of
the same, and to the same design, as aforesaid; and for that Infants, as
Infants, whether Israelites, or Christians Infants, are all alike in all
respects to their respective Circumcision or Baptism aforesaid; We do affirm,
that Infant Circumcisions command, may, and ought to be thought to be allowed
its practice (...), without a new command upon the account aforesaid, that
Generalia generaliter and semel docenda.

The Lord himself declares it, by what is expressed, Mark, 13.37. That he intends
that we should take his command, given but to some expre^sly, to include all
others in like case to be considered to do, or allowed to do the same by virtue
of the said command or injunction which is appointed thereunto; for when the
Lord Jesus had given an injunction to watch, he explains his intent further,
(least others ^^fter times should think the said injunction concerned not them,
but only his present Disciples, to whom he then spoke) he says what I say to
you, I say to all, Watch.

Hence we see it was meant further than to those to whom it was literally
spoken at present, the reason is granted, a pari, because all are one time or
other subject and liable to the like dangers and temptations respectively, that
his then present Disciples were, which he warns to take heed of the then
dangers.

And therefore, since Infant Baptism is a parallel in all respects, as
aforesaid respectively, with Infant Circumcision to all intents and purposes,
that they are, and may be applied unto, as aforesaid.

We do with confidence assert, that the Lord did intend that we may upon all
due occasions, Baptize Infants under the Gospel, as the Israelites did
Circumcise their Infants, by his command under the legal dispensation; for that
one command does (upon the account aforesaid) give alike allowance to all
persons and things alike considerable, and to be concerned as Infant Baptism,
and Infant Circumcision respectively, are to be considered in reference to each
other, and their end for which they are respectively appointed.

Now it being so the rule, a quatenus ipsum ad de omni effi^ax est illatio,
justifies Infant Baptism upon the account of the said rule; for that the said
rule declares, that from one thing or person as such, arises a prevalent
influence to include all to be granted, in like manner to be owned as such, and
so under the same consideration to be considered respectively.

As Abraham is declared to be justified only as a Believer, Romans 4.22.

Hence every true Believer may assure himself upon Abraham's account aforesaid,
to be justified also, without being particularly named that he is also
justified; the reason is for that an identity and sameness in things, must
necessarily be owned alike to all intents and purposes, in whomsoever, or
wheresoever it is found respectively, which is the aim and scope of the rule
aforesaid, a quatenus ipsum, etc. in the sense and latitude thereof.

And it is observable which is expressed Romans 4. ver. 23, 24. that it was not
written for his sake alone, but for us also who believe. And the reason must be
from, and upon the account of the said rule, that quatenus ipsum ad de omni,
etc. and may we not say therefore, a pari, that Infant Circumcision was not
written for Israelites Infants alone, in abstracto, but for Christians Infants
also in concreto.

Upon the like account to warrant thereby Infant Baptism from Infant
Circumcision, though that be only commanded expressly, and not Infant Baptism
in like manner expressly; for that a quatenus ipsum ad de omni efficax est
illatio.

Now Infant Circumcision was commanded only, as Israelites Infants were in
Infancy, such and such, so and so. Therefore there is no more reason to
disallow of Infant Baptism than of Infant Circumcision in themselves
respectively, to be considered in their respective Infancies; and as for the
command of Infant Circumcision only, that does not hinder, but confirm the
allowance of Infant Baptism upon the account aforesaid, especially since no
prohibition (in any case) is given against Infant Baptism.

So that Infant Baptism may be practiced by way of office, and as a good
document, be as useful to grown Christians upon the acccount aforesaid, as
Infant Circumcision ever was ordained by way of office likewise, and not
otherwise, as aforesaid.

Hence it is more consentaneous, and agreeable to reason, for Christians to
Baptize their Infants, in order to the coming again to the Child-like innocent
life (which is the sole end both of Circumcisions and Baptisms Ordination
respectively, as aforesaid,) for that Infant Baptism is the more lively and
perspicuous exemplar of the two, of the attainment unto the Child-like innocent
life; because Christians Infants are as innocent as Israelites Infants could
be, and Baptism being a through washing (after Circumcisions work in its
Mystery is performed,) from all remaining defilements of Flesh and Spirit.

Hence upon the aforesaid account, Infant Baptism is a more significant and
useful document and instruction, in order to the Childlike innocent life and
state, than Circumcision; therefore it cannot in reason and equity be denied,
but that the Lord did intend its practice as well as Infant Circumcision, but
did not command it expressly, because needless upon the account of the rules
aforesaid, generalia generaliter and quatenus ipsum ad de omni.

And therefore we cannot in reason think, that God gave grown Israelites such a
good document and instruction, in order to signify to them the first step unto
the Child-like innocent life, by commanding them to Circumcise their Infants by
way of office only, (as aforesaid) to mind and admonish them upon all occasions
thereof: but we must with like (if not with more) reason think, that the Lord
does allow of Infant Baptism, to mind and admonish grown Christians upon all
occasions, duly to endeavor after the completing the Child-like innocent life,
as Baptism in its Mystery does set forth by a through washing from all
remaining defilements of Sin, after Circumcision in its Mystery has cut off
the gross Sins; and therefore the Lord (to his Honor be it spoken) cannot but
allow of Infant Baptism to be administered also by way of office and as a good
document, and respectively to grown Christians, by allowing them also to
Baptize their Infants, as the Israelites were commanded to Circumcise their
Infants upon the like, and no other account, as aforesaid.

We cannot persuade our selves otherwise than as aforesaid, unless we do charge
the Righteous and Just Lord to be more neglective and injurious to grown
Christians, than he was to grown Israelites, by not allowing grown Christians
alike (if not a more significant) document and instruction (than Infant
Circumcision was) by Baptising their Infants, in order to the completing the
said Child-like innocent life thereby.

We hope they will not impose upon us to believe, (for fear of unthought of
evil consequences to follow thereupon) that God did command Infant
Circumcision, and did intend to d^^own Infant Baptism only upon his own mere
authoritative will and pleasure without any further reason but his mere Will
for the said commanding Infant Circumcision, and disowning Infant Baptism,
which is as useful and significant to all intents and purposes, as ever
Circumcision was, for no other reason, but because he would: this we cannot
yield unto, for that Gods Infinite Wisdom is previous and foregoing to all his
Works, as it is expressed, Psalm. 104.24. O Lord how manifold are thy Works! in
wisdom thou have made them all. Hence in great Wisdom (and no otherwise) did
the Lord ordain Infant Circumcision.

And therefore he could not out of mere will and pleasure disown Infant
Baptism; for that if he do, he does disown that which is as rational and useful
upon the account of all like respects betwixt Infant Circumcision, and Infant
Baptism, as ever Circumcision was.

This they dare not stand unto, and therefore ask them why the Lord should own
Infant Circumcision, and command it, and yet disown Infant Baptism, which
Christians Infants are as capable of to all intents and purposes, as Israelites
Infants were of Infant Circumcision.

Ask them the reason aforesaid, they answer (for a shift, as we have heard from
some, not knowing a better reason for it, for want of searching into Divine
Writ for a better:)

That God (say they) did it to distinguish Israelites Infants from Heathens
Children; whereas indeed that reason for it, is more frivolous, than Infant
Baptism is; for that Heathens seldom see (unless by accident) Israelites
Infants in that age, to show their Circumcision; and we judge that the grown
Israelites Circumcision was more advantageous for that purpose, for that they
could give the grown Heathens a particular account of their Circumcision;
Wherefore their God commanded them to be Circumcised, but yet take their
aforesaid reason for Infant Circumcision as it is, and then retort it upon
them, and tell them that they confess thereby that God commanded Infant
Circumcision by way of office only, for that is no more (by their Confession)
than a representative to Heathens for the end assigned, as aforesaid; and it is
all we aver, and say, (but in a better sense) that God did command Infant
Circumcision by way of office only, and to be a fit document and instruction to
grown Israelites, as has been demonstrated upon the accounts and ends set
forth, as aforesaid.

And Infant Circumcision being so commanded, we say it is commanded upon no
other grounds, than upon what Infant Baptism may be practiced, that is, by way
of office and good document unto grown Christians, as has been often (for
memories cause) expressed, and urged.

Now it being so, that Infant Baptism is not urged for its practice, but only
by way of office, which is the same that contradicents to Infant Circumcision
confess, as it is proved from their own confession is commanded for.

Hence we say that there was no need for a new command for to warrant Infant
Baptism upon the account aforesaid, for its Administration; for that there is
one before, viz. for Infant Circumcision administered by way of office only, and
it being so; the ancient practiced rules attest and warrant another thing to be
done by way of like office also, as Infant Baptism is with Infant Circumcision,
as aforesaid, which said ancient maxims are these ensuing.

Generalia generaliter, and semel docenda: a quatenus ipsum ad de omni efficax
est illatio.

1. Generals are to be taught generally, and at once.

2. That from such and such, so and so, arises a prevalent Inference, and
concluding of another like thing, as such and such, so and so, in like manner
both these rules are founded in the head of comparates in Logic, a paribus
from likenesses betwixt things that are to be considered as adequate and alike
respectively, in reference to each other, as Infant Baptism is with Infant
Circumcision by way of office, as aforesaid.

We can give many instances for the practice of the first named maxim
generaliter.

Ramus (mentioned before) never names argumentum but once, (after its
distribution) though it have its influence in and upon every head of Logic,
because its genus generalissimum, the chief general to them all as specials
under it, for genus communicate totam suam essentiam suis speciebus, that is,
the general communicates its whole general essence to all specials under it.

Instance: Animal does in like manner communicate the vegitative and sensitive
virtue and life to Man and Beast.

And therefore to express a general more than once, is needless; for that it is
idem per idem, the same by the same; and the rule is, frustra fit per plura
quod potest fieri per pauciora; it is a frnstra, and (...) to little purpose to
do a thing by many things, which may be done by fewer.

Hence the said rule for and by teaching generals at once is practiced, to
prevent needless tautologies, and repetitions of things alike to be considered,
and may be understood by one, and at once.

And is it not a needless repetition to recite a new Command for warranting
Infant Baptism, when the Lord has given one before for Infant Circumcision,
which was administered upon no other nor better account, than Infant Baptism may
be administered also?

And since it is ^o betwixt Infant Circumcision, and Infant Baptism
respectively, that rule also, a quatenus ipsum ad de omni, justifies Infant
Baptism, though it have no express command for its practice, yet it is as truly
warranted as Infant Circumcision is, though it be commanded; yea, and by virtue
of the said command, for that Infant Baptism is such and such, so and so, as
Infant Circumcision is such and such, so and so, in reference to the same use
and end respectively, as aforesaid.

It Is said that Abraham was justified only as a Believer, Romans 4.

Hence every true Believer may assure himself (upon the account of Abraham's
Justification) that he is Justified also, though he be not named by an express
to be Justified also.

And it is assured him from the rule a quatenus ipsum, as aforesaid; for that he
is such and such, so and so; and therefore needs no new naming of him
justified, but his true Belief by Faith is sufficient, as Abraham's was.

For that an identity and sameness must necessarily be owned in one as well as
the other, where it is found.

But because the contradicents to Infant Baptism, do so tenaciously adhere to
the having a particular Command for their practice of a duty to be done upon
Scripture account and liking, as they do for the practice of Infant Baptism; or
they will not (as they do not) own the practice of it.

We shall offer to their serious consideration that express, Deuteronomy. 25.4.
concerning Oxen, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox when he treads
out the Corn.

The Apostle makes use of the said naked command, concerning muzzling the mouth
of the Ox in the case aforesaid; saying, 1 Cor. 9.9. Does God take care for
Oxen? (as to fill his Divine Records with Commands for them, which are
intentionally writtten for more Heavenly concerns than Oxen,) or says he that
altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is written, (says the
Apostle) who would have thought the said Command concerning the Ox, had been
intended (unless the Apostle had declared so much) (...) to be a Command in
special, concerning the livelihood of Evangelical Ministers, of which there is
not a tittle in the said Scripture, neither before nor after; yet the Apostle
does apply it to be chiefly intended for the providing and giving livelihood to
Evangelical Ministers; so also, 1 Timothy 5.18.

Now wh^t is his w^rrant for so doing? surely no other, but only from
argumentum de comparatis, viz. a minori ad magis; that is, from comparates of
the less to the greater, which is, that if the Lord commanded so concerning the
Ox, He meant it to be understood more especially concerning Evangelical
Ministers livelihood, though he did not express so much therein.

And may We not say the like for and concerning Infant Baptism, from Gods
command for Infant Circumcision?

That God intended thereby his allowance, or warrant for Infant Baptism.

For can we think that God had such care for Infant Circumcision, as to command
that, and altogether pass by his taking notice of Infant Baptism: whereas it is
as rational, useful, and documental in being administered by way of office, as
ever Circumcision was, which was administered only by way of office, as
aforesaid; and Infant Baptisms Administration by way of office, does represent
and hold forth a more lively and perspicuons document, in reference to the end
both of Circumcisions and Baptisms work, for which they were brought in
respectively, as aforesaid.

Hence a minori ad magis also; that is, from the less to the greater, betwixt
Infant Circumcision and Infant Baptism; for that Infant Circumcision being the
less significant by way of office, than Infant Baptism, upon their respective
considerations is, in reference to the attaining unto the Child-like innocent
life and state.

It cannot in reason be denied, but that God did intend by his command for
Infant Circumcision, to warrant the practice of Infant Baptism also without a
command; or truly, as the Apostle tells the Cor. that God intended there should
be the allowance of Evangelical Ministers livelihood; by his only commanding
not to muzzle the mouth of the Ox, though he did not give command for it also,
as he did for the Ox.

All aforesaid for the adjusting Infant Baptism, upon the (...) considerations
aforesaid, in reference to (...), must (as we persuade ourselves they will) be
yielded unto, or we shall at last entangle our selves, as Pharaoh said, the
Israelites were entangled, Exodus 14. in such ensuing evil consequences by our
not yielding, as will infer many unworthy (we are afraid blasphemous)
reflections upon the Lord Jesus, by his neither commanding, nor forbidding
Infant Baptism; for that all the long and violent contests among conscientious
Christians have been thereupon, because the Lord has not forbidden, nor
commanded it.

Hence, one party disowns it, because it is not commanded: the other party
pleading for it, and practicing it, (as they may) because it is not forbidden.

Now, if the Lord had pleased to have commanded, or forbidden Infant Baptism;
surely the sad and known contests about it, had (we are more than confident)
never been.

Hence we do ex fine rei, and upon the matter, make the Lord to be (absit
bl^sphemia dicto) the first author of them all, for it is a true maxim, Quod est
causae causae, est causa causati: in causis immediate dependentibus inter se.

That is, the cause of a cause immediately depending on each other, is the first
cau^^ of the thing caused thereby.

Now since all the contests that have been about Infant Baptism, for that the
Lord has neither commanded it, nor forbidden it, as he might ^a^ly have done
either.

Hence we make him causam, at least causam sine quanon, of all contests about
Infant Bap^^sm.

There is a story (whether true or feigned it matters not, for ficta arguunt
fidemque faciunt, as that of the Trees) Judges 9.8. (that went forth to choose
a King) of a very strife lover Parent, who when he looked to die, made his last
Will and Testament so dark and ambiguous for sense and meaning, on purpose his
Children should not know in express words his respective intentions toward
them in reference to his last Will and Testament; saying to himself, it does me
good to think how my Children will contend and quarrel among themselves after
my death concerning my words toward them in my last Will and Testament.

We forbear the application relatively to Christ's last Will and Testament.

But yet if the Lord Jesus did not intend that his command for Infant
Circumcision should adjust the warrant for Infant Baptism, without more ado; We
infer, the Lord Jesus to deal ex fine rei upon the matter, as darkly and
ambiguously in his last Will and T^stament (in reference to Infant Baptism) as
the strife lover Parent did in his last Will and Testament, as aforesaid: As if
the Lord Jesus were pleased (by his neither commanding nor forbidding Infant
Baptism) with all the said contests and strifes that have risen among his
Children and Disciples about it.

This must follow (...) upon the Lords own testimony in another case, a pari,
Prove. 8.36. where it is said by the Spirit of God, all that hate me love death,
that is, the damnable death.

But who loves that? for nemo vult sui destructionem, said a Heathen.

Yet because he that hates God, which consists in a separated life from God,
does bring the said inevitable death upon himself, as if he loved it.

And so we frequently use the expression of loving that misery and punishment
we bring upon our selves (knowingly and voluntarily) which is annexed by
assignment unto the same.

As when we say to a Thief taken in the fact, that he longed to be hanged, when
he desires nothing less in his affections.

Hence a pari, it must (ex vi consequentiae) follow, if the Lord does not
command, nor forbid Infant Baptism, by reason whereof all the contests and
strifes about it have risen, that he is charged (if the command for Infant
Circumcision was not intended to warrant its practice) to be at least the causa
sine qua non, that is the cause without which the contests about Infant Baptism
had not been among conscientious and professing Christians.

Hence we do stick to it, and affirm with more than confidence, that God
intended his command for Infant Circumcision (upon the parallel respects
betwixt Infant Circumcision and Infant Baptism, as aforesaid) should declare
(...) allowance of the practice of Infant Baptism, about which there has been
such bitter opposition, by reason the Lord has neither commanded it, nor
forbidden it.

God hates, especially among his conscientious Disciples, all such contests and
quarrels; For first, he is (as he is truly styled in a known place) the Author
of Peace, and Lover of Concord, and calls all his Disciples to peace.

And is the true Joseph, who warns his Brethren not to fall out by the way,
Genesis 45.24. but endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit, and the bond of
Peace, Ephesians. 4.3.

Hence, surely the Lord Jesus would not have been so negligent, careless,
unmindful ((...)) as neither to command, or forbid Infant Baptism, to have
prevented the strifes aforesaid (between two well meaning parties) about it;
for that they are so contrary, (especially to break forth among his professing
Disciples,) to his own inclination to Peace and Concord, so much, and in diverse
places declared in the Scriptures.

Upon all which aforesaid, let us pensitate and weigh that good and wholesome
express in Public Baptism.

Doubt ye not, but be well persuaded for the time to come, oh ye contradicents
of Infant Baptism! that God allows and owns that charitable work of ours in
bringing Infants to his Holy Baptism; for that they are (being Baptized) as
good a document of remembrance to grown Christians upon the account aforesaid,
as ever Infant Circumcision was, though commanded; but yet commanded upon no
other account, but by way of office, as aforesaid respectively, by which
Christians Infants ought, and no otherwise to be Baptized.

We shall not presume to trouble the contradicents to Infant Baptism further,
by multiplying more seeming arguments in specie for it, which yet in re vera
will be but repetitions, and idem per idem, contrary to the maxim, generalia
generaliter, and semel dicenda.

Therefore we desire them seriously to examine what we have here offered to
consideration, in reference to the Justification of Infant Baptism, by our
(through Gods direction) New Discovery of the way and means thereof, as
aforesaid.

Yet give us leave to say, for a further illustration of the more than probable
intention of the Lord to wrap up his allowance and owning Infant Baptism in his
command for Infant Circumcision, and especially not prohibiting it, without a
repetition of another command for Infant Baptism; for that the Spirit of Wisdom
does frequently in Holy Writ fold up for many causes very much in little, or in
half that which is intended, and must be explicated respectively to make the
sense and scope of the portion of Scripture (where it is) full and complete, to
the purpose that the said Scripture is appointed for.

And there are many instances thereof in Holy Writ; but we will offer but two
at present. One is in Psalm. 1.6. where it is said, the Lord knows the way of the
righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish.

In the first part of the said Verse, there must be supposed to make the sense
thereof full and perspicuous, the contrary to that which is expressed in the
latter part of the Ver. (viz.) the way of the wicked shall perish, which is,
the way of the righteous shall be preserved, for preservation is contrary to
perishing.

Hence two axioms in the said part of the Verse, one apparent, the Lord owns
the way of the righteous; the other latent, which is this, the Lord says,
therefore the Lord preserves the way of the righteous; the reason is, because
the righteous and wicked are contraries; and therefore, if the way of the
wicked shall perish, therefore the way of the righteous shall be preserved; and
it is for that the Lord owns the way of the righteous, therefore his way shall
be preserved.

In the latter part of the Verse is positively attested, that the way of the
wicked shall perish, the reason is clear, when the contrary to the first part
of the Verse is added and expressed, which is, the Lord disowns the way of the
wicked, as he owns the way of the righteous upon the account that whether we
are wicked or righteous; therefore he disowns the way of the wicked.

The Proverbs of Solomon are full of such latent and tacit disposures of
Scriptures; but we shall give you but one instance of the very many so couched
there, as aforesaid; which said instance is in Prove. 13.10. Only by pride, (or
rashness rather) comes contention, but with the well advised is wisdom.

There must be these axioms laid down in the first part of the Verse.

1. Folly is the attendant of Pride or Rashness. 2. Therefore by Pride, (or
Rashness rather,) comes contention. In the latter part of the Verse these two
axioms. 1. Wisdom attends the well advised. 2. Therefore with the well advised
there is peace and quietness.

In the first part of the Verse is supplied Folly, the contrary to Wisdom,
specified in the latter part of the Verse.

And in the latter part is supplied the contrary to Contention in the first
part of the Verse.

Which contrary is Peace and Quietness; and so the full sense and scope of the
said Verse is laid down (...) the demonstration of the cause of Rashness, viz.
Folly with Rashness is the cause of all contention.

In the latter part of the Verse is laid down the cause of well advisedness,
which is Wisdom; and that being with the well advised, it causes and
preserves Peace and Quietness, which is the contrary to Contention in the
first part of the Verse.

Thus it appears how the Spirit of God does in Holy Writ contract and wrap up
many depending axioms, which are requisitely to be supplied to explicate the
intended sense and scope in them for brevities sake.

And the ground and warrant of the contraction by latent and tacit disposures
of them in the portions of Scriptures where they are, is from the rule of
contraries in Logic; for that contraries are such opposites, that uno
affirmato, alterum negatur, and uno negato, alterum affirmatur, because they do
ratione and re inter se dissentire.

That is, contraries are such opposites, that one being affirmed, the other
must be denied, and one being denied, the other must be affirmed; because such
opposites both in Logical respect, or respective reasonings; and in also their
respective natures and beings, oppose one another, as the righteous and wicked
do.

And therefore where such opposites are disposed together, the intelligent can
draw forth for the respective uses, such latent and tacit axioms out of those
that are mentioned and expressed in the said Scriptures; As the Lord knows or
owns the way of the righteous, therefore he disowns the way of the wicked,
because the wicked is contrary in his way to the way of the righteous.

So the way of the wicked shall perish, as it is expressed.

Therefore the way of the righteous shall be safe, or preserved; for that the
wicked and righteous ones ways (owned and disowned) are contraries, as in the
first part of the Verse declared.

So in Prove. 13.10. By Pride or rashness comes contention, therefore with well
advisedness, or with the well advised is quietness and peace; for that rashness
and well advisedness are opposite contraries; and therefore, if by rashness
comes contention, it must follow a contrariis contrariariorum consequentiis
that is, from the contrary consequentials of consequences; from well
advisedness comes peace and quietness.

So if Wisdom is the attendant of well advisedness as it is expressed to be in the
Verse, with the well advised is wisdom; for that is the cause of well
advisedness, and the guide of the well advised.

Therefore by the rule of contraries, as aforesaid, Folly is the attendant and
cause of rashness, for that is the opposite to Wisdom.

Now if all such portions of Scripture (wherein such latent and tacit
disposures of axioms are contained, as are in Psalm 1.6. and Prove. 13.10. (in
which Book multitudes are contained) were expressly, v^^^, and uno intuitu, laid
forth, that is, opened at once, and together; how voluminous and big would they
swell the Bible unto? even too big for a Pocket reception, and a Vade Mecum
upon the account aforesaid. Neither could the Bible be read over so soon and
often, with all the axioms relating to the said respective portions of
Scriptures, and explained (as they must be) to make the intent and scope of
them appear to open view, as they do being disposed as they now are, by the
supplies added out of each contrary, as aforesaid.

Therefore the Lord in great Wisdom, disposed multitudes of Divine axioms in
Holy Writ for brevities cause, and ends and purposes aforesaid.

And may we not (in like manner) think that the Lord omitted his Command for
Infant Baptism, though he allow and own it upon the respective accounts
aforesaid betwixt it and Infant Circumcision, in reference to their respective
Administrations for brevities cause, and to avoid needless repetitions; which
if he had commanded it expressly, yet it had not been (nor could be) upon any
other account than that which he gave for Infant Circumcision.

for which it was to be done by way of office only, and good document to others
concerns at present, not their own; and therefore since Infant Baptism may be
done by way of office also, and to as good purpose as ever Infant Circumcision
was, it was needless (with reverence be it spoken) for the Lord to repeat a new
Command for Infant Baptism also, for that upon the account aforesaid, it had
been (we believe) but a tautology idem ad (...) idem that is the same to which
went before ex fine rei upon the matter, if he had given another Command for
Infant Baptism also.

Thus we have offered to consideration the several grounds and reasons why the
Lord might omit (upon rational grounds,) to give a Command for Infant Baptism,
and could give no prohibition against Infant Baptism upon the account before
demonstrated betwixt Infant Baptism, and Infant Circumcision, we have now we
hope sufficiently argued the demonstration of Justification of Infant Baptism
by a New Discovery; which Discovery is found out by the consideration of those
two great and useful Sacraments or Mysteries, (viz.) Circumcision and Baptism,
which the Lord appointed and brought in, and annexed to his respective
dispensations Legal and Evangelical, for such uses and ends as are before
declared, and that for the removing of two great impediments, (viz.) the gross
Sins, first by Circumcision in its Mystery; and then the remaining defilements
(that for some time continue until w^shed away, (viz.) by Baptism in its
Mystery, both which the gross Sins and remaining defilements of Sin, do impede
and obstruct (until removed) the coming back again to the Child-like innocent
life and state which our Savior declares to be done for an entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven; Therefore he sets a little Child in the midst of his
Disciples, Matt. 18.3. and then declares so much unto them, as aforesaid.

Hence Circumcision and Baptism upon the account aforesaid, were brought in by
way of office only, as representitavely documental, and teaching in their
respective Mysteries in reference to the ends and purposes they were appointed
for, as aforesaid.

And for that our Savior declares the Child-like innocent life to be the
pattern and exemplar to which Circumcision and Baptism in their respective
operations do relate and tend unto respectively,

Hence the Lord ordained Infant Circumcision to represent the said Child l^ke
innocent life and state by way of office and good document as aforesaid, to
grown Israelites at present, to mind them thereof what rule of life they must
look unto, and also by both Circumcision and Baptism to relating and depending
operations respectively, as aforesaid; and therefore both are to be received
only by way of office, and that in reference to others, not themselves at
present.

And We believe also, that most of the Bible, especially the Historical parts
of it, of things done, or not to be done; or otherwise of consequence, are not
w^itten for such use and end as the letter of them seems to express; but for
higher concerns by way of office designed by God thereunto, though they be
declared in literal expresses, yet not to be done upon literal accounts only,
as they seem to hold forth.

For can We imagine that the Holy and Infinite Wise God, who knows things
(intus and in cute,) past, present, and to come, would cause a Volum^ to be
compiled of so low and sordid things, as the letter does express and for no
other Mysteries under them, and to cause it to be called his Holy Bible, and
Sacred Word of his, most profitable for instruction of good manners according
to Divine Truth, and reproof of evil manners, comfort of dejected ones for want
of his Divine and Heavenly presence; to make them of a Holy and Heavenly life,
and to exhort them that are too slow in pursuing of good, and and to dehort
th^^ whose feet are too swift to run after evil, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

Thus we cannot imagine, that the Lord would suffer his said Volumn to b^
filled with so many expresses, as in letter they seem to look to be done the
clear contrary way.

Therefore We believe, they all hold forth something or other by way of office
and good document, to represent the way and means by which the fallen Humanity
is to be made (through their Mystery) better toward its amendment to piety
again, or whereby the wicked and persevering evil Humanity grows worse and
worse, according to that 2 Timothy 3.13.

And so was that of Lot's daughters practices, in reference to entice and
persuade their Father, and his yielding and complying with such a wickedness,
as the letter of the Scripture seems to hold out; for that it is so contrary to
Nature, and against the Law of Naitons, like that as is mentioned, 1 Cor. 5.2.

Yet neither they, nor Lot their Father have any reflection of evil for what
they did respectively, but all passed over in silence, without mentioning any
failing in them, but declaring their respective fact, without mentioning more
than what they did.

Therefore some better Mystery was intended and designed under what was done,
than what the letter seems to hold forth; nor was that true in the letter Ver.
31, That there was not a Man in the Earth (if we take the Earth for the
habitable World) to come in unto them after the manner of al^ the Earth; for
there were then many they might have married with, and some of Abraham's Seed
also.

Hence some further design must be intended then that under the letter, and
that of a good document, for that God (says St. James, Chap 1.) tempts no man
to evil.

Jacob Beh^m (no ^uch contemp^ible Writer as many account him) tells us in his
Mysterium magnum on the said Scripture, of a more sublime and documentally
useful design the Lord had in ordering all the said transactions betwixt Lot's
daughters, and of Lot their Father to be as they are Recorded.

And who can persuade themselves, that Lot, who is called a righteous man, and
vexed his righteous Soul, 2 Pet. 2.7. with the unclean conversation of the
Sodomites? should do such an horrid evil as the letter does express? for then
the Poets Verse he had verified in himself; Turpe est doctori cum culpa
redarguit ipsa. For he that was vexed with the unclean conversation of the
Sodomites, committed a more foul uncleanness himself, if the letter be there
true of what they did without a Mystery; Therefore we ought to decline such
like conceptions of such Holy Men as Lot is recorded to be.

And surely Holy Men of God (who spoke that, and all Scripture, as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost) would not have recorded those facts of Saints; and if
they had; then with some monition annexed to the publication of them, but
nothing of blemish to them is hinted in the said Scripture.

If the words that be here published by Holy Men, be to set forth Lot's
Daughters, and Lot's practices as their unnatural wickedness.

Then those Holy men who writ them, did most contrary to David's advice, 2 Samuel
1. Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in Askelon.

Not in Gath, wraths Wine press, where profane persons squeeze out the dregs of
highest reproach (upon all occasions) of facts recorded in Scripture, done by
most eminent Saints of God.

The Natrative of Jacobs having so many Wives together; and the Patriarchs so
many Concub^nes: How do carnal and vicious men abuse it to a liberty of the
Flesh, even to the committing great folly in Israel?

They thereupon take (...) liberty to have many Wives together, if not in one
place, yet in many and in diverse Countries; at least many Concubines, because
the Ancients had so, when as in the beginning God appointed to the Man but one
Wife; and the reason is given, Mal 2^.15. Because he sought a godly Seed; and
Our Savior told the Pharisees upon their cavilous quaerie to Him, Matt. 15.4,
5, 6, 7, 8. that from the beginning it was not so; Therefore it is altogether
contrary to the first Institution of Marriage in the Innocent state, and after
the fallen humanity returns to his God again, it will be in the said case as in
the beginning, Mat. 15.4, 5, 6.

But because they find in Holy Writ, that the old Fathers had many Wives, and
that the Wives laid their Handmaids by their Husbands, therefore they pervert
the Divine design of God to a carnal (and sometimes profane) abuse, and meaning
quite contrary to Gods said design in his permission aforesaid, whose ways are
not the carnal Man's ways: nor His thoughts their thoughts, Isai. 55.8. As it
was told by a very sober person in the presence of diverse, that Sarah (whom St.
Peter specifies, 1 Pet. 3.6.) to be an Exemplar of Piety in her Conversation,
was the first Bawd who gave her Maidservant to her Husband Abraham, Quis talia
fando temperat? --

For that it was told in Gath, (as the letter expresses it) wraths Wine Press
to squeez out reproach against the Saints of God, whose ways are not their
ways, but above their sight, as they stand recorded in Scripture; and what was
told in Askelon, where false weights are used; (as Askelon signifies) which
those the malicious and envious Jews used betwixt Christ and Barrabas, in that
they rejected Christ, and chose Barrabas a notorious robber; it falls out so
oftentimes, that a less offense is aggravated against Saints that fail, as Gal.
6.1. are spread abroad with great insulting, when notorious practices of
vicious men are hid, if possible; but if they cannot, then lessened and excused
with and by the recorded sayings of the Saints, as Noah, Lot, and David, etc.
who stand recorded upon higher accounts by the Spirit of Gods direction, than
they are capable to understand in the blindness of their understandings; Thus
the fleshly reason does abuse the respective Narratives of the Saints actions
of such and such, as aforesaid.

For the said Fathers had their communion with God, and his Heavenly Spirit,
and performed their Services in the Hour of God, the heart of Humanity, Hebr.
3. in and through the Spirit of God, neither could they perform any Services
acceptable to God, without the Heavenly Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8.

But the earthly Spirits of natural reason take no regard (as a Germane says)
to the Spirit of the Lord, if so be they have but the letter, they are content
to rest in its naked express, and thereupon take the things recorded only as
the letter expresses them.

Whereupon it comes to pass, that the carnal figurative man thinks the Divine
and Spiritual Ordinances, are for the most part made use of for an earthly lust
in the Flesh; and then declare and say, the Lord so meant and intended it, for
that the Holy Scriptures hold it out in the express letter of them.

And so it does, that men are trees, and Herod a Fox, yet they are to signify
some further considerations as they will confess, which yet in many other
things they will not yield that higher Mysteries are under them, but stick to
the letter, and mistake thereby most of the Ordinances and Services which they
take out of the letter, and say, the Scripture is written (as it is
acknowledged) by the Holy Spirit, which must be our rule; and he that will deny
it, that the Holy Spirit has not so meant it as they fancy, through the
blindness of their earthly reason, then he must be a Seducer and an Heretic
that says otherwise than they say; whereas under the said letter other things
(as St. Paul tells the Jews, Gal. 4.4.) are meant; and Jacob Behem declares,
that Divine and Heavenly Mysteries are meant by and through the practices of
Lot's Daughters, and of Lot himself, as he says, for that the ancient Fathers
recorded in the Old Testament, had their communion with God, and his Heavenly
Spirit, neither could they perform their Services in the House of God, the
heart of the Humanity, Hebr. 3.6. acceptable to God without the Heavenly
Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8.

But the earthly Spirits of natural reason take no heed that there is further
meaning and intention of the Spirit of God under the letter; but if they have
the plain letter express, then they are content in and with their Services
(without minding whether the Spirit of God have a further and more secret
meaning under the letter, yea owned) as it had under the two Mountains, Gal.
4.24, 25.

And they say the Scriptures are written by the Holy Ghost; and it is confessed so
they are: but yet the Spirit of the Lord must open that within the vale, (2
Cor. 3.13, 14, 15.) before they can know the mind of God in the said
Scriptures, Romans 2.10, 11. which are, and must be our rule of direction.

Yet they are so confident they know the Scriptures sense, by what the letter
holds out, as they will not depart from it, though they may read in the same
Scriptures how the learned Scribes and Pharisees mistook the letter of the
Scriptures, to the causing of great contentious among themselves concerning
Christ, that he could not be a Prophet, see John 7, ver. 40. to ver. 53. what
bandying there was among them about our Lord; some whose hearts were opened,
(as Lydia's was) did affirm him to be the Prophet; some that he was the Christ:
But the Scripture learned denied it upon the account of the place from whence
he came, (viz.) Galilee; therefore he could not be the Christ, for that the
Scripture says so, affirm the learned that Christ came of the Seed of David,
and out of the Town of Bethlehem; and how incensed were they against Nicodemus,
for wishing them to consider their Law that condemns no man before it hear him,
and know what he does.

They asked him if he were of Galilee, and bid him search and look, they meant
in the Scripture letter surely; For out of Galilee arises no Prophet. But if
these learned men had not been blinded in their carnal reason, but understood
that the Lord appointed all these names by way of office as significants of
further Mysteries under the said literal names, then they would not have been
so confident in their we say, and no say, for in their Mystery; all these
aforesaid specifications, (some whereof they owned, but ignorantly) the other
they denied, that a Prophet does not arise out of Galilee, which yet there does
arise Prophets; and Christ the Prophet also there, as Galilee in its word
signifies Conversion or turning about, and in reference to Gods design to the
new life by repentance; therefore so much is spoken of Christ's appearing to his
Disciples in Galilee, that is, in their turning about to him; and so much is
expressed of Christ's going into Galilee, and Preaching in Galilee.

So it was also true that Christ was of the Seed of David in the Mystery, as
David in his office figures forth, which is the lovely Service.

So Christ came out of Bethlehem, the house of Bread, as that Town in its name
figureth forth; and does not Christ say of himself, John 6.49, 50. that He is
the Bread that came down from Heaven? so of the City of Nazareth was Nathaniel
also mistaken in, and that out of the letter.

When Philip said to him, John 1.45. of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets
did write.

Jesus of Nazareth the Son of Joseph: Nathaniel replies, Can any good thing
come out of Nazareth? this he gathered from the letter only, for that it was a
contemptible City; and yet Matt. 21.11. the multitude confess that he was Jesus
the Prophet of Nazareth of Galilee, and to that City was the Angel sent to
Mary, Luke 1.26. It was a City of Galilee; Now all these had under their
respective literal names, their respective Mysteries contained. And can we
think otherwise, when the Spirit of God causes the said respective names to be
so punctually recorded, it cannot be without such a design; for as the Apostle
says 1 Cor. 9. Does God take such care for Oxen, as to cause Moses to write a
Law for them, without a further or higher concern than Oxen.

And so does the Spirit of God cause so many Scripture names for Ciphers, only
to be written without a design of greater Mysteries under them, which the
learned Scribes were ignorant of, and therefore denied Christ to be a Prophet,
and the Christ of God, for that he comes out of Galilee; and out of Nazareth
they thought no good thing could come.

And Nathaniel thought so for a time, that no good thing could come out of
Nazareth; whereas Nazareth signifies Separation, and Christ is said, Heb. 7.26.
to be Holy, harmless, separate from Sinners; and therefore in the Mystery of
the name, he comes a Prophet out of Nazareth, and so arises a Prophet out of
Galilee, which in the Mystery of the name signifies a turning about, as
aforesaid; and therefore Nazareth is a City in Galilee; for Galilee in its
Mystery signifies turning about; Nazareth which signifies Separation, must be
a City there; for Separation is the end and scope of turning about Acts 26.
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God.

We have made the large digression aforesaid; for that we think it
correspondent to our aim in every particular, which is to persuade God fearing
people to search by Prayer and Meditation, whether (as we have before offered
to consideration) the greatest part of Gods Holy writings, from the first of
Genesis to the last of the Revel. are not to be looked upon, and enquired into as
to be written for our learning of higher Mysteries than the letter holds forth
unto us) which will be consented unto by us, when the Lord opens our thoughts
to consider and apprehend, that they are mostly by way of office, and as
representatives (as the two Mountains were, Gal. 4.) of higher Mysteries to be
owned and received by the Jews.

And now we return to offer to consideration the Divine and Heavenly reason,
that the Holy God had in permitting the old Fathers recorded in the Old
Testament, to have so many Wives; and to take Handmaids to their bed, and have
so many Concubines; which was a kind of needfulness (consider at is consider
and is) in reference to the fallen humanity, being fallen from God, whereby the
true marriage with one Man and one Woman was broken off, which otherwise had
never been, that the Man should have had more Wives than one (as appears by
Mal. 2.14, 15.) given him of God, for to beget of the same one (...) of fruit,
or Children; and the reason is for that causa qua causa semper facit idem.

Hence the many Wives came in through disobedience, and figured forth, that
when the Man fell away from that Heavenly Diety, he then begat with his Wife
two sorts of births of dfferent natures, by reason whereof, one killed the
other, figured forth in Cain, Genesis 4.8. who killed his Brother Abel, the breath
of God; and therefore if if the revolt from God had not been committed, then
the only Marriage which God made in the beginning had not been broken; neither
had the Handmaids been needful to bring forth Children.

But when the only God saw that his Marriage that he had made in Unity and
Concord was broken off, and that from the Apostate and corrupt generation ^here
came forth always strife and contention, figured forth by and in the struggling
in Rebeccahs womb, Genesis 25.22, 23. which Gods pure and Holy Spirit could not
endure that there should be always strife and dissension in the humane being;
and therefore he looked upon the Power and Omnipotency of his being and Spirit,
for to beget thereout Ministers and Servants (through his most great Wisdom) to
set up, and by degrees to re-establish through their service, the only Marriage
again, by the begetting of Divine Children in a figure.

To this end the Lord at first chose Abraham for a Servant, and a Father, to
make him fruitful as well Divinely as Humanely, Romans 9.9. Out of whose
fruitfulness there was brought forth Isaac, Jacob, David, Solomon, Moses, and
many others, in whom the manly being was in strength to be serviceable to God.

And this manly power (understand it Spiritually) says the Germane aforesaid
was inclined to generate; Now he could not generate without the help of a
Female, that is, (says the aforesaid Germane) love to the fruitfulness of God,
Truth, Comprehension, and Understanding, which are all Feminine.

Now these Women had yet Handmaids, by whom they were served, and whom they
might bring to their Husbands for to conceive by them.

For they well knew that they should not at first conceive by their Husbands,
unless they laid (so the Deity ordered it,) their Handmaids (which are Faith,
Hope, and Love, Gods obedience in figure) with their Husbands; otherwise they
could not bring forth any Fruits (Spiritually) in the Humanity.

Behold for this reason the Women laid a Handmaid with their Husbands, to the
end that he thereby should engender and beget increase or fruit, which is a
serviceable work, whereby the earthly lusts are broken and destroyed.

Now for this end Sarah laid her Handmaid called Hagar by her Husband, (and she
is a growing and increasing Woman coming out of affliction, for she came out of
Egypt) of her, Abraham begat an illegitimate Child, before Sarah can bring
forth a legitimate Child. Hagars Child was named Ishmael, and called Gal. 4.
The Son of the Bondwoman, Hagar, aforesaid.

So Rachel the lawful Wife (for whom Jacob served 7 years) had Leah, which is a
Labratess, who was laid first with Jacob, Rachels Husband, with whom the
Husband must first beget fruit, Genesis 29.32. and her first born was Reuben, the
Son of Sight, which is the first fruit to be brought forth, Acts 26.17, 18. To
whom I send thee, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light,
which was the first thing Ananias said to Paul, Acts 9.17, 18. Brother Saul
receive they sight. Then was brought forth ( Genesis 29.33.) Simeon, Hearing,
which is the next to Sight, and then Levi, ver. 34. one adjoined; for after the
Seeing and Hearing with the eyes and ears of their understandings, which the
Apostle prays for in the Ephesians behalf, Chap. 1.18. then there is way made
to be joined (in a further preparation) with the Deity and Humanity. And then
is born Judah, Confession, in which God is owned, according to that Psalm. 76.1.
In Judah is God known or owned, his Name is great in Israel; that is, his Being
is great in the prevailer, as the Angel interprets the name, Genesis 32.28.

These therefore are the Administrations that go before in reference to the
preparation, for the Deity and renewed Humanity to be joined together, even as
our Savior set forth several Administrations (in reference to his own office
to be done by him) under the names (in a Mystery) of his Disciples; as first,
he assigns Simon, it notes obedience Matt. 10.2. For that the Sinner is first
called to obedience, which is the obedience of Faith, Romans 1.5, 6, 26. And
therefore is called Peter, that is, the Rock of Faith sounded on the obedience.
The next sent forth is Andrew, which notes Virility or Strength, which is next
to Simon Peter, the obedience of Faith, which brings forth the strength, as
appears Hebr. 11. tot. cap. And we are commanded to be strong in the Lord,
Ephesians. 6.10, etc. hence called Simon Peter's brother in the Mystery. The next
in his office is James, the same with Jacob, the subduer of the sin, the next
to Andrew the strength, for then able to overcome by wrestling, as Jacob did,
and he is the Son of Zebedee endowed, or a good dowry, as Jacob had when he
wrestled and prevailed, Genesis 22.28.

Now because all this, as Paul says (1 Cor. 15.10.) is through Grace I
labored more than you all; yet not I, but the grace of God in me.

Therefore John, the Grace of God is next, and is the Brother James sent to
Preach in the wilderness of Judea, Matt. 3.1. in that bewildred state (after
they come out of the house of Bondage) of the confused thoughts in the
repenting Sinner, that leads him from one by-path to another.

Hence God in great Mercy and care to the repenting Humanity, sends John the
Baptist, as the forerunner (to the through washer the Christ of God, Ephesians.
5.27.) to wash away the remaining defilements of Sin, first in the River of
Judgment, ver. 6. and this John is the Son of Zacharias, the remembrance of the
Lord, Luke 1.72. for the Lord remembered his oath, ver. 73.

And his office was to prepare the way of the Lord, by pulling down the high
Mountains, the high thoughts of carnal reason, to make strait the crooked ways,
the subtle windings and turnings of the carnal reason, as those subtle Jews
had, Luke 20.20, 21. the rough ways smooth, the boisterous and rugged thoughts
in the carnal reason, as were in Paul before his Conversion, Acts 9.20. and
Acts 16. in the Jailor. Then shall all flesh see the Salvation of God, Luk 3.6.
Isa. 62.1.

Hence we see how our Lord sent forth his own Administrations in and by way of
office, in reference to his own design.

And therefore it need not seem strange, that the Lord should permit and order
some things to be done (in an extraordinary way) by the Old Fathers, Abraham
Isaac, Jacob, David, Solomon, to take to themselves so many Wives and
Handmaids, by whom they begat so many and diverse Children, even to figure forth
in a Mystery; the breaking thereby the many Lusts by degrees in the yet
unrenewed Humanity.

And therefore Abraham begat a Son of Hagar, as aforesaid, called Ishmael, to
figure forth the Servantiship under the Law, which must be cast out when Sarah
the Belief, has brought forth Isaac the true Joy, Gal. 4.25. then must
Ishmael be cast out, for that he was the figure of the Servantship under the
Law, Gal. 4.30.

So that it appears, that Sarah her giving Hagar, was by way of of office, that
(...) the Seed of the Servantship under the Law was first to be bego^ten by
Abrabam, to figure forth it to be first brought forth, before the freedomship
which is in the Belief, Gal. 4.1, 2. The like is to be said of the rest, as
aforesaid.

Hence they are to be looked upon as Spiritual Wiv^s, Handmaids, Concubines in
Gods design, though they were also creaturely Wives whom they laid with their
Husbands, to bring forth Children in a Mystery by them, and not to satisfy
their Lust thereby, as the carnal men of the world think, and thereby practice
it; and justify themselves in so doing, upon the Old Fathers having many Wives,
as aforesaid.

But this cannot be owned in reason, that the Lord should wink at this in such
Holy Men as the Old Fathers were; nor that the Lord did connive at it to
replenish the World thereby the sooner; For that God had rather begin the World
anew as he did after the Flood, which was destroyed merely for that cause, Genesis
6, 4, 5, 6, etc.

And it is said that the Lord sought a Godly Seed, Mal. 2.15. Therefore there
could be no such connivence from the Lord upon any such account aforesaid;
neither would the Lord have suffered his Holy Prophets to have stuffed his Holy
Scriptures with such stories, to the giving a liberty to the Flesh, and so to
the corrupting of good manners, and bringing in an ungodly Seed.

This cannot by sober Men be yielded unto, for that the Scriptures are
Spiritual, and have for their scope, Spiritual things and designs, for that God
is a Spirit, and will be worshipp^d in Spirit and Truth, John 4.23.

Therefore if we look upon their Wives, as creatural Wives only in Gods design
and aim, we err and mistake, not knowing the Scriptures what they mean in
their Mystery, nor yet the Holiness of God, who is said ( Hab. 1.13.) to be of
purer eyes than to behold Iniquity.

Besides, these Husbands had more Concubines, which figured forth also by way
of office, Ministering Spirits which move to and fro, and are also Feminine by
whom the Husbands especially were served in the divided times, for they were no
longer to continue but until the lawful Wife became pregnant by her lawful
Husband, and then the Handmaids with the Concubines have performed Spiritually
(and in their Mystery) their Service to a Divine fruitfulness, as Handmaids.

Mary the Mother of our Lord who calls her self a Handmaid, ( Luke 1.38.) was
the last Handmaid, because she brought forth the Christ of God the Savior, who
is the end of the Law and Prophets, and of the Types and Figures; Therefore
when he comes and is born in us out of Mary, that pure Virgin Doctrine, God
says, Cast out the bondmaid with her Son, Gal. 4.27. as it was said when Sarah
the lawful Wife had brought forth Isaac the Son of true joyfulness, then Sarah
caused Abraham ( Genesis 46.10) to Cast out the bondwoman and her Son.

Hence it is apparent that Sarah gave no more Hagar her Handmaid to her Husband.

And when the Handmaid with her Son is cast out, then God sets up in his
Christly being the decayed Marriage in its former State and condition even as
it was ordained of God at first; namely, one Man and one Woman inward in the
Spirit (2 Cor. 11.2.) and outward among the creatures, 1 Timothy 3.2. Titus 1.16.
1 Cor. 9.5.

He that will not in this last part of time be obedient to this Christly
Marriage in the one only being; but will choose false Marriages, and marry
Wives and Concubines to the satisfying of his fleshly desires, because they
read the Old Fathers aforesaid had many, (but in a Mystery only, as aforesaid)
let him take heed, for such an one will be judged in the sight of God for a
Whoremonger, and shall not, according to the Word of the Lord, have any portion
in the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. for that they are mistaken in the
ground and motive of their practice of having many Wives and Concubines,
because the Old Fathers had many; but it was practiced and allowed them upon
another account aforesaid, and not to satisfy their Carnal Lusts and desires
thereby.

And as many mistake the reason of Gods allowance to the introducing great
licentiousness; so not a few mistake the Apostles testimony of Gods loving
Jacob, and hating Esau, before they had done good or evil, whereby they seem to
introduce great partiality in God, (to Gods great dishonor) with whom there is
no respect of persons; and can there be more partiality appear then in this, to
love some before, or without preconsidering they had done good, and hating
others before (or without preconsidering) they had done evil.

The mischiefs these may introduce, (ex fine rei) are presumptions in some upon
their false persuasion to think themselves beloved of God with love of
acceptance, before they have done good personally, as God requires, so upon
Gods hating Fsau before he had, or is preconsidered to do evil personally; what
can it evidence in God, if it were (as it is not) so, but highest severity
without Justice in Gods doing it? and then St. James's testimony is not true,
Mercy rejoices over Judgment, James 2.13. But severity to some before they do
evil personally, rejoices over Mercy; and what can it produce in such as think
upon their eternal state, but distractions, doubts, and fears, yea desperation
it self, as stories, and not a few witness so much?

Therefore we assure our selves, that Gods loving and hating Jacob and Esau
before they had done good and evil, is declared only by way of office, and as
respective representatives of two dissinct beings under those two names; for in
Jacob the Breath of God is in him, and that God loves before it do personally
good, because it comes out from God; and Esau signifyes the Earthly being, and
(...) God hates that before it have personally done evil, for it comes not
forth of God; but God did not personally hate Esau, nor did Esau continue
hatred to Jacob, for Genesis 45.6, 7, 8, 9. Esau was personally reconciled to
Jacob, which showed his good nature, by which the Apostle, (1 John 3.14, 15.)
declares a passing from death to life; and where did Esau personally do to
Jacob, as is expressed, Obad. ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. or to any that were with
him; and did not the Lord also promise many blessings personally to Esau, Deuteronomy.
2.5. Now where are any blessings given by promises to any reprobates or wicked
men, as such? though it is granted, that God gives them many blessings, as Romans
2.4. to lead them to repentance (but not by promise) upon the account
aforesaid, unless they repent, Acts 2.37. Therefore Esau was not at his birth a
reprobate personally, and that upon the account of Gods blessing him, as
aforesaid.

Hence that ( Romans 9.11.) is meant of Esau in his office only, and as a
representative of the earthly nature and old world, Esdr. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. which
God hates before the said Esau had done evil personally; and so all that is
spoken of Esau, ( Obad. ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.) is spoken of Esau by way of
office, and as a representative of the earthly nature, that is, cruel against
the Israel of God.

And therefore it being so as not spoken of Esau personally, there can be no
absolute reprobation and rejection demonstratively proved from what is said,
Romans 9.11. concerning Jacob and Esau before they had done good or evil.

Which very expression demonstrates it to be most contradictory to Gods Mercy
and Justice, (his two ruling attributes) and also to his Decree to reward or
punish all mankind according to their works, 2 Cor. 5.10. and it is said,
Lament. 3.29. the man suffers only for his Sin. Rev. 2.17. yet God says, Ezekiel.
18.32. that as he lives, he desires not the death of a Sinner.

Now if that be true, that God reprobates any in Decree, before they are
preconsidered to do evil, then the Lord loves (absit blasphemia dicto) their
death, contrary to his said asseveration or Oath, Ezekiel. 18.32. Further, none
dare say that God does actually punnish before the Sin is committed, and can he
pass a Decree to reprobate Esau personally, before his Sin be considered as
preexistent? this is most illogical and irrational, for that then the Act is in
exercito, before it has its object considered in reference to it, ut versatus
circa objectum.

And Sin is declared in Holy Writ to be the only object of Gods anger, who
hates Iniquity, and loves Righteousness, Heb. 1.9.

Hence that of loving Jacob, and hating of Esau before they had done good or
evil, cannot be meant personally of them, but only by way of office as they
stood in Gods design, the representatives of elect and reprobate, under the
significations of their respective names of Jacob and Esau, as aforesaid; Jacob
having the Breath and inspiration of the Divine being in the renewed Humanity,
to tread down Sin to a prevailing over it; and Esau as the Earthly being
brought forth in the fallen Humanity, to the persecuting and rejecting the
breathing or inspiration of the Divine being, which since the fall of the
Humanity is the youngest, and brought in to rule over the elder; that is, Esau
in Mystery the Earthly beng, John 1.4.

Thus we have offered to consideration, now conducing it is to come to the true
knowledge of the Scripture Mystery, to make diligent search into the
Scriptures, and that with most humbe Prayers to the Lord to give us to
understand whether the greatest part of Holy Writ be not to be looked upon by
the Lords own design, as to be interpretatively spoken and delivered to us by
way of office, and as representatives and significancies of other Mysteries,
than the letter of the Scriptures hold forth literally unto us; for otherwise
we shall be much put to it to make some Scriptures true; for where did Esau
personally serve Jacob? yet it is said, the elder shall serve the younger.

And if some Scriptures be not to be understood by way of office; how barren
and low in expre^s and matter, do they seem to be in their sense and scope? Yea
some ridiculous (absit blasphemia dicto) as that of Jacob his clothing of his
Son in a party colored Coat, as great personages have done their Naturalists,
we heartil, wish that themselves would behold their Naturalists Coat, (who are
the innocent ones in great measure) and improve the spectation of it, to mind
them to return to the end and scope of Joseph's party colored Coat, which was
to figure forth the various and diverse virtues expressed, (and we exhorted
unto) 2 Pet. 1.4, 5, 6. that the Joseph, the growing to perfection is clothed
with, Phil. 3.14, 15.

And some passages in the Books called the Apocrypha are smiled at, fit for
nothing but (movere cachinum) to move laughter; as that of Tobit and his Dog
attending on him.

Now Tobit in its name signifies Goodness, and what serviceable creature is
there more ready to wait on his Master than the Dog is? and therefore is not
the Dog the fittest document and representative of the good will, which will
always wait upon Tobit the goodness in the renewed Humanity? Hence in the
Mystery, and by way of office and good document, Tobit and his Dog are not so
contemptible, but a most useful meditation.

And Shingler in his Penteglotte intimates, that the Book of Tobit was written
in Hebrew, and most call that Book and others Apocrypha, because not written in
Hebrew, though in truth that is no reason, if leisure would permit to argue it;
but whether it be a reason yea or no, yet we think the truest reason for that
those divided Books are called Apocrypha is, because their Mysteries (for want
of Faith, and diligence with Prayer to read them) are hid from us.

It might seem as strange to read of our Saviors mixing clay and spittle to
open the blind man's eyes; if it were not understood to be by way of office and
Mystery, as it was; for carnal reason cannot but think that mode to be the
ready way to have continued him blind; but the foolishness of God is wiser than
Men, 1 Cor. 1.25. ver. 27.

And how ridiculous was it (absit blasphemia dicto) to carnal reason to see
Christ riding upon an Ass to Jerusalem, and garments spread under him, and all
the People shouting with acclamations before him, and strewing Palm-branches in
the way, crying Hosanna to the highest; this was strange to the letter learned
Jews; hence that was by way of office and good document of higher Mysteries

If all were not appointed by design from God by way of office, and better
Document in Mystery than the blind reason can comprehend, they had been betrer
(pardon the expression) left out; what is the reason why the carnal wits say,
they can get as much good or more at a Play, than hearing a Sermon, which is or
should be a discourse upon some portion (more or less) of the Scriptures,
profitable for Doctrine, for correction to mend them that are too much lifted
up in false persuasions of their safe being, to raise them up which are too
much (though there are but few of them) cast down in doubts and fears; and also
profitable for Exhortation to virtue, and Dehortation from vice; this should be
the mode of a Sermon out of the pattern of healing words, 2 Timothy 1.13. which is
the speaking as of the Oracles of God. 1 Pet. 4.11. And as for the Predicant he
must do it (says the Apostle there) as of the ability which God gives for the
end there expressed; the original is more significant, (...), etc. the words
properly and most fitly are as out of the strength which the Lord then
supplies, for it is an old saying, Spiritus non semper tangit corda
Prophetarum, Gods Spirit does not always touch the hearts of the Prophets, as
it did Christ, whereby he always spoke as one having authority, and not as the
Scribes, Matt. 7.27. Now whether one can get as much good at a Play to his
betterment, and to the good life, that is the state of the Case; they may speak
as good words as significant to their purpose, and with as much (...) to the
sensible affections as the Predicant can do; but if that (...) the Lord
supplies (which comes forth from God) be absent, that is the enquiry, if it be
absent, then it is not Gods Ordinance, ut finis cui; and so it passes away as
like water through a sieve; one would have thought that Dives argument used to
Abraham had been a most prevalent one to warn his Brethren to amend their
lives, by desiring him to send one from the dead to tell them of his torments,
who wanted now a drop of water to cool his tongue, that abused his plenty of
the best Equors in his life time; but Abraham tells him they have Moses, and
the Prophets, yet Moses was not then living for them to hear; But let us hear
them, and if they hear not them, says Abraham, neither will they be persuaded
though one a^se again from the dead.

And we see it verifyed among our selves of late; what has the fore wasting
Plague, the raging and violent Fire in this City, and the late War? what have
these, we say, reformed the generality of the People? testify it that can;
Hence that which Abraham said is most true, If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one come from the dead again.

All this we have spoken, is to remove the empty pretense aforesaid, and to
mind us of that, 1 Cor. 1.21. and when the world by wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe; and all
this cannot be true out of the letter only, but it is and must be out of the
Spirit.

The truth is, if we come to be persuaded that God designed most of his Holy
Writings to be looked upon, and applied or spoken to us for higher Mysteries
than the natural Creation, we should find more benefit by reading of them, than
we have words, or time to express; as for instance, if we look upon the 1. or
2. of Genesis, which treats of the Worlds and Man's Creation, to intend another
Spiritual World also; and the new Creation spoken of 2 Pet. 3.13. But we look
for new Heavens and new Earth, according to his promise wherein dwells
righteousness; would it not raise up your thoughts above this imperial world?

Secondly, By looking upon something in the Scriptures beyond and under the
letter; it would preserve the Saints honor from that reproach which is cast
upon them by something which the letter of the Scripture hold forth they did;
as what Lot and Noah did in reference unto those evils that the Scriptures
relate in the letter they did; So what Abraham did in having a Child b^ Hagar
the Bondwoman; so Jacob in his reproach for his many Wives, which yet are not
to be looked upon as creaturely Wives only, but in higher Mystery; so Solomon
as having so many Concubin^s, which are not yet to be looked upon as creatural
only, but in a Mystery.

Thirdly, It will make the Scripture true in every part of it, which otherwise
in the bare letter cannot be made true; for where did Esau the elder Brother
serve Jacob his younger Brother in the letter, yet in a Spiritual consideration
he did?

Fourthly, It will make the whole Scripture (which was written for our
learning) Romans 15.4. or concern and instruction to all, which otherwise cannot
in the letter of personal concerns to all, at all times, and all places.

Fifthly, it would preserve the Holy Scriptures from seeming contradictions in
themselves, that yet were designed by Divine Providence to be most true in the
sense the Holy Ghost spiritually intended them to be considered; for instance,
Judas Iscariot was chosen by Christ knowingly; as all his Apostles besides
were, and he did, and would have verifyed his name true which way soever he had
persevered in, he being as chosen of Christ by way of office as other Disciples
were; for Iscariot signifies a death and killing, and by betraying his Lord and
Master he was a Judas Iscariot indeed, a professed Murderer, for he murdered
and killed the just One, James 4.6. and being himself an instrument to do it by
others; But if he had continued in the obedient life to his Lord, he had been
also a Judas Iscariot, a professed Son of murdering and killing, the wicked
nature in himself, and an instrument to help to do it in others; So that Christ
chose him by design and way of office, which he might have performed the best
way through grace, as he did the worst way through Satan's temptation; and we
believe most of the names of Men, and others in Scripture, are designed by God
to have a twofold scope and end in their nomination, as Cain which signifies a
possession, and so he was of the earthly wicked nature, by killing his brother
Abel, that is, a Divine breathing (for Abel signifies the breath) of God, being
in him; but if he had preserved ^bel his Brother, as the Heavenly breathing of
God in himself (as his Brother) he had still been a Possession, but then a
Possession of the said Heavenly being to his growing up to eternal life, (and
as a Divinely Spiritual Germane says, the names of the 7 Churches of Asia (are
to be considered by way of office) have a twofold and contrary significancy
intended to be in them by the Lords own design; We will instance but in one for
brevity sake, Ephesus the first Commonalty or Church, signifyes a
Desirableness; As the man's elicit act consents to the Grace of God: so that
Ephesus, which signifies Desirableness to good, as the takes part with his
Brother Abel, the Breath of God, which is in all men that come into the World,
John 1.9.

And also Ephesus signifies Desirablene^s to the evil, as he takes part with
his Brother Cain within him, the wicked nature to be his Possession.

Hence the Scripture names are designed to be considered by way of office, and
great documents in Mysteries, as aforesaid.

If the Holy writings were more strictly looked upon, and owned to be for other
Mysteries than the letter seems to express, there would not have been such
doubts and contesis about the sense of the Scriptures, as there are among many
men (yea understanding and learned men) raised as there are, nor yet against
Infant Baptism, any more than against Infant-Circumcision, for that they are
born to be done by way of office and good document to others concerns more than
their own; and Infant Baptism may be administered to as good purpose upon the
account aforesaid, as ever Circumcision could be.

If Simon Peter were owned, as our Savior chose him by way of office as he
did, there would not have been such Volumns written as there have been about
Peter's personal Supremacy, pro and con, as being the chief and first Bishop of
Rome. For Peter is and must be the first Bishop or Administration by way of
office of all the rest, because he is in his name the Obedience of Faith, which
is the substratum and foundation of all things, Hebr. 12.1. as the adjunct
occupate that is conversant about them, in reference to his office, and no
personal Supremacy can be derived from Peter's, merely personal respect to
continue always Supreme in his person; for that our Savior blames his
Disciples for seeking any superiority over one another as personally relating
to them, in respect of their mere persons, that they are to be considered by
way of office both in faithfulness and order.

So that where ever the Obedience of Faith does most appear by way of office,
performed by Spiritual men in office; there Peter's Supremacy appears, and is
set up as well in one Christian Nation and Government as in another, else how
could the Lord remove the Churches Candlestick out of its place, if the the
abuse of a Spiritual office were not the provoking cause of it? as he does
threaten, Revel. 2.5.

God is so far in love with Obedience of Faith, that every Nation (as the
Scripture says) that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him;
And therefore the Spiritual Supreme Governor of every Nation that works
Righteousness, does as truly exercise in and under his own Government. Peter's
Supremacy, that is, he being first in the Obedience of Faith by way of office,
as aforesaid, as another Nation does.

The great contest about Transubstantiation in the Lords Supper would soon
vanish, if it were known in the Mystery, and in reference to Christ's Spiritual
Body and Blood, as appears by John 6.53. to 63. where our Savior tells us,
it is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing; what Flesh do you
think that is that profits nothing? and what Flesh must that be which Christ
says, ver. 54, 55, 56. Who ever eats of it has eternal life: and he dwells in
Christ, and Christ in him; which therefore must declare indeed, a
Transubstantiation of Christ's Flesh and Blood, but not of bodily Flesh, for
that (says Christ) profits nothing, ver. 63. And St. Peter says 1 Pet. 18,
19. Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold from your
vain conversation, but with the Blood of Christ, etc. And was not Christ's Body
and Blood perishable, for that it was spilt on the ground in his Crucifixion?

Hence the Miracles pretended to be seen of Christ's bodily Blood and Flesh in
the Consecrated Bread, to what purpose are they published, and the People
persuaded to believe them, if the corporal Flesh be that which Christ says
profits nothing?

There has been great endeavors and undertaking by some, to reconcile all
divided and opposing persuasions to be united in the bonds of operative love to
God and our Neighbor, for that our Savior says on those two Commands hang
all the Law and the Prophets; and therefore what ever does not promote, but
destroy the said operative love to God and our Neighbor (as all divided
persuasions and opinions do by persevering in them,) is not worth the
contending for; Yea those persuasions are to be abhorred, which attempt to
promote themselves by bloodshed, and the poisoning one another, For the wisdom
which is above is peaceable, Jam. 1.17. and the wisdom from below is earthly
and devilish, ver. 15. upon which the said attempts are to be abhorred, by which
any divided persuasion sets up it self as religious.

There has been and is the like contest about many Scripture senses and
meanings out of the letter, which seem to thwart and cross one another;
whereupon some take the sense this way, and some take it that way, and so
contend about the letter sense and meaning; but if we did frequently look for
something further under the letter in reference to higher Mysteries, than the
bare letter seems to hold out, we should forbear the hot contentions that are
about the letter sense; when we might think that something further is intended
under the letter, which we at present apprehend not for want of Spiritual eyes
to see further than the letter; for the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.11. No man
knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to
him, ver. 14. Yet the Scripture letter is not to be rejected, (that is not our
meaning) but also to look for something further under the letter, which may be
of greater use and concern to us, than that which the letter seems to hold out.

We say again, that we do not reject the letter of the Scripture, for how could
any Mystery be demonstrated but out of the Scripture testimonies? We see that
the Apostle, and our Savior himself confuted all gainsayers to their
Doctrine, out of the written testimonies of Moses, and the Prophets; Therefore
we reject not the Scripture letter in his due place and scope, but we wish only
that the Scripture in the letter were looked upon for the most part to contain
in them more Spiritual concerns and higher Mysteries by way of office and
representative documents, than the bareletter holds out, as Jacob and Esau, as
has been before declared, Romans 9.

If we do not look upon the Scriptures in many places of them, to intend higher
Mysteries than the letter holds forth, then the Apostles speech of the letter 2
Cor. 3.6. may be often verifyed and made true, that the letter kills.

It killed our Savior, his Apostles, and the Prophets, Matt. 23.34, 35. and
all the Martyrs since Christ and his Apostles fell asleep.

It Is merely the letter without looking further, for what the letter is
intended for a further consideration, to hold out something further by way of
office; that has been the occasion of much mischief and wickedness, as
poisoning and blood sheds by mistaking the letter, as the literal indulgencies
given to many for doing and promoting such wickedness, as aforesaid; whereby
they are encouraged by hopes of pardon to do the greatest wickedness they are
put upon, which hopes arise from the said indulgences offered unto them upon a
verbal and outward confession only; whereas the Scripture tells us, he that
confesses and forsakes his Sins shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13. and not every
one that cries Lord, Lord, shall enter into his Kingdom, Matt. 7. Therefore
God must needs hate all such ways and means to promote Religion by such like
practices; for the Apostle says, Romans 3.8. We must not do evil, that good may
come of it, whose damnation is just.

Hence we must be sure that we do not abuse the Scripture, either in the letter
or Mystery of it, that may incite us to do any mischief to others; for that is
against the command, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

Which if we did believe those mill machinationes, and noscendi arts, would
soon be given over, as they did who used curious arts, burnt their Books in the
sight of men, Acts 19.19.

We must take heed that we do not in the sticking to the letter-sense, hold
forth out of that letter any thing that tends to the reproach of the high
Saints of God, as that of Lot and his Daughters aforesaid, what they are
pretended to do; So of Abraham and Hagar aforesaid, of Jacob's many Wives, and
Solomon's many Concubines aforesaid; and so the rest of the Patriarchs.

This must be granted without contradiction, that as the Lord created the
Humanity innocent; so upon its Fall and Disobedience, the whole intention and
design was to magnify his great attributes of Mercy and Bounty to the said
fall^n Humanity, by bringing it back again to its first innocent estate, but
yet by such ways and means as he in his infinite Wisdom thought fit and
advantageous thereunto; and those ways and means he would not discover and lay
open to all, but keep them to his own revealment to whom he pleases, as even to
the Babes and teachable ones, and not to the wise and learned, and profane men
of the world, Matthew. 11.29. Father I thank thee, because that thou have hid
these things from the wise, and men of understanding, and have opened them unto
Babes, Matt. 11.29.

Hence it cannot be, but that the Lord did intend many other things under the
letter, than the letter it self does express; and also did intend other things
to be acted and done, or not to be done, by way of office only, and not for
their personal concerns at present who did them, as he bid Hosea to take a
Harlot to Wife, Hosea 1. What! was the Lord so much pleased with such a
reception? surely not, since he abhors the practice of Whoremongers and
Adulterers, but the Lord assigned that to him by way of office, as he
represented the (for so his name signified a Saving) Lord himself by that said
office, even his willingness to take the Apostate adulterated Humanity unto
himself again, which is become an Harlot from him, Jerem. 3.1. Hosea 2.9.

But the danger of what we have proposed of looking beyond the bare letter, for
some Mystery under the said letter, is the turning the Scripture into
allegories, and so make the Scriptures a Nose of wax, as is pretended by doing
so, as aforesaid; but do not they more truly turn them into a Nose of wax, that
in their respective religious persuasions are as truly opposite disparates,
alike opposing one to another in what they contend for; as a Lion, a Bear, a
Fox, and many other devouring creatures, are disparates in their respective
natures, one to another; for as the aforesaid devouring creatures do alike
oppose one another in their respective Nature all of them, as one does to one;
so are all the divided persuasions aforesaid (we name none) opposite disparates
to all others as to one of them.

And yet they all pretend their Scripture letter to justify them all
respectively; which cannot be that it should, for that the Scriptures are from
the Holy Spirit of God, and the Spirit is but one, and moves uniformably to one
thing; and therefore if there be 13 divided persuasions, as religious ones,
then 12 of them must be mere fictions, and not dictated by and from the Holy
Spirit, but out of their own good thinkings; though every one pretends the
letter for the ground of his persuasion, as once two great parties, Armenians,
and their opposites, did both pretend to the Nine and Thirty Articles of the
Church, to justify (though opposite to each other) their persuasions; whereupon
King Charles the I. took occasion to say, it was some satisfaction to him in
reference to both the divided persuasions aforesaid, that they did respectively
fly to the Nine and Thirty Articles for what they held.

Now do not these make the Scriptures a Nose of wax, more truly than they do
which are charged to do it? by turning the Scriptures into allegories, turpe
est doctori cum culpa redarguit when the Kettle does call the Pot, etc.

But what are Parables? (which are specifyed in the Scriptures) what are they
but Allegories that contain other things and Mysteries than the letter holds
forth? and Matt. 13.34. it is said that Christ spoke nothing to them without a
Parable, and he had his end in it; to reserve the Mysteries under the letter to
his own revealment and discovering as he thought fit, and well knew who are fit
to receive them, John 16.12. I have many things to say to you, but ye are not
able to bear them now.

And secondly, Our Savior would not discover them to the wicked World, which
were not worthy as yet to be taught by him, and would not use them aright, to
the ends for which that under the letter is intended; Therefore he says to his
Disciples, Matthew. 7. Give not Holy things to Dogs, nor cast Pearls before
Swine; that is, those Mysteries aforesaid under the letter, to those that are
of currish and snarling dispositions, and of a swinish nature, that are upon
all occasions wallowing in the mire of this Word, and tread the said Pearls
under their feet.

Trismegistus said to his Son, to whom he communicated and taught his secrets,
My Son Tatt, hide these things from the wicked and profane world.

Our Savior never intended that proud and self-willed men in their own eyes,
should have his secrets revealed unto them, Matthew. 11.25, 26. I thank thee O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them to Babes.

So that it is not the self-wisdom, nor great letter-learning that makes us
capable of understanding the Mysteries contained in the Scriptures; but there
must be humility, and innocence of life, to move the Lord to cause us to
understand those Mysteries, for that they are contained under the letter, which
though the learned do understand and see what it holds forth in its axiomatical
disposition, yet they can see no further than that; we well remember that
Arch-Bis^^ Usher Preaching in St. Mary's in Cambridge upon the Text, 1 Samuel
12.24.25. which upon an occasion of a Fast kept when King Charles the I. was in
Spain, and all the People sighed, and longed for His Majesty's return; He took
his Bible and clapped his hands together, and said in this manner, (turning
himself to the Doctors, and Heads of the University there present) Well, you
Doctors, you shall never understand this Book, unless you lead Godly lives.

We see that our Savior says, John 7.17. If any man do my Will, he shall know
of the Doctrine, whether it be from Heaven, or no.

Hence, without the obedient life, our Savior told the learned Scribes and
Pharisees, they could not know the Doctrine, whether from Heaven, or no; for
though learned men may and do judge of things within the compass of Reason, yet
not of Heavenly things above it, 1 Cor. 2.10. because God reveals them by his
Spirit, and tells us, ( ver. 4.) the natural man recieves not the things of the
Spirit, neither can he know them, because they are Spiritually discerned.

It Is a true rule, Quicquid recipitur, recipitur per modum recipientis, that
is, whatsoever is received, is received according to the disposition and temper
of the receiver; as it appears by the reception of a distempered palate, in
reference to Meat and Drink; and therefore men cannot understand though never
so learned, the Mysteries contained in Scripture under the letter, unless they
be Spiritually tasted and relished by them.

Hence St. John says, for the assurance of those he wrote to, that he declared
the very truth unto them, wherein they should walk, Saying, that which we have
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, (of the wore
of life) declared we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and
truly our fellowship, is with his Father, and with the Son Jesus Christ, 1 John
1. ver. 1, 3.

Our Savior tells us, John 14.23. that the way to have that fellowship, is, to
keep his Words; and then he says, He and his Father will come to them, and
make their abode with him, vid. ver. 21.

We say no more in reference to what we have said concerning the adjusting of
Infant Baptism by our New Discovery aforesaid, than what we have sufficiently
declared, and set forth.

Unless you be pleased to give us leave to offer our thoughts concerning the
mode or manner of Baptising those which are to be Baptized in Baptismal water.

We think, and are persuaded in our selves, (but we do not determine it, sed
disquiri relinquimus) that the Feet only of the Baptized are only to be covered
with the Baptismal water.

Our reasons are, first from Baptisms operation and use, appointed by the Lord
in a Mystery, relating, and essentially depending on Circumcision, which was
ordained by God (before Baptism in its operation) for the cutting off the gross
Sins from the depraved Humanity.

And for that many defilements of Sin do for some time remain after the gross
Sins are cut off; therefore the Lord brought in Baptism, and ordained it for to
wash away the remaining defilements of Sin, after the gross Sins are cut off.

And these defilements are remaining in the affections, chiefly to be purged
and cleansed away, according to that, 2 Cor. 7. Therefore having these
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit,
Ephesians. 5.27.

Also the members of the body, which figure out the affections, are the Feet, a
Simili, because as the Feet carry the Body, so the affections carry the Soul
here and there, whither predominancy and interest do lead or force them; hence
Solomon says, Eccles. 5.11. Take heed to thy foot when thou go to the house
of God, and be more ready to hear, than to give the Sacrifice of fools, etc.

Hence the Feet only upon the account aforesaid are to be covered with
Baptismal water, from an induction of particulars. First, For that Baptism was
ordained to wash and cleanse away the defilements of Sin, and those defilements
are in the affections, and the affections are resembled to the Feet.

Hence we offer it to consideration, whether the Feet (upon the account
aforesaid) be not to be covered with Baptismal water?

Our second reason for it, is from Christ's practice, only in washing his
Disciples Feet, John 13.5, 6. Secondly, From his speech to Peter, who denied
our Savior out of ignorant modesty, and humility to wash his face.

But upon our Saviors replication to him, that if he did not wash his Face, he
had no part with him; Peter then rejoyns upon that account, and says to his
Lord, if so, then not my feet only, but also my hands and (...) head.

To this our Savior answers, to correct Peter's (now ignorant forwardness)
upon his (and our) Lords informing Peter concerning the washing of his Feet
saying, he that is released upon the account aforesaid, needs not save to wash
his Feet, and is clean every whit.

Our Saviors said express, ver. 10, is in the Original thus, (...) Where it is
evident, that our Savior uses these two words of diverse significations, yet
our Translators render them both in one, (viz.) to wash, saying, he that is
washed, needs not save to wash his Feet.

Whereas the first word which our Savior uses is (...) and differs much from
the other word he uses, which is (...) the Infinitive Mood.

(...) is a Participle Passive of (...) that comes of (...) to loose, or to be
released from something needful to be released from, which releasment (we are
persuaded) in our Saviors meaning and intention, is that which relates to
Circumcisions releasment, which performs in the Mystery the foregoing work in
the repenting Humanity, by cutting off the gross Sins, as aforesaid; which must
be done, before Baptisms work in its Mystery does take place, for to wash away
the remaining defilements, when Circumcision has cut off the gross Sins
aforesaid.

Then the repenting Humanity is surely released from his great bondage,
according to that express, Luke 13.16. And ought not this Woman (being a
Daughter of Abraham) whom Satan has bound, Lo, this Eighteen years to be
loosed from this bond?

The word out Savior uses here to be loosed, is (...) an Infinitive Mood of
(...), as (...) is a Participle of it, as aforesaid.

Hence our Saviors meaning in the said Verse, was to inform Peter of so much,
by using the Participle (...), which notes released, as aforesaid.

He that is released (viz.) by Circumcisions work) needs not save to wash his
Feet, which are his affections, figured forth by the Feet, upon the account
aforesaid.

And therefore our Savior arises from his Paschal Supper, and power water,
(...) that is, into washing Vessels, alluding to the Jewish vessels, they used
(if not the same) for their daily washing, Mark 7.2, 3, 4, 5 to wash his
Disciples Feet, and he comes to Simon Peter to wash his Feet, and it is likely
first to him, because under the same Figure of his two names, he is the first
of Christ's Administrations to be, and was sent forth, Matthew. 10.2.

Now since our Savior washed the Feet only, upon this account aforesaid; We
offer it to consideration, whether the Feet only, in reference to Baptisms work
in its Mystery, and the order of it, are not to be covered, and not the whole
Body to be plunged in Baptismal water, and that from the words of Christ to
Peter, Ver. 10. He that is released, as aforesaid, needs not save to wash his
Feet, not his hands and head also; for that by our Saviors discourse to Peter,
they are not the object of Baptisms, but Circumcisions work in its Mystery,
which cuts off the gross Sins, which are of two sorts; First, open Profaneness
and wickedness, figured forth by the Hands, which are the instruments of
outward practices in some respect or other, whether good or evil.

Now the second sort, are those which lie in the Head, the seat of carnal
reason, which are the chosen Holinesses thereof.

In both these our Savior lies buried; Hence it is said, Isai. 53.9. He made
his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death.

Now in the letter, Christ was buried alone, Matthew. 27.60. And Joseph laid him
in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out of the Rock.

Hence it is apparent, that Christ lies buried also in the wicked, and in the
rich as long as they continue so; though he was but once buried, and alone in
Joseph's said new Tomb. Now as the wicked are the profane ones, so the rich
are such, which are rich in their chosen Holinesses, as the Apostle does attest
it of the Corin. 1 Cor. 4.8. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, that is, in
their self knowledge, and chosen holiness, as appears, ver. 1. to ver. 8. So
was the Lawyer that politic questionist, Matthew. 19.20, 21. All these have I
kept from my youth, what lack I yet? etc. John 9.40. The Pharisees said, are We
blind also? Hence Christ tells them, ver. 21.38. That Publicans and Harlots go
to the Kingdom of God before them, because it is easier to convince these, for
that their gross Sins stare them in the face, when yet the other sort do
justify themselves, as he did, Matthew. 19.20. Therefore when Christ's Disciples
were released from the gross Sins of Hand and Head, (as they were) otherwise
they could not have been his coming on Disciples; then our Savior might say to
them, He that is released, as abovesaid, need not save to wash his Feet.

Hence we ask again, ex vi praedict. whether it be not more consentaneous to
Baptisms work in a Mystery, which is the washing of the affections, to cover
the Feet only in Baptismal water.

And it is observable, that when the Eunuch was Baptized by Philip, Acts 8.38.
It Is only said, (...), They both descended into the water; and then (...) when
Philip had Baptized him.

Both which distinct acts of their descending into the water, and their
ascending out of the water again, do hold out no more in reference to the said
Acts themselves, but to the covering of the Feet only in water, not covering
the whole Body in water, as if that were the proper and peculiar significant,
relating to a burying with Christ in Baptism.

Which burying comes when the Circumcised in a Mystery, and also the Baptized
in a Mystery, (that is, Spiritually washed from all the remaining defilements
of Sin, which are a true buryal, and the last degree of the three specifyed in
reference to Christ, (viz.) Crucified, Dead, and Buried; and then follows the
Resurrection again to a new life, Romans 6.5.

Hence nothing can be extorted out of the said express of burying with Christ
by Baptism, to pretend to a covering of the Baptized all over in Baptismal
water, but the covering of the Feet only with water, is most agreeable to
Christ's practice in washing his Disciples Feet.

This we have offered to consideration, and do not determine it: neither will
we be contentious in the case, sed relinquimus disquiri.

Observing the Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 11.16. If any man lust to be contentious,
we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God; for that is of more evil
consequence, than the doing or forbearing of a Ceremony, which is but a
concomitant for a preservative of a significancy of some particular thing, that
has its use in ushering in (in due order and place) the two great
Commandments, upon the which our Savior told the Lawyer, did hang all the Law
and the Prophets.

Hence to break the operative love to God, and our Neighbor; for the not
doing, or doing any relative Ceremony, is, to set up the Ceremony above the
performing of the two said great Commands in their end and scope.

And whether he that does so, does not hinder all the performances in reference
thereunto; for that St. James declares, 2.10. He that fails in one point, is
guilty of all, for all makes up but one rule of love, which is broken by
opposition; because doing, or not doing a Ceremony, upon which contention do
proceed many horrid mischiefs and miseries, as are seen by woeful experience.

Hence the Apostle says, We have no such custom, neither the Churches of God.

It Is not unworthy of our consideration, of the Ceremony mentitioned by the
Apostle, 1 Corin. 11.3. where he sets forth, with the grounds on which it is
founded in its acts respectively, to be done by Men and Women Believers, with
all the concomitants relating to the said Ceremony, and the reasons expressed
and laid out, from ver. 4, 5. to ver. 16.

Yet when the Apostle had so fully argued for it in all the respects, as
aforesaid; He would not contend for it, to the breach of love and peace among
the Corinthians, but says ver. 16. If any lust to be contentious, we have no
such custom, neither the Churches of God.

What Ceremony is there in all the Apostles writings, so largely expressed and
urged for practice, upon so many reasons and inducements, as that aforesaid?
yet is it not so much as taken notice of at this day for any practice, though
it stand Recorded in Holy Writ so fully, as aforesaid; when as yet some
Ceremonies are contended for with great Zeal, pro and con, as if they were the
marrow and life of our Religious Services, needfully to be observed, (as they
thought of Circumcision, Acts 15.1.) or we cannot be saved; yet is there no
particular express for the Ceremony, which sometimes we practice, but is taken
up merely upon an allusion to a word or two in Holy Writ, upon which account we
only practice the said Ceremony, as we do for covering all over the persons to
be Baptized in Baptismal water, because it is said, Romans 6.4. Being buried with
him in Baptism; therefore by reason of the said express, it is greatly contended
for, to cover all over the person that is to be Baptized in Baptismal water.

And what contentions have there been, and still are, against Infant Baptism?
because there is no express Command for it, when it is no where forbidden, which
surely God would have done, if he had disowned it upon the account aforesaid.

And it is also as good a document and instruction by way of office
administered, as ever Circumcision could be upon the like account aforesaid.

Hence St. Paul's reflection upon the Galathians, contending only for the
Ceremony of Circumcision, Gal. 3.1. (...); O unconsidering Galathians, who has
bewitched you? may be said of Us, -- teneros quis mihi fascinat agnos?
Who does seduce our filly Sheep?
And them from straying does not keep?


By contending about doing, and not doing of some Ceremonies, merely upon an
uncertain directive of us in the cases aforesaid.

Thus verifying what the Poet says, (...),
(...).
The substance we as Nifles take,
And Nifles for our work we make.


This is most true (it is feared) in our contests aforesaid; but let us for the
time to come desist, and contend for the Faith (by a quiet and peaceable life
in all love) which was once delivered to the Saints, Jude ver. 3. and not for
the doing or forbearing a Ceremony, the substance whereof is the operative love
to God and our Neighbor, Matthew. 22.40. Let us not for the time to come contend
any more against Infant Baptism, than against Infant-Circumcision, since Infant
Circumcision was done, though commanded (as it was then needful) by way of
office only, and Infant Baptism may be done also by way of office, and to as
good use and document, (therefore not forbidden) as ever Infant-Circumcision
was or could be.

Neither let us be diswaded from the allegorized sense of the Scripture on the
pretense that some make it (as it is said) a Nose of wax, for we have already
hinted how all divided persuasions do, that more frequently and strangely than
they which allegorize the Scriptures, which is done to raise up our thoughts
above the letter.

Only let us be sure to take the Apostles advice, and keep the pattern of
wholesome words, (...) which is the exemplar of healing words what is amiss in us.

And be careful to offer nothing as a higher concern (than the letter holds
forth) but what is of a Spiritual document and instruction.

And what will then be the detriment or wrong to the said portion of Scripture,
or to our selves, by offering something of higher Mysteries contained under the
letter, than the letter holds forth.

Surely this will incite us to read the Scriptures more and more, and prefer
the reading of them (both for frequency and diligence) before Plutarchs Lives,
the Turkish History, or any other Humane History extant, what ever.

Not that we should reject the readng of these in their due time and place; For
God has given the Humanity a twoofold life and state, to be conversant in. The
Natural, and the Spiritual, yet not pari modo and gradis, but subordinate, to
be conversant in them, and not collateral, as if both were of like concern to
us, though most make the Natural estate of more concern to us, than the
Spiritual; Notwithstanding our Savior bids us, Matthew. 6.33. to seek first the
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, etc.

We should do in our converse and reading of Divine and Humane Histories, as
our Savior told the Pharisees, they should do in their petty tithings, and the
greater things of the Law; as Judgment, and the Love of God, these ought ye to
have done, and not leave the other undone, Luke 11.42.

We should read the Humane stories, to understand and observe how some ingenies
and wits have improved themselves in the state and affairs of the habitable
World, that we may imitate them, and do the like.

Ut nobis honori amicis utilitati and Reipublicae emolumento esse possimus.

Profitable to our Generation in reference thereunto.

And let us read intermixed Histories betwixt Civil and Inhumane writings, (not
prophance writings, for it is said, Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. Let it not be once named
amongst you as becomes Saints.)

Let us (we say) read the foresaid, that we may understand and observe the
various and manifold Serpentine subtileties, and what not Inhumanities, that
vicious men have abounded in, wherein they have exercised themselves like
Lions, Beats, and Tigers, and that against the Lords innocent ones, Hebr. 11,
34, 35, 36. as if they came for no other end into this habitable world, but to
bite and devour, and to be devoured one of another, Gal. 5.15.

These we may read to lament such woeful effects and practices as are seen daily
to arise and issue forth from the degenerate and apostate humanity, fallen by
disobedience from its God.

But we should read the Divine writings with diligence and frequency, and with
humble Prayer to Almighty God, that in them we may come to know how and by what
means the Lord will, and does bring back the repenting humanity to the Heavenly
life and state again, in such a way, and by such means as the Scriptures do
contain in them, under such coverts and figures as the disobedient persevering
humanity in disobedience, shall never comprehend in the letter of of the
Scriptures (though all Scripture is written for our learning) until we are
taught of God, John 6.45. And therefore it is said, that Christ spoke to the
Multitude in Parables, and without a Parable he spoke not unto them, Matthew.
13.34. but he explained them apart to his Disciples, which Parables are no
other but Allegories, which is the expressing of one thing to intend thereby
another meaning, Gal. 4.24.

There is a Noble Person in France, who has (as it is reported) written of
late a Book in defense of Allegories, and showing the necessity of our owning
of them to be most frequently in Scripture, if we expect to understand the
Scriptures in their Latitude, and understand the strange and high Mysteries
which are wrapped up under the letter; yea, of more strange, and high, and
advantageous Mysteries, than all the humane Stories can produce, or parallel.

As for instance, that of Abraham's Conquest over 4 Kings, which had overcome 5
before, and only with 318 Servants born in his House, and by these brought back
the goods of the King of Sodom, and also his Brother Lot and his goods, and the
Women also, and the People taken Captives by the said Kings, vide Genesis 14.13,
14, etc.

What Master of a Family can, (in any Humane Story) be produced? who with them
born in his House to the number of 318, did overcome 4 Kings, as Abraham did,
and bring back the spoil again to them, from whom it was taken?

Where do you read in Humane Story, of throwing down City walls by sounding of
a Trumpet, that the Conquerers might enter in? Yet we read Joshua 6.4, 5, 6. of
the walls of Jericho, thrown down with the blowing of Rams horns, whereby the
Conquerers entered in.

How ridiculous is that Story (absit blasphemia dicto) if no Mystery were
hidden under the letter for our learning; What do any in this habitable World
expect to do the like, and so to gain an easy entrance into their Enemies
Cities? or do any one Family of 318. ever expect to overcome their Potent
Enemies, consisting of 4 Kings in battle against them, as Abraham did? sure no.

It is said, Romans 15.4. Whatever is written, is writtten for our learning;
Therefore every thing written, is for the learning and benefit of all Mankind
respectively; yet this is not true (with reverence be it spoken) that all the
Saints of God have actual benefit of all what is written at all times, and in
every place; which surely in a Scripture sense and Mystery, they may have at
all times, and in every place, which yet in the letter express only, they have
not, nor have need of at all times, and in all places.

As for Instance, St. Paul says, 2 Timothy 2.12. All (not some) that will live
Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution; Now that is not universally
true in the bare letter, but in a sense under the letter, it is alwa^s true of
all the Saints of God, poor or rich, high and low, but not in the letter; for
it is possible a man may live in a Wilderness alone, yea with his friends also,
and in the midst of his Potent friends, to defend him from all violence and
persecution whatever, how shall these then suffer persecution under them upon
the account aforesaid?

But in a sense hid under the letter it is always true, and cannot be otherwise,
as the Apostle intimates, Galat. 4.29. Where he says, he that was born after
the Flesh, persecuted him that was born of the Spirit.

This persecuter, which is the Bondwomans Seed, is within us in all places, and
at all times, and in all conditions, until cast out by the Spirit of the Lord,
2 Cor. 3.17. Therefore in this sense and no other, it is true of all, that live
Godly in Jesus Christ, they shall suffer persecution.

What shall we tell you of David's Worthies? 2 Samuel 23.9, to 17. and what they
did, and yet how useless that Story is to us, unless to gaze upon, if we take
the Story but in the letter only?

Also of what concern to us is David's Conquest over Goliath? wherein the
disparity of strength betwixt them is to be considered, the disparity of
David's age and his, and the strange means that David overcame him with, and
all expressed in the letter, 1 Samuel 17.

How strange and incredible is this to carnal reason? and to what purpose is it
recorded in the Holy Bible, if nothing under the letter were contained, and of
universal concern to all?

And who would think that true of Moses, Hebr. 11.23, 24, 25. in refusing a
Kingdom, and that a large one, offered to him for an Inheritance? or would not
Moses be taken by the ambitious Men of this world to be manifestly guilty of
great folly in refusing it, if something better and higher Mystery, were not
meant there under the letter, for Moses and others to enjoy above that Kingdoms
inheritance.

What Magnanimity was there in those mentioned for doing and suffering, Hebr.
11.33. to 38. cui bono? and to what purpose in reference to us? if it did not
relate to, and concern all the Saints of God to do and suffer the like
respectively, as they did aforesaid.

And our Savior says of his Worthies, Joh. 14.12. He that believes in me, the
works that I do, shall he do also, and greater than these; Hence, there must be
other things contained under the letter, than are held forth only in the letter.

Otherwise the Scriptures must be in some things untrue (absit blasphemia
dicto) in some things of no concern to our Heavenly estate) in some things
ridiculous, and not worthy of taking notice of the respective Stories and
Narratives in them, unless some higher Mysteries be hid under the letter, for
us to enquire into; Therefore it must be granted, in reference to the letter,
that some further thing must be intended under it, to remove all those
insufferable inconveniences aforesaid from the Scriptures, which otherwise
must remain, and likewise to introduce all things in the right sense (opened)
in the Scriptures from under the letter, for to make the man of God perfect to
every good work, 2 Timothy 3.17.

(...). 2 Timothy 2.7. (...). 1 These. 5.21.
Consider what we say, and the Lord give you Understanding to try all things,
and to keep the best.
FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
COurteous Reader, We beg thy pardon that so many Crypses of defects,
redundancies, and inversion of parts, appear dispersed here and there in this
our Breviat of Infant Baptism, adjusted by our New Discovery.

For this offense we beg thy pardon, because it came not through remisness and
carelessness, but through many other causes, quas nunc praescribere longum est.

And it being so, (as it is well known it is,) We hope thy Charity, according to
Scripture requiring, 1 Pet. 4.8. in thy candid breast, will cover our errors
aforesaid committed.

Qui non est sponte nocens, is poene innocens sit. And to make thee amends what
we can, We have (by the labor of a very ready and good friend) inscribed all
and every one of them in the respective Margins, where they are our blemish.

To remove thy trouble in poring upon an Errata, to find our meaning, what it
ought to be there respectively.

Sic habetis confitentam reum and avidum Lectori Candidato (quoad vires)
satisfacere. Parcas igitur (ut possis) Parkero tuo, retineasque illum, in
favore tuo, dum manet lachesi quod torqueat in Parkero parcendo, propter
Confess. praedict. Vale.

