AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. PARKINSON's Expulsion From the UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD In the
Late TIMES.

In Vindication of him from the False Aspersions cast on him in a late
Pamphlet, Entitled, The History of Passive Ob^^^ence.

LONDON: Printed for, and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, in the Old Bailey.
1689.

AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. PARKINSON's Expulsion From the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD In the
Late Times.
ONE might well have expected, That Mr. P. who was illegally expelled the
University of Oxford, and thereby deprived of his Fellowship in Lincoln College
in the late Times, would, upon his restitution to the University, have been
immediately invited to return to his College. Or, if 'twere too much to expect
That, yet one might in reason have thought, that none of the College would have
opposed his returning to it: especially considering, that even those, who
formerly were his Accusers, are now in their Opinions come over to him; or at
least have acted by those very Principles, which they accused him of
maintaining. Now methinks they should in reason do one of these two things;
Either still reject his Principles, or receive Him. For not to admit him, when
they have admitted his Principles, is as much against the Rules of good Logic,
as it is, when they have granted the Premises, to deny the Conclusion. The
Reverend Dr. Ironside, late Vice Chancellor of Oxford, (now Lord Bishop of
Bristol) restored him to the University above six Months ago; and why the
Rector and Fellows of Lincoln College have not yet readmitted him to his
Fellowship, I believe they can no more tell, than Dr. H. can, why he expelled
him the University. I Am sure he ought to be readmitted; and since the College
cannot yet be brought to do him right, (though I doubt not but in time they
will) I Will endeavor to do him what right I can by Printing his Case, and
telling the World how he was wronged.

Mr. P. was a Master of Arts, and Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxford: the
Fellowship he had there, is limited to the County of Oxford; so that none, but
an Oxfordshire Scholar, is capable of it. And there is this further to be
observed concerning it, That the Bishop of Lincoln, for the time being, (who is
Visitor of that College) has a peculiar right of nomination to it, whenever it
is vacant. And accordingly he, being an Oxfordshire Scholar, was nominated to
this Fellowship by Bishop Fuller, in the Year 1674. and admitted to it by the
Rector and Fellows of the College.

There he lived comfortably for nine years; and being a Tutor, had for some
years above twenty young Schloars (at a time) under his care; insomuch, that by
his Fellowship, and advantage of Pupils, he had a yearly Income of 120 l. and
there, it is thought, he might have lived to this day, had he not had so many
Pupils. 'Twas the taking of Pupils that chiefly induced him to stay in that
College so long, (the Fellowship alone being hardly sufficient to maintain him
there;) and 'twas, perhaps, the taking of too many, that moved some of the
Fellows to drive him from thence: (I say, some of the Fellows, for no more than
four out of twelve were his Accusers:) This probably was his greatest fault; a
fault, which he was never careful to mend, nor they willing to forgive.

But they pretended a more specious cause for their violent Prosecution of him:
they gave it out, That he was a disloyal Man, and disaffected to the
Government: and indeed, if to have other, notions of the Government, than they
had, were to be disloyal, it must be owned Mr. P. was so: for he was willing to
think and speak of the Government as the Lawyers taught him, who, he believed,
best understood it; but they were so wise as to correct the Law by their
Mistakes in Divinity. They thought the King was Absolute; he was of another
opinion. They said, The Legislative Power was lodged solely in the King; he
believed it was not: They were against the Bill of Exclusion, he was for it.
They were for Dr. Hick 's Passive Obedience, he was for Mr. Johnson's. Now a
difference between him and them about such Points as these, one may easily
guess, would cause frequent Disputations and Quarrels; and a little ill Nature
prompts men to undo those whom they quarrel with, provided they have
opportunity.

And Mr. P's Adversaries had as fair an opportunity for undoing of him; as
their hearts could wish. For, mark the time when they began to complain of him:
it was in the Year 1683, at that very time, when the Earl of Essex, Lord
Russel, Colonel Sidney, and other Gentlemen of Eminent Note, were seized on,
and sens to the Tower for their zeal in opposing Popery, and Arbitrary Power:
it was then, when the Nation was in a great ferment; when men's Passions were
high, and made a great noise, so that Reason could not be heard. This was a
lucky time for Informers, and of this Mr. P's Adversaries took the advantage.

Having got so fair an opportunity for oppressing him, they first applied
themselves to the Reverend Dr. Marshall, Rector of the College, and filled his
Ears with Complaints against him. The Rector, who well knew that 'twas not any
concern for the Government, but rather Ill Will, and Self-interest, which set
them against him, endeavored to check their Heat, and bring them to some
temper; but the more he labored to quiet them, the more outrageous they grew:
They knew they had, what they called, the Government on their side; and that if
the Rector would not receive their Complaints against one, whom they had
everywhere set out as a Whig, there were others that would. They made grievous
Complaints of the Rector himself for refusing to do them justice (as they
phras'd it;) and gave it out, That he deserved to be turned out of the College
for favoring Mr. P.

The Rector hereupon thought fit to appoint a Meeting of the Society, about the
end of July 1683, for the hearing of their Complaints against Mr. P. and gave
him notice of it. It fell out unluckily for him, that many of the Fellows, (and
those too of best note) were then absent from the College, (as is usual in the
Long Vacation) who, had they been there, it is likely would have advised his
Adversaries to let the matter fall, and to forbear prosecuting one of their
Fellow Members.

A Meeting then there was of the Society at the time appointed; and Mr. P's
Adversaries having drawn up their Charge against him, were pleased to read it
to him. He perceiving that some things laid to his Charge were not material,
had they been true; that some were very false; and that others wanted only a
fair Interpretation to make them pass; desired a Copy of their Accusation, and
promised within a day or two to give them his Answer to it in writing. The
Rector likewise requested the same in his behalf; but neither of them could
prevail. The Rector perceiving that he could not gain any thing of them that
was fair, and resolving not to comply with them in any thing that was soul, nor
to pass an unjust censure upon him (which they pressed him to do) dissolved the
Meeting.

Finding now that they could not work on the Rector, nor gain his concurrence
for oppressing of Mr. P. they applied themselves to Dr. H. a
Provice-Chancellor, and complained that Mr. P. had in their Company (some
Months before) maintained several false and dangerous Propositions.

Hereupon the Doctor sent for him, August the 20th, and told him, That some of
the Fellows of Lincoln College had made complaints against him. He desired to
know who were his Accusers, and what they laid to his Charge, and to have a
Copy of their Accusation, and promised his Answer to it. The Doctor said, 'Twas
fit he should know his Accusers, and have a Copy of their Accusation, and
promised him both. And it must be owned, that this was fair dealing in the
Doctor; but tho he was so fair as to make this promise, yet he was not so just
as to keep it.

August the 24th, the Doctor sent for him again, and tho he would neither let
him know who were his Accusers, nor what they laid to his Charge; yet he
required him forthwith to give Bail of 2000 l. for his good Behavior, and
Appearance at the next Assizes, which were to begin at Oxford on the 3d of
September following.

I will not here blame the Doctor for denying Mr. P. a Copy of his Accusation,
nor yet for exacting so extravagant a Bail; because how unreasonable soever
these things may seem, yet they were agreeable to those times, and herein he
did but write after the many ill Copies that were set him by others. But I can
hardly forbear complaining of him for this one thing, (because herein I think
he followed no example) that, when Mr. P. had named for his Bail two Scholars,
Mr. B. and Mr. K. both Masters of Arts, and Fellows of Colleges, and of as good
note as any in the University, he refused them both, and yet would give no
reason for his refusing of them. It seemed somewhat hard to Mr. P. that two of
his own Body, the University, should be refused, and that without any reason
given; and that he should still be forced to name others. But this, how hard
soever it was, he was forced to comply with, and to try again if he could hit
the Doctor's humor in naming two others; which he had the good luck to do: For
guessing, that no Scholars would pass with him, he named two of the Town, Mr.
P. and Mr. C. who were accepted for his Bail; and he was dismissed, having been
kept Prisoner by the Doctor several hours, till his Sureties came to release
him.

At the next Oxford Assizes, begun September the 3d. 1683. Mr. Philip Burton
came to Oxford, and exhibited an Indictment against Mr. P. for maintaining the
Propositions following (which I here present the Reader with, together with
some remarks on each of them).

l. That it is lawful to exclude the next Heir to the Crown front his Right and
Title to the Succession.

I suppose his Accusers mean, as he did, such an Exclusion, as had not long
before been debated in Parliament, and had passed the Honorable House of
Commons in two or three Parliaments successively. Now such an Exclusion as
this, no doubt, Mr. P. held to be lawful, and, as I believe, two third parts of
the Nation held it as well as he; though I never yet heard of any, besides him,
that had the ill luck to be impeached for it. The Law, I Am sure, says, That the
King, Lords and Commons, have right to limit and bind the Crown of this Realm,
and the Descent, Inheritance, and Government thereof; as appears by the 13th of
Queen Elizabeth, Cap. 1. by which Statute it was made Treason, during the life
of that Queen, to hold, affirm, or maintain the contrary; and, after her
decease, forfeiture of Goods and Chattels: And me thinks it is somewhat strange,
that it, should be High Misdemeanour in Mr. P. to speak as the Law does. If
Doctor H. knew nothing of this Law, one would think his Friend Mr. Burton
should have instructed him in it.

2. That if a Prince did not perform his duty, the Subjects might be discharged
of theirs.

Mr. P. denies, that lie ever affirmed any such general Proposition. And I
cannot but observe, that I have heard Dr. Marshall, who was then Rector of
Lincoln College, more than once affirm, That at that Meeting held in the
College about the end of July, (which I spoke of before) and held on purpose
for hearing of Complaints against Mr. P. there was not the least mention made
of this Proposition. And Mr. P. dares affirm upon Oath, That he heard nothing
of it at that Meeting; and therefore it is likely they had not thought of this
to object against him at that time, it being not probable they would have
concealed it, had they known arty thing of it. Nor is it a hard matter to guess
how they came by it; for one may see it word for word, among the twenty-seven
Propositions that the University of Oxford condemned on the 21st of July 1683.
it being indeed a pare of the second Proposition in the Decree of that
University. And it is likely, that Mr. P. had never been accused for maintaining
this Proposition, if that University had not first condemned it. I think, I am
not bound to speak my thoughts concerning this Proposition; but however, out of
mere love to Truth, I will say thus much, That in some Constitutions of
Government, and in some Cases, I believe it is true, if the Prince not only
does not perform his duty, but acts also exorbitantly to the contrary. And
because Truth is then best, when it is rightly applied, I will venture to apply
this to our present Case, and say, That the late King James having not done his
duty, (but the contrary) the stiffest of the Jacobites ( Mr. P. 's Accusers not
excepted) may be discharged of theirs, and may honestly (without distinctions,
or equivocations, or mental reservations) take the new Oath of Allegiance to
our Gracious Sovereigns King William and Queen Mary.

3. That the King might be for ever laid aside, so that there should never more
be a King of England for the future, by the Consent of King, Lords, and Commons.

One fault I Am sure there is in this proposition, That it is sillily worded: Now
methinks it is somewhat hard to bring an information against Mr. P. for an
uncouth expression, if he had been guilty of it. There is in the words, 1.
Something supposed, and that is, a consent of the King, Lords, and Commons,
That the King should be for ever laid aside, so that there should never more be
a King of England for the future; which is a very wild supposition, it being
not in the least probable that ever the thing supposed should happen. And 2.
there is something affirmed upon this unlikely supposition, and that is, That
the King might be for ever laid aside, so that there should never more be a
King of England for the future, in case there were such a consent. Now whether
this be true, or no, let those judge who will; for my part I hardly think it
worth my while to examine it.

I doubt few will believe that Mr. P. was indicted for these matters, unless I
publish a Copy of the Indictment; and therefore that, such as it is, here
follows:

A Copy of the Indictment. Ad Assisas Autumnal 35. Car. 2di Regis.
JUrati pro Dom. Oxon.
Rege Super Sacrament. suum praesentant, quod Jacobus P. De Oxon in Com Oxon.
Clericus timorem dei in cord suo non habens, etc. primo die Augusti, Anno
Regni dicti Dom. nostri Caroli 2di, etc. tricesimo quinto apud Oxon praedict.
in Com. proedict. ex sua prava mente and nequissima Machinatione, in praesentia
and auditu quam plurimor subditor. dicti Dom. Regis tunc and ibid. praesentium,
de dicto Dom. Rege and gubernatione, and regimine suis hujus Regni
faelicissimis falso malitiose nequiter Diabolice and Seditiose dixit, asseruit,
declaravit, and pr^palavit, Quod licitum ^uit praecludere Proximum haeredem a
titulo and Successione suis ad coronam. Et Quod si princeps (dict. Dom. Regem
nunc innuendo) debitum ejus Anglice duty non performaret, subditi (subditos
dicti Dom. Regis nunc innuendo) ab eorum exonerentur. Et quod Rex (dictum
Dominum Regem nunc innuendo) in perpetuum excluderetur, Anglice laid aside, ita
quod in futuro nunquam Rex esset, Anglice a King in Anglia, per consensum
Regis, Dominorum and Communium in Parliamento. Ea intention and proposito
incitare and movere populum hujus Regni Angliae ad odium and disprobationem
Anglice dislike personae dicti Domini Regis and gubernationis stabiltae hujus
Regni Angliae, etc.

E. H. Testes. R. F. Testes. A. T. Testes. T. W. Testes.


To this Indictment Mr. P. (as well he might) pleaded Not Guilty; and his Trial
was put off till the following Assizes, that is, till the following Lent. And
now he thought himself safe till Lent came, the Trial being put off till that
time; and doubtless safe he was by the Political Law; but on a sudden Dr.
Hicks's Imperial Law laid hold on him, and condemned him before his Trial came:
For the very day after he had pleaded Not Guilty, Dr. H. the
Pro-Vice-Chancellor sent for him, and told him, He must expel him the
University.

Mr. P. thought it somewhat strange, That the Doctor should first send him to
the Assizes, to be Tried there; and then should on a sudden call him back, and
Condemn him without so much as the formality of a Trial. He said, That the
matter was then under a Judicial examination, and he hoped the Doctor would
wait the issue of that, and not pass a more grievous judgment upon him, whilst
the matter stood indifferent, than in probability the judgment of the Law would
be, in case he were found guilty upon the Indictment. He further desired, That
in case the Doctor were resolved to proceed immediately, He would himself first
hear him.

The Doctor's Answer was, That he had Orders from above to expel him. To this
Mr. P. replied, That surely he mistook his Orders; That possibly he might have
Orders to Try, but not to Condemn him without a Trial; or if he had received
any such illegal Orders, he ought not to obey them; That he knew of no Orders
that could turn him out of the University, and consequently out of his
Fllowship; That his Fellowship was his Freehold, and none could turn him out of
his freehold, but by Law. And therefore he desired the Pro-Vice-Chancellor
Chancellor to say, by what Law he proceeded. 'Twas no easy matter to gain the
Doctor's Answer to this untoward question: But at length he gave this, That he
proceeded by the Laws or Statutes of the University.

To this Mr. P. Replied, That these indeed were Laws which obliged him, and
that he might have Proceeded against him by these Laws at first, if he had so
pleased; but that now he fairly could not, having already bound him over to the
Assizes, and begun a Prosecution of him at Common Law.

Then Mr. P. desired him to say, by what particular Statute of the University
he proceeded.

The Answer was. by the Statutes de Contumeliis compescendis, and de
Perturbatoribus Pacis.

To this Mr. P. Replied, that surely it ought to be proved that he had uttered
contumelious words, and to be made out, that he had been a disturber of the
peace; which had not yet been done: For he had not been so much as examined
concerning any matters laid to his charge; he had not been heard; he had not
had his Accusers face to face, nor any license to answer for himself concerning
the Crimes laid against him: And 'twas not agreeable to any Law, whether Divine
or Humane, whether Civilt, or Common, or Statute Law, to Condemn any one before
he was heard.

But 'twas in vain to dispute with one who resolved to obey Orders; for the
Doctor answered alt Mr. P's Arguments (and 'twas indeed the best answer he
could give) by telling him, That he had Orders from above to expel him. And
accordingly he did forthwith expel him the University in an arbitrary manner;
having never heard him, nor so much as summoned him to a hearing.

Dr. H. it seems thought it a point of Loyalty to obey Orders; but I can tell
him of as Loyal persons as he is, who would not have thought so. What does he
think of the Seven Bishops that were sent to the Tower? Were they for obeying
Orders? What thinks he of the Lord Bishop of London's behavior in Dr. Sharp's
Case? Was not his Lordship bid to suspend that Reverend person? and did his
L^^^ship do as be was bid? Did not hit Lordship choose rather to be Suspended
himself, than to Suspend a Dean of the Church in an illegal manner? True
Loyalty always ways keeps pace with Justice, but never outruns it; nor is it to
be thought Loyalty to undo a Fellow-Subject at the command of ones Prince.

A Copy of the Expulsion.
TImotheus Halton Sacrae Theologiae Professor and Universitatis Oxon. Pro
Vice-Cancellarius omnibus literas hasce inspecturis salutem. Cum ex juramentis
quam plurimorum testium fide dignorum ^oram nobis susceptis Jacobus Parkinson
A. M. and Coll. Lincolniensis Socius verba contumeliosa in serenissimum Dominum
nostrum Carolum secundum Regem Angliae ad pacem and concordiam Regni
impediendam, and ad lites and tumultus fovend. in contemptum Domini Regis,
coronae, dignitatis legumque suarum, and in aliorum in tali casu delinquentium
incitamentum malitiose and seditiose protulisse, eoque nomine contra bonos
mores, jus hujus Regni commune, and Statuta istius Vniversitatis notorie
deliquisse convictus sit: Nos ut paci publicae and disciplinae Academicae
(quantum in nobis est) prospiciamus, and gliscenti in dies Seditiosorum
licentiae obviemus, praedictum Jacobum Parkinson tanquam pacis and publicae
tranquillitatis perturbatorem (juxta statuti in ea parts editi exigentiam) ex
ista Universitate Oxon. expellimus bannimus and exterminamus; ac expulsum,
bannitum and exterminatum tenore praesentium denunciamus, atque omnibus
Universitatis istius privilegiis penitus exutum declaramus. Mandantes insuper
eidem Jacobo P. ut intra septem dies proxime sequentes publicationem
praesentium extra istam Universitatem Oxon. ejusque praecinctus se recipiat, in
posterum non reversurum sub poena juris si post dictos septem dies intra
Universatem istam ejusve praecinctus, aut dicta circumcirca milliaria
deprehensus fuerit quacunque de causa, nisi in jus legitime vocatus, in quorum
omnium fidem Sigillum officii Cancellariatus Universitatis Oxon. praesentibus
apposuimus. Dat. apud Oxon. sexto die mensis Septembris, Anno Dom. 1683.

I cannot choose but observe here these two things.

1. That this Expulsion was grounded upon an Allegation which was not true;
namely, That Mr. P. was ^^^victed of speaking reproachful Words against the
Government, whereas indeed he was never tried, nor convicted.

2. That Dr. H. did not mention what those reproachful Words were.

Now this Expulsion of Mr. P. from the University, implying an Expulsion from
his College, drew on him two very great Losses, the loss of his Fellowship, and
the loss of his Pupils in Lincoln College, to the value of 120 l. per ann.
(which Losses he has suffered these six years.)

And now one would have thought, That Dr. H. having expelled him the
University, would however have suffered him to breathe quietly in some other
Air; and having forbidden him to come within five miles of Oxford, would have
disturbed him no more, provided he had kept his due distance from the forbidden
Place. But the Doctor did not think fit to do his work by halves. And therefore
having unjustly expelled Mr. P. the University, and stripe him of all that he
bad, and made him poor, and bare, and naked, he took effectual care to keep him
so; he still kept him under the lash of the Indictment, and forced him to
attend several Assizes at Oxford; not that he ever intended that Mr. P. should
be brought to his Trial; (for he well knew, that the trying of one at the
Assizes, whom he had condemned without a Trial, would not be much for his
Credit) but this he did partly to expose him more and more, and show him as a
Criminal to his Country every half year; partly to put him to great Expense and
Charges, that thereby he might the sooner consume that little Treasure he had
laid up; but chiefly to hinder him from getting any other Preferment; rightly
concluding, That none would venture to prefer one who was under an Indictment
for High Misdemeanor.

And after all this, when the Doctor was even ashamed to give him any more
trouble, and put him to any further Charge in attending the Assizes at Oxford;
Matters were so managed (whether by Dr. H. or by Mr. Burton, I will not say)
that the Indictment was removed by Certiorari to the King's Bench. And there
Mr. P. appeared before Chief Justice Jefferies, who having treated him as he
used to do others, and passed on him those usual Complements that were wont to
flow from his foul Tongue, turned him over to Mr. Burton, with whom Mr. P. was
to make his peace as well as he could. But though he could easily guess at what
rate he might purchase his quiet, yet he did not think sit to come up to the
price; and so the Prosecution still contin^ed depending till April 168^, at
which time a Cessat Process^rs was easily granted.

I cannot but think that all Scholars of that famous University of Oxford, and
especially all Fellows of Colleges, will be Mr. P's Advocates, and plead his
Cause against Dr. H. For if a Pro-Vicechancellor might expel him without so
much as hearing him, it may concern them to consider, that any Vicechancellor
may in like manner turn out any of them, whenever the Expelling Humor shall
take him; and what has been Mr. P's Case, may be their own.

The Question now is (and one would indeed wonder it should be a question)
Whether Mr. P. who is already restored to the University, ought to be restored
to his Fellowip in Lincoln College? He thinks that he ought; those of the
College think otherwise: (which I confess is not very strange, if one
considers, that some of them were his Accusers, and that one of them is in his
Place.) Now there being this Controversy between Him and Them, he applied
himself (as the College-Statutes direct in such Cases) to the Lord Bishop of
Lincoln; and having stated his Case, presented it, May the 6th, to his Lordship
then in London. He represented to his Lordship, That he was one of the Fellows
of Lincoln College, nominated to a Fellowship there in 1674, by his Lordship's
immediate Predecessor, Bishop Fuller; That in 1683, he was Illegally and
Arbitrarily expelled the University by Dr. H. Pro-Vicechancellor; That the
Rector and Fellows (taking it for granted, that an Expulsion from the
University, whether just or unjust, implied an Expulsion from the College,)
signified to his Lordship the vacancy of his Place: and that thereupon his
Lordship (who has the right of nominating one to this Place, when vacant)
forthwith nominated one Mr. Cornish to it, who enjoyed it till he died; and,
after his decease, one Mr. Bartholomew, who enjoys it to this day. He did
further set forth, That the Reverend Dr. Ironside ( late Vicechancellor of
Oxford ( now Lord Bishop of Bristol) had restored him to the Univirsity. And he
humbly, conceived, that thereupon he ought to be restored to his College, and
to his Fellowship in it. For there never was (he said) any other reason
alleged to deprive him of the Profits of his Felloship in Lincoln College, but
only this, That being expelled the University, he was judged incapable of
staying in his College, and enjoying the Profits of his Fellowship there; and
that Reason now ceased; and therefore he hoped, there being no Reason to keep
him out of his Fellowship any longer, he should forthwith be restored to it. He
therefore humbly begged his Lordship, who had nominated another to his Place,
to make void that his Nomination, or rather to declare it void, (it being
really void and null in the Construction of the Law;) and thereby to make way
for his return to his Fellowship in Lincoln College.

And afterward, July the 16th, he wrote a Letter to his Lordship; then at
Buckden; part of which I here present the Reader with, and that in his words.

I humbly conceive, That your Lordship, as Visitor of the College, may null or
make void your nomination of another to my Place, upon good Information, That
it was not well grounded at first; as, I believe, it now plainly appears to
your Lordship that it was not. For your Lordship's nomination of another to
succeed me in my Fellowship, was grounded upon Dr. H 's Expulsion of me, and a
supposed vacancy arising from thence; and therefore your Lordship's nomination
of another could be no more just, than Dr. H 's Expulsion of me was; nor could
give another any more right to my Place, than the Expulsion took from me: And I
desire no easier Thik than to prove, that the Expulsion was unjust, and being
such, could not deprive me of the just Right I had to my Place in Lincoln
College; (for no man shall lose a just Right by the unjust Act of another:) and
if it could not deprive me of my Right to my Fellowship in Lincoln College,
then still I have a right to it, notwithstanding Dr. H 's Expulsion of me; and
he, who is at present in it, can have no right to it, notwithstanding your
Lordship's Nomination. And therefore I appeal to your Lordship as Visitor of
Lincoln College, and beseech your Lordship to do me right. I leave it to your
Lordship's Wisdom, to take what method your Lordship shall think fit for the
relieving of me: and if your Lordship thinks nothing less than a Visitation
will no, I humbly desire your Lordship to proceed to a Visitation.

I cannot say that these two Papers of Mr. P. did operate nothing on my Lord
Bishop; (for his Lordship declared himself to be clearly of opinion, That Mr.
P. had hard measure, that he had been very unjustly treated, and that Dr. H.
and those of the College, who had done him wrong, ought to make him
satisfaction.) Yet this I must say, That though his Lordship received his
Appeal, yet (for what Reasons I cannot tell) he has not yet thought fit to
judge between the College and Him.

It must be owned by me, that the Rector and Fellows of Lincoln College have
made some Objections against Mr. P's restitution to his Fellowship: and it
cannot be denied by them, but every one of their Objections has had an Answer
from him, though in my judgment some of them needed not any. They may print
their Objections, if they list, and his Answers too, if they believe them such
as will serve to ser^^ff their Objections with advantage; but I have no room
for Objections and Answers in this Paper. However, to give the Reader a taste
of their Objections, I will mention one of them, and it is their great Objection
in the Opinion of the Visitor, that is, it is their greatest they have. The
great Objection (says his Lordship in a Letter directed to a Gentleman in
London) that they have against Mr. P 's Restitution, is, That he neither had,
nor ever asked leave to be absent from College, which is Expulsion by their
Statutes. And then his Lordship says how he had answered it: To this I told the
Rector in a Letter, That Mr. P. was expelled from the University, and not to
come within five miles of it; and therefore could not come to the College to
ask leave to be absent. One would think that an expelled man should rather have
asked leave to stay in the College, than have begged leave to go away. Sure
they were very hard put to it for Objections against Mr. P's Restitution, when
such as these were sent from Oxford to Buckden.

Thus have I given a short and true Account of Mr. P's Case; my next Task is to
vindicate him from the false Aspersions that a late Author has cast on him in
his History of Passive Obedience.

This Author was pleased to say in his Preface, That he only did the Office of
an Historian; but I Am sure he has done it very ill in this particular that
concerns Mr. P. however he has done it in others; which I do not intend to
examine. The Office of an Historian I always thought had been to relate, and
not to invent; but this Author has given too great a liberty to his Invention,
there being not one jot of truth in his whole Story of Mr. P.

I cannot but observe, that he ushers in his false Tale of Mr. P. with another
that is also false, and concerns a whole Convocation of Doctors and Masters as
well as him; for speaking of the Decree of the University of Oxford past in
their Convocation, July the 21st, 1683. he says, That it-was subscribed by the
Vice Chancellor, other Professors, and the whole Convocation. What the
Vice Chancellor and other Professors did, I cannot tell; but I Am sure, so far
is it from being true, that it was subscribed by the whole Convocation, that it
was never so much as offered to the whole Convocation for their subscription.
But the Case was plainly this; The D. of Gloucester, as this Author says, (and
who else, or whether any else, I know not) drew up a Decree, in which several
Propositions were condemned as false, seditious, and impious; and several Bocks
quoted, in which it was said the Propositions condemned were contained: but
none of the Convocation besides the Person or Persons concerned in drawing up
the Decree, had any time given to examine the truth either of the Propositions,
or of the Quotations. But the Paper drawn up was read in the Convocation house,
and 'twas immediately put to the Vote, whether it should pass, or no; the
Zealous Men cried out, Placet; and others thought not fit to make opposition:
and so out they came from the Convocation, and presently a fire being kindled
in the Court of the Schools, the naughty Books were burnt by the hand of the
Marshall.

And now having abused a Convocation of Doctors, and Masters, he singles out
Mr. P. and falls foul upon him. And pursuant to this Decree, Parkinson, a
Fellow of Lincoln College, for maintaining, That the right and foundation of
all Power was in the People; That Kings are accountable for their
Male-administrati^n, etc. And particularly, That King Charles the First was
justly put to death for making war upon his Subjects; was, Ann. 1684. expelled
the University.

In the first place, He is mistaken as to the time of Mr. P's Expulsion (which
is not seemly in one that pretends to do the Office of an Historian) for he was
not expelled in 1684. (as this Author says) but in 1683. But this Mistake I
easily forgive, because, I belleve it was against his will; and will only
desire the Reader from hence to observe, how little this Historian understood
^'s Case, and how unfit he was to represent it.

But he is guilty of a far worse Mistake, in assigning the Cause of the
Expulsion; and this* I doubt, was a wil^ul Mistake, and therefore justly
deserves blame. He mentions Three Propositions.

1. That the right and foundation of all Power is in the Poeple.

2. That Kings are accountable for their Maladministration, etc.

3. And particularly, That King Charles the First, etc. And says that P. was
expelled the University for maintaining of these Three, with an etc. which he
was pleased to add to the tail of the Second Proposition, and by which he would
have his Reader understand a great many more Propositions than he was willing
to express. As for his Et coetera's, I have nothing to say to 'em; for I know
not what, nor how many they are, any more than he does. But as for the Three
Propositions that he has mentioned, I do aver it is so far from being true,
that P. was Expelled for all, or any of them, that it was never so much as
objected, or laid to his Charge, That he had maintained any one of them: And I
challenge this Author, whoever he is, to produce any Authority for what he has
with so much confidence asserted. The Indictment (as is plain to any one that
reads it) will not help him out; for though therein mention be made of Three
Propositions, yet not one of those Three in the Indictment is the same with any
one of these mentioned in the History of Passive Obedience. A Copy of the
Bannimus, or Expulsion, will stand him in as little stead; for though that
mentions that P. was expelled for uttering reproachful Words against King
Charles the Second, yet it does not express in particular what they were. I am
resolved to be civil to this Author, and therefore I Will give him leave to go to
Dr. H. the Expeller, and ask him, what he expelled P. for. I know well enough
what Answer he will give: He will say, That an Indictment was exhibited against
P. That the Grand Jury had found the Bill; That he from thence concluded that
P. was guilty; That thereupon, without any more ado, he proceeded to expel him;
it being needless to try one, whom he believed to be guilty. And if you object
any thing against this way of proceeding, as not agreeable to Law, then
presently out he pulls his Orders from above, and this answers all Objections.
This he formerly said, and this I Am apt to think he will still say; and if he
does, it is plain that he charges P. with nothing but what was in the
Indictment, and consequently not with any of these Three Propositions, that are
mentioned in the History of Passive Obedience.

But I Will give Dr. H. leave to give what Answer he pleases; (though, I believe,
he had much rather I would give him leave to hold his Tongue) I Will give him
leave to say what this Author would have him, That he expelled P. for
maintaining these very Propositions that are mentioned in the History of
Passive Obedience. But then I expect, that he should be so civil as to answer
the following Queries: Why did he not mention these Propositions in the
Indictment? Why not in the Bannimus? Why did he not at least particularly
mention that Third Proposition, which this Author has mentioned in so
particular a manner? Why did he not take care to publish this to the World, and
that too with the highest aggravations, out of mere regard to his own Credit,
and for vindicating the Severity of his own Proceedings, which most men thought
were unjust? One would think it was very nigh as bad to affirm, That King
Charles the First was justly put to death, as 'twas to hold, That his Son the
Duke might be excluded: and why then was this latter mentioned in the
Indictment, and not the former? To conclude, If Dr. H. knew any thing, six
years ago, of P's maintaining these Three Propositions, why did he then conceal
it? And if he knew nothing of it, how could he expel him for it?

I have, I hope, sufficiently vindicated P. from the misrepresentations of this
Author; and I think I need say no more about it; but I have not yet done with
the Author himself: I find him a peevish Man, and I Am unwilling to leave him as
I find him, and therefore I Will try, if I can, to put him into good humor. And
because there is nothing he seems to like more than his Passive-Obedience, or
Non-resistance (tho I am apt to think, he likes it somewhat less in this, than
he did in the former Reign) I will, to please him, give it under my hand, That
if he will still be for his Passive-Obedience in the present Reign, I will not
oppose him; (and it may be I may get Mr. Johnson to subscribe the same) not
that I think it a true Doctine any more now, than 'twas in the two late Reigns,
but because I am persuaded that it is now become innocent, and will do no harm;
for a Doctrine can do no harm when it is not believed: and neither King nor
people will believe this Doctrine any longer. The late King James had
sufficient experience of this Principle of Passive Obedience to his cost; and
our present King is more Wise, and more Just, than to make trial of it: And the
people, I tro, will never more be fond of a Doctrine that renders their beings
uncomfortable in this World, since their Spi^itual Pastors are now of opinion,
that they may get to Heaven without it. And, God be thanked, we are like to
hear this Doctrine from the Pulpits no more; for they that have sworn
Allegiance to King William, cannot with any Grace Preach up a Doctrine that
directly tends to dethrone him, by condemning all those that invited him
hither, and assisted him here, and set the Crown on his head: And they who have
not sworn, and will not swear Allegiance to him, are never like to have any
Pulpits to Preach in; unless the King and Parliament should, by an Act of
Grace, think fit to indulge those, who declare themselves enemies to the
present Constitution. So that, as far as I can see, this Doctrine of
Passive-Obedience, and Non-resistance, must take shelter in Conventicles; (I
mean new and upstart Conventicles; for the old ones, I believe, will not
receive it, unless one can imagine that they like it any whit the better,
because it now brings a testimonial from a late dying Bishop): This Doctrine, I
say, however it be thought by some to be the Characteristick of the Church of
England, must creep into private Meetings, and be Preached up in a Tub; And I
hope that both Preachers and Hearers of this Doctrine will be few, and (a
temper being speedily found out to reconcile the Dissenters to our Church) the
only Conventiclers in the Nation.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for Richard Baldwin.
THE History of Most Illustrious William, Prince of Orange: Deduced from the
first Founders of the Ancient House of Nassau: Together with the most
considerable Actions of this present Prince. The Second Edition. A Collection
of Fourteen Papers, Relating to the Affiairs of Church and State, in the Reign
of the late King James. The Character of a Trimmer. His Opinion of I. The Laws
and Government. II. Protestant Religion. III. The Papists. IV. Foreign Affairs.
By the Honorable Sir W. Conventry. The Third Edition, carefully Corrected, and
cleared from the Errors of the first Impression. An Impartial, Relation of the
Illegal Proceedings against St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxon, in the Year of
our Lord 1687. Containing only Matters of Fact as they occurred. The Second
Edition. To which is added the most Remarkable Passages, omitted in the former,
by reason of the Severity of the Press. Collected by a Fellow of the said
College.

