A Particular ACCOUNT OF THE Defeat of the Rebbels At WISBICH in the Isle of
Ely.
By His Majesty's Forces yesterday Morning, with the number of the Captains,
Lieutenants, Ensigns, etc. taken Prisoners, with their Cannon and Ammunition,
etc.
SUch was the Villainy of a great part of this Rebellious Regiment (late the
Lord Dunbarton's) that notwithstanding his Majesty's Princely Care, in sending
them 1300 Guineas for Advance Money, and to pay off their Arrears, and the
great Civility showed them by their Colonel and other Officers, nothing could
take them off from their intended Revolt and Rebellion, the manner of which an
Account has been already given, and since our last they continued in a Body,
taking their Way toward Cambridgeshire, to endeavor to get into the Northern
Road; but as they began their March, one of the Ammunition Wagons with Powder,
blew up, killed One, and hurt some others. The First Night they reached Stow
Market, and lay in the Church: But his Majesty having an immediate Account of
this their rebellious Proceedings, forthwith dispatched Three Regiments of
Horse, and one of Dragoons, with Instructions, if they refused to surrender at
Discretion, to fall on and reduce them by Force, who were so expeditious in the
Undertaking, that on Tuesday Evening they arrived at St. Ives, and there
understanding, that they were marched from Mildenhall and retired to Wisbich in
the Isle of Ely; Count Solmes, Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Forces, sent
Marshal Schomberg an Express, That he was advanced within some few Miles of the
Rebels; which, tho they had got themselves into a Fastness almost impassible
for Horse, being a Fenny Conntry; and had planted their Cannon upon a Causeway,
where they must approach, yet he was resolved the next Morning to attack them
in their Post: And briskly advaneing upon them, some of their Hearts began to
fail, and were desirous to Surtender, upon whom they held a Council of War, and
hanged, as it is said, about Fourteen or Fifteen of their Companions: And being
pressed by the King's Forces, and and not judging that Place of sufficient
Security, they retreated to the Town of Sleeford, where being surrounded, and
Fire being ready to be given, upon them, they sent forth their Commander, with
his Cravat about his Neck, Halter-wise, who Submitted entirely to the Mercy of
the King, forthwith laying down their Arms, surrendering themselves into their
Custody, which Account Colonel Lang stone sent Express this Morning to
Whitehall. Six Captains, Eight Lieutenants, and Seven Ensigns, who are all in
Prison, and His Majesty's Pleasure to know how they should be proceeded
against: And we hear that some among them offers to Discover who were Advisers
of this Mischievous Project to Embarras the King's Aflairs.

Printed for Richard Wier, at the Swan in Bishopsgate-street.


