A Particular Account of a Terrible and Bloody ENGAGEMENT BETWEEN THE English
and French Fleet, IN THE BAY of BANTRY On the IRISH Coast.
With an Exact List of the Damage sustained, and those Slain and Wounded on
both sides.
AFter all the many False and Incoherent Relations we have lately received both
of the English and French Squadrons, there being those who purposely give out
their Shams, that the Reality may not be credited, we received an authentic
Relation brought to the Court by Captain Elmore Commander of the Edgar, who was
present in the Engagement, which is to this Effect.

That Admiral Herbert Riding with about 18 of His Majesty's Men of War in
Milford-Haven, having received Intelligence that the French Fleet was about
Sailing from Breast, the Close of last Month weighed Anchor, and made for the
French Coast. Likewise being informed that the day before a Squadron of French
Ships, composing 28 Men of War, 7 Fireships, besides Vessels of Burden, were
sailed out of Breast, having some Landmen on Board, stood after them with all
the Sail he could make, and the Day after got sight of them. But the Night
coming on, the French, not thinking it safe for them to Engage, altered their
Course from putting into King sail, and steered to the most Westerly part of
Ireland, and got into the Bay of Bantry, where they made all the Expedition
they could to unship their Men, which some will have to be 3000 English,
Scotch, Irish and French. And Admiral Herbert reaching the said Bay about
May Day in the Morning, gave the French all the Provocations possible to come
forth and Engage him; which they, notwithstanding they were almost double the
Number, would not adventure to come forth. Upon which, the Courage of the
English Seamen was such, That they would adventure to Fight, tho upon great
Disadvantage. And thereupon the Admiral bore into the Bay with what Ships he
could, which were not above Nine, and Encountered the whole Squadron of the
French for about Seven hours; and never was greater Valor shown than upon this
Occasion.

The Admiral finding that it was impossible either to bring his Fleet to bear
upon them, or get them out of Harbor, contented himself, at present, with the
Damage he has done them, which is very Considerable, tho not as yet
particularly known: And bringing off Two Ships that were somewhat disabled in
the Fight, has sent them to Portsmouth to Re-fit, while he stays with the rest
of the Fleet to block them in; and it is hoped, that so soon as he can be joined
with some other Men of War, to give a very good Account of them. The Loss on
our Side is only Capt. George Elmore, Brother to the Captain who brought the
Account to the King, with a Lieutenant, and about 150 Seamen. And, it is
believed, the French have lost Treble the Number, with one of their Ships sunk
in the Fight. But we shall have a particular Account of this great Action in
few days published at large.

Licensed, May 8. 1689.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. 1689.


