A SERMON Preached before THE Lord Bishop OF CHICHESTER AT JEWS, At his First
VISITATION there.

By TIMOTHY PARKER Rector of East-Hothley in Sussex.

IMPRIMATVR,

27. April 1676. Georg. Hooper Reverend. Dom. Archiep. Cant. a Sacris
Domesticis.



LONDON, Printed for John Baker at the Three Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1676.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD RALPH, BY DIVINE PERMISSION, Lord Bishop
OF CHICHESTER.
My Lord,
YOur Lordship's favorable acceptance of this following Sermon, and Commanding
it to be Printed (for such force Your desire carries with me) have at length
made me adventure to present it to Your Lordship's View, with hope, that what
upon hearing had Your approbation, will upon sight pass however for allowable.

After Your Lordship's declaring in favor of it, I am little concerned what
Reception 'twill find abroad, believing with some reason that what such a
Judgment disapproves not, can not easily displease the Good and Heartily
Judicious, and it is the good opinion of such only I have value for. If some few
of my Brethren, by the Perusal of this plain Discourse, may be in the least
measure aided toward making themselves and others Better, I have my end in it.

To contribute the best I was able, to excite a greater sense of Religion
amongst us, by animating the Ministers of it to display its Beauty in their
Lives, as well as their Discourses, was the Des^gn I proposed to my self. And
what ever the Success be, I have the satisfaction that I did not take my aim
amiss, and how unproportionable soever the means be I used; the defect was not
from any want of Good will to lend the best assistance I was able; Prompted
thereunto by a Spark of that Zeal for the success and prevalency of true
Christian Piety against the Licentiousness of this present Age, that glows in
the Hearts of all good men, and that Your Lordship in Particular is all on fire
with. This my Lord it is that makes You Venerable, this gains You the Hearts of
all good men, makes You awful to the bad. This will make You a Public Blessing
whilst You live, Embalm Your Memory when dead? Nay, make You live after Death
on Earth, in the Hearts and Memories of all good men that knew You, in Heaven
in the Joys of our Lord. That God would long preserve Your Lordship for the
Benefit of his Church, and make all Your Endeavors for its Prosperity
eminently successful, is the Hearty Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble, And Dutiful Servant, Timothy Parker.

MATTHEW 5.16. Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your good
Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
THe greatest and most important Enquiry that ever was in the World, was that
of the Psalmist, Who will show us any Good? Who will discover to us wherein
true Blessedness lies, and by what ways and means we may be able to obtain it?
An Enquiry that every man is highly concerned to be satisfied in, from that
common Principle of Nature that inclines every thing to seek its own
Preservation and Wellbeing: But such Darkness had man's Apostasy brought upon
his mind, that he was utterly at loss how to arrive at any satisfaction in this
Search, as by the great variety of differing Opinions about man's chiefest good
sufficiently appears. Sad and deplorable was the condition of the World,
plunged in misery, and lost as to all Remedy within Nature's ken and reach,
when our blessed Savior, the true light of the World, came from Heaven, on
purpose to discover that happiness that mankind was groping after in the dark,
and to this end communicated his light to those that were his first Hearers,
not only to guide their own feet in the paths of peace, but that they by the
light of their Doctrine, and good example, might illuminate a dark World,
disperse the beams of saving truth from one end of the Heavens to the other,
and by propagating it to their Successors, make such a comfortable day to those
Nations that had long sat in darkness, and the shadow of death, as should
know no night to the worlds end: And to this purpose he enjoins them here in
the Text; Let your Light so shine, etc.

Which words, whether they were spoken to the promiscuous multitude of the
Disciples, or appropriated to those that were to be the Stewards and Dispensers
of the Gospel Mystery, is disputed amongst Interpreters, nor need it be
determined by me. It Is sufficient for my present purpose, that though the
Charge here given belong not solely to the Apostles and their Successors, yet
it casts a peculiar aspect upon them, it takes faster hold of them by an
accession of peculiar ties, and binds them to its obedience in a higher and
more improved sense: And that is sufficient to warrant my addressing a Discourse
to my Brethren of the Clergy from these words: In which as they have a peculiar
regard to them, they contain a duty enjoined, with a reason enforcing it; and
in the duty enjoined these three things. 1. A knowledge of the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and that such a knowledge as may enable us to instruct others. 2. A
vigorous endeavor to propagate our light, and to communicate this wholesome
knowledge to others. 3. A life conformable to this Doctrine. Of these in their
order, beginning with the first.

1. A knowledge of the Gospel Mysteries, and that such a knowledge as may
enable us to instruct others in them. The great end why the Gospel Ministry was
set up, was to turn sinners from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to
God, and the chains wherewith the Devil holds men in captivity are chains of
darkness. They are altenated from the life of God through the darkness that is
in them. All the affairs of this dark Kingdom are carried on by Falsehood and
Imposture. All the Sophisticate Wares that he obtrudes upon men, for which he
gains their souls in exchange, are put off by the advantage of darkness and
obscurity; hence sinners and fools are terms convertible in Scripture, and
(...), that all sins in some sense are sins of Ignorance is good Divinity. The
Devil deals with sinners as Elisha with the Syrians, first smites them with
blindness, and then leads them captive at his pleasure; as the Philistims with
Sampson, first bores their eyes out, and then they are fit for his drudgery.
Twould spoil the Merchants of Hell to have their Merchandise seen by a true
light: And consequently he that would be instrumental to rescue sinners from
under the Prince of darkness, must be furnished with an excellent knowledge,
with a clear and bright understanding, able to represent things in their true
colors; the beauty of holiness and the deformity of fin, both stripped of those
disguises the Devil puts upon them to make the one lovely, and the other hated.
A little knowledge with an honest heart may qualify an ordinary Christian for
Heaven: But it is no small scantling of knowledge will qualify a man to
undertake ex officio, the charge of conducting others thither: It Is sufficient
for an ordinary Christian to know his own duty, his own weaknesses, his own
temptations; but he that has the care of others souls, must know what duty
belongs to them in their different Stations; What temptations their various
conditions are assaulted with, and what Weapon; are proper to repulse them,
what dangers they are exposed to, and what remedies are to be provided against
them. The World is a Hospital of diseased souls, laboring under variety of
spiritual distempers, that call for the compassionate skill of the spiritual
Physician; who should know what remedies to apply to their different maladies,
and have them always in a readiness: How to address against Pride in the
Ambitious, Covetousness in the Mammonist, Cruelty in the Oppressor, Craft and
Overreaching in the Fraudulent, Error, Prejudice, and Misperswasion in many a
wellmeaning but deluded soul: How to convince the obstinate, and silence the
gainsayer, to satisfy the scrupulous, and confirm the weak; to encourage the
timorous, and alarm the drowsy; to make Hypocrisy let fa^l her Vizard, Vain
Glory her Plumes, and prefumption her delusive hopes; to make the stubborn
ungovernable spirits of men to understand the ^^auty and benefit of Government.
His lips should preserve knowledge, that when he speaks it may be as the
Oracles of God, suitable to the occasion, evident to the understanding,
forcible on the affections; otherwise he will never approve himself a workman
that needs not be ashamed. He must have milk for babes, and stronger meat for
grown Christians; be able to acquaint them with the beauty of God's Works, the
Impressions of Power, Wisdom, Goodness that he has stamped on all his
Creatures, to which an inspection into the Works of Nature is requisite. To
make them see the Beauty of Providence, the watchful care that God has
exercised over his Church in all Ages; to which the knowledge of Church History
and Antiquities is necessary. Above all to make them understand in some good
measure (...), the wonders of love and mercy, wisdom and goodness displayed in
the Work of our Redemption; which cannot be well done without great study, and
serious application of mind to find out the meaning of the Holy Ghost in
Scripture, which is the only Authentic Volume in the World where the
knowledge of these wonders is recorded. To a true understanding whereof a great
variety of other knowledge in Languages, Antiquities, Customs of the Eastern
Nations, lend a very good assistance.

I might speak my self out of breath, before I could give a summary of those
things the man of God ought to be instructed in, before he be competently
furnished for the management of his important Charge. The Physician of souls
should be well versed in Soul Anatomy, know how to govern the Passions of men;
what is proper to raise, allay, and moderate them; for he can never well govern
the lives of men, that does not in some measure hold the reigns of their
affections in his hands. So difficult and important is the Ministerial Charge,
that the Father had reason to say 'twas a work Angelorum humeris formidandum,
and not to be managed by every trifling undertaker. So sensible was the great
Apostle of the weightiness of it, though endowed with extraordinary abilities
from Heaven, that he cries out, (...); Who is sufficient for these things! How
much then does it concern us, upon whom these ministerial abilities are not
conferred but by God's blessing upon our own industry implored by earnest
prayer, to study, pray, read, meditate, that we may be enabled to discharge our
Function; so, that we may not be ashamed of our workmanship, that God and our
consciences may approve of us, that others may receive benefit, and we find
favor and acceptance in the day of righteous retributions.

2. A second thing included in this Charge, as it casts a peculiar aspect upon
the Ministers of the Gospel, is a vigorous endeavor to communicate our light,
and to impart this saving knowledge to others, which is done by instructing
their Ignorance, and awakening their consideration. First, by instructing their
Ignorance, addressing to their Understandings, illightning the minds of men to
make a right judgment of things. The Understanding, which is the leading
faculty of the soul must first be enlightened, before the will which is the
principle of action can embrace what is good and avoid what is evil. What ever
the grace of God does in renewing the minds of men, it does it by first
irradiating the Understanding; And the Ministers of the Gospel, who are
subworkers to Grace, must proceed in the same method. Light was the first in
the Old Creation, when the rude mass of being began to put on Beauty, and it is
the first in the new Creation, when Christ is formed in the soul. This
therefore must be his first work, and business to bring them to a right
understanding, to restore them to their right minds. But he must not think it
enough to convey truth into their understandings and leave it there, but he
must work it upon their affections by awakening their consideration, by all the
forcible motives of persuasion, by all the arts of wise and prudent
insinuation, forcing all the passions and affections within men to engage on
the side of truth, to print it the deeper in their minds. Sometimes awakening
their fears by representing the terrors of the Lord, sometimes animating their
Hopes, by showing them the recompense of the Righteous. He must never give them
over till the truth is rooted in their souls, and till the fruits of piety
appear in their lives. No nor then neither, but still he must be watering the
tender plants, still cherishing all good beginnings, the first sproutings of
piety, and encouraging small proficients to greater growth, the good
proficients to aspire after perfection, till Grace ripen into Glory, and all
the Runners in this Race, all the Combatants in this Warefare have got the
Crowns on their Heads, and the Palms of Victory in their Hands. Never
forgetting all the while to beg of God, who alone gives the increase to Paul's
planting and Apollo's watering, to crown his endeavors with success. And to
excite himself hereto such considerations will be useful.

1. That this is the end for which all Ministerial abilities were bestowed,
Ephs. 4.11, 12. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers; For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ. All these several
Orders of Ecclesiastical Persons, and all variety of gifts that qualify for
the discharge of their several Functions, were for the benefit of the Church of
God. And no Talents shall be more severely accounted for than those given for
this use. The very bestowing them is an exaction of duty, the receiving them
like that of Press-money, an engagement to service and employment. If we let
these Treasures lie by and rust, the very rust of them will witness against us.

2. It Is the best testimony of our love, the greatest proof of our fidelity to
our Lord and Master. That great lover of Souls has entrusted many of them to
our care, and in them the worth of many Worlds is deposited in our hands.
Whether they shall live Eternal Ages in Joys, too big for Mortal thoughts to
conceive, or die the Devil's Slaves, and partake his torments, depends in great
measure upon our care in instructing them. What value our Savior puts upon
them is best understood by the price he paid for them, they were redeemed with
the blood of God; and by his passionate recommending them to the care of those
whom he appointed their Guides and Instructors. Simon Son of Jonah love thou
me? Feed my Sheep. And again, and a third time, love thou me? Feed my Sheep,
feed my Lambs. If we have any affection for that Savior of ours to whom we owe
our present valuable enjoyments, and all our future hopes; if any compassion
for those souls which are the purchase of his blood, if any regard of that
important trust that must be accounted for with greatest severity, we cannot
but bend all the Forces and Powers of our Souls to the discharge of it, and
apply our selves to it with greatest cheerfulness and alacrity in testimony of
the great honor he has put upon us: For

3. It is the Noblest employment in the World. A work of the greatest Charity,
and Charity is the work of Heaven. The greatest object of compassion in the
World are the souls of men blinded by Ignorance, enslaved to lust, in bondage
to the Devil; and the greatest labor of Love is that that is undergone to
rescue them out of that captivity. To cloth naked backs, and feed empty
bowels, and redeem miserable Captives from the thraldom of merciless Tyrants,
is a charity that God accepts, and highly rewards. But to cloth the nakedness
of men's understandings by making them wise to salvation, to feed poor
hunger-starved souls with the bread of life, to break off the Devil's fetters,
and redeem them from hellish tyranny, is a charity as much more noble, as
Eternity exceeds Time, as the Souls of men are of more worth than their Bodies.
It Is a Work that rejoices Heaven, causes Joy amongst the Angels. Those Blessed
Spirits keep, (as it were) a Festival upon the day of a sinner's Newbirth. And
shall a work applauded by all the Inhabitants of Heaven be managed with
coldness and indifferency, with faint and languishing endeavors. There Is
nothing makes men more Godlike than becoming great and public Benefactors; and
none are more Eminently so, than they that are instrumental to turn many souls
to Righteousness. He that has any sense of true Godliness in his heart, cannot
but think it one of the greatest blessings God can bestow upon him, to make him
an instrument of deriving blessings upon a Multitude: Much more, blessings of
that importance that do men good for ever, blessings that fit and prepare men
for Heaven, that shall be everlastingly remembered there with eternal
Hallelujahs to God the Author, and eternal acknowledgments to men the
instruments. For it is not to be supposed Ingratitude, a Vice so detestible on
Earth, should ever find any place in Heaven.

4. This will be a very great evidence of our own sin cericy. It Is the nature,
the true Indoles of true Piety, wherever it is, to spread and dilate it self.
All good is communicative, and the better any thing is, the more diffusive.
Piety enlarges the hearts of men to espouse the Interest of all mankind; it is a
daily prompter to good and worthy actions, whereby others may be advantaged; an
active, restless Principle that can no more cease from benefitting all that
come within its reach, than fire can cease from burning, or a spring from
streaming forth. The love of God and man are the Elements of its Nature. Above
all, it makes men painful and industrious in their Callings, faithful in their
own places and stations. Since then God has made it our business and
employment in the World to communicate the knowledge of himself and his Christ
to men, to direct them in the Paths that lead to eternal happiness; We cannot
have a better evidence that we are partakers of the Divine Nature, than by
imitating the Divine Goodness in employing those Talents he has bestowed upon
us, to the use for which he designed them. Our own Sonship will be best made
out by our resemblance to our Heavenly Father, and Almighty goodness is that
Character that most readily offers it self to the minds of men, when they would
srame an Idea of God within themselves.

5. The faithful performance of this duty is recompensed with an ample and
Superlative reward, Every Soul that we are instrumental to bring to Heaven will
add a new luster to our Crown, Dan. 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the
Start for ever and ever, or if that place be capable of another meaning that of
our Savior will put it out of doubt, He that receives a Prophet in the name of
a Prophet shall receive a Prophet's neward. Where if a Prophet's reward did not
in port something extraordinary and transcendent, there would be nothing of
encouragement and enforcement to the duty. And if we had not this assurance of
a Divine Promise, it might be strongly argued from that natural influence the
happiness we are instrumental to procure for other, will have upon our own. To
be instrumental to bring Souls to Heaven, to add new Members to the Church
Triumphant, is to provide so many everlasting Monuments of our pious care and
pains, whose Joys will all unite and center upon us, we looking upon them but
as our selves divided, Children begotten by us to God, with whom we traveled in
pain, till Christ was formed in them. Besides, God who in justice punishes the
Accessory, as well as the Principal in evil deeds, will be more inclinable to
reward in us that good, that others do by our counsel, persuasion and
direction, by how much he is more prone to show mercy, in which he delights,
than to afflict the children of men, which he does unwillingly. And what an
encouragement is this to labor in the Lord's Harvest, to spend our selves for
the good of our Flocks, when every soul that we are instrumental to save from
death, will bring such an accumulation to our Joys, and add a new Coronet to
our Crown.

3. A third thing in this Charge, is a Life conformable to the Doctrine of the
Gospel. Not to mention the obligations common to us with the rest of
Christians, there are several considerations peculiar to us as Ministers of the
Gospel, that enforce the strictest conformity to the Laws thereof.

1. Whereas other men, by the urgency and exigence of their secular
employments, have their thoughts often called off from attending the Concerns
of Eternity; Our very office and employment in this World confines our thoughts
to the things of another. It is the happy Privilege of men of our Order that
their general calling as Christians, and more special as Ministers, do in a
manner coincidere, fall into one, at least they hold an intimate
correspondence, and lend a friendly assistance to each other. Those larger
portions of time that others are generally obliged to bestow upon employments
secular, we are engaged to spend in such, as promore our own and others
salvation. And if the want of consideration occasion most men's neglect of the
Gospel (as it is certain it does.) It is but just and reasonable to expect that
they whose office obliges them to give themselves wholly to the meditation and
practice of divine things, who are Juris Evangelici consulti, should live most
exactly answerable to the Gospel Law. Abeunt studia in Mores, said the Orator,
men's studies have an influence upon their morals. Both God and men then will
expect that they whose sole employment it is to regulate their own and others
Lives according to the admirable Rules of Christian Religion should walk
suteably to their profession. Especially being provided for in temporals almost
without their care, that they may with less distraction attend the affairs of a
higher nature. They should endeavor to escape not only Vitia, but infirma
Naturae, the common frailties incident to humanity, and approach as near as
possible to perfection of Angels, whom they so nearly resemble in employment,
they being ministering spirits sent forth for the good of those who shall be
heirs of Salvation. What greater indecency can there be, than for men that
converse frequently with holy things, and toss them often in their thoughts to
have no sense and relish of them upon their hearts? To meditate upon the love
of God and Christ, to be able to tell affectionate and melting stories of it to
others, and that possibly with a seeming transport of affection, and yet to
freez by this fire; to have the passage betwixt the head and heart so
obstructed, that not a spark of truth that enlightens the understanding can get
into the heart, and warm it with such a love as is the spring of obedience, is
such a Devil's Miracle as vies with that of Almighty God, who preserved the
three Children from all smell of fire in the midst of a fiery Furnace. That
men, who can discover to others the Reasonableness, the Necessity, the Beauty
of Religion, should neither be prevailed upon by the Reason, nor constrained by
the Necessity, nor charmed with the Beaury of it, is the most unaccountable
thing in the World. What will they be able to answer to God, to their own
Consciences, when their own Reasonings, Discourses, Sermons will rise up in
Judgment against them? What will they do in the day of Visitation, when the
great Bishop of their Souls will call them to account for their scandalous and
unchristian Lives, so dissonant to the Principles of that holy Doctrine they
pretend to be the Teachers of?

2. The great influence of our Examples in ^tramque partem may be another
consideration. A little to change my Author's words, Eo sumus loco constituti,
ut bona malaque nostra ad Rempublicam pertineant. We can neither go to Heaven,
nor Hell solitary. I mean, we cannot go to either of those so distant places,
but in all probability others will attend as drawn by the Influence of our
Examples.

First, Our Holy and Exemplary Lives will render our Labors more succesful,
add Authority and Veneration to our Persons, weight to our words, make them
(...), (as he said of Epectetus) effectual prevailing words. 'Twill put an edge
upon our reproofs, facilitate their entrance, promote their efficacy, be a
means to drive them home. The words of God in our mouths are more likely to
become (...) living Oracles, the Seed of a New Birth. Not but that the Seed may
prosper what ever the hand be that sows it. It Is God's blessing gives the
increase, and that depends not on the qualification of the Instrument: But yet
it is most usually found attending upon the endeavors of good men. Our Savior
himself (I think I may say) would not have been thought to have spoke as never
man spoke, if he had not lived as never man lived. With what irresistible
Authority did he check the sins of others, when he ushered in his reproofs of
them with his appeal to themselves touching his own innocence? Which of you
convinces me of sin? Christian Religion is admirable in the Divinity of its
Author, in the Purity of its Precepts, in the excellency of its end, in the
mightiness of its aids; but its Beauty is never seen to advantage till it
become visible in men's lives. Then it most charms the affections of men,
recommends it self to their esteem and approbation, when it subdues Lust and
governs Passions, and adorns the Conversation. When it makes men meek and
merciful, pure and peaceable, humble and resigned, watchful to lay hold of, and
improve all opportunities to do good. When to a great measure of knowledge
these qualifications unite in the same Person, his Doctrine distills as the
rain, winds it self into the hearts of men, insinuates into their affections,
takes fast hold of their souls. Besides the blessing that attends upon a good
man that renders his endeavors successful, there is a natural aptness in his
words to work an Impression on his Hearers. His own soul having the stamp of
truth upon it, being cast into the mold of it, and touched with a sense of its
importance, and a tender love and compassion to the Souls of men, will oblige
himself to press it home with that unaffected gravity and seriousness, that his
very heart will discover it self in his Language, he will give you a raste of
his soul in his Discourse. His words come from the heart, and are most likely
to reach the hearts of others, they proceed from a living Principle, and are
most likely to beget life in his Hearers. Even Seneca would advise his Friend
Lucilius to make use of such Instructors. Qui vita. docent, qui cum dixerint
quid faciendum sit, faciendo, probant; qui docent quid vitandum sit, nee unquam
in eo quod fugiendum dixerint deprehenduntur; quos magis admireris, cum
videris, quam cum audieris. A good Life with him was beyond all Topics of
Persuasions.

Secondly, Our ill Examples have a malignant influence, and scatter infection
far and wide, will give Authority to Vice, and furnish it with excuse and
apology. If the Salt of the earth lose its savor, rotteuness and putrefaction
will cover the face of it. Two things make wickedness bold and daring, and
overflow beyond all measure, when it is either established by a Law, or
encouraged by leading examples. It Is observable all along that the greatest
symptoms of decaying piety were legible in the vicious lives of a depraved
Clergy. And the best Prognostics of the future growth of Religion is, when it
not only tipps the Tongues, but lives in the Hearts, adorns the Conversations,
and regulates all the Actions of its Ministers. So that Cato's definition of an
Orator, Vir bonus dicendi peritus, is a more necessary ingredient into a
Preacher's. For with what decency and congruity can he be severe in reproving
the faults of others, who is indulgent and favorable to his ow^? Quid enim
turpius quam ab aliis vitae rationem reposcere, quam tuae non potes reddere?
All severity of this nature must begin at home. In all probability he will wink
at those vices in others which he allows in himself, spare to strike at the
root of those sins where every blow he gives lights upon himself. For with what
face can he control the vices of others, whose reproofs rebound upon himself
and fly in his own Face? With what likelihood of success can he attempt to
shame men out of their sins, who by his own example brings sin into credit?
Will those Remedies he tenders to others be accepted and esteemed by them, when
it is apparent he either never used them, or if he did found them ineffectual?
Physician, cure thy self, will be retorted to his shame. For a Demas to declaim
against Covetousness a Diotrephes against Pride and Contention, a Judas against
Treachery, a Hophni and Phineas against lust and intemperance, a conceited
Pharisee against Hypocrisy, is but to do public Penance every time he gets
into the Pulpit, to light up a torch to expose his own shame by, to proclaim
himself a wilful, hardened, self-condemned sinner, to render himself a miserable
and sad spectacle to good men, but the scorn and mirth of fools. To what end
serves the Ministry but to persuade people to conform their Hearts and Lives to
the laws and example of the holy Jesus? And what more effectual course can we
take to render all our endeavors insuccesful, than to shame our own profession
by an unsuitable Conversation, to violate those Laws we should enforce obedience
to, to confute our holy Doctrine by a lewd practice? Little credit is given to
him who frequently contradicts himself, and no contradiction so injurious to a
holy Doctrine as an unholy life. Quid verbis opus est cum facta videam, is but
too usual a Plea though very unwarrantable whereby men shift off the
obligations pressed upon them by those who break loose from all the ties of duty
themselves. Sin reflects contempt upon every thing it meddles with, makes not
only the persons of men despised, but their useful Counsels, their wholesome
Reproofs, their best and most convincing Arguments lose their value and esteem,
as coming from them. Which the Spartan Senators well understood, when a
worthless person having mentioned something useful to the Public, they voted
it should be anew propounded by some Person of Worth and Integrity, and then
put in execution.

3. Conformity of life to the Laws of our Religion is the ready way to obtain
that skill in the Mysteries of Christianity that will render us abl^ Ministers
of the New Testament. Christianity is a Doctrine according to Godliness, and
the honest heart is the best qualification in the learner. A mystery of
Godliness, and Piety is the best Key to the Mystery. Such a wisdom as begins in
the fear of the Lord, increases by doing good, and departing from Iniquity,
ends in the Beatifical Vision. Our understandings are enlightened in this
Mystery by the same degrees that our hearts are purified, till at length when
all sin is purged out, we shall be admitted to the sight of God, who is the
Author and the end of our Religion, whither it leads us by sanctification of
the spirit, and belief of the truth. Christianity is not Ostentatio scientiae,
but le^ vitae, and whosoever does not conform his life to its rules, will be
very short sighted in its Mysteries, Error in Judgment is the natural issue of
a pollured heart, it is a people that do err in their hearts. If the Judgment
continue Orthodox with an unchristian practice, it is so by mere contingency. He
has no security to be preserved from dangerous ertour, who does not guard
himself from wilful sins; it being too usual to make shipwreck of faith and a
good conscience both together. Whereas he, who uses the best means of
information, and does his duty to the best of his knowledge and ability, has
the greatest security imaginable he shall not our dangerously. The secrets of
the Lord are with them that sear him^ A good understanding have they that do
thereafter. The lamp of knowledge is fed with the oil of ^iety, as this
increases or decreases, that waxes brighter or dimmer; if this be not preserved
that will be in danger to be extinguished, at best it will cast but a faint and
languishing light, like the sepulchral lamps of the Ancients that were
imprisoned in a dark Vault, and lent only a wan, pale light to a dead Carcass.
It Is only by doing good and eschewing evil that we come to have our senses
exercised to discern betwixt the one and the other. There is a spiritual
sensation in the soul of man that sees a Beauty, and relishes a sweetness in
all the acts enjoined by Religion, that lies asleep, unless by an active and
vigourous prosecution of our duty it be exercised and stirred up.

4. I add fourthly the consideration of the Person whom we represent, the
Person of the Son of God, the Great High Priest of our profession, who was
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. A Person that never trod one
step awry. A Divine pattern of holiness and purity, humility and charity. His
whole life was a paraphrase of this Sermon upon the Mount: All his Actions,
Motions, whole Behavior were exemplary and instructing. We bless the people in
his Name, offer up their prayers to God in his Name, beseech people in his
stead to be reconciled to God. How necessary is it those hands should be
cleansed from all pollution, that are lift up to a holy God, in the Name of the
Holy Jesus, in the behalf of a people that he purified to himself to be a
peculiar people zealous of good works? How incongruous and misbecoming is it,
that the Ambassadors of the Son of God, who came into the World to destroy the
works of the Devil, should be addicted to any of those which their Lord and
Master came to destroy, that they who are Agents for the Prince of peace,
should be of quarrelsome and contentious spirits; that they, whom he has set
apart to draw others to a conformity to his Laws and great example, should
violate and trample upon his Laws, and represent his example so ill as if he
were a Patron and Advocate of Impiety?

I might add lastly (as deserving our consideration) that we cannot be wicked
without being more inexcusable than other sinners, whether we know more or less
than they. If we know more, and do as ill our stripes will be multiplied
proportionably to the greatness of our Knowledge. If we know as little, and
live as wickedly, the greater obligations and opportunities of knowing better,
will be put upon our accounts. The Devils who fell from Heaven, fell deepest
into Hell; and they who fall from Heaven Gates, from the greatest advantages of
knowing and living well, will be next to them in Torments.

I am sensible what misconstruction may be put upon my honest meaning, and that
this pressing the Ministry to the regard of purity, may by some be interpreted
Reproach and Libelling. But to this I shall only say, that they who have the
thousand witnesses to attest the truth of their sincerity, may with joy and
exultation of spirit, turn admonition to Panegyric. And I hope there is a
great number of such here, who the less they have to reform, the more they have
for which to rejoice and to bless God. And for those whose hearts smite them,
may they continue so to do till repentance and amendment follow. We must please
all men for their edification, and for their edification we must displease them
too. 'Twas a good wish that of Bernard's, Sic mihi contingat semper bear
amicos, terrendo salubriter, non adulando fallaciter. Let us not think that our
faults can escape Notice, the publickness of our station, the nature of our
employment will not suffer it. We are a Spectacle to Angels and men; the eyes
of Friends and Enemies are upon us; these watch for our halting, those eye us
as their patterns. Let us not become a scorn to the one, nor a grief to the
other, nor lay a stumbling block in the way of either. Let us be content to
hear out Duties pressed upon us by our Friends, who do it in love and compassion
to our souls; or rather let not that content us, but let us proceed to
extirpate and abandon all our Vices. This is the most effectual course we can
take to make all men good, and to make the hearts of all good men bless God for
us, to gain our enemies, and force them to become our friends. God will not
fa^l ^a make that Promise good to us, wherein to Christians in general he has
obliged himself: If a man's ways please the Lord he will make his Enemies to
be at Peace with him.

I proceed now to the latter part of my Text, the Reason enforcing the Charge
here given; That they may see your Good Works, and Glorify your Father which
is in Heaven. That they may see your Good Works. We must take heed we stop not
there, for if our Aims be short of Heaven, our Reward will be on this side
Heaven too. The most specious and glorious works if done only to be seen of
men, will find a Hell for their Reward in stead of an Heaven. But though a Good
Naice may not be our last end, yet as it is subservient to the Glory of God, as
it renders us more useful to the World, and puts us into a greater Capacity of
doing good, it is to be accounted one of God's Choicest Blessings, to be
received with thanks, preserved with care, and procured by all warrantable
means. Of all men a Minister ought to be most tender of it, since the Credit of
his Person credits the Cause he manages, and it is natural for Contempt to pass
from the former to the latter. If men entertain a low and mean opinion of the
Speaker, they will disesteem the things he speaks, slight his Doctrine, reject his
Counsels, scorn his Reproofs, never counsult him in Doubtful Cases, and (to the
Hazard of their Souls) neglect that necessary assistance that otherwise they
might receive from him: And therefore Saint Paul thought it no misbecoming
thing to wipe off those Aspersions cast on him by the Factious Teachers in the
Church of Corinth. Indeed, it is sometimes so far from being a fault that it
becomes a piece of Necessary Justice that we owe to our selves, to vindicate
our Names from Slander and Reproach. It Is one way of resisting the Devil, whose
very name carries Slander in it, and one of whose greatest Stratagems, to
obstruct the progress of Religion, is to blast the Reputation of its Ministers,
and bring both their Persons and Office into disgrace. And I could wish they
would take notice of this, who any ways contribute to bring a disrepute upon
the Clergy, that they only promote the interest of Hell, lend their assistance
to the Devil, and help to uphold by this means his otherwise tottering Kingdom.

But after all, a Good Name is best secured by the same Method our Eternal
Salvation is. That patient continuance in well-doing whereby we seek for Glory,
Honor, Immortality hereafter, will secure us such a measure of esteem here, as
God sees needful for us. Let us be but careful to discharge our Duty, and for
our other concerns deposit them in the same hands in which we trust our Souls.
And if when we do well we are evil spoken of, we may wear the Reproaches of men
as our Crown.

Let us not therefore separate what our Savior has here united, but seek our
Credit and Reputation so far only, as it is subservient to the further Ends of
God's Glory, and our Brethrens Edification, That men may see our Good Works and
glorify, etc. What it is for men to glorify God our Savior himself can best
interpret, and he tells us, John 15. v. 8. that it is to bear much fruit; To
have their Souls shining with Divine Graces, and their lives beautified with
the Works of Holiness, that is, to be renewed after the Image of God, which
Renovation is wrought upon them by a hearty belief of the Gospel, and sincere
endeavors to conform to the precepts of it. This then is the Purport of our
Savior's Words in the latter part of the Text; By being thus burning and
shining Light, we may be happy Instruments to make others hearty and serious
Christians. For by this means they will be brought first, to love and liking of
the Gospel. They will conceive there is in it something more than Humane, when
it makes men so holy, humble and charitable, so useful to the World, so wholly
taken up in promoting the greatest interest of mankind. 'Twill breed in them an
high esteem of the Gospel. For as nothing is more injurious to it than an
unsuitable conversation in those who are the Promulgers of it, so nothing more
courts the esteem of men to it, and recommends it to their approbation, than a
strict conformity to its Rules. And when men once come to conceive High and
Honorable thoughts of it, the next step will be to submit themselves to the
Laws of it, to put themselves under its Discipline, and try what efficacy it
may have upon their own Souls, which they see has wrought such admirable
effects in the Souls of others. We may by this happy Union of Purity both in
Life and Doctrine, be Instruments of begetting such a quick and lively sense of
Religion in the hearts of men, such a serious and sober practice of it in their
lives, such a Zeal in them to transmit it down to their Posterity, that the
places we live in may be the better for us to the World's end, and all
after-Ages may reap the fruits of our endeavors. The whole Christian World
hold their Religion at this day from those that were the first Planters of it;
every Age since has been irradiated with their light, and swayed by their
Great Examples. The Children of Light in all after Ages acknowledge them for
their spiritual Fathers, and the Generations yet to come will rise up and call
them blessed. They had extraordinary Abilities (you will say) and brought
Credentials from Heaven, the Gift of Miracles, to attest the Truth of their
Doctrine. It Is true, they had so, and so 'twas necessary they should, being to
propagate a new Doctrine, a Doctrine so contrary to all the Religions then
received in the World, they being so few, and having such a wide Province as
the World assigned them, and that so entirely captivated by Satan. But God, who
proportions the measure of his Gifts to the necessities of the Age in which
they are to be employed, is not wanting to bestow upon us, even in this Age,
what is needful for the maintenance of true Religion, and succesful opposition
to the Kingdom of Darkness. Inspired Gifts and Miracles were then necessary to
convert a Heathen World. Abilities acquired by God's blessing on our own
Industry, employed with honest hearts, seconded by good example, influenced by
the Spirit of God, are as sufficient for this Age, as Miracles were, for that.
Manna wane cessary in the Wilderness where all ordinary and natural supplies
were wanting; but when Israel arrived in Canaan, where the necessities of life
were supplied in a natural way from the Plenty and Fertility of the Soil, their
miraculous food ceased, nor do we find that stubborn, mutinous People ever
repining at the loss of it, their necessities being amply provided for without
it. I persuade my self, were Miracles necessary for the Age we live in, we
should not want them. The Spirit of God, sent on purpose to enable for the Work
of the Ministry, does still afford all necessary Aids. Inspired Gifts indeed
are ceased, and Miracles, but the gracious effects of it upon the Hearts of
men, attending our Ministry are still continued. Where ever I see a Soul that is
humble, and pure, and charitable, rejoicing in God, despising the World,
patient in Sufferings, and forgiving injuries and enemies, there I am sure the
Spirit of God has Breathed, Nay there he dwells. And (thanks be to God) the
World is not so degenerate, but that many of this temper may be found that owe
this Renovation of their minds to the influence of the Divine Grace upon them
in the use of the present Ministry. So that what was adapted to the
Circumstances of the first Ages of Christianity, that is ceased; but what
things accompany Salvation, what tend to renewing the Image of God in the minds
of men, fitting them to be partakes of the Inheritance of the Saints in light,
these are still continued, and shall be to the World's end.

Let us therefore (my Brethren) acquit our selves like faithful Stewards in the
Discharge of our mighty Trust. Those Souls that were redeemed with the blood of
God, are committed to our care. Let not what was so dear to him, be vile and
cheap with us. Let us think no pains too great, no labor and circumspection
too much to be used in such a weighty affair. Cursed, says the Prophet, is he
that does the Work of the Lord negligently. And the more important the Work is,
the heavier will be the Curse, upon either total neglect, or lazy performance.
We have two Powerful Engines to reform a depraved World, the Purity of our
Doctrine, and the Piety of our Lives, and they never work kindly and
effectually, but in Conjunction. Never Conjunction of happy Stars ever
portended such Blessings to the World, as these Gemella Sydera, these
Twin-Lights, when they twist their beams, and shed their united Influence upon
it.

These would make us such a Light of the World as would chase all works of
darkness out of it, the Rulers of the darkness of this World would not be able
to stand before us, if we put on this Armor of Light. A knowing and well
instructed Piety is both Armor and Ornament; Armor both of defense and
offense, the weapons of our warfare that will render us succesful in fighting
the Lord's Battles, signally instrumental in reducing a stubborn rebellious
World to obedience to the Laws of our Blessed Savior, the Captain of our
Salvation. Let but this Command in the Text be obeyed, and we are secure of his
Aids whose Banners we fight under. For if our Light so shine before men, they
will see our Good Works and Glorify our Father which is in Heaven. We shall
hereby secure our own Salvation, credit the Gospel, rejoice the Angels in
converting Sinners, make all good men with thankful hearts and tongues bless
God for us, and our selves, after we have for a while been burning and shining
Lights in the World, shine as Stars for ever and ever in the Upper Regions of
Light and Bliss.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7. line 27. read enlightening for illightning, page 17. line 19, read
Epictetus for Epectetas.


