A NEW GUIDE FOR CONSTABLES, Headboroughs, Tythingmen, Churchwardens, Overseers
and Collectors for the Poor, Surveyors for Amending the Highways and Bridges,
with Directions for Keepers of Fairs and Markets, and Treasurers for the Relief
of poor Maimed Soldiers and Mariners.

Containing not only whatsoever may be useful to them in the Execution of their
several Offices, that is already Extant in any BOOK of this Kind.

But also The Heads of all those Statutes which do concern any of the said
Offices that have been since made in the Reigns of the late King Charles, King
James, and their present Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary; being the most
Complete of any Work of this Nature.

Collected by J. P. Gent.

London, Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins Esquires, And are
to be sold by most Booksellers in London, 1692.

The CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. OF the Original, Office and Jurisdiction of High Constables, Petty
Constables, Headboroughs, Borsholders and Tythingmen. Page 1. Chap. 2. The
Constables Office about Affrays. 9 Chap. 3. The Constables Office about
Alehouses, etc. 12 Chap. 4. The Constables Office about Arms, etc. 15 Chap. 5.
Articles which the High Constables are to return the Justices at their
Sessions, or their Monthly Meetings in their Divisions, and to cause their
Petty Constables, etc. in their several Liberties to make Return thereof unto
them. 17 Chap. 6. The Constables Office about Foreign Bone-Laces, Cutwork,
Imbroidery, etc. and French Goods. 19 Chap. 7. The Constables Office for
providing necessary Carriages for his Majesty, etc. 23 Chap. 8. The Constables
Office about Irish Cattle. 27 Chap 9. The Constables Office about Conventicles.
30 Chap. 10. The Constables Office about Clothiers. 32 Chap. 11. The Constables
Office about the Customs. 34 Chap. 12. The Constables Office about
Setting-Dogs, etc. 35 Chap. 13. The Constables Office about Escapes and
Arrests. Ibid. Chap. 14. The Constables Office about Excise. 37 Chap. 15. The
Constables Office about Fish. 38 Chap. 16. The Constables Office about forcible
Entries, etc. 40 Chap. 17. The Constables Office about Hedge-breaking, etc.
ibid. Chap. 18. The Constables Office about Stoned-Horses. 43 Chap. 19. The
Constables Office about Hue and Cry. 44 Chap. 20. The Constables Office about
Laborers, etc. 46 Chap. 21. The Constables Office about Malt-making 48 Chap.
22. The Constables Office about disturbing (...) Ministers. 49 Chap. 23. The
Constables Office about Moss-Trooper^ 5^ Chap. 24. The Constables Office about
the Peace. 5^ Chap. 25. The Constables Office about Physicians. 5^ Chap. 26.
The Constables Office about the Plagu^ ibid Chap. 27. The Constables Office
about conveyin^ Prisoners to the Goal. 5^ Chap. 28. The Constables Office about
Quarter Mon^^^ for Maimed Soldiers, Prisoners, etc. ^^ Chap. 29. The Constables
Office about Popish Rec^sants. 5^ Chap. 30. The Constables Office about
distraini^^ for Rent. 6^ Chap. 31. The Constables Office about Riots a^^ Routs.
6^ Chap. 32. The Constables Office about Rogues a^^ Vagabonds. 6^ Chap. 33. The
Constables Office about keeping t^^ Sabbath. 7^ Chap. 34. The Constables Office
about profa^^ Swearing. 7^ Chap. 35. The Constables Office about Tobac^^
Planting. 7^ Chap. 36. The Constables Office about Weights and Measures. 77
Chap. 37. The Constables Office about Watches. 78 Chap. 38. The Constables
Office about Executing Warrants. 80
The Contents of the Chapters in the Churchwardens Office.
Chap. 1. THE Antiquity of the Churchwardens Office, and how they are to be
chosen. 85 Chap. 2. The Churchwardens Office about Profanation of the Sabbath,
and of the Church 88 Chap. 3. Some few Cases concerning Actions for, and
against Churchwardens. 90 Chap. 4. The Churchwardens Office about disposing of
Seats in the Church. 93 Chap. 5. The Churchwardens Office about Reparations and
Rates. 95 Chap. 6. Some Cases wherein the Churchwardens are equally concerned
with the Constables and Overseers of the Poor. 99 Chap. 7. The Churchwardens
Office about passing Accounts, together with the Heads of most of the things
which they are to present in the Visitation Court. 101
The Contents of the Chapters in the Office for Overseers of the Poors.
Chap. 1. OF the Antiquity of these Officers, (...) their Qualifications, and
how, an^ when to be chosen. 10^ Chap. 2. Of the several sorts of Poor People,
a^^ what Poor the Overseers are to provide for, a^^ relieve, or to set to work.
10^ Chap. 3. The Duty of the Overs^ers about puttin^ forth, and binding of
Apprentices, with the Form of the Indenture for that purpose. 11^ Chap. 4.
Several Cases about Settlements, and al^ touching Bastards, etc. 11^ Chap. 5.
The Overseers Office in making of Rate^^ and passing Accounts. 12^ Chap. 6. The
Overseers Duty about Weights an^ Measures, and Burying in Woollen. 13^
The Contents of the Chapters in the Office for Surveyors of Highways, etc.
Chap. 1. HOW many Sorts of ways there are of the Choice of these Officers,
wit^ some few General Cases concerning Highway 13^ Chap. 2. The Duty of the
Surveyors about Settin^ and Calling the Parishioners to the common day^ Works
for the Highways, and about taking an^ digging for Gravel, Chalk, Sand, etc.
14^ Chap. 3. The Surveyors Duty about cutting dow^ Bushes, Trees, and scouring
of Ditches in the Highways; and also touching Presentiments an^ Inquiries about
Defaults, passing of Accounts, Traveling of Wagons, Wains, etc. 147 Chap. 4.
Some Heads of the Stat. 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17. concerning the Ways, Sewers,
Pavements, etc. in London, and the Scavengers Office. 150 Chap. 5. Some Heads
of the 2 of W. and M. for Paving and Cleansing the Streets in the Cities of
London and Westminster, Suburbs and Liberties thereof, the Out-Parishes in the
County of Middlesex, the Borough of Southwark, and other Places within the
Weekly Bills of Mortality, in the County of Surrey. 153 Chap. 6. Several Cases
about the Repairs of Bridges, with the Names of the Statutes which concern
particular Bridges. 158 ^^rections for the Keepers of Fairs and Markets. 164
^^rections to Treasurers, for the Relief of Poor Maimed Soldiers and Mariners.
169
THE DUTY OF CONSTABLES, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Original, Office and Jurisdiction of High Constables, Petty
Constables, Headboroughs, Borsholders and Tythingmen.
THE S^xon Christian King Alfred (King of England) for the more peaceable
Government and Ease of his Subjects, divided this whole Realm of England first
into Shires, then caused those Shires to be subdivided into Hundreds, Rapes,
Ridings, Wapentakes; and divided these also into Tythings, Leets or Boroughs,
and in all these Divisions were appointed Officers for the better preservation
of the Peace, such are High Constables, Petty Constables, Headboroughs,
Borsholders and Tythingmen; the Office of all these latter, is one and the
same, only different in Title, according to the Custom of the Country; in
Middlesex, besides the High Constables of the Hundreds, they have Petty
Constables and Headboroughs in the respective Parishes, and they are in number
more or less, according to the greatness or smalness of the Parish; in Kent
these Petty Officers of the Parishes are called Borsholders; but in Hampshire,
and all the Western Parts, Tythingmen, and their Divisions of Parishes,
Tythings; in Sussex the Hundreds are called Rapes; and in the North, Ridings
and Wapentakes.

There was anciently in England, a great Officer called the High Constable of
England, and he kept an Office (which is supposed to come hither with William
the Conqueror out of Normandy) or Court, called the Constables Court, or the
Court of the High Constable, wherein he had Authority to hear and determine
Contracts, touching Deeds of Arms out of the Realm, and to determine all things
concerning War within the Realm; as Combats, Blazon, Armory, etc. but not to
deal with Battle in Appeals, that belonging to the Common Law of the Land.

Amongst the rest of the Conquerors Laws, this is one, That if a Frenchman do
Appeal an Englishman of Perjury or Murder, the Frenchman may defend himself
by Battle, Which in English was then called Earnest, which Word we yet retain;
and the Officer to see this performed, was the High Constable; but this
Officer, Court and Practice, is long since dissolved.

The Etymology of this word Constable, proceeds from the old word Conning or
Cyng, and Staple or Stable; the word Conning or Cyng, signifies a King, and
Stable, a Stay or Prop; which is as much as to say, the stay or Prop of the
King; that great Officer the Constable of England, having that Title given by
reason of the great Authority that he had, was a principal Prop or Stay unto
the Kings Government; from whence is this Title and Office of this Lower
Constableship derived and continued (though with lesser Authority unto this
hour) and is a Branch of that Original.

By the Statute of Winchester, made in the time of King Edward the First, these
Constables of Hundreds were appointed to keep Watching and Warding, for the
better keeping of the Peace, and prevention of Thieveries and Robberies, and
apprehensions of Felons and Rogues, etc. and that the High Constables in every
Hundred and Franchise, should take the view of Armor, etc.

Hereby it appears, that the Name of a Constable in an Hundred or Franchise, is
an Officer to assist and support the King's Majesty in the Maintenance and
Perservation of his Peace, within his Hundred or Franchise, and he is called
the High Constable, in respect of the Constables or Petty Constables, and
Headboroughs or Tythingmen, which be in the respective Towns, Villages,
Parishes, or Precincts within his Hundred or Franchise under his Jurisdiction;
and it is also the part and duty of these inferior Officers to execute the
High Constables Office in his absence, in maintaining and keeping the Peace in
their several Tythings and Limits, and in the High Constables presence to be
aiding and assisting unto him.

The High Constables of every Hundred, or Rape, or Riding, are chosen by the
Justices in each County, most usually at their General Quarter Sessions, or in
their several Divisions. From the Justices they receive their Authority, and
are by them again discharged of their Office as they shall see cause. At the
entrance into their Office they take an Oath, the usual Form whereof follows.

The High Constables Oath.
YOU shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the
King, in the Office of a Constable. You shall see and cause His Majesty's Peace
to be well and truly kept, and preserved according to your Power. You shall
Arrest all such Persons as in your sight and presence shall ride or go armed
offensively, or shall commit or make any Riot, Affray, or other Breach of His
Majesty's Peace. You shall do your best endeavor (upon complaint to you made)
to apprehend all Felons, Barretors, and Rioters, or Persons riotously
assembled: and if any such Offenders shall make resistance [with force] you
shall levy Hue and Cry, and shall pursue them until they be taken. You shall do
your best endeavor, that the watch in and about your Hundred be duly kept, for
the apprehending of Rogues, Vagabonds, Nightwalkers, Evesdroppers, Scouts, and
other suspected Persons, and of such as go armed, and the like; and that Hue
and Cry be duly raised and pursued according to the Statute of Winchester,
against Murderers, Thieves, and other Felons; and that the Statutes made for
the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and such other idle Persons as come
within your Bounds and Limits be duly put in Execution* you shall have a
watchful Eye to such Persons as shall maintain or keep any Common House or
Place, where any unlawful Game is or shall be used; as also to such as shall
frequent or use such Places, or shall use or exercise any unlawful Games, there
or elsewhere, contrary to the Statutes. At your Assizes, Sessions of the Peace
or Leet, you shall present all and every the Offenses done contrary to the
Statutes made 1 Jacobi, 4 Jacobi, and 21 Jacobi Regis, to restrain the
inordinate haunting and tippling in Inns, Alehouses, and other Victualling
houses, and for repressing of Drunkenness; you shall there likewise true
Presentment make of all Bloodsheddings, Affrays, O^tcries, Rescous, and other
Offenses committed or done against the Kings Majesty's Peace within your
Limit^: you shall once every Year, during your Office, present at the Quarter
Sessions all Popish Recusarts within your Liberty, and their Children above
nine, and their Servants, ( scil. their Monthly Absence from the Church) 3 Jac.
4. You shall well and duly execute all Precepts and warrants to you directed
from the Justice of the Peace of this County, or higher Officers; you shall be
aiding to your Neighbors against unlawful Purveyances: in time of Hay or
Corn-harvest, upon request, you shall cause all Persons, meet, to serve by the
day for the Mowing, Reaping, or getting in of Corn or Hay; you shall in Easter
Week cause your Parishioners to choose Surveyors for the mending of the
Highways in your Parish or Liberty; and you shall well and duly ac^ording to
your Knowledge, Power, and Ability, do and execute all other things belonging
to the Office of a Constable, so long as you continue in the said Office.

So help you God.

In this Oath is briefly comprehended the whole Duty of a Constable, and the
principal Matters of his Office at large.

The Form of the Petty Constable or Tythingmans, etc. Oath runs thus.
YOU shall Swear, That you shall well and truly execute the Office of a
Tythingman of the Tything of H. (or Headborough, etc.) His Majesty's Peace in
your own Person you shall keep, and see it kept in all others, as much as in
you lies. In the presence of the High Constable, you shall be aiding and
assisting unto him; and in his absence you shall execute his Office, and do all
other things belonging to your Office, according to your Knowledge and Power,
until another be chosen in your room, or you be legally discharged thereof.

So help you God.

There are in several Counties of this Realm other Officers; that is, by other
Titles, but not much inferior to our Constables; as in Warwickshire a
Thirdborough, and in other places a Borough-head, in others a Chief-pledge.

The Authority of these (as I said) is much like that of the Constables: but
yet the Office of the Constable is distinct, and of greater Authority and
Respect than these.

But in Towns where there be no Constables, and that the only Officers for the
Peace, there be Headboroughs, Thirdboroughs, Borsholders, or such others; and
in such cases where their Power and Authority is declared to be equal with the
Constable; in all such things their Office is all one in a manner: and diverse
Statutes do appoint Offenders to be punished by the Constable, or other
inferior Officers, which must needs be the Tythingmen, etc. 1 Jac. cap. 7.

12 H. 7. f. 8. The High Constables of Hundreds, are Conservators of the Peace
within their several Hundreds and Franchises at the Common Law.

Brook Peace 13. Fitz. 127. All Petty Constables by virtue of their Office,
within their several Liberties of their several Towns, are Conservators of the
Peace at the Common Law.

Bacons use of the Law ^, 6. In ancient time High Constables of the Hundreds,
and Petty Constables in every Town, were yearly appointed by the Sheriff in his
Turn, and were there sworn.

Direct. Judges 29. Constables lawfully chosen, if they shall refuse to be
sworn, the Justices of the Peace may bind them over to the Assizes or Sessions
of the Peace, and for such his Contempt, he is there to be indicted, fined, and
imprisoned.

Coke 8.43. Every Person that is chosen to be a Constable, ought to be idoneus
Homo, a Man apt and fit for the Execution of the said Office: and to be idoneus
Homo, the Law requires in him three qualifications, viz.

1. Honesty: to execute his Office truly, without Malice, Affection or
Partiality.

2. Knowledge: to understand his Duty wh^ he ought to do.

3. Ability: as well in Estate as in Body, tha^ so he may attend and execute
his Office diligently, and not neglect the same through Wan^^ or Impotency.

For such as are chosen out of the meane^^ Sort, are either ignorant what to
do, or stand in awe of the greater; so that they dare no^ do what they ought,
or else are not able to spare time; therefore they ought to be chosen out of
the better sort of Parishioners, and not either by the House, or other Custom.

If a Man be chosen Constable, not able and qualified as aforesaid, he may be
discharged of his said Office by Law, and another fit Man appointed in his
place.

Co. 8.42. If Leets choose unable or unfit Petty Constables, it is cause of
Forfeiture of the Leet, and such choice is void.

14 Car. 2. c. 12. Two Justices of the Peace may appoint and swear new
Constables, Headboroughs, etc. in case of death or removal of such Officers out
of the Parish. And if in default of holding Court Leets they continue above the
Year, they may be discharged at the Sessions, and others put in.

Idem Stat. Constables, Headboroughs and Tythingmen, which are out of Purse for
their Charges, they may with the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, and
other Officers of the Parish, make Rates upon all Occupiers of Lands and
Inhabitants, and all others chargeable to the Poor, by the Stat. 42 El. which
being confirmed under the Hands and Seals of two Justices of the Peace, may by
their Warrants be levied by distress and sale of the Goods of such as refuse to
pay the same.

I shall now set forth every particular Branch of the Constables Office, and of
the Tythingmen, Headboroughs, and Borsholders: their Duties are the same in
effect, and their Authority; yet the later are inferiors to the former.

CHAP. II. The Constables Office about Affrays.
IF one makes an Affray, or Assault upon another, in a Constables presence, or
in his presence shall threaten to kill, beat or hurt another, or shall be in a
Fury ready to break the Peace. In these Cases, the Constastable may commit the
Offenders to the Stocks, or to some other safe Custody for the present, until
such time as he can carry them before some Justice of the Peace, or to the
Goal, until they shall find Sureties for the Peace. The Constable may take
Security for the Peace, by Obligation to be sealed and delivered to the Kings
use, which Bond the Constable was to send to the Exchequer or Chancery, from
whence the Process should issue to levy the Debt to the Kings use, if the Peace
were broken. This was the Opinion of three of the Judges of the Common Pleas in
Skirrets Case, Trin. 35 Eliz. Com. Banc. Rot. 1458. But Anderson Chief Justice
said, That the Constable ought to carry the Party, that he should see breaking
o^ the Peace, before a Justice to find Sureties so^^ the Peace which is the
usual Practice at this day. 3 H. 4. 9 and 10. Bacons use of the Law, fol. 5.
Dalt. J.P. c. 1. fol. 4, 5.

Dalt. J. P. c. 8. fol. 33. The Constable, where he sees an Affray made, or
such as are about to make an Affray, ought to command the Affrayers, in the
Kings Name, to surcease, and depart on Pain of Imprisonment; and if a Constable
being present at an Affray, does not his best endeavor to part them, it being
presented by the Jury at the Sessions of the Peace, such Constable may be fined
for it.

3 H. 7. 1. 3, H. 7. 20. Lamb. 136. 38. E. 3. 8. Dalt. J. P. c. 8. fol. 33. If
any be dangerously hurt in an Affray, the Constable, or any other may stay the
Offender, and carry him to a Justice of Peace, who is either to Bail him till
the next Goal delivery, or to commit him to the Goal, until it be known whether
the Party hurt will live or dye thereof.

Lamb. 135. 1 H. 7. 7. 3 H. 7. 10. If Affrayers will not depart, but do draw
Weapons, or give any Blow, the Constable may command Assistance of others to
cease the Affray; and if they make resistance, may justify the bearing, and
wounding of them: and if either the Constable, or any of his Assistants be
killed, it is Murder in the Affrayers.

Lamb. 135. 7 E. 3.19. Where there is a great and dangerous Affray, the
Constable may make Proclamation in the Kings Name, that the Affrayers shall
keep the Peace, and depart. And if the Affray be in a House, the Constable may
break into the House (if the Doors be shut) to see the Peace kept, though none
of the Parties have taken any hurt; and if the Affrayers fly into another Man's
House, the Constable upon fresh pursuit may break into such House, and
apprehend them.

Dalt. c. 8. fol. 34. etc. 118. fol. 340. Cromp. 146. b. and 172. b. Where the
Affrayers fly into another County, the Constable seeing it, may freshly pursue,
or cause them to be pursued, and taken there: and then the Constable may carry
them before some Justice of Peace, of the County where they are taken, to find
Sureties for the Peace.

And if they fly into a Franchise, only within the same County where the
Affray was, the Constable (seeing this) may freshly pursue them, and take them
out thence.

Dalt. J. P. c. 8. f. 34. 38 H. 8. After the Affray is over, the Constable
cannot Arrest the Affrayers without a Warrant; except some Person has received
such hurt there, that he is in danger of death. But before the Affray begun,
and at the time thereof, he may Arrest them without a Warrant.

Dalton ibid. It is not properly an Affray, unless some blow be given or
offered to be given; for hot words is no Affray, neither can the Constable
apprehend them for Words, unless they threaten to kill, beat, or hurt one
another; in such Case the Constable may take such Persons and carry them before
a Justice to find Sureties for the Peace, and yet such Threatening is no Affray

If an Affray, or an Assault be made upon the Constable himself, he may not
only defend himself, but may also put the Parties offending in the Stocks till
such time as he can carry the^ to a Justice of Peace, or to the Goal; an^ if he
be not able to arrest them himself, h^ may then call others to his Assistance,
wh^ may justify to arrest the Offenders, Dalt. c. 8* fol. 35. 5 Hen. 7. 6.

CHAP. III. The Constables Office about Alehouses, etc.
IF any one keep an Alehouse, or sell Beer or Ale without License, he forfeits
20 s. to the use of the Poor, to be levied by distress and sale of the
Offenders Goods, by the Constable and Churchwardens, by Warrant from a Justice
of Peace, before whom the Offense i^ proved; which Goods are to be sold within
three days after the Distress taken, and the Overplus to be returned, if any
be: and in default of Distress, the Delinquent is to be openly whipped by the
Constable. If the Constable refuse, or neglect to execute his Warrant, he
forfeits 40 s. to the Poor; and the Justice may commit the Constable to the
Goal, until he causes the Offender to be whipped, or pays the 40 s. to the
use of the Poor, 3 Car. 1. c. 3. Dalt. J.P. c. 7. f. 31, 32.

If a common Inn keeper or Alehouse-keeper refuses to lodge a Traveller, he
profering to pay ready Money for his Victuals, etc. the Constable may cause such
an inn keeper or Alehouse-keeper, to be indicted at the Sessions or Assizes,
where he may be fined and imprisoned, or the Party grieved may have his Action
of the Case against the Innkeeper or Alehouse keeper. But they are not bound
to lodge, or find Victuals without ready Money first paid, if it be required,
Co. 9. lib. Rep. fol. 87. b. 10 H. 7. 8. Daltons J.P. c. 7. f. 28.

In the Condition of the Recognizance, which every Alehouse-keeper enters into,
that is licensed to sell Drink, it is one Clause, That he shall keep one or
more spare Beds for lodging of Strangers.

Were this well looked into, in and about London, abundance of forfeited
Recognizances would be found; and a great many lazy Knaves, that Live at their
Ease, by selling Drink, might be set to work for their livings.

They are bound likewise not to suffer any Gaming in their Houses or Backsides,
which now is the main Prop of most of them; and there they draw in Apprentices,
and Servants, to their ruin: were they punished according to the Statute for
this, these Caterpillars would not swarm so thick as they do.

If any Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, or Victuallers do sell less than a full
Ale Quart of the best Ale or Beer, or two Quarts of the small for one Penny, he
forfeits 20 s. for every Offense. If he suffers Townsmen, or others, to sit
tippling in his House, he forfeits 10 s. for which the Constables and
Churchwardens, upon a Warrant from a Justice of Peace, ought to distrain and
levy the Forfeitures, according to the Statute; and if there be no Distress to
be found, or if the Officers neglect within 20 days to certify the same
Default to the Justices, the Officer forfeirs 40 s. to the use of the Poor, to
be levied by Distress on their Goods, by Warrant made to any indifferent
Person, from any one or more Justices of the Peace, under their Hand and Seal.
And, for want of Distress, the Justice may commit the Offenders to the Goal,
there to remain till they have paid the said Forfeitures. In all these Cases,
the Distresses are to be kept six days, and if the Parties do not pay the
Forfeitures within that time, then the Distress is to be apprised and sold, and
the Overplus returned to the Owners, if any be, 1 Jac. c. 9. 1 Car. 1. c. 4.

If the Constable, or other Officer of the Parish, neglect to serve the
Justices Warrant against Townsmen, or others, for Tippling in any Inn, Alehouse,
or Victualling-house, or against Men for being Drunk, viz. for Tippling, 3 s. 4
d. and for being Drunk, 5 s. to be levied by Distress on the Offenders Goods,
and sale thereof after six days default of payment, rendering the overplus to
the Owner, and for want of Distress, and not able to pay, the Tipler is to be
set in the Stocks four hours, and the Drunkard six hours; and if in any of
these cases the Constable neglect to do his Duty, he forfeits 10 s. to be
levied by Distress and Sale of his Goods to the use of the Poor. These Offenses
are to be enquired after within six Months after they are committed, and the
Constables, and other Officers of the Parish may be charged upon their Oaths to
present them. 21 Jac. c. 7. Dalt. J.P. c. 7. f. 28.

CHAP. IV. The Constables Office about Arms, etc.
IF any Person shall ride, or go armed offensively before the Kings Justices,
or before any other the Kings Officers or Ministers during their Office, or in
Fairs or Markets, or elsewhere, by Night or by Day, in Affray of the Kings
People, and Breach of the Peace; or wear, or carry any Guns, Daggers, or
Pistols charged; in such case the Constable upon the sight hereof, may seize
and take away their Armor, and other Weapons, and cause them to be apprized,
and answered to the King as forfeited, and carry them before a Justice, to find
Sureties for the Peace, 2 E. 3. c. 3. 7 R. 2. 13. Co. 3. part Inst. fol. 162.
Dalt. J. P. c. 9. fol. 35, and 159.

But the Kings Servants in his Presence, Sheriffs, and their Officers, and
other the Kings Ministers, and such as be in their Companies assisting them in
their Office, and all others pursuing Hue and Cry, where any Felony, or other
Offenses against the Peace be committed, may lawfully bear Armor or Weapons, 2
E. 3. c. 3.

All High Constables, Petty Constables, and other Officers within their several
Parishes, are to be aiding and assisting to such Persons as shall have Warrants
from the Lord Lieutenants, or any two of their Deputies, under their Hands and
Seals, to search for, and seize all Arms in the custody and possession of any
Person or Persons whom the said Lieutenants or their Deputies shall judge to be
dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom, and to secure the same, and give account
thereon to the said Officers; but such search is to be made in the daytime,
only between Sun rise and Sun set, and not otherwise, unless it be in Cities
and their Suburbs, Towns Corporate^ and Market Towns, or Houses within the
Bill^ of Mortality, in which places search may be in the night, if the Warrant
so direct.

No dwelling house of any Peer of the Realm i^ to be searched, unless the
Warrant be from the Kings Majesty, under his Sign-Manual, or in the Presence of
the Lieutenant, or one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the said County o^ Riding.
And in all Places and Houses aforesaid where search is made, in case of
Resistance, to enter with force; and such Arms so seized where the Lieutenants,
or their Deputies, or any two of them think fit, may be restored to the Owners
again, 14 Car. 2. c. 3.

The Constables by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of the Lord Lieutenant, or
any three or more of the Deputy Lieutenants, are to levy such Sums,
Forfeitures, Penalties and Payments, as shall be charged upon any Person or
Persons within their several Liberties, for the furnishing of Arms, Horse or
Foot, or Payment of Soldiers, 14 Car. 2. c 3. and 15 Car. 2. c. 4.

And where sufficient Distress cannot be had, then the Lord Lieutenants and
their Deputies, by like Warrant to the Constable, may commit such Offender to
prison, until he shall make satisfaction according to the said Forfeiture,
Payment or Penalty, ibid.

CHAP. V. Articles which the High Constables are to return the Justices at
their Sessions, or their Monthly Meetings of the Divisions, and to cause their
Petty Constables, etc. in their several Liberties to make Return thereof unto
them.
1. THey are to return the Names, Sir names, Additions of Names and Qualities
of all Popish Recusants (as well Housekeepers as Lodgers) dwelling or residing
in any of their said Parishes, Liberties or Precincts.

2. Such Persons as shall continue Drinking or Tippling in any Inns or Alehouses
at any time, and more especially upon the Lords Day, or Holy Days, and such
Persons as they shall find Drunk, and all such Innkeepers and Alehouse-keepers
as shall entertain them.

3. Item the Names of such as shall profanely Swear or Curse, with the number
of their Oaths, immediately after the committing such Offense, inform the next
Justice thereof.

4. Item they are to return such Victuallers or Alehouse-keepers as use
Victualling, or selling of Beer and Ale without License.

5. Item such Persons as suffer any unlawful Games to be suffered in their
Houses, Backsides, or Gardens; and also the Names of such as shall play at any
of the said Games.

6. Item such Persons as refuse or neglect to do their Duty of Watching and
Warding.

7. Item such Persons as divide their Houses into several Tenements, and such
as do entertain Inmates, who may be an Annoyance to their Neighbors, or likely
to bring charge upon the Parish.

8. Item the Defaults of Petty Constables a^ Tythingmen, etc. for not causing
Rogues, V^gabonds, and Beggars, to be duly apprehen^ed, punished, and passed,
according to t^^ Statute.

9. Item all Masterless Men and Women, ^^ving at their own Hands, such as are
Idle, a^^ will not Labor, and can give no good a^count how they get their
Living; all suspi^^ous Persons, Whores, Noctivagants, or Nigh^ walkers, and
Mothers of Bastards, which m^^be chargeable to the Parish.

10. Item the Names of such Persons as ^^fuse to take Apprentices, poor Parish
Childr^^ to Husbandry, or other Callings, according (...) Law.

11. Item all such as neglect to make d^^^ Rates and Collections for the Relief
of the Po^^ in every Parish, and that cannot, or do not gi^^ a just account of
the Employment of the Re^^ and Stock of the Poor.

12. Item of the Defects in the High Way and Bridges, with the Names of such as
shou^^ repair them, and have neglected or refused (...) do their Duty herein.

13. Item such Scavengers as neglect to (...) their Office in cleansing the
Streets, to be kep^ clean within their Liberties; and the Name of such Persons
as commit common Annoyances, by laying of Dung, Soil, Dirt or Ashes (...) the
Street.

14. Item the Names of all such Persons (...) refuse to pave the Streets before
their Houses where the said Streets have usually been pave^ formerly.

15. Item the Names of all such Persons as ^eep any Hogs (to the common
Annoyance of ^is Majesty's Subjects) in or about such Liber^^es, Places and
Precincts, where Hogs ought ^ot to be kept.

16. Item all such Bakers as put light Bread (...) sale, and the Weight
thereof; and such ^rewers as sell Beer or Ale to unlicensed Alehouse-keepers;
all Forestallers, Regrators, and ^^grossers of any Corn, Grain, Butter, Cheese,
^acon, or any other kind of dead Victuals ^hatsoever.

17. Lastly, All such Persons as can prove or ^^stifie any of the said
Offenses, are to be warn^d to appear before the said Justices at their ^essions
or Meetings aforesaid, to testify their ^nowledge of such Offenses of which
they can ^^ve Information.

CHAP. VI. The Constables Office about Foreign Bone-Laces, Cut-work,
Imbroidery, etc. and French Goods.
THE Constables upon Warrant to them directed from the Justices of Peace, or
Chief Officers of the Cities, Towns Corpo^ate, etc. are to search within their
respective Counties, Cities, Towns, etc. in the Shops ^eing open, Warehouses,
and Dwelling House ^f such Person or Persons, who shall be suspected to have
any Foreign Bone-Laces, Cut-works, Imbroideries, Fringes, Bandstrings, But^ons,
or Needle-works make of Thread, Silk, or any, or either of them, made in the
Parts beyond the Seas, and where they find any suc^^^ to seize the same, 14
Car. 2. c. 13.

No French Wine, Vinegar, Brandy, Lin^^^ Cloth, Silks, Salt, Paper, or any
Manu^^ctures made of, or mixed with Silk, Thre^^^ Wool, Hair, Gold or Silver,
or Leather, ^^^ing of the Product or Manufacture of any (...) Dominions of the
French King, shall after (...) 24th of August, 1689. during the Term of th^^
Years, or before the end of the first Session, Parliament, next after the
expiration of (...) said three Years, to be imported into Engla^^ Wales, or
Town of Berwick, or Isles of Jers^ Guernsey, Alderny, Sark, or Isle of Man,
mi^^ or unmixt with any Commodity of the P^^duct of any other Country; such
Import^^^on, and vending the said Commodities impo^^ed contrary to this Act,
being by the (...) Act declared a common Nuisance: And su^^ Goods are to be
seized, and carried in^^ his Majesty's Warehouse, and if upon (...)
Information into the Exchequer; the Ju^^ find that they are French Goods,
Judgme^^ shall be, That the Wines and Brandy shall (...) staved and spilt in
some River, Stream or S^^ near the place where they were seized, or sh^^ remain
in the Warehouses, and the other Commodities publicly burnt and destroyed:
T^^ Importers to forfeit the value: They in who^^ Hands they shall be seized,
or who sold the^^ the like for the first Offense: And for the ^^cond Offense,
double the value, and after Co^viction of the second Offense, to be incapab^^
to exercise, or execute any Office or Employment about any part of the Kings
Revenue, (...) any other Office or public Employment wh^^soever.

And if any Person not being a known Mer^^ant, Vintner, or Shopkeeper shall
sell, or ^^pose to sale, any of the Commodities afore^^^d, (and be thereof
convicted) shall over and ^^ove the aforesaid Penalties, suffer twelve ^onths
Imprisonment, without Bail or Main^^ze, and all Ships and Vessels, with their
^^ns, Tackle and Furniture in which any of ^^e said Goods shall be imported
during the said ^^erm; and also every Bark, Hoy, Lighter, ^^rge, Wherry, Boat
or other Vessel whatsoever, ^^t of which any of the said Goods shall be ^^^t on
Shore, shall be forfeited, and the Ma^^^r, or any other Person taking care of
such ^^ip or Vessel, shall forfeit 500 l. and also, ^^eing convicted thereof
before a Justice of ^eace, by the Oaths of two Witnesses) be com^itted to the
next Goal, for twelve Months, without Bail or Mainprize. And all Seamen,
^ariners, Watermen, Carmen, Porters, La^^urers, or other Persons whatsoever
assisting (...) unshipping, carrying or conveying any of ^^e said Goods, upon
Proof as aforesaid, shall (...) subject to like Imprisonment, or be pub^^ckly
whipped at the discretion of the Justice (...) Peace. And all Carts, Wains,
Wagons, ^arriages, Plough-Teams, Horses or Oxen made ^^e of in the Carriage or
Conveyance of any of the said Goods, shall be seized, and upon Proof made
before a Justice of Peace of the ^ounty where the same were so seized, by ^^e
Oaths of two credible Witnesses, that they ^ere assisting in the Carriage or
Conveyance of any of the said Goods, the same shall be forfeited, one half
thereof to be disposed of to ^he use of the Poor of the Parish where the same
shall be seized, the other half to th^^ use, who shall seize the same. The
Inform^^ who after seizure or stay of the Goods, fr^^dulently delays the
Prosecution, shall forf^^^ 500 l.

All Officers of the Customs, Sheriffs, Mayo^ Bailiffs, Constables, and other
Officers are ^^joyned to be aiding and assisting in the due ^^ecution of this
Act, See 1 W. and M.

By 2 W. and M. For the more effectual p^^ting in Execution, the Act for
Prohibiting (...) Trade and Commerce with France, it is Ena^^ed, That if any
Person after the first of F^bruary 1690. shall sell, or utter by retail (...)
Glass Bottles, or in any other retail Measur^ not made of Pewter, and sealed
according (...) Law, any kind of Wine whatsoever, or oth^^ Liquor exposed to
sale for Wine, or sell t^^ same for a greater price, than by the said A^^ is
appointed, and be convicted thereof by t^^ Confession of the Party, or the Oath
of t^^ credible Witnesses, before one or more J^stice or Justices of the Peace
of the Count^^ City, or place where such Offense shall be committed (who are
hereby required and i^ powered to adminster an Oath to that pu^pose) such
Person being prosecuted with thirty days next after such Offense committe^
shall forfeit and pay for every such Offen^^ the Sum of fifty shillings, which
if not pa^^ upon demand, shall be levied by distress a^^ sale of the Goods and
Chattels of every suc^ Offender, by Warrant under the Hand a^^ Seal of the
Justice or Justices before who^^ such Conviction shall be made, which Warrant
the said Justice and Justices are impowe^^d, and required to grant to the
Constable, ^eadborough, or Tythingman of the Parish, (...) Place where such
Offense shall be commit^^d, who are required and authorized imme^^ately to levy
the same, rendering the over^^us to the Owner thereof; the said Penalty,
^orfeiture, and Money so levied, to be given to ^^e Informer.

CHAP. VII. ^^e Constables Office for providing necessary Carriages for his
Majesty, etc.
BY the Statute of 1 Jac. 2. it is Enacted, That the Clerk, or Chief Officer of
his ^ajesty's Carriages, shall three days at least ^^fore his Majesty's
Arrival, by Warrant from ^^e Green-Cloth, give notice in Writing to ^^o or more
of his Majesty's Justices of the ^eace next adjoining, to provide such a num^er
of Carts and Carriages from the Places next ^^jacent, as his Majesty shall have
present use (...), expressing the certainty of that number, (...) also the time
and place when and where ^^e said Carts and Carriages are to attend; which
Carriages shall consist of four able Horses, (...) six Oxen, or four Oxen and
two Horses; ^^r each of which Cart or Carriage, the re^pective Owners shall
receive sixpence for each ^^^le they shall go laden; and, that in case any of
his Majesty's Subjects of this Realm ^^all refuse to provide and furnish his
Majesty, that now is, or his Queen that is or shall be, ^^r His or Her
Household, or her Majesty Catherine Queen Dowager, or Her Household, (...) their
Progress or Removals, with such suffic^ent and necessary Carriages for their
Wardrobe, or other Necessaries, for ready Monl^^ tendered to them, or shall
without just an^ reasonable Cause refuse to make their Appearance, with such
sufficient Carts and Carriage as are before expressed, that then upon d^^^ Proof
and Conviction of such neglect or refusal, by the Oath of the Constable or
other Officer, or two other credible Witnesses, before the said Justices of the
Peace of the County, or Mayor, or other Chief Officer (...) the City or
Corporation where he or the^ Inhabit, (which Oath they shall have power t^
adminster) the Party so refusing, shall for suc^ his refusal and neglect,
forfeit the Sum of fort^shillings to the Kings Majesty's use, to be forth with
levied by distress and sale of his Goo^^ and Chattels (rendering to the Parties
the ove^ plus upon every such Sale, if there shall b^ any) by Warrant from the
said Justices of the Peace, Mayor or other Officer. No Horses Oxe^ Cart or Wain
shall be enforced to travel abo^^ one days Journey from the Place where the^
receive their Lading, and that ready Payme^^ shall be made in Hand, for the
said Carriage at the place of Lading, without delay, according to the aforesaid
Rates: And in ca^^ any Justice of the Peace, Mayor, Officer o^ Constable shall
take any Gift or Reward t^ spare any Person or Persons from making such
Carriage, or shall injuriously charge or grie^^ any Person through Envy, Hatred
or Evil, will who ought not to make such Carriage, or sha^^ impress more
Carriages than he shall be directed from the Green-Cloth to do, that then upon
due Proof and Conviction thereof, the ^arty so offending, shall forfeit the Sum
of ten ^ounds to the Party thereby grieved, or any ^ther who shall sue for the
same, to be reco^ered by Action of Debt in any of his Maje^^y's Courts of
Record, wherein no Essoign, ^rotection, or Wager of Law shall be allow^d. And
in case any Person or Persons shall resume to take upon him or them to impress
any Horses, Oxen, Cart, Wain or Carriages for ^is Majesty's Service, other than
the Person so ^mpowered, then he or they so offending, ^^all upon due
Conviction of the said Offense, ^^cur and suffer the Punishment contained in
^^e Act of 12 Car. 2.

And it is further Enacted, That the High ^onstable or Constables, the Mayor,
Bailiff, (...) other Chief Officer, who shall be required ^y this Act, to warn
the said Carts and Car^^ages, as in the said Act directed, do make a ^eturn in
Writing to the Clerk or other Of^^cer of the Carriages, of the Names and Places
(...) Abode of every such Person who is so ^arned to bring in his Cart or
Carriage, to ^^e intent it may be known (in case of any ^^llure) who is in
default, and the said Con^^ables, and other Chief Officer or Officers ap^ointed
by this Act, to warn in the said Car^^ages, as abovesaid, may be discharged and
^^demnified, and the Defaulters punished, as ^n this Act is provided.

14 Car. 2. c. 20. For providing Carriages, by Land and by Water, for the use
of his Maje^^y's Navy and Ordnance, Two or more Justices of the Peace, by
Warrant from the Lord High Admiral of England, or two or more (...) the
principal Officers or Commissioners of the Navy, or the Master of his Majesty's
Ordnance or the Lieutenant of his Ordnance, are t^ provide Carriages, with
Horses and Oxen o^ of the Country, not being above twelve Mil^ distant from the
place of lading; the Owne^ of which Carriages, or their Servants, are (...)
receive twelve pence a Mile for every Load (...) Timber, and eight pence a Mile
for every T^^^ of other Commodities. And all such Persons (...) neglect or
refuse to make their appearance, upon Oath thereof made before the Justices, b^
the Constable, or two Witnesses, the Person refusing, or neglecting, forfeits
twenty shilling^ to be levied by Distress and Sale of his Good^ by Warrant from
the said Justices, Mayor, (...) other chief Officer, or from the principal
O^ficers or Commissioners of his Majesty's Nav^ or Master, or Lieutenant of his
Majesty's Or^nance, rendering to the Owner the overplus, (...) any be, first
deducting the Charge of Distrai^ing.

No Horses, etc. or Land-Carriage, shall (...) forced to travel more
days-journy, from the place where they receive their Lading, nor b^ compelled
to continue longer in the Employment, than the said Justices shall appoint; an^
that ready Money be paid to the Parties in han^ at the place of Lading,
according to the Rat^ aforesaid, Stat. ibid.

The said Act of 14 Car. c. 20. and 13 c. 8. are (...) continue until the end
of the first Session of the next Parliament, and expired, but revived b^ 1 Jac.
2. for 7 years, from June 21, 1685. and (...) continue to the end of the first
Session of the next Parliament.

CHAP. VIII. The Constables Office about Irish Cattle.
(...) any great Cattle, Sheep or Swine, or any (...) Beef, Pork or Bacon,
(except such as is the necessary Provision of the respective ^^^ps or Vessels
in which the same be brought, (...) exposing the same, or any part thereof
(...) sale) shall by any wise whatsoever be ^^^^ported or brought from Ireland,
or any ^^^er Part beyond the Seas, into the King^^^ of England, Dominion of
Wales, or Town (...) Berwick upon Tweed; in such case the ^^^stable,
Tythingman, Headborough, Church^^^dens, or Overseers of the Poor, or any of
^^^m within their respective Liberties, Pa^^^es or Places, may take and seize
the same, (...) keep the same during the space of ^^^nt and forty hours, in
some public or ^^^venient place, where such seizure shall be ^^de; within
which time, if the Owner or ^^ners, or any for him, or them shall make ^ppear
unto some Justice of Peace of the ^^e County, where the same shall be so
sei^^^, by the Oath of two credible Witnesses, ^^t the same were not imported
from Ireland, from any other Place beyond the Seas, (ex^^^t the Isle of Man)
then the same, upon (...) Warrant of such Justice of Peace, is to be ^^^ivered
to the Owner or Owners without de^^^, 18 Car. 2. c. 2.

But in default of such Proof and Warrant, ^n the same to be forfeited, and one
half ^^reof to be disposed to the use of the Poor of the Parish where the same
shall be so fou^^ and seized; and the other part thereof to (...) or their own
use that shall so seize the sam^ 18 Car. 2. c. 2.

Such Cattle as are imported from the I^^^ of Man, (before excepted) into
England, and are not to exceed the number of six hundre^ in one Year, and they
are to be of no oth^^ Breed, than of the Breed of the Isle of Man and all to be
landed at the Port of Chester, (...) some of the Members thereof, and not
els^where, 18 Car. 2. c. 2.

This Act was to continue for seven Yea^^ and from thence, to the end of the
first Ses^^on of the next Parliament: And is now by t^^ Statute of 32 Car. 2.
c. 2. revived and ma^^ perpetual.

But these former Remedies not proving effectual for the prevention of the
Transpo^^ing of the Cattle aforesaid, it is further pr^vided, That whenever,
and as often as (...) shall happen, either through any fraud^lent Agreement, or
unfaithful Connivence (...) any Constable, Headborough, Tythingm^^
Churchwarden, or Overseer of the Poor, (...) that it shall happen any otherwise
howsoev^^ that any great Cattle, Sheep, Swine, Be^^^ Pork or Bacon, after the
first Seizure (...) them, or any of them, by Virtue of the afor^said Act, shall
be driven, brought, carri^^ into, or found in any other Parish or Plac^ than
where the same shall be first seized, (...) aforesaid; That then, and so often,
and from time to time, it shall and may be lawful (...) and for the Constable,
Tythingman, Headb^rough, Churchwarden, or Overseer of t^^ Poor, of every, or
any such other Parish or Place, where such great Cattle, Sheep, Swine, Beef,
Pork or Bacon, shall be brought, driven, or carried into, or found as
aforesaid, to seize, ^ake, and dispose of the same, and every, or any of them
as forfeited, The one Moiety thereof to the use of the Poor of such other
Parish or Place, where such Seizure shall be made, the other to the use of such
Officer or Officers, who shall seize the same as aforesaid; any other, or
former Seizure or Seizures, in any other Parish or Parishes, Place or Places,
notwithstanding, Stat. 20 Car. 2. c. 7.

And now by the Statute of 32 Car. 2. c. 2. ^t is further provided, That any
Person may make such Seizures as well as the Constables, or other Officers or
Inhabitants: And that to prevent fraudulent Seizures, and Compositions, the
Seizors shall within six days after Conviction and Forfeiture, cause the said
Cattle, Sheep and Swine, to be killed; and the ^ides and Tallow shall be to the
Seizor, and ^he Remainder to be distributed by the Churchwardens and Overseers,
amongst the Poor of the Parish; where any such great Cattle, Sheep or Swine
shall be imported or found.

The Seizor, Churchwarden or Overseers, sailing in his Duty, shall forfeit
forty shillings, for every one of the great Cattle, and ten shillings for every
Sheep or Swine, which should have been so killed and dristributed: one Moie^ty
to the Poor of the said Parish, the other to the Informer, to be levied by
Distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, by Warrant from any one Justice of
Peace; and for want thereof, the Offender to be committed to Goal for the
Months without Ball.

Mutton and Lamb imported, shall be subj^^^ to the like Seizure, and the
Importers and S^^lers to the like Penalties, as for Importation^^ Beef, Pork or
Bacon; and the like of But^^^ and Cheese imported from Ireland.

If any great Cattle, Sheep or Swine, wh^^^ have been seized, be found alive in
any ot^^^ Parish or Place, they are to be seized ag^^^ and killed to the
Benefit of the Seizor, (...) the Poor of that Parish or Place, in man^
aforesaid.

English or other Cattle, intermixed with I^^^ Cattle, shall be deemed Irish in
all respe^^ 32 Car. 2. c. 2.

CHAP. IX. The Constables Office about Conventicles.
BY the Stat. of 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. made agai^^ Seditious Conventicles; every
Constab^^ Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwarden, (...) Overseers of the Poor,
are authorized and ^^quired to levy the Fines assessed by the Just^^^ of Peace,
upon those who shall be present at u^lawful Conventicles, upon their Goods and
Ch^^tels, having first received a Warrant under (...) Hands and Seals of one or
more Justices, or Ch^^^ Magistrate, and forthwith deliver the Money ^levied to
the same Justice of Peace, or Chief M^gistrate. And by Warrant from one or more
J^stice or Justices, or Chief Magistrate, and respective Constables,
Headboroughs and Tythingm^^ (Overseers not named) may with what aid, force and
assistance they think fit, after refusal or denial to enter, break open into
any House, or other Place, where they shall be informed any Conventicle is
held, as well within Liberties as without, and take into their Custody the
Persons there unlawfully assembled, to be proceeded against according to this
Act.

No Peers House is to be searched, unless in presence of a Lord Lieutenant, or
two Justices of Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum.

If any Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwarden, or Overseer of the
Poor, shall know, or be credibly informed of any Conventicle within his
Precinct, and shall not thereof ^nform some Justice of the Peace, or Chief
Magistrate, and endeavor the Conviction of the Parties, but neglects his Duty,
he forfeits five Pound, to be levied on his Goods: And any Person sued for
acting by this Law, may plead the General Issue, and give the special Matter in
Evidence, and shall recover treble Costs, 22 Car. 2. c. 1.

By the 1 W. and M. for Exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subjects
dissenting from the Church of England, from the Penalties of certain Laws, It
is Enacted, That all Persons that take the Oaths, and make, and subscribe the
Declaration in the said Act mentioned, to be taken, shall not be liable to any
Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures of 35 Eliz. nor 22 Car. 2. But, That if any
Assembly of Persons dissenting from the Church of England, shall be had in any
Place for Religious Worship, with the Doors locked, barred or bolted during any
time of such Meeting together, all and every Person or Persons that shall come
to, and be at suc^ Meeting, shall not receive any benefit from this Law, but be
liable to all the Pains an^ Penalties of all the aforesad Laws, recited i^ this
Act, for such their Meeting. And also That if any Person dissenting from the
Church of England, as aforesaid, shall here after be chosen, or otherwise
appointed t^ bear the Office of High Constable, or Pet^^ Constable,
Churchwarden, Overseer of the Poor, or any other Parochial or Ward Office and
such Person shall scruple to take upon him any of the said Offices, in regard
of the Oaths, or any other Matter or Thing required by the Law, to be taken or
done, i^ respect of such Office, every such Person sh^^ and may execute such
Office or Employme^^ by a sufficient Deputy, by him to be provided that shall
comply with the Laws on this behalf.

CHAP. X. The Constables Office about Clothiers.
COnstables, and other Officers, upon request are to aid and assist the Wardens
and Assistants for regulating the Trade of Worsteds, and other Stuffs, called
Norwich Stuffs made in Norwich, and the County of Norfolk^ 14 Car. 2. c. 5.

They ought to be very vigilant in this Business, for there never was such
slight and unserviceable Stuffs as now are; to the great Damage of his
Majesty's Subjects.

In the West Riding of the County of York, ^he Constables are likewise by
Warrant from ^he Justices of the Peace, Master and Wardens ^f the Corporation,
or any thirteen of them, ^o levy such Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures, (...)
shall grow due from any Clothier, by vir^ue of the Statute aforesaid, by
Distress and ^ale of the Offenders Goods, rendering the over^lus to the Owner
upon demand, 14 Car. 2. c. 5.

Clothiers must pay their Spinners, and other Workfolks, their Wages in ready
Money, and ^ot in Wares, and shall deliver their Wool in ^ue weight, on pain to
forfeit six pence for ^very Default; and the Carders, Spinners, Wea^ers, and
other Workfolks, are to do their Work faithfully, on pain to forfeit double
Damages to the Party grieved, 4 E. 3. c. 1. Fitz. ^.P. 103.

The Master, or Head Officer in a Corporation, where there is no Master, and
out of a Corporation, every Justice of Peace, High Constable and Stewards of
Court Leet, shall hear and determine the Complaints, as well for non-payment of
the Workfolks Wages, as the Damages aforesaid, by examining the Parties; for
which Damages they have Power to commit the Offenders to the Goal, until the
Party grieved be satisfied, Stat. idem.

The Justices of Peace, and High-Constables, may search any House, or other
Place for Tenters, Ropes, Rings, Headwrinches, or other Engines for stretching
of Cloth, and if they find any, to deface them; and if the Owner use them
again, these Officers may take them away and sell them, and give the Money to
the Poor, 39 Eliz. c. 20.

CHAP. XI. The Constables Office about the Customs.
BY the 14 Car. 2. Such Person or Persons are authorized by Writ of Assistance,
under the Seal of his Majesty's Court of Excheque^ are to take a Constable,
Headborough, or oth^^ public Officer inhabiting near the Place, and the
daytime are to enter, and go into any Hou^^ Shop, Cellar, Warehouse, Room, or
other Plac^ and in case of Resistance, break open t^ Doors, Chests, Trunks, and
other Packag^ there to seize, and from thence to bring a^^ kind of Goods,
Merchandise whatsoever, pr^hibited and uncustomed, and to put, and sec^^^ the
same in his Majesty's Storehouse, in the Po^^ next to such Place where the
seizure shall (...) made, 13 Car. 2. c. 11.

All Officers belonging to the Admiralty, Ca^tains, and Commanders of Ships,
Forts, Castl^ and Block-houses, and all Justices of Peace, Ma^ors, Sheriffs,
Constables and Headboroughs, an^ other the King's Majesty's Officers and
Subject whatsoever, whom it may concern, are to b^a^ding and assisting to all
and every Person a^^ Persons, which are, or shall be appointed by h^^ Majesty
to manage his Custom: and if the Officers of the Customs, or any acting in aid
of them shall be sued, indicted, prosecuted or molested such Persons, their
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, may plead the General Issue, and give the
several Acts relating to the Customs, or any of them in Evidence, in any of his
Majesty's Courts of Justice, 14 Car. 2. c. 11.

The Stat. of 12 Car. 2. c. 19. about Customs, was ^o continue but to the end
of the first Session of ^he next Parliament, and is now expired.

CHAP. XII. The Constables Office about Setting-Dogs, etc.
THE Constable, Tythingman, or Headborough of any place (upon a Warrant under
the Hands and Seals of two or more Ju^^ices of the Peace) has power to search
the ^ouses of any Persons suspected to keep Set^ing-Dogs, or Nets, for the
taking of Pheasants ^^r Partridges, and the Dogs and Nets there ^ound, to take,
carry away, detain, kill, destroy, and cut in pieces, 7 Jac. c. 11. Dalt. J. P.
c. 37. ^ol. 90.

But they cannot search the Houses of any who have Free Warren, or any Lord of
any Manor, or such as have 40 l. per ann. or more ^n Freehold, or some Estate
of Inheritance, ^or 80 l. per ann. for Life, or be worth in Personal Estate 400
l. These may keep Nets and Dogs to take Pheasants or Partridges in their own
Ground, Stat. idem, Dalt. ibid.

CHAP. XIII. The Constables Office about Escapes and Arrests.
IF a Constable, or any other Officer, which has a Prisoner in custody for
Felony, or Suspicion thereof, voluntarily lets, or suffers the Prisoner to
go where he will at liberty (though this be breaking of Prison) yet it (...)
Felony in the Jailer, Constable, or him the lets such Prisoner escape, but
it is no Felon^ in the Prisoner; but if such a Prisoner she escape by the
Negligence of his Keeper, an^ against his Will and Knowledge, then it is Felony
in the Prisoner, because a Breach of Pr^son, and the Jailer or Constable, etc.
shall b^ Fined by the Judges or Justices for such Escape Dalt. J.P. c. 106.
fol. 272. Bro. Coron. 112, 22^ 316, 454. and Bro. Escape 31 Stamford fol. 32.

If a Constable, or other Officer, shall voluntarily suffer a Thief (being in
his Custody) t^ go into the Water, and drown himself, the Escape is Felony in
the Constable, and the Thie^ is Felo de se; but if the Thief shall suddenly
(without the assent of the Constable) kill, hang or drown himself, this is then
but a neglige^^ Escape in the Constable, and Fineable, as aforesaid, Dalt. J.
P. c. 106. fol. 272.

The voluntary letting a Felon escape before he be arrested for the Felony, is
no Felony i^ the Party that suffers him to escape; but (...) the Constable
suffer one to escape, whom he knows has committed a Felony, he is finable, i^
it do not make him accessory, Dalt. ibid.

Where a Felony is committed, and one is Arrested for the same, or Suspicion
thereof* though the Constable, etc. shall after have certain intelligence and
knowledge that the Party arrested is not Guilty of the Offense; yet they may
not set the Party at liberty, for he must not be delivered but by due course of
Law, Cromp. 40, 44. Dalt. J.P. c. 106. f. 275.

If a Constable convey a Felon to the Goal, and the Jailer will not receive
him, then the Constable must bring him back to the Town where he was taken, and
that Town shall be charged with the keeping of him until the next
Jail-delivery; and in such case the Jailer shall be punished by the Justices,
Dalt. J. P. c. 118. fol. 340.

The Constable, or other Officer, that shall Imprison any Felon in the Stocks,
may lock the Stocks, and if need be, may also put Irons on the Prisoner, and
when he conveyeth him to the Goal, or to the Justice, he may Pinion him, or
otherwise make him sure, so that he cannot escape, ibid.

CHAP. XIV. The Constables Office about Excise.
THose Officers under the Commissioners of Excise, called Gagers, are to have
the Constable along with them, when they enter by night into the Houses of any
Brewer, Innkeeper, Victualler, etc. to gage their Coppers, Fats, or Vessels,
or to take an Account of their Beer, Ale, Worts, Perry, Syder, Strong Water,
Metheglin, Mead, Coffee, Chocolate, Sherbet or Tea, brewed; made or distilled
in the said Houses, 12 Car. 2. c. 23, 24.

Such Persons as shall be convicted before the Justices of Peace, or
Commissioners of Excise, of any Offense and Forfeiture within the Acts for
Excise, the Constables, upon Warrant to them directed from the Justices of
Peace, are to levy the Penalties upon the Goods of the Offenders, by distress
and sale thereof, rendering the overplus to the Owners, and for want of
Distress, they are to carry the Party to the Goal, there to remain till
satisfaction be made, 12 Car. 2. c. 23, 24.

The Constables are also upon Warrant to them directed, to summon all
Alehouse-keepers, etc. to appear before the Commissioners of Excise, at such
days and places as shall be appointed in the said Warrant, from time to time.

CHAP. XV. The Constables Office about Fish.
THE Constables and Churchwardens, by Warrant from any one or more Justices of
the Peace (where any Offense is committed in destroying the Spawn and Breed of
Fish, along the Seashore, or in any Haven or Creek, or within five Miles of
the Mouth of any Haven or Creek, by Fishing with Nets of less Mesh than three
Inches and an half between knot and knot) are to levy the penalty by distress
and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering the overplus to the Owners; the
penalty is ten shillings and forfeiture of their Nets, 3 Jac. c. 12. Wingatts
Abr. Stat. Tit. Fishers and Fishing.

The Justices of Peace of the Counties of Worcester, Salop and Gloucester, upon
their own knowledge, or upon information that any Person has made use of any
Net, Engine, or Device in the River of Severn, whereby any Salmon, Trout o^
Barbel, under the length appointed by the Stat. of 1 Eliz. shall be taken or
killed, or has fished with any Net for Salmon, Salmon-mart, Salmon-p^al, Pike,
Carpe, Trout, Barbel, Chub or Grayling, the Mesh whereof is under two Inches
and a half square, from knot to knot, allowing to each Mesh four knots, or
above twenty yards in length, and two yards in breadth, or above fifty yards in
length, and six yards in breadth, in the wing of the Net, in the said River
from Ripplelochelake to Gloucester Bridge, or above sixty yards in length below
Gloucester Bridge, and six yards in breadth, in the wing of the Net, or has
fished with two of those Nets fixed together, or used any Net or Device for
taking the Fry of Eels, or whereby the Spawn of Fish shall be destroyed, shall
issue out Warrants under the Hands and Seals of any two of them, in their
respective Countles, to the Under Conservators of the said River, or to any
Constable, Tythingman or Headborough, to search in the daytime, in all
suspected places, for such unlawful Instruments, and to seize them, and bring
them to the Quarter Sessions to be burnt or destroyed, 30 Car. 2. c. 9.

If any Ling, Herring, Cod, or Pilchard, fresh or salt, dried or bloated, or
any Salmons, Eels or Congers, taken by Foreigners, Aliens to the Kingdom of
England, shall be imported, uttered, sold, or exposed to sale in this Kingdom;
in such case the Constable, Headborough, etc. or any other Person may take and
seize the same, and one half thereof must go to the use of the Poor of the
Parish where the same is so found and seized, and the other half to the use of
the Party that seizes the same, 18 Car. c. 2.

CHAP. XVI. The Constables Office about forcible Entries, etc.
IF a Constable, or any private Person of the same County do refuse to attend
and assis^ the Justices of Peace, upon request to remove a^^ Force, or to
convey the Parties to the Goal, he may be imprisoned for his neglect, and make
Fine^ to the King, 15 R. 2. c. 2. Dalt. J.P. c. 22. f. 57.

CHAP. XVII. The Constables Office about Hedge-breaking, etc.
SUch as are convicted before a Justice of Peace, for cutting and taking away
of Cor^ growing, robbing of Orchards, breaking Hedges, and their Procurers and
Receivers knowing the same, are to give the Party grieved such Satisfaction as
a Justice of Peace shall think fit; and i^ they cannot give such satisfaction,
then the Justice may commit the Offenders to the Constable to be whipped for
the first Offense, and the like pain for the second Offense; and if the
Constable, or other Officer, do not by himself, or some other, see the same
done accordingly, then the Justice may commit such Officer to the Goal, there
to remain without Bail, until he procure the Offender to be whipped as
aforesaid, 43 El. c. 7.

The Constables, Headboroughs, or other Person, in every County, City,
Town-Corporate, or other Place, where they shall be Officers and Inhabitants
have power to apprehend, or ^ause to be apprehended such Persons as they
^uspect, for having, carrying, or conveying any Burden or Bundles of any kind
of Wood, Underwood, Poles, or young Trees, or Bark of any Trees, or Gates,
Styles, Posts, Rales, Pales, Hedge-wood, Broom or Furze; and any Con^^able,
Headborough, etc. by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of one Justice, may enter
into the Houses, Outhouses, Yards, Gardens, or other Places belonging to the
Houses of such Persons as they shall suspect, etc. and where they shall find
any, to apprehend the Parties suspected for cutting the same, and those in
whose ^ustody, etc. any such Wood or Underwood shall be found, and carry them
before a Justice of the Peace, and if the Party cannot give a good account to
the Justice how he came by the said Wood, etc. by the consent of the Owner, or
shall not within the time the Justice shall appoint, prove who he bought it of,
then such Person shall be deemed convicted of the cutting and spoiling of Wood,
within the Statute of 43 Eliz. and for the first Offense shall give such
satisfaction to the Owner within such time as the Justice shall appoint, and
pay over and above presently to the use of the Poor where the Offense is
committed, so much Money as the Justice shall appoint, not exceeding ten
shillings: And for default of performance hereof, the Justice may commit the
Offender to the House of Correction for so long time as he shall think fit, not
exceeding one Month, or otherwise to be whipped by the Constable, or other
Officer; and for the second Offense, the Offender is to be sent to the House of
Correction for one Month, and there he ^^ to hard Labor; and if he be
convicted the third time, then to be punished as an incor^^gible Rogue, 15 Car.
2. c. 2.

If any Person buy any Burdens of Woo^ Underwood, Sticks, etc. of any who may
j^^^ly be suspected to have come by the same ^^lawfully, upon complaint to a
Justice, Head O^ficer, etc. and if upon Examination by Oa^^ it appears, That
the same were bought of su^^ Person as aforesaid, the Justice may order (...)
Buyer to pay the treble value thereof to hi^ from whom they were stolen; and
for no^ payment, the Justice may grant his Warrant the Constable, to levy the
same by distress (...) sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering to t^^ Owner, the
overplus, and for want of such d^stress, then to commit the Party to the G^^ at
his own charge, there to remain one Mon^ without Bail, Stat. ibid.

None is to be punished by this Statute, th^^ have been punished by any former
Law for the same Offense, and all Offenders within the Statute, must be
prosecuted within six Wee^^ after the Offense committed.

Highways. See the Office of Surveyors of Highways and Bridges.

CHAP. XVIII. The Constables Office about Stoned-Horses.
NOne ought to put to feed upon Forests or Commons (except they be Commons
where Mares are not usually kept) any stoned-Horse, being above two years old,
and not fifteen hands high from the lower part of the Hoof to the upper part of
the Wither (every hand containing four Inches Standard measure) on pain to
forfeit the same Horse, 32 H. 8. c. 13.

If any Stoned-Horse of lesser Stature be put to feed in any such Common
(unless it be in Fen-grounds of the Isle of Ely, and of the Counties of
Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk or Suffolk, where they
need be but thirteen hands high) any Man may seize them to his own use, so that
first by the assistance of the Keeper of the Ground, or Constable, Bailiff,
Headborough, or other such Officer of the Parish adjoining, such Horse be
brought to the next Pound, and there by such Officer, in the presence of three
other sufficient Men, he be measured, and found lower than the Statute, 32 H.
8. c. 13. 8 Eliz. c. 8. Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Horses.

Those that refuse to measure, or to be present at measuring, do foreit 40 s. a
piece for every such default, to be divided between the King and Prosecutor.
But note, That an Horse that makes an Escape into such Common, shall not be
questioned, so that he stay not above four days after notice thereof at the
Owners House, or in h^^ Parish Church, 32 H. 8. c. 13.

Forests, and Common Grounds must be drive^ yearly at Michaelmas, or within
fifteen days after by the Keepers, Constables, or other Office^ abovesaid, on
pain of forty shillings; and the have power to drive them at any other time
(...) the Year, at their pleasure, and such likewi^^ have the Owners of the
Ground. And if upon the Drift any unlucky Tits shall be found, the^ may be
killed, 32 H. 8. c 13. Wingates Abr. St^^ Tit. Horses.

Note, That this Act of the 32 H. 8. c. 13. not to extend to the County of
Cornwall, 21 J^^ c. 28.

CHAP. XIX. The Constables Office about Hue and Cry.
THE Constables or Tythingmen of ever^ Town, Parish or Village, to whom H^^ and
Cry shall come, ought to search in (...) suspected Houses and Places within
their liberties, and as well the Officers, as all other Persons which shall
pursue the Hue and Cry may take and stay all such Persons as in their Search
and Pursuit they shall find to be suspicious, and shall carry them before some
Justice of the County where they are taken to be examined, where they were at
the time of the Felony committed; and if any default be in the Officers, they
may be fined by the Justices for their neglect, Dalt. J.P. c, 28. fol. 75.

Where a Hundred is sued for a Robbery, and ^amages are recovered against one
or some ^^w Inhabitants of the Hundred, and the rest ^efuse to contribute
thereunto; in such case ^wo Justices of the Peace (one of the Quorum) ^welling
within or near the Hundred, may for the levying thereof, set a Tax upon every
Parish within that Hundred; according to which the constables or Tythingmen of
every Parish must ^^ax the particular Inhabitants within their Liberties, and
then levy the Money upon such ^s refuse, by Distress and Sale of their Goods,
^estoring the overplus, if any be, and after the ^ony is gathered, they are to
restore the same ^o the Justices, or some of them that made the ^^ate, within
ten days, 27 Eliz. c. 13. Dalt. J.P. ^. 48. fol. 132.

That Hundred where Fresh Suit shall cease, shall answer half the Damages to
the Hundred where the Felony was committed, to ^e recovered in any Court at
Westminster, in the Name of the Clerk of the Peace of the County where the
Felony was committed; in which case the Death or Change of the Clerk of the
Peace, shall not abate the Suit. And this Recovery is to be taxed and levied as
the former, 27 Eliz. c. 13.

Where any one of the Robbers is apprehended, or where the Action is prosecuted
within one Year after the Robbery committed, the Hundred is not chargeable for
the Robbery. Observe likewise, that the Hue and Cry shall not be judged legal,
unless the Pursuit be both by Horse and Foot, Bract. lib. 3. fol. 121. Dalt.
J.P. f. 133.

He that goes not at the command of the Sheriff or Constable at the Cry of the
County that is, upon Hue and Cry to arrest Felon^ after Attainder, shall be
grievously fined a^ imprisoned, Westminster. 1. c. 9. Co. 2 part, Inst. f^^ 172.

CHAP. XX. The Constables Office about Laborers, etc.
THE Constable in the time of Hay an^ Corn Harvest, upon request to him made by
any Man that wants Laborers, to ge^ in his Harvest, to prevent loss thereof,
may cause all such Artificers as he shall see mee^ to labor, to serve by the
Day for Mowing Reaping, or otherwise, for the getting in o^ Corn or Hay abroad,
according as they see^ fit and able to perform. And if such Persons shall
refuse to work, after they are requested thereunto, the Constable may set then
in the Stocks, by the space of two days and one night; and if the Constable
neglect to perform his Office herein, he forfeits forty shillings, 5 Eliz. c.
14.

No Person retained in Husbandry, or in any Arts appointed by that Statute,
shall depart after the time of such retainer expired, out of the City, Town or
Parish where he last served, to serve in another without a Testimonial, ( viz.
in a Town Corporate, under the Hands and Seals of the Magistrate, and two
Householders there; and in the Country under the Hands and Seals of the
Constable (or other ^fficers) and two Householders of the Town or ^^rish where
he last served; which Testimo^^al is to be registered by the Minister; for which
he is to have two pence, and then to (...) delivered to the Party, 5 Eliz c. 4.

The Form of a Testimonial for a Servant.
MEmorandum, That J. S. Servant to J. D. of Bramsil in the County of
Southampton, ^oman, is licensed to depart from his said Ma^^r, and is at
liberty to serve elsewhere, according to the Statute in that case made and
pro^^ded. In witness whereof we have hereunto (...) our Hands and Seals this
25th day of August, in the 22th Year of the Reign of our gracious Sovereign
Lord King Charles the Second, 670.

Ri. Turner, Constable of Bramsil. R. C. and J. D. Householders there.


If it be one that lives with a Woman, then ^^y, [ is licensed to depart from
his Mistress or ^ame, as she is;] if the Master be not a ^^oman or Husbandman,
but an Handycrafts^an, as Tailor, Smith, etc. then Name him (...) in the
Testimonial.

The Master that retains a Servant without ^^ch a Testimonial, forfeits 5 l.
being thereof convicted by Indictment taken in the Sessions of the Peace; and
every Servant which shew^^h not such a Testimonial to the chief Officer (...) a
Corporation, or to the Constable or other Officer, Minister or Churchwarden of
the place where he is to dwell, may be imprisoned until he ^rocure one, and if
he produce not one within one and twenty days next after the first dayof (...)
Imprisonment, or if he shall show a false or co^^terfeit one, then he is to be
whipped and used ^s Vagabond, 5 Eliz. c. 4. Dalt. J.P. c. 31. f. 63.

This Statute, as to this particular of Tes^^monials, is now grown in a manner
quite o^t so seldom used, that it is scarce know Although the Penalty in the
same be strict (...) severe, yet it is of good use; and so are great many Penal
Statutes more very benefit to the Commonwealth, if they were duly (...) in
execution, especially those enacted to pun^^^ the daily Offenses of Brewers,
Bakers, A^^ houses; all such as use false Weights or Measur^ Millers,
Forestallers, Ingrossers, Regrators, (...) multis aliis, etc. These are the
Caterpillars (...) the Kingdom.

CHAP. XXI. The Constables Office about Malt-making.
THE Constables and Bailiffs of any Tow^ ought from time to time to view a^^
search all such Malt as shall be made or put^ sale within any of their
Liberties, and if the^ find any being evil made, or mingled with (...) Malt,
then the Constable or Bailiff, with advi^^ of one Justice of Peace, may sell
the same (...) such Persons at such a Rate as the Justice thi^^ fitting, 2 E.
6. c. 10. 21 Jac. c. 28. 3 Car. ^ c. 4.

Stat. 2 E. 6. c. 10. There are three sorts (...) evil and deceitful Malt, viz.

1. Where Barley and Malt has not in the ^aking thereof in the Vat, Floor,
Steeping and Drying thereof, three Weeks at the least; ^xcept it be in June,
July, and August, and (...) those Months it must have seventeen Days; and under
such time it cannot be made wholesome.

2. They ought to take out of every Quarter ^f Malt half a Peck or more of
Dust, by reading, Rubbing and Fanning the same, before they put the same to
fale, or else they ^orfeit 20 Pence for every Quarter otherwise ^old, to be
divided between the King and the ^^former.

3. If any Malt shall be put to sale, not well ^ade, according to the limited
time, or made (...) Mow-burnt, or Spired Barley, or mixed ^ood and bad
together, they forfeit two shil^^ngs for every Quarter, to be divided as
afore^^id.

This Act extends not to such as make Malt for their own Provision only; and
the Forfeitures aforesaid must be prosecuted within one (...) ear.

CHAP. XXII. ^^e Constables Office about disturbing of Ministers.
IF any Person purposely without Authority disturb a Preacher lawfully
licensed, in ^reaching, Praying or Administration of the ^acraments, either by
Talking, Laughing, Hum^ing, or the like; any Constable or Churchwarden of the
Place ought presently to apprehend the Party, and carry him before a Justly of
the Peace of the same County, who m^^ commit him to safe custody; and within
f^^ days after (with another Justice of the Peace they may examine the Matter;
and if the^ find it true by two Witnesses, they must commit him to the common
Goal, there to ^^main for three Months, and from thence (...) the next Quarter
Sessions; at which, upon the Parties Reconciliation, and entering ^o^ Security
for one whole Year, he may be r^leased, (at the discretion of the Justices; but
if he continue still in his obstinacy, he m^^ continue in Prison, without Bail,
till he be p^nitent, 1 Mar. Sess. 3. c. 3. Wingates Stat. T^ Sacraments, Dalt.
J. P. c. 41. f. 103.

He that Rescues an Offender in this ki^^^ shall suffer like Imprisonment, and
forfeit fi^^ pounds; and the Inhabitants that suffer such (...) Offender to
escape, being presented before (...) Justices at their Sessions of the County
or Co^poration where the Offense was made, do a^^ forfeit five pounds, Idem.

CHAP. XXIII. The Constables Office about Moss-Troopers.
THE Constables, and other Officers within the Counties of Northumberland and
C^^berland, upon Warrant from the Justices of the Peace, are to levy by
Distress and Sale of the Parties Goods (rendering the overplus to the Owners)
all such Sums as shall be charged upon any Person within their several
Constable ^^^^es, by the Justices at their Sessions, for the ^^feguard of the
Counties against the Injury, ^^heft and Rapine of Moss-Troopers: And the
^ustices also may examine any Complaint a^^inst the Constables, or other
Officers that shall ^eglect, or refuse, or fail to give obedience to the Act,
or do any thing in disturbance thereof, and bind over such Person to the
Quarter Sessions, to be proceeded against according to Justice, (...) 3 and 14
Car. 2. c. 22.

This Act was by the Stat. 29 and 30 Car. 2. c. 2. ^evived, and to continue for
7 years, and to the and of the first Session of the next Parliament.

And by 1 Jac. continued for 11 years, and from thence to the end of the first
Session of the next Parliament.

CHAP. XXIV. The Constables Office about the Peace.
THE Constable ought to do what he can to keep the Peace, but he cannot take
Surely of the Peace, at the request of any Man, H. 7. fol. 18. A. Cromp. 6.12.

The Constable, or other Officer, before he Arrest the Party upon a Warrant for
the Peace, ^ought first to acquaint the Party therewith, and charge him in the
Kings Name to go along with him to the Justice, to put in Sureties, according
to the Warrant; and if the Party refuse so to do, then the Officer ought
forthwith to take and convey him to the Goal, without carrying him to any
Justice at all, there to remain till he does find Sureties; and then at the
next Sessions of the Peace, (...) Officer ought to deliver in his Warrant, a^
certify what he has done therein, Dalt. c. 3.

If the Party yield to go, and find Sureti^^ then the Officer may not
absolutely Arrest hi^ yet he is not bound to go up and down w^^^ him till he
can get Sureties, but he may ke^^ him till he can get Sureties to come unto hi^
and if the Party make resistance, or offer (...) go away afterward, the
Officer may ca^^^ him to the Goal, or set him in the Stocks (...) he can get
aid to carry him to the Goal, D^^ 69. f. 166.

If an Officer having a Warrant from a Just^^^ of Peace, against a Man to find
Sureties (...) the Peace, and do afterward receive a S^p^sedeas out of the
Chancery or Kings Bench, (...) from another Justice of Peace of the sa^^ County
to discharge the same Surety of t^^ Peace; and yet, nevertheless the Officer
w^^ cause the Party to find Sureties by virtute (...) the Warrant, the Party
may refuse to give i^ and if he be arrested or imprisoned for su^^ refusal, he
may have his Action of False Imp^^sonment against such Officer; for the
S^p^sedeas is a Discharge of the former Warran^ Dalt. J.P. c. 69. f. 168.

If a Constable be informed, that a Man a^ Woman be in a Adultery or
Fornication together, or that a Man and Woman of Evil Report are gone to a
suspected House together in the Night, the Constable may take Compa^^ with him,
and if he find them so, he may carry them before a Justice of the Peace to fin^
Sureties for their Good Behavior, 13 H. 7. 10 Dalt. J.P. c. 75. f. 189.

If any shall abuse a Constable in the execu^^on of his Office, the Constable
may have him ^ound to the Good Behavior for it, Fitz. ^ar. 207. Cromp. 135.

Any injurious Force or Violence used against ^he Person of another, his Goods,
Lands, or ^ther Possessions, whether it be by threatening Words, or furious
Gestures, or force of the ^ody, or any other Force used in terrorem, (...) said
to be a Breach of the Peace, Dalt. c. 3. ^ol. 9.

CHAP. XXV. The Constables Office about Physicians.
THE Constables, and other Officers in London, and within seven Miles round,
are to be ^iding and assisting to the President of the College of Physicians,
and all Persons authorized by the said College, for the due execution of the
Laws and Statutes belonging to the said College, upon Pain of running into
contempt to the King, 1 Mar. Par. 1. Sess. 2. c. 9. Wingates Stat. Tit.
Physicians.

CHAP. XXVI. The Constables Office about the Plague.
IF any Person infected, or being, or dwelling in an House infected with the
Plague, shall be by the Constable commanded to keep his House, and
notwithstanding shall wilfully go abroad, and converse in Company, having (...)
infectious Sore on him, it is Felony, and such Person shall not have such Sore
about h^^ yet for his Offense he shall be punished as a ^^gabond, by the
appointment of any one Jus^^^^ of the Peace, and further, shall be bound to
Good Behavior for one whole Year, Wing^^^^ Stat. Tit. Plague, 1 Jac. c. 13.
Dalt. J.P. c. ^ fol. 91.

The Justices of Peace, or any one of the and other Head Officers in Corporate
Tow^ ithin their several Limits, may appoint Sea^ers, Watchmen, Examiners,
Keepers and B^^ers for the Persons and Places infected, and any Person
infected, or dwelling, and being in House infected, shall contrary to the
commitment or appointment of the Justice of Peace, Constable, etc. wilfully
attempt to go abroad, to resist such their Keepers or Watchmen, the may such
Watchmen with Violence, force the to keep their Houses, and if any hurt happ^^
thereupon, the Watchmen shall not be impeac^ed therefore, 1 Jac. c. 13. Dalt.
J.P. c. 39. f 9* Cromp. 122. b. Wingates Stat. Tit. Plague.

If the Constable, or other Officer, wilfully neglect to levy the Money (by
Warrant from t^^ Justices of Peace, upon the Statute for Relief^ any Town
infected with the Plague) by Distre^^ and Sale of the Goods of such Persons as
refu^^ or neglect to pay; then they forfeit for ever such Offense ten
shillings, to be employed to the said Charitable Use, Wingates Stat. Tit.
Plagu^ 1 Jac. c. 31. Dalt. J.P. c. 39. f. 91.

CHAP. XXVII. The Constables Office about conveying Prisoners to the Goal.
AN Offender which is to be conveyed to Goal, must bear all Charges both of
himself and of those that guard him, if he be able; and if he refuse to pay the
Charges, or shall not at the time of the Commitment discharge the same, then
upon a Warrant from a Justice of Peace, the Constable of the Liberty, or Town
where the Offender has any Goods (being within the same County) may sell so
many of the Parties Goods, as in the discretion of the Justice shall be thought
sufficient to satisfy the said Charges, the Apprizement to be made by four
Inhabitants of the Parish where such Goods be, and the overplus to be returned
to the Owner, 3 Jac. c. 10. Dalt. J.P. c. 43. f. 104.

And if the Offender have no Goods to defray the Charges, then the Charge must
be born by the Town or Parish where the Offender was taken, which must be done
by Tax made by the Constable, Churchwardens, and two or three other
Inhabitants; and where there are no such Officers, then four of the principal
Inhabitants of the Parish must make the Rate, which being allowed under the
Hand of a Justice of Peace, every Inhabitant must pay their proportion,
according to the said Rate; and if any refuse to pay, the Constable,
Tythingman, or other Officer, by Warrant from a Justice of the Peace, may levy
the same by Distress, and (after Apprizement by four o^ the Inhabitants) may
sell the same, rendring^ to the Party refusing the overplus, if any be, 1 Jac.
c. 10.

And if the Constable, or other Officer, th^^ makes such Distress be sued, he
may plead Justification, and upon a Verdict for the Defendant, or a Nonsuit of
the Plaintiff, he shall recover treble Damages, besides Costs of the Suit.

Purveyance, See Carriages. Chap. 7. fol. 23.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Constables Office about Quarter Many for Maimed Soldiers,
Prisoners, etc.
THE Constables and Churchwardens are to levy by Distress and Sale of the
Offenders Goods, such Money as is rated upon any Person within their
Constablery, for the Relief of poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners, rendering the
overplus to the Owner, 43 Eliz 3. Wingates Stat. Tit. Captains and Soldiers.

And this Money, so collected, is to be paid quarterly to the High Constable of
the Hundred, ten days before every Quarter Sessions, or else the Constable and
Churchwardens, their Executors, etc. forfeit twenty shillings: And the High
Constable is to pay in the Collection Money (to the Treasurers appointed by the
Justices) every Quarter Sessions, or otherwise he, his Executors, etc. forfeits
40 s. which forfeitures are to be levied and employed by the Treasurer for the
increase of their Stock for the uses aforesaid, 43 El. c. 3. and Wingates Stat.
Tit. Captains and Soldiers.

The High Constables are to make Quarterly Payment, at every Sessions unto the
Collectors appointed by the Justices, of all such Sums of Money as are raised in
every Parish, and paid to them by the Churchwardens or Constables, for the
Relief of the poor Prisoners in the Goal, under pain of five pounds, 14 El. c.
5. Wingates Stat. Tit. Prison and Prisoners.

The Constables and Churchwardens are to levy by Distress and Sale of the
Offenders Goods, so much Money as is rated upon any Person within their Parish,
for the Relief of the Prisoners in the Kings Bench and Marshalsey, and also of
Hospitals and Almshouses, and Relief of the Poor within their County, rendering
the overplus to the Owner; and for want of such Distress, the Justice of Peace
may commit the Party to Prison, there to abide till it be paid, without Bail or
M^inprize, which Money the Churchwardens are to pay to the High Constable ten
days before the end of every Quarter Sessions; and if the Churchwardens, their
Executors, etc. fail to pay this Money, they forfeit ten shillings, and if the
High Constable, his Executors, etc. fail to pay the Treasurers of the County
the same Money at the Quarter Sessions, they forfeit twenty shillings; which
Forfeitures the Treasurers may levy by Distress and Sale as aforesaid, and the
Moneys to be employed to the uses aforesaid, 43. Eliz. c. 2. Wingates Stat.
Tit. P^^ People, Dalt. J.P. c. 53. fol. 135.

CHAP. XXIX. The Constables Office about Popish Recusants.
POpish Recusants above Sixteen years of a^^ shall within forty days after
their convict^on repair to their usual dwelling, and not remo^^ above five
Miles from thence, on pain to fors^^^ all their Goods and Lands, and Annuities,
duri^^ Life; and if they have no certain Abode, th^^ are they to repair to the
Place where they we^^ Born, or where their Father and Mother dwel^ and within
twenty days after their arrival, the^ to give their Names in Writing to the
Ministe^ Constables and Headboroughs, which Minister to enter them in a Book to
be kept for that purpose, and he, together with the said Constable and
Headboroughs, are to certify the same to the next Quarter Sessions, where the
Justice of Peac^ must cause the same to be enrolled, 35 Eliz. c. ^ Wingates
Stat. Tit. Crown.

The Constables and Churchwardens of ever^ Parish, or the one of them; if there
be not such, then the High Constables of the Hundre^ there, are once every year
to present at the General Sessions of the Peace, the monthly absence from
Church of every Popish Recusant, and the Names of their Children, being above
the Age of nine Years, abiding with their said Parents, and of their Servants,
together with the Age of their Children as near as they can know them, on pain
to forfeit respectively for every such default twenty shillings; which
Presentment the Clerk of the Peace, or Town Clerk shall Record without Fee, on
pain of forty shillings, Wingates Stat. Tit. Crown, 3 Jac. chapter 4.

If the Minister, Petty Constable, and Churchwardens of any Parish, or any two
of them, shall complain to any Justice of Peace, of any Person justly suspected
for Recusancy, then any such Justice may tender the Oath of Allegiance to the
Person so suspected; and if he refuse to take it, and be of the Age of eighteen
years or above, then the Justice may commit the Party to the Goal, there to
remain until the next Assizes or Sessions of the Peace; and if then the Party
refuse again, he incurs a Praemunire, but if it he a Woman Covert, she shall
only be imprisoned, there to remain without Bail till she take the said Oath,
Wingates Stat. Tit. Crown, Dalt. J. P. c. 45. fol. 108. 7 Jac. c. 6.

1 W. and M. No Papist, or Reputed Papist (refusing to make and suscribe the
Declaration enjoined by 30 Car. 2. and the Oaths enjoined in an Act for
removing and preventing all Questions, etc. about the Assembling and Sitting of
this present Parliament) shall at any time after the 15th day of May, 1689.
have, or keep in his own Possession, or in the Possession of any other to his
use, or at his disposition, any Horse or Horses above the value of five pounds
to be sold, and that two or more Justices of the Peace, by Warrant under their
Hands and Seals, may, and shall Authorize any Person or Persons, with the
Assistance of the Constable, or his Deputy, or the Tythingman, or Headborough,
(who are required to be aiding and assisting) to search for, and seize for the
us^ of their Majesty's, and their Successors, all such Horses.

CHAP. XXX. The Constables Office about distraining for Rent.
BY 2 W and M* It is Enacted, That from and after the first day of June, 1690.
Where any Goods or Chattels shall be distrained for any Rent reserved and due
upon any Demise, ^ease or Contract whatsoever, and the Tenant or Owner of the
Goods so distrained, shall not within five days next after such Distress taken,
and notice thereof (with the cause of such taking) left at the Chief Mansion
House, or other most notorious Place on the Premises, charged with the Rent
distrained for, replevy the same, with sufficient Security to be given to the
Sheriff, according to Law, That then, in such case, after such Distress, and
notice, as aforesaid, and expiration of the said five days, the Person so
Distraining, shall and may with the Sheriff or Under Sheriff of the County, or
with the Constable of the Hundred, Parish or Place where such Distress shall be
taken, (who are hereby required to be alding and assisting therein) cause the
Goods and Chattels so distrained, to be appraised by two Sworn Appraisers (whom
such Sheriff, Under Sheriff, or Constable, are hereby empowered to swear) to
appraise the same truly, according to the best of their Understandings; and
after such Appraisement, shall and may lawfully sell the Goods and Chattels so
distrained, for the best Price can be gotten for the same, toward satisfaction
for the Rent, for which the said Goods and Chattels shall be distrained, and of
the Charges of such Distress, Appraisement and Sale, leaving the Overplus (if
any) in the Hands of the Sheriff, Under Sheriff, or Constable, for the Owners
use.

And that it may be lawful for any Person or Persons having Rent, arrear and
due upon any such Demise, Lease or Contract, as aforesaid, to seize and secure
any Sheaves or Cocks of Corn, or Corn loose, or in the Straw, or Hay lying or
being in any Barn or Granary, or upon any Hovel, Stack or Rick, or otherwise
upon any part of the Land or Pound charged with such Rent, and to lock up, or
detain the same in the place where the same shall be found, for, or in the
nature of a Distress, until the same shall be replevied upon such Secu^ity to
be given, as aforesaid; and in default of Replevying the same, as aforesaid,
within the time aforesaid, to sell the same after such Appraisement thereof to
be made; so as nevertheless such Corn, Grain or Hay so distrained, as
aforesaid, be not removed by the Person or Persons distraining to the Damage of
the Owner thereof, out of the Place where the same shall be found and seized,
but be kept there (as impounded) until the same shall be replevied, or sold in
default of replevying the same within the time aforesaid.

And, that upon any Pound-breach or Rescous of Goods or Chattels, distrained
for Rent, the Person or Persons grieved thereby, shall in a special Action upon
the Case for the Wro^^ thereby sustained, recover his and their treble Damages
and Costs of Suit against the Offender or Offenders, in any such Rescous or
Pound-breach, any or either of them, or against the Owners of the Goods
distrained, in case the same be afterward found to have come to h^^ use or
possession.

And it is provided, That in case any such Distress and Sale, as aforesaid,
shall be mad^ by virtue or color of this present Act f^^ Rent, pretended to be
arrear and due, where in truth no Rent is arrear or due to the Person or
Persons distraining, or to him or the^^ in whose Name or Names, or Right, such
Distress shall be taken, as aforesaid; that then the Owner of such Goods or
Chattels distraine^ and sold, as aforesaid, his Executors or Administrators,
shall and may by Action of Trespass, or upon the Case, to be brought against^
the Person or Persons so distraining, any or either of them, his or their
Executors or Administrators, recover double the value of the Goods or Chattels
so distrained and sold, together with full Costs of Suit.

CHAP. XXXI. The Constables Office about Riots and Routs.
SHeriffs, Constables, and all other the Kings Officers, shall suppress
Rioters, and imprison them, and all other Offenders against the Peace, 27 R. 2.
c. 8.

Where three Persons or more shall come and assemble themselves together, to
the intent to do any unlawful Act with force or violence against the Person of
another, his Possessions or Goods, as to kill, beat, or otherwise to hurt, or
to imprison a Man; to pull down a House, Wall, Pale, Hedge or Ditch; wrongfully
to enter upon, or into another Man's Possession, House or Land, etc. or
wrongfully to cut or take away Corn, Grass, Wood, or other Goods; or to hunt
unlawfully in any Park or Warren, or to do any other unlawful Act, (with force
or violence) against the Peace, or to the manifest Terror of the People; if
they only meet to such a purpose or intent, although they shall after depart of
their own accord, without acting any thing, yet it is an unlawful Assembly,
because of their Intention at first, Bro. Tit. Riot. 4, 5. Co. 2 Part
Institutes, fol. 176. Dalt. J. P. c. 85. fol. 217.

And if after such Meeting they shall ride, move or go forward, toward the
execution of such Act, whether they put their intended purpose in execution or
not, this is a Rout. And if they do act any such thing indeed, then it is a
Riot.

CHAP. XXXII The Constables Office about Rogues and Vagabonds
THE Constable, Tythingman or Headborough, assisted by the Minister, and one
other of the Parish, is to see (or do it himself) Rogues and Vagabonds, which
shall be taken begging, stripped naked from the Middle upwards, and openly
whipped till their Body be bloody, and then forthwith to be sent away from
Parish to Parish, or Tything to Tything, the next straight way to the place of
their Birth; and if that cannot be known, then to the pla^e where they last
dwelt, by the space of one whole year, before such punishment; and if that
cannot be known, then to the Town through which they last passed unpunished:
and when they come there, if it cannot be discovered where they were born, or
last dwelt, as aforesaid, then are they by that Constable to be conveyed to the
House of Correction, or common Goal of that County, to be employed in Work, or
placed in some Service, and so to continue by the space of one year; or in case
they be not able in Body, that Town is to keep them, till they may be placed in
some Almshouse within the same County, 39 Eliz. c. 4. Wingates Stat. Tit.
Vagabonds, Resolu. Judges sect. 717. Bolst. 2 part Rep. fol. 258.

After such punishment, the Vagabond is to have a Testimonial under the Hand
and Seal of the Constable, Tythingman, etc. and the Minister of the place,
testifying the day and the place of his punishment, the place to which he is to
be ^onveyed, and the time limited for his passage ^hither; which time if by his
own default he ^xceeds, he shall incur the like punishment from time to time,
till he arrive at the place ^^mited. The substance of the Testimonial is ^o be
entered by the Minister in a Register Book, which he is to keep for that purpose
on pain of 5 s. Dalt. f. 129.

The Form of a Testimonial for conveying a Rogue or Vagabond.
W. W. a sturdy vagrant Beggar (aged about forty years) tall of stature, red
haired, and long lean visaged, and squint-eyed, was this 24th day of A. in the
22th year of the Reign of Our Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second,
etc. openly whipped at T. in the County of G. according to the Law for a
wandering Rogue; and is assigned to pass forthwith from Parish to Parish, by
the Officers thereof, the next straight way to W. in the County of B. where he
confesses he was Born; and he is limited to be at W. aforesaid, within twelve
days now next ensuing, at his peril. Given under the Hands and Seals of C.W.
Minister of T. aforesaid, and of J.G. Constable there, the day and year
aforesaid.

A Justice of Peace alone may under his Hand and Seal make such Testimonial,
Lambert 206.

If any Constable, Tythingman or Headborough be found negligent in the due
execution of the Act of the 39th of Eliz. aforesaid, he forfeits ten shillings
for every Default. And such Persons as shall hinder the Execution of t^^ Law
upon Rogues, forfeit five pounds, and (...) to be bound to the Good Behavior.
And i^ Constable refuse to receive a Rogue, and to co^vey him or her to the
next Constable; or if (...) do receive him, and not convey him to the ne^^
Constable, he forfeits five pounds, and may (...) bound to the Good Behavior,
39 Eliz. c. Dal^on c. 47. fol. 128. Resolu. Judges sect. 1^ 14.

Every Person shall apprehend, or cause (...) be apprehended such Rogues as he
shall (...) or know to resort to his House to beg, or r^ceive any Alms, and him
or them shall car^^ or cause to be carried to the next Constable; (...) else
shall forfeit for every such Default (...) shilling, and the Constable is to
whip and co^vey such Rogues, as before is directed, on p^^^ of twenty
shillings, 1 Jac. c. 7. Dalt. c. 47. f^^ 128. Resolu. Judges, sect. 13, 14.

Two Justices of Peace, (one of the Quo^^^ by Warrant under their Hands and
Seals, m^^ cause to be levied, by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, all
the Fines and Forfeiture aforesaid, after Conviction of the Party, which must
be either by Confession of the Party; (...) Proof of two Witnesses before the
said Justices, 39 Eliz. c. 4. Dalt. c. 47. fol. 149. 1 J^^ c. 7.

Constables or Tythingmen neglecting t^^ search for Rogues upon the Justices
Warrant or to appear at their Meeting, to give an account what Rogues have been
punished, or sent to the House of Correction; or if they neglect to convey such
to the House of Correction, as by Warrant are to be sent thither, they are
liable to such Fine as the Justices please, not exceeding forty shillings, 7
Jac. c. 4.

Any Justice of the Peace may reward any Person or Persons, who shall
apprehend, and bring before him any Rogue, Vagabond, or sturdy Beggar, by
granting to such Person a Warrant under his Hand and Seal, to the Constable or
Tythingman of the place through which the Rogue did pass unapprehended;
ordering the said Constable, etc. to give such Person two shillings for every
Rogue so taken: And if the Constable, etc. refuse to pay it, the Justice of the
Peace may proceed against such Officers, according to the Stat. 1 Jac. 7. and
compel him to pay his Forfeiture by the said Statute, and to allow the said two
shillings out of the said Forfeiture, to such Person, with such further
Allowance for loss of time, as the Justice shall think fit, 1 Jac. 7. 14 Car.
2. c. 12.

If any Person shall apprehend any Rogue, at the Confines of any County, which
passed through any Parish of another County unapprehended, then the Person so
apprehending such Rogue, must carry him to some Justice of Peace of the County
through which he passed unapprehended, who (upon a Certificate under the Hand
of some Justice of Peace of the County where such Rogue was apprehended) is to
grant his Warrant to the Constable, etc. to pay two shillings, as aforesaid;
which if he refuse or neglect, then the Justice is to proceed against the
Constable, etc. and cause him to pay ten shillings to the Party, or so much
thereof for loss of time as the Justice shall think fit, 14 Car. 2. c. 12.

And also, That whereas Constables, Tythingmen, etc. are at great Charges in
Relieving, carrying with Passes, and conveyin^ Rogues, etc. all Constables,
Tythingmen, etc. so out of Purse, with the Churchwardens as Overseers of the
Poor, and other Inhabitan^^ of the Parish, may make a Rate, and tax (...) the
Inhabitants of the Parish, which a^^ chargeable by the 43 of Eliz. which Rate
mo^^ be confirmed under the Hands and Seals o^ two Justices of the Peace. And
if any Person refuse to pay his Rate, then the Constable, (...) Warrant from
two Justices of Peace, may Je^^ the same upon the Goods of the Party refusing
rendering them the Overplus, if any remai^ thereof, 14 Car. 2. c. 12.

All these Persons hereafter named, are accounted and adjudged Rogues,
Vagabonds, an^ sturdy Beggars: That is to say, All such Persons above the Age
of seven years, Man o^ Woman, Sole or Covert, that wander from their usual
place of Abode, abroad, every where begging; or if they do not beg, yet (...)
they wander and loiter about without a lawfu^ Pasport, and give no good account
for their Travel, are accounted Rogues, 39 Eliz. c. 4. and 17. 43 Eliz. c. 2. 1
Jac. c. 7. 21 Jac. c. 28. 7 Jac. c. 24. 5 Eliz. c. 4. Dalt. c. 47. fol. 123,
124, 125.

All Scholars and Seafaring men which beg, wandering Persons that use unlawful
Games, subtle Craft or Plays, or pretending themselves to have skill in
Physiognomy, Palmistry, or the like; or to be Fortune Tellers, or
Figure-casters.

All Proctors, Patent-gatherers, (except for Fire) Collectors for Goals,
Prisoners or Hospitals, wandering abroad; Fencers, Bearwards, (those are Rogues
in Grain) common Players of Interludes, and Fiddlers or Minstrels, wandering
abroad.

All Juglers, Hocus Pocus, and Slight of Hand Artists, Tinkers, Pedlars, and
Petty Chapmen and Glass-men, wandering abroad, especially if they be not well
known, or have not a sufficient Testimonial; all counterfeit Egyptians, not
being Felons; all Persons delivered out of Goals, which beg for their Fees, or
otherwise do travel begging; such as go to ^or from the B^ths, and do not
pursue their License, Soldiers and Mariners that beg, and counterfeit a
Certificate of their Commanders.

All Laborers which wander abroad out of the Parish, and refuse to work for
Wages reasonably taxed, having no living otherwise to maintain themselves; and
such as go with a General Pasport, which is not directed from Parish to Parish.

All these are accounted Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars.

All Servants that depart out of their Service, ( viz. out of one City, Town or
Parish to another, or out of one Hundred or County to serve in another) without
a Testimonial, or with a false one; and such Persons as are sick of the Plague,
and wilfully go abroad in Company, against the command of Officers, are to be
punished as Vagabonds; but none are to be sent to the place of Birth or last
Habitation, but wandering Rogues. Those which beg in their own Parish, or in
High ways, (without the appointment of the Overseers) are to b^ sent to the
House of Correction.

A Wife and Children under seven years (...) Age, being vagrant, must be placed
with the Husband; and if the Husband be dead, the^ with the Wife where she was
born, or l^^ dwelt; and vagrant Children above seve^^^ years of Age, must be
sent to the place (...) their Birth; and if the Vagrant Parents, wh^^^ their
Children under seven years of Age, (...) placed at the place of Birth of the
Parents, (...) at the place of Dwelling; if afterward the Parents, or either
of them die, or run away yet the Children once settled, must rema^^ there
still, and may not be sent to the place (...) their Birth, though afterward
they attain t^ the Age of seven years, 39 Eliz. c 4. Dalt. J.P* c 47. fol. 135.
Resolu. Judges, sect. 4, 5.

The Wife being but a vagrant Rogue, ough^ to be sent to her Husband, though he
be b^^ a Servant in another Town or Parish; and the Rogue whose place or
dwelling cannot be know^ having Wife or Children under seven years (...) Age,
they must go with the Husband to the place where they were last suffered to
pass through unpunished; where the Children mus^ be relieved with the Work of
their Parents though their Parents be committed to the House of Correction.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Constables Office about keeping the Sabbath.
THE Constable by Warrant from a Justice of Peace, (or the Chief Officer of any
^ity, Borough, or Town Corporate) under their Hand and Seal, against such as
use unlawful ^ames on the Sabbath Day, as Bull-baiting, Bear-^aiting,
Enterludes, or other unlawful Exercises ^ithin their own Parish, or out of
their own Pa^^sh at any such Sports whatsoever, may levy the ^enalty of three
shillings and four pence, by ^istress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, ren^ring
the overplus to the Owners; and in de^ult of Distress, the Constable is to set
the Of^enders in the Stocks by the space of three hours: Note, That the Party
offending in these Games, must be questioned within a month after the Of^ence
committed, 1 Car. 1. c. 1. Dalt. J.P. c. 23. ^ol. 63.

If any one on the Sabbath Day, keep, or be ^resent at any Wrestling,
Shootings, Bowlings, ^inging of Bells for Pleasure, Mask, Wake, Church Ale,
Dancing, Games, Sport or Pastime whatsoever, they forfeit five shillings, if he
or ^he be above fourteen years of Age, and if un^er that Age, then twelve pence
by him that ^ath the Government of the Party, to be levied by Sale and Distress
by the Constable, by Warrant from a Justice of Peace, or Chief Officer, ^s
aforesaid; and for want of Distress, to be set ^hree hours in the Stocks. And
every Carrier going with his Horses on this day, or Wagoner, Carrier or Waynman
going with any Wagon, Cart or Wayn, or Drover with his Cattle, forfe^^ twenty
shillings for every Offense, to be levi^^ also by Distress and Sale of his
Goods, if he (...) questioned within six weeks after the Offen^^^ done; but
there must be but one twenty sh^^lings forfeit for one Journey, although they
p^^^ through several Parishes, and this twenty sh^lings that Parish shall have
where the Distre^^^ is first taken, 3 Car. 1. c. 1. Dalt. c. 50. ^ 134.

And if any Butcher by himself, or any for hi^ shall kill or sell any Victuals
upon the Lo^^ day, he forfeits six shillings and eight pence, (...) be levied
by the Constable, by Distress and S^^^ as aforesaid, upon Warrant from a
Justice Peace, etc. the Offense to be questioned wi^^ six weeks after it is
committed, and the Part^^ to be convicted before any Justice of Peace Mayor, or
Head Officer, etc. upon their ow^ view, proof of two Witnesses or more, or t^^
Parties own confession, and the Justice, Mayor etc. may reward the Informer
with the this part of the Penalty, 3 Car. 1. c 1. Dalt. J.P. c. 5^ fol. 134.

All Laws in force concerning the Observation of the Lords day, shall be put in
Execution none shall do any Work, by Labor or Business that day, Works of
Charity and Necessity only excepted:) and the Offender, if of the Age (...)
fourteen years or upwards, shall forfeit fin^^ shillings: none shall cry, or
expose to sale (...) Wares that day, on pain to forfeit them: (...) Drover,
Horse-Courser, Waggoner, Butche^^ Higler, or their Servants, shall travel on
the Lords day, on pain to forfeit twenty shillings no Person shall travel on
that day with any Boa^^ Wherry, etc. except on extraordinary occasion ^o be
allowed by a Justice of Peace, or Head Officer of the place, etc. on pain to
forfeit five shillings, 29 Cap. 2. c. 7.

The Justice of Peace, or Chief Officer of the City, Borough, etc. before whom
the Offender ^s convicted, by View, Confession, or Oath of ^one Witness, shall
give Warrant to the Consta^les or Churchwardens, to seize the Goods ^^ried, or
put to sale, and to sell them, and to ^evy the other Penalties by distress and
sale of Goods, and in case of inability, etc. to set the Offenders in the
Stocks for two hours: the Penalties to be to the Poor of the Parish where the
Offense ^s committed, saving that the Justice or Head Officer may reward
Informers, the Reward not exceeding a third part of the Penalties. But
Prosecution must be made upon this Act within ^en days after the Offense
committed, 29 Car. 2. c. 7.

Dressing of Meat in Families, Inns, Cooks^hops, etc. and crying of Milk before
nine in the Morning, or after four in the Afternoon, are not prohibited by this
Act, 29 Car. 2. c. 7.

No Writ, Process, Warrant, etc. shall be served on the Lords day, except for
Treason, Felony, or Breach of the Peace; but the Service shall be void, and the
Party serving it shall answer Damages, as if done without Warrant, 29 Car. 2.
c. 7.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Constables Office about profane Swearing.
IF any Person or Persons shall profanely C^^^ and Swear, for every time so
offending the^ forfeit twelve pence; the Offense to be pro^^ within twenty days
after it is committed, (...) the Oath of two Witnesses, or by Confession the
Party before any Justice of Peace, or H^^ Officer of any City or Town
Corporate; w^^ thereupon may issue out their Warrant to the Constables, and
Churchwardens, and Overse^^ of the Poor of that Parish where the said Offen^^
shall be committed, and the said Constables, o^ are to levy the Sum and Sums of
Money by (...) stress and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendr^^ the overplus, if
any be, to the Owner, 21 J^^ c. 20. 3 Car. 1. c. 4. Wingates Stat. Tit.
Sweari^^ Dalt. J.P. c. 55. f. 138.

Note, Where no Distress is to be had, the Offender, if above twelve years of
Age, sh^^ by Warrant, as aforesaid, be set in the Stoc^^ three whole hours; but
if the Offender be ^^der the Age of twelve years, and shall not forth with pay
the said Sum of twelve pence per Oath then he or she is to be whipped by the
Constable^ or by the Parent, or Master, in the Constable presence, 21 Jac. c.
20. 3 Car. 1. c. 4. Dalt. J.P. c. 55. fol. 138.

CHAP. XXXV. The Constables Office about Tobacco Planting.
ALL Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, and every of
them, upon Information or Complaint made to them, (...) any of them, by any of
the Officers of the ^ustoms, or by any other Person or Persons ^hatsoever, that
there is any Tobacco set, sown, ^anied, or growing within their Jurisdictions
(...) Precincts, (except such as is growing in any ^hysick Garden of either
University, or in any ^^her private Garden, where the quantity of ^round
planted exceeds not one half of one ^^ble, in any one Place or Garden) they are
with^^ ten days after such Information or Complaint, (...) cause to be burnt,
plucked up, consumed, or ^^terly destroyed, all such Tobacco so set, sown,
^anted or growing, 12 Car. 2. c. 34.

And if any Person or Persons shall resist, or ^ake forceable opposition
against any Person or ^ersons in the due execution of this Office as a^vesaid,
every Person or Persons for every such ^ffence, shall forfeit the Sum of five
pounds, to (...) recovered in any Court of Record; and be so committed to the
Common Goal of the ^ounty where the Offense was committed, there (...) remain
without Bail or Mainprize, until he, ^^e, or they do enter into Recognizance to
his ^ajesty, his Heirs and Successors, with two suffi^^ent Sureties in ten
pounds Penalty, not to do (...) commit the like Offense again, 12 Car. 2. c.
34. ^^ Car. 2. c. 7.

And now by the Stat. 22 and 23 Car. 2. It further provided, That the Justice
of Peace (...) a month before every Quarter Sessions, (...) Warrants to High
Constables, Petty Constabl^ and Tythingmen, to make search what To^^^^ is then
sown, planted or made, and by who^^ and to make Presentment thereof in Wri^
upon Oath at the next Quarter Sessions; wh^^ Presentment shall be a conviction
in Law, (...) less the Party (having ten days notice before (...) Sessions)
traverse the same there, and find S^^^ties to prosecute his Traverse the next
Quar^^^ Sessions after such Traverse entered, 22 and (...) Car. 2. c. 26.

Constables, Tythingmen, and other pub^^^^ Officers, shall from time to time,
within fourt^^^ days after Warrant from two or more Justi^^ of Peace, calling
to them such as they find c^^venient, destroy all Tobacco planted or gr^^ing in
any Ground: If such Tobacco be (...) consumed fourteen days after receipt of
(...) Warrant, such Constables, Tythingmen, or ot^^^ Officers respectively
shall forfeit five shilli^^ for every Rod so set or planted, etc. and
p^^portionably for a greater or less quantity; (...) moiety to the King, the
other to him that ^^t sue for the same, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 26.

Persons refusing to assist the Constable, ^ being convicted before two
Justices of Peac^ shall forfeit five shillings, to be levied by distr^^^ and
sale of Goods, and for want thereof shall (...) committed for a week: And
Persons forc^^^^ resisting any Constable, etc. being convicted aforesaid, shall
forfeit five pounds, to be levied aforesaid, and in default thereof, shall be
committed for three months, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 26.

Physic Gardens, and Gardens for Surgery ^xcepted, as in the former Acts.
Persons sued ^or acting in Pursuance of any of these three Acts of Parliament,
may plead the General Issue, and give the special Matter in Evidence: This Act
is to continue nine years, and from thence ^o the end of the Session of
Parliament then next ^nsuing, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 26.

Continued 1 Jac. 2. for seven years, and from ^hence to the end of the next
Session of Parliament.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Constables Office about Weights and Measures
ALL Cities, Boroughs, and Market Towns in England, ought to keep common
Weights and Measures sealed, at which the Inhabitants may weigh freely; and all
Foreiners must pay for every Draught under forty pounds, one Farthing; for a
Draught between forty and an hundred, an Halfpenny; and for a Draught between
an hundred and a thousand, one Penny; wherewith the Weights are to be
maintained; and the Officers which attend that Service are to be rewarded at
the discretion of the Inhabitants, 8 H 6. c. 5.

Every City which wants such Weights and Measures, forfeits 10 l. to the King,
every Borough 5 l. and every Market Town 40 s. and the chief Officers of such
places (upon request to them made) are to Mark and Seal such Weights and
Measures to any of the Kings Subjects, taking for the marking of every Bushel
one Penny; and none ought to (...) with any other Weights and Measures, but
suc^ as are marked or sealed, 8 H. 6. c. 5. 11 H. ^ c. 4.

The Mayors and chief Officers in Cities, and ^ are once every year, at least,
to view all Me^sures and Weights in their Jurisdictions, (...) to break or burn
such as they find defective and to punish the Offenders for the first O^fence
six shillings eight pence, for the secon^ thirteen shillings four pence, and
for the thi^^ Offense, twenty shillings; and besides, (...) adjudge the
Offenders to the Pillory, ^1 H. ^ c. 4.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Constables Office about Watches.
A Watch is to be kept in every Town, Parish, Village and Tything, every nigh^
from Ascension till Michaelmas, from Sunset to Sunrise, which the Constables,
etc. must constantly cause to be set, and, that by two o^ four Men, according
to the greatness of the place, 13 Edw. 1. c. 4. Dalt. c. 60. f. 140. P^ul^
Watch. 1.

These Watchmen are to apprehend and examine all Strangers that pass by them in
the Night, and if they find cause of suspicion (...) them, then they may secure
them till the Morning; and if the Parties refuse to obey the Watchmen, they may
levy Hue and Cry to take them, and upon their resistance, the Watchmen may
justify the beating of them, and set them in the Stocks or Cage till Morning;
and ^hen if no suspicion be found in the Parties, ^hey may let them go; but if
there be found suspicion in them, then the Watchmen may de^iver them to the
Constable, or Tythingmen, etc. who is to convey them before a Justice of Peace,
who after Examination of them, may bind them over, commit or acquit them as he
shall see cause. These Watchmen are also to apprehend all such as ride or go
armed, and all Rogues, Vagabonds, Noctivagants, Nightwalkers, Evesdroppers,
Scouts, and such like, 1 Dalt. c. 60. fol. 140. 5 Ed. 3. 14. 5 H. 7. 5.

These three particulars following, have been held for Law concerning Watches,
viz. Dalt. J.P. c. 60. fol. 141.

1. The Watchmen must be Men of able Body, well and sufficiently armed, and no
Man is compellable to watch, unless he be an Inhabitant within the same Town or
Parish where he is required to watch. 2. Such as are Inhabitants within the
Town, are not compellable to watch at the will of the Constable, but only when
their turn comes, according to the use and custom of the place, which is most
commonly by Turn or House. 3. It has been held by some, That if a Man, who is
compellable to watch, shall contemptuously refuse to watch, upon command of the
Constable, that in such case the Constable might, ex Officio, set the Party in
the Stocks for his contempt, Dalt. ibid.
But the safest way is for the Constable (...) present such Person for his
Default at the Assis^ or Sessions of the Peace, or else to compl^^^ of him to a
Justice of the Peace, who (...) bind the Offender to the Good Behavior, a^^ so
over to the next Quarter Sessions, there (...) answer, etc.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Constables Office about Executing Warrants.
THE Constable, or other sworn Officers whom any Warrant shall be directe^ and
delivered, ought with all speed and se^^^cy to seek and find out the Party, and
then (...) execute his said Warrant.

A known sworn Officer (be he Sheriff, Under Sheriff, Bailiff or Constable,
etc.) need not to show his Warrant to a Man when (...) comes to serve it upon
him, though he d^mandeth it; but if the Justice will direct (...) Warrant to
his Servant, or to another (wh^ is no sworn Officer) to serve it, they m^^^
show their Warrant to the Party, if he deman^ it, or otherwise the Party may
make resistance, and needs not to obey it, Bro. Faux I^ pris. 23.

A sworn and known Officer, if he will no^ show his Warrant yet he ought to
declare to the Party the Contents thereof upon serving it Co. 6.54. and 9.68.

An Officer gives sufficient notice what he is when he says to the Party, I
Arrest you in the Kings Name, etc. and in such case the Party, at his peril,
ought to obey him, though he knows ^im not to be an Officer; and if he have
no ^awful Warrant, the Party gieved may have ^is Action of False Imprisonment
against him, ^o. 6.69.

If a Constable, or other Officer, do arrest a Man for the Peace, or the like,
before he has any Warrant, and then afterward does pro^ure a Warrant (or a
Warrant comes after to ^im) to arrest the Party for the same cause, ^he first
Arrest was unlawful, and the Officer is ^able to an Action of False
Imprisonment, Dyer ^44. Stat. 43 El. c. 6.

Where a Warrant is granted against I. H. the Son of T. H. and the Officer
thereupon arresteth I. H. the Son of W. H. although in truth he ^e the same
Person that offended, and against whom the complaint was made, yet this Arrest
is wrongful, and the Officer is subject to an Action of False Imprisonment, 10
E. 4. fol. 12. ^r. False Impris. 38.

If a Constable, or any other Person, has arrested a Man by virtue of his
Warrant, which he has from a Justice of the Peace, and then takes his Word,
that he will come to him again at another time, to go with him to the Justice
according to his Warrant, (and so latteth the Party go) who comes not again at
the time appointed, it seems the Officer cannot afterward arrest, or take him
again by force of his former Warrant, because this was done by the consent of
the Officer; but if the Party arrested had escaped (of his own wrong) without
the consent of the Officer, the Officer may take him again, and again, upon
fresh Suit so often as he escapes, although he be out of view, or that he fly
into another Town (...) County. Cromp. 214. a. and 184. Cro. 53.144.

When an Officer has received a Warrant he is bound to observe and pursue the
effe^^ of his Warrant in every behalf and particul^^ or otherwise his Warrant
will not excuse (...) of that which he has done.

If a Constable, or other Officer, having lawful Warrant to arrest another, and
he sh^^^ be resisted or assaulted by the Party, or by another Person, then may
that Officer justify t^^ heating or hurting of such Persons, and other (upon
his request) may and ought to aid hi^ 21 H. 7.39.

If a Justice of Peace shall issue our any Warrant for a Matter wherein he has
Jurisdictio^ although it be beyond his Authority, yet it (...) not disputable
by the Constable, or other s^^^ Officer, but must be obeyed and executed (...)
the Constable, or other Officer, to whom it (...) brought. As if a Justice of
Peace shall se^^ forth his Warrant to arrest one for the Pea^^ or Good
Behavior without cause, the Office^ that serves this Warrant, shall not be
punishe^ for the executing thereof; but if a Justice (...) Peace shall make his
Warrant to do a thi^^ out of his Jurisdiction, or in a Cause where^^ the
Justice of Peace is no Judge, if the Offic^^ shall serve such a Warrant, here
he is punishable; for the Officer is not bound to obey him who is not Judge of
the Cause no more tha^ a mere Stranger, for the Officer is bound (...) take
notice of the Authority and Jurisdiction (...) the Judge, 14 H. 8.16. Br. Faux
Impris. 8. Co. 10 26. Cromp. 74.

But if any Justice sends his Warrant to a Constable, or any other Officer, to
bring him to answer all such Matters as shall be objected against him, and does
not specify the Cause in his Warrant, wherefore he issued forth the same, this
Warrant is unlawful, and the Officer is liable to an Action of False
Imprisonment if he executes it.

So if a Justice of Peace send a Warrant to take one for Cozenage, to take and
bring to a Justice, or to Goal, one that another does suspect for Felony, where
the Matter is small, or the Suspicion slight, or to license a petty Chapman to
sell from House to House, to send a poor Body to a place otherwise than the Law
directs, such kind of Warrants are not Warrantable.

All Warrants not specifying the Cause, are utterly against Law, Cooks Inst.
part 4. Tit. de Frangent. Prison.

Except for Treason, or Warrants from the Council, Secretaries of State, or
Lord Chief Justice, these need not set forth the Cause for Reasons of State.

If any Man shall contemn or abuse the Justice of Peace his Warrant, as by
casting it into the Dirt, or treading it under his Feet, etc. such Offender may
be bound to his Good Behavior for it, and be indicted and fined, it being a
contempt against the Kings Process. Cromp. 144.

THE Churchwardens OFFICE.
CHAP. I. The Antiquity of the Churchwardens Office, and how they are to be
chosen.
THE Antiquity of the Office of a Churchwarden (when they first received that
Title) is very uncertain; but some are of Opinion, that it was about eighty
seven Years after Britain had received the Christian Faith, which most
Historians do agree, was planted here in the Reign of King Lucius, in the Year
of Christ CLXXX, who is hitherto stilled the first Christian King of this Isle;
and that Dionysius In the Year CCLXVII did divide (both in Rome and other
places) to Bishops their Dioceses; and Parishes, Churches and Churchyards to
Priests, Vicars and Curats; whether at that time, or how long after
Churchwardens were instituted, is not certainly known.

But all Authors do agree, that they are very ancient Officers, that these
Churchwardens of Parishes are at the Common Law taken in the manner of a
Corporation, 12 H. 7. ult. that (...) to say, Churchwardens at the Common Law
are persons enabled by that Name to take Moveable Goods or Chattels, and to
sue, or be sued at the Law concerning such Goods for the use and profit of
their Parish. And they are to take care, see to, and preserve the Goods of the
Church, viz. The Church-Books Communion Cups, etc. and other decent Ornaments
and Furniture of the Church, which they do find there at their coming into
their Office.

In the Book of Constitutions and canons Ecclesiastical, agreed upon in the
Synod beg^^ at London Anno Dom. 1603. and in the first Yea^ of King James, it
is appointed, that Churchwardens, Questmen, Sidemen, or Assistants (...) every
Parish, shall be chosen by the joint Consent of the Minister and the
Parishioners, if i^ may be; but if they cannot agree upon such a choice, then
the Minister shall choose one, and the Parishioners another; and without such a
joint or several Choice, none shall take upon them to be Churchwardens; neither
shall they continue any longer than one Year in that Ofifice, except they be
chosen again in like manner; and they are to be yearly chosen in East^^ Week;
Canon 89, 90.

But notwithstanding this Canon, where there is an ancient Custom in any Parish
for the choic^ of Churchwardens contrary to the Canon, in suc^ case the Custom
is to be observed before the Canon, as shall be instanced in several cases here
after mentioned.

If the Parishioners of a Parish have used time out of mind, etc. to choose one
Churchwarden, and the Parson or Vicar another, and afterward a Canon is made,
that the Vicar shall elect two, and he do so accordingly; and the Parishioners
elect one, according to their Custom, and the Ordinary disallows him, and
confirms the other two chosen by the Vicar, in this case a Prohibition shall be
granted, The Parishioners Case of Rovenden in Kent, Rolls Cases, part 2* f.
287. Pas. 5 Jac. B. R.

A Prohibition was granted against a Churchwarden chosen by the Parson of St.
Magnus by London Bridge by force of a Canon, upon a Surmise, that the Parish
had a Custom to choose two Churchwardens, Trin. 7 Car. 1. B.R. between Shirley
and Brown, Rot. 1391. Rolls 2 part, fol. 287.

Warners Case, B. R. Pas. 17 Jac. The like was granted against a Churchwarden
chosen by the Parson of St. Alhallows London.

Pas. 5 Jac. Cro. 2 part Rep. The Case of the Parishioners of Walbrook London.

Pas. 15 Car 1. B.R. The like against a Churchwarden chosen by the Parson of
St. Thomas in London, Cro. 3 part, Evelyns Case.

Pas. 4 Car. 1. B.R. Rot. 420. Rolls Cases, 2 part fol. 287. The like granted
between Draper and Stone for Abchurch in London.

An Attorney cannot be made a Churchwarden; but if he be put in, and refuse, and
be sued in the Spiritual Court, he may have a Prohibition, Wilsons Case, Pas.
14 Car. 1. B. R. and Bakers Case, Trin. 14. Car. 1. B. R. Rolls Cases, 2 part,
f. 272.

CHAP. II. The Churchwardens Office about Profanation of the Sabbath, and of
the Church.
THE Churchwardens are diligently to set that all the Parishioners duly resort
to their Parish Church on Sundays and Holydays, and there continue the whole
time of Divine Service; and none to walk, or stand idle, or talking in the
Church, Churchyard or Church porch, during that time; and all such as shall be
found slack or negligent in resorting to the Church, (having no great or urgent
cause of Absence) they shall earnestly call upon them, and if they amend not
after due Admonition, they must present their Names to the Ordinary of the
place, Canon 90. 5 Ed. 6. c. 1.

If the Churchwardens find any Person absent from the Church upon Sundays or
Holy days in the time of Divine Service, Preaching, or other Holy Exercise,
such Person is to pay 12 d. to the use of the Poor. And this extends as well to
all Women Covert, as to other Persons; or the Churchwardens may present such
Offenders in the Ecclesiastical Court; but they must not pay 12 d. and be
presented too, 1 Eliz. c. 1. Hob. Rep. f. 97.

If the Officer find any Tippling, in any Inn or Alehouse, in the time of Divine
Service, then they forfeit 3 s. 4 d. more for Tippling, besides the 12 d. for
being absent from the Church; And the Master of the House that suffers them to
drink, forfeits 10 s. which Forfeitures are to the use of the Poor, 4 Jac. c. 5.

The Churchwardens, or Questmen, and their Assistants, shall suffer no Plays,
Feasts, Banquets, Suppers, Church Ales, Drinkings, Temporal Courts or Leets,
Lay Juries, Musters, or any other Profane Usage to be kept in ^he Church,
Chapel, or Churchyard; neither the Bells to be rung superstitiously upon
Holydays or Eves abrogated by the Book of Common Prayer, nor at any other times
without good cause, to be allowed by the Minister of the place, and by
themselves, Can. 88.

Neither the Minister, Churchwardens, nor any other Officer of the Church,
shall suffer any Man to preach within their Churches nor Chapels, but such as
by showing their License to preach shall appear unto them to be sufficiently
authorized thereunto, Can. 50, 85.

And the Churchwardens and Questmen are also to see that in every Meeting of
the Congregation the Peace be well kept, and that all Persons excommunicated,
and so denounced, be kept out of the Church.

Every of the Persons appointed by the said Act, to take the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, in the respective Court where he takes the said Oaths, shall
first deliver a Certificate of his receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
as in and by the said Act is likewise appointed, under the Hands of the
respective Minister and Churchwardens, and shall then make proof of the Truth
thereof, by two credible Witnesses at the least upon Oath, 25 Car. 2. c. 2.

CHAP. III. Some few cases concerning Actions for, and against Churchwardens.
NOte, As I have said before, the Lo^^ does make Churchwardens a kind (...)
Corporation, and enables them by that Name t^ take moveable Goods and Chattels,
and to s^^ and be sued at Law concerning such Goods for the use and benefit of
their Parish; yet they cannot take an Estate of Lands to them by Name of
Churchwardens; for if a Feoffme^ be made to the use of the Churchwardens of
(...) this use is void, for they have no capacity (...) take such Purchase,
Finch lib. 2. c. 17. p. 179 Rolls Cases, 1 part, fol. 393.

Neither can Churchwardens prescribe to have Lands to them and their
Successors, for they are no Corporation to have Lands, but for Goods of the
Church only.

If a Man buy a Bell, and hang it up in the Steeple, or do make a Pew, and set
it up is the Church, and do neither make any Word o^ Writing there of, yet by
this is the Bell o^ Pew dedicated or given to the Church, 11 (...) 4. 12. 8 H
7. 12.

The Churchwardens have no Action at the Common Law to recover a Legacy, nor
any thing which they never had; but if any Goods or Ornaments of the Church, be
once in their Possession and Custody, they may maintain as Appeal of Robbery
against him that steals them, and an Action of Trespass against him that
shall wrongfully take them away, although ^t be the Vicar or Parson himself:
and the Damages that shall be recovered thereby, shall ^e to the use of the
Parish, and not to their own use, 37 H 6. 30. and 34. 11 H. 4. 12.

But if those Churchwardens (from whom ^he Goods were so taken) shall happen to
die before any Action by them brought for the Goods, the succeeding
Churchwardens shall have an Action for the same Goods, Fitz. N.B. ^1. K.

If a Bell be broken, the Churchwardens may have an Action against him that
brake it, and shall recover Damages, which shall be to the use of the Parish,
and not to their own use.

The Churchwardens have no such property in the Goods of the Church, as thereby
to have power to give, sell, release, hurt, or impair them, without the assent
of the Sidemen or Vestry.

If the Churchwardens shall give or impair the Goods of the Church in their
Custody, the Parishioners may choose new ones, who may have an account against
their Predecessors, Finch lib. 2. c. 17. p. 179.

If the Organs be taken out of the Church, the Churchwardens may bring an
Action of Trespass for the same; for the Organs belong to the Parishioners, and
not to the Parson; and therefore the Parson cannot sue the Party in the
Ecclesiastical Court that took them, Trin. 21 Jac. B.R. Rolls Cases, 1 part.
fol. 393.

If the Walls, Windows or Doors of the Church be broken down, or the Trees in
the Churchyard be cut down, or the Grafts thereof be eaten up; in this case
the Parson or Vicar, and not the Churchwardens, shall ha^^ an Action for it. A
Parson may bring his action for breaking and entering into his House and Close,
when it is the Church and Churchyard, 10 H. 4. fol. 9. 8 H. 6. fol. 9.

The Churchwardens by the assent and agreement of the Parishioners, may take a
ruino^ Bell, and deliver it to a Bell-Founder, as agree with him that he shall
have four Pound^ for casting it, and that he shall retain the sa^^ till the
four pounds be paid: And such agreement of the Parishioners shall excuse the
Churchwardens in a Writ of Account brought against them by their Successors
Churchwardens, M. 3^ 38 El. B. R. Methold and Winne^ Case, Rol^ Cases, 1 part,
fol. 393.

If the Churchwardens present in the Ecclesiastical Court, That one A.B. (one
of their Parishioners) is a Railer, and Sower of Disco^^ amongst his
Neighbors; in such case there lies a Prohibition; for this belongs to the Lee^
and not to the Spiritual Court, unless such Railing were in the Church or
Churchyard Mich. 16 Jac. C.B. Rot. 716. Smith and Pan^^^ Case.

If the Churchwardens sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for a Church Way, which
they clai^ to belong to all the Parishioners by Prescription, a Prohibition
lies, for this is a Tempora^^ Cause.

If the Churchwardens of H. sue R. A. in the Ecclesiastical Court, for that he
and all those whose Estate he has in such an House, etc. at the Perambulation
or Procession of the Parishioners of the Parish, did use to provide (...)
Refreshing for them, with Bread, Cakes, Cheese, and Ale, etc. and suffer them
to rest there; in this case a Prohibition will be granted, for that they claim
it in the nature of a Corrody.

CHAP. IV. The Churchwardens Office about disposing of Seats in their Church.
THE Churchwardens are to look to the Repair of the Seats in the Church, but
the disposing of the Seats in the Body of the Church belongs of common Right to
the Ordinary of the Diocese, so that he may place and displace whom he pleases,
except in some cases.

As if a Man and his Ancestors, and all those whose Estate he has in a certain
Message, have used time out of mind to repair an Isle of the Church, and to
sit there, and none else; in such place the Ordinary cannot displace him,
because he has it by Prescription for a reasonable consideration.

If a Man prescribe, that he and his Ancestors, and all those whose Estate they
had in a certain Message, did use to sit in a certain Seat in the Body of the
Church, time out of mind, in consideration that he and they have used time out
of mind to repair the said Seat, if the Ordinary remove him from such Seat, a
Prohibition may be brought, for the Ordinary has no power to dispose of it;
for it is a good Prescription, and by intendment a go^^ Consideration for the
same.

But if a Man prescribe to have a Seat in the Body of the Church generally,
without consideration to repair the same, in such case the Ordinary may
displace him.

But the Ordinary has nothing to do with the Seats in the Chapels belonging to
the Houses of Noblemen, Trin. 12 Jac. C.B. Rolls Cases, 2 part fol. 288.

But if a Layman by the dissolution of Monasteries has a Monastery in which
there is (...) Church, parcel of it, and he suffers the Parishioners for a long
time to come to it, and do Divine Service, and to use it as their
Parish Church* this (unless for all the whole time the Party has used to place
Men in their Seats himself) shall give Jurisdiction to the Ordinary to order
the Seats; for that now in Fact is the Parish Church, although that before it
were not subject to the Ordinary, Tr. 12 Jac. C. B. Buzzards Case, Rol^s 2
part, f. 228, 289.

If there be a Custom in a Parish that twelved the Parishioners may choose
Churchwardens, which Churchwardens have power by the Custom to repair the
Seats, and make new ones is the Body of the Church, and to appoint what Persons
shall sit in them; and the Churchwardens so elected, do erect a new Seat in the
Body of the Church, and appoint a certain Man to sit there, and afterward the
Ordinary decrees, that another shall have the Seat, here a Prohibition lies;
for the Custom has fixed the power of disposing the Seats in the
Churchwardens, P. 16 Jac. B. R. Barbin and Tredennicks Case for a Seat in
Breock Church in the County of Cornwall: but the reason of granting the
Prohibition in this Case, ^as partly because that the Sentence of the Or^inary
was, That Tredennick should have the Seat ^o him and his Heirs, and that none
should dissturb him on pain of Excommunication, which (...) unreasonable, and
by such Sentence he and his ^eirs should have it, though they were no
In^abitants within the same Parish, Rolls Cases, ^ part, fol. 289.

CHAP. V. The Churchwardens Office about Reparations and Rates.
THE Churchwardens are to see that the Church and Churchyard be well repaired
and kept clean; and they are to pro^ide Books of Common Prayer, Books of
Ho^^^lies, a Parchment Book for Registring of ^hristenings, Weddings and
Burials in; Fonts, ^ulpits, Tables, Chests for Alms, Communion Cups, Ornaments,
and other Furniture, and (...) Chest with three Locks and Keys for putting the
same in. And they are to provide ^read and Wine for the Sacrament according ^o
the number of the Communicants, 37 H. 6. ^0. 11 H. 7. 27. Canon 20, 70, 80, 81,
82, 83, ^4, 85.

And they may Rate the Parish for Money to ^efray their Charges.

Their Rates are to be done by the Churchwardens, with the assent of the
greater part of ^he Parishioners, and upon a general warning ^ven before they
meet for that purpose. And the Ecclesiastical Court has Cognizanoe of (...)
Reparation of the Body of the Church.

If a Man dwell in one Parish, and have La^^ in another Parish, which he
occupies there, (...) may be charged for such Lands, for the Rep^^^tion of the
Church of the Parish where (...) Lands lie, Co. 5. Rep. fol. 67.

If an Inhabitant of one Parish lease out (...) Lands which he has in another
Parish, res^^ving Rent, then he shall not be charged in (...) Parish where the
Lands lie, because there (...) Parishioner and Inhabitant who may be charges
Ibid.

If a Man live in one Parish, and occupy La^^ in another Parish, he shall not
be charged (...) that Parish where the Lands lie, for the O^naments of the
Church according to his La^^ for the Inhabitants only ought to be rated (...)
them.

Neither can a Man be charged in the Par^^^ where he does inhabit, for the
Lands which (...) occupies in another Parish, toward the ^^paration of the
Church in the Parish where^^ lives; because then he might be twice charge^^
for he may be charged in the Parish where (...) Land lies.

If a petty Chapman take a Stall in the Wa^^ of a Manor for Rent, within the
Market, (...) two or three hours every Market Day to i^ his Commodities, the
Market being held the one day every Week, but he inhabits in another Parish,
here he cannot be rated to the Repa^^tion of the Church for such Stall or
Stand^^^ M. 20 Jac. B.R. between Holms and the Churchwardens of Kittering in
Northamptonshire, res^^ved, and a Prohibition granted accordingly, R^^ Cases, 2
part, f. 289.

If a Citizen of London build an House in ^he Parish of A. and inhabit there in
the time of Sickness in London, and has not any Land in the Parish, and
afterward he is assessed 20 s for ^he Reparation of the Church, where others
that have a 100 Acres of Land in the same Parish ^ay but 6 d yet
notwithstanding no Prohibition ^^es in this case in the Court Christian,
because they have the Jurisdiction of the thing; and therefore he must be
ordered according to their ^aw, M. 5 Jac. C.B. Sir Robert Leys Case, Rolls
^ases, 2 part, fol. 289.

If there be a Chapel of Ease within a Pa^^sh, and one part of the Parish have
used ^^me out of mind to repair the Chapel themselves without the rest of the
Parishioners, and ^here to hear Service, and Marry, and all ^ther things, but
only that they Bury at the Mother Church, notwithstanding they must ^ontribute
to the Reparation of the Mother church, Mich. 13 Jac. C. B.

If some Parishioners be rated, and others are ^ot, and those who are rated,
are sued in the ^cclesiastical Court, they must plead this Mat^er in this
Court, for they cannot have a Pro^ibition.

Where there are five Bells in a Church, and ^^e major part of the Parishioners
agree that ^^ere should be made a sixth Bell, which is ^ade accordingly, and
they make a Rate for ^^e payment of it, this shall bind the remainder (...) the
Parishioners, though they did not agree ^^rd it; otherwise any obstinate
Persons might under any thing intended, and what is fit for (...) Ornament of
the Church, Heckfield and Mat^^^gly, etc.

Every Man ought to be rated according to his Personal Estate, and not
according to his Lands for the Goods and Ornaments of the Church; and by a Land
Rate for Church Reparations, though the Occupier of the Lands li^^ in another
Parish.

These things are accounted Church Reparations, and are to be performed by a
Land Ra^^, viz.

The Walls of the Church and Steeple, the Churchyard. Walls or Rails, the
Windows a^^ Bars of Iron, the Glass, the Roof of Timber with Laths, Nails,
Prigs, Dogs, and Bolts (...) Iron, the Covering of Lead, Tile, Slates (...)
Shingles, the Floor with Stone or Paving-Tile the Doors with Locks, Keys,
Ridges, Hoo^^ and Nails; the Furniture of the Steeple, w^^^ Stairs, Floors,
Bells, Wheels and ^opes; the Pulpit, and the Pews and Seats not made by private
Men.

These following are to be rated on the inhabitants of the Parish, and not upon
Out-dw^llers, viz.

The Communion Table, and Coverings thereof, the Communion Cups, the Bread and
Wh^^^ for the Communicants, the Bible, and oth^^ Books appointed to be in
Churches, the Wa^^ing of the Communion Clothes, Candles (...) Lecture Days, the
Surplice, Pulpit-Cloth a^^ Cushion, the Clerk and Sextons Wages, a^^ Expenses
of the Churchwardens and Sidesmen about the Parish Business.

By the Statute of 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 17. ^^tituled, [ An Act for the
better Paving and Cle^^sing the Streets and Sewers in and about the City of
London;] it is Enacted, (amongst other things) That where any Church or
Churchyard shall be fronting or adjoining to any of the Streets, Lanes, or
Passages before mentioned in the said Act, the Persons thereby au^horized and
appointed, shall rate and assess a ^easonable proportion thereof upon the
Parish ^hereunto belonging, the same to be paid by ^he Churchwardens of every
such Parish for the ^ime being, who are by the said Act required ^o pay the
same accordingly in the behalf of the same Parish.

CHAP. VI. Some Cases wherein the Churchwardens are equally concerned with the
Constables and Overseers of the Poor.
THE Churchwardens are to join with the Constables in making of Rates for the
Relief of the poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners, and for conveying Prisoners to
the Goal, and to execute Warrants for the same.

The Churchwardens are to join with the Constables in choosing of Surveyors for
the High Ways, and in the setting down of Days for the Work, and in the
oversight of the High Constables Account for the Money they do receive upon any
Forfeitures about the High Ways. And they may with the aid of two Justices (one
of the Quorum) force High Constables to account for, and pay in what Money they
have received forfeited for default of High Ways; and to execute the Justices
Warrants for the Penalties and Forfeitures about cleansing the Streets, and
repairing the High Ways, 14 Car. 2. c. 2.

The Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor are to execute the Justices
Warrant for levying the Penalties of five pounds upon the Parties Goods that is
not buried in Woollen* which Penalty is to be employed to the use of the Poor,
18 Car. 2. c. 4.

The Churchwardens in London, Westminster, and Borough of Southwark, etc. upon
every Monday or Tuesday in Easter Week, together with the Constable, Overseers
of the Poor, and Surveyors of High Ways in every Parish respectively, or the
greater number of them; giving notice, or calling together such other
Inhabitants of their Parishes as have formerly born the like Offices, they, or
the greater number of them are to make choice of, and shall nominate and
appoint two or more able Persons, that are Tradesmen of their Parish, to be
Scavengers for the Streets, Lanes, and other open Passages of each Ward or
Division within the said Parish for the Year next following, and until others
be chosen and settled in their places, 2 W. and M.

CHAP. VII. The Churchwardens Office about passing Accounts, together with the
Heads of most of the things which they are to present in the Visitation Court.
THE Churchwardens at the end of their Year, or within one Month after at the
most, are before the Minister and Parishioners to give up a just Account of
their Receipts and Disbursements; and at their going out of their Office, they
are to deliver up to the Parishioners what Money, or other things of right
belonging unto the Church which they have remaining in their Hands, that it may
be delivered over by them unto the next Churchwardens, by Bill indented, Canon
89.

If the Churchwardens refuse to do this, they may be presented at the next
Visitation Court for it, or the succeeding Churchwardens may bring their Action
of Account against them at the Common Law, and compel them to it; and in this
Account they shall be allowed their needful Disbursements and Expenses about
the Parish Business.

The Churchwardens, Questmen, or Sidesmen shall not be bound to exhibit their
Presentiments above once a Year where it has been no oftener used, nor above
twice a Year in any Diocese whatsoever, except it be at the Bishops Visitation;
for the which Presentiments of every Parish Church or Chapel, the Register of
the Court where they are to be exhibited, shall not receive above 4 d. in one
Year, under pain of Suspension from the execution of his Office the space of
one Mo^^^ for every Offense toties quoties. But the Church^wardens may
voluntarily present oftener if the^ please, Canon 116.

No Churchwardens, Questmen, or Sidesm^^ shall be called or cited but only at
the time (...) times before limited, to appear before (...) Ecclesiastical
Judge whatsoever, for refusing (...) other times to present any Faults
committe^ in their Parishes, and punishable by Ecclesiastical Laws. Neither
shall they or any of the^ (after their Presentiments exhibited at any (...)
those times) be any further troubled for (...) same, except it evidently appear
that they (...) willingly and wittingly omit to present so^^ public Crime or
Crimes, as they knew (...) have been committed, or could nor be ^g^^rant that
there was then a public Fame (...) them; or unless there be very just cause
(...) call them to explain their former Presentment^^ And in case of wilful
omission, their Ordinary shall proceed against them in such sort, as (...)
Cases of wilful Perjury in a Court Ecclesiastical it is already by Law
provided, Ca^^ 117.

One of the two times of Presentiments is ^^ways to be about a Week or Fortnight
after Easter, at which time also the old Churchwardens are to leave their
Office, and new one^ are to come in; but the new ones are not (...) be sworn
till the old ones have given in the Presentiments; and every Parson or Vicar,
(...) their Curats in their absence, are to join (...) the Presentment with the
Churchwardens, and^^ and if the Churchwardens refuse to present then every such
Parson and Vicar, or in their absence their Curats may themselves present to
their Ordinaries at all such times, and when else they shall think fit, Canon
113, 118.

The Sum of the Articles usually given to the Churchwardens to make their
Presentiments upon, are these, viz.
I. WHether their Church and Chancel, Bells and Ropes be in good repair, and
the Ten Commandments, Lords Prayer and Creed, drawn out in fair Letters, the
Kings Arms set up, Assessments made for the Repair of the Church, and Who
refuses to pay?

If they have a Font, Communion Table, Carpet, Table-Cloth, Flagons, with Cups
and Cover for Bread and Wine, a Reading Desk, a Pulpit, with a Cushion and
Covering for it, a fit Common Prayer Book of the largest Volume, the Bible in
Folio, of the last Translation, with a Book of Homilies, and Book of Canons,
and a Surplice?

If the Tombs, Monuments and Gravi-stones be safely kept from removing and
breaking?

A Book of Parchment for Registring Christnings, Weddings and Burials, etc. a
Chest with three Locks to put the same and the Church Ornaments in, with a Box
for Alms, and a Table of Degrees prohibiting Marriage hung up in the Church?

If the Parsonage House, and Outhouses, be in good Repair, and the Churchyard
will fenced to keep out Swine, etc.

II. Whether the Parson, Vicar or Curate, read the Common Prayer at Morning and
Evening Service, wear his Surplice, bid Days, preach every Sunday, or read an
Homily, Catechize, observet^ fifth of November, thirtieth of January, twen^^
ninth of May, and second of September; (...) observe Perambulations, or going
the Bounds (...) Rogation Week, preach sound Doctrine, and (...) no Sedition
against the King or Government; cel^brate the Lords Supper three times every
Year (...) least, whereof at Easter for one; baptize Infa^^ with Godfathers and
Godmothers, visit the Sick and Pray with them, bury the Dead according t^ the
Book of Common Prayer, Marry none cla^^stinely, preach in his Gown, be a Man of
a fis^ and chaste Life, a Peacemaker amongst his Neighbors, and one that takes
care to reduce Sectarius Recusants, Separatists, and refractory Persons to the
Obedience and Doctrine of the the Church; and reads the Book of Canons to the
People at leas^ once every Year, and the XXXIX Articles twi^^ every Year.

III. Whether all their Parishioners of due (...) resort to the Church to
Divine Service, b^ha^^ themselves reverently there, kneel, stand up, and make
Answer to the Rubric of the Common Pray^^ Book? Whether any Work, or sell
Wares on Sundays or Holydays? Or whether Vintners, Victuallers, Innkeepers, or
others do receive any to drink i^ their Houses in the time of Divine Service?

Whether any Marry within the Degrees forbidden, or be Adulterers, Swearers,
Blasphemers, Drunkards?

If any above 16 Years of Age do not receive the Lord Supper three times a
Year, whereof Easter to be one?

If any keep their Children unchristned, Women that come not to be churched, or
any bring not their Dead to be buried after the Service of the Church? Or if
any be married without Banes or License at unlawful hours?

And whether their Almshouses, Hospital, School or Spittle, if they have any,
be well and godly used, or any thing detained from it? What Legacies given to
pious uses; and if the Parishioners be placed into Pews or Seats without
offense or contention.

IV. Whether their Parish Clerk and Sexton (if they have any) be duly chosen,
can Write and Read, be of an honest Life, and make the Responses to the Hymns
and other Suffrages?

And if the Schoolmaster, Physician, Surgeon, and Midwife (if they have any)
teach or practice without License? If the Churchwardens be duly chosen
according to the Canon or Custom? And if the old Churchwardens have been
diligent to keep the Church in good Repair, to preserve all the Furniture
thereof, and walk out of the Church usually about the midst of Divine Service,
to see who are abroad in Alehouses, or elsewhere absent or evilly employed.

These are the Heads of most of the Articles that are inquired of at the
Visitation Courts; but it is probable there may be some small alteration,
according to the use of the several Diocesses in several places.

THE OFFICE OF THE Overseers of the Poor.
CHAP. I. Of the Antiquity of these Officers, of their Qualifications, and how,
and when to be chosen.
THose to be chosen to this Office, ought to be substantial Persons, Men of
Wisdom and a good Conscience; they must be Householders, for this Name and
Office may beseem the Best, and not the meanest Men, (it being an Office of
great Antiquity and Excellency;) For as God himself has a special Respect to
the Miseries of the Poor, so they be like God that provide for the Necessities
of the Poor, Dalt. J.P. 143.

The Overseers of the Poor are to be chosen yearly, and joined with the
Churchwardens of the Parish in the oversight and ordering of the Poor of the
Parish. They are to be chosen by two or more Justices of the Peace, (one
whereof to be of the Quorum) who are yearly under their Hands and Seals at
Easter, or within one Month after, to appoint four, three, or two substantial
Householders, according to the greatness of the Parish, to be joined with the
Churchwardens to look to the Poor of the Parish, Stat. 43 Eliz. c. 2. 21 J^^.
c. 28.

The major part of these Officers, without the rest of them, may do any thing
belonging to their Office. But they are to have the allowance and consent
either in particular, or in general, of two Justices of the Peace (Quor. unus)
to every thing they do about their Office. And these Officers, or such of them
as shall not be let by just excuse (to be allowed by two Justices) are to meet
monthly in the Church, on Sunday after Evening Prayer, and there are to
consider of some meet directions about their Office, and they are to use all
possible diligence in their Office on pain to forfeit for every such Default
twenty shillings, 43 El. c. 2. Wing^tes Stat. Tit. Poor People.

And if it happen that Overseers be not appointed according to the 4^ El. then
every Justice of Peace, or Head Officer of that Division or Corporation shall
forfeit 5 l. to be levied by a Sessions Warrant, and employed to the use of the
Poor of the Parishes where such default is made, 43 El. c. 2. Wingates Stat.
Tit. Po^^ People.

CHAP. II. Of the several sorts of Poor People, and what Poor the Overseers are
to provide for, and relieve, or to set to work.
THere are three sorts or degrees of Poor, as first, the Poor by Impotency and
Defect, as the Aged and Decrepit that are past their Labor; the Infant,
Fatherless and Motherless, and not able to work; the Person naturally disabled
either in Wit or Member, as an Idiot, Lunatic, Blind, Lame, etc. not being
able to work; and the Person visited with grievous Sickness or Disease, though
casually, yet thereby for the time being impotent. All these the Overseers are
to provide for, that they have necessary Relief, and Allowances proportionable,
and according to the continuance and measure of their Maladies and Needs, and
of these it may be said, Si non pavisti, occidisti, Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 169.

Then secondly, The Poor by Casualty, as a Person casually disabled or maimed
in his Body, as the Soldier or Labourer, etc. maimed in their lawful Callings,
the Householder decayed by casualty of Fire, Water, Robbery, Suretiship, etc.
and the poor Man overcharged with Children: All these (and such like others)
having Ability, and strength of Body, but not sufficient Means to maintain
themselves, are to be set to work by the Overseers, and being not able to live
by their Work, they are in Charity to be relieved in some reasonable
proportion, according to their several Wants and Necessities, D^^ J.P. c. 73.
f. ibid.

Then lastly, The thristless Poor, as the ri^tous and prodigal Person, that
consumes all wi^^ Play or Drinking, etc. the dissolute Person, as the Strumpet,
Pilferer, etc. the slothful Person the refuses to work, etc. and the Vagabond
the will abide in no place or service; and for all the^ the House of Correction
is the place where they are to be sent to, and being of able Bodies, the^ they
are to be held to hard Labor, and to maintain themselves by their Labor and
Work, without charging the Town or County for any Allowance, 7 Jac. c. 4 Dalt.
J.P. c. 73. fol. 170.

But it seems, that if any of these last so^^ Poor happen to prove impotent,
and also (...) cases of manifest extremity, then they are to be relieved by the
Town, Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. ibid.

If the Parents be able to work, and may have Work, they are to find their
Children by their labor, and not the Parish; but if they be overcharged with
Children, they may help, by having some of their Children put out Apprentices
by the Overseers, Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 157.

The Father, Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother, and the Children and
Grandchildren of every poor impotent Person not able to work, being of
sufficient Ability, shall relieve such poor Persons in such manner, as the
Justices o^ Peace of that County (where such sufficient Person dwells) at
their General Quarter Session^ shall Assess; and if such Person refuse to able
the Order, they forfeit 20 s. for every mon^^ to the Poor of the Parish, which
Forfeiture ^s (...) be levied by the Churchwardens or Overseers, or one of
them, by Warrant from any two Justices of the Peace (Quor. unus) within their
Limits, by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, and want of distress, any
two such Justices may commit the Offender to prison, there to remain without
Bail till the said Forfeiture be paid, 43 El. 2. Resol. Judges 16, 17. Dalt.
J.P. c. 73. f. 156.

But if a Man marry a Grandmother that has no Estate, the Grandfather in Law
is not chargeable: But if she has an Estate caused without such Marriage, or
that comes after Marriage by descent, or otherwise to her, here he may be
charged: But where they have raised themselves an Estate by their own Industry,
there it is doubtful. But in no case shall he be charged longer than his Wife
lives; and it seems also Bastard Children are not within this Law, neither can
the Justices do any thing therein against a Man that lives out of their County.
See Boulst. ^^p. 2 part, f. 245, 246, 247.

No Poor may beg but in their own Parish, and there by License of the Overseers
of the Poor; and they may not license them to beg in the Highways there, and
without the License of the Overseers they may not beg at all, Res. Judges 15.
Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 157. 39 El. 3.

No Inhabitants may serve any Poor at their Door, but those of their own
Parish, that have license from the Overseers of the Poor to beg there, under
pain of 10 s for every time they do so, 1 Jac. 7. Dalt. J.P. c. 83. f. 20.

These Officers are to make provision for a poor Man that wants an House (but
not for a common Herdsman or Sheperd) with consent of the Lord of the Manor
first had in writing under his Hand and Seal, either by themselves, or with a
Sessions Order, may erect a Cottage upon any part of the Waste of a Manor, and
lodge Inmates therein, notwithstanding the Stat. 31 El. ^. But such Cottage may
not be afterward employed otherwise than to lodge impotent Persons there, for
if it be, then it falls within the penalty of the 31 El. aforesaid, 43 El. c. 2
Wingates. Stat. Tit. Poor People.

All such Persons married or unmarried, having no Means to maintain them, using
no ordinary and daily Trade of Life to get their Living by, and such Persons
also as can get no Work, are to be set on Work by the Overseers; and any one
Justice of Peace may send to the House of Correction, or Common Goal, such as
shall not employ themselves to work being appointed thereto by the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish, 43 El. c. 2. Dalt. J.P.
c. 73. f. 143.

And to this purpose the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor may, by, and
with the consent of two or more Justices of the Peace (Q^^r. unus) etc. Set up
use, and occupy any Trade, Mystery or Occupation, only for the setting on Work,
and better Relief of the Poor of the Parish, Town or Place where they are
Overseers, etc. 3 Car. 1 c. 4. Dalt. J P. c. 73. f. 148. Wingates Stat. Tit.
Poor People.

CHAP. III. The Duty of the Overseers about putting forth, and binding of
Apprentices, with the Form of the Indenture for that purpose.
IN the putting out of Children Apprentices, there ought to be regard had to
the Master, the Child, and the Parents; First, to the Master, that he be of
Ability and Honesty, otherwise by some device or hard entreaty they may provoke
their Apprentices to depart or run away; and regard is also to be had to his
Trade or Faculty, lest the Apprentice consume his time without learning any
thing: Secondly, Regard is to be had to the Apprentices to put them out timely,
and while they are young and tractable (so that they be above the Age of seven
years) otherwise by reason of their idle and base Educations, they will hardly
keep their Service, or employ themselves to work: Then lastly, Regard is to be
had to the Parents, to take away such from them as are brought up to live idly
and loosly, or else such as are a burden and charge to their Parents, Dalt. J.
P. c. 73. f. 150, 151.

The choice of these Apprentices, are to be out of the poorest sort of
Children, whose Parents are the least able to relieve them, and they are to be
above 7, and under 15 years of Age, when they are first bound, 7 Jac. c. 3.
Wingates Stat. Tit. Poor People.

And these Officers are to have the consent of two Justices of the Peace in the
placing out of such Apprentices; and they may bind the Man-child till 24 years
of Age, and the Woman-child till 21 years of Age, or till she be married, which
shall first happen: And these Apprentices (...) be bound to Weavers, Masons,
Dyers, Fullers, (...) any other Trade, as well as to Husbandry (...)
Housewifery, See 43 El. c. 2. Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 14^ Wingates Stat. Tit. Poor
People.

Now this placing of Apprentices may be (...) any Man, whom the Officers and
Justices think (...) to receive them, within the same Parish or el^^where in
other Parishes within the same Hundred, either with, or without Money; therefore
it is fit in this case to consider, if the Child be young, and the Party to
whom they place it is not very able, then they may give Money, if they please,
as the Party and they shall agree, (...) Judges 1633. Quest. 1.

All Men that-have, or may have use for Servants, as Knights, Clergymen,
Gentlemen, and Yeomen, as well as Tradesmen, are bound to take Apprentices;
yea, though wealthy Men Table themselves, or live so privately, that they have
no use for a Servant, yet they may be compelled to take them, or else to pay a
Sum of Money for putting them Apprentices elsewhere; and if they refuse to pay
the Sum imposed upon them, two Justices of the Peace may make their Warrant to
levy the same by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, Res. Judges 1633.
Quest. 4. Po^^. 24. Dalt. J P. c. 73. f. 151.

Or the Refusers to take Apprentices, may be presented and indicted for the
same, upon the Stat. 43 El. c. 2. at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace,
Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. ibid. Res. Judges 1633. Quest. 7.

An Apprentice put to a Man in respect of his Farm, when his Lease expireth,
the Apprentice shall go still with the Farm, if the first Master be so pleased;
otherwise it is where an Apprentice is put to a Man in regard of his Ability,
or for other Respects. And where any differences are between the Officers and
the Man that is to receive an Apprentice, about Money, and what Money shall be
given or otherwise, ^here the Justices thereabouts, or in their Defaults, the
Sessions must end it, Res. Judges 1633. Quest. 2. Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 151.

If the Parents of poor Children shall refuse to let their Children be put
forth Apprentices (without good cause showed) such Parents may be bound over,
by the Justices, to answer their said Default, and if the Children shall
refuse, the Justices may send them to the House of Correction, there to remain
till they be content to be bound and serve, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. and 58. f. 153.
and 119.

Note, That this binding must be by Indenture, and may not well be done by a
verbal Agreement; and the Indenture must be either between the Justices,
Churchwardens and Overseers, or them and the Apprentice on the one part, and
him that takes the Apprentice of the other part, as appears by the Form of the
Indenture in the end of this Chapter; and he must be named by the Name of
Apprentice expressly, or else he is no Apprentice, though he be bound, Cromp.
184. Dalt. J.P. c. 5. f. 120.

And this binding is as effectual to all purposes, as if the Children were of
full Age, and did bind themselves by Indentures and Covenants; and all such as
are bound by the Overseers, as abovesaid, may safely be received and kept (...)
Apprentices by their Masters, 1 Jac. c. 25. (...) Jac. c. 28. Dalt. J. P. c.
58. fol. 120. 3 Car. 1. c. ^ 5 El. c. 4. Cromp. 184. b.

Such Money as is given to put out poor Children Apprentices, is to be employed
in Corporate Towns, by the Corporations, and in other places by the Parson or
Vicar, together with the Constables Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor,
or the most part of them; who shall (...) forbear to refuse to employ the same
accordingly, on pain to forfeit five marks, each o^ them so making default, to
be divided betwi^ the Poor of the Parish and the Prosecutor, 7 Jac. c. 3.
Wingates Stat. Tit. Poor People.

The Party taking any Money with such Apprentice, shall give good Security by
Obligation to repay it at the end of seven years next ensuing the date of the
said Obligation, or within the three months after the end of the said seve^
years; and if such Apprentice shall die within seven years, then within one
year after his or her death; and if the Master, Mistress or Dame happen to die
within the seven years, then within one year after their death; so as the Money
may be employed in placing the Apprentic^ with some other of the same Trade, to
serve out his time, at the discretion of the Parties trusted as aforesaid, 7
Jac. c. 3.

And the Money so given shall be employed within three months after the Receipt
thereof, and if there shall not be apt Persons found in the places where it is
given to the Apprentices, it shall then be employed in the Parishes next
adjoining, by the Parties that are trusted with it, in the place where it was
so given, and ^here also Bond shall be taken, as before is declared, 7 Jac. c. 3.

If the Master shall put his Apprentice into ^pparel, it is a Gift in Law, and
he cannot afterward take it away, though he should part with his Apprentice,
Br. Transgr. 93.

An Apprentice cannot be discharged from his Apprenticeship but by four
Justices of the Peace ^t the least, and in open Sessions, or else by ^he
Agreement of the Master and Apprentice, and under his Masters Hand in Writing,
Dalt. J. P. c. 58. f. 121.

The Form of these Indentures, mentioned before, is as follows, viz.
THIS Indenture made the 29th day of September, in the 20th Year of the Reign
of Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Annoque Dom. 1668. witnesses, that J. W. and G. R. Overseers of the Poor in
the Town of Kirk-Leaventon, and J. R. Churchwardens of the ^^me Town, by and
with the consent of Sir J. P. Knight and Baronet, and T. M. Esquire two of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace for the North Riding of the County of York, have by
these Presents ^laced and bound J. T. (being a poor fatherless child) as an
Apprentice with E. H. of Kirk-Leaventon aforesaid, Widow; and as an Apprentice
with her the said E.H. to dwell from the day of the ^^ate of these Presents,
until she the said J.T. shall ^ome to the Age of 21 years, or be married, which
shall first happen, according to the Statute in that ^ase made and provided, by
and during all which time and term the said J. T. shall the said E. ^ her Dame
well and faithfully serve in all (...) lawful Business as the said E. H. shall
put (...) the said J. T. unto, according to her Power, (...) and Ability, and
honestly and obediently in (...) things shall behave her self toward her said
Da^^ and Children, and all the rest of the Family (...) the said E. H. And the
said E. H. for her (...) promises, covenanteth, and agrees that she (...)
said E. H. the aforesaid J. T. in the Art and She of Housewifry, the best
manner that she can, (...) may, shall teach and inform, or cause to be taught
and informed, as much as thereunto belongs, and she the said E. H. knows;
and also during (...) the said Term, to find unto her said Apprentice, Meat,
Drink, Linen, Woollen, Hose, Shoes, W^^ing, and all other things needful or
meet for a^ Apprentice. In Witness whereof, etc.

Note, If it be a Boy that is to be bound Apprentice to Husbandry, or any other
Trade, the^^ he may be bound till 24 years of Age, as (...) showed before in
this Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Several Cases about Settlements, and also touching Bastards, etc.
TOuching settling of poor People, the Justices are to meddle with none but
those who are impotent, and such as are like to be chargeable to the place
where they are Boulst. Rep. 1 part, 347.

By 13 and 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. It is Enacted, that upon complaint by the
Churchwardens, ^^d Overseers of the Poor, to any Justice of ^eace within forty
days after any poor Person ^ometh to settle in a Tenement under 10 l. ^^r
annum, two Justices of Peace, whereof one (...) be of the Quorum, may by
Warrant remove ^^ch Person to the Parish where they were last ^^gally settled
for forty days, unless they give ^^curity to be allowed by the said Justices
for discharge of the Parish: Persons aggrieved may ^ppeal to the Quarter
Sessions.

But Persons having a Certificate from the ^inister of the Parish, and one
Churchwarden, and one Overseer of the Poor, declaring them inhabitants there,
may go into any Parish to ^ork, and the not returning of such Persons, ^hen
their Work is finished, or falling Sick whilst they are at Work, shall not be
accounted (...) Settlement: If any return to the Parish from ^hence they are
removed, a Justice of Peace ^ay send them to the House of Correction, to ^^e
punished as Vagabonds, or to a public Work house to be employed in Labor: and
if ^^e Churchwardens and Overseers of any Parish to which any are removed,
refuse to resolve them, and provide them Work, etc. a justice of Peace may bind
over such Officers to ^^e Assizes or Sessions.

Churchwardens and Overseers for the Poor ^here any Bastard-Child shall be
born, may ^ize so much of the Goods and Profits of the ^ands of the Putative
Father and Lewd Mother, (...) two Justices of Peace shall order toward
^ischarge of the Parish, to be confirmed at the ^essions: who may make an Order
for the Churchwardens, etc. to dispose of the Goo^ by sale or otherwise as they
shall think (...) and receive the Profits of so much of the^^ Lands, as shall
be ordered by the Sessions.

The Poor in every Town-ship or Village (...) Lancashire, Cheshire, Darbyshire,
Yorkshire, N^thumberland, Bishopric of Durham, Cumberland and Westmoreland
shall be provided for in the Township and Village where they inhabit, (...)
were last legally settled: And two or more overseers shall be chosen in every
Township etc. who shall execute all powers for the Belief of the Poor under the
Penalties mentioned in 43 Eliz. c. 2.

This Act of 13 and 14 Car. 2. c. 12. was (...) continue no longer than to the
end of the first Session of the next Parliament, but revived by 1 Jac. 2. c.
17. to continue for seven years, an^ to the end of the first Session of the
next Parliament.

And whereas poor Persons at their first coming to a Parish, do commonly
conceal themselves, the forty days intended by the said Act to make Settlement,
shall be accounted from the time of their deliveries of notice in wri^ing of
their House of Abode, and the number of their Family, if they have any, to one
of the Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poo^ of the said Parish, 1 Jac. 2. c.
17.

No Man but a Vagrant Beggar, ought to be sent out of any Parish to the place
of his Birth or last Habitation; for if any refuse to work in the Parish where
he is settled, or to work for the Wages assessed, then he is by the Justice^ to
be sent to the House of Correction, Co. 2 part Inst. fol. 730. 7 Jac. c. 4.
Resol. Judges 9. Dalt. ^. P. c. 73. f. 157. 39 El. c. 4. 1 Jac. c. 7.

If a Scholar in the University, or in a Grammar School begin to be suspect, he
may be, or (...) he does become impotent, and is like to ^e a Charge to the
Parish where he is, he must ^e sent to his Parents if he have any, other^ise to
the place where he was last legally ^^ttled before he came to School, Res.
Judges 633. sect. 32.

If one be Born, and live 20 years in A. and ^^en go to B. and there live in a
House and pay ^is Rent, and after he come to C. and there Works 20 Weeks as a
Labourer in a Quarry of ^^ones, where he breaks his Back, and becomes ^^potent,
and there is taken vagrant and beg^^ng, in this case he must be sent to A. the
^^ace of his Birth, and there must be provided ^or, Res. Judges, 14 Car. 1.

If a Man that has a Wife and Children, take (...) House in one Parish for a
Year, and during ^is time he is illegally forced out of his Possession; then he
takes an House as Inmate in another Parish, out of which he is put within two
^r three days, and then not having any place (...) be in, he gets into a Barn
in the third place, and there his Wife is delivered of another ^hild: In this
case they are all to be sent to the ^arish out of which they were first
illegally ^^rced, Resol. Judges 1633. sect. 24.

One Born in D. left that place for the space (...) 20 years, then lived in S.
took an House and ^^id Rent, and left that place also six or seven ^ears, and
then came to L. in another County. and there was twenty Weeks, did Work, and
there became impotent, and did wander, at beg in the same place, and was taken
as a Vagrant, and it was ordered he should be passed and settled at D. where he
was Born, by the Judges at Worcester Assizes, 14 Car. 1. Boulst. Re^ 1 part, f.
375.

No Child under the Age of seven years sha^^ be adjudged a Rogue within the
Stat. 39 El. c. ^ But it seems such Children vagrant and beggin^ must be sent
and placed with the Father (...) Husband of the Wife; and if he be dead, the^
with the Mother (where she was born, or la^^ dwelt by the space of one year)
and such Children, once thus settled or placed, must the^^ remain, and not be
sent from thence to the^^ place of Birth, though after their Parents die or run
away, or that the said Children gro^ above the Age of seven years, yea, though
th^^ said Children after beg, and prove vagrant i^ the Town, for there they
must be set to labo^^ by the Overseers of the Poor, Dalt. J.P. c. ^^ f. 209.

But Children above seven years of Age, going about vagrant, or begging in the
Country, shall be punished as Rogues, and sent (...) their place of Birth,
Dalt. J. P. chapter 83. f. 209.

The Wife being a Vagrant Rogue, must be sent to her Husband, though he be but
a Servant in another Town; and where the Husband and Wife have an House,
(though as an inmate) and either of them Rogue about, in this case they are to
be sent to the place where the House is, Dalt. J. P. c. 83. fol. 209.

The Rogue, whose place of birth or last dwelling cannot be known, having Wife
and Children under seven years of Age, they must go with the Husband to the
place where they were last wilfully suffered to pass through without
punishment, where the Children must be ^elieved by the Work of their Parents,
though the Parents be committed to the House of Correction; and if the Rogue
have Children above ^even years of Age, that Rogue about with him, then they
are to be sent to the House of Correction also with the Parents, and when they
come out again, then to their several places of births, Dalt. J.P. c. 83. f.
206. and Shephards Guide ^or J.P. page 252. Res. etc. b.

If I live in a House in A. there with my Children, but I work in B. where I am
hired by the year, in this case my Children shall be in A. but ^f I have an
House in B. they shall be placed ^here, Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 158.

A. being a Wanderer with three Children born in three Parishes, comes to Dale
with them ^o her Sister, and there dies shortly after, here the Children must
be settled in the several Parishes where they were born, and not in the Parish
where the Mother died, Boulst. Rep. 2 part, 351.

No Man is to be put out of the Town where he dwells, and is lawfully
settled, nor to be sent to his place of Bith, or last Habitation, but a Vagrant
Rogue, not to be found by the Town, except the Party be impotent, but they
ought to set themselves to labor, if they be able and can get Work; and if
they cannot get Work, then the Overseers are to set them to work; and if in
such case such Persons wander abroad begging out of the Parish, then they may
be sent as Vagabonds (from the place where they shall be taken wandering or
begging) to the place of their Birth, Dalt. J.P. c. 83. f. 209.

If a Maid Servant be gotten with Child at (...) by her Fellow Servants (or by
another Man o^ the same Town) and after both their Service^ ended, they Marry,
and then the young Man is retained at B. and afterward the Woman is delivered
of her Child, in this case she with her Child are to be sent to the Father at
B. and there must be settled, Dalt. J.P. c. 73 f. 159.

If any disturbance be made to any Settlement lawfully ordered by the Justices,
either by the Constables refusing to receive and convey a Rogue where they
ought to do it, or by the Churchwardens and overseers of the Poor in refusing
such an one as is duly sent to be settled there, in such case they forfeit 5 l.
by the 39 El. c. 4.

If a Woman unmarried be hired Weekly, Monthly, half Year, or Yearly, in one
Parish, and there be gotten with Child, and then goes into another Parish, and
there is settled in Service, or otherwise for two or three Months, and then she
is discovered to be with Child, is this case she and her Child shall be settled
in the Parish where she then is, and must not be sent to the Parish whence she
came, Resol. Judge^ 1633. sect. 12.

If a Woman be delivered of a Bastard Child in one Parish, and then go into
another Parish with her Child, in this case the Child after it is nursed, is to
be sent to, and settled in the place where it was born, and not to remain with
the Mother, Resol. Judges 1633. sect. 23.

If A. have a Bastard Child by B. born in Dalt, and the reputed Father marries
another Woman, and they breed the Child 10 years in the Parish of Sale, and the
Mother of the Child is in Service all this while, and a single Woman, the
reputed Father dies; in this case the Child is to be sent to the Mother first,
to be maintained by her, if she be able, and if not, it must be kept by the
Parish of Salt, where it was settled with the Father 10 years, Boulst. Rep. 2
part, fol. 350.

If a Woman have a Bastard Child, and is like to be chargeable to the Parish,
and she is sent to the House of Correction for it (as she may be by Law) in
this case it has been questioned whether the Child must go with her, or remain
in the Town where it was born, (or settled with the Mother) and there to be
relieved by the Work of the Mother, or by Relief from the Reputed Father, upon
the 18 El. and it seems most reasonable to be so; and yet the common opinion
and practice is otherwise, (to wit) to send the Child with the Mother to the
House of Correction: And this may also seem reasonable where the Child sucketh
on the Mother, Dalt. J.P. c. 11. f. 41.

If a Woman with Child be sent to the House of Correction, and there be
delivered, the Child must be sent back to the Parish where the Woman came from,
there to be relieved. Also if a Woman be traveling, and have her Child with
her, and is apprehended and sent to the Goal, and there hanged for Felony, in
this case the Child shall not be chargeable to the place where the Goal is, but
to the place where it was born (if it can be known) otherwise to the place
where the Mother was apprehended and so was the opinion of Sir Nicholas Hi^^ 3
Car. 1.

The two next Justices (Quor. unus) in (...) next to the Limits where the
Parish Church (...) may take order as well for the punishment (...) the Mother,
and reputed Father of a Bastard Child, as also for the Relief of the Parish
where it is born, by charging the Mother and Father with the payment of Money
weekly toward the keeping of it, or otherwise: And if the Mother or Father
perform not the Justices order therein, they are to suffer Imprisonment without
Bail, except he or she give Security to perform, or else to appear at the next
Sessions, and abide the order of the Justices there, if any be made there; and
if none be made, then to stand to the first order, Dalt. J.P. c. 11. f. ^. 18
El. c. 3.

Note, That this Order may be made by any two Justices of the County (Quor.
unus) as (...) held by some, but most properly by the tw^ next Justices, and
the question must be about such a Bastard Child as is like to be a charge to
the Parish; and the Security must be given to the Parish where the Child is
born, to secure the Parish from the charge of the Child, or to keep the Child:
it must be a Parish with in the County where the two Justices have power, and
the Order must be certain how long the reputed Father must keep the Child,
secure the Parish, etc. and it must be made against the Person that is
suspected to have gotten the Bastard Child, and not against another Person to
contribute toward it, because it was gotten in his House, etc. and the Order
must express the Child by the Name of a Bastard Child, and not the reputed
Child of such an one; and the Justices for the better discovery of the Matter,
may upon Oath examine the Mother her self concerning the reputed Father, the
time, etc. Dalt. J. P. c. 11. fol. 40. 18 Eliz. c. 3. 7 Jac. c. 4. See Steels
Rep. fol. 154, 245, 246, 247, 388. and see Pridgeons Case, Hill. 9 Car. 1. B.R.
and Slaters Case, Pasch. 13 Car. 1. B.R. Cro. Rep. 1 part.

CHAP. V. The Overseers Office in making of Rates, and passing Accounts.
THE Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, or the greater part of them (for
the doing and performing of the things they have in charge) may raise weekly,
or otherwise by Taxation of every Parson, Vicar, and other Occupier of Land,
House or Tithes, Colemines, or saleable Underwoods, within the Parish, Town,
etc. such a Sum as they shall think fit; and this Rate they must have allowed
and confirmed under the Hands of two Justices (Quor. unus) and then by Warrant
from them, or any other two Justices (Quor. unus) they may levy by distress and
sale of the Goods of the Party refusing to pay the said Tax, rendering the
overplus to the Owners, and in default of Distress, two such Justices may
commit the Party to prison, there to remain without Bail till he be discharged
by him, 43 El. chapter 2. Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 148. Wingates Stat. T^^ Poor People.

Now these Rates ought to be well and tr^^ made, according to Men's visible
Estates, real i^ personal, within the place only, and not (...) any Estate
elsewhere; at Lincoln Assizes, 9 Ca^^ by Justice Hutton and Crook.

Note, That a Parish in Reputation, shall be Parish within this Law: so that if
A. be ancient Parish that has Officers in it, and the^^ be a Town within this
Parish, which for a long time has been used, and reputed as a Parish and has
all Parochial Rights, as Churchwardens, etc. here this place may be rated as t^
Parish toward the Poor, Huttons Rep. fol. 93. (...) M. 3 Car. B.R. Hilton and
Paul's Case, Cro. 3 p^^ Rep.

This Tax must be set upon the Tenants and Occupiers of Lands; and not upon the
La^^lords Living within or without the Parish; (...) the Tenant only is
chargeable for the Land, B^^strods 1 part, Rep. fol. 354.

The Parson having a full tenth Part of the Profits of the Place, may be rated
to a tenth Part Resol. Judges 1633. sect. 33.

He that does occupy Lands in his own Hands lying in several Parishes, he must
be charged in every Parish for his Land lying therein, only according to the
proportion thereof, and (...) more; but for his personal Estate it seems
reasonable he should be charged for it in the place where his Person is: All
Lands Ancient Demesne, Guildable and Copyhold, are to be charged with these
Rates, which ought to be according to the value, or by the pound, and not
according to the quantity, Sed consuetud^ tollit Legem.

The Rate for Stock or Goods is thought reasonable to be set after the
proportion of Lands, (viz.) an 100 pound in Stock to be rated after 5 or 6
pound a year in Land.

Note, That in some special Cases a Man may be rated beyond his Ability; as
where one brings a Charge upon a Parish; or under any pretense brings in a Man
that may be chargeable in a Parish, he may, if there be cause for this, be
raised in his Rate to the full value of his Estate; and so was the Opinion of
Sir Nicholas Hide, Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 167.

Where the Inhabitants of any Parish are not able to relieve their Poor, any
two Justices (Quor. unus) may tax other Parishes and Places within the Hundred,
yea, the whole Hundred, if need require; and where that is not sufficient, the
Justices in their Sessions may tax the County in part, or wholly at their
discretion, 43 El. c. 2. Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Poor People, 14 Car. 2. c. 12.

If any Persons find themselves aggrieved in any Tax, or other-Act done by the
Overseers, or by the Justices of Peace, they are to be relieved at the Quarter
Sessions, Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 160. Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Poor People.

The Father, Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother and Children of every poor
Person, shall be assessed toward their Relief, as the Justices of the Peace in
their Sessions of the Peace in the County where such Father, etc. dwells, shall
limit and appoint, on pain to forfeit 20 s. a month, to the use of the Poor, to
be levied by distress and sale as aforesaid, and for want of distress to be
committed to Prison till the Forfeiture be paid, 43 El. c. 2. Wingates (...)
Stat. Tit. Poor People, Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 1^^.

Head Officers in Cities and Corporate Towns and Aldermen of London, have in
their severa^ Precincts like Authority that Justices of Peace have in their
Counties, and no other Justice^ of Peace are to enter and intermeddle there
Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Poor People, 43 El. c. 2.

If any Parish shall extend into two Counties or part thereof to lie in any
City or Corporate Town where they have Justices: Then the Justices of every
County, etc. are to intermeddle only within their own Limits; and every of them
respectively within their Limits are to execute this Law concerning the
nomination of Overseers, binding of Apprentices, granting Warrants to levy
Taxations, taking Account of Overseers, and committing such as refuse (...)
account, or to pay their Arrearages; and yet the Overseers shall without
dividing themselves, execute their Office in all places within the said Parish,
but shall give up Accounts to the Justices, or Head Officers of both Places,
Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Poor People, 43 El. c. 2. Dalt J.P. c. 73. f. 156.

These Officers within four days after the end of their Year (and that other
Officers are nominated) are to yield up a true Account to two Justices (Quor.
unus) of these things following, 1. What Sums of Money they have received, or
rated and not received? 2. What stock of Ware or Stuff is in their Hands, or is
the Hands of any of the Poor? 3. What Apprentices they have put out, and bound
according to the Statute? 4. What Poor they have set to work or relieved? 5.
What Poor they have suffered to wander and beg out of their Town, or in the
Highways, or in their Town without their directions? 6. Whether they meet
monthly to consider of the things belonging to their Office? 7. Whether they
made their Rates indifferent upon all Men, according to their Ability? 8.
Whether they have endeavored to gather and levy such Assessments? 9. Whether
they have neglected the Justices Warrants to them, or any of them directed for
the levying of any Forfeiture according to the Stat. 43 El. c. 2. Dalt. J. P.
c. 73. f. 153.

By the Statute of 30 Car. 2. for Burying in Woollen, the Justices are not to
allow the Accounts of the Overseers of the Poor, until they have given them an
Account of the Burials and Certificates, and of their levying the Penalties in
pursuance of that Act, 30 Car. 2. c. 3.

Now if the Churchwardens, or Overseers, or any of them, shall refuse to make
and yield a true and perfect Account to the said Justices, of all such Money,
and of all such Stock as aforesaid, any two Justices (Quor. unus) may commit
them to the common Gaol, there to remain without Bail, till they have made a
true Account, and satisfied, and paid to the new Overseers so much of the said
Sum or Stock, as upon the said Account shall be remaining in his or their
Hands, etc. And if they make a false Account, they may be bound over to the
Assizes or Sessions, and there an Indictment may be preferred against them,
Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 154.

Also if any of the Churchwardens or Overseers shall refuse, or deny to pay, or
deliver over to the new Overseers the Arrearages (Sums of Money or Stock) which
shall be in their Hands, and due, and behind upon their Account to be made as
aforesaid, any two such Justices of Peace may make their Warrant to the present
and subsequent Churchwardens and Overseers, or any of them, to levy the same by
distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering to the Parties the overplus,
and in default of such distress, any two Justices of the Peace may commit him
or them to the common Goal, there to remain without Bail, until payment or
delivery of the said Sum, Arrearages and Stock be made, 42 El. c. 2. Dalt. J.P.
c. 73. f. 154.

If any such Stock shall be in the Hands of any of the Poor to work, and such
Poor shall refuse to deliver the same, two such Justices may make the like
Warrant, to levy the same by distress, and for lack thereof, may commit such
Offenders to the Goal, as aforesaid, Dalt. J.P. c. 73. ibid.

And for these aforesaid, and all other Negligencies of the Churchwardens and
Overseers, in the Execution of their Office, about the Poor, etc. every of
them, for every Default, he makes, forfeits 20 s. which Default must be proved
either by the Offenders own Confession, or by Examination of Witnesses, and it
is to be levied by the new Churchwardens and Overseers, or one of them, by
Warrant from two Justices, as aforesaid, by distress and sale of the Offenders
Goods; and for want of Distress, two such Justices may commit Offenders to the
Goal, there to remain without Bail, till the said Forfeitures shall be paid;
which said Forfeitures are to be employed to the use of the Poor of the said
Parish, Dalt. J.P. c. 73. f. 155. 43 El. c. 2.

CHAP. VI. The Overseers Duty about Weights and Measures, and Burying in
Woollen.
THere shall be one Weight, one Measure, and one Yard, according to the
Standard of the Exchequer, throughout all the Realm, as well in places
Privileged, as without, and every Measure of Corn shall be striked without
Heap: And whosoever shall keep any other Weight, Measure, or Yard, whereby any
Corn, Grain, or other thing is bought or sold, shall forfeit for every Offense
five shillings, being thereof convicted, by the Oath of one sufficient Witness,
before any Justice of Peace, or Head-Officer of the City, Town, or Place where
the Offense is done, to be levied by the Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor
of the Parish, to the use of the Poor of the said Parish, by Distress and Sale
of the Offenders Goods, and for want of Distress, to be Imprisoned without Bail
until payment. And all Persons, upon Suit against him or them, for any thing
done upon this Act, to plead the General Issue, and give the Act in Evidence,
and to have treble Costs, if unjustly vexed, Dalt. J.P. c. 112. f. 246. 17 Car.
2. c. 19.

No Corpse shall be buried in any thing other than what is made of Sheeps Wool
only, or be put into any Coffin lined or faced with any thing made of any
material but Sheeps Wool, on pain of the Forfeiture of five pounds, 30 Car. 2.
c. 3.

An Affidavit under the Hands and Seals of two Witnesses (or under the Hand of
the Magistrate or Officer before whom it was sworn, for which nothing shall be
paid) must be brought to the Minister within eight days after the Party is
interred, that he was not buried contrary to this Act, which shall be taken
before some Justice of Peace, Master of Chancery, Ordinary or Extraordinary,
Mayor, Bailiff, or other chief Officer of the City, County, Borough, etc. where
the Party was buried: And if no such Affidavit be brought, the Minister shall
give notice thereof under his Hand to the Churchwardens or Overseers of the
Poor, who within eight days after shall repair to the Chief Magistrate in any
Town, etc. if buried there, else to a Justice of Peace, who upon Certificate
thereof from the Minister, etc. shall grant a Warrant for levying the
Forfeiture by distress and sale of the Goods of the Party deceased, or in
default thereof, of the Persons Goods in whose House the Party died, or the
Goods of any that had a Hand in putting such Party into any Shroud, Coffin,
etc. contrary to this Act, or that ordered the same: And if such Person were a
Servant, and died in the Masters Family, the Masters Goods to be liable: And if
such Person died in his Parents Family, the Parents Goods to be liable: One
Moiety of which Forfeiture shall be to the Poor of the Parish where the Party
is buried, the other to him that shall sue for the same, 30 Car. 2. c. 3.

Ministers, Churchwardens, and Overseers, Justices of Peace, or Chief
Magistrates, neglecting their Duty aforesaid, shall forfeit five pounds for
every Offense, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, etc. wherein
the Prosecutor shall recover his full Costs, so as the Suit be commenced,
within six months after the Offense committed; one fourth part of the
Forfeitures to the King; two fourth parts to the Poor of the Parish where the
Offender dwells; and one fourth part to the Informer, 30 Car. 2. c. 3.

Every Minister shall keep a Register of all Burials and Affidavits: And where
no Affidavit is brought as aforesaid, shall enter a Memorial thereof against
the Name of the Party interred, and of the time when he notified the same to
the Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor. And the Overseers when they give up
their Accounts at the Sessions, or to any two Justices at their monthly
Meetings, shall give an account of the Name and Quality of every Person
interred since their former Account; and of such Certificates, and of their
levying the Penalties, and of their disposal thereof, on pain of five pounds to
be levied by distress and sale of Goods, by Warrant from the said Justices, or
two of them: and their Accounts shall not be allowed till they have accounted
for their Burials, 30 Car. 2. c. 3.

No Penalty shall be incurred where the Party died of the Plague: If any Person
be prosecuted, for what he shall do in pursuance to this Act, he may plead the
General Issue, and give this Act in Evidence: And upon a Nonsuit,
Discontinuance or Verdict for him, or Judgment upon a Demurrer, he shall have
treble Costs, 30 Car. 2. c. 3.

And now by the Statute of 32 Car. 2. (where no Justice of Peace shall reside,
or be to be found in any Parish where any Party shall be interred) such Oaths
or Affidavits may be adminstred, not only by such Magistrates as aforesaid, but
by any Parson, Vicar, or Curate in the same County, other than of the Parish or
Chapel of Ease where the Party is interred; and they are to attest the same
under their Hands gratis, 32 Car. 2. c. 1.

The Overseers Duty about Irish Cattle, See Duty of Constables, chapter 8.

Their Duty in suppressing Conventicles, See Duty of Constables, chapter 9.

Note, That the Overseers of the Poor, are to receive for the use of the Poor
of the Parish where the Offense is committed, of such who kill, or take in the
nightime any Conies upon the Borders of Warrens, or other Grounds lawfully
used for keeping of Conies, except Owners, etc. or Persons by them employed,
and of such who use Snares, Harepipes, or other like Engines, or who take any
Fish by any Net, Angle, or other Device whatsoever, in any Water or River, or
shall be assisting thereunto, without consent of the Lord, or Owner of the said
Water, what Sum the Justice of Peace before whom such Offender shall be
convicted, shall think meet, not exceeding ten shillings (which he is to pay
over and above recompense to the Owner:) And in default of payment thereof, he
that takes or kills such Conies, or uses Snares, etc. shall be committed to
the House of Correction for any time not exceeding one month: And the Goods of
him that takes such Fish shall be liable to distress; and for want of a
Distress, he shall be committed to the House of Correction, for any time not
exceeding one month, unless he enter into Bond with one or more Sureties to the
Party injured, not exceeding ten pounds, never to offend in like manner, 22 and
23 Car. 2. c. 24.

A GUIDE FOR SURVEYORS OF Highways and Bridges.
CHAP. I. How many Sorts of Ways there are; of the Choice of these Officers,
with some few General Cases concerning Highways.
THere are three kind of Ways; First, A Foot-way, called Iter, quod est jus
eundi, vel ambulandi hominis. Secondly, a Foot-way and an Horse-way, called
actus, ab agendo, and this vulgarly is called a Pack or Drift-way, and is both
a Foot-way and Horse-way. Thirdly, A Cart-way, etc. called Via or Aditus, (and
contains the other two, and a Cart-way also) for this is jus eundi, vehendi,
and vehiculum and jumentum ducendi; and this is twofold, viz. Via Regia, The
Kings Highway for all Men, and communis Strata, belonging to a City or Town,
or between Neighbors.

It is called the Kings Highway, for that the King at all times has therein
Passage for Himself and his People, and may punish all Nusances therein, though
otherwise the Interest be in the Lord to bring his Action for digging therein,
or other like Trespass there done, Dalt. J.P. c. 50. f. 101. and see Rolls
Cases, 1 part f. 392. 2 E. 4. 9. 8 E. 4. 9. 17 E. 3. f. 43. Bro. Chemine, 10,
11. and Leet 3. 27 H. 6. f. 9. 8 H. 7. f. 5.

The Highway is not only the Common Tract, where Carts, Carriages, and People
have gone; but if the Way be Foundrous, that People cannot pass in the Common
Tract, and there be Out-lets out of it, into the Soil of another adjoining, the
People may in such extremity use those Out-lets upon another Soil, although it
be sown with Corn: And that is, in such case, the Kings Highway as well as
the other; for the Kings Subjects must have a convenient Passage, as was
resolved in a Try^^ at Bar against Sir Henry Du^comb, Tr. 10 Car. Rolls 1 part
of Abridgment, fol. 390. Therefore where a Way goes through a Man's Land, and
the Owner of the Land Fence it on both sides, he, by so doing, has made
himself liable to repair the Highway, and keep it passable; and it is not
sufficient for him to keep it in as good repair, as it was at the time of the
Enclosure; for by so doing he has straightened the Highway, Dalt. J.P. c. 50. f.
98.

The Constables and Churchwardens of every Parish shall yearly, upon Tuesday or
Wednesday in Easter Week, call together a number of the Parishioners, and then
make choice of two of the Parish to be Surveyors of the Highways the Year
following, who shall forthwith take that Office upon them, on pain to forfeit
twenty shillings a piece, 2 and 3. Ph. and Mar. c. 8.

The Constables and Churchwardens are then also to appoint six days betwixt
that and the four and twentieth day of June, for the amendment of the High
ways, and to give public notice thereof in the Church the next Sunday after, 2
and 3 P. and M. c. 8. and 5 El. c. 13.

Highways must be sufficiently amended at the charge of the whole Town: And it
is not enough for the Inhabitants to do their full six days work yearly; except
their Ways be all well and sufficiently repaired thereby: For if all their said
Ways be not sufficiently amended, the whole Town may be indicted therefore, and
if six days work in the year will not serve ^o amend them, the Surveyors may,
yea, must appoint more days, Dalt. P.J. c. 50. f. 101.

The Owner of Lands, if he be not the Occupier thereof, ought not to be charged
toward the repair of the common High ways; but the Tenant who occupies the
Lands is to be charged Bill. 1^ Car. 1. Br. in one Fosters Case, per Curiam,
Roells Cases, 1 part, f. 390.

All Fines and Forfeitures assessed in the Sessions, upon the Statute 5 El.
about Highways, must be Estreated by the Clerk of the Peace, and must be
levied, accounted, and employed as i^ appointed by the 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. c.
8. 5 El. c. 13.

The Surveyors upon Warrant from two Justices of Peace, are to levy by distress
and sale of Goods, the Forfeitures of all such Persons as offend against the 18
El. 10. in not Scowring their Ditches, etc. and if they neglect by the space of
a year after the offense committed, to levy the Forfeiture; Then the Justices
may send to the Constable and Churchwardens to levy the same, 18 El. c. 10.

By the Stat. 22 Car. 2. c. 12. All Constables and Surveyors of the Highways
shall put in execution the Statutes for repairing and enlarging Highways, and
levy the Penalties thereby imposed. And every Constable or Surveyor of the
Highways neglecting so to do, or wilfully suffering any Wagons or Carts to
pass through his Limits, with any more Horses or Cattle, or in any other manner
than this Act allows, upon Conviction thereof by one Oath before one Justice,
or the Justices own view, shall pay such Fine (not exceeding 40 s.) as such
Justice shall Assess.

All Actions brought against any Person for acting by this Law, shall be laid
in the proper County, and Defendants may plead the General Issue, and recover
treble Costs.

No traveling Wagon, Cart, etc. in which any Burdens shall be carried,
(except Carts used about Husbandry, and carrying Hay, Straw, Co^^ unthrashed,
Coal, Chalk, Timber for Shipping or Building, Stones of all sorts, Ammunition
or Artillery for the King) shall be drawn, or go in any Road or public High
way, with above five Horse-beasts at length, and if any draw with more Horses
or Oxen, he shall draw all two (...) breast, except one Horse.

Every Owner of any Wagon, Cart, etc. Horse or Beasts; shall forfeit for every
Offense 40 s. one third part to the Surveyors to amend the Ways; ^ne third part
to the Overseers for the Poor; ^he last third part to him who shall discover
the Offender.

The Surveyor, where any neglect to come ^^d labor, shall complain thereof to
the next ^ustices, who upon Oath of one Witness, shall ^^vy for every days
labor neglected 18 d. and ^or every Man and Horse 3 s. and for every Cart with
two Men 10 s. for each day neglecting, (...) Car. 2. c. 12.

CHAP. II. The Duty of the Surveyors about Setting and Calling the Parishioners
to the common days Works for the Highways, and about taking and diging for
Gravel, Chalk, Sand, etc.
THese Officers are to see that the Parishioners do their Work on the days
appoint^d, and that according to these Rules following, viz. Every Person
having in his own Occupa^ion a Plough Land in Tillage, or in Pasture in ^he
same Parish, or keeping there a Plough or ^raught, shall find and send on every
day to ^^e place appointed by the Surveyors, one ^ain or Cart provided, after
the Fashion of ^he Country, with Oxen, etc. fit for the Carri^ge, and with
necessary Tools fit for the Work, and with two able Men, who are there to do
^^ch Work with their Wains, etc. as they shall ^e appointed (by the Surveyors)
by the space of eight hours every of the said six days, on pain of 10 s. every
day default is made, 2, 4 P. M. c. 8. Rastall. 199. Lamb. 459. Wingates Abr.
Stat. Tit. Highways, Dalt. J.P. c. 50. f. 102.

And every other Householder, Cottager, and Labourer of the Parish, Town, etc.
(able to labor, and being no hired Servant by the year) must by himself, or
some other able Man, be then and there ready to work every of the said six
days, by the space of eight hours, as aforesaid, where they shall be appointed
by the Surveyors, under pain to forfeit 12 d. for every day they make default,
2, 3 P. M. c. 8.

Note, That all Persons being chargeable but as Cottagers, by the 2 and 3 P. M
yet if they be in Subsidy 5 l. in Goods, or 40 s. in Lands, or above, they must
find two able Men to work every of the said six days, 18 El. c. 10. Wingates
Abr. Stat Tit. Highways.

If any of the Carriages shall not be thought needful by the said Surveyors
upon any of the said days, they may appoint instead of a Team, two able Men to
work as aforesaid, who shall not fail on pain that the Party that should send
them, shall forfeit 12 pence for every day that either of them make default,
Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways, 2, 3 P. M. c. 8. Dalt. J.P. c. 50. f. 100.

He that shall occupy a Plow-land in Tillage or Pasture, lying in several
Parishes, shall be chargeable only in the Parish where he dwells; and he that
occupies several Plow-lands in several Parishes, shall be charged in each Town
or Parish where such Land lies (to wit) to find in each Town or Parish one
Cart furnished as aforesaid, though he be no Inhabitant there, 10 El. c. 18.
Dalt. J.P. c. 50. f 99.

Now for the further opening of these things, note, That it is said, that a
Plow-land is not of any certain Contents, but ordinarily it is so much as one
Plough may Plough in one day, which in some Countries is more, and in some
less, according to the heaviness of the Soil, Co. 9 Rep. f. 124. Co. on Lit. f.
69. and vide Lamb. ver. Hide 35 H. 6. f 29.

And note, That a Plow-land, or Carve of Land may contain House, Meadow,
Pasture and Wood: And if one have so much of this as will keep a Plough, and
yield Tillage for it, if part of it were cared, in this case it seems he is to
send his Plough, Vide Co. 4 Rep f. 3^. b. and 9 Rep. f. 122.

He that has a Plough land, and no Plough, but does suffer his Land to lie
fresh, yet he is to and a Plough for this Work; and so it has been agreed by
the Judges, Mich. 21 Jac. Dalt. J.P. c. 50. f. 105.

He that keeps a Plough, or Draught for Carriage, although he occupies
little or no Land, ^ut carries or plougheth for other Men, yet it seems he is
to send his Cart to the Highways; and if a Man keep only two Horses and a Cart
for his own Business, in this case it seems he is to come with his Cart and two
Horses, with a Man ^o manage them, Vide Dalt J.P. c. 50. ibid.

It is held by some, that so many Ploughs or ^aughts Men have, and use
frequently about their own Business in Summer, so many they are to bring with
them to the Highways; so that ^f a Man have one Plough and five or six Horses,
and shall Plough seven or eight score Acres of ^and, and shall usually go in
the Summer time with two Carts or Draughts; in this case it seems he is to come
with two Carts or Draughts to this Service: And he that occupies 40 or 50
Acres of Land, and keeps only three Horses, and one Draught or Cart, he is to
come with one Draught or Cart, Dalt. J.P. c. 50. f. 105.

These Officers may, if they see cause, for the amendment of the Highways,
take and carry away so much of the Rubbish, and smallest broken Stones already
dug, of any Man's Quarry lying within the same Parish, without leave of the
Owner, as they shall think needful, or gather the loose Stones lying dispersed
in any Man's Grounds; but they may not without License dig in any Man's Quarry
for new Stones, nor take the great Stones already dug; and if there be no
such Rubbish to be found in any Man's Quarry within the said Parish, then may
they enter into any Man's several Ground within the Parish, lying near the place
where the Ways are decayed, and there (if they see any hopes of finding
Materials fit for the Reparation thereof) without leave of the Owner, they may
dig for Sand, Stones, Gravel, etc. so that it be not in the Houses, Gardens,
Orchards, or Meadows of any Man; for they are not to come there without License
of the Owner; and in such place^ where they may dig without leave, they are not
to make a Pit above ten yards in breadth, c^^ length, and they are to take care
that the place^ be filled up again at the charge of the Parish within one month
after, upon pain to forfei^ five Marks to the Owner of the Ground, to be^
recovered by Action of Debt; and this by the 5 El. c. 13.

CHAP. III. The Surveyors Duty about cutting down Bushes, Trees, and scouring
of Ditches in the Highways; and also touching Presentiments and Inquiries about
Defaults, passing of Accounts, Traveling of Wagons, Wains, etc.
IF the Owners of the Grounds, next adjoining to the Highways, do not keep
their Hedges low, and cut down their Trees and Bushes growing in the same ways,
they forfeit ten shillings, Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways, 5 El. c. 13. 18
El. c. 10.

And he that scours not his Ditches in the Ground next adjoining to the Ground
that is next the Highways, to the end the Water may have the better passage
out of the Highways, shall forfeit 12 pence for every Rod so left unscoured,
18 E. c 10. Wingate, ut supra.

If any scour his Ditch by the Highway side, and throw the scouring thereof
into the Highway, and suffer it to lie there six months, he forfeits for every
Load thereof 12 pence; and the Surveyors are to make Sluices where such Banks
have been heretofore made, for carrying away the Water out of the Highway, 18
El. c. 10.

Every Surveyor may cause any Watercourse, or Spring of Water in the Highway,
(within their Parish) to be turned into another Man's several Ditch or Ground
next adjoining to the said Way, in such manner as by the discretion of the said
Surveyor shall be thought meet, Dalt. J. P. c. 50. f. 103.

Note, That the Forfeitures of the Act of the 18 El. c. 10. must be levied by
the Surveyors for the time being, (by Warrant from the ^ustice^ before whom the
Party shall be convict) by Distress and Sale of Goods; which Forfeitures are to
be employed toward the amendment of the Highways; and if the Surveyors
neglect to do it within one year after the Offense committed* then the
Constables and Churchwardens by like Warrant may do it, 18 El. c. 10. Wingates
Ab^. Stat. Tit. Highways.

The Surveyors, or one of them, are to present to the next Justice of Peace
every Default upon the 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 8. and 5 El. c. 14. within one
month after it shall be made, on pain o^ 40 s. and the Justice is on pain of 5
l to certify the same at the next Quarter Sessions, where the Justices have
power to inquire of the Default, and shall set such Fine upon the Delinquents,
as they, or two of them (Quor. unus) shall think fit, 5 El. c. 13.

That the Presentment of a Justice of Peace in Sessions, upon his own Knowledge
shall be (...) good Conviction, whereupon the Justices in Se^sions, or any two
of them (Quor. unus) may asses^ a Fine, as well as upon a Verdict of twelve Me^
but in this case the Delinquent shall be admitted to his Traverse, as in other
Cases, 5 El. c. 13 vide Rastal. 199.

The Defaults and Offenses upon these Statute 2 and 3 P. and M. 5 El. and 18
El. are inquitable by the Justices of Peace in their Sessions, or by Stewards
in Leets, either of which have power to set Fines upon Offenders at their
discretions; of which Fines, indented Estreats ((...) the Sessions under the
Hand and Seal of the Clerk of the Peace, in the Leet, under the Hand and Seal
of the Steward) shall be delivered within six weeks after Michaelmas, one part
of the Estreat to the Bailiff or High Constable of the Liberty, and the other
part to the Constables and Churchwardens of the Parish where the Offenders
live, 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 8. 5 El. c. 13. 18 El. c. 10. Wingates Abr. Stat.
Tit. Highways.

And these Estreats shall be a sufficient Warrant for the Bailiff, or Chief
Constable of the liberty to levy the said Offenses by way of Distress; and if
no Distress can be found, or the Party do not pay the Fine within 20 days after
^awful demand thereof, he or they shall forfeit double so much; all which Fines
and Forfeitures are to be employed, and bestowed toward the amendment of the
Highways in the Parish where the Offenses are committed, Wingates Abr. Stat.
Tit. Highways, 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 8.

The Bailiff, or High Constable, shall yearly betwixt the first of March, and
last of April, render ^o Account unto the Constables and Churchwardens, who
have the other parts of the Estreats of the Fines, of what Money they have
received, on pain of 40 s. and the said Constables and Churchwardens have power
to call the ^ailiff or High Constable before two or more ^ustices of the Peace
(Quor. unus) to pass his Account, who have power to commit him, until he have
satisfied all the Arrearages by him received, save 8 d. in the pound for his
own Fee, ^od 12 d. in the pound for the Clerk of the Peace, or Steward of the
Leet, and in this case the succeeding Constables and Churchwardens have ^e same
power as their Predecessors had, 2 and 3 ^. and M. c. 8.

Two Justices of the Peace by the Stat. 18 El. may take Accounts of the
Surveyors of the Ways, and the Petty Constables and Churchwardens, for such
Forfeitures (within that Statute) as they have levied, 18 El. c. 10 Dalt. J.P.
c. 50. f. 103.

Note, There are several Statutes which concern particular Highways, in which
these Surveyors are little concerned; I shall therefore only name the Statutes,
and they who desire to be further informed therein, may look the Statutes at
large.

Stat. 39 El. c. 10. for repairing the Highways in the Wild of Sussex, Surry
and Kent, used for Iron Works. Stat. 37 H 8. c. 3. For Huntingto^ Lane near to
Chester. Stat. 14 H 8. c. 6. and 26 H. 8. c. 7. For laying out new Highways in
the Wild of Kent or Sussex. Stat. 1 P. and M. 2. c. 5. for the Causway between
Dorchester and Sherborn. Stat. 18 El. c. 10. about the Kings Ferry in Kent.

CHAP. IV. Some Heads of the Stat. 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17. concerning the
Ways, Sewers, Pavements, etc. in London, and the Scavengers Office.
BY the Stat. of 22 and 23 Car. 2. A Clause so a late Act of Parliament,
Entitled, A^ Act for Rebuilding the City of London; wherein was Enacted, That
the Numbers and Places for Common Sewers, Drains and Vaults, and the manner of
Paving and Pitching Streets and Lanes in the said City and Liberties, should be
set ou^ by Persons appointed by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, or
seven or more of them, together with the Surveyors, or one of them within the
Precincts respectively, which Persons, or seven, or more of them were empowered
to impose Taxes upon Houses in proportion to the benefit they receive thereby,
and to levy the same by Distress and Sale of Goods, is made perpetual, together
with the Powers thereby given and appointed to be executed: And the sole Powers
of ordering and regulating the keeping clear, pitching and paving the Streets,
Lanes and Passages, with the manner thereof, and of making and cleansing Drains
and Sewers in London, is to remain in the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens, to
be executed by such as the Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council shall
appoint, or seven or more of them being all Members of the said Court. And
Persons employed in any of the said Works, are enjoined to observe the
Directions of the Persons in that behalf authorized, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

Offenders may be proceeded against by Indictment at the next Sessions of the
Peace, in the said City and Liberties, unless they submitted to the Censure of
the Persons so authorized, or any seven or more of them, and pay the Mulct by
them imposed to the Chamber of London, to be employed toward the Works in this
Act mentioned, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

The Persons so authorized may impose Taxes on the several Wards and Precincts,
and direct Precepts to the respective Deputies and Common Council Men to assess
the same, and like Precepts to Scavengers to collect the same: And where any
Church or Churchyard shall front or adjoyn to any of the said Streets, Lanes or
Passages, they may assess a reasonable proportion upon the Parish to be paid by
the Churchwardens, of which Assessments the Deputies and Common Council Men
shall return Duplicates with the Scavengers Names, within twenty days after
receipt of the Precepts. And in default of the said Deputies, and Common
Council Men the said Persons to be authorized may rate the said Assessments.
And in default of payment within six days after demand, the Scavengers may levy
the same by distress and sale of Goods, rendering the overplus, besides the
reasonable Charge of distraining: And the Money so collected shall be paid into
the Chamber of London, not to be issued thence, but by order of the said
Persons so to be appointed, or seven or more of them, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

Inhabitants aggrieved through defect or decay of Pavements, or want of
cleansing the Streets, etc. shall upon proof that such grievance is unreformed,
receive directions from the Persons so to be authorized, or seven or more of
them, for redressing the same, and a Warrant under their Hands and Seals to the
Chamberlain of London to issue Moneys for defraying the Charge thereof,
together with any Sum not exceeding ten shillings for encouragement of his or
their Diligence, who upon receipt of such Warrant shall pay the same
accordingly: And Persons aggrieved by any Charge imposed by virtue of this Act,
within five days after demand thereof, may appeal to the Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, whose Order therein shall be final, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

The Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council may set out and purchase
Ground for Laystals, and places for public Stores, for receipt of Dirt and
Rubbish carried out of the City, and for other Materials and Commodities. The
Money for the same to be paid out of the Moneys arising by the Imposition upon
Coals appointed for public Uses of the City, other than the Money appointed for
Building Churches, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

No Persons by this Act made liable to be rated toward the altering, mending,
or cleansing the said Vaults, Sewers, etc. or cleansing, etc. Streets, Lanes,
etc. shall be otherwise charged or liable thereunto, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

CHAP. V. Some Heads of the 2 of W. and M. for Paving and Cleansing the Streets
in the Cities of London and Westminster, Suburbs and Liberties thereof, the
Out-Parishes in the County of Middlesex, the Borough of Southwark, and other
Places within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, in the County of Surrey.
EVery Inhabitant inhabiting in the said Parishes, and in the Town of
Kensington, shall twice every Week sweep before their Houses and Buildings, and
take up the Dirt ready for the Scavenger, or other Officer, or else for every
Offense or Neglect, forfeit 3 s. 4 d.

If any throw, or permit to be thrown, Ashes, Filth, or Annoyance before his
House, Building or Wall, shall forfeit 5 s. If before any Church, Churchyard,
or public Buildings, or into any Sink, or Way, public or private; but shall
keep it in their Houses and Yards, until, the Officers come to carry it away,
or else forfeit 20 s.

Churchwardens, Housekeepers of White Hall, or other the Kings Houses, or of
Noblemens Houses, shall be subject to like Penalty; so shall Ushers of Courts,
and Porters, and Keepers of other public Buildings.

Scavengers and Officers shall come every day (except Sundays and Holidays) and
give notice that the Parties concerned may bring out their Dust, etc. or
forfeit 40 s. for every neglect.

Every Householder shall pave, and keep repaired the Streets before their Houses
and Ground unto the Channel, or else forfeit for every Rod 20 s. and 20 s.
every Week until at shall be sufficiently repaired.

Where new Streets and Ways are made, which the Justices of Peace in their
General Quarter Sessions shall think f^^ and convenient to be paved with Stone
or Gravel, and shall order the same to be done before every dwelling House or
Building in such Street or Way; Every Person neglecting, shall forfeit forty
shillings for every such Offense, for every Perch, and after that rate, for a
greater of lesser quantity, and the like Sum for every Week till the same be
paved and amended.

Where Streets, Lanes or Allies have been by Custom otherwise repaired, it
shall be done by such Persons as are by Custom to do it, under the Penalties
aforesaid.

Upon Monday or Tuesday in Easter Week, The Constables, Churchwardens,
Overseers and Surveyors giving notice, and calling such Inhabitants that have
served that Office, shall choose two Tradesmen to be Scavengers; who being
allowed under the Hand of any two Justices, shall within seven days take the
Office, or pay 10 l. and within seven days after such refusal, they shall in
like manner choose another, who shall accept, or pay 10 l. which Penalties to be
levied by Distress and Sale, and for want of Distress or Payment within six
days after notice at his House, to be sent to the Goal until payment. Within
twenty days after such Election, the Constables, etc. shall call such
Inhabitants as have born the like Office, and make a Tax by a Pound Rate, which
being confirmed by two Justices, shall be quarterly paid upon demand made by
the Scavengers, or other Officers appointed to gather the same, and being
refused, shall by Warrant of two Justices be levied by Distress and Sale, and
for want of Distress, by Imprisonment of the Offender until payment. The
Scavengers are to account for the Money by them Collected, to two Justices of
the Peace, within twenty eight days after new Scavengers are Elected, and to
pay what Money remains in their Hands to the new Scavengers.

The Scavengers and Rakers for any of the said Parishes shall have liberty, by
the Order of the Justices in the Petty-Sessions, or any two of them, to lodge
their Soil in such vacant places near the Streets or Highways, a^ shall be
thought convenient by the said Justices, for the accommodation of the Country
Cart^ returning empty from the said Parishes, they giving satisfaction to the
Owners of such vacant places, and in case of unreasonable Demands, the Justices
in their Petty Sessions may hear and moderate the same. If any Persons find
themselves aggrieved with the Rates made by virtue of this Act, or any ways
prejudiced by the determination of the Justices in their Petty-Sessions, they
may have recourse to the Justices at their General Quarter Sessions of the
Peace.

And whereas there are many Common Highways within the said Parishes, which
cannot be sufficiently repaired by means of the Laws now in force, an
Assessment may be made upon all the Inhabitants, Owners and Occupiers of Lands
and Houses, or personal Estate usually ratable to the Poor within any of the
said Parishes, to be collected by such Persons as the Justices shall appoint at
their General Quarter Sessions, the Money so collected, to be employed as the
Justices shall direct toward repairing the said Highways.

No such Rate shall exceed four pence in the Pound, in any one year, in the
yearly value of Lands, Houses or Tenements, nor of eight pence for every twenty
pounds in personal Estate.

No Person or Persons whatsoever, shall suffer his Wagon, Cart or Car to stand
in the Haymarket near Pickadilly in the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields, St.
James within the Liberty of Westminster, Borough of Southwark, or any other
place in the Parishes within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, laden with Hay or
Straw, to sell the same from Michaelmas to Lady Day, after two of the Clock in
the Afternoon, and from Lady Day to Michaelmas, after one in the Afternoon, on
pain to forfeit five shillings for every Offense and Neglect.

The Owners and Proprietors of any Cart, Car or Dray, the Wheels whereof shall
not be made six Inches in the breadth, or shall be shod with Iron, or be drawn
with above two Horses, shall forfeit forty shillings for every time such Cart,
Car or Dray shall be used, for the uses; and to be levied as aforesaid: This
shall not extend to any Country Cart or Wagon that shall bring any Goods to
the Cities or Places aforesaid, or shall carry any Goods half a Mile beyond the
paved Streets of the said Cities and Places.

One Justice of Peace upon View or Confession, or Oath of one Witness, may
convict any of the Offenses aforesaid, If Conviction be upon proof, one Moiety
to the Overseers of the Poor, for the Relief of the Poor of the Place where the
Offense was committed, the other Moiety to him that shall discover and
prosecute the same. But if the Conviction shall be by the View, then one half
to the Poor, the other toward repairing and cleansing the Streets, to be paid
to the Scavengers of the Place, to be levied by the Justices Warrant under Hand
and Seal, to the Constable, by Distress and Sale, or for want of Distress or
Payment within six days after notice at the House, to be sent to Goal without
Bail, u^^^^ payment.

No Person (within the Cities of London and Westminster, and Liberties of the
same, Borough of Southwark, and Parishes aforesaid) shall breed, feed or keep
any Swine in any Houses or Backsides of the paved Streets where the Houses are
contiguous, on pain to forfeit the same to the Churchwardens and Overseers of
the Poor of the Parish where such Swine shall be kept, to the use of the Poor.

The Churchwardens, Chappel-wardens, Overseers of the Poor, Constables,
Beadles, Headboroughs or Tythingmen of any the Parishes in the said Cities and
Places respectively, in the daytime, with a Warrant under the Hand and Seal of
the Lord Mayor, or any other of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace, may
search for such Swine, and if any be found, they may seize and carry them away,
and sell them for the best price that can be had, and distribute the Money to
the Poor of the Parish where they were seized.

CHAP. VI. Several Cases about the Repairs of Bridges, with the Names of the
Statutes which concern particular Bridges.
WHere a Common Bridge in the Kings Highway is in decay, and that it cannot be
proved or known, who, nor what Lands are chargeable to the repairing thereof;
in this case four Justices of the Peace (whereof one to be of the Quorum)
within the Shire or Riding wherein such decayed Bridges be; and if they be in a
City, or Town Corporate, then fort such Justices of Peace there, may within the
Limits of their several Commissions, call before them the Constables, or two of
the most honest Inhabitants of every Town and Parish within the Shire, Riding,
City or Town Corporate, wherein such Bridge, or any parcel thereof shall happen
to be; and the Justices (upon the appearance of the Constables, or other
Inhabitants, and with their Assents) may Tax every Inhabitant in any such City,
Town or Parish within their Limits, to such reasonable Sum of Money as by their
Discretions they shall think convenient, as well for the repairing of such
Bridge, and also for the making and repairing of the Highways by the space of
300 Foot next adjoining to the Ends of any such Bridges, 22 H. 8. c. 5. Dalt.
J.P. c. 16. f. 44. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 701, 702.

But Note, Where the Franchise, City or Borough is a County of it self, and
has not four or more Justices of the Peace, whereof one or more are of the
Quorum, in this case no other Justices of the Peace, of any Shire or County,
have any power to meddle there by this Act, but such decay must be reformed by
the Common Law, by such Remedy as they were before the making of the Statute of
22 H. 8. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 702.

And note, That this Taxation ought not to be made by the Justices, without the
Consent of the Constables or Inhabitants, nor by them without the Justices; and
this Tax ought to be upon every Inhabitant in particular, and not to be set
upon the Hundred, Parish, Town, etc. for then one or two might be distrained
upon for the whole, Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 704.

After such Taxation made, as aforesaid, the said Justices of Peace shall cause
the Names and Sums of every particular Person so by them taxed, to be written
in a Roll indented in Parchment for every Hundred, and sealed with their Seals,
Co. 2 part, Inst. fol. 704. Dalt. J.P. c. 16. ibid.

And the said Justices may make two Collectors of every Hundred, for the
Collecting of all such Sums of Money by the said Justices set and taxed, which
Collectors receiving the one part of the Roll indented, have power thereby to
collect all the Sums of Money therein contained, and if refusal be made upon
demand, then to distrain, and sell such Distress, rendering the overplus to the
Owner, if any be, Dalt. J.P. c. 16. f. ibid. 22 H. 8. c. 5. Co. 2 part, Inst f.
705.

The said Justices also are to appoint two Surveyors, who shall see such
decayed Bridges and Ways repaired and amended from time to time as often as
need shall require, to whose Hands the Collectors must pay the Moneys by them
received, Dalt. J.P. c. 16. ibid. 22 H. 8. c. 5.

And the said Collectors and Surveyors, and their Executors and Administrators,
and every of them shall from time to time make a true Account to the said
Justices of Peace, of the Receipts, Payments and Expenses of the said Sums of
Money, and if any of them refuse so to do, then the Justices of Peace from time
to time, by their Discretions, may make out Process against the said Collectors
and Surveyors, their Executors and Administrators by Attachment, Precept or
Warrant under their Hands and Seals returnable at their General S^ssions of the
Peace, and the said Justices may allow such reasonable Costs and Charge to the
Surveyors and Collectors upon their Accounts, as to them shall seem convenient,
22. H. 8. c. 5. Dalt. J. P. c. 16. ibid.

If any such Bridge be wholly in a City, or other Corporate Town, the
Inhabitants of the said City or Corporate Town must repair it; and where such
Bridges lie out of such City or Corporate Town, the same must be made by the
Inhabitants of the Shire or Riding within which the same Bridge shall be, and
if part of the Bridge be in one Shire or Riding, City or Corporate Town, and
part in another, then every of them shall be charged to make and repair such
part as shall lie, and be within their own Limits, 22 H. 8. c. 5. Co. 2 part,
Inst. fol. 207. Dalt. J.P. c. 16. fol. 45.

But otherwise no Village or Freeman shall be compelled to make any Bridge; but
such as of old time, and by right they were wont to make, Magna Charta, c. 15.

By the Common Law, some Persons were ^ound to repair Bridges, Ratione tenurae
su^ Ter^^ram, etc. and this was binding, into whose Hands soever the Estate did
come; but they which have Lands on the one side, or on the other, or on both,
are not bound in Common ^ight to repair the same, 44 El. 3. 31. 21 E. 4. ^6. 5
H. 7. 3. Crompt. 186. 8 H. 7. 5. b. Co. 2 part, ^. ^. f. 700.

If a Man which holds 100 Acres of Land, ^ught to repair a Bridge by tenure
of the same, (...) allen 20 Acres thereof to one Man, and 10 ^cres to another
Man, in such case every Owner (...) Occupier of such Lands must be charged
^roportionably for their said Lands, Regist. 268. o. ^. N. B. 235. b. Co. 2
part, Inst. f. 700.

Again, Some by the Common Law were bound ^y prescription to repair a Bridge;
but herein ^here is a diversity between Bodies Politic or Corporate, Spiritual
or Temporal, and Natural Persons: For Bodies Politic, etc. may be bound by
usage and prescription only, because they are local, and have a perpetual
Succession, and never die; but a Natural Person cannot be bound by the Act of
his Ancestor, without Assets, or some Profit to be taken therefore, 21 E. 4.
fol. 38. b. 27 Ass. 8. Crompt. 187. Co. 2 part, f. 700. Dalt. J.P. c. 16. f 45.

By Common Right, Bridges are to be amended by the whole County, if it be not
known who ought to do the same otherwise, Pasch. 19 E. 3. 28, 29. Co. 2 part,
Inst. f. 701. Crompt. 186. b. Tr. 10 Car. 1. the Case of Longford Bridge, Rolls
Cases 1 part, f. 368. and Cro. Rep. 3 part, the same Case.

If a Man erect a Mill for his own particular Profit, and cut a new Course for
the Water to come to it, and makes a new Bridge over the same, and the Kings
Subjects use to ride over the same as over a common Bridge; such Bridge ought
to be repaired by him who has the Mill, and not by the County, because he
erected it for his own Benefit, 8 E. 2. B. R. adjudged for Bow Bridge and
Channel Bridge against the Prior of Stratford, Rolls Cases, 1 part, f. 368.

Such as are chargeable to repair a Bridge, may enter upon any other Man's Land
or Soil adjoining, and lay their Stone, Lime, Timber, or other Things necessary
there, for the repairing and amending thereof, and the Owner of the Lands shall
have no Action therefore; for it is for the common Profit; and the Party that
is chargeable to repair a Bridge, must also maintain the Way at each end
thereof (thoug^ the Soil be to another) and if the ends be broken by the
Watercourse, he must follow the Watercourse, and repair the Way, etc. Crompt.
186. b. 43 Ass. Dalt. J.P. c. 16. f. 46.

The Names of some Statutes for particular Bridges follow, 8 H. 6. c. 28. For
the making of Burford and Culhamford Bridge. 18 E. 1. c. 7. and 27 E. c. 25.
For the maintenance of Rochester Bridge. 18 El. c. 20. For repair of the
Bridges within a Mile of Oxford. 23 El. c. 11. For the maintenance of the
Bridges over Toss in Wales. 39 El. c. 23. For making and repairing of Newport
and Carlion Bridges over the River Usk. 39 El. c. 24. For building and
maintenance of a Bridge at Wilton upon Wy, near Ross, in Herefordshire. 43 El.
c. 16. For erecting and repairing Edon and Presberk Bridges in Cumberland. 3
Jac. c. 23. For making and repairing Chepstow Bridge.

By the Stat. 22 Car. 2 c. 12. It is Enacted, That the Surveyors and Orderers
of the Work, of amendment of the Highways, shall be yearly chosen in Christmas
Week, according to the Stat. 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 8. Which Persons so chosen,
shall take upon them that Office, and shall appoint six days for providing
Stones, Gravel, and other Materials, and for working in the Highways, having
respect to the Season of the Year and Weather, and giving notice publicly some
convenient time before the several days. At which day all Persons liable to the
said Work, shall attend and work: And the said Surveyors and Orderers shall
make return of the Defaulters, and every of them within one Month, to some
neighboring Justice of the Peace of the same County.

DIRECTIONS for the Keepers of Fairs and Markets.
FAirs are accounted things of Franchise and Privilege, as well as of Profit;
and whether they be held and claimed by Charter of the King, or by
Prescription, which supposes a former Charter, they ought to be holden for no
longer time, than such Grant or Use will warrant: And after such time, what is
done there, is not warranted or justifiable, nor amounts to more than a private
Transaction; and the Sheriff ought to make Proclamation, That those that have
Fairs keep them no longer then they ought to do; and every Lord of a Fair,
shall at the beginning thereof, make Proclamation how long the same is to
continue, upon pain to be grievously amerced to the King; And if they hold them
longer than they ought, they shall be seized into the Kings Hands, until they
make Fine for the Offense; and if a Merchant sell Ware after the time the Fair
ought to end, he shall forfeit to the King double the value of what is sold,
and the Prosecutor shall have the fourth part, Dalt. J. P. c. 62. f. 138.

The Owner, or Chief Keeper of every Fair and Market-over^, are to appoint and
limit out a certain and open place within the Town, Place, Field or Circuit
where Horses, Mares, Geldings and Colts must be sold, and they must appoint one
sufficient Person, or more, to take Toll, and keep the same place from ten of
the Clock before Noon, until Sunset of every day of the foresaid Fair or
Market, upon pain to lose for every Default 40 shillings, 2 and 3 P. and M. c.
7. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 715.

The Toll-gatherer, his Deputy or Deputies are to take their due and lawful
Tolls for every Horse, Mare, etc. at the place and times aforesaid; and they
are to have before them at the taking of the said Toll, the Parties, to the
Bargain, Exchange, Gift, Contract, or putting away of every such Horse, Mare,
etc. and also the same Horse, Mare, etc. so sold, exchanged, or put away, and
then the Toll gatherer must write in his Book the Names, Sirnames, and dwelling
Places of all the said Parties, and the Color, with one special Mark at the
least of the said Horse, Mare, etc. on pain to forfeit for every Default 40
shillings, 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 7. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 7 5.

And the said Toll gatherer is within one day after the Fair, etc. to bring his
Book to the Owner, Governor or Ruler, etc. of the Fair or Market, who is then
to cause a Note to be made out of the same; of the true number of all the
Horses, Mares, etc. sold at the said Fair or Market, to which Note he must set
his Hand or Mark, on pain of 40 shillings: And if the Toll-gatherer neglect to
bring the Book, as aforesaid, he also forfeits 40 shillings, 2 and 3 P. and M.
c. 7. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 715.

Where no Toll is due, the Book-keepers Fee for entering every Contract, is one
penny and no more, 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 7. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 716.

Now since the making of this Stat 2 and 3 P. and M. It is further provided by
the 31 Eliz. That every Seller or Exchanger of any Horse, Mare, etc In a Fair
or Market, which is unknown to the Toll-taker or Book-keeper must procure one
credible Person that is well known to the Toll-keeper, or Book-keeper, who is
to vouch and testify his Knowledge of the Seller, and the Toll-taker, or Book
keeper, is to enter both the Names and Sirnames, Mysteries, and Places of
Dwelling of the Seller and Voucher into his Book, with the Color, Mark and
Price of the Horse, Mare, etc. so sold or exchanged; and he is to give the
Buyer, if he require it, a Note in writing out of his Book, concerning the
Contract subscribed with his Hand, for which he is to have two pence, 31 El. c.
12. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 717, 718.

Every Toll-taker or Book-keeper that suffers a Sale to pass without a Voucher,
unless he know the Party of his own Knowledge, as aforesaid, and every Person
making false Testimony or Avouchment in the behalf aforesaid, and every Seller
unknown to the Toll-taker, not bringing a Voucher, and causing the same to be
entered as aforesaid, forfeits five pounds, one Moiety thereof to the King, and
the other to the Prosecutor; and also the sale of such Horse, Mare, etc. to be
void, 31 El. c. 12. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 718.

And note, That though an Horse, Mare, etc. be at the sale used in all the
Points aforesaid, with Voucher, etc. yet the right Owner, his Executors or
Administrators, may redeem a stolen Horse, if they claim him within six months
after the stealing, at the Parish or Corporation, where they shall find him and
make proof within 40 days after, by two sufficient Witnesses, before the next
Justice of Peace of the County, or before the Head Officer in a Corporation,
that the Horse was theirs, and repay to the Buyer such price for the Horse, as
the same Buyer shall upon his own Oath before such Justice or Officer, testify
he paid for him, 31 El. c. 12. Wingates Stat. Tit. Fairs and Markets, Co. 2
part, Inst. f. 718.

If a stolen Horse be not sold in Fair or Market, according to the Rules
aforesaid, then such Sale does not alter the Property of the right Owner, but
he may seize or replevy him wheresoever he finds him, 31 El. c. Wingate ubi
supra, Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 718.

No Person shall buy any Oxen, Ronts, Steers, Kine, Heifers, Calves, Sheep,
Lambs, Goats or Kids alive, and sell the same again, unless he keep the same
five Weeks in his own Grounds; or where he has Herbage by Grant or
Prescription, upon pain to lose double the value of the Cattle; one Moiety to
the King, the other to the Informer, 5 Ed. 6. c. 14.

By the Stat. 22 Car. 2. c. 8. There shall be no Bushel but the Winchester
Bushel, containing eight Gallons, and none shall sell by other Measure, on pain
of 40 shillings.

If the Clerk of the Market of the Kings House, or others authorized to mark or
seal Measures, being required, shall neglect or refuse to seal or mark any
Bushel, Half Bushel, or Peck duly gauged, he forfeits 5 l. for the first
Offense, and for every other Offense 10 l. or if the Kings Clerk of the Market
of his House take more than his Fees, or if any other take above one penny for
sealing a Bushel, one half penny for the Half Bushel or Peck, or more than one
farthing for any lesser Measure, he incurs the Penalties in the Stat. 17 Car. 1.

That at the charge of such Persons who have the Toll, or profit of the Market
where no Toll is taken, there shall be before 29 Sept. 1670. one Measure of
Brass provided and chained in the Marketplace, upon pain to forfeit 5 l. 22
Car. 2. c. 8.

By the Stat. of 22 and 23 Car 2. It is further provided, That whosoever shall
sell or buy any Corn or Salt by the Bag, or without measuring, being thereunto
required, or in any other manner than as by the Stat. 22 Car. 2. c. 8. is
directed, and without shaking the Measure by the Buyer, shall forfeit besides
the Penalty in the former Act, all the Corn or Salt, or the value therefore to
the Person or Persons complain^^g, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 12.

Upon complaint to one or more Justices of Peace, the Proof shall lie upon the
Defendant, to make appear by Oath of one or more Witnesses, that he or they did
sell or buy according to this and the said former Act; wherein if he fail, he
shall forfeit as by this Act is directed, to be levied by distress and sale of
Goods, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of one or more Justices before whom
such Conviction shall be. The Penalties to be distributed, one half to the Poor
of the Parish where the Offense shall be committed, the other to the Informer,
22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 12.

DIRECTIONS to Treasurers, for the Relief of Poor Maimed Soldiers and Mariners.
THE Justices of Peace are yearly at the Quarter Sessions, about Easter, to
choose or appoint one or two Persons (according to their Discretions) of the
County, for the taking and distributing of the Moneys collected for the Re^ief
of poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners: And these Treasurers, by the Words of the
future, ought to be Subsidy Men of 10 pounds ^n Lands, or 15 pounds in Goods,
and these Officers are to continue in their Office one Year, and new ones then
to be chosen in their Rooms, 43 El c. 3. Wingates Stat. Tit. Captains.

Now for the raising of Money for these Treasurers, the greater part of the
Justices in their Quarter Sessions, have power to charge every Parish within
their Limits, toward a Weekly ^elief of maimed Soldiers and Mariners, so that
no Parish pay Weekly above 10 pence, nor under 2 pence; nor any County, which
consists ^f above 50 Parishes, pay above 6 pence, one ^arish with another, 43
El. c. 3.

When the Tax is levied, the Constables and Churchwardens are to deliver it
quarterly (ten days before every Quarter Sessions) to the High Constables of
their Division, who must deliver to ^he Treasurers of the County, at the same
Quarter Sessions all the same Money; and if the Constables or Churchwardens,
their Executors, etc. fail in the payment, to the High Constable, within the
time aforesaid, then they are to forfeit 20 s. and if the High Constable fall
to pay the Treasurers every Sessions, then he forfeits 40 s. which Forfeitures,
as it seems, the Treasurers may levy by Distress and Sale of the Offenders
Goods, without any Warrant, rendering the overplus to the Owner: And these
Forfeitures are to go in Augmentation of the Treasurers Stock, 43 El. c. 3.

The maimed Soldier or Mariner which was Pressed, shall repair (if he be able to
Travel) to the Treasurers of the County where he was Pressed; if he were not
Pressed, then to the Treasurers of the County where he was Born, or were he last
dwelt by the space of three years, at his Election; but if he be not able to
Travel, then to the Treasurers of the County where he Lands; and he is to bring
with him a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Chief Commander, or of
the Captain under whom he served, containing the particular of his Hurts and
Service, which Certificate shall also be allowed by the Muster-Master, or the
Receiver-General of the Rolls for the Muster, under one of their Hands, 33 El.
c. 3.

Then upon such a Certificate, the Treasurer^ aforesaid may allow the Party
Relief to maintain him till the next Quarter Sessions; an^ then the major-part
of the Justices may allo^ him a Pension, which the Treasurers mu^^ pay him
quarterly, until it shall be revoked (...) altered by the said Justices; and
this Allowanc^ is not to exceed 10 l. per annum to a Common Soldier, not 15 l.
to an Officer under a Lieutenant, nor 20 l. to a Lieutenant, 43 El. c. 3
Wingates Stat. Tit. Captains and Soldiers.

Where Soldiers and Mariners arrive far from the place where they are to
receive Relief, the Treasurers there shall give them Relief, and a Testimonial
whereby they may pass from Treasurer to Treasurer, until they shall come to the
place required; and this shall be done upon the bare Certificate of the
Commander and Captain, although they have not as yet obtained any Allowance
from the Muster-Master, or Receiver-General of the Muster-Rolls, Wingates Stat.
Tit. Captains and Soldiers, 43 El. c. 3.

If any Soldier or Mariner beg, or counterfeit a Certificate, he shall be
punished as a Common Rogue, and shall lose his Pension, if he have any 43 El.
c. 3. Wingate, ut supra.

When out of the County where the Party was Pressed, a fit Pension cannot be
satisfied, it shall then be supplied by the County where he was born, or else
where he last dwelt by the space of three years, Wingate, ubi supra, 43 El. c.
3.

The Treasurers are to Register all their Receipts and Disbursements, and must
enter the Names of the Parties relieved into their Book, and also the
Certificate, by virtue whereof the Disbursements are made; and where they
disallow of a Certificate, they are to set down the Reasons of their Refusal
under the Certificate, or on the back thereof, 43 El. c. 3. Wingate Stat. Tit.
Captains and Soldiers.

If any Treasurer wilfully refuse to give Relief in the Cases aforesaid, the
Justices of the Peace, in their Sessions, may set a Fine upon him, which may be
levied by Distress and Sale of his Goods, Wingate, ubi supra.

These Officers at the end of their Year, within 10 days after Easter Sessions,
are to give (...) a just Account to the succeeding Treasurers o^ all their
Receipts and Disbursements within the time of their Office; and then if they
have any Money in their Hands, they are to deliver it to their Successors; and
if any such Officer his Executors or Administrators shall not give up such
Account within the time aforesaid, o^ shall be otherwise negligent in the
Execution of his Office; The Justices at the Sessions may assess what Fine they
please upon him; so tha^ it be not under five pounds, but what the^ please
above five pounds upon him, his Executors or Administrators, Wingate, ubi supra
43 El. c. 3.

In Corporations, the Justices there are t^ put this Act in Execution, and not
the Justices of the County: This Act is not to prohibit the City of London to
make a Tax if nee^ require, differing from that above limited i^ this Act, so
that no Parish pay above thr^^ shillings Weekly, nor under twelve pen^ Weekly,
one Parish with another, 43 El. c. 3.

FINIS.

